Exploring the Black Box : An Analysis of Work Group Diversity , Conflict , and Performance Author ( s ) : Lisa Hope Pelled , Kathleen M . Eisenhardt , Katherine R . Xin Source : Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 44 , No . 1 ( Mar . , 1999 ) , pp . 1 - 28 Published by : Johnson Graduate School of Management , Cornell University Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2667029 . Accessed : 02 / 08 / 2011 12 : 07 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = cjohn . . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Johnson Graduate School of Management , Cornell University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Administrative Science Quarterly . http : / / www . jstor . org Exploring the Black Box : An Analysis of Work Group Diversity , Conflict , and Performance Lisa Hope Pelled University of Southern California Kathleen M . Eisenhardt Stanford University Katherine R . Xin University of Southern California ? 1999 by Cornell University . 0001 - 8392 / 99 / 4401 - 0001 / $ 1 . 00 . We thank Deborah Ancona , Blake Ash - forth , Domenic Colabella , Christopher Earley , Connie Gersick , Jean Kahwajy , Gerald Ledford , Nandini Rajagopalan , Robert Sutton , and Allen Weiss for their helpful input . We are especially grateful for the valuable feedback provided by Daniel Brass , Linda Johanson , and three anonymous reviewers . This research was funded by the Stanford Integrated Manu - facturing Association . If we cannot now end our differences , at least we can help make the world safe for diversity . - John F . Kennedy In this paper we present an integrative model of the rela - tionships among diversity , conflict , and performance , and we test that model with a sample of 45 teams . Find - ings show that diversity shapes conflict and that conflict , in turn , shapes performance , but these linkages have subtleties . Functional background diversity drives task conflict , but multiple types of diversity drive emotional conflict . Race and tenure diversity are positively associ - ated with emotional conflict , while age diversity is nega - tively associated with such conflict . Task routineness and group longevity moderate these relationships . Results further show that task conflict has more favorable effects on cognitive task performance than does emotional con - flict . Overall , these patterns suggest a complex link be - tween work group diversity and work group functioning . ' In the past decade , demographic diversity has become one of the foremost topics of interest to managers and manage - ment scholars . The term demographic diversity refers to the degree to which a unit ( e . g . , a work group or organization ) is heterogeneous with respect to demographic attributes . At - tributes classified as demographic generally include " immu - table characteristics such as age , gender , and ethnicity ; at - tributes that describe individuals ' relationships with organizations , such as organizational tenure or functional area ; and attributes that identify individuals ' positions within society , such as marital status " ( Lawrence , 1997 : 1 1 ) . The heightened concern with demographic diversity ( hereafter referred to simply as diversity ) stems not only from the growing presence of women and minorities in the work force ( Buhler , 1997 ) but also from modern organizational strategies that require more interaction among employees of different functional backgrounds ( e . g . , Dean and Snell , 1991 ) . One of the most significant bodies of research to arise from this trend is a stream of field studies linking group composi - tion to cognitive task performance - i . e . , performance on tasks that involve generating plans or creative ideas , solving problems , or making decisions . The impact of diversity on cognitive task performance has been examined in studies of top management teams ( e . g . , Bantel and Jackson , 1989 ; Murray , 1989 ; Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven , 1990 ) and lower - level work groups ( e . g . , Kent and McGrath , 1969 ; Mur - nighan and Conlon , 1991 ) . Despite this spotlight on diversity in work groups , there is more to be done . Investigations of diversity and work group performance have largely been what Lawrence ( 1997 ) re - ferred to as " black box " studies , which do not measure in - tervening process variables . Further , the effects on perfor - mance are still unclear . Some studies ( e . g . , Bantel and Jackson , 1989 ) have linked diversity to favorable perfor - mance on cognitive tasks , and some ( e . g . , Murnighan and Conlon , 1991 ) have linked it to unfavorable performance on such tasks . Others ( e . g . , Watson , Kumar , and Michaelson , 1993 ) have shown that group diversity both enhances and diminishes cognitive task performance . To 1 / Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 ( 1999 ) : 1 - 28 1 These two types of conflict have been given a variety of labels , such as substan - tive and affective conflict ( Guetzkow and Gyr , 1954 ; Pelled , 1996 ) , cognitive and affective conflict ( Amason , 1996 ) , sub - stantive conflict and interpersonal conflict ( Eisenhardt , Kahwajy , and Bourgeois , 1997a ) , and task and emotional conflict ( Jehn , 1994 ) . Although they have used different labels , these studies have of - fered similar definitions for the two di - mensions , essentially describing the same constructs . capture fully the complex relationship between work group diversity and performance , we need more sophisticated theories and empirical work incorporating intervening vari - ables and multiple types of diversity . The objective of the current investigation is to begin to meet these needs , offer - ing an intervening process theory - one that attempts to un - tangle the complicated set of relationships among five types of diversity and performance - and providing a test of that theory . Two prior studies that have empirically assessed whether process variables intervene between group diversity and per - formance are particularly important to our efforts . Ancona and Caldwell ( 1992 ) examined the intervening role of internal task process ( i . e . , the setting of goals and priorities ) and ex - ternal communication . Later , Smith et al ' s ( 1994 ) top man - agement team study looked at three potential intervening variables ( social integration , informality of communication , and communication frequency ) . The authors of both studies discovered that the process variables they measured did not fully explain the observed effects of diversity on perfor - mance , and both then suggested that the mediating effect of conflict should be assessed in future research . Hence , in the model we propose and test here , conflict plays an inter - vening role . The model proposes that work group diversity indirectly af - fects cognitive task performance through two kinds of con - flict : intragroup task conflict and intragroup emotional con - flict . Task conflict is a condition in which group members disagree about task issues , including goals , key decision ar - eas , procedures , and the appropriate choice for action , and emotional conflict is a condition in which group members have interpersonal clashes characterized by anger , frustra - tion , and other negative feelings ( Jehn , 1994 ; Eisenhardt , Kahwajy , and Bourgeois , 1997a ) . 1 We suggest that job - re - lated types of diversity largely drive task conflict . In contrast , emotional conflict is shaped by a complex web of diversity types that increase emotional conflict based on stereotyping and decrease emotional conflict based on social comparison . Task routineness and group longevity moderate these diver - sity - conflict relationships . Each type of diversity indirectly affects performance via its relationship with conflict : task conflict tends to enhance performance , while emotional con - flict tends to diminish performance . Thus , we offer a model that postulates that the black box between diversity and per - formance contains a more elaborate set of relationships than previously thought . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESES Link between Diversity and Task Conflict When the members of a work group have different demo - graphic backgrounds , they may have dissimilar belief struc - tures ( Wiersema and Bantel , 1992 ) , i . e . , priorities , assump - tions about future events , and understandings of alternatives ( Hambrick and Mason , 1984 : 195 ) , based on previous train - ing and experiences . As Eisenhardt , Kahwajy , and Bourgeois ( 1 997b : 48 ) recently noted , executives " who have grown up in sales and marketing typically see opportunities and issues 2 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity from vantage points that differ from those who have primar - ily engineering experience . " Such distinct perspectives may stem , in part , from resource allocation and reward disparities ( Donnellon , 1993 ) , which encourage contrasting views of what is important . Due to their respective belief structures , group members with different demographic backgrounds may have divergent preferences and interpretations of tasks ( Dearborn and Simon , 1958 ; Walsh , 1988 ; Waller , Huber , and Glick , 1995 ) . These divergences are likely to manifest them - selves as intragroup task conflict . As diversity within a work group increases , such task conflict is likely to increase . In - creased diversity generally means there is a greater probabil - ity that individual exchanges will be with dissimilar others . Members are more likely to hear views that diverge from their own , so intragroup task conflict may become more pro - nounced . While any type of diversity may trigger task conflict , some are more likely to do so than others , based on the relevance of their corresponding belief structures . People hold multiple belief structures about a variety of information domains ( Walsh , 1988 ) ; those belief structures most relevant to the information processing task at hand tend to influence inter - pretation of that task ( Wickens , 1989 ; Waller , Huber , and Glick , 1995 ) . Thus , demographic attributes corresponding to highly relevant belief structures should be especially influen - tial in the perception of work group tasks . The job - related - ness of a demographic attribute is the degree to which that attribute captures experiences and skills germane to cogni - tive tasks at work ( Pelled , 1996 ; Pelled , Cummings , and Kizi - los , 1999 ) . If work group members differ with respect to a demographic attribute that is low in job - relatedness , then their divergent experiences and knowledge may not pertain to the work they do , and opposing task perceptions may not emerge in the group . If work group members differ with re - spect to a highly job - related demographic attribute , however , then their divergent experiences and knowledge are apt to be pertinent to the task , and incongruent task perceptions are likely to emerge . Diversity with respect to highly job - re - lated attributes is therefore apt to have a stronger relation - ship with task conflict than is diversity with respect to less job - related attributes . Functional background and tenure are highly job - related at - tributes . Both are defined by one ' s workplace experiences , specifically , whether one is exposed to a particular functional area and how much time one has worked for a company . Also , cognitive tasks in organizations typically demand the experience and knowledge obtained through exposure to functional areas and organizational tenure . Ancona and Cald - well ( 1992 ) noted that for tasks such as those of product development teams , functional background and company tenure are likely to be particularly important because they determine one ' s technical skills , information , expertise , and one ' s perspective on an organization ' s history . Others ( Sessa and Jackson , 1995 ; Milliken and Martins , 1996 ; Pelled , 1996 ) have similarly argued that functional background and tenure are especially pertinent to work group tasks . 3 / ASQ , March 1999 Age , gender , and race , in contrast , are low in job - relatedness . In a recent editorial , one scholar even went as far as to argue , " there is no such thing as a woman ' s approach to mathematics or an African American approach to physics " ( Heriot , 1996 : M5 ) . A less extreme and perhaps more realistic assertion is that of Zenger and Lawrence ( 1989 : 357 ) : " Although age similarity may produce similarity in general attitudes about work . . . , such attitudinal similarity is unlikely to have much direct bearing on conversations about technical work . " The same logic applies to race and gender . For example , the attribute race tends to capture a broad collection of experiences , such as traditions followed , treatment received from teachers , and clubs joined . Work experiences may only be a fraction of the total set of experiences it captures ( Pelled , Ledford , and Mohrman , 1998 ) . Sessa and Jackson ( 1995 : 137 ) have observed that race , gender , and age " form the context of more general social relationships " and , compared with tenure and department membership , are less directly associated with team objectives . Functional background and tenure , then , are apt to have a stronger impact on perceptions of work group tasks than are race , gender , and age : Hypothesis 1 ( H1 ) : Functional background and tenure diversity will have stronger positive associations with intragroup task conflict than will diversity in age , gender , and race . Link between Diversity and Emotional Conflict While task conflict is largely shaped by the job - relatedness of diversity , emotional conflict is shaped by a more complex set of forces . One key factor is categorization , the subconscious tendency of individuals to sort each other into social categories , often on the basis of demographic attributes ( Tajfel et al . , 1971 ; Tajfel , 1972 , 1982 ) . Because there is an abundance of information about people and things in our environment , categorization is a useful way to simplify and " make our perceived world more predictable and controllable " ( Zimbardo and Leippe , 1991 : 236 ) . Once categorization takes place , people strive for self - esteem by developing positive opinions of their own category and negative opinions of other categories ( Turner , 1975 ; Tajfel , 1978 ) . They perceive members of their own social category as superior and engage in stereotyping , distancing , and disparaging members of other categories ( Tajfel , 1982 ) . Members of other social categories , in turn , resent such stereotyping and disparaging treatment , and hostile interactions erupt in the group ( Reardon , 1995 ) . These hostile interactions constitute emotional conflict , clashes characterized by anger , resentment , and other negative feelings . As diversity within a work group increases , individuals generally will have more exchanges with those in different social categories . People in different social categories will be directly confronted with each other ' s negative stereotypes and self - serving biases , and emotional conflict may become more pronounced . Although any kind of diversity may provoke categorization - and thus emotional conflict - in this manner , some kinds have a greater tendency to do so than others , depending on 4 / ASQ , Ma rch 1999 2 Personal communication from Blake Ashforth , 1997 . Work Group Diversity the permeability of their defining demographic attributes . The permeability of an attribute is the degree to which that attribute can be altered , moving a person from one social category to another social category . Diversity based on relatively impermeable attributes is particularly likely to yield intercategory clashes . When attributes are not easily penetrated , it is difficult for employees to " stand in the shoes " of those in another social category . Consequently , employees feel especially polarized - and are therefore especially likely to stereotype - members of another category ( Nelson , 1989 ; Kramer , 1991 ) . Race , gender , age , and tenure are not easily permeated . A person cannot change his or her race or gender and must wait a period of time for noteworthy increases in age and tenure . Also , a person can never regress to a younger age or a lesser amount of tenure in the same company . Functional background , in contrast , is more permeable . Employees often can transfer from one functional area to another if they simply want exposure to different areas or if the conditions in another area are better , and many companies " rotate employees in and out of both technical and business - oriented positions to help them round out their skills " ( Ryan , 1991 : 76 ) . Hence , employees may find it easier to identify with those of a different functional background than with those of a different race , gender , age , or tenure . Thus , categorization theory leads to the following prediction : Hypothesis 2a ( H2a ) : Diversity in race , gender , age , and tenure will have stronger positive associations with intragroup emotional conflict than will diversity in functional background . The previous hypothesis , derived from categorization theory , suggests that diversity tends to increase emotional conflict , but it is also possible that diversity diminishes emotional conflict . Festinger ' s ( 1954 ) social comparison theory suggests this competing prediction . 2 According to Festinger , humans have an innate tendency to evaluate themselves and their qualities - e . g . , their opinions , abilities , and progress . Festinger contended that when objective information is unavailable , people prefer to compare themselves with similar others . This preference exists because comparison with a similar other is more meaningful and informative than comparison with someone who is very different . Festinger further asserted that , in Western culture , people feel a pressure to improve their abilities or other qualities continually , and , as a result , they strive to be slightly better than the targets of their comparisons . This process , according to Festinger , leads to competition among similar others . In his original formulation of social comparison theory , Festinger used the term similarity to refer to similarity on the ability or other quality being evaluated . Over the years , however , researchers have found that people also compare themselves with those who are similar on other dimensions , such as attractiveness or gender ( e . g . , Miller , 1982 ; Major and Forcey , 1985 ) . Based on social comparison theory , then , we can expect demographic similarity to be associated with rivalry or professional competition in work groups . Feelings of jealousy and hostility may accompany competitive , rivalrous interactions ( Tjosvold , 1991 ) . Hence , demographic 5 / ASQ , March 1999 similarity ( group homogeneity ) may ultimately be linked to intragroup emotional conflict . As a work group becomes more homogeneous ( i . e . , as diversity decreases ) , individuals generally have more exchanges with similar others . Employees may be confronted with more social comparisons that precipitate rivalrous clashes , and emotional conflict in the group may become more pronounced . While any kind of similarity may trigger social comparison - and thus emotional conflict - in the work context , some kinds of similarity are stronger triggers than others , depending on the career - relatedness of their defining demographic attributes . The career - relatedness of an attribute is the degree to which that attribute is considered in formal and informal assessments of career progress . In a work context , people are especially attuned to career achievements , rather than outside accomplishments . Hence , when employees engage in social comparison at work , they primarily look at those demographic attributes tied to career progress evaluations . Similarity with respect to highly career - related attributes is therefore particularly likely to yield the jealous rivalry that characterizes emotional conflict . Age , tenure , and functional background are highly career - related . There are powerful age norms encouraging employees to expect that career progress comes over time , with age ( Lawrence , 1988 ) . Hence , workers may view people who are similar in age - people at the same stage in life - as yardsticks with which to measure their own career progress , and they may be concerned about falling behind ( e . g . , not being as successful or powerful as ) those persons . For example , a group member who is 25 years old is apt to be more concerned about a 27 - year - old " shining " in the group than about a 50 - year - old shining . By the same token , there are implicit career timetables and expectations for know - how associated with tenure , so employees are inclined to look to others of the same tenure to see who has achieved greater recognition , acquired more expertise , or made more career progress in other ways . Additionally , since formal evaluations of individual employees typically compare employees in the same functional area or department ( Kirkpatrick , 1986 ) , group members may be especially inclined to focus on persons from the same functional area when making social comparisons . Race and gender , in contrast , are less highlighted in informal and formal assessments of career progress . For example , a female employee will not necessarily expect the same degree of influence and recognition as another female employee simply because both are women ; each may bring a different degree of experience to a group . Moreover , comparisons based on gender and race similarity are , in general , not an explicit part of formal evaluations . Thus , consideration of social comparison processes leads to the following expectation : Hypothesis 2b ( H2b ) : Diversity in age , tenure , and functional background will have stronger negative associations with intragroup emotional conflict than will diversity in race and gender . Link between Task and Emotional Conflict Researchers have previously suggested that task and emotional conflict may influence each other . As Ross ( 1989 : 6 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity 140 ) observed , it is possible for task - related disagreements " to generate emotionally harsh language , which can be taken personally . We then have both task and psychological conflicts occurring at the same time . " Group members may feel strongly that their views on a particular issue are correct , and they may show impatience or intolerance when others express different views . Moreover , members whose ideas are disputed may feel that others in the group do not respect their judgment . Tjosvold ( 1991 ) observed that group members sometimes assume their competence is being challenged when their ideas are criticized . Conversely , emotional conflict may sometimes lead to task conflict . Individuals who feel frustrated or angry with other members of their group may have a propensity to dispute the ideas of those other members , for angry people are generally less compliant and agreeable than those who are cheerful ( Milberg and Clark , 1988 ) . Also , there may be a negative halo effect , such that when one feels irritated by or hostile toward another person , one is more inclined to find fault with that person ' s ideas . In their multiple case study of top management teams , Eisenhardt and Bourgeois ( 1988 ) concluded that executives who were engaged in political infighting tended to have distorted perceptions of each other ' s ideas . Even though such conflict is affective in origin , it may evolve into substantive debate : Hypothesis 3 ( H3 ) : There will be a positive association between task conflict and emotional conflict in work groups . Moderators of Diversity - Conflict Linkages Jackson ( 1992 : 155 ) observed that an important but as - yet - unanswered question is , " Does the nature of the task moderate the impact of group composition ? " In addressing this query , a key task feature that warrants attention is task routineness , the extent to which a task has low information processing requirements , set procedures , and stability ( Van de Ven , Delbecq , and Koenig , 1976 ; Gladstein , 1984 ; Jehn , 1995 ) . This feature is especially relevant because it determines the richness of information required for a group ' s task , that is , whether a group needs to draw on different knowledge bases . There are two possible effects that task routineness can have on the positive association between diversity and task conflict . One possibility is that task routineness diminishes the association between diversity and task conflict . When tasks are well - defined and straightforward , group members have little need to exchange opinions or challenge each other . Hence , in groups with routine tasks , even if members have diverse backgrounds , there is only minimal room for task conflict based on those backgrounds . In groups with nonroutine tasks , there is more room for task conflict , so group members with diverse backgrounds are more likely to exchange opposing opinions and preferences derived from their backgrounds . The tendency for diversity to trigger task conflict may therefore be heightened by task nonroutineness , or diminished by task routineness : Hypothesis 4a ( H4a ) : Task routineness will reduce the positive associations between diversity variables and task conflict in work groups . 7 / ASQ , March 1999 An alternative possibility is that task routineness will have the opposite effect . Early theories of optimal arousal ( Hebb , 1955 ; Fiske and Maddi , 1961 ; Berlyne , 1967 ) suggested that people have a preferred level of arousal , a preference for stimulation that is neither too low nor too high . Drawing on these theories , Zuckerman ( 1979 ) postulated that people engage in behaviors that decrease stimulus input when their optimal level of arousal is exceeded and increase stimulus input when they are underaroused . Empirical evidence , including results of sensory deprivation research ( e . g . , Vernon and McGill , 1960 ) and Zuckerman ' s own studies ( 1979 , 1984 ) , is consistent with this notion . An implication of Zuckerman ' s theory , referred to as sensation - seeking theory , is that people who are understimulated will seek experiences and interactions that offer them greater arousal . Since group members performing routine tasks may experience suboptimal levels of stimulation , they may seek opportunities to debate about their tasks to make their work more exciting . More specifically , they may elicit opposing task perspectives from people with different backgrounds , hoping to engage in cognitively stimulating discourse . In contrast , group members performing nonroutine tasks may be sufficiently aroused by the group ' s task and may be less motivated to draw out additional task conflict for the sake of excitement : Hypothesis 4b ( H4b ) : Task routineness will enhance the positive associations between diversity variables and task conflict in work groups . Sensation - seeking theory is not likely to apply in the case of emotional conflict . When tasks are routine , group members are unlikely to seek emotional conflicts with people of different backgrounds , for researchers have found that people typically do not seek unpleasurable arousal when understimulated ( Zuckerman , 1979 ; Gallagher , Diener , and Larsen , 1989 ) . Still , task routineness may influence the relationship between diversity and emotional conflict . People performing complex tasks may be more anxious and , consequently , rely more heavily on cognitive mechanisms for simplifying information processing ( Staw , Sandelands , and Dutton , 1981 ) . In contrast , when tasks are routine , people have less need for such cognitive mechanisms ( e . g . , categorization ) . Thus , the tendency for diversity to trigger categorization and , ultimately , emotional conflict will be weaker when tasks are routine . Research on displaced aggression also suggests that the association between diversity and emotional conflict will be weaker when tasks are routine . Studies have shown that frustrating work conditions lead to more interpersonal aggression among employees ( Storms and Spector , 1987 ; Chen and Spector , 1992 ) . Because routine tasks tend to be less frustrating than complex tasks , members of groups with routine tasks may have less frustration to vent and , consequently , less inclination to blame or " pick on " people of different backgrounds , compared with members of groups with complex tasks : Hypothesis 5 ( H5 ) : Task routineness will reduce the positive associations between diversity variables and emotional conflict in work groups . 8 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity In addition to task routineness , a second moderator likely to operate on diversity - conflict relationships is group longevity , the length of time group members have spent working together ( Katz , 1982 ) . After a period of time , group members may become familiar with the different perspectives in a diverse group . If a group member has an idea , he or she may be able to anticipate other members ' criticisms and , consequently , either frame the idea to make it more acceptable or avoid expressing the idea altogether . Alternatively , through informational social influence , group members may begin to share each other ' s perspectives , arriving at a common understanding of the group ' s tasks ( Katz , 1982 ) . In this manner , group longevity may diminish any tendency for diversity to trigger task conflict . Group longevity may also weaken any positive associations between work group diversity and emotional conflict , for social categories based on demographic attributes may eventually become blurred . The boundaries of the " in " category and the " out " category may change , so that individuals who were once considered outsiders become insiders ( Kramer , 1991 ) . Over time , as members grow accustomed to being in the same work group , the perceived " in " category is apt to become the whole work group , while other work groups are perceived as " out " categories . Since people have a limited focus of attention ( Kahneman , 1973 ; Fiske and Taylor , 1991 ) , their enhanced focus on the group as a category is likely to diminish their focus on demographic categories . Group longevity may therefore moderate any tendency of diversity to yield emotional conflict in work groups : Hypothesis 6 ( H6 ) : Group longevity will diminish the positive associations between diversity variables and conflict in work groups . Task and Emotional Conflict as Mediators : Their Links to Performance The task and emotional conflict triggered by a group ' s diversity may , in turn , affect the cognitive task performance of the group , although the mediating roles of the two types of conflict are apt to differ . The task conflict that diversity yields is likely to enhance group performance on cognitive tasks . Exposure to opposing points of view encourages group members to gather new data , delve into issues more deeply , and develop a more complete understanding of problems and alternative solutions ( Tjosvold , 1986 ) . Also , the constructive criticism associated with task conflict can facilitate vigilant problem solving , an approach that Janis ( 1989 ) recommended for making important decisions . If group members fail to criticize each other ' s ideas because they are too concerned about maintaining unanimity , they may overlook important details , succumbing to " groupthink " ( Janis , 1982 ) . Previous case study and empirical findings support the notion that task conflict enhances cognitive task performance . Hoffman and Maier ( 1961 ) found in a lab study that groups with conflicting opinions produced better solutions to standardized sets of problems . Later , using a sample of student groups , Jehn ( 1994 ) showed that task 9 / ASQ , March 1999 conflict was positively associated with group performance on a class project . In a multiple case study , Eisenhardt , Kahwajy , and Bourgeois ( 1997b ) found that top management teams in high - performing firms had higher task conflict than teams in low - performing firms . Amason ' s ( 1996 ) large - scale study of top management teams was consistent with this pattern , revealing that task conflict was positively associated with decision quality . Thus , Hypothesis 7 ( H7 ) : Task conflict will have a positive association with the cognitive task performance of work groups . In contrast to task conflict , the emotional conflict yielded by diversity is likely to impair the cognitive task performance of work groups . First , since anxiety ( an emotion that characterizes emotional conflict ) often leads to cognitive interference ( Sarason , 1984 ) , group members may not take relevant information into consideration when solving problems . Second , the hostility that characterizes affective conflict may make group members reluctant to share or listen to each other ' s potentially useful ideas or information . Third , when there is emotional conflict , group members are likely to consume time and energy making - or defending themselves against - personal attacks ; as a result , they may have little remaining time and energy to devote to critical task - related matters ( Evan , 1965 ; Jehn , 1994 ) . The results of prior research are consistent with the notion that emotional conflict impairs cognitive task performance . Evan ' s ( 1965 ) study of research and development teams suggested that interpersonal attacks diminished team productivity . Also , Jehn ' s ( 1994 ) above - mentioned study of student groups showed that intragroup emotional conflict was negatively associated with group performance on a class project . Similarly , Amason ' s ( 1996 ) study of top management teams revealed that emotional conflict , which he called affective conflict , was negatively associated with decision quality . Eisenhardt , Kahwajy , and Bourgeois ( 1997b ) , too , found that emotional conflict impaired team process and firm performance . Thus , Hypothesis 8 ( H8 ) : Emotional conflict will have a negative association with the cognitive task performance of work groups . The above eight hypotheses constitute an intervening process theory of work group diversity , conflict , and performance . Below we describe the field study conducted to test our hypotheses . METHODS Sample Participants in this study included the members of 45 teams from the electronics divisions of three major corporations . The teams were involved in monitoring and modifying work processes with the objective of improving those processes , and often they were also involved in the design of new products . All teams were assembled to complete lengthy but time - limited projects , and many of the teams were cross - functional , including research and development ( R & D ) and manufacturing representatives within their functional mixtures . They also were engaged in cognitive tasks that , 1O / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity according to team members ' assessments , ranged from moderate to high complexity . We obtained team performance ratings from 41 out of 45 team managers and received completed questionnaires from members of all 45 teams . Although the number of teams is modest by some standards , it compares well with other field studies and , as a field study , yields valuable insights not at - tainable in the laboratory . A total of 443 team - member ques - tionnaires were distributed , and 317 were returned . On aver - age , 73 percent of the members of a team returned completed questionnaires . The teams in our sample had an average size of approximately 10 members ( s . d . = 3 . 2 ) . The average team had a mean age of 38 . 5 years ( s . d . = 5 . 5 ) and a mean tenure of 10 . 6 years ( s . d . = 4 . 9 ) . Also , the average percentage of nonwhites on a team was 19 percent ( s . d . = 21 percent ) ; the average percentage of women on a team was 25 percent ( s . d . = 18 percent ) ; and the average R & D representation on a team was 44 percent ( s . d . = 33 percent ) . Measures Diversity . This study included two types of work group diver - sity indices , one for numeric demographic data and another for categorical demographic data . The team - member ques - tionnaire was the source of demographic data used to com - pute these indices . Following an approach recommended by Allison ( 1978 ) for numeric variables , we used the coefficient of variation ( standard deviation divided by the mean ) to mea - sure age diversity and tenure diversity . Thus , to assess age diversity within teams , we divided each team ' s standard de - viation of age by the team ' s mean age . Similarly , we as - sessed company tenure diversity within teams by dividing each team ' s standard deviation of tenure by the team ' s mean tenure . To measure team diversity with respect to categorical vari - ables ( functional background , gender , and race ) , we used an index recommended by Teachman ( 1980 ) : H = - Pi ( InP1 ) . 1 = 1 The index takes into account how work group members are distributed among the possible categories of a variable . The total number of categories of a variable equals 1 , and Pi is the fraction of team members falling into category 1 . For ex - ample , the gender variable has two possible categories ( I = 2 ) : 1 corresponds to a woman and 2 to a man . If a given team of ten members has three women and seven men , then P1 equals . 3 , P2 equals . 7 , and H equals . 61 . If a team of ten members has one woman and nine men , then P1 equals . 1 , P2 equals . 9 , and H equals . 32 . As Ancona and Caldwell ( 1992 : 328 ) noted , " The only exception occurs when [ a category ] is not represented . " In such a case , one cannot set Pi equal to zero , for the natural logarithm of zero does not exist ; thus , one would only use the Pi values for the other categories to compute H . Conflict . The task conflict scale ( et = . 78 ) comprised four questionnaire items based on Jehn ' s ( 1994 ) measure of task conflict , and the emotional conflict scale ( ax = . 83 ) comprised 1 1 / ASQ , March 1999 four questionnaire items adapted from Jehn ' s ( 1994 ) emotional conflict scale . Each item measured conflict on a 5 - point Likert scale . Group - level indices of task and emotional conflict were formed by averaging individual - level indices of task and emotional conflict . Aggregation to the group level was justified by an eta square of . 33 for task conflict ( F = 3 . 03 , p < . 001 ) and an eta square of . 32 for emotional conflict ( F = 2 . 92 , p < . 001 ) . In general , an eta square greater than . 20 indicates that any two people within the same group are more similar in their responses than two people who are members of different groups ( Georgopoulos , 1986 ; Florin et al . , 1990 ) . Moderators . The task routineness measure ( a - = . 62 ) comprised three items drawn from Gladstein ' s ( 1984 ) task complexity measure , reverse - scored on a 5 - point Likert scale . Aggregation to the group level was justified by an eta square of . 31 ( F = 2 . 72 , p < . 001 ) . To ensure the discriminant validity of the task conflict , emotional conflict , and task routineness items , we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) . Table 1 shows the results of this analysis . The CFA , which used the maximum likelihood method , produced a chi square of 46 . 90 with 41 degrees of freedom ( i . e . , a chi square of 1 . 14 per degree of freedom ) . The goodness - of - fit index is . 98 , and the root - mean - square residual is . 035 . These figures indicate that there is a good fit between the data and the theoretical factor structure ( Wheaton , Alwing , and Summers , 1977 ) . Our group longevity measure , following previous studies ( Katz , 1982 ; Smith et al . , 1994 ) , was the average length of time the members of a team had belonged to that team . A team with a higher average has a longer history of working together . Performance . Using 5 - point Likert scales , each team ' s manager rated the team on two dimensions from Ancona and Caldwell ' s ( 1992 ) measure of manager - rated team Table 1 Results of Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Task Routineness and Intragroup Conflict Items Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Task Relationship Task Item conflict conflict routineness 1 . To what extent are there differences of opinion in your team ? . 68 2 . How often do the members of your team disagree about how things should be done ? . 83 3 . How often do the members of your team disagree about which procedure should be used to do your work ? . 76 4 . To what extent are the arguments in your team task - related ? . 57 5 . How much are personality clashes evident in your team ? . 80 6 . How much tension is there among the members of your team ? . 83 7 . How often do people get angry while working in your team ? . 62 8 . How much jealousy or rivalry is there among the members of your team ? . 70 9 . The technology , required skills , and information needed by the team are constantly changing . [ reverse - scored ] . 67 10 . During a normal work week , exceptions frequently arise that require substantially different methods or procedures for the team . [ reverse - scored ] . 79 11 . Frequent interaction between team members is needed to do our work effectively . [ reverse - scored ] . 47 12 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity performance : efficiency of team operations and number of innovations or new ideas introduced by the team . The group performance measure comprised these items ( a = . 61 ) . Principal components analysis revealed that the items constituted a single factor accounting for 74 percent of the variance in responses . Each item in the scale had a factor loading of . 86 . When forming each multi - item measure in this study ( i . e . , task conflict , emotional conflict , task routineness , and performance ) , we combined items by using factor scores as weights and computed a weighted sum of scale items , as described by Pedhazur and Schmelkin ( 1991 : 125 ) . Using factor scores in this manner creates a more accurate measure than simply computing a mean , which assigns equal weights to items . This procedure was feasible because respondents answered all of the items in a scale . Controls . Group size was a control variable in our study because the literature on groups has noted that size is a key variable influencing group dynamics and performance ( Brewer and Kramer , 1986 ) and because larger teams have more potential for heterogeneity ( Bantel and Jackson , 1989 ; Jackson et al . , 1991 ) . We also controlled for site differences in our regressions . In particular , Site B had a distinct culture . It was more conservative and bureaucratic than the other two sites , offered less training in team skills , and was heavily connected to the declining defense industry . We controlled for group longevity and task routineness ( the moderators described above ) because previous research has found that the average tenure of group members and the nature of group tasks often influence group interactions and performance ( e . g . , Katz , 1982 ; Weingart , 1992 ) . Also , when testing for moderating effects , it is necessary to control for the main effect of the moderating variable ( Baron and Kenny , 1986 ) . Data Analysis We tested the hypotheses using seemingly unrelated regression ( SURE ) and ordinary least squares regression . When evaluating the significance of most predicted effects ( all except those predicted in competing hypotheses ) , we used one - tailed tests , which are suitable for directional hypotheses ( Erickson and Nosanchuk , 1977 ; Wonnacott and Wonnacott , 1984 ) . LISREL was not an alternative for this study because it was inappropriate for our sample size ( Breckler , 1990 ) . Hypotheses 1 through 6 ( with the exception of hypothesis 3 ) were tested with SURE analyses . SURE is a statistical technique that solves a set of regression equations simultaneously and allows for error covariances among the equations ( Zellner , 1962 ; Parker and Dolich , 1986 ; Ghosh , 1991 ) . It is appropriate to use the technique in this study because the predictors in the equations with emotional conflict as a dependent variable have considerable overlap with the predictors in the equations with task conflict as a dependent variable . Also , we expected that task and emotional conflict would be significantly correlated . Each SURE analysis involved two equations , one that had task 13 / ASQ , March 1999 conflict as the dependent variable and another that had emo - tional conflict as the dependent variable . Our first SURE analysis only included control variables as predictors . In the second SURE analysis , we included both diversity and control variables as predictors . In the third SURE analysis , we added interaction terms , having mean centered the interaction term variables to reduce potential multicollinearity effects . We used the likelihood ratio test ( Kennedy , 1979 ; Ghosh , 1991 ) to determine the goodness of fit of the models . For the likelihood ratio test , the criterion is as follows : - 2 [ ln ( likelihood functionconstrained model ) - fn ( likelihood functionunconstrained model ) ] The criterion has a x2 distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of constraints . To test H3 , which suggested that task and emotional conflict would be positively associated , we examined the zero - order correlation between the two conflict measures . We also per - formed an OLS regression ( not shown but available from the authors ) , using the approach that Smith et al . ( 1994 ) used in their study of demography , group process , and performance when assessing the effect of one intervening process vari - able ( informality of communication ) on another intervening process variable ( social integration ) . They treated social inte - gration as an " intervening dependent variable , " while " all team demography and control variables , plus informality of communication were treated as independent variables " ( 1994 : 429 ) . Here , we assessed the effect of emotional con - flict on task conflict by regressing task conflict on the diver - sity variables , controls , and emotional conflict . Similarly , we assessed the effect of task conflict on emotional conflict by regressing emotional conflict on the diversity variables , con - trols , and task conflict . When testing H7 and H8 , which posited that task and emo - tional conflict would act as mediators between diversity and group performance , we followed a standard procedure used to test for mediating effects , " first , regressing the mediator on the independent variable ; second , regressing the depen - dent variable on the independent variable ; and third , regress - ing the dependent variable on both the independent variable and on the mediator . . . " ( Baron and Kenny , 1986 : 1177 ) . The independent variables were the diversity variables in this study , and the proposed mediating variables were task and emotional conflict . The dependent variable was group perfor - mance . After running the regressions , we examined the re - sults to see if a mediating effect was present . Pure media - tion calls for the following conditions ( Baron and Kenny , 1986 ) : First , the independent ( diversity ) variables should af - fect the mediator ( task or emotional conflict ) in the first equation . Second , the independent variables should affect the dependent variable ( performance ) in the second equa - tion . Third , the mediator ( task or emotional conflict ) should affect the dependent variable in the third equation , and the effect of the independent variables on the dependent vari - able should be less in the third equation than in the second equation . 14 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity RESULTS Table 2 shows the means , standard deviations , and correla - tions among all predictor , outcome , and control variables . We performed several checks on the correlational properties of the data before testing our hypotheses . First , we re - viewed the correlations among the independent variables shown in table 2 . The median correlation magnitude ( abso - lute value ) was . 19 , and the correlation with the greatest magnitude was . 48 . As noted by Tsui et al . ( 1995 : 1531 ) , " There is no definitive criterion for the level of correlation that constitutes a serious multicollinearity problem . The gen - eral rule of thumb is that it should not exceed . 75 . " Similarly , Kennedy ( 1979 ) indicated that correlations of . 8 or higher are problematic . As a second check , we examined the variance inflation factor ( VIF ) of each independent variable . The larg - est VIF in our regressions was less than 3 , a sign that multi - collinearity was not a problem ( Guo , Chumlea , and Cockram , 1996 ) . As described earlier , H1 , 2a , and 2b were tested with SURE analysis involving two equations . Using the likelihood - ratio test , we determined that the goodness of fit of this two - equation model was = 24 . 81 ( d . f . = 10 ; p < . 01 ) . Table 3 presents the SURE equations with task conflict as the de - pendent variable . Model 2 tested H1 , that functional back - ground and tenure diversity would have positive associations with task conflict in work groups . This hypothesis was sup - ported for functional background diversity , which had a sig - nificant positive relationship with task conflict ( beta = 1 . 08 , p < . 05 ) , while , consistent with the same hypothesis , diversity in race , gender , and age had nonsignificant associations with task conflict . Unexpectedly , the relationship between tenure diversity and task conflict was also nonsignificant . This sug - gests that functional background diversity is the key demo - graphic driver of task conflict . Table 4 presents the SURE equations with emotional conflict as the dependent variable . Model 2 tested H2a and 2b , Table 2 Means , Standard Deviations , and Intercorrelations among Study Variables * Mean S . D . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 . Group size 9 . 84 3 . 17 - 2 . Task routineness 5 . 31 . 94 - . 10 - 3 . Group longevity . 89 . 71 . 43 - . 03 - 4 . Site B - - - . 04 . 22 . 08 - 5 . Emotional conflict 4 . 58 1 . 04 . 35 - . 43 . 03 . 09 - 6 . Task conflict 6 . 93 1 . 32 . 28 - . 23 . 01 . 32 . 48 - 7 . Race diversity . 45 . 42 - . 18 . 09 - . 17 - . 46 - . 04 - . 24 - 8 . Gender diversity . 48 . 20 - . 20 . 26 - . 28 . 31 - . 10 . 03 . 25 - 9 . Age diversity . 24 . 08 - . 14 . 30 - . 14 - . 06 - . 45 - . 27 . 19 . 18 - 10 . Company tenure diversity . 72 . 20 . 18 - . 06 . 37 - . 25 . 27 - . 01 - . 08 - . 35 - . 18 - 11 . Functional background diversity . 64 . 37 - . 07 . 22 - . 24 - . 07 - . 21 . 14 . 26 . 19 . 33 - . 16 - 12 . Group performance 6 . 26 1 . 30 . 16 . 00 . 40 - . 30 - . 07 . 05 - . 02 - . 19 . 09 . 36 - . 13 * Because the emotional conflict , task conflict , task routineness , and group performance measures were each formed by using factor scores to compute weighted sums of scale items , their means may exceed 5 , even though their items had only 5 response anchors . All correlations above . 19 are significant at p < . 10 , one - tailed tests . All correlations above . 25 are significant at p < . 05 , one - tailed tests . 15 / ASQ , March 1999 Table 3 Seemingly Unrelated Regression ( SURE ) Results : Equations with Task Conflict as Dependent Variable ( N = 45 ) * Model Independent variables 1 2 3 4 Controls Group size . 14 - - . 12 - - . 11 - - . 08 Site B 1 . 25 - - - 1 . 3400 1 . 41000 1 . 2800 Task routineness - . 39 - - - . 40 - - - . 42 - - - . 52 - Group longevity - . 33 - . 30 - . 18 - . 19 Predictors Race diversity ( RD ) - . 02 . 15 . 11 Gender diversity ( GD ) - . 04 . 17 . 50 Age diversity ( AD ) - 3 . 64 - 3 . 46 - 4 . 17 - Company tenure diversity ( TD ) . 64 . 58 . 61 Functional background diversity ( FD ) . 1 08 - - . 98 - - 1 . 0100 Interactions FD x Task routineness . 74 - FD x Group longevity - . 153 - ' R - squared . 29 . 39 . 44 . 42 * p < . 10 ; - p < . 05 ; - - p < . 01 . * Entries are SURE coefficients . One - tailed tests were used for effects predicted in directional hypotheses . predictions about diversity and emotional conflict based on categorization theory and social comparison theory , respec - tively . Consistent with H2a , both tenure diversity ( beta = 1 . 76 , p < . 01 ) and race diversity ( beta = . 81 , p < . 05 ) had significant positive associations with emotional conflict , while functional background diversity did not . Consistent with H2b , age diversity had a significant negative association with emotional conflict ( beta = - 3 . 43 , p < . 05 ) . Surprisingly , gender diversity was not significantly related to emotional conflict in either direction . As a sensitivity analysis , we replaced each of our diversity measures for categorical variables ( race , functional back - ground , and gender ) with an alternative measure . Instead of Teachman ' s index , we used Blau ' s ( 1977 ) heterogeneity in - dex : H = 1 - ( p 2 i = = 1 where Pi is the proportion of group members in category i , and I is the number of possible categories . For example , if a given team of ten members has three women and seven men , then P1 equals . 3 , P2 equals . 7 , and H equals . 42 . With this alternative measure , we still obtained the pattern of re - sults described above . Since the effect of gender diversity was nonsignificant , we conducted several additional sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of this result . We replaced our gender diversity measure with the simpler measure that South et al . ( 1982 ) used in their study of intergender relations : the proportion of women in a work group . This measure , like Teachman ' s , re - vealed no significant effect of gender diversity . Next , we 16 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity Table 4 Seemingly Unrelated Regression ( SURE ) Results : Equations with Emotional Conflict as Dependent Variable ( N = 45 ) * Model Independent variables 1 2 3 4 Controls Group size . 12 - - . 13 - - - . 12 - . - Site B . 49 - 1 . 04 - - - 1 . 20 - 1 . 06 - - - Task routineness - . 47 - - - - . 41 - - - - . 48 - - . 43000 Group longevity - . 22 - . 49 - - - . 49 - - - - . 52 - - - Predictors Race diversity ( RD ) . 81 - - . 89 - - - . 7600 Gender diversity ( GD ) - . 27 - . 19 - . 36 Age diversity ( AD ) - 3 . 4300 - 2 . 63 - - 3 . 5200 Company tenure diversity ( TD ) 1 . 76000 1 . 74000 1 . 64000 Functional background diversity ( FD ) - . 23 - . 38 - . 12 Interactions RD x Task routineness - 1 . 12 - TD x Task routineness - . 59 - RD x Group longevity - . 70 - - TD x Group longevity - 1 . 44 - R - squared . 32 . 54 . 60 . 59 p < . 10 ; " p < . 05 ; . . . p < . 01 . * Entries are SURE coefficients . One - tailed tests were used for effects predicted in directional hypotheses . used a dummy variable to indicate whether or not a group was skewed , with women constituting less than 20 percent of its membership or men constituting less than 20 percent of its membership ( Kanter , 1977 ) . We looked at the effects of skewness in favor of men ( i . e . , larger proportion of men ) , skewness in favor of women , and skewness in general , and still , we found no significant effects of gender composition on conflict in work groups . Our initial test of H3 , which predicted a positive association between task conflict and emotional conflict , was the zero - order correlation between the two variables . The two types of conflict were positively correlated ( r = . 48 , p < . 01 ) , consistent with H3 . Several OLS regressions ( not shown but available from the authors ) corroborated this finding . A regression of task conflict on diversity variables , controls , and emotional conflict showed that emotional conflict was a significant predictor of task conflict ( beta = . 35 , p < . 05 ) . A regression of emotional conflict on diversity variables , controls , and task conflict showed that task conflict was a significant predictor of emotional conflict ( beta = . 26 , p < . 05 ) . Like HI and 2 , H4a , 4b , and 5 were tested with a SURE analysis involving two equations . Using the likelihood ratio test , we determined that the goodness of fit of this two - equation model was X2 = 10 . 36 ( d . f . = 3 ; p < . 05 ) . Hypothesis 4a proposed that task routineness would reduce the positive relationships between diversity and task conflict , while competing hypothesis 4b suggested that task routineness would enhance the positive relationships between diversity and task conflict . In table 3 ( above ) , model 3 presents the equation that tested these predictions . 17 / ASQ , March 1999 3 To interpret each significant interaction further , we took an additional analytical step not shown in this paper ( but available from the authors ) . Specifically , we examined the functional form of the interactions . This procedure , which Schoonhoven ( 1981 ) described in detail , is appropriate for interactions involving two continuous variables and avoids the information loss associated with median split procedures . First , we took a partial derivative to determine mathematically whether the moderated relationship ( i . e . , the relationship between the diversity variable and conflict , moderated by either task routineness or group longevity ) was monotonic or nonmonotonic . We then plotted the partial derivative over the range of the mean - centered moderating variable ( either task routineness or group longevity ) ; this plot illustrated how the relationship between diversity and conflict changed over the range of the moderator ' s values ( i . e . , the values of task routineness or group longevity ) . Consistent with H4b , the interaction of task routineness and functional background diversity had a significant positive association with task conflict ( beta = . 74 , p < . 10 ) , suggesting that functional background differences were more likely to trigger task conflict when tasks were routine than when tasks were nonroutine . A partial derivative analysis revealed that the effect of functional background diversity on task conflict was monotonic over the range of task routineness observed in our sample . A graphical display showed that the effect was stronger for higher levels of task routineness . H5 proposed that task routineness would diminish the positive relationships between diversity and emotional conflict . In table 4 , model 3 presents the equation that tested this hypothesis . Consistent with H5 , the interaction of task routineness and race diversity had a significant negative association with emotional conflict ( beta = - 1 . 12 , p < . 05 ) , and the interaction of task routineness and tenure diversity had a significant negative association with emotional conflict ( beta = - . 59 , p < . 05 ) . Partial derivative analyses revealed that the effects of race diversity and tenure diversity were monotonic over the range of task routineness observed in our sample . Graphical displays showed that these effects were weaker for higher levels of task routineness . H6 proposed that group longevity would diminish the positive relationships between diversity and conflict . This hypothesis was tested with a SURE analysis involving two equations , one for task conflict and one for emotional conflict . The goodness of fit of this two - equation model was X2 = 9 . 486 ( d . f . = 3 ; p < . 05 ) . As revealed in model 4 of tables 3 and 4 , all moderating effects of longevity supported H6 . The interaction of group longevity and functional background diversity had a significant negative association with task conflict ( beta = - 1 . 53 , p < . 05 ) . The interaction of group longevity and race diversity had a significant negative association with emotional conflict ( beta = - . 70 , p < . 05 ) , as did the interaction of group longevity and tenure diversity ( beta = - 1 . 44 , p < . 1O ) . Partial derivative analyses revealed that the effects of the diversity variables were nonmonotonic over the range of longevity in our sample . Graphical displays showed that longevity had to reach a certain threshold to diminish the diversity - conflict relationships . For functional background diversity , this threshold was . 66 years . For race diversity , the threshold was 1 . 09 years , and for tenure diversity , the threshold was 1 . 14 years . The above - mentioned regressions of conflict against diversity variables constituted the first portion of our tests of mediating effects . Table 5 displays the remaining portions required by the Baron and Kenny ( 1986 ) method . Model 2 of table 5 shows the regression of our dependent variable ( performance ) against the independent variables ( diversity measures ) and controls . Model 3 shows the regression of our dependent variable against one process variable ( task conflict ) , the independent variables , and controls . Model 4 shows the regression of our dependent variable against another process variable ( emotional conflict ) , the independent variables , and controls . Finally , model 5 shows the regression of our dependent variable against both 18 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity process variables ( task and emotional conflict ) , the independent variables , and controls . The results do not strictly satisfy all requirements for a mediating effect , for we did not find a significant relationship between diversity and performance in model 2 , although we did find evidence ( model 3 ) that task conflict is positively associated with cognitive task performance ( beta = . 30 , p < . 05 ) , as H7 predicted . This positive relationship remained when diversity variable predictors were removed from the equation . Thus far , an implicit assumption in our hypotheses and analyses has been that the effects of diversity variables on conflict are independent of one another . It is conceivable , however , that this is not the case . Interactions among different types of diversity may also shape work unit dynamics ( Alexander et al . , 1995 ) . Therefore , we performed additional , exploratory analyses to examine how the joint effects of diversity variables influenced conflict in these data . Given the exploratory nature of this analysis , we used two - tailed tests . Since there were five diversity variables , the number of possible combinations of two diversity variables was 10 . We ran 10 SURE analyses to assess the effects of these 10 diversity variable interaction pairs on each of two conflict variables . Out of 20 possible interaction effects , four were significant . Gender diversity and age diversity had a positive interaction effect on emotional conflict ( beta = 17 . 40 , p < . 05 ) , as did gender diversity and functional background diversity ( beta = 4 . 00 , p < . 05 ) . Age diversity and tenure diversity had a negative interaction effect on emotional conflict ( beta = - 15 . 39 , p < . 05 ) , and the interaction between race diversity and functional background diversity had a negative effect on task conflict ( beta = - 2 . 50 , p < . 05 ) . Table 5 Regression of Group Performance on Conflict , Diversity , and Control Variables ( N = 41 ) * Model Independent variables 1 2 3 4 5 Controls Group size . 02 . 03 - . 07 . 00 - . 05 Task routineness . 16 . 17 . 22 . 19 . 19 Group longevity . 44 - - . 35 - - . 40 - - . 370 . 37e Site B - . 39 - - . 40 - - - . 51 - - - - . 42 - - . 48 - - Diversity variables Race diversity - . 12 - . 1 1 - . 14 - . 09 Age diversity . 13 . 20 . 14 . 18 Company tenure diversity . 14 . 11 . 12 . 14 Functional background diversity - . 1 0 - . 19 - . 10 - . 21 Conflict variables Task conflict . 3000 . 32 - - Emotional conflict . 06 - . 09 R - squared . 29 . 34 . 40 . 34 . 40 F 3 . 70 - - 2 . 06 - 2 . 27 - - 1 . 79 2 . 00 ' * Sp < . 10 ; so p < . 05 ; . . . p < . 01 . * Entries are standardized regression coefficients . One - tailed tests were used for effects predicted in directional hypotheses . 1 9 / ASQ , March 1999 DISCUSSION Researchers of work group demography and top management team composition have often relied on the argument that diversity increases conflict , which , in turn , influences group performance . This study assesses the validity of that argument and reveals that the black box between diversity and performance is complex . Our results suggest that different types of diversity have distinctive effects . The diversity variables that drive task conflict differ from those that drive emotional conflict , and task conflict , in turn , tends to have more favorable performance consequences than emotional conflict . Additionally , our findings indicate that diversity can both increase and decrease conflict . The results also suggest that the combination of diversity types present and several contextual moderators influence the strength of the relationship between a particular diversity variable and conflict . In short , our findings point to multiple interrelated factors that must be considered when determining how work group composition will shape conflict and , ultimately , performance . Given that a preponderance of group research has been confined to laboratory settings , the current study is noteworthy in its use of field data , including team members ' questionnaires as well as managers ' ratings of team performance , but the data are not without limitations . In particular , they are cross - sectional , a feature that renders causal interpretations difficult . Also , the sample size of 45 teams , while substantial for a field investigation , limits the power of statistical tests . In addition , several of our predictor variables ( e . g . , age diversity ) had only modest variation across groups , so their effects may be underestimated . Nonetheless , this study begins to develop a multifaceted model of demographics , process variables , and outcomes , and the use of workplace data helps ensure that our findings have external validity . The findings themselves reveal some telling relationships among diversity , conflict , and performance . Diversity and Conflict The findings suggest that task conflict is a relatively straightforward phenomenon driven by functional background differences , a highly job - related type of diversity . Apparently , because functional background is so related to work , people are particularly likely to draw on belief structures based on functional background when addressing workplace issues ; hence , functional background differences are the key source of task conflict in work groups . This result substantiates managers ' use of cross - functional teams to create difference of opinion . While task conflict is a relatively simple phenomenon driven by functional background differences , our findings suggest that emotional conflict is more complicated . On one hand , emotional conflict is increased by dissimilarity in race and tenure . It appears that , because race and tenure attributes are relatively impermeable , people find it difficult to identify with ( and easy to stereotype ) those of a different race or tenure . Race and tenure differences therefore tend to 20 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity encourage heated interactions in work groups . Given this tendency , managers may want to pay particular attention to group process in multi - race and mixed - tenure settings . On the other hand , emotional conflict is increased by similarity in age . Any tendency for age differences to trigger emotional conflict appears to be overshadowed by the tendency for age similarity to trigger social comparison and , ultimately , emotional conflict . Age is a career - related attribute , so em - ployees tend to measure their own career progress by look - ing at that of coworkers in their age cohort ( Lawrence , 1988 ) . When age similarity in a group increases , these ca - reer progress comparisons , which prompt jealous rivalry , of - ten increase . As Hambrick ( 1994 : 202 ) noted , " if group members are extremely similar , they face the prospect of head - on rivalries that could drive them apart . . . . This might particularly occur if several group members were the same age and vying to be the next group leader . . . . " Overall , these findings suggest that diverse groups face countervail - ing forces , such that some forms of diversity increase con - flict and other forms do the reverse . Hence , managers must be prepared to meet challenges presented by heterogeneity as well as homogeneity in their work groups . The lack of a gender diversity effect in this study is intrigu - ing , given that other studies have found important effects of gender heterogeneity on work group outcomes , including reduced performance on cognitive tasks ( Kent and McGrath , 1969 ; Murnighan and Conlon , 1991 ) , reduced cross - gender support ( South et al . , 1982 ) , and increased within - gender support ( Ely , 1994 ) . One possible interpretation is that gen - der composition , by itself , is unrelated to conflict . Alterna - tively , gender diversity may trigger categorization and social comparison processes that cancel each other ' s effects . Yet another possibility is that the absence of gender diversity effects on conflict stems from the bicategorical nature of gender . If a demographic attribute has only two possible cat - egories , then an increase in group diversity means that the distribution in the group becomes more balanced . When this occurs , members of the category previously holding the nu - merical majority have less opportunity to interact with similar others ; consequently , they may face more conflicts . Mem - bers of the category previously in the numerical minority , however , have a greater opportunity to interact with similar others ; consequently , they may face fewer conflicts . Hence , the net level of the conflict in the work group may change very little . Future research could profitably examine gender dynamics further . Our exploratory analysis of diversity variable interactions yielded four significant findings . Some of these lend cre - dence to recent arguments by Alexander et al . ( 1995 ) . For example , we found that age diversity and tenure diversity , which were negatively correlated , had a negative interaction effect on emotional conflict . This finding is consistent with Alexander et al ' s ( 1995 ) assertion that when two types of diversity are negatively correlated , categorization may be - come more difficult , and intercategory tensions may be less likely . Conversely , the positive interaction effect of gender diversity and age diversity supports Alexander et al ' s 21 / ASQ , Ma rch 1 999 claim that categorization is easier - and intercategory tensions more likely - when two types of diversity are positively correlated . The positive interaction effect of gender diversity and functional background diversity also supports this claim . Another exploratory finding , the negative interaction effect of race diversity and functional background diversity on task conflict , may reflect subtle racism , a form of prejudice that is more indirect and difficult to detect than old - fashioned direct racial prejudice ( Dovidio and Gaertner , 1991 ) . Due to societal norms discouraging the blatant expression of racial prejudice , employees may have reverted to a less obvious form of discrimination . That is , they may have ignored the opinions of persons from different functional areas when those persons were of a different race as well . Any interpretations of the observed diversity variable interactions must be treated with caution , however , given the exploratory nature of these analyses . Nonetheless , they do represent an avenue for future research . Moderator Effects Our work also extends traditional main - effects research on diversity by examining conditional effects . We found that task routineness and diversity interacted to influence conflict , although the direction of this interaction effect was not the same for both types of conflict . While task routineness reduced the positive associations between diversity and emotional conflict , it enhanced the positive associations between diversity and task conflict . The effect on emotional conflict supports our reasoning that , because routine tasks create less frustration than complex tasks , people in groups performing routine tasks are less likely to displace frustration onto dissimilar others . The effect on task conflict supports the notion that group members performing routine tasks seek task debates with dissimilar others to make their work more interesting . Consistent with previous sensation - seeking research , our study suggests that when a task is understimulating , people seek arousing experiences ( e . g . , task conflict based on background differences ) but not unpleasant arousing experiences ( e . g . , emotional conflict based on background differences ) . The moderating effects of group longevity were consistent with our hypotheses as well . The positive associations between diversity variables and both types of conflict were weaker in groups with more longevity . Apparently , after working together for a period of time , group members of different backgrounds either develop a shared understanding of tasks or learn to anticipate and deflect opposition to their ideas . Additionally , during that period , the boundaries of social categories may become blurred , so that individuals who were once considered out - group members become in - group members . Conflict and Performance Another significant finding in our sample of work groups was that task conflict had a positive association with cognitive task performance . Such conflict evidently fosters a deeper understanding of task issues and an exchange of information 22 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity that facilitates problem solving , decision making , and the generation of ideas . Although we found that functional background diversity was related to task conflict and task conflict was related to performance ( both with and without controlling for diversity variables ) , a third sign was needed to verify a mediating effect : a positive relationship between diversity and performance , without task conflict included in the equation . We did not see that third sign , perhaps because we were unable to use a full structural equation model . A LISREL analysis with a larger sample may ultimately confirm mediation . Surprisingly , we found no evidence that emotional conflict impaired performance . In a recent study , Jehn ( 1995 ) found no relationship between emotional conflict and performance , despite having found one before ( Jehn , 1994 ) . She explained that " while relationship troubles cause great dissatisfaction , the conflicts may not influence work as much as expected , because the members involved in the conflicts choose to avoid working with those with whom they experience [ emotional ] conflict " ( Jehn , 1995 : 276 ) . In the present study , subjects may also have found ways to cope with those with whom they had emotional conflicts . Although there are clear theoretical and empirical distinctions between task and emotional conflict , our results show that each type of conflict tends to accompany the other . Task conflicts may be taken personally by group members and generate emotional conflict , or emotional conflict may prompt group members to criticize each other ' s ideas , thereby fostering task conflict . Taken together , our findings suggest that diversity variables can influence conflict and yet , with the exception of functional background diversity , do not necessarily have much bearing on work group performance . That is , while race , tenure , and age diversity influenced emotional conflict , they lacked substantial ties to performance . Groups ( at least these groups ) were apparently able to manage their negative effects . At the same time , except in the case of functional background diversity , groups did not achieve sizable gains from background differences . Directions for Future Research This investigation opens a number of avenues for related research . One avenue is to continue exploring the role of process variables in the relationship between work group diversity and performance . Although we have measured task and emotional conflict in this study , it would also be helpful to measure some of the other process variables , such as social comparison , categorization , and sensation seeking , that were unmeasured components of our theory . Because these processes provide explanations for competing - predictions , it would be useful to investigate them further . Additionally , a next logical step for researchers is to conduct a study that assesses the linkages among conflict and the process variables that other demography studies have examined - e . g . , external communication ( Ancona and Caldwell , 1992 ) , social integration ( O ' Reilly , Caldwell , and Barnett , 1989 ) , and informal communication ( Smith et al . , 1994 ) . Another opportunity is to explore further the 23 / ASQ , March 1999 dynamics of gender diversity in work groups . The effects of such diversity may be difficult to capture in a deductive empirical study such as this one . Case research may be more revealing , allowing a more microscopic view of member exchanges in groups with moderate , low , and high levels of gender diversity . Finally , it would be useful to assess the robustness of the diversity variable interaction effects found here . Further study would be useful in probing the generalizability of those findings . Also , investigations with different dependent variables may determine whether diversity variable interactions influence processes other than conflict . Subtle racism , which one of our diversity variable interactions may reflect , is a particularly provocative topic for future research . Conclusion Demography scholars ( e . g . , Wagner , Pfeffer , and O ' Reilly , 1984 ; Ancona and Caldwell , 1992 ) have frequently implied that conflict plays a central role in the relationship between diversity and work group outcomes . The present study has built on this notion , examining a complex set of linkages among work group diversity , conflict , and performance . The findings suggest that different types of diversity have distinct relationships with task and emotional conflict because of the specific properties of each type of diversity , because of interactions among the diversity types that are present , and because of the group ' s longevity and task routineness . Further , the findings suggest that task conflict has more favorable performance consequences than does emotional conflict . Overall , these results offer researchers a clearer view of the black box between work group diversity and performance . This study also sheds light on patterns that practitioners can expect in diverse work groups . In particular , managers and members of cross - functional teams can take comfort in knowing that task conflict is likely in those teams and that such conflict may enhance performance . There is also a basis for expecting age variation to diminish emotional conflict . At the same time , race and tenure diversity may increase emotional conflict , especially in new groups with nonroutine tasks . Anticipating such a possibility may be critical if organizations hope to manage employees ' background differences successfully . REFERENCES Alexander , Jeffrey , Beverly Nuchols , Joan Bloom , and Shoou - Yih Lee 1995 " Organizational demography and turnover : An examination of multiform and nonlinear heterogeneity . " Human Relations , 48 : 1455 - 1480 . Allison , Paul D . 1978 " Measures of inequality . " American Sociological Review , 43 : 865 - 880 . Amason , Allen C . 1996 " Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional conflict on strategic decision making : Resolving a paradox for top management teams . " Academy of Management Journal , 39 : 123 - 148 . Ancona , Deborah G . , and David F . Caldwell 1992 " Demography and design : Predictors of new product team performance . " Organization Science , 3 : 321 - 341 . Bantel , Karen A . , and Susan E . Jackson 1989 " Top management and innovations in banking : Does the composition of the top team make a difference ? " Strategic Management Journal , 10 : 107 - 124 . 24 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity Baron , Reuben M . , and David A . Kenny 1986 " The moderator - mediator vari - able distinction in social psy - chological research : Concep - tual , strategic , and statistical considerations . " Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 51 : 1173 - 1182 . Berlyne , Daniel E . 1967 " Arousal and reinforcement . " In D . Levine ( ed . ) , Nebraska Symposium on Motivation , 1967 : 1 - 110 . Lincoln , NE : Uni - versity of Nebraska Press . Blau , Peter M . 1977 Inequality and Heterogeneity . New York : Free Press . Breckler , Steven J . 1990 " Applications of covariance structure modeling in psychol - ogy : Cause for concern ? " Psy - chological Bulletin , 107 : 260 - 273 . Brewer , Marilynn B . , and Roderick M . Kramer 1986 " Choice behavior in social di - lemmas : Effects of social identity , group size , and deci - sion framing . " Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychol - ogy , 50 : 543 - 549 . Buhler , Patricia 1997 " Scanning the environment : Environmental trends affecting the workplace . " Supervision , 58 : 24 - 26 . Chen , Peter Y . , and Paul E . Spec - tor 1992 " Relationships of work stress - ors with aggression , with - drawal , theft , and substance use : An exploratory study . " Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 65 : 177 - 184 . Dean , James W . , Jr . , and Scott A . Snell 1991 " Integrated manufacturing and job design : Moderating effects of organizational inertia . " Academy of Management Journal , 34 : 776 - 804 . Dearborn , DeWitt C . , and Herbert A . Simon 1958 " Selective perception : A note on the department identifica - tions of executives . " Sociom - etry , 21 : 140 - 144 . Donnellon , Anne 1993 " Crossfunctional teams in product development : Accom - modating the structure to the process . " Journal of Product Innovation Management , 10 : 377 - 392 . Dovidio , John F . , and Samuel L . Gaertner 1991 " Changes in the expression and assessment of racial prejudice . " In Harry J . Knopke , Robert J . Norrell , and Ronald W . Rogers ( eds . ) , Opening Doors : Perspectives on Race Relations in Contem - porary America : 11 9 - 225 . Tus - caloosa , AL : University of Ala - bama Press . Eisenhardt , Kathleen M . , and L . J . Bourgeois 1988 " Politics of strategic decision making in high - velocity envi - ronments . " Academy of Man - agement Journal , 32 : 543 - 576 . Eisenhardt , Kathleen M . , Jean L . Kahwajy , and L . J . Bourgeois 1997a " How management teams can have a good fight . " Har - vard Business Review , 75 ( 4 ) : 77 - 85 . 1997b " Conflict and strategic choice : How top manage - ment teams disagree . " Cali - fornia Management Review , 39 ( 2 ) : 42 - 62 . Eisenhardt , Kathleen M . , and Claudia B . Schoonhoven 1990 " Organizational growth : Link - ing founding team strategy , environment , and growth among U . S . semiconductor ventures , 1978 - 1988 . " Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 35 : 504 - 529 . Ely , Robin J . 1994 " The effects of organizational demographics and social iden - tity on relationships among professional women . " Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 39 : 203 - 238 . Erickson , Bonnie H . , and T . A . Nosanchuk 1977 Understanding Data . Toronto : McGraw - Hill Ryerson . Evan , William 1965 " Conflict and performance in R & D organizations . " Industrial Management Review , 7 : 37 - 46 . Festinger , Leon 1954 " A theory of social compari - son processes . " Human Rela - tions , 7 : 117 - 140 . Fiske , Donald W . , and Salvatore R . Maddi 1961 Functions of Varied Experi - ence . Homewood , IL : Dorsey . Fiske , Susan T . , and Shelley E . Taylor 1991 Social Cognition . New York : McGraw - Hill . Florin , Paul , Gary A . Giamartino , David A . Kenny , and Abraham Wandersman 1990 " Levels of analysis and ef - fects : Clarifying group influ - ence and climate by separat - ing individual and group effects . " Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 20 : 881 - 900 . Gallagher , Dennis , Ed Diener , and Randy J . Larsen 1989 " Individual differences in af - fect intensity : A moderator of the relation between emotion and behavior . " Unpublished manuscript , Department of Psychology , University of Illi - nois , Urbana - Champaign . Georgopoulos , Basil S . 1986 Organizational Structure , Prob - lem Solving , and Effective - ness . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Ghosh , Sukesh K . 1991 Econometrics : Theory and Ap - plications . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Gladstein , Deborah L . 1984 " Groups in context : A model of task group effectiveness . " Administrative Science Quar - terly , 29 : 499 - 517 . Guetzkow , Harold , and John Gyr 1954 " An analysis of conflict in de - cision - making groups . " Hu - man Relations , 7 : 367 - 381 . Guo , Shumei S . , William C . Chumlea , and David B . Cockram 1996 " Use of statistical methods to estimate body composition . " American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 64 : 428S - 435S . Hambrick , Donald C . 1994 " Top management groups : A conceptual integration and reconsideration of the ' team ' label . " In B . M . Staw and L . L . Cummings ( eds . ) , Research in Organizational Behavior , 16 : 171 - 213 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . 25 / ASQ , March 1999 Hambrick , Donald C . , and Phyllis A . Mason 1984 " Upper echelons : The organi - zation as a reflection of its top managers . " Academy of Man - agement Review , 9 : 193 - 206 . Hebb , D . 0 . 1955 " Drives and the CNS ( concep - tual nervous system ) . " Psy - chological Review , 62 : 243 - 254 . Heriot , Gail 1996 " Diversity is more than skin deep . " Los Angeles Times , July 14 : M5 . Hoffman , L . Richard , and Norman R . F . Maier 1961 " Quality and acceptance of problem solutions by mem - bers of homogeneous and heterogeneous groups . " Jour - nal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 62 : 401 - 407 . Jackson , Susan E . 1992 " Team composition in organi - zational settings : Issues in managing an increasingly di - verse workforce . " In Stephen Worchel , Wendy Wood , and Jeffrey A . Simpson ( eds . ) , Group Process and Productiv - ity : 138 - 173 . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Jackson , Susan E . , Joan F . Brett , Valerie I . Sessa , Dawn M . Cooper , Johan A . Julin , and Karl Peyron - nin 1991 " Some differences make a difference : Individual dissimi - larity and group heterogeneity as correlates of recruitment , promotions , and turnover . " Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 : 675 - 689 . Janis , Irving L . 1982 Victims of Groupthink . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 1989 Crucial Decisions : Leadership in Policymaking and Crisis Management . New York : Free Press . Jehn , Karen A . 1994 " Enhancing effectiveness : An investigation of advantages and disadvantages of value - based intragroup conflict . " International Journal of Con - flict Management , 5 : 223 - 238 . 1995 " A multimethod examination of the benefits and detriments of intragroup conflict . " Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 40 : 256 - 282 . Kahneman , Daniel 1973 Attention and Effort . Engle - wood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Kanter , Rosabeth M . 1977 Men and Women of the Cor - poration . New York : Basic Books . Katz , Ralph 1982 " The effects of group longev - ity on project communication and performance . " Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 27 : 81 - 104 . Kennedy , Peter 1979 A Guide to Econometrics . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kent , R . N . , and N . E . McGrath 1969 " Task and group characteris - tics as factors influencing group performance . " Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 5 : 429 - 440 . Kirkpatrick , David L . 1986 " Performance appraisal : When two jobs are too many . " Train - ing : The Magazine of Human Resource Development , 23 ( 3 ) : 65 - 68 . Kramer , Roderick M . 1991 " Intergroup relations and orga - nizational dilemmas : The role of categorization processes . " In L . L . Cummings and B . M . Staw ( eds . ) , Research in Orga - nizational Behavior , 13 : 191 - 228 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Lawrence , Barbara S . 1988 " New wrinkles in the theory of age : Demography , norms , and performance ratings . " Academy of Management Journal , 31 : 309 - 337 . 1997 " The black box of organiza - tional demography . " Organiza - tion Science , 8 : 1 - 22 . Major , B . , and B . Forcey 1985 " Social comparisons and pay evaluations : Preferences for same - sex and same - job wage comparisons . " Journal of Ex - perimental Social Psychology , 21 : 393 - 405 . Milberg , Sandra , and Margaret S . Clark 1988 " Moods and compliance . " British Journal of Social Psy - chology , 27 : 79 - 90 . Miller , C . T . 1982 " The role of performance - re - lated similarity in social com - parison of abilities : A test of the related attributes hypoth - esis . " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 46 : 1222 - 1228 . Milliken , Frances J . , and Luis L . Martins 1996 " Searching for common threads : Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups . " Acad - emy of Management Review , 21 : 402 - 433 . Murnighan , J . Keith , and Donald E . Conlon 1991 " The dynamics of intense work groups : A study of Brit - ish string quartets . " Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 36 : 165 - 1 86 . Murray , Alan I . 1989 " Top management group het - erogeneity and firm perfor - mance . " Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 10 : 125 - 141 . Nelson , Reed E . 1989 " The strength of strong ties : Social networks and inter - group conflict in organiza - tions . " Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 32 : 377 - 401 . O ' Reilly , Charles A . , David F . Cald - well , and William P . Barnett 1989 " Work group demography , social integration , and turn - over . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 : 21 - 37 . Parker , Thomas H . , and Ira J . Dolich 1986 " Toward understanding retail bank strategy : Seemingly un - related regression applied to cross - sectional data . " Journal of Retailing , 62 : 298 - 320 . Pedhazur , Elazar J . , and Liora P . Schmelkin 1991 Measurement , Design , and Analysis : An Integrated Ap - proach . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Pelled , Lisa H . 1996 " Demographic diversity , con - flict , and work group out - comes : An intervening pro - cess theory . " Organization Science , 7 : 61 5 - 631 . 26 / ASQ , March 1999 Work Group Diversity Pelled , Lisa H . , Thomas G . Cum - mings , and Mark A . Kizilos 1999 " The influence of organiza - tional demography on cus - tomer - oriented prosocial be - havior : An exploratory investigation . " Journal of Busi - ness Research , in press . Pelled , Lisa H . , Gerald E . Ledford , and Susan A . Mohrman 1998 " Individual demographic dis - similarity and organizational inclusion : A field investiga - tion . " Academy of Manage - ment Best Paper Proceedings , OMT Division : Al - A17 . Reardon , Kathleen K . 1995 They Don ' t Get It , Do They ? Communication in the Work - place - Closing the Gap be - tween Men and Women . Bos - ton : Little , Brown . Ross , Raymond S . 1989 Small Groups in Organizational Settings . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Ryan , Alan J . 1991 " Job rotations grease long - term IS wheels . " Computer - world , 25 ( 24 ) : 76 . Sarason , Irwin G . 1984 " Stress , anxiety , and cognitive interference : Reactions to tests . " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 46 : 929 - 938 . Schoonhoven , Claudia B . 1981 " Problems with contingency theory : Testing assumptions hidden within the language of contingency ' theory ' . " Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 26 : 349 - 377 . Sessa , Valerie I . , and Susan E . Jackson 1995 " Diversity in decision - making teams : All differences are not created equal . " In Martin M . Chemers , Stuart Oskamp , and Mark A . Costanzo ( eds . ) , Di - versity in Organizations : New Perspectives for a Changing Workplace : 133 - 156 . Thou - sand Oaks , CA : Sage . Smith , Ken G . , Ken A . Smith , Judy D . Olian , Henry P . Sims , Douglas P . O ' Bannon , and Judith A . Scully 1994 " Top management team de - mography and process : The role of social integration and communication . " Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 39 : 412 - 438 . South , Scott J . , Charles M . Bon - jean , William T . Markham , and Judy Corder 1982 " Social structure and inter - group interaction : Men and women of the federal bureau - cracy . " American Sociological Review , 47 : 587 - 599 . Staw , Barry M . , Lloyd E . Sand - elands , and Jane E . Dutton 1981 " Threat - rigidity effects in orga - nizational behavior : A multi - level analysis . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 26 : 501 - 524 . Storms , Philip L . , and Paul E . Spector 1987 " Relationships of organiza - tional frustration with reported behavioural reactions : The moderating effect of locus of control . " Journal of Occupa - tional Psychology , 60 : 227 - 234 . Tajfel , Henri 1972 " Social categorization . " In Serge Moscovici ( ed . ) , Intro - duction a la Psychologie So - ciale , 1 : 272 - 302 . Paris : Larousse . 1978 Differentiation between Social Groups . New York : Academic Press . 1982 Social Identity and Intergroup Relations . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press . Tajfel , Henri , M . G . Billig , R . P . Bundy , and C . Flament 1971 " Social categorization and in - tergroup behavior . " European Journal of Social Psychology , 1 : 149 - 177 . Teachman , Jay D . 1980 " Analysis of population diver - sity . " Sociological Methods and Research , 8 : 341 - 362 . Tjosvold , Dean 1986 " Constructive controversy : A key strategy for groups . " Per - sonnel , 63 : 39 - 44 . 1991 Team Organization : An Endur - ing Competitive Advantage . New York : Wiley . Tsui , Anne S . , Susan J . Ashford , Lynda St . Clair , and Katherine R . Xin 1995 " Dealing with discrepant ex - pectations : Response strate - gies and managerial effective - ness . " Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 151 5 - 1 543 . Turner , John C . 1975 ' Social comparison and social identity : Some comparisons for intergroup behavior . " Euro - pean Journal of Social Psy - chology , 5 : 5 - 34 . Van de Ven , Andrew H . , Andre Delbecq , and R . Koenig 1976 " Determinants of coordination modes within organizations . " American Sociological Review , 41 : 322 - 338 . Vernon , J . , and T . E . McGill 1960 " Utilization of visual stimula - tion during sensory depriva - tion . " Perceptual and Motor Skills , 11 : 214 . Wagner , W . Gary , Jeffrey Pfeffer , and Charles A . O ' Reilly 1984 " Organizational demography and turnover in top manage - ment groups . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 : 74 - 92 . Wailer , Mary J . , George P . Huber , and William H . Glick 1995 " Functional background as a determinant of executives ' selective perception . " Acad - emy of Management Journal , 38 : 943 - 974 . Walsh , James P . 1988 " Selectivity and selective per - ception : An investigation of managers ' belief structures and information processing . " Academy of Management Journal , 31 : 873 - 896 . Watson , W . E . , K . Kumar , and L . K . Michaelson 1993 " Cultural diversity ' s impact on interaction process and perfor - mance : Comparing homoge - neous and diverse task groups . " Academy of Man - agement Journal , 36 : 590 - 602 . Weingart , Laurie 1992 " Impact of group goals , task component complexity , effort , and planning on group perfor - mance . " Journal of Applied Psychology , 77 : 682 - 693 . Wheaton , B . , B . Muthen , D . Al - wing , and G . Summers 1977 " Assessing reliability and sta - bility in panel models . " In D . Heise ( ed . ) , Sociological Meth - odology : 84 - 136 . San Fran - cisco : Jossey - Bass . Wickens , Christopher D . 1989 " Attention and skilled perfor - mance . " In D . Holding ( ed . ) , Human Skills : 71 - 105 . New York : Wiley . 27 / ASQ , March 1999 Wiersema , Margarethe F . , and Karen Bantel 1992 " Top management team de - mography and corporate stra - tegic change . " Academy of Management Journal , 35 : 91 - 121 . Wonnacott , Thomas H . , and Ronald J . Wonnacott 1984 Introductory Statistics for Business and Economics . New York : Wiley . Zellner , Arnold 1962 " An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and tests for aggregation bias . " Journal of the American Statistical Association , 57 : 348 - 368 . Zenger , Todd R . , and Barbara S . Lawrence 1989 " Organizational demography : The differential effects of age and tenure distributions on technical communication . " Academy of Management Journal , 32 : 353 - 376 . Zimbardo , Philip G . , and Michael R . Leippe 1991 The Psychology of Attitude Change and Social Influence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Zuckerman , Marvin 1979 Sensation Seeking . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 1984 " Sensation seeking : A comparative approach to a human trait . " Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 7 : 413 - 471 . 28 / ASQ , March 1999