Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development Jack R . Smith , 1 Agnieszka Seyda , 1 Norbert Weber , 1 Doyle Knight , 2 Sascha Abramson , 1 Joachim Kohn * 1 1 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , and New Jersey Center for Biomaterials Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey , New Brunswick , NJ 08854 , USA Fax : ( þ 1 ) 732 445 - 5006 ; E - mail : kohn @ rutchem . rutgers . edu 2 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Center for Computational Design Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey , New Brunswick , NJ 08854 , USA Received : October 9 , 2003 ; Accepted : November 3 , 2003 ; DOI : 10 . 1002 / marc . 200300193 Keywords : biocompatibility ; biodegradable ; biological applications of polymers ; computer modeling ; proteins Introduction Combinatorial approaches have led to dramatic changes in the way lead compounds for the discovery of new drugs are identiﬁed . [ 1 ] The approach of creating millions of combi - natorially synthesized moieties within a single reaction vessel , followed by the identiﬁcation of potentially active compounds in a selective bioassay , is often referred to as combinatorial drug discovery ( ‘‘CombiChem’’ ) . For this approach to be effective , rapid screening assays , as well as appropriate computational methods for data handling , need to be available . In spite of the conceptional simplicity of this approach , substantial technical hurdles had to be overcome before combinatorial techniques could be used with some success in drug discovery . [ 2 ] One of the earliest material science applications of the combinatorial discovery approach was the search for catalytically active polymers by Menger et al . [ 3 ] They Summary : The advent of high - throughput combinatorial synthesis techniques in drug discovery has stimulated efforts to apply these techniques to the discovery of biomaterials . To be of practical utility , combinatorial approaches to biomater - ials design require ( i ) the availability of parallel synthesis techniques to generate libraries of polymers , ( ii ) efﬁcient assays for the rapid characterization of biorelevant material properties , and ( iii ) computational methods to efﬁciently model different biological responses in the presence of polymers . Here we report the integration of these methodol - ogies andillustrate the potential of thisapproach to accelerate the development of new biomaterials . The parallel synthesis of a library of 112 biodegradable polyarylates has been reported previously . This librarywasused todevelop efﬁcient screening techniques to determine biorelevant polymer pro - perties ( ﬁbrinogen adsorption , gene expression in macro - phages , growth of fetal rat lung ﬁbroblasts ( RLFs ) ) . A Surrogate ( semiempirical ) Model was developed ( i ) to deter - mine molecular - scale polymer properties that correlate to various biological responses , and ( ii ) to predict ﬁbrinogen adsorption and RLF growth on polymeric surfaces . For 38 out of 45 polymers , the model predicted the amount ofﬁbrinogen adsorbed correctly within the error of the experimental measurements . The growth of rat lung ﬁbroblasts was correctly predicted by the model for 41 out of 48 polymers . The correlation factor between the model’s predicted values and the experimentally determined data was 0 . 54 (cid:1) 0 . 09 and 0 . 69 (cid:1) 0 . 12 for ﬁbrinogen adsorption and RLF growth , res - pectively . The results presented here demonstrate the utility of combinatorial and computational approaches for the rational design of polymers for biomedical applications . Design of the library of polyarylates , which are copolymers of a diacid and a diphenol . Chemical diversity was created by variations in the structure of the diacid ( marked as ‘‘Y’’ ) and the pendent chain ( marked as ‘‘R’’ ) . Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 DOI : 10 . 1002 / marc . 200300193 (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Feature Article 127 Jack R . Smith completed his undergraduate thesis in physics in the group of Stuart Field ( University of Michigan ) bymodelingthedynamicsofchaoticsystems . Subsequently , heworkedasaninterndevelopingdata acquisition algorithms for the Babar project in the group of Michael Levi ( Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory , USA ) . His PhD work was performed under the supervision of Dawn Bonnell and Roger French ( University of Pennsylvania , USA ) andfocusedonusingexperimentandmodelingtoestablishcorrelationsbetweenbonding , atomic - scale structure and optical properties in thin , amorphous films of CrOCN used in DUV phase - shift lithography . Forthisworkhereceivedtheuniversity’sSteinPrize . In2001 , hewasawardedtheChateaubriand Fellowship for postdoctoral study in France . In the group of Joel Chevrier at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility ( Grenoble ) , he studied the oxidation of AlPdMn quasicrystalline surfaces primarily using scanningprobetechniques . Currently , heisapostdoctoralassociateattheNewJerseyCenterforBiomaterials working closely with Drs . Knight and Kohn on the computational modeling of bioresponse to polymeric materials / surfaces . Dr . Agnieszka Seyda is a graduate of McMaster University in Hamilton , Ontario ( Canada ) where she received her BS in Biochemistry in 1995 . Her Ph . D . ( 2000 ) is from the University of Toronto , Department of Biochemistry . After graduating , Dr . Seyda was a postdoctoral fellow at Ontario Cancer Institute , Princess Margaret Hospital , Toronto , Canada . As a Research Assistant Professor with the New Jersey Center for Biomaterials at Rutgers University , Piscataway , New Jersey , her research focused on cell interactions with polymersurfacesatthelevelofgeneexpression . SheiscurrentlyemployedatEthicon , adivisionofJohnsonand Johnson , Inc . NorbertWeberreceivedhisBSinBiology , MSinCellPhysiologyandPh . D . inCellandMolecularBiologyfrom theUniversityofTu¨bingen , Germanywherehealsoheldhisfirstpostdoctoralpositionresearchinggeneexpres - sion profiling in surface - activated leucocytes using cDNA - microarrays and Real - Time RT - PCR . He has also heldapostdocpositionatRutgers , theStateUniversityofNewJerseyattheNewJerseyCenterforBiomaterials . He is currently a Research Associate at Rutgers where his research focuses on fluorescence assays to detect surface - adsorbedproteins andattached cells , real - timemeasurementsofprotein adsorptionand cellreceptor binding to polymeric surfaces using a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring ( QCM - D ) . DoyleKnightreceivedhisPh . D . inAeronauticsattheCaliforniaInstituteofTechnologyin1974 . Followingtwo years in the United States Air Force as an Aeronautical Engineer , and one year postdoctoral position at the California Institute of Technology , he joined the faculty of the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace EngineeringatRutgers – TheStateUniversityofNewJersey . HisresearchinterestsincludeSurrogateModeling , designoptimization , gasdynamics , turbulencesimulationandhighperformancecomputing . HeisanAssociate Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics , and the authorof more than 170 technical papers . He is the Directorof the Rutgers University Center for Computational Design , established in 1996 . Dr . Sascha Abramson completed her undergraduate degree in English from the University of Pennsylvania in 1996 . In2002shereceivedherdoctorateinBiomedicalEngineeringfromRutgersUniversityforherworkwith tyrosine - derived polycarbonates . Dr . Abramson studied the physico - mechanical and biological properties of tyrosine - derived polycarbonates with a special emphasis on polymer degradation and the response of bone tissuetopolymerimplants . Dr . AbramsonjoinedtheNewJerseyCenterforBiomaterialsandtheRutgersCenter forComputationalDesignforajointpostdoctoralpositioninwhichshedevelopedrapidscreeningprotocolsfordegradablepolymers . Dr . Abramson currently works at Celgene Cellular Therapeutics . Professor Joachim Kohn is the Board of Governors Professor of Chemistry at Rutgers University and an Adjunct Associate Professor of Orthopedics at the New Jersey Medical School . He currently serves as the Director of the New Jersey Center for Biomaterials . His research interests focus on the development of new biomaterials for prostheses , implantable drug or gene delivery systems , and tissue regeneration scaffolds . He is mostly known for his pioneering work on ‘‘pseudo - poly ( amino acid ) s’’ – a new class of polymers that combine the nontoxicity of individual amino acids with the strength and processibility of high quality engineering plastics . He emphasizes the use of combinatorial approaches for the design of new polymers , and uses computational modeling and simulations for the elucidation of cell – polymer interactions . He has published 167 scientific manuscripts and reviews and holds 31 patents . Professor Kohn has extensive technology transfer experience . He serves on the scientific advisory boards of 4 companies . Professor Kohn is the recipient of numerous awards and honors , including the 2003 Clemson Award for Basic Science of the Society for Biomaterials . 128 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim created random patterns of pendent chains along a polymer backbone and identiﬁed a number of polymer mixtures that exhibited phosphatase - like activity . However , the simple CombiChem approach of generating many different poly - mers within one single reaction vessel is limited by the difﬁculty of separating the mixture into individual poly - mers . Indeed , Menger was unable to identify which speciﬁc polymer composition in each of his catalytically active mixtures was associated with the observed phosphatase - like activity . The problems associated with the separation of mixtures of many different materials into discrete compositions were circumvented by the use of spatially resolved libraries . This approach was applied for the ﬁrst time in a combinatorial search for photoluminescent inorganic phosphor composi - tions : Schultz et al . created different material compositions within a two - dimensional X - Y grid . A simple optical reading of the photoluminescence as function of the X and Y coordinates within the grid provided the necessary high - throughput assay and allowed the identiﬁcation of lead compositions with potentially useful photoluminescence . [ 4 ] This concept of spatially resolved libraries was later adap - ted by Amis and his coworkers at the National Institute for Standards and Technology ( NIST ) to explore the properties of polymer blends within a two - dimensional grid in which all possible blend compositions were represented by a pair of X , Y coordinates . [ 5 , 6 ] For most practical applications in materials science , a parallel synthesis approach seems to be more useful than the creation of many different materials within one single reaction vessel . Using parallel synthesis , a library of materials can be created in such a way that each individual materialisobtainedinpureforminaseparatereactionvessel . This approach was used in 1997 in Kohn’s laboratory to prepare the ﬁrst combinatorially designed polymer library . [ 7 , 8 ] Their approach consisted of the synthesis of strictly alternating A – B copolymers . In this approach , ﬁrst , structural templates for the A and B monomer are deﬁned and a polymerization scheme is developed . Next , structural modiﬁcations are introduced in a systematic fashion into the A and B templates , resulting in the formation of families of related monomers ( A1 , A2 , A3 , etc . and B1 , B2 , B3 , etc . ) . Finally , each of the A monomers is copolymerized with each of the B monomers in separate reaction vessels . Speciﬁcally , Kohn’s group used eight different diacids ( the A monomers ) and 14 different diphenols ( the B monomers ) to create a library of 8 (cid:2) 14 ¼ 112 structurally related polyarylates ( Figure 1 ) . [ 8 ] The same approach was later used by Langer etal . tosynthesizealibraryofcopolymersthatwerescreened for use as synthetic transfection vectors . [ 9 ] The term ‘‘biomaterial’’describes a material intended for use in a medical device or implant . [ 10 ] While commonly used biomaterials include metals , ceramics , and natural materials ( such as collagen ) , [ 11 ] within the framework of this publication we will focus on the application of com - binatorial and computational approaches to the identiﬁca - tion of new , synthetic polymers as potential biomaterials . While the traditional application of polymers as engineer - ing plastics is well established and supported by an exten - sive understanding of structure - performance correlations , a comprehensive understanding of the interactions between implanted polymers and the surrounding cells and tissues has not yet been established , making it impossible to apply a rigorous , rational design process to the identiﬁcation of new biomaterials . [ 12 , 13 ] Therefore , a combinatorial approach to biomaterials design appears to be particularly promising , since this approach can be applied successfully when clear correlations between the basic design variables ( e . g . , biomaterial chemistry and structure ) and the performance of the polymer ( e . g . , cell - biomaterial interactions ) are not available . Furthermore , combinatorial methods can be the most effective when a large number of variables make it impossible to explore the entire range of experimental variables in an exhaustive fashion . Computational techniques to build , screen , and mine libraries of compounds have evolved rapidly in recent years as an efﬁcient strategy for molecular discovery and optimization . [ 14 – 19 ] To the best of our knowledge , however , these powerful computational strategies have not yet been applied to optimal biomaterial design . Likewise , the use of semiempirical models , such as Artiﬁcial Neural Network ( ANN ) models , has been limited . ANNs have been success - fully applied to a wide range of modeling problems . For instance , Baluja [ 20 ] developed an ANN to control a passen - ger vehicle on a highway , Chandra and Sudhakar [ 21 ] developed an ANN for printed numeral recognition , and Yoon et al . [ 22 ] developed an ANN ( denoted DESKNET ) to diagnose papulosquamous skin diseases . This latter system is utilized in medical education , achieving a correct diagnosis for 70 % of the skin diseases . In spite of the wides - pread use of ANNs and similar semiempirical modeling techniques in many ﬁelds , a detailed literature search revealed only two prior publications that are relevant to the prediction of a cellular response based on the measurement of some physical material properties . The ﬁrst publication developed a multivariant model that was successful in establishing a correlation between the surface properties of common polymeric materials and the amount and retention of ﬁbrinogen adsorbed from a complex mixture . [ 23 ] The second publication described a similar multivariant model to investigate the relation between endothelial cell growth and surface properties of plasma - deposited ﬁlms . [ 24 , 25 ] In order to be of practical utility , the previously reported parallel synthesis of polymer librariesneeds to beintegrated with efﬁcient screening assays , as well as appropriate com - putational methods for data handling and modeling . While it would be premature to speak in terms of ‘‘high through - put’’ assays at this point , the development of efﬁcient rapid - screening assays for biologically relevant material proper - ties that can facilitate the extensive testing of dozens or Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 129 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Figure 1 . Design of the library of polyarylates . ( A ) : Polyarylates are copolymers of a diacid and a diphenol . Chemical diversity was created by variations in the structure of the diacid ( marked as ‘‘Y’’ ) and the pendent chain ( marked as ‘‘R’’ ) . ( B ) : Representative examples of the pendent chain structures used to modify the diphenol component . ( C ) : Representative examples of the diacid structures used to modify the polymer backbone . 130 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim hundreds of polymers represents an important research challenge . A second challenge relates to the need to adapt commonly used computational techniques to appropriately account for the experimental uncertainty inherent in biological data sets . Finally , a third research challenge is to develop a better understanding of which molecular - scale polymer properties are the best predictors of biorelevant polymer performance , such as cell growth , toxicity , or biocompatibility . Some of these challenges are being addressed by the work presented here . Materials and Methods Polymer Synthesis and Characterization Polymers from a combinatorial library of tyrosine - derived polyarylates were synthesized according to published procedures . [ 8 ] The polymers consisted of a series of commercially available diacids and tyrosine - based diphe - nols which were synthesized as previously described . [ 26 ] The 112 polymers of the library were subjected to a characterizationprotocol consisting of purity and chemical - structure analysis by proton and carbon NMR spectroscopy , High - pressure liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) , and ele - mental analysis , followed by molecular - weight determina - tion by gel - permeation chromatography , detailed thermal analysis by differential scanning calorimetry ( DSC ) and thermogravimetric analysis ( TGA ) , and air - water contact angle measurement by goniometry . [ 8 ] Cell Proliferation Studies on Flat Surfaces Cell proliferation studies were either performed on spin - coated glass cover slips or on compression - molded disks that were inserted into the bottom of wells in 96 - well plates . [ 8 , 27 ] The number of cells present on the growth substrata was estimated using a commercially available MTS colormetric assay ( Promega , Madison , WI ) . Surface Protein Adsorption by Immunoﬂuorescence Assay 384 - Wellmicrotiterpolypropyleneplates ( Cat . No . 264576 ) were obtained from Nalge Nunc International ( Rochester , NY , USA ) , while 96 - well polypropylene plates were obtained from VWR ( Bridgeport , NJ ) . The assay has been reported previously . [ 28 , 29 ] Brieﬂy , polymers were dissolved in methylene chloride ( 5 % ( w / v ) ) . Next , the polymer solu - tions were ﬁltered through 0 . 45 m m PTFE ﬁlters ( Whatman Inc . , Clifton , NJ , USA ) . Then , individual microtiter wells on the plates were ﬁlled with test polymer solutions . To evaporate the solvent , the plates were kept at a temperature of 50 8 C for 3 hours in a drying oven . This process generated thin , macroscopically smooth polymer ﬁlms inside the wells . The wells were then exposed for 90 min to 25 m L of ﬁbrinogen solution in phosphate buffer , followed by rinsing with PBS . After blocking of non - speciﬁc antibody binding sites by incubation with bovine serum albumin , the plates were rinsed with PBS and exposed to ﬂuorescently labeled polyclonal anti - ﬁbrinogen antibodies . After appropriate washing steps , the amount of surface - adsorbed ﬁbrinogen was determined by measuring the ﬂuorescence in each well in a ﬂuorescence reader ( Spectra Max Gemini , Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA , USA ) . Human ﬁbrinogen adsorp - tion to non - coated polypropylene wells was used as an internal control to normalize the ﬂuorescence signals against an internal standard . Gene Expression by Real Time RT - PCR In Vitro Rat Peritoneal Macrophage Culture Monocyte - derived macrophages were harvested from the peritonea of adult Sprague – Dowling rats treated with 50 mL of PBS at 0 8 C . Monocytes were plated on poly - propylene plates in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Media ( D - MEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mmol / L L - glutamine , 100 U / mL penicillin G ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , 100 m g / mL streptomycin ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) and allowed to achieve a quiescent state by incubation for 48 hours . After this period , the macrophages were plated on different , solvent - cast polymer surfaces in 96 - well polypropylene plates as described before . [ 28 , 29 ] Macro - phages in either quiescent or lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) activated state were assayed by real - time Reverse Tran - scriptase – Polymerase Chain Reaction ( RT - PCR ) for the expression of IL - 1 b and IL - 6 . Real - Time RT - PCR The PCR reaction was performed on a Rotor - Gene TM Four - Channel Multiplexing System ( Corbett Research , Mortlake , NSW , Australia ) . Data was analyzed using the Rotor - Gene software and the manufacturer’s general pro - tocol was followed with regard to RNA isolation , reverse transcription , and ampliﬁcation . Speciﬁcally , total RNA was isolated from adherent cells six hours post seeding using TRIzol 1 Reagent ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Brieﬂy , 50 m L of TRIzol 1 Reagent was added to each well . Duplicate samples were combined to ensure sufﬁcient amounts of RNA , yielding 100 m L of cell extract per surface per condition . The extract was allowed to stand for 10 min then mixed with 50 m L chloroform and inverted repeatedly for 15 s followed by 3 min incubation and centrifugation for 15 min at 10 000 rpm . The resulting aqueous layer was then combined with 100 m L of isopropanol and mixed thoroughly . RNA was then pelleted and resuspended in 30 m L of UltraPure TM DNase / RNase - Free Distilled Water ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) containing 0 . 5 m L of DNase I Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 131 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcation . DNase I was inactivated by incubation at 70 8 C for 5 min . Messenger RNAwas reversibly transcribed by combining 10 m L of the total RNA with 1 m L of oligo ( dT ) 12 – 18 primer ( Integrated DNA Technologies , Coralville , IA ) and 1 m L of 0 . 01 M dNTP mix and incubating for 10 min at 65 8 C . A mixture of 4 m L of 5x ﬁrst - strand buffer , 2 m L of 0 . 1 M DTT , and 1 m L of RNaseOUT TM Recombinant Ribonuclease Inhibitor ( 40 units / m l ) ( Invitro - gen , Carlsbad , CA ) was then added to the sample and incubated for 2 min at 42 8 C . Reverse transcription was then initiated by the addition of 0 . 5 m L ( 100 units ) of Superscript II 1 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) and the reaction was incu - bated at 42 8 C . After 50 min , the reaction was inactivated by heating the mixture to 70 8 C for 15 min . All samples were diluted to 100 m L total volume using UltraPure TM DNase / RNase - Free distilled water . The reversibly transcribed pro - duct was then stored at (cid:3) 20 8 C until used for PCR . PCR was performed using a Platinum 1 Taq DNA Polymerase ( 5 U / m L ) ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Five microliters of reversibly transcribed product was used for each PCR reac - tion . A mix of 5 m L of 10 (cid:2) PCR buffer , 2 . 5 m L of 0 . 05 M MgCl 2 , 1 m L of 0 . 01 M dNTP mix , 0 . 5 m L of 10 (cid:2) SYBR 1 Green I nucleic acid gel stain ( 10 000X concentrate in DMSO ) ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) and 0 . 25 m L of Platinum 1 Taq DNA Polymerase were used per reaction tube . UltraPure TM DNase / RNase - Free distilled water was then used to bring each reaction volume to 50 m L . Primer pairs ( Table 1 ) were added to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 6 M . The ampliﬁcation was then performed for 35 cycles ( 94 8 C for 20 s , 56 8 C for 20 s and 72 8 C for 20 s per cycle ) . After data analysis using the Rotor - Gene software , expression ratios were determined by dividing the signal intensity of the product of interest by that of the corresponding b - 2 - microtubulin . in vitro Cell - Growth Measurements Sample Preparation Previously published procedures [ 8 ] to culture rat lung ﬁbroblast ( RLF ) cells on ﬂat surfaces of various test polymers were modiﬁed and adapted from a 24 - well plate format to a more efﬁcient 96 - well plate format . In the 24 - well plate format , the polymers were spin coated onto 15 mm glass . Once dry , the cover slips were loaded polymer side up into 24 - well polystyrene plates . For the 96 - well plate format , polymers were either compression molded into thin , round disks which could be ﬁtted tightly into the bottom of each well , or polymers were directly coated onto the well surface by solvent casting . In this case , polypropylene plates were used [ 28 , 29 ] and 50 m L of a 7 % ( w / v ) solution of test polymer in methylene chloride produced the best surface coverage . After extensive drying , incubation at 37 8 C for three days did not dislodge any of the ﬁlms from the polypropylene well surface . All three methods of sample preparation provided similar cell - growth results . Cell Culture and Data Collection Rat lung ﬁbroblast ( RFL - 6 ) cells were grown on the test surfaces for seven days as described before [ 27 , 30 ] and meta - bolic activity was measured with a commercially available kit ( CellTiter96 1 , Promega , Madison , WI ) . The measured value for the metabolic activity was then normalized to tissue culturepolystyrenewhich servedas internal standard . The Normalized Metabolic Activity ( NMA ) value was used in the computational models . Computational Modeling Overall Strategy First , polymer descriptors were generated for each polymer . Then , the signiﬁcance of each descriptor with respect to the set of experimental bioresponse data was ascertained . Finally , the three most signiﬁcant descriptors in conjunction with the experimental data for polymers contained within the training set , were used as inputs into an Artiﬁcial Neural Network ( ANN ) to predict protein adsorption and cell growth for those polymers included in the validation set . The experimentally determined values were then compared with the predictions derived from the model . Software Used The Molecular Operating Environment platform ( MOE Version 2003 . 02 , software available from Chemical Com - puting Group Inc . , 1010 Sherbrooke Street West , Suite 910 , Montreal , Canada H3A 2R7 http : / / www . chemcomp . com ) Table1 . Forward and reverse primers for RT - PCR . Gene Primer Sequence IL - 6 Forward primer 5 0 ATT CTG TCT CGA GCC CAC CA 3 0 Reverse primer 5 0 CTG AAG GGC AGATGG AGT TGA 3 0 IL - 1 b Forward primer 5 0 TGC AGG CTT CGA GAT GAA CA 3 0 Reverse primer 5 0 ACATGG GTC AGA CAG CAC GA 3 0 b - 2 - microglobulin Forward primer 5 0 CTC ACA CTG AAT TCA CAC CC 3 0 Reverse primer 5 0 AAG AAG ATG GTG TGC TCATTG 3 0 132 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim and Dragon software ( http : / / www . disat . unimib . it / chm / Dragon . htm ) were used to calculate 101 molecular descriptors for each polymer . Identiﬁcation of the Three Most Signiﬁcant Descriptors for a Given Bioresponse Together with two experimentally measured quantities , glass transition temperature ( T g ) and air - watercontact angle ( y ) , and an additional structural descriptor , the Total Flexibility Index ( TFI ) , a total of 104 individual descriptors were available for each polymer . A C5 Decision Tree routine ( ID3 Algorithm available from RuleQuest Research Pty Ltd , 30 Athena Avenue , St Ives NSW 2075 , Australia . http : / / www . rulequest . com / see5 - info . html ) was used to cal - culate a measure of signiﬁcance , the Information Gain ( IG ) [ 31 ] of each of the 104 descriptors for a given bio - response . A Monte Carlo approach was used to account for experimental uncertainty . A sequence of 500 000 computer - based ( pseudo ) experiments was performed varying the value of bioresponse for each polymer randomly but within a normal distribution ( deﬁned by the experimental standard deviation ) about the mean . Each pseudo - experiment yields a single ‘‘most relevant’’ descriptor – the descriptor with the highest Information Gain . The results for all 500 000 pseudo experiments were tallied in a histogram . The three descriptors with the highest counts in this histogram were then selected as the input variables for the ANN . Design of the Artiﬁcial Neural Network ( ANN ) Model The ANN was a two - layer perceptron . Its inputs are the three descriptors obtained from the Decision Tree analysis , and its output is a prediction of a speciﬁc bioresponse . ANN methodology is comprehensively described elsewhere . [ 32 ] Using half of the experimental data set ( the training set ) , the ANN was trained by minimizing the mean - square differ - ence between the ANN - predicted values and the experi - mental values . Training was accomplished using a Genetic Algorithm . [ 33 ] The accuracy of the ANN was assessed by comparison of the predicted values and experimental values for the remaining half of the experimental data set ( the validation set ) . The effect of experimental uncertainty on ANN predictive capability was assessed via a Monte Carlo analysis . A sequence of 100 experimental data sets was generated wherein the mean value of the bioresponse for a given polymer was perturbed by a random number obtained from a normal distribution derived from the standard deviation of the experimental bioresponse values measured for that polymer . For each experimental data set , an ANN was built using half of the experimental data set selected at random to train the ANN . The accuracy of the ANN was determined by comparison of the predicted and experi - mental values for the remaining half of the experimental data ( the validation data set ) . Results and Discussion Synthesis Traditional Materials Development versus Combinatorial Materials Design Kohn’sgrouphasusedtyrosine - derivedmonomerstoprepare a wide range of polymers . Among those , tyrosine - derived polycarbonates [ 34 ] andtyrosine - derivedpolyarylates [ 8 ] areof particular relevance to highlight the difference between a traditional polymer development approach and a combina - torial approach . The polycarbonates were prepared entirely by conventional polymer synthesis techniques : each of the four different tyrosine - derived polycarbonates described in theliterature [ 34 ] waspreparedsequentially . Ninemonthswere requiredtooptimizethesynthesisforeachofthetestpolymersandtopreparesufﬁcientquantitiesfortesting . The polymers had identical backbone structures but differed in the length of an alkyl ester pendent chain attac - hed to the backbone of each repeat unit . A substantial amount of data was collected on the effect of increasing pendent chain - length on selected polymer properties , such as glass transition temperature , rate of chemical degrada - tion , surface hydrophobicity , and mechanical properties . However , while each polymer was carefully characterized , it was impossible to distill data collected for individual polymer properties into generally applicable correlations that would permit extrapolations beyond the four speciﬁc polycarbonates tested . Further , while cell culture data were reported , [ 34 , 35 ] it was impossible to predict the biologically relevant performance characteristics of any one polymer based on its molecular structure and basic biophysical features . Incontrasttothe‘‘randomwalk’’throughpolymerdesign space taken during the development of polycarbonates , one of the main goals of modern biomaterials research is to develop a new generation offunctional biomaterials that are rationally designed to produce a biological response that is optimal for the intended clinical application . In view of this challenge , tyrosine - derived polyarylates were designed as a combinatorial library and all 112 currently available poly - mers were prepared within one week in a ‘‘home - made’’ parallel synthesis reactor . [ 8 ] Design of the Library of Polyarylates The basic structure of desaminotyrosyl - tyrosine alkyl esters ( DTR , see Figure 2 ) consists of a unit of ‘‘desaminotyr - osine’’ and a unit of L - tyrosine alkyl ester , linked together by a regular peptide bond . DTR is a derivative of naturally occurring tyrosine dipeptide with the important structural modiﬁcation that the N - terminus of the peptide has been replaced by a hydrogen atom and the C - terminus of the peptide is protected by a pendent chain ‘‘R’’ of variable length and structure ( Figure 3 ) . This particular design gives rise to a versatile diphenolic monomer . Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 133 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim In polyarylates , a diphenol and a dicarboxylic acid are copolymerized , forming a strictly alternating A – B copo - lymer similar to the copolymerization of a dialcohol and a dicarboxylic acid ( leading to a polyester ) or the copolymer - ization of a diamine and a dicarboxylic acid ( leading to polyamides ) . Thus , if the dicarboxylic acids are regarded as the A monomer , and the diphenols are the B monomer , a combinatorial design is obtained when a set of x structural variations of ‘‘A’’ and y structural variations of ‘‘B’’ are copolymerized in all possible combinations . Considering the ultimate applications of the polymers as medical - implant materials , the speciﬁc dicarboxylic acids used were selected from the constituents of the Krebs Cycle , various nutrients , and from the FDA’s list of approved food additives ( EAFUS Listing ) . Overall , eight dicarboxylic acids and 14 diphenols were used , resulting in 112 indivi - dual polymer compositions . [ 8 , 27 ] For the initial synthesis of the library , about 100 to 200 mg of pure polymer was obtained from a 25 mL reaction vessel . [ 8 ] Polymer Characterization and Development of Data Sets Increasing the pace of polymer synthesis is not useful without a corresponding acceleration in the pace of polymer characterization and evaluation . To analyze the more than 100 polymers contained in the library of polyarylates , Kohn et al . developed a series of new assays for the rapid characterization of large polymer sets . [ 8 , 27 , 36 – 40 ] With only 30 mg of polymer sample , glass transition temperature , melting temperature , decomposition temperature , the position of low - temperature transitions , an estimate of the ﬂexural modulus , surface hydrophobicity , surface che - mical composition ( by XPS ) and surface topography by scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) and / or atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) were obtained . Using miniaturized compression - molded thin ﬁlms , an additional 15 mg of polymer was sufﬁcient to generate disks which were inserted in 96 - well tissue culture plates and used to evaluate the ability of these polymers to support cell growth . [ 27 ] In the course of the characterization of the 112 polymers , data sets with hundreds of individual data points were obtained . The most intuitive way to analyze such large data sets is by visual inspection of appropriately arranged gra - phic presentations ( Figure 4 ) . By deﬁning a new structural polymer descriptor , the ‘‘total ﬂexibility index’’ , the graphic presentation of Figure 4 could be transformed into a correlation between chemical structure and the glass transition temperature ( Figure 5 ) . [ 27 ] Asthis correlation was shown to extend beyond the 112 polymers contained initially in the polyarylate library , [ 41 ] measurements perfor - med on a representative subset of about 40 polymers made it possible to predict the glass transition temperature of every polyarylate that can theoretically be derived from the copolymerization of structural variants of the particular templates of ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’ used here . To facilitate data analysis , it is possible to deﬁne a library space . [ 41 ] If n different properties are being measured for each polymer , the corresponding data set can be mapped in ‘‘ n - dimensional space’’ from which any number of two - dimensional projections can correlate two polymer proper - ties of interest . For example , using the correlations for glass transition and air - water contact angle , the ‘‘boundaries’’ of the library space were determined ( Figure 6 ) . For all combinations of glass transition temperature and air - water contact angle that fall within the shaded area of the plane , a polymer structure can be identiﬁed that will exhibit the desired combination of properties . Figure 4 . Bar graph presentation of the glass transition tem - peratures of 112 polymers in the polyarylate library . When appropriately sorted , the bar graphs clearly show the progression from low to high T g , the upper and lower limits of possible T g values , and intuitively illustrate that there may be a correlation between chemical structure and the glass transition temperature . Similar presentations were prepared for surface hydrophobicity , mechanicalproperties , andvariouscellular responses ( notshown ) . Figure 3 . Chemical structure of tyrosine - derived polycarbo - nates . See Figure 2 for corresponding structures of monomers . Figure 2 . Chemical structure of DTR diphenols . Note that the monomers form an homologous series , differing only in the length of their respective pendent chain ( R ) . Commonly used pendent chains are ethyl ( E ) , butyl ( B ) , hexyl ( H ) , octyl ( O ) , and dodecyl ( D ) esters . 134 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Protein Adsorption Assay Clean material surfaces that come in contact with serum - containing ﬂuids in vitro or in vivo are rapidly covered by serum proteins . Numerous studies reveal that different synthetic , polymeric substrates vary in their ability to ad - sorb proteins and , therefore , vary in their ability to support cell attachment and growth . [ 42 – 45 ] In fact , the wide interest in protein surface adsorption in the biomedical community is motivated by the hypothesis that cellular responses to polymeric surfaces are mediated by the protein layer that adsorbs on the surface . [ 12 , 23 , 46 , 47 ] The type and conforma - tion of the protein layer forming on a polymer surface may therefore be a major determinant of the suitability of a given polymer surface for biomedical applications . For example , adsorption of ﬁbrinogen , one of the most prevalent proteins in blood , to a polymer surface reduces the blood compat - ibility of that surface . [ 23 , 48 , 49 ] For the reasons mentioned above , a cost - efﬁcient , rapid technique for the study of protein - polymer interactions was critically needed . Previously available assays for the detection of surface - adsorbed proteins , such as immuno - blotting [ 50 ] or surface plasmon resonance , [ 51 ] are accurate but far too costly or too time consuming to be applied to the rapid screening of a large number of polymer samples . Therefore , we designed an immuno - ﬂuorescence assay that could be conducted in commercially available , large capa - city microplates using highly sensitive detection of surface - adsorbed ﬁbrinogen with ﬂuorochrome - labeled antibodies . Utilization of standard microplates allowed the use of conventional microplate processing and reading devices . We screened a selected set of 45 polymers for polymer - adsorbed human ﬁbrinogen using the immuno - ﬂuorescence assay described above . The results show a polymer - depen - dent adsorption of ﬁbrinogen ( Figure 7 ) . A group of polymers with low ﬁbrinogen - binding capacity ( left side of the chart ) and a group with high ﬁbrinogen - binding capacity ( right side of the chart ) could be identiﬁed . The statistical comparison of each of 10 low ﬁbrinogen - binding polymers ( nos . 1 – 10 , Figure 7 ) with each of 10 high ﬁb - rinogen - binding polymers ( nos . 36 – 45 , Figure 7 ) showed signiﬁcant differences in the amount of ﬁbrinogen adsorp - tion between the polymers ( p < 0 . 001 ) . This data set was used to train an Artiﬁcial Neural Network ( ANN ) model ( see below ) . Protein adsorption is strongly inﬂuenced by the hydro - phobicity of the surface , as measured by the air - water contact angle ( y ) . Several studies therefore explored towhat extent y correlates with the adsorption of proteins when a material comes into contact with protein - containing solu - tions . [ 13 ] In turn , the layer of adsorbed proteins affects cell growth , [ 52 ] indicating that a simple measure of surface hydrophobicity ( y ) may correlate with many cellular responses . [ 53 ] To test this hypothesis , we plotted the air - water contact angle ( y ) versus ﬁbrinogen adsorption for all 45 polymers ( Figure 8 ) . From the ﬁgure , it can easily be seen that the relationship between ﬁbrinogen adsorption and y is not a linear correlation ( R 2 ¼ 0 . 43 ) . While linear curve ﬁtting failed to shed light on the relevance of y on ﬁbrinogen adsorption , the ANN provided additional insights ( see below ) . Genotypic Expression of Proinﬂammatory Cytokines in Macrophages Macrophages play a critical role in invoking inﬂammation and the foreign - body reaction to biomaterials . Upon initial contact of macrophages with foreign objects , a variety of cellular reactions are triggered , including the production of reactive oxygen species , and the release of pro - inﬂamma - tory ( e . g . , IL - 1 b and IL - 6 ) and anti - inﬂammatory cytokines Figure 5 . Exponential correlation between the glass transition temperature of individual polymers contained within the library of polyarylates and the ‘‘total ﬂexibility index’’ ( x ) , an empirically derived parameter that describes the chemical structure of the polymers . Using the equation y ¼ 127 . 48e ( (cid:3) 0 . 11818 x ) , the glass transition ( y ) of every one of the thousands of theoretical polymer structures contained within the library can be predicted . Figure 6 . Illustration of the library space deﬁned by a two - dimensional projection of the air - water contact angle ( y ) and glass transition temperature ( T g ) . The dark points are the coordinates of polymers that were synthesized and analyzed . For all combina - tions of T g and y that fall within the shaded area , a polymer with corresponding properties can be found in the existing library of polyarylates . [ 39 ] Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 135 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim ( e . g . , IL - 10 and TGF - b ) . The interest in studying macro - phage interactions with material surfaces is motivated by the need to better understand the mechanism of this interaction , and by the need to design biomaterial surfaces that lead to controllable macrophage - surface interactions . We are currently addressing these objectives by developing efﬁcient assays to explore the up - or down - regulation of gene expression of pro - inﬂammatory cytokines in macro - phages that are in contact with different polymer surfaces . Here , we report preliminary results from the evaluation of 72 polyarylates ( Figure 9 ) . This is currently the largestset of polymers for which gene - expression data have been obtained within one single experiment . Since the 72 test polymers were carefully characterized in terms of polymer structure and material properties , the changes observed in the gene expression of IL - 1 b and IL - 6 can potentially be correlated with the wide range of material properties , protein adsorption data , and cell - growth data obtained in the course of our studies . Computational Modeling of Protein Adsorption and Cell Growth Computational modeling is a necessity if large and complex data sets like those presented in the previous sections are to be useful in biomaterials development . In similar cases , semiempirical , or ‘‘surrogate , ’’ modeling has been shown to be an efﬁcient approach . [ 13 ] We present the results of our semiempirical Surrogate Model methodology to predict ﬁbrinogen adsorption and fetal rat lung ﬁbroblast growth . Fibrinogen Adsorption As outlined in Materials and Methods , a large number of structure - based polymer descriptors were calculated . Next a Decision Tree routine was used to identify those des - criptors that were most relevant to ﬁbrinogen adsorption . The three most signiﬁcant descriptors obtained from the Decision Tree analysis are compiled in Table 2 . These descriptors were used as inputs in the ANN , which was then trained on half of the available data set . The ANN pre - dictions of ﬁbrinogen adsorption on polyarylate surfaces are given in Figure 10 . Overall , the ANN made correct predictions for 38 of the 45 test polymers ( Figure 10 ) . The average percentage root mean square ( rms ) error in prediction of the validation set was 35 % , which compares favorably with the average percent relative standard devia - tion of the experimental measurements ( i . e . , 18 % ) . The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient for the validation data sets was 0 . 54 (cid:1) 0 . 12 , also indicating a high degree of predictive capability . Figure 8 . No correlation is evident between air - water contact angle y and human ﬁbrinogen adsorption . Amount of adsorbed ﬁbrinogen ( n ¼ 16 ) is given in percent relative to a polypropylene surface which served as internal control . Figure 7 . Immuno - ﬂuorescence screening of adsorbed human ﬁbrinogen on 45 polymers ( mean (cid:1) SD ; n ¼ 16 ) . 136 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Rat Lung Fibroblast ( RLF ) Proliferation The results of the Decision Tree analysis relating to RLF proliferation are compiled in Table 3 . Among the three most relevant descriptors was log P , an empirical estimate of the octanol / water partition coefﬁcient of individual polymer chains . This is a very interesting result as several studies report an empirical correlation between surface hydro - phobicity and cell growth . The ANN predictions of RLF NMA are given in Figure 11 . Overall ( using training set and validation set data ) the ANN predicted cell growth correctly for 41 out of 48 polymers to within the average percent experimental error of 23 . Using a more stringent test , and considering the ANN predictions for the validation set only , the ANN predictions were within the average percent experimental error for 19 out of 24 polymers . This represents a 79 % success rate of making correct predictions of cell growth on a wide range of polymer surfaces . The average percentage rms error of the validation set was 28 % ( correlation coefﬁcient : 0 . 54 (cid:1) 0 . 09 ) . The ANN was less successful in making correct predictions at both the low and high extremes of cell growth . Work is currently underway to understand the limitations of the model and to improve it . Figure 9 . Gene - expression levels of pro - inﬂammatory cytokines by rat peritoneal macrophages grown on 72 different polymer ﬁlms . Bars indicate relative expression values . Polymers were given a unique identiﬁcation number ( X - axis ) and arranged in order of increasing expression values . The expression values shown represent the average of two separate experiments . ( A ) : Gene - expression levels for IL - 1b . ( B ) : Gene - expression levels for IL - 6 . Table2 . The three most signiﬁcant polymer descriptors for the prediction of ﬁbrinogen adsorption . Descriptor Name Deﬁnition Signiﬁcance Gain a ) T g Experimentally measured glass transition temperature 823 a _ nH Number of hydrogen atoms in the molecule 509 log P ( o / w ) Log of the octanol / water partition coefﬁcient ( including implicit hydrogens ) calculated from a linear atom type model 489 a ) Decision Tree Monte Carlo descriptor results for ﬁbrinogen adsorption . ‘‘Signiﬁcance Gain’’ indicates the ratio between the number of pseudo experiments in which the given descriptor was found to have the highest IG to the number of experiments in which a random parameter was found to have the highest IG . Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 137 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Table3 . The three most signiﬁcant polymer descriptors for prediction of rat lung ﬁbroblast ( RLF ) growth . Descriptor Name Deﬁnition Signiﬁcance Gain a ) Slog P _ VSA9 The sum of the VdW surface area of atoms in the molecule for which the value of the log P ( o / w ) descriptor is greater than 0 . 4 . 483 Hydrophilic factor An empirical index obtained as a count of the number of hydrophilic groups . 331 Slog P _ VSA5 The sum of the VdW surface area of atoms in the molecule for which the value of the log P ( o / w ) descriptor is greater between 0 . 15 and 0 . 20 . 316 a ) Decision Tree MonteCarlo descriptor resultsfor RLFcell growthon different polymersurfaces . ‘‘Signiﬁcance Gain’’indicates theratio between the number of pseudoexperiments in which thegivendescriptor was foundto havethe highest IG to the number ofexperiments in which a random parameter was found to have the highest IG . Figure 10 . Comparison between experimental values for ﬁbrinogen adsorption and the values predicted by the ANN . The experimentally determined amounts of ﬁbrinogen adsorbed to different polymer surfaces are shown as diamonds . The error bars relate to the rms error of the experimental measurements . The values predicted by the ANN are shown as triangles . The ANN used the three descriptors given in Table 2 as inputs . For 38 out of 45 polymers , the ANN correctly predicted the experimental value within the error range of the measurement . This accuracy of prediction holds for both the training and validation sets . Figure 11 . Comparison between experimental values for the normalized metabolic activity ( NMA ) of rat lung ﬁbroblasts ( RLF ) and the values predicted by the ANN . NMA values are a measure of the number of cells growing on a polymer surface . The experimentally determined NMA values for different polymer surfaces are shown as diamonds . The error bars relate to the rms error of the experimental measurements . The values predicted by the ANN are shown as triangles . For 41 out of 48 polymers , the ANN prediction was within the average error range of the measurement . The ANN used the three descriptors given in Table 3 as inputs . 138 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Conclusion New approaches to biomaterials development are driven by three major , recent technological developments : ( i ) efﬁcient parallel synthesis of polymers for biomaterials applica - tions , ( ii ) rapid screening assays for various cellular res - ponses ( bioresponses ) in the presence of polymers , and ( iii ) semiempiricalmodelingusingtechniquesofmachinelearn - ing . While all of these techniques arewell known the ﬁeld of drug discovery , they have so far not been applied to the challenge of biomaterials discovery in an integrated fashion . Combinatorial libraries of more than one hundred bio - materials have now been prepared in sufﬁcient quantities for in vitro assays . Rapid screening assays for biologically relevant material properties such as ﬁbrinogen adsorption , cellular proliferation and macrophagegenotypic expression have been developed and can be performed at substantially lower cost and in shorter time than previously possible . Surrogate ( semiempirical ) modeling techniques based upon machine learning technology can be effectively used to screen polymer libraries for identiﬁcation of high - perfor - mance polymers . The successful prediction of protein adsorption and cell growth on different polymeric surfaces by a computational model presents a signiﬁcant break - through and illustrates that the integration of combinatorial and computational techniques into a consistent design approach can reduce the time and cost required to identify biomaterials with optimum performance characteristics for speciﬁc clinical applications . Acknowledgements : This work was supported by seed funds provided by Rutgers University , by NIH grant R01 EB00286 , and by ‘‘ RESBIO – The National Resource for Polymeric Biomaterials ’’ funded under NIH grant EB001046 . Financial support was also provided by NIH Grant HL - 60416 and the New Jersey Center for Biomaterials . Dr . Wise Young , Dr . Dong Ming and Ms Merise Dunbar are acknowledged for helpful suggestions regarding macrophage harvesting and culture . We also thank Drs . William Welsh and Vladyslav Kholodovich for help with descriptor development and resources and Dr . Khaled Rasheed for consultation regarding machine learning algorithms . [ 1 ] G . Lowe , JCS Rev . 1995 , 309 . [ 2 ] M . H . Lyttle , Drug Dev . Res . 1995 , 35 , 230 . [ 3 ] F . M . Menger , A . V . Eliseev , V . A . Migulin , J . Org . Chem . 1995 , 60 , 6666 . [ 4 ] J . Wang , Y . Yoo , C . Gao , I . I . Takeuchi , X . Sun , H . Chang , X . Xiang , P . G . Schultz , Science 1998 , 279 , 1712 . [ 5 ] J . C . Meredith , A . P . Smith , A . Karim , E . J . Amis , Macromolecules 2000 , 33 , 9747 . [ 6 ] A . P . Smith , J . F . Douglas , J . C . Meredith , E . J . Amis , A . Karim , Phys . Rev . Lett . 2001 , 87 , 015503 . [ 7 ] S . Brocchini , K . S . James , V . Tangpasuthadol , S . M . Pendharkar , X . Tong , J . Kohn , Annual Meeting of the Society for Biomaterials , New Orleans , LA 1997 , Published by : Society for Biomaterials , Minneapolis , MN p . 143 . [ 8 ] S . Brocchini , K . James , V . Tangpasuthadol , J . Kohn , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1997 , 119 , 4553 . [ 9 ] D . M . Lynn , D . G . Anderson , D . Putnam , R . Langer , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2001 , 123 , 8155 . [ 10 ] D . F . Williams , ‘‘Deﬁnitions in Biomaterials – Proceedings of a Consensus Conference of the European Society for Biomaterials’’ , Volume 4 , in : Progress in Biomaterials , 1987 , Elsevier , New York , NY . [ 11 ] J . Kohn , R . Langer , in : ‘‘ Biomaterials Science : An Introduction to Materials in Medicine ’’ , B . D . Ratner , A . S . Hoffman , F . J . Schoen , J . E . Lemons , Eds . , 1996 , Academic Press , San Diego , CA 64 . [ 12 ] B . D . Ratner , J . Mol . Recognit . 1996 , 9 , 617 . [ 13 ] D . G . Castner , B . D . Ratner , Surf . Sci . 2002 , 500 , 28 . [ 14 ] D . L . Kirkpatrick , S . Watson , S . Ulhaq , Comb . Chem . High Throughput Screen . 1999 , 2 , 211 . [ 15 ] M . M . Hann , A . R . Leach , G . Harper , J . Chem . Inf . Comput . Sci . 2001 , 41 , 856 . [ 16 ] C . M . Kraemer - Pecore , A . M . Wollacott , J . R . Desjarlais , Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2001 , 5 , 690 . [ 17 ] C . A . Voigt , S . L . Mayo , F . H . Arnold , Z . G . Wang , J . Cell Biochem . Suppl . 2001 , 37 , 58 . [ 18 ] W . Wiechert , J . Biotechnol . 2002 , 94 , 37 . [ 19 ] A . V . Veselovsky , A . S . Ivanov , Curr . Drug Targets Infect . Disord . 2003 , 3 , 33 . [ 20 ] S . Baluja , in : ‘‘ Practical Handbook of Genetic Algorithms : New Frontiers ’’ , L . Chambers , Ed . , Vol . II , 1995 , CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL p . 31 . [ 21 ] V . Chandra , R . Sudhakar , Proc IEEE Southeastcon , Knox - ville , KY 1988 , p . 633 . [ 22 ] Y . Yoon , R . Brobst , P . Bergstresser , L . Peterson , J . Neural Network Comp . 1989 , 43 . [ 23 ] V . H . Perez - Luna , T . A . Horbett , B . D . Ratner , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 1994 , 28 , 1111 . [ 24 ] A . Chilkoti , A . E . Schmierer , V . H . Perez - Luna , B . D . Ratner , Anal . Chem . 1995 , 67 , 2883 . [ 25 ] M . Wagner , M . Shen , T . Horbett , D . Castner , J . Biomed . Mat . Res . 2003 , 64A , 1 . [ 26 ] J . Kohn , S . Brocchini , A . Schwartz , Synthesis of tyrosine - derived diphenol monomers , US Patent 5 670602 , issued 1997 , assigned to Rutgers University . [ 27 ] S . Brocchini , K . James , V . Tangpasuthadol , J . Kohn , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 1998 , 42 , 66 – 75 . [ 28 ] N . Weber , D . Bolikal , S . Bourke , J . Kohn , Society for Biomaterials 29th Annual Meeting , Reno , Nevada , 2003 , Published by : Society for Biomaterials , Minneapolis , MN , p . 28 . [ 29 ] N . Weber , D . Bolikal , S . L . Bourke , J . Kohn , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 2003 , in press . [ 30 ] S . D . Abramson , ‘‘Selected Bulk and Surface Properties and Biocompatibility of a New Class of Tyrosine - derived Polycarbonates’’ , ( Ph . D . Thesis ) , 2002 , Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ . [ 31 ] T . M . Mitchell , ‘‘ Machine Learning ’’ , 1997 , McGraw - Hill , New York , NY . [ 32 ] J . Hertz , R . G . Palmer , A . Krogh , ‘‘ IntroductiontotheTheory of Neural Computation ’’ , Volume 1 , 1991 , Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , Redwood City , CA . [ 33 ] K . Rasheed , H . Hirsh , A . Gelsey , ‘‘ Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Engineering ’’ , 1997 , 11 , 295 . [ 34 ] S . I . Ertel , J . Kohn , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 1994 , 28 , 919 . [ 35 ] J . Zhou , S . I . Ertel , H . M . Buettner , J . Kohn , Annual Meeting of the Society for Biomaterials , Boston MA 1994 , Integration of Combinatorial Synthesis , Rapid Screening , and Computational Modeling in Biomaterials Development 139 Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Published by : Society for Biomaterials , Minneapolis , MN p . 371 . [ 36 ] J . Kohn , S . Brocchini , K . James , V . Tangpasuthadol , E . Tziampazis , P . Moghe , Proceedings of the Materials Research Society – Spring Meeting , San Francisco , 1999 , Published by : Materials Research Society , Warrendale , PA . [ 37 ] A . M . Belu , S . Brocchini , J . Kohn , B . D . Ratner , Rapid Commun . Mass Spectrom . 2000 , 14 , 564 . [ 38 ] P . L . Ryan , R . A . Foty , J . Kohn , M . Steinberg , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 2001 , 98 , 4323 . [ 39 ] S . Abramson , G . Alexe , P . Hammer , J . Kohn , Society for Biomaterials 29th Annual Meeting , Reno , Nevada , 2003 , Publishedby : SocietyforBiomaterials , Minneapolis , MN , 24 . [ 40 ] S . Abramson , D . Smith , J . Kohn , Society for Biomaterials 29th Annual Meeting , Reno , Nevada , 2003 , Published by : Society for Biomaterials , Minneapolis , MN , 343 . [ 41 ] C . H . Reynolds , J . Comb . Chem . 1999 , 1 , 297 . [ 42 ] B . K . Brandley , O . A . Weisz , R . L . Schnaar , J . Biol . Chem . 1987 , 262 , 6431 . [ 43 ] A . Nicol , D . C . Gowda , T . M . Parker , D . W . Urry , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 1993 , 27 , 801 . [ 44 ] E . Tziampazis , J . A . Cassaday , J . Kohn , P . V . Moghe , Transactions of the Sixth World Biomaterials Congress , Kamuela , Hawaii ( USA ) , 2000 , Published by : Society for Biomaterials , Minneapolis , MN , Volume 1 , p . 166 . [ 45 ] X . B . Yang , H . I . Roach , N . M . Clarke , S . M . Howdle , R . Quirk , K . M . Shakesheff , R . O . Oreffo , Bone 2001 , 29 , 523 . [ 46 ] B . D . Ratner , J Dent Educ . 2001 , 65 , 1340 . [ 47 ] B . D . Ratner , T . A . Horbett , D . Shuttleworth , H . R . Thomas , J . Coll . Interf . Sci . 1981 , 83 , 630 . [ 48 ] P . Favia , V . H . Perez - Luna , T . Boland , D . G . Castner , B . D . Ratner , Plasmas and Polymers 1996 , 1 , 299 . [ 49 ] C . F . Mandenius , L . Ljunggren , Biomaterials 1991 , 12 , 369 . [ 50 ] S . R . Mulzer , J . L . Brash , J . Biomater . Sci . Polym . Ed . 1990 , 1 , 173 . [ 51 ] G . B . Sigal , M . Mrksich , G . M . Whitesides , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1998 , 120 , 3464 . [ 52 ] A . Magnani , G . Peluso , S . Margarucci , K . K . Chittur , in : ‘‘ Integrated Biomaterials Science ’’ , 2002 , Kluwer Aca - demic / Plenum , New York , 669 . [ 53 ] S . L . Goodman , T . G . Grasel , S . L . Cooper , R . M . Albrecht , J . Biomed . Mat . Res . 1989 , 23 , 105 . 140 J . R . Smith , A . Seyda , N . Weber , D . Knight , S . Abramson , J . Kohn Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2004 , 25 , 127 – 140 www . mrc - journal . de (cid:1) 2004 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim