What We Are Reading Synopses of recent studies in health services research A Longitudinal Study of State Strategies and Policies to Accelerate Evidence - Based Practices in the Context of Systems Transformation Take Away Points • The use of evidence - based practices ( EBPs ) for the treatment of substance use disorders is gradually becoming widespread . However , widespread implementation mostly favors psychological interventions . Between 2007 and 2009 , states reported increased implementation of psychosocial interventions and the use of methadone , but limited use of screening and brief interventions and other medication assisted treatments . • While states have opted to promote EBPs by requiring or encouraging providers to deliver these practices with existing contract funds , only five states have legislative mandates requiring EBPs for substance use disorders . The Issue Recent policy developments , including the Affordable Care Act of 2010 , necessitate the integration of substance abuse treatment with primary care and the need for evidence - based practices ( EBPs ) that incorporate best research evidence , clinical expertise and patient values . State governments are appropriate entities for promoting EBPs in the treatment of substance use disorders and each state has dedicated Single State Authority ( SSA ) charged with overseeing substance abuse treatment services . However , little is known about states’ strategies for improving access to EBPs , and the extent of ( and changes in ) EBP implementation across the states . Study Methods and Design The study was designed to describe state agency efforts to promote implementation of three EBPs : screening , brief intervention , and referral to treatment ( SBIRT ) , psychosocial interventions ( PIs ) , and medication - assisted treatment ( MAT ) . The researchers employed a longitudinal mixed method study using semi - structured interviews and surveys to solicit data from SSA administrators on their strategies for influencing and promoting implementation of the EBPs publicly funded systems of care . Participants were 51 SSA directors / designees ( representing the 50 states and Washington , DC ) who completed an initial rapid assessment interview in 2007 and follow - up interviews in 2008 and 2009 . Data collection focused on status of EBP implementation and strategies to increase adoption and implementation of EBPs ( i . e . , SBIRT , PIs and MAT ) . The survey asked respondents to rate the implementation and adoption of these EBPs using 5 - point Likert type scales which were dichotomized ( 1 - 3 vs . 4 or 5 ) to examine widespread implementation . The survey / interview also asked about the presence of EPB language in direct and indirect state contracts ( including competitive grants ) , and organizational structure , authorization / licensure , treatment provider funding , regulations and legislation , and staff functions . Descriptive statistics were used to summarize survey items while qualitative data from the interviews were coded and analyzed for emerging themes . Source Rieckmann T , Abraham A , Zwick J , Rasplica C , & McCarty D . ( 2015 ) . Health Services Research , 50 ( 4 ) , 1125 - 1145 . Key Findings and Limitations • Significant increase in widespread implementation of psychosocial interventions and medication assisted treatments over the three years while there were no changes in SBIRT . o Between 2007 and 2008 , there was a double fold increase in the number of states reporting widespread implementation of psychological interventions and MAT . o From 2008 to 2009 , Motivational Interviewing / Motivational Enhancement Therapy ( MIT / MET ) was the only psychological intervention with significant increase in widespread implementation and there were no changes in the implementation of medication assisted treatments o As of 2009 , there was wide availability of psychological interventions ( Cognitive Behavior Therapy , MIT / MET and the ASAMPPC were available in at least 71 % of the states ) while MAT ( including Methadone , Disulfiram and Smoking cessation ) was widely implemented in less than a third of the states . • Use of state legislation to promote EBPs was uncommon . Only five states ( Oregon , North Carolina , Alaska , Wisconsin and Idaho ) reported legislative mandate for EBP implementation . • Funding for SBIRT is balanced primarily across all four sources ( general funds , Medicaid , Federal Block Grants , and other grants ) ; PIs were funded primarily through state general funds and federal block grants ; and approximately three - fourths of states relied on state general funds and Medicaid to fund medication assisted treatments . • States used contract language as a common lever for EBP implementation . States with direct contracting were significantly more likely to include EBP - related contract language in 2007 and 2008 . • States face similar changes to EBP implementation including limited / lack of funding and workforce and staffing needs . Facilitators of EBPs include partnerships with primary care providers and professional development for staff and providers . The study is not without limitations . For example , the data collection instrument was modified during the three year study , hence the unavailability of data for all key variables ( e . g . , individual EBPs ) and inability to examine trajectories of change . Also , data collection coincided with the early phase of the 2008 economic recession hence the need for further studies to examine if the observed trend has continued or changed . Final Thoughts • State agencies are important for impacting the use of EBPs and needed changes at the provider level with the overarching goal of improving client outcomes . States can improve the quality of care for SUDs by providing access to , and emphasizing the use of EBPs . • Despite the increased implementation of psychosocial interventions and MAT ( specifically , the use of methadone ) , there is still the need for states to ensure consistent access to these services . • With the ongoing shifts in health care environment , SSAs are likely to assume greater involvement in the administration of Medicaid funding for the treatment of SUDs . “Health care reform and implementation of parity in coverage increases access to treatment for alcohol and drug use . Science - based substance abuse treatment will become even more crucial as payers seek consistent quality of care . ”