CRITICAL REVIEWS Biomechanics of Scar Tissue and Uninjured Skin David T . Corr 1 , * and David A . Hart 2 – 4 1 Biomedical Engineering Department , Jonsson Engineering Center , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy , New York . 2 McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health , 3 Department of Surgery , and 4 Department of Medicine , University of Calgary , Calgary , Canada . Signiﬁcance : Skin exhibits direction - dependent biomechanical behavior , inﬂuenced by the structural orientation of its collagen - rich ﬁbrous network and its viscous ground - substance matrix . Injury can affect the skin’s structure and composition , thereby greatly inﬂuencing the biomechanics and direc - tionality of the resulting scar tissue . Recent Advances : A combination of stress - relaxation and tensile failure test - ing identiﬁes both the tissue’s physiologically relevant viscoelastic behavior and resistance to rupture . When studied in mutually orthogonal directions in the plane of the tissue , these measures give insight into the directional properties of healthy tissue , and how they change with injury . By controlling the biomechanics of the wound environment , a new force - modulating dressing has demonstrated the ability to improve healing and reduce scar formation . Critical Issues : Skin and scar biomechanics are typically characterized by us - ing tensile failure , which identiﬁes the tissue’s resistance to rupture but offers limited insight into its normal daily function . Characterizing physiologically relevant biomechanics of skin , and how they change with injury , is critical to understand the tissue’s ability to resist elongation , bear load , and dissipate energy via viscous means . Future Directions : Compared with uninjured skin , scar tissue demonstrates similar high - load stiffness , greatly reduced resistance to failure , reduced low - load compliance , and altered material directionality . These ﬁndings , identiﬁed through combined stress relaxation and failure testing , suggest morphological changes with injury that are consistent with the viscoelastic and directional changes observed biomechanically . A more complete understanding of the directional , physiologically relevant skin biomechanics can guide the design and critical functional assessment of wound treatments , scaffolds , and tissue - engineered skin replacements . SCOPE S kin is a composite material consisting of a collagen - rich ﬁbrous network embedded in a ground sub - stance matrix . The proteoglycan - rich matrix provides skin its viscous nature at low loads . 1 The main ﬁbrous con - stituents , collagen and elastin , provide structural stiffness and elasticity to the skin . 2 , 3 Skin exhibits anisotropic , time - dependent , viscoelastic material behavior , in which the direction of minimal extensibility correlates with the ﬁbrous network’s principal direc - tion . 4 Skin is also a dynamic tissue , changing with age and inﬂuenced by gender . Much of our current understanding of skin behavior has come from bio - mechanical tensile testing , in which tissue is stretched and the force that develops is measured . Although fail - David T . Corr , PhD Submitted for publication August 12 , 2011 . * Correspondence : Biomedical Engineering Department , 7042 Jonsson Engineering Center , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , 110 8th St . , Troy , NY 12180 ( e - mail : corrd @ rpi . edu ) . j 37 ADVANCES IN WOUND CARE , VOLUME 2 , NUMBER 2 Copyright ª 2013 by Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . DOI : 10 . 1089 / wound . 2011 . 0321 ure properties have typically dominated previous tensile analyses , skin’s viscoelastic behavior at low loads has gained recent interest due to its relevance to normal physiological functioning . An apprecia - tion of these biomechanical properties identiﬁes the skin’s ability to resist elongation , bear load , and dissipate energy via viscous means . 5 When studied in mutually orthogonal directions in the plane of skin and scar , these measures give insight into the directionality of healthy tissue , and how the direc - tional properties change with injury . 6 Similar ana - lyses can be employed to functionally assess potential wound healing treatments and engineered tissue replacements . TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE In his pioneering work , Karl Langer identiﬁed that skin’s load - deformation behavior consisted of a highly extensible initial phase followed by a lin - ear response . 7 , 8 The initial strain - stiffening phase , or ‘‘toe - in’’ region , occurs at low loads and is at - tributed to progressive recruitment of collagen ﬁ - bers : due to straightening of slack ﬁbers and rotation of collagen ﬁbers to align with the direc - tion of elongation . 1 When strained , skin dissipates elastic energy stored in the ﬁbrous network via viscous means , as shown through both creep and stress relaxation . This viscous behavior dominates skin biomechanics at physiologically relevant loadings , and is believed to result from water con - tained in the tissue , and be inﬂuenced by the presence of proteoglycans . Thus , the biomechanics of skin is greatly inﬂuenced by its structure and composition . Wounding can greatly alter both structure and composition , thus resulting in scar tissue with signiﬁcant biomechanical differences . Skin’s ﬁbrotic network exhibits a directionality that correlates with its biomechanical function . Thus , to more completely assess skin biomechan - ics , it is critical to characterize the directional dif - ferences in both the physiologically relevant viscoelastic properties and failure properties . This can be achieved by evaluating specimens obtained in orthogonal directions within the plane of the tissue , using a combination of stress - relaxation and tensile failure testing . When carried out in both skin and scar tissue , the inﬂuence of injury on the directionality and biomechanical function of skin can be identiﬁed . Understanding how injury affects skin function can help identify the corre - sponding structural and compositional changes , and provide valuable information for the design and functional assessment of clinical treatments and / or tissue - engineered skin replacements . Biomechanics also inﬂuence the healing wound , with more pronounced scarring observed in ana - tomical locations of high tissue tension . It appears that this effect can be mitigated by controlling the wound mechanical environment with a new force - modulating dressing . CLINICAL RELEVANCE Skin exhibits a highly directional response to stretch . It is least extensible in the ﬁbrous net - work’s principal direction , which greatly inﬂuences the viscoelastic properties displayed at low loads and physiologic displacements . Acute wounding alters the skin’s ﬁbrotic structure , thereby pro - ducing scar tissue with signiﬁcant functional im - pairments . Exploring skin biomechanics , in both healthy skin and scars , provides insight into the directionality of healthy tissue , and how it changes with injury . A more complete understanding of how wounding affects the skin’s physiologic and failure properties can help guide the design and functional assessment of more effective treatments or en - gineered materials to repair compromised skin . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL OR MATERIAL : ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS Pigs offer a preclinical model for full - thickness excisional wounds , with striking structural and functional similarities to human skin . 9 – 11 Moreover , different breeds of pig exhibit responses to wound - ing that parallel those observed among humans of different ethnicities . As such , porcine models serve as excellent experimental models to study various aspects of human wound healing . Evaluating spec - imens during the late remodeling phase addresses the properties of a stable wound , in which scars have become more normocellular , an extracellular matrix is well established , and further remodeling occurs at a slow rate . However , this does not pro - vide direct insight into other healing phases or the TARGET ARTICLES 1 . Corr DT , Gallant - Behm CL , Shrive NG , and Hart DA : Biomechanical behavior of scar tissue and uninjured skin in a porcine model . Wound Repair Regen 2009 ; 17 : 250 . 2 . Gurtner GC , Dauskardt RH , Wong VW , Bhatt KA , Wu K , Vial IN , et al . : Improving cu - taneous scar by controlling the mechanical en - vironment : large animal and phase I studies . Ann Surg 2011 ; 254 : 217 . 38 CORR AND HART temporal aspects of wound healing . Biomechanical evaluation using a combination of stress - relaxation followed by tensile failure grants insight into both the viscoelastic properties relevant to physiologic use and tissue failure properties . 5 , 12 These proper - ties correlate to compositional and structural as - pects of the tissue . Thus , evaluating skin and scar specimens , in orthogonal directions within the tis - sue’s plane , identiﬁes skin’s material properties and directionality , and how these change with injury and subsequent healing . A new , force - modulating , polymer dressing can control the wound’s mechanical environment to improve incision healing and reduce scarring . 13 However , this dressing has not yet been applied to excisional wounds . DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS AND RELEVANT LITERATURE The inﬂuence of acute injury on dorsal skin biomechanics was explored by using porcine skin and scar tissue specimens , evaluated during the late remodeling phase of healing ( 70 days ) after full - thickness excisional wounding . 6 Test speci - mens were obtained in two orthogonal directions within the plane of skin : axial ( cranial - caudal ) and transverse ( dorsal - ventral ) . Biomechanical char - acterization , using stress relaxation followed by tensile failure , provided insight into the tissue’s viscoelastic response in physiologically relevant loadings , as well as its resistance to tensile rupture ( Fig . 1 ) . Biomechanical testing For stress relaxation , specimens are stretched a small amount ( e . g . , 1 . 0 mm at 2 . 4 mm / s ) and iso - metrically held for a period of time , during which tissue forces relax due to viscous energy dissipa - tion . Data analysis can determine the peak force during relaxation ( an indirect measure of low - load tissue stiffness ) , and rate of relaxation ( indicative of tissue’s viscous energy dissipation ) . For tensile failure , specimens are stretched at a constant rate Figure 1 . ( a – c ) Schematic of biomechanical protocol . ( a ) Mechanical test specimens are obtained by using a punch in both uninjured skin and scar , in two orthogonal directions : axial ( cranial – caudal ) and transverse ( dorsal – ventral ) . ( b ) A stress - relaxation protocol ( e . g . , a 10 % elongation , held for 4min [ ﬁrst 10s shown ] ) is used to characterize the low - load viscoelastic response , nondestructively . ( c ) Finally , the specimen is stretched to failure to obtain measures of the toe - in region ( approximated by arrow ) , high - load stiffness ( gray area of line ) , and failure properties . ( d – f ) Skin and scar data in a representative animal . ( d ) Mechanical test specimens obtained in scar ( left ) and uninjured skin ( right ) . ( e ) Relaxation tests reveal that scar relaxes faster and is stiffer at lower loads . ( f ) Failure testing shows , despite similar high - load linear stiffness values , that scars exhibit stiffer low - load behavior , and greatly reduced resistance to rupture . This combined protocol identiﬁes the physiologic and failure properties , as well as their planar directionality , and how these change with injury ( adapted from Ref . 6 ) . BIOMECHANICS OF SCAR TISSUE AND SKIN 39 ( 2 . 4 mm / s ) until failure , while recording both dis - placement and force . Force - displacement data identify a number of important properties : load and displacement at failure , energy to failure ( material ‘‘toughness’’ ) , linear stiffness ( indicative of high - load tissue stiffness ) , and ‘‘toe - in’’ duration ( extent of strain - stiffening behavior ) . At low loads , skin displays a nonlinear behavior in which it stiffens with increasing stretch . The extent of this strain - stiffening region , or toe - in , can be either directly calculated , or approximated by measuring the limit displacement . It is in this region that the skin , as well as most soft biologic tissues , typically operates . Uninjured skin Skin displayed comparable high - load behavior in both directions , exhibiting similar resistance to failure ( loads , displacements , and energy at failure ) , as well as no directional difference in linear stiffness . However , at low loads , skin was more compliant in the axial direction than transverse : as evidenced by signiﬁcantly lower peak relaxation forces and larger toe - in regions . Relaxation tests further identiﬁed that the skin relaxed much faster in the axial di - rection than in the transverse direction . These behaviors are consistent with a tissue having principal orientation of collagen ﬁbers bi - ased toward the transverse direction . In such a structure , collagen ﬁbers bear load at a lower tissue strain in the transverse specimens than the axial ones . As a result , transverse specimen ‘‘toe - in’’ would be smaller , low - load stiffness would be higher , and the collagen would experience a greater strain for a given displacement . Straigh - tening of collagen ﬁbers would cause ﬂuids to exude from the tissue , thereby decreasing the viscous response . 14 Thus , transverse specimens should display slower rates of relaxation than axial spec - imens , as was experimentally evidenced . Effect of scarring Scars showed signiﬁcantly reduced failure properties ( load , displacement , and energy ) , thus indicating their compromised bursting strength , extensibility , and toughness , with regard to un - injured skin . 6 , 15 High - load linear stiffness was relatively unaffected by scarring , 6 as previously observed in human hypertrophic scars , 5 whereas the low - load behavior showed a more dramatic response . Scars relaxed faster , indicating greater viscous content , and exhibited reduced toe - in du - rations and stiffer responses at low loads . Scar tissue also showed strikingly similar viscoelastic behavior in both directions : with no directional differences in failure properties , low - load behav - ior , or relaxation rate . Scar tissue’s decreased failure resistance would suggest less total collagen in the tissue cross - section , due to either reduced size or number of collagen ﬁbers . Since scars exhibit signiﬁcantly stiffer responses at low loads , a greater strain would be expected in the collagen ﬁbers , and , thus , a greater ‘‘wringing out’’ of the tissue . The increased viscous behavior observed in a tissue that should exude more water suggests that scars start with signiﬁcantly higher water content , most likely due Figure 2 . Polarized light microscopy of skin ( left ) and scar ( right ) , showing collagen network organization with regard to axial and transverse axes . Skin displays a collagen network with principal direction biased toward the transverse direction . Scars healed with considerable organization , in a ﬁber orientation with similar components in both directions , and exhibited much thinner ﬁber bundles than uninjured skin . These morphologic differences between skin and scar support the observed viscoelastic and failure biomechanics ( modiﬁed from Ref . 6 ) . 40 CORR AND HART to increased proteoglycan content ( quan - titative ) , expression of different pro - teoglycans ( qualitative ) , or a combination of both of these factors . Interestingly , similar elevated viscous behavior was ob - served in healing ligaments , although the speciﬁc cause ( s ) of this increase was not identiﬁed . 16 The considerably compromised biome - chanical function and decreased failure resistance of scars highlights the need for clinical treatments to restore normal viscoelastic behavior to the wound site . This would increase load transfer and strain compatibility between skin and scar , thereby leading to improved func - tionality and esthetics of the healed wound . Both skin and scar tissue struc - turally adapt to loading , exhibiting rapid parallel realignment of collagen in re - sponse to stretch . 17 Additionally , clinical and preclinical data demonstrate pro - nounced scarring in anatomical areas with high tissue tension , 18 – 20 thereby in - dicating that the wound environment’s biomechanics can greatly inﬂuence heal - ing outcomes . Signiﬁcantly reducing tension in healing wounds could act to minimize scarring , as was recently dem - onstrated by using a force - modulating polymer wound dressing . 13 INNOVATION The ﬁrst target article provides an in - novative method to assess full - range me - chanical properties of skin and scar tissue , as well as their directional differences . 6 A protocol of stress relaxation followed by tensile failure characterizes the physiolog - ically relevant , viscoelastic behavior , and failure properties . Evaluating orthogonal specimens determines the directionality of these properties . In skin , this approach identiﬁed signiﬁcant changes with injury in failure and viscoelastic properties , as well as altered directionality in low - load response , which were consistent with ob - served structural changes ( Fig . 2 ) . This relatively simple approach can also char - acterize and assess functionality of various bioma - terials , and engineered soft - tissue replacements . 6 Recent experiments , conducted in Yorkshire and red Duroc pigs , indicate that scar formation in liga - ments , 21 as well as in skin , 22 leads to breed differ - ences in both low - and high - load behavior . 22 – 24 Thus , genetic inﬂuences can affect the biomechanics of healing skin and ligament . The second target article 13 developed a novel dressing that modulates the healing wound’s TAKE - HOME MESSAGE Basic science advances (cid:2) Characterization using stress relaxation followed by tensile failure testing reveals both the physiologically relevant viscoelastic biome - chanical behavior of the tissue and its resistance to rupture . (cid:2) Biomechanical evaluation of skin and scar tissue specimens , in orthog - onal directions within the plane of skin , identiﬁes the material properties and directionality of skin , and how these change with injury and sub - sequent healing . (cid:2) Precise measurement and analysis of low - load behavior uniquely iden - tiﬁed changes in biomechanical behavior that were not appreciated through the traditional analysis of high - load linear stiffness and failure properties . (cid:2) Biomechanical differences between skin and scar tissue suggest mor - phological changes that may occur with injury which are consistent with the viscoelastic and directional changes observed . (cid:2) Genetic inﬂuences can affect the scarring response and biomechanics in healing ligament and skin . (cid:2) Controlling the mechanical forces on a healing wound can modify scar development and maturation . Clinical science advances (cid:2) Characterizing both failure properties and low - load viscoelastic behavior provides insight into the skin’s resistance to rupture , and the way it functions in normal , physiologic use . (cid:2) Identifying full - range tissue behaviors , and how they change with injury , provides a more complete understanding of the functional impairments of scar tissue . (cid:2) The porcine model exhibits similar structure , function , and healing re - sponse to normal human cutaneous healing , and as such , it is an at - tractive model to study human wound healing . Relevance to clinical care (cid:2) Compared with uninjured skin , scar tissue demonstrates similar high - load stiffness , greatly reduced resistance to failure , reduced low - load com - pliance , and altered material directionality . (cid:2) It is critical to consider low - load viscoelastic behavior , in addition to failure properties , when assessing skin , scar tissue , or skin substitutes . (cid:2) The considerable reduction in biomechanical function coupled with de - creased failure resistance of scars highlights the need for clinical treatments to restore the skin’s viscoelastic behavior to the wound site . (cid:2) A more complete understanding of directional physiologically - relevant skin biomechanics can guide the design and critical functional assess - ment of potential wound treatments , scaffolds , grafting procedures , and tissue - engineered skin replacements . (cid:2) Biomechanical modulation of the wound environment by using a novel polymeric wound dressing has demonstrated the ability to reduce scar formation in skin . BIOMECHANICS OF SCAR TISSUE AND SKIN 41 biomechanical environment to reduce scarring . By exploiting its elastic recovery , the polymer sheet dressing can be adhered to skin with a prescribed amount of prestretch to deliver precise compressive loads to unload , or stress - shield , the wound . This provides an innovative potential treatment to con - trol tissue loads during healing , which may help scars achieve structure , and directional properties similar to those of surrounding skin . CAUTION , CRITICAL REMARKS , AND RECOMMENDATIONS Skin and scar tissue biomechanics were explored in an established porcine model of wound heal - ing , 9 – 11 shown to exhibit a similar response to normal human cutaneous healing . 9 Pigs ( and hu - mans ) are tight - skinned animals that heal through a combination of re - epithelialization and wound contraction . Wound contractions associated with these domestic pigs ( * 50 % ) 9 are similar to those observed in normal human wound healing ( 25 % – 50 % ) . 10 In contrast , loose - skinned animals ( e . g . , rodents , lagomorphs ) heal predominantly via contraction , with wound contractions approach - ing 90 % . 25 Porcine scars exhibited functional deﬁcits similar to those previously observed in human skin injury ; lower resistance to failure , and reduced toe - in region compared with unin - jured skin . 5 , 26 These similarities in structure , function , and healing response highlight the pig as an attractive model for studying human wound healing . Since these experiments study a single time point after acute full - thickness excision , they do not address the affect of age or time after injury as factors , and the results are limited to porcine skin healing in the late remodeling phase . Thus , the direct extrapolation of these ﬁndings to other models of wound healing ( e . g . , human healing , burns , incisions , body location , time postinjury , etc . ) is cautioned . Similar caution is advised for extrapolating the reduced scarring observed in incisions treated with a force - modulating dressing , to the case of excisional wounds . FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS OF INTEREST Further studies conducted at different develop - mental stages ( e . g . , juvenile , growing , sexually mature , and skeletally mature ) would be necessary to identify and quantify any age - related differences in wound healing , and longitudinal studies could address temporal factors . Since skin cells , 27 struc - ture , and mechanical demands likely vary with location , future investigations using tissue from both dorsal and ventral wounds could determine whether location of injury plays a signiﬁcant role in healing . Similarly , due to their contributions to low - load viscoelastic behavior , future studies ex - ploring proteoglycans ( qualitatively and quantita - tively ) may reveal their involvement in responses to injury , and give insights into potential thera - pies to restore normal viscous behavior to healing wounds . Furthermore , porcine incision scar forma - tion has been signiﬁcantly reduced by mechanical manipulation of the healing wound environment by using a dynamic stress - shielding dressing . 13 Future efforts can utilize this force modulation to guide excisional scars to achieve structural alignment , and , thus , biomechanical directionality , similar to the surrounding uninjured skin . ACKNOWLEDGMENTSANDFUNDINGSOURCES The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of The Alberta Ingenuity Fund ( DTC ) , Ernst & Young Fellowship in Joint Injury and Arthritis Research ( DTC ) , The Arthritis Society , CIHR , and NSERC . D . A . H . is the Calgary Foundation - Grace Glaum Professor . AUTHOR DISCLOSURE AND GHOSTWRITING The authors have no competing interests or disclosures relevant to this work , and no persons other than the authors contributed to the writing of this article . REFERENCES 1 . Lanir Y : Skin mechanics . In : Handbook of Bioen - gineering , edited by Skalak R and Chien S . Dallas , TX : McGraw - Hill , 1987 , pp . 11 . 1 – 11 . 25 . 2 . Lanir Y : The ﬁbrous structure of the skin and its relation to mechanical behaviour . In : Bioengineer - ing and the Skin , edited by Marks R and Payne PA . Hingham , MA : MTP Press , 1981 , pp . 93 – 96 . 3 . Smith LT , Holbrook KA , Byers PH : Structure of the dermal matrix during development and in the adult . J Invest Dermatol 1982 ; 79 Suppl 1 : 93S . 4 . Stark HL : Directional variations in the extensi - bility of human skin . Br J Plast Surg 1977 ; 30 : 105 . 5 . Dunn MG , Silver FH , Swann DA : Mechanical analysis of hypertrophic scar tissue : structural 42 CORR AND HART basis for apparent increased rigidity . J Invest Dermatol 1985 ; 84 : 9 . 6 . Corr DT , Gallant - Behm CL , Shrive NG , and Hart DA : Biomechanical behavior of scar tissue and uninjured skin in a porcine model . Wound Repair Regen 2009 ; 17 : 250 . 7 . Langer K : Zur Anatomie und Physiologie der Haut . I . U¨ber die Spaltbarkeit der Cutis . [ The anatomy and physiology of the skin . I . About the cleavage of the cutis . ] Sitzungsber Akad Wien 1891 ; 44 : 19 . 8 . Gibson T : Karl Langer ( 1819 – 1887 ) and his lines . Br J Plast Surg 1978 ; 31 : 1 . 9 . Gallant - Behm CL , Reno C , Tsao H , and Hart DA : Genetic involvement in skin wound healing and scarring in domestic pigs : assessment of molecular expression patterns in ( Yorkshire x Red Duroc ) x Yorkshire backcross animals . J Invest Dermatol 2007 ; 127 : 233 . 10 . Gallant - Behm CL and Hart DA : Genetic anal - ysis of skin wound healing and scarring in a porcine model . Wound Repair Regen 2006 ; 14 : 46 . 11 . Wang JF , Olson ME , Reno CR , Wright JB , and Hart DA : The pig as a model for excisional skin wound healing : characterization of the molecular and cellular biology , and bacteriology of the healing process . Comp Med 2001 ; 51 : 341 . 12 . Silver FH , Freeman JW , DeVore D : Viscoelastic properties of human skin and processed dermis . Skin Res Technol 2001 ; 7 : 18 . 13 . Gurtner GC , Dauskardt RH , Wong VW , Bhatt KA , Wu K , Vial IN , et al . Improving cutaneous scar by controlling the mechanical environment : large animal and phase I studies . Ann Surg 2011 ; 254 : 217 . 14 . Provenzano P , Lakes R , Keenan T , and Vanderby R Jr : Nonlinear ligament viscoelasticity . Ann Biomed Eng 2001 ; 29 : 908 . 15 . White WL , Brody GS , Glaser AA , Marangoni RD , Beckwith TG , Must JS , et al . : Tensiometric studies of unwounded and wounded skin : results using a standardized testing method . Ann Surg 1971 ; 173 : 19 . 16 . Thornton GM , Leask GP , Shrive NG , and Frank CB : Early medial collateral ligament scars have inferior creep behaviour . J Orthop Res 2000 ; 18 : 238 . 17 . Verhaegen PD , Schouten HJ , Tigchelaar - Gutter W , van Marle J , van Noorden CJ , Middelkoop E , et al . : Adaptation of the dermal collagen structure of human skin and scar tissue in response to stretch : an experimental study . Wound Repair Regen 2012 ; 20 : 658 . 18 . Ogawa R : Keloid and hypertrophic scarring may result from a mechanoreceptor or mechan - osensitive nociceptor disorder . Med Hypotheses 2008 ; 71 : 493 . 19 . Wray RC : Force required for wound closure and scar appearance . Plast Reconstr Surg 1983 ; 72 : 380 . 20 . Ogawa R , Okai K , Tokumura F , Mori K , Ohmori Y , Huang C , et al . : The relationship between skin stretching / contraction and pathologic scarring : the important role of mechanical forces in keloid generation . Wound Repair Regen 2012 ; 20 : 149 . 21 . Germscheid NM , Thornton GM , Hart DA , and Hildebrand KA : Wound healing differences be - tween Yorkshire and red Duroc porcine medial collateral ligaments identiﬁed by biomechani - cal assessment of scars . Clin Biomech 2012 ; 27 : 91 . 22 . Corr DT , Gallant - Behm CL , Shrive NG , and Hart DA : The role of genetics in the biomechanical behavior of scar tissue and uninjured skin in a porcine model ( Abstract ) . Wound Repair Regen 2006 ; 14 : A58 . 23 . Corr DT , Gallant - Behm CL , Frank CB , Hart DA , Shrive NG : A comparison of the load behaviour in ligament and skin : tissue and scar ( Abstract ) . In : Proceedings of the 2005 BMES Annual Fall Meeting , September 28 – October 1 ; Baltimore , MD : Biomedical Engineering Society , 2005 . 24 . Germscheid NM , Thornton GM , Hart DA , and Hildebrand KA : A biomechanical assessment to evaluate breed differences in normal porcine medial collateral ligaments . J Biomech 2011 ; 44 : 725 . 25 . Hayward PG , and Robson MC : Animal models of wound contraction . Prog Clin Biol Res 1991 ; 365 : 301 . 26 . Clark JA , Cheng JC , Leung KS , and Leung PC : Mechanical characterisation of human postburn hypertrophic skin during pressure therapy . J Bio - mech 1987 ; 20 : 397 . 27 . de Hemptinne I , Gallant - Behm CL , Noack CL , Parreno J , and Hart DA : Dermal ﬁbroblasts from red Duroc and Yorkshire pigs exhibit intrinsic differences in the contraction of collagen gels . Wound Repair Regen 2008 ; 16 : 132 . BIOMECHANICS OF SCAR TISSUE AND SKIN 43