Some Notes on the Design of “World Machines” Ann Light University of Sussex Falmer , UK ann . light @ sussex . ac . uk Margot Brereton Queensland University of Technology , Australia m . brereton @ qut . edu . au Paul Roe Queensland University of Technology , Australia p . roe @ qut . edu ABSTRACT We offer the idea of world machines as a new archetype for systems that draw together computational powers to connect , sense and infer with a social agenda of cross - world collaboration . This archetype builds on existing socio - technical systems with global reach , to raise the profile of tools that maintain a collaborative agenda and resist a tendency towards networks as giant surveillance and marketing devices . We use the case study of designing a bio - acoustic observatory to consider key characteristics and challenges for this thought experiment . We highlight systems to empower better human nature in line with the conference theme of being human . The paper asks how technical tools can be both ecological and enchanting , to present a positive model of development and prompt transformation towards lived understanding of custodianship , cooperation and co - created resilience . In doing so , we consider a way that technology can support the future of resource - management , counter - balancing its own resource - hungry nature . Author Keywords Ecology ; environment ; sensing ; inference ; networks ; sharing ; utopian ; bird - watching ; bio - acoustics ; custodian ; cooperation . INTRODUCTION This paper introduces the concept of the world machine as a new archetype for a socio - technical system , designed to draw together a group of tools that combine computational powers with a social agenda of cross - world collaboration , in resistance to dominant market rhetoric . It builds on a history of calls to design sustainably , from Buckminster Fuller ( 1969 ) and Papanek ( 1985 ) to recent work on design for interconnected thinking ( eg DiSalvo et al 2010 , Dourish 2010 , Light 2011 ) . Specifically , we look at how our powers to connect , sense and infer can be combined and turned to crowdsourcing engagement with shared world issues . These three powers of computation have developed dramatically in the last 10 years to the point where their usage is common . What makes them interesting here is that they offer the potential , in combination , to herald new relations and new ways to think about our world as a series of relations . But to do so requires certain social and technical choices – otherwise , we have just another giant surveillance or marketing system . We explore what characteristics make this class of system radical , using a crowd - sourced bird song identifier as a case study , to ask how understanding tools as world machines could lead to ecological and enchanting design and deployment decisions . Being human is necessarily linked with fellow species , the soil beneath us and other systems of life . It requires a sustainable balance of productivity ( including all design of new ICT ) and care for delicate ecologies and limited resources . So we present this theme as a challenge to the monetization of human engagement and a stimulus to reconsider our activities in an ecologically unbalanced world . While we do not offer a theory , we suggest a concept intended as explanatory , practical and normative in Horkheimer’s sense of critical theory , i . e . ‘it must explain what is wrong with current social reality , identify the actors to change it , and provide both clear norms for criticism and achievable practical goals for social transformation’ ( Bohman 2005 ) . We offer these notes as a provocation to use new technical powers to design for readiness , resilience and flexibility in how we live – meta - qualities that can provide a good local and global basis for reacting to the unknown . BACKGROUND Understandings of global interrelatedness , the politics of the market place and local variation play a part in any world system ( Massey 2005 ) . We give a background to our thinking here , noting the paper is not in a scientific genre claiming new research findings , but a provocation to our peers . In other words , it can draw widely without compromising any truth claims , within the space dictates of a short thought piece . Sharing , Environment and Ecological Thinking Sharing is understood in manifold ways . The sharing economy deals with spare capacity that can be rented out ( Botsman 2013 ) . File sharing makes replicable digital content illicitly available in a ‘cultural revolution’ ( Aigreen 2011 ) . Both developments exist in a culture of owned personal or corporate resources . We focus , in contrast , on shared world resources , such as sunlight , air , sea and life itself , with which , it is argued , we have a custodian relation ( Green and Raygorodetsky 2010 ) since these travel on from past to future generations . Care for these is primordial in the sense that interdependence is a condition of our existence ( Puig de la Bellacasa , 2012 ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . OzCHI ' 15 , December 07 - 10 2015 , Melbourne , VIC , Australia Copyright © 2015 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3673 - 4 / 15 / 12 . . . $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838832 . 289 Yet , this care comes in competition with the demands of capital and economic progress . The term “Anthropocene” points to the degree of environmental impact that human activity now has , having arguably become the greatest force shaping the planet . Technology is implicated in this capacity to shape our futures . Understandably , this has led to interest in making digital tools that reduce this impact . But a major review of environmental design literature offers critique of work for individualizing response to global issues ( DiSalvo et al 2010 ) . And Dourish ( 2010 ) goes further , showing how some conceptions of human - world interaction uncritically accept market politics as natural and nature as somehow outside us . He urges us to consider tools that scale up and link people with common concerns as a way of harnessing a global response . Morton ( 2010 ) distinguishes between environmentalism and ‘ecological thinking’ , arguing that ‘in a world where we truly cared for what we now call the environment , there would be no need to point it out as such’ ( p104 ) : ‘The ecological “enchants the world” , if enchantment means exploring the profound and wonderful openness and intimacy of the mesh [ a weave of ‘entangled presences’ ] ’ . In this , he echoes Bennett’s suggestion that the world inspires ‘deep and powerful attachments’ and ‘one must be enamored with existence and occasionally even enchanted in the face of it in order to be capable of donating some of one ' s scarce mortal resources to the service of others’ ( Bennett 2001 ) . Enchantment is argued to be a motivating force . In contrast , it has been found counter - productive to use extrinsic motivators ( such as financial reward ) to promote concern for greater - than - self issues ( Crompton 2010 ) , an effect also seen in research into how children learn to share and perceive themselves as moral agents ( Warneken et al 2008 ) . Work on behavior change shows that incentivizing cooperation changes the conditions for it . Heartfelt care cannot be purchased ; it is , as Gauntlett ( 2011 ) says , its own reward . Such insights help us ask how world machines can be ecological and enchanting , to prompt transformation toward understanding of custodianship , cooperation and resilience and act as positive ideology in creating the conditions for more investment in sharing resources . WORLD MACHINES Light ( 2011 ) wrote , ‘If we combine the potential of connected groups with that of connected data , the mix could make a powerful force for informed change . ’ We explore this here , looking at the social framing necessary . New tools give us a new ability to trace actions and manage attribution . Connected data reveals cause and effect more powerfully , showing the impact of activity taking place in one context in terms of environmental , social or economic change elsewhere . We already use computation to infer patterns from sensor - compiled datasets . ‘Social networks’ are a platform for generating , sharing and acting on global data . For the purposes here , we do not need detail about technical specifications ( which are developing rapidly ) , but observe that systems are now able to combat fraud by monitoring spending patterns ; join patients with suitable organ donors within a viable distance ; and throw up adverts targeting our desires . Through data mining - centralizing information , analyzing patterns and spotting intersections in massive datasets - global commercial interests are learning about what we buy , what we like to do and how this constitutes consumption behaviour ( Bove and Mallett 2004 ) . This wide range of applications indicates that , while the technical side has many drivers , we can also usefully consider the socio - technical choices . So , what counts as a world machine ? It is only a world machine if it can equip members of world society ( Beck , 2000 ) with access to the means to sample , test and report on their circumstances and what they see ( or can sense with tools ) , as well as to find each other , analyze the meaning of the data and link up for action upon what is found . It connects local and global , but does so without crushing defining elements of local culture . The two - way flow of information , from local nodes to a more central processing facility and back , is a defining characteristic . By contrast , closed , market - driven crowd - sourcing tools , like Mechanical Turk ( www . mturk . com ) , critiqued by Irani et al ( 2013 ) , and Taskrabbit ( www . taskrabbit . com ) , that source and share out cheap labour fail the criteria for a world machine . Facebook , with its global reach , fails the criteria by commodifying its users for advertising revenue and exploiting personal data . Despite spanning the world , such tools are founded on principles that do not embody and , thus , promote collaborative ideals . Towards World Machines Elements of world machines already exist in public collaborations , such as the search for extra - terrestrial life ( www . seti . org ) , Wikipedia ( Kittur et al 2008 ) and the Personal Genome Project ( www . personalgenomes . org ) . In these projects , we see sharing of data , tools and outcomes , and freedom from imposed incentives . World machines begin with such collaborative approaches and take them further , enabling people to sample , test and report on their circumstances as well as to find each other , analyze data and link up for action . Several citizen science projects engage people in gathering and / or pre - processing data about the planet for interpretation by scientists . Inspiration can be found , particularly , in the suite of Zooniverse citizen science sites ( Tinati et al 2015 ) , whose inaugural site Galaxy Zoo engages people to search for and classify galaxies . Data preprocessing generally involves tasking people to classify shapes or sounds , so that data is made easier for experts to analyse . Tasks are precise and simple , set within predefined workflows to make them manageable and accomplishable by lay people . With its massive reach and suite of projects , Zooniverse is perhaps the closest thing we have to a world machine . Galaxy Zoo participants have found new galaxies and activities extend to citizen astronomy groups offline . In the domain of birding , sites such as eBird ( Sullivan et al 2009 ) allow birders to upload bird surveys and sightings , photos and trophy calls . This citizen science dataset is large enough now that it has become useful for research . 290 We note Aoiki et al ( 2009 ) and DiSalvo et al’s ( 2008 ) analysis of what can happen in practice when citizens come together to do environmental monitoring – there are multiple issues of motivation , data reliability and simple collaboration . However , all socio - technical systems are prone to politics and management issues , and world - spanning tools bring cultural concerns too ( Light 2010 ) . This does not negate the adoption of archetypes that help us see how design and politics relate and , in that spirit , we now sketch the motivations and structures of our case study that investigates the pragmatic , interesting and challenging aspects of making a world machine . CASE STUDY Our case study concerns the creation of a bio - acoustic observatory through the collaborative collection and analysis of large data sets by crowd sourcing . It imagines the extension of the achievements of existing citizen science sites towards a global , collective , ongoing monitoring of the planet . Biodiversity monitoring is vital to understanding the effects of land use and climate change . But it is still an expensive manual process that involves researchers’ observations in the field . This world machine uses automated acoustic sensing ( placing microphones in key areas of habitat and recording ) and harnesses local human help for analysis and comparison over time . The tool builds on work with birdwatchers ( Cottman - Fields et al 2013 ) , which indicates they would be willing and interested to continue their pastime online , identifying birds from audio data and monitoring the changes in species , presence , absence , abundance , first appearance in the season , last appearance in the season , etc . We use the bio - acoustic observatory prototype to motivate a review of ideas and research questions about how to design a world machine . Engaging Participants beyond Tasking The identification of birdcalls requires knowledge and enduring interest , while the opaque data sets require sophisticated analysis , unlike traditional crowdsourcing . That is , it is an example of a citizen science project that goes beyond simple tasking . It will integrate and share more sophisticated analysis and visualisation tools to empower greater and more varied kinds of engagement . It respects and harnesses the different expertise of its participants and sets the tone for a kind of citizen science with more depth and variety of collaboration , between lay - people , hobbyists , amateur and professionals . It evolves acoustic sensing infrastructure and communities for long - term monitoring of the planet over time , to which discrete science projects can also contribute . Birdwatching is one of the world’s most popular pastimes . In the US , 46 million people observe wild birds around the home , while 17 . 8 million take trips away to observe wild birds ( U . S Census , 2011 ) . Our work begins with BirdLife Australia ( 2015 ) , Australia’s national bird - watching association with 75 , 000 members . Volunteers from the membership are required to collaboratively and interactively analyze large data sets of recorded birdsong ‘in the raw’ , though not everyone has the skill or patience to join in with such a programme . Within a bio - acoustic observatory , people might , for example , use combinations of filters and samplers to find species , accommodating different levels of background noise , etc . ( Towsey et al 2012 ) . Interfaces can be varied , playful and also provide training . Analysis can include scientific questions such as the presence - absence of species , how rich diversity is and how species that are rare or invasive change their patterns over time - issues found to interest professional ecologists and bird watchers alike . Research with current systems ( Cottman - Fields et al 2013 ) reveals the need for substantial work to understand how volunteers can easily and accurately tag bio - acoustic signals in an interactive , collaborative and sustained way , so feedback from the use of tools will drive development ( Heyer and Brereton 2010 ) . Specific questions include : Can teams of birdwatchers of different ability collaborate around data , e . g . one person identifying , another verifying ? What other material about habitat is needed to support identification ? Can calls be categorized by ease of recognition ? What role can membership organizations play ? And can interaction design support the experience of interacting with the data to be easy , social , informative and compelling ? Current citizen science sites all wrestle with these kinds of questions and making world machines involves platform design for more effective collaboration , extending reach to a scale of monitoring impossible without machines and a web of amateur support . Enduring motivations Bird watching has a social side and this is fostered with opportunities for local and distributed teamwork on data , as well as in work to position and maintain recording devices in suitable habitats . Birdwatchers are motivated by both the access to greater information about birdlife in their local area ( and in places they might travel ) and the chance to contribute with their own knowledge using state - of - the - art tools ( Cottman - Fields et al 2014 ) . This transfer of motivations and practices from bird watching in general to collaboration in birdwatching in a world machine is important . These motivations act in concert with the nebulous desire to do something for the wider environment . Without such personal motivations there would be insufficient reason to support the work . Bird watchers are generally high in concern for the protection of habitats , yet alone , environmental concern does not lead to the adoption of new habits ( Strengers 2011 ) . So , whereas many citizen science projects may task individual participants with discrete activities , using extrinsic motivators , the approach here builds on existing intrinsically satisfying social practices , communities of practice and expertise and local knowledge . However , Rotman et al ( 2012 ) found that ‘few citizen science projects have reached the full collaborative potential of scientists and volunteers’ . They document a motivational framework for citizen science , developed within the realm of current approaches . Such motivations notwithstanding , world machines need to entice , to make engagement easy , to grow expertise and to mobilize social movements , thus further increasing knowledge , motivation , interest and use . Existing commercial social networks might be leveraged to garner exposure and interest . 291 Usable Sophistication The challenges are manifold , building on what is known to make crowdsourcing of these data complex ( e . g . Aoki et al 2009 , DiSalvo et al 2010 ) and adding extra elements . This project starts with a technical opportunity ( for large scale acoustic monitoring ) and works to make it usable ( through forms of data reduction and visualisation ) . It engages ecologists to frame questions effectively and offers those interested a chance to skill up and to answer with their own knowledge . The ambitions for participant collaboration make this exemplary of a hypothetical world machine , doing global environmental monitoring for intrinsic rewards , but the challenge of creating systems of participation begins locally , on the ground , with particular groups , cultures and ecological questions . Ecology and Enchantment The bio - acoustic observatory is an example of the use of multiple types of technical capability that brings together the themes of this discussion . In our case study , the link to studying ecology is clear , with some potential for an ‘ecological thinking’ perspective : sharing sounds of the life of birds and other vocal species , through the day and year , in their habitat , among other life forms . Over time , the impact of local events , such as building new roads , can show in the data , just as general trends can emerge . And local data can be mapped against trends from other parts of the world so that both differences and interrelatedness become more apparent . Thus , there are ways of connecting to one’s immediate place and other local people as part of collaborating - thereby giving a sense of belonging - and also the pull of global shared connections , offering the ‘attachment’ to the wider world that Bennett ( 2001 ) describes . It can do this in a way that is accountable to the participants involved . Interpretation is in local people’s hands in entering the data and knowledge stays a shared resource ( for those people able to make sense of it ) , not least because the new observatory will make its analysis open to all . People are able to see the direct results of their activities . Further , the potential exists to make it meaningful for others too . Again this moves engagement beyond tasking to custodianship . Whatever model is suggested to support its sustainability at the end of the research , be it subscription for participants , adoption by a natural history museum or an international consortium of bird watching organizations , the model can include user - governance and acknowledge and make explicit its own management choices , based on the co - design of a system that uses existing and intrinsically satisfying practices . This has the virtue of building on existing enchantment ( here , with birds and their habitats ) : augmenting it with scale , significance and purpose ; part , in this instance , of a global care for wildlife that goes beyond individualized acts of dropping money in WWF boxes or sponsoring an animal . It has the satisfaction of involving conspicuous joined - up thinking . Such scaling - up can stem from any local - global activity that makes causal and social shared connections more apparent , allows people access to the knowledge they have contributed to and encourages creative use of the data . CONCLUSION The market is usually allowed to decide what technology flourishes ( e . g . Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014 ) , but the market tends to reproduce the status quo of market economics . Our concept works to ‘explain what is wrong with current social reality’ ( Bohman 2005 ) in an embodied way , promoting global and social resilience , emphasizing interdependence and building care in action . To be counted a world machine , the design needs to oppose the current tendencies of misusing resources ; depoliticizing social relations 1 ; giving extrinsic incentives for virtuous behaviors ; and monetizing interactions . We have shown that alternative approaches exist , pointing out that they gain ideological force by being discussed and noted , increasing the potential to inform social change by advocating for it . A world with world machines keeps a focus on shared lifeworlds , harnessing our best ideas to tackle epic quests and wooing us to collaborate . As an ideology , this seeks to combat the depoliticization of data , raise critique and challenge phenomena such as ‘share - washing’ ( the commercialized sharing economy of AirBnB , Uber and Taskrabbit ) by offering an intrinsically social , not monetary , version of sharing practices . By being seen to address ( if not deal with ) the greatest challenges to be conceived by the minds brought together in its operation , it provides ambition . It is potentially a driving force for change at world level , since use brings new knowledge and structures whose impact cannot be predicted . We make no apologies for the utopian goals , but also no promises of attaining them . Yet the aspirations here are more than a whim ; they are a strategy to align with . We will finish by observing that in an era when ideas go viral and visions shape ( rather than just predict ) the future , we need ideas and archetypes to counter less critical , but very worrying , options . We can only design what we can imagine . Sharing exists at the heart of human culture , but if our systems redefine it as exploitative , as we see in the sharing economy ( see Light and Miskelly 2014 ) , we make it harder for people to collaborate . The more we believe sharing is an individualized activity that belongs to resource - rich people , the more our designs for sharing will erode the fiber of what makes neighborhoods resilient and supportive . World machines offer a critical alternative for humanity and being human and for the production of technology that is not merely a drain on physical resources , but incorporates a measure of hope . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our birdwatcher and ecologist collaborators , our research groups , our reviewers and the Australian Research Council for Discovery Grant DP140102325 . 1 Social relations are irreducibly political . Politics organizes the practices and institutions through which order is created . Attempts to depoliticize social relations , for example , by basing them on rational economic principles , are as politically motivated as all other interventions , leading inexorably to political antagonism . See e . g . http : / / criticallegalthinking . com / 2013 / 05 / 31 / seven - theses - on - human - rights - 5 - depoliticization / . 292 REFERENCES Aigreen , S . Sharing : Culture and the Economy in the Internet Age , Amsterdam University Press ( 2011 ) Aoki , P . , Honicky , R . , Mainwaring , A . , Myers , C . Paulos , E . , Subramanian , S . and Woodruff , A . A Vehicle for Research : Using Street Sweepers to Explore the Landscape of Environmental Community Action . CHI’09 , 2009 , 375 - 384 . Beck , U . What is Globalization ? Polity Press ( 2000 ) Bennett , J . The Enchantment of Modern Life . Princeton University Press ( 2001 ) Birdlife Australia ( 2015 ) http : / / www . birdlife . org . au / who - we - are / our - organisation / people Bohman , J . Critical Theory , 2005 : http : / / plato . stanford . edu / entries / critical - theory Botsman , R . The Sharing Economy Lacks a Shared Definition : giving meaning to the terms , 2013 : http : / / www . slideshare . net / CollabLab / shared - def - pptf Bove Jr , V . M . and Mallett , J . Collaborative knowledge building by smart sensors , BT Tech . J . 22 ( 4 ) 2004 Brynjolfsson , E . and McAfee , A . The Second Machine Age : Work , Progress , and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies , Norton & Co . ( 2014 ) Buckminster Fuller , R . Operating manual for spaceship earth , Southern Illinois University Press , IL ( 1969 ) Cottman - Fields , M . , Brereton , M . Roe , P . Virtual Birding : Extending an Environmental Pastime into the Virtual World for Citizen Science . CHI’13 , 2013 Cottman - Fields , M . , Brereton , M . , Wimmer , J . and Roe , P . Collaborative extension of biodiversity monitoring protocols in the bird watching community . Proc . PDC’14 , 2014 , 111 - 114 Crompton , T . Common Cause : The Case for Working with our Cultural Values , WWF - UK , 2010 DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A , Louw , M . , The Neighborhood Networks Project . PDC’08 , 2008 DiSalvo , C . , Sengers , P . , and Brynjarsdottir , H . Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI . CHI’10 , 2010 Dourish , P . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . DIS’10 , 2010 Gauntlett , D . Making is Connecting , Polity Press , 2011 Green , D . and Raygorodetsky , G . Indigenous knowledge of a changing climate , Climatic Change , 2010 , 239 – 242 Heyer , C , and Brereton , M . Design from the everyday : continuously evolving , embedded exploratory prototypes . Proc . DIS’10 , 2010 . Irani , L . , M and Silberman , S . Turkopticon : Interrupting Worker Invisibility in Amazon Mechanical Turk . CHI’13 , 2013 . Kittur , A . and Kraut , R . Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia : Quality through coordination . CSCW’08 , 2008 Light , A . Bridging Global Divides with Tracking and Tracing Technology . IEEE Pervasive 9 ( 2 ) , 2010 , 28 - 36 Light , A . Digital interdependence and how to design for it , interactions , 18 ( 2 ) , 2011 , ACM , New York Light , A . and Miskelly , C . Design for Sharing , Sustainable Society Network : http : / / tinyurl . com / DesShare Massey , D . For Space . Sage ( 2005 ) Morton , T . The Ecological Thought . Harvard University Press ( 2010 ) . Papanek , V . J . Design for the real world : human ecology and social change ( 2nd ed ) , Academy , Chicago ( 1985 ) Puig de la Bellacasa , M . Nothing comes without its world : thinking with care . The Sociological Review , 2012 , 60 ( 2 ) : 197 - 216 . Rotman , D . , Preece , J . , Hammock , J . , Procita , K . , Hansen , D . , Parr , C . , . . . and Jacobs , D . Dynamic changes in motivation in collaborative citizen - science projects . Proc . CSCW’12 , 2012 , 217 - 226 Strengers , Y . Designing Eco - Feedback Systems for Everyday Life . CHI’11 , 2011 Sullivan , B . L . , Wood , C . L . , Iliff , M . J . , Bonney , R . E . , Fink , D . and Kelling , S . eBird : A citizen - based bird observation network in the biological sciences . Biological Conservation , 142 ( 10 ) , 2009 , 2282 - 2292 Tinati , R . , Van Kleek , M . , Simperl , E . , Luczak - Rösch , M . , Simpson , R . , & Shadbolt , N . ( 2015 , April ) . Designing for Citizen Data Analysis . CHI’15 , 2015 Towsey , M . , Planitz , B . , Nantes , A . , Wimmer , J . , & Roe , P . ( 2012 ) . A toolbox for animal call recognition . Bioacoustics , 21 ( 2 ) , 107 - 125 . U . S . Dept of the Interior , U . S . Fish and Wildlife Service , and U . S . Dept of Commerce , U . S . Census Bureau . 2011 National Survey of Fishing , Hunting , and Wildlife - Associated Recreation , 2011 : http : / / tinyurl . com / otudww9 Warneken , F . and Tomasello , M . Extrinsic Rewards Undermine Altruistic Tendencies in 20 - Month - Olds , Developmental Psychology , 44 ( 6 ) , 2008 , 1785 – 1788 293