IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 165 Research Article The Role of Rhetoric in Engineering Judgment S COTT W EEDON Abstract— Introduction : ABET has approved changes to the EAC’s Criterion 3 that will take effect for the 2019 - 2020 accreditation cycle . Among many changes and rearrangements is the introduction of the term “engineering judgment” as one of the competencies that students must develop to prepare for professional engineering . Literature review : However , engineering judgment is not deﬁned in the criterion , and although it is a ubiquitous concept in the philosophy of engineering and engineering education , little empirical investigation has been undertaken into the practice of engineering judgment . And there is even less conceptual or empirical investigation into communication’s role in the practice of engineering judgment . Research questions : 1 . What does engineering judgment look like in practice ? 2 . How does the sociotechnical situation affect engineering judgment ? 3 . What role does rhetoric have , not only in communicating judgments , but in forming them as well ? 4 . How can teachers and practitioners in engineering and technical communication use these ﬁndings to facilitate better judgment in the classroom and at work ? Methods : Using videotape and ﬁeldnotes , the author examines the two sequences of decision - making from a student engineering design project . An ethnomethodologically inspired framework is used to exhibit the phenomenal details of “doing” engineering judgment . Discussion / conclusion : Data reveal that engineering judgment may be fruitfully understood by educators as not just a cognitive and individual ability to apply technical knowledge , but instead a capacity of participants to rhetorically establish common cause to interrogate and reﬂect on the relations between technical data and situations . Index Terms— Design , embodiment , engineering judgment , rhetorical theory . A BET has introduced a number of changes to the EAC Criterion 3 for the 2019 - 2020 accreditation cycle . Among the many proposed changes is the introduction of the term “engineering judgment” in its Outcome 6 : “An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation , analyze and interpret data , and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions” [ 1 ] . Currently , the outcome reads : “an ability to design and conduct experiments , as well as to analyze and interpret data” [ 1 ] . The revision posits engineering judgment as a mediator between experimental data and conclusions . However , this function can only be inferred because engineering judgment is not included in the deﬁnition section of the EAC , where other contestable terms like “basic science , ” “engineering design , ” “engineering science , ” and “team” receive attention . Thus , engineering judgment is considered to be a core Manuscript received October 5 , 2018 ; revised December 2 , 2018 ; accepted December 3 , 2018 . Date of publication March 13 , 2019 ; date of current version May 17 , 2019 . The author is with the Department of English , Texas Tech University , Lubbock , TX 79409 USA ( email : Scott . Weedon @ ttu . edu ) . This paper has supplementary downloadable material at http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org provided by the translators . The ﬁles consist of a Chinese translation of the abstract by Z . Xi ( 66 kB in size ) and a Spanish translation of the abstract by R . Anido ( 66 kB in size ) . IEEE 10 . 1109 / TPC . 2019 . 2900824 competency of engineering , but what it means is not speciﬁed in the EAC criteria . While “engineering judgment” is not deﬁned in the criteria , scholars in the philosophy of engineering , the history of engineering , and education in engineering have researched and theorized the topic [ 2 ] – [ 7 ] . In this literature , engineering judgment is conceptualized as an ability beyond mere calculation that is principally about applying scientiﬁc data to contingent circumstances . And judgment is almost always an individual and cognitive capacity , strengthened through experience and expertise . The present analysis challenges both the reduction of judgment to an act of application and the belief that engineering judgment is primarily a cognitive and individual ability . By expanding upon an earlier discussion [ 8 ] that focused on the role of representations and the social , communicative , and material aspects of engineering judgment , the present analysis argues that engineering judgment should be considered a rhetorical capacity to expand engineers’ sense of a situation to understand the ramiﬁcations of action . This abstract thesis will be made concrete by analyzing ethnographic video recordings of engineering students working on a design project . While engineering judgment is a ubiquitous concept in the philosophy of engineering and engineering education , there remains little 0361 - 1434 C (cid:2) 2019 IEEE . Personal use is permitted , but republication / redistribution requires IEEE permission . See http : / / www . ieee . org / publications standards / publications / rights / index . html for more information . 166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 empirical investigation of engineering judgment in practice . Furthermore , there is even less conceptual or empirical investigation into communication’s role in the practice of engineering judgment . ( See Sauer [ 9 ] for a related discussion in risk communication . ) Existing research is almost completely concerned with judgment as it relates to ethics , not the judgment of ordinary engineering practice . Drawing a stark difference between ethical and more mundane judgment is perhaps arbitrary or short - sighted [ 2 ] , but the EAC criteria respect a difference , using engineering judgment in relation to experimentation in Outcome 6 and using judgment relating to ethical choices in the Outcome 4 without reference to Outcome 6 : An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgments , which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global , economic , environmental , and societal contexts . [ 1 ] This study will respect the EAC’s separation to investigate the manner and practice of engineering judgment in action , but acknowledges now that further research is needed to unite quotidian engineering judgment and ethical judgment . Engineering practice needs a uniﬁed understanding of judgment , for as Davis states , There is no good engineering , no good science , and so on without good judgment and no good judgment in these disciplines without ethics . Doing even a minimally decent job of teaching one of these disciplines necessarily includes teaching its ethics ; teaching the ethics is teaching the discipline ( or at least a large part of it ) . [ 2 , p . 790 ] This article ﬁrst details the relevant literature on engineering judgment to generate research questions that seek to respecify engineering judgment as a rhetorical and embodied achievement . The research methodology will describe the tools and sequence of data collection and introduce ethnomethodology inspired procedure as a guiding perspective for analysis . Ethnomethodology is a research orientation focused on members’ local production of order , through and with tools and other material artifacts [ 10 ] . The focus on the phenomenal details of “making a judgment” provides an exhibition for considering engineering judgment as it is practiced in actual situations . The data reveal that engineering judgment is thoroughly rhetorical and embodied , and this understanding can help teachers and practitioners in engineering , technical communication , and other design disciplines understand the integral role of rhetoric in making judgments . L ITERATURE R EVIEW Engineering judgment is a core competency for engineering . Philosophers , educators , practitioners , and historians agree that engineering judgment is necessary for ethical , sophisticated , and professional engineering practice [ 2 ] – [ 6 ] . They say that while scientiﬁc and mathematical knowledge undergirds engineering practice , engineering judgment governs the appropriate and ethical application of engineering knowledge . Ferguson , the inﬂuential historian of engineering , makes just this point to close his book Engineering and the Mind’s Eye : Necessary as the analytical tools of science and mathematics most certainly are , more important is the development in student and neophyte engineers of sound judgment and an intuitive WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 167 sense of ﬁtness and adequacy . . . . Unquantiﬁable judgments and choices are the elements that determine the way a design comes together . [ 3 , p . 194 ] For Ferguson , the relationship between engineering judgment and science and mathematics is one of deployment and application . This deployment and application is “more important” than the learning of “analytic tools” for understanding the “nature of the education that an engineer requires” [ 3 , p . 193 ] . For Ferguson , engineering judgment is not only a fundamental competency for engineering ; it is of the utmost importance for producing a professional engineer . The inﬂuential engineering educator Wickenden considered judgment an important prerequisite for the professional engineer as well . For Wickenden , judgment was more than just experience : it was experience “digested , ” weighed , measured , and reﬂected upon to understand and apply its fruits [ 11 , p . 5 ] . In a 1929 convocation address to freshmen of the Case School of Applied Science , Wickenden exhorted his audience to be “a judge or arbiter of economy” because an engineer “must study the possible ration of utility to cost” [ 12 ] . He expanded upon this concept of engineering judgment to encompass the “handling of men [ sic ] , expending great sums of money , making or recommending decisions of great magnitude , and taking the risks that go with deciding” [ 12 ] . For Wickenden , engineering was a matter of managing resources from their quantitative properties to their social , economic , and future impacts . He believed engineers could be equal to the purview he believed was theirs by knowing the laws that govern ; getting the facts and deﬁning the problem ; analyzing the possible ways to solve it ; counting the cost , picking the most advantageous solution , and getting it done . [ 13 ] Wickenden’s perspective on judgment can be detected as a coauthor of the famous Hammond Report of 1944 that reafﬁrmed the goals of the earlier report of 1940 [ 14 ] . In an enumeration of the “scientiﬁc - technological” objectives of engineering education , engineering judgment is described as reasonable skill in making approximations , and in choosing the type of approach in the light of the accuracy required and the time available for solution . [ 14 , p . 593 ] Again , as with Wickenden’s earlier work , there is a distinct ratiocinative and calculative quality to engineering judgment . However , later in the report , judgment’s province is expanded to become a crucial component of the “Art of Engineering . ” The authors align engineering judgment with resourcefulness , skill , and experience for the better application of the engineering method , and they compare judgment to intuition . The description of judgment comes in the midst of the report’s pronounced concern with “critical understanding” of the “limitations in the application of principles to practical situations” [ 14 , p . 601 ] , suggesting that engineering judgment is useful in understanding the boundaries between axioms and their application to the actual circumstances of engineering . At least as early as the Hammond Report , it was recognized that engineering judgment has no formula , algorithm , or heuristic , so educators put students in situations that called for the practice of engineering judgment . This approach produced the proliferation of design courses in undergraduate engineering programs that seek to simulate the kinds of constraints and requirements of professional engineering . It is in these classes where engineering judgment starts , owing to the necessity of making decisions on how to satisfy contrary demands , such as ( say ) efﬁciency versus power [ 15 ] . Just what engineering judgment is , though , or how best to foster it is less understood in the engineering education literature and almost entirely absent from the literature of professional communication . Part of this lack of understanding is due to the difﬁculty of deﬁning “engineering judgment . ” Davis thoroughly evaluates the slipperiness of engineering judgment and the way it cannot be said to equate to decision - making , phronesis , discretion , discernment , or common sense , but is related to all of them [ 2 ] . He concludes his analysis without a deﬁnition of engineering judgment ( as he is unable to ﬁnd one satisfactory ) but does discover two prominent qualities : namely , judgment creates alternative courses of action , and judgment is reasonable rather than rational . For Davis , engineering judgment is a creative act generated under constraints , and it proceeds not from abstract or general formulae , but from practical engagement . Case studies of professional judgment make experience a primary component of judgment , providing the practitioner with the ability to recognize mistakes , foresee problems , and economize attention [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . Case studies show how 168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 engineering problems were successfully , or more often , unsuccessfully handled in the past , thus equipping the engineer with a body of vicarious experience of how to avoid engineering mistakes . The earlier quote from Ferguson [ 3 ] suggests that deployment and application of that body of experience are two components of judgment , a point with which Vincenti [ 6 ] concurs . Holt makes judgment a skill of appreciation , a perceptive ability to see and ﬁt an idea to a purpose [ 4 ] . Holt also echoes Ferguson’s [ 3 ] emphasis on nonverbal thinking in engineering judgment , suggesting that judgment includes the ability to visualize reasons for making decisions [ 4 ] . Peck expands engineering judgment to include a “sense of proportion , ” which he describes as embodied and experiential [ 16 , p . 588 ] . Peck explicitly posits engineering judgment as often opposed to automated and computational methods of decision - making , because for him , engineering judgment’s province is where theory and calculation have not yet—or may never—reach . When these thinkers’ ideas are taken together , engineering judgment may be described as a distinct individual capacity to artfully and reasonably deploy and apply lessons from the disciplinary past , individual professional experience , and general technical knowledge to ﬁt emerging situations . Engineering judgment sometimes stands as a mediator between automated and algorithmic determiners and conclusions , and sometimes in opposition to their techniques . Missing from these formulations of engineering judgment is an acknowledgment of the sociotechnical environment in which engineers work , and thus , the integral role of communication . Though Parkin [ 8 ] addresses both the sociotechnical environment of engineering design and the role of communication , his interest is in modelling the psychology of engineering judgment and his mention of argument and the role of tools is cursory . Furthermore , Parkin and the other discussions summarized above lack empirical corroboration or elaboration . Engineering judgment is recollected from experience , history , or deduced through philosophical methods , but is not investigated in engineering practice itself . And what is nowhere discussed is how engineering judgment is practiced by students . Technical communication literature does not address engineering judgment per se , except in passing ( see Sauer [ 9 ] ) . There is oblique reference to it throughout work on decision - making and risk communication in so far as engineering judgment is potentially a component of nearly any engineering assessment and communication . However , I have found no attempt to take it on as a topic itself in the technical communication literature . It is , in a sense , everywhere and nowhere in the literature : engineering judgment ﬁgures in discussions of recommendations , expertise , standards , and other topics , but it is not itself a subject of focus . This study is a beginning in ﬁlling that gap by looking at students performing engineering judgment and then looking back to the literature for a way to conﬁgure what we know to actual practice . But before I present my methods and data , I want to acknowledge the question of whether a study involving students rather than professionals can help us understand engineering judgment . One reason for concern may be that an academic setting is an inauthentic engineering situation , lacking the real constraints of professional engineering . While true , an academic setting provides a sincere engineering situation if not an authentic one . Though the constraints in the classroom are simulated , the professionalism is performed rather than habituated , the stakes are comparatively low , and the design artifact is still an engineered one , produced through engineering methods and answerable to engineering concerns . There are also the following advantages to studying students . (cid:2) One advantage of an academic setting is that the engineering is more concentrated in local spaces rather than distributed across departments within organizations , thus making the details of engineering easier to closely document . ( This is not to say that judgment in organizations or distal settings could not be closely observed , for there are robust methodologies to draw from [ 17 ] – [ 19 ] . ) (cid:2) The engineering judgment of students is just taking form ; thus , it is more perspicuous to the observer . (cid:2) Perhaps most important , studying students provides educators a view into how judgment operates in their own classrooms and how they may better foster it . Studying the way engineering students “do” engineering judgment can give us a blueprint of the rudiments of professional engineering judgment and help us understand the role of communication . The following research questions emerge from this review of the literature . WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 169 RQ1 . What does engineering judgment look like in practice ? RQ2 . How does the sociotechnical situation affect engineering judgment ? RQ3 . What role does rhetoric have , not only in communicating judgments , but in forming them as well ? RQ4 . How can teachers and practitioners in engineering and technical communication use these ﬁndings to facilitate better judgment in the classroom and at work ? To answer these questions , I employ a qualitative approach inspired by ethnomethodology to understand how engineering judgments are made . M ETHODS A ND M ETHODOLOGY The larger Institutional Review Board - approved ethnographic study from which these data are taken focused on the professionalization of engineers through design work . I followed and video - recorded one group of engineering students throughout an entire semester of a university engineering design course , interviewed a number of other students , and observed class sessions . The engineering design course was the second in a three - course sequence introducing students to the design process and manufacturing methods that mechanical and biomedical engineering students take in their sophomore and junior years . For data collection , I recorded and transcribed nearly 23 hours of videotape using the NVIVO10 program . I employed data analysis detailed in Maxwell [ 20 ] , who suggests a coding sequence that starts with organizing codes forming topics , and then moving to substantive coding describing the contents of data chunks or establishing theoretical codes taken from prior disciplinary or developing theory . The transcripts were organized by date and then coded with a descriptive category that named the content of the text . Due to the small number of participants ( 7 in the group I observed ) , I was able to further reduce the data through close reading to develop themes . These themes were elaborated and challenged in conversation with the disciplinary literature through memos throughout the analytic process . Then , I reperformed a sequence of organizational and descriptive coding and close reading for each theme . The portion of the study examined here is of two consecutive group meetings where students decided the wind force that their solar tracker should be able to withstand . These two sequences were culled from the larger project to provide a case study on the theme of engineering judgment . The approach to analyzing these two sequences adheres closely to a methodology for studying epistemological topics in scientiﬁc and technological settings developed by Lynch [ 10 ] . Lynch’s framework seeks to respecify topics ( examples may include observation , measurement , or visualization ) whose understanding has drifted from or has never been grounded in the practical action of an activity’s participants . He draws on ethnomethodology [ 21 ] , a perspective on work and decision - making that focuses on the phenomenal details of activities . The purpose of this approach is to build an alternate explanation of scientiﬁc and technical activities alternate to the kinds of disciplinary explanations that would understand them from frameworks exogenous to the activities themselves . In other words , ethnomethodology understands an activity as in situ achievement through members’ methods that are “chained bodily and chiasmically to places , spaces , architectures , equipment , instruments , and timing” and not according to frameworks handed down through disciplinary corpuses [ 21 , p . 105 ] . Lynch proposes that the way to understand activities and concepts used to designate and explain scientiﬁc and technological work , like “measuring , counting , depicting , observing , describing , and so forth” is to look in perspicuous settings for “primitive examples” of the action and to see how they are accomplished in situ [ 10 , pp . 298 – 299 ] . Lynch’s purpose is to respecify disciplinary concepts as topics of investigations . He notes that all too often , knowledge - making acts , such as observing or judging , are used as explanatory resources to understand scientiﬁc and technical work . His procedure makes such knowledge - making acts topics for analysis rather than resources to explain scientiﬁc and technical practice . Judgment , understood through various abstract deﬁnitions , is in need of an approach that focuses on its performance at its most perspicuous . The study analyzed here is comparatively low - tech , so intelligible to observers , and includes only a few participants dealing with apprehensible problems . Designing is more centralized and concrete in this case because it is not distributed across contexts and participants , not interrupted by other activities , and thus offers to analysis a perspicuous setting for studying engineering judgment . Lynch further suggests that when studying practical action , the activities be described in 170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 detail , and the actions of participants be set down in the sequence of their occurrence , allowing the reader to see how the actions are carried out . Lynch recommends that investigators suspend “judgment on whether the activities of scientists and mathematicians are epistemologically ‘special”’ [ 10 , p . 303 ] to allow the ordinary character of the activities observed to become evident . He also recommends that the methods of analysis be “uniquely adequate” [ 10 , p . 302 ] to the setting , meaning that the investigator uses methods suitable to the case rather than from his or her discipline to make the participants’ and the researcher’s action as transparent as possible . Finally , Lynch recommends bringing discussions from the disciplinary literature back into the discussion so a more empirically based speciﬁcation of an activity may be compared with them . This approach to understanding judgment as achieved in interaction rather than as a top - down application of standards or solely a psychological process has predecessors in sociology [ 22 ] – [ 24 ] . These studies show that place , emotion , a sense of self , and contingency are formative of judgment . Less attention , however , is paid to the rhetorical tactics used not only to justify judgments , but to make judgements in the ﬁrst place . The data below help engineers and technical communicators see the role of rhetoric in engineering judgment . R ESULTS First Sequence In the middle of the semester , but still early in the design process , six of the seven students ( Steve , Bob , Nico , Silvio , Sedat , and Pranav , all pseudonyms ) from the design group I observed came together in a study room to break down the work required for the next several weeks of the assignment . They agreed to begin work on calculating the amount of wind force their solar tracker would need to withstand for customers in southern Ontario , the location of their target client . Students were told in the course lecture to “get things to numbers” to provide a clear way for others to understand how their device works , what it is composed of , how much energy it will provide / use , and how much it will cost . The engineering design class posited that numbers are the language of engineering . The group surrounded a whiteboard and each student had his laptop in front him . Bob took it upon himself to inscribe the calculations for wind force on the whiteboard , asking the rest of the group for the equations and factors . They wanted their solar tracker to withstand the force of 100 mph winds , a number they found from a website selling solar trackers , and characterized as “what competitors guaranteed . ” They ﬁrst tried to list all of the forces that would act on the solar panel , but settled on the immediate task of determining the weight and shape of the solar panels . Sedat found an equation on Wikipedia to calculate what he thought was wind load : F D = 1 p v 2 C D 2 A . ( This is the drag equation and not a formula for determining wind load . The group would soon see their mistake . ) Bob asked members of the group to ﬁll in the variables , and they called out numbers generated from internet searches , which Bob recorded on the whiteboard , erasing variables and putting numbers in their place . After all of the variables were assembled , Bob noted that the numbers were in various units , inches , feet , slugs , pounds , and so on , and needed to be consistent . The group then converted the units , and Bob documented the replaced units as conversions were made and pointed out which units still needed to be converted . After each unit was converted , he went back over his changes saying , “This is ﬁne . This is ﬁne . This is ﬁne . ” tapping each converted unit with his marker . After making the units uniform , they calculated the formula , and ended up with a conclusion of 9 . 2 lbs . of force resulting from 100 mph winds on 72 ft 2 solar panels . Silvio was incredulous : If you think of a hundred mile an hour wind acting on , what it is , what is it , 72 . 2 square feet of solid surface and it’s just 9 pounds of force ? That does not seem even remotely possible . Each member of the group looked back to the board and started to question the numbers . Nico wondered if perhaps the 72 . 2 square feet of surface area was too much . Bob had the group recalculate to check whether 72 . 2 square feet was the correct surface area , and it was . Silvio insisted the conclusion was nonsensical . He took up a marker and designated the tip of the marker as a point of 72 . 2 square feet and pushed against the marker with his ﬁnger to illustrate just how insigniﬁcant 9 pounds is ( see Fig . 1 ) . Bob suggested that the group look up wind load . Pranav already had and gave the two equations for calculating wind load . Bob asked Pranav to explain the values , such as the height of the object . Pranav WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 171 Fig . 1 . Argument from ridicule . Silvio demonstrates wind force with a marker , as Bob looks on . explained which values are given , which they had to ﬁnd , and the operations to perform for all of them . After he ﬁnished , Bob stated that “This might be air resistance” while tapping the equation on the whiteboard . Nico smiled at the group’s mistake . Bob asked Pranav to calculate the wind load using the equations he found , and Bob read the values from the board to Pranav and he calculated them on his computer . After a few moments , he announced the wind force as 2546 . 98 lbs . There was an immediate reaction of shock from the group . Nico leaned over to look at Pranav’s computer and Pranav recited all of the operations he had performed with the “wind force calculator . ” The group then tried to gauge what kind of weather typically befalls southern Ontario . They could not make a cost - effective structure able to withstand such force , so they reassessed the actual conditions for which they had to design . After determining the small likelihood of extreme weather , Steve brought up the fact that the average wind gust for the region is 32 mph . Bob went back to the whiteboard and asked for the wind force for 100 , 50 , and 40 mph . Pranav gave him the numbers , 2546 , 636 . 7 , and 407 lbs . , and Bob wrote each on the board . Nico stated that he could not imagine what that ( meaning , 2546 lb . of force on a solar panel ) would be like . Steve offered that it is over a ton . “It is like you threw a truck at our solar panel , ” said Silvio . “Constantly . Constantly throwing a truck at our solar panel , ” corrected Bob . The entire group laughed at the absurdity , but they continued to make similar comparisons . Bob noted the difference between 50 and 40 mph of wind force amounted to the weight of a large person . Silvio remarked on the difference between 50 and 100 mph being vast , and how he could not imagine building a solar panel to withstand 100 mph Fig . 2 . Making the object present . Bob provides dimensions for the solar panel . winds . They made a provisional decision to design for a 40 mph wind force . Second Sequence The theme of the imaginable continued into a subsequent design session a week later , where Bob , Steve , and Sedat continued the work of calculating the durability of their solar tracker . The session revolved around the question of whether the gear structure could move the solar tracker . Focusing on the dimensions of the solar panels , Steve recalled a realization he had come to while examining his bathroom tiles : they were each a square foot , and so he became astounded when he estimated the size of a 72 ft 2 solar panel . Assessing the height of his fellow designers , he said “that is longer than all of us put together . ” Bob then sketched a solar panel on the whiteboard and labeled all of the dimensions they had calculated ( see Fig . 2 ) . Sedat commented that he had never seen a solar panel , but there was a local solar farm they could visit . The group used Bob’s sketches to reassess the proposed gear and cable structure that used one cable and one gearbox to move the solar tracker . Examining the dimensions of the solar trackers , they began to reconsider whether the gear could move solar panels so large . Bob reminded the group that the project was “purely conceptual” and they had to consider how late in the semester they were . Sedat suggested they visit a nearby solar farm to see solar trackers ﬁrsthand . Meanwhile , Bob brought up a scaled design in SolidWorks . Steve and Sedat huddled around his computer and remarked on the weight of the solar panels , and Steve stated that the solar panels would be 2000 lbs . even if they did not use steel as Bob had done in SolidWorks [ a popular computer - aided design ( CAD ) software ] . Sedat suggested afﬁxing the gears elsewhere to better move the heavy solar panels , but nothing was agreed upon . Sedat volunteered 172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 that the problem was that the solar panels weighed too much . Steve countered that there are gears that may move tons , but Sedat reminded the group that they did not have that much energy to spare and still meet their benchmark for efﬁciency . Bob insisted that the group stick with the design . Steve reiterated Sedat’s issues with the weight of the solar panels , and after a few moments , the whole group started to search for directions to the solar farm mentioned before . D ISCUSSION First Sequence As evident above , experience and reasoning contribute to judgment , but they only account for a portion of the action . Rhetorical ﬁgures , gestures , displays ( e . g . , whiteboards and computer screens ) , and tools ( formulas and CAD software ) constitute the making of a judgment . In the ﬁrst sequence , we see the students trying to ﬁgure out the wind force that their solar tracker should withstand . They start with the wrong equation but eventually ﬁnd the right one when Silvio realizes that the calculations do not jibe with common sense . The group further reﬁnes their calculations by imagining the force of the wind at different speeds . Judgment here is a process of rhetorically gathering and framing perspectives , and crucial to this process is the role played by representation or displays [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] . The description above shows how student engineers use displays to calculate , record calculations , and examine the sequence of their engineering . By making tasks , data , and equations in a space where each participant can examine the sequence and progress of the group’s activity , points are discerned where the group activity has gone awry in the eyes of the participants . The calculations come to be both the action of designing and a record of that action . The ability to discern points where the group activity has gone wrong rests on the multiple affordances of the displays . The role of displays in making judgments changes as the whiteboard goes from a record of progress to “a medium for conception of concrete objects” [ 25 , p . 319 ] . The sketches and numbers become fungible and malleable in light of new thinking and discourse . The whiteboard records , ﬁgures , and reﬂects the conceptual objects on which the group deliberates , whether they are sketches , equations , or agendas . In this particular case , dealing with equations , the whiteboard provides a locus of attentive action and point of inception for the group’s examination of incongruities between formulas and common sense , and between options for design requirements . Objects and gestures to display the concepts , conclusions , and consequences of design were crucial for presenting to the group issues for judgment and resources for making judgments . This is especially evident when Silvio takes up a marker to illustrate how ludicrous it is to believe that 100 mph wind would only generate around 9 lbs . of force . He made an argument from ( light ) ridicule with the marker , advocating for the group to recover their intuitive sense of force over what the equation reveals . The students had done the equation correctly , which is the record of the work and the trajectory of their task . The equation - as - guide for how a task can be completed fails in that role , though , when the equation conﬂicts with embodied sense . The inscriptions on the whiteboard then become suspect and open to a different interpretation . They become resources to reassess the sequence of activity and what the group should be doing . It is at this point that Bob realizes the equation they had been working out was incorrect . Silvio’s holding up their conclusion to ridicule makes an apparent disjunction between the equation and common sense . Bob recognizes the implication of Silvio’s illustration and interrogates the equation , and after hearing the operations for determining wind load , he sees that the equation the group was working out was for “wind resistance . ” An argument from ridicule brings the group to consider their mathematical conclusions in the light of common sense . Perelman and Olbrects - Tyteca note that appeals to ridicule reinforce the incompatibility of conclusions that ﬂy in the face of accepted opinion [ 27 ] . Ridicule is conservative in the sense that it “works towards the preservation of what is accepted , ” and exposing one to ridicule is the “penalty for blindness and is apparent only to those for whom this blindness is obvious” [ 27 , p . 205 ] . Ridicule reveals what has been overlooked or overstepped in reaching for an answer or argument . The common sense violated could be an accepted opinion , a well - known fact , or some other matter that does not easily admit questioning . Common sense here designates something particular . Silvio’s common sense is the embodied knowledge of recognizing and understanding the consequences of basic physical interactions , presumably gained from experience in everyday life . Exposure to these basic physical interactions results in knowledge of density , force , shape , mass , WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 173 velocity , and volume inherent in objects and their reactions on other objects . In other words , even if Silvio had never experienced 100 mph winds , he knows intuitively that it is impossible that only 9 lbs . of force on an object would be produced from such a gale . This kind of knowledge is anterior and perhaps ancillary to a formal mathematical and scientiﬁc understanding of force . Whatever its position , it becomes a guiding force in judging the durability of the solar tracker design . This guiding force is located in the body , both as gestural demonstration with a marker and the implicit appeal to a “sense” of how forces act on objects . The body becomes the standard of measure and a calculating device in opposition to the calculations on the whiteboard . This move from the calculations to the body to accepted common sense is a rhetorical action performed through demonstration and an argument from ridicule . After researching the wind force of 100 , 50 , and 40 mph winds , the group scrutinized the numbers and the requirements for design by creating counterfactual scenarios using analogies , such as thinking of 100 mph of wind force as being like throwing a truck at a solar tracker . The counterfactual scenarios vivify the numbers on the whiteboard , prompting the group to assess the consequences of recommending that the solar tracker be able to withstand a certain amount of force . Again , embodied sense plays a large part in determining the design requirements . Imagined scenarios of concussive force guide the decision that it is unnecessary to design a solar tracker able to withstand gale force winds to a place where such standards of durability were unexpected and unlikely to be tested . Judgment proceeds through reﬂecting on and making ( common ) sense of displays of activity . And judgments are accomplished through the rhetorical use of displays that focus group action and nominate embodied sense to become common sense . Second Sequence In the second sequence , students are trying to conceptualize the solar tracker according to the technical speciﬁcations that they have created . Despite having settled the technical speciﬁcations , the students ﬁnd that the actual dimensions of the proposed solar tracker make it difﬁcult to ﬁgure out how to move it . Steve’s concerns stem from a realization of the size of the solar panels after examining his bathroom tiles , and he communicates his concerns through analogy , saying that the panels are taller than all of the present group members stacked one on top of each other . This realization led to Bob drawing the dimensions of the solar tracker on the whiteboard and then having the group inspect his scaled drawings on his CAD software . The students made attempts to work with these representations , but rather than making the design more malleable , the opposite happened . The detail of the design unfolded the object beyond the students’ ken . The design’s scale , partly manifested through analogy , exceeded their ability to conﬁdently work with it , and so they decided to travel to a local solar farm to see just what kind of object they would have to rotate . The second sequence complements the ﬁrst sequence’s exhibition of the roles of bodies , rhetoric , and displays in making judgments . Analogy plays a crucial role here as it has for past studies of scientiﬁc and engineering work . Graves detailed the ways analogies structured physicists’ knowledge of the layers and densities of superlattices [ 28 ] . In an earlier study , I showed how designers use analogy to ground abstract design ideas in basic mechanical concepts , such as the turntable and the ball - and - socket [ 29 ] . In this paper , analogy moves bodily experience into a place for understanding magnitude , and this analogy , in turn , colors the technical dimensions with new import . The technical dimensions now display an immensity and weight that was not comprehended before the analogy . Technical dimensions , in this instance , work like Latour’s conception of inscriptions . Latour calls inscriptions “ﬁgures , diagrams , plates , texts , silhouettes , and then and there present things” that “unfold in front of [ the ] eyes” as a demonstration of some aspect of the behavior or dimensions of phenomena [ 30 , p . 14 ] . To make ﬁndings durable , various texts displace phenomena and gather adherence to a particular perspective on the phenomena through networks of circulation [ 30 ] . Inscriptions are often thought of as ways to simplify , stabilize , and control unwieldy nature . But in this instance of the student engineers , the analogy revised the inscriptions and served to demonstrate to the students that they did not have the inscriptional power to make their design workable ; they could not control what they had designed . They needed more powerful inscriptions and advice on how to handle them . Several of the students eventually visited the local solar farm where they spoke to engineers and saw fully operational solar trackers . They watched how the trackers moved , spoke with experts about their group’s design problems , and took pictures and video of the trackers to share with the rest of their 174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 group . They added another dimension to their experience with solar trackers , coupling new inscriptions with embodied knowledge and expert advice . Analogy and presence were integral for coming to the judgment that the students’ collective knowledge lacked dimension to comprehend their design . Seeing the size of the solar panels in terms of bathroom tiles and stacked students led the group to scrutinize the assembled speciﬁcations of the solar tracker . As they ﬁlled in details and attempted to design within those speciﬁcations , they agreed that they needed a new way of making the design workable . Thinking through analogy made the lived and apprehensible world a reference for the calculated object . The calculated object becomes thought of in terms of what is accessible to the group’s common perception and bodily experience . Their design methods were assessed in this new light , and they were able to make the proﬁtable decision to add another dimension to their experience with the design by visiting the local solar farm . In both sequences , judgment is a matter of rhetorical action moving the body and embodied knowledge into the foreground alongside numbers . Occasions for judgment are not necessarily planned or foreseen but emerge from working with the design when someone recognizes a barrier in or to the course of the work . To judge the adequacy of a procedure or approach , the body and lived experience are rhetorically presented as another way of thinking through the procedure . Common ( bodily ) sense is established as common ground from which the group can invent possibilities to move past a barrier and continue its work . In the ﬁrst sequence , the body becomes a way to check the plausibility of conclusions . In the second sequence , the body becomes a means for comprehending the magnitude of the task undertaken . In both cases , this move constituting judgment does not happen spontaneously or suddenly , but is rhetorically achieved between the participants in a situation consisting of people , tools , displays , and problems . C ONCLUSION While the study is limited by a focus on a single group of male , able - bodied , engineers and thus is not a generalizable or an entirely representative study , it may still provide insight into how engineering judgments are made . The results of the study suggest that technical and engineering communication teachers recognize engineering judgment as a rhetorical competency , one marked by the ability to rhetorically shift or invent standards and considerations in contingent situations . As such , judgment is not simply an individual cognitive ability that one has as it is something that one does with situated participants . Parkin [ 8 ] , as noted in the literature review , understood the importance of communication to engineering judgment , but he did not emphasize communication’s constitutive role in the process of making judgments nor the importance of tools to that process . For technical communication , judgment could be said to be a part of any work in communicating assessments . But the study above pushes that conception further and leads me to suggest that teaching students to communicate effectively with a range of audiences is a necessary condition for judgment to be performed . To better understand judgment , technical and engineering communication can start to draw from the following two sources . Rhetorical Theory One is One source contemporary rhetorical theory that examines how language and deliberation work together to advance judgment . Judgment has been a topic for rhetorical theory from its inception . For Aristotle , rhetoric was concerned with disposing an audience to make a judgment through appeals to reasoning , character and virtue , and the emotions [ 31 ] . Rhetoric , as the invention of the available means of persuasion in a given situation , seeks to understand an appropriate action for a particular time , place , people , or task . As such , it has much in common with understandings of engineering judgment that focus on how and when to apply engineering reasoning for developing a speciﬁc kind of deliverable for a client . Moreover , the rhetorical approach to judgment aligns with a conception of judgment as a practical engagement [ 32 ] . Leff , in evaluating rhetoric’s subject matter and ofﬁce , offered a conception of rhetoric as rhetorical judgment , a process of uniting argument and style to address practical matters for particular occasions , a conception that is related to the ancient principle of decorum [ 33 ] . He designates decorum as that which allows us to comprehend a situation as a whole , to locate its meaning in a context , and to translate this understanding into a discursive form that becomes an incentive to action . [ 33 , p . 61 ] WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 175 For Leff , judgment necessarily entails the ability to perceive the stakes of a problem or situation and the concomitant ability to transform that understanding into a discursive form to induce action in others . These discursive forms are not predetermined but depend on the situation . The two sequences examined in this study can add to Leff’s concept because they show that discursive inducement to action is not always posterior to judging , but is itself a way of initiating the act of judging , of accomplishing judgment even . Metaphor , analogy , ridicule , and description in the aforementioned sequences do not simply issue from an agent who has comprehended the situation , but instead reveal immanent tensions unnoticed in the situation itself . In so doing , rhetoric is a locating and translating technique as much as it is a disseminating one . Rhetorical theory also emphasizes the social aspect of judging . The philosopher Arendt is the great modern thinker of judgment , and though she never completed her major work on judgment , in what she had discussed of the topic , communication holds a constitutive role in judgment’s formation : . . . the power of judgment rests on potential agreement with others , and the thinking process which is active in judging something is not , like the thought process of purer reasoning , a dialogue between me and myself , but ﬁnds itself always and primarily , even if I am quite alone in making up my mind , in an anticipated communication with others with whom I know I must ﬁnally come to some agreement . [ 34 , p . 813 ] For Arendt , judgment is made and validated in and through communication , even within the individual herself . The ability to reach a consensus , agreement , or common ground presupposes something that is communicable , and thus judgment is not completely subjective or private . In other words , judgment is social . The wind force calculation demonstrated the sociality of judgment as one student used an argument from ( light ) ridicule to expand the ( bodily ) sense of the numbers that students had calculated . By positing the body as a shared standard , making a judgment is a joint venture not only through situated , coordinated action , but as a joint cognitive action as well . Indeed , the tactic of employing ridicule presupposed and reinforced the social act of making a judgment by calling on common sense to both help the group see and assess the problems with the calculations through their shared intuition of force . It is important to note that the work of judgment is not just social and discursive , but emerges from and is distributed across speciﬁc technologically laden situations . Recent research in technical communication [ 35 ] and similar work in engineering education [ 26 ] assists in glossing the students’ accomplishment of judgment as bodily and chiasmically linked to tools and environments—that is , judgment is emergent and enacted through and with tools and environments . Technical communicators and engineers may be seen as parts of environments , and their actions emerge from and are made possible through the affordances of the environments that they are part of . Rivers posits that not only our actions but our minds are structured by environments : “external elements , such as tools and environments , are not simply employed by our minds but actively constitute our minds” [ 36 , p . 416 ] . Indeed , the engineering students’ work was anchored in and constituted by tools and displays that assisted in recognition , assessment , and documentation of their procedures for judging . Engineering judgment is often described in other inquiries as principally a cognitive process of reasoning , but these descriptions are not sensitive enough to the sociotechnical environments where judgment is done . Instrumental Methods The second way that these data can help engineers and technical communicators is to encourage them to think critically about the instrumental methods they use to make engineering decisions , and to remember that algorithmic thinking depends on the correct inputs in the ﬁrst place . Parkin notes that [ t ] oo many young engineers put their trust in computer programs with little thought for the often shaky research foundation of the modelling behind the program and the limits of its application in practice . [ 8 , p . 83 ] Our representational and communicative technologies are becoming so sophisticated and detailed that they seem to sufﬁce for designing . But to develop that all - important “sense of proportion” [ 16 , p . 588 ] is to recognize that many dimensions of acquaintance with design objects are necessary . Engineers in the past had been exclusively educated through hands - on experience , a tradition still informing some engineering education today 176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 62 , NO . 2 , JUNE 2019 [ 3 ] . Reminding students to get a multidimensional feel for the artifacts and contexts that they are working with provides them with sensitivity to how technical speciﬁcations are materialized and interact in environments . One promising avenue for engineering communication to make engineering judgment a part of their pedagogy is to integrate design thinking and problem - based learning into the writing classroom . Judgment is not something that can be taught but it can be developed through practice in solving problems that call for judging . Davis notes that the design process seems to be intimately connected to the practice of engineering judgment [ 2 ] , and Dewey’s theory of inquiry that is often taken as a model for design practice is an exploration of a situation through judgment [ 37 ] . Design theory and problem - based learning have been articulated with writing instruction in recent research , stressing design thinking and theory as an alternative to pedagogy privileging writing conventions and the writing process [ 39 ] – [ 45 ] . Leverenz , for example , summarizes how design “privileges the new and encourages the use of conventional resources in unexpected ways” [ 39 , p . 3 ] . Design is about ﬁnding creative ways to address problems by writerly engagement that does not shy away from the possibility of failure [ 39 ] . Part of that engagement is judging a problematic situation and creating solutions . Cluing students into how judgment is exercised in design situations reminds them to think critically about their writing tasks and seek to understand the best ( and not just the ﬁrst ) strategy for translating , documenting , and visualizing technical information . In addition , students can be taught that engineering communication is not only a matter of documentation and presentation , but a conversation with the components of a situation [ 38 ] . Indeed , the principles of audience awareness , precision , and directing perspectives that are the cornerstone of engineering writing ﬁnd their counterparts in the emerging design situation . Understanding that the solutions to design problems are rhetorically inventive acts of judgment deepens students’ appreciation for the sociotechnical reality of engineering work and its reliance on communication and performance [ 43 ] . Putting engineering judgment in conversation with engineering communication reveals engineering judgment’s rhetorical underpinning and alerts communication teachers to their crucial role in structuring students’ judging practices . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] ABET ( 2018 ) . Criteria for accrediting engineering programs . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . abet . org / [ 2 ] M . Davis , “A plea for judgment , ” Sci . Eng . Ethics , vol . 18 , pp . 789 – 808 , 2012 . [ 3 ] E . Ferguson , Engineering and the Mind’s Eye . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press , 1994 . [ 4 ] J . E . Holt , “The designer’s judgment , ” Design Stud . , vol . 18 , pp . 113 – 123 , 1997 . [ 5 ] H . Petroski , “Failure as source of engineering judgment : Case of John Roebling , ” J . Perform . Constructed Facilities . , vol . 7 , no . 1 , pp . 46 – 58 , 1993 . [ 6 ] W . G . Vincenti , What Engineers Know and How They Know It : Analytical Studies From Aeronautical History . Baltimore , MD , USA : The Johns Hopkins Univ . Press , 1990 . [ 7 ] J . Parkin , Engineering Judgment & Risk . London , UK : Thomas Telford Ltd . , 2000 . [ 8 ] J . S . Weedon , “Putting engineering judgment in conversation with engineering communication , ” in Proc . IEEE Int . Commun . Conf . , 2017 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 9 ] B . Sauer , The Rhetoric of Risk : Technical Documentation in Hazardous Environments . Mahawah . NJ , USA : Routledge , 2003 . [ 10 ] M . Lynch , Scientiﬁc Practice and Ordinary Action . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press , 1993 . [ 11 ] W . E . Wickenden , A Professional Guide for Junior Engineers . New York , NY , USA : Engineers’ Council for Professional Development , 1949 . [ 12 ] W . E . Wickenden , “Dr . Wickenden’s convocation address to Case men , ” Presented Case School Appl . Sci . , Cleveland , OH , USA , Sep . 26 , 1929 . [ 13 ] W . E . Wickenden , “The President’s own page , ” Case Alumnus , Wickenden Papers , University Archives , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH , USA , Oct . 1929 . [ 14 ] H . P . Hammond et al . , “Report of committee on engineering education after the war , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 34 , no . 9 , pp . 589 – 613 , 1944 . [ 15 ] K . Dorst , “Design problems and design paradoxes , ” Design Issues , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 4 – 17 , 2006 . [ 16 ] R . B . Peck , “Where has all the judgment gone ? The ﬁfth Laurits Bjerrum memorial lecture , ” Can . Geotech . J . , vol . 17 , no . 4 , pp . 584 – 590 , 1980 . [ 17 ] L . L . Bucciarelli , Designing Engineers . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press , 1994 . [ 18 ] K . Henderson , On Line and on Paper : Visual Representations , Visual Culture , and Computer Graphics in Design Engineering . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press , 1999 . [ 19 ] D . A . Winsor , Writing Power : Communication in an Engineering Center . Albany , NY , USA : SUNY Press , 2012 . WEEDON : THE ROLE OF RHETORIC IN ENGINEERING JUDGMENT 177 [ 20 ] J . A . Maxwell , Qualitative Research Design : An Interactive Approach , vol . 41 . Thousand Oaks , CA , USA : Sage , 2012 . [ 21 ] H . Garﬁnkel , Ethnomethodology’s Program : Working out Durkheim’s Aphorism . A . W . Rawls , ed . Lanham , MD , USA : Rowan & Littleﬁeld , 2002 . [ 22 ] B . Merriman , “The editorial meeting at a little magazine : An ethnography of group judgment , ” J . Contemporary Ethnography , vol . 46 , no . 4 , pp . 440 – 463 , 2017 . [ 23 ] S . Hirschauer , “Editorial Judgments : A praxeology of ‘voting’in peer review , ” Social Stud . Sci . , vol . 40 , no . 1 , pp . 71 – 103 , 2010 . [ 24 ] M . Lamont . How Professors Think . Cambridge , MA , USA : Harvard Univ . Press , 2009 . [ 25 ] L . Suchman , “Representing practice in cognitive science , ” Human Stud . , vol . 11 , pp . 305 – 325 , 1988 . [ 26 ] J . Juhl and H . Lindegaard , “Representations and visual synthesis in engineering design , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 102 , no . 1 , pp . 20 – 50 , 2013 . [ 27 ] C . Perelman and L . Olbrects - Tyteca , The New Rhetoric : A Treatise in Argumentation . South Bend , IN , USA : Univ . of Notre Dame Press , 1969 . [ 28 ] H . Graves , Rhetoric in ( to ) Science . New York , NY , USA : Hampton Press , 2005 . [ 29 ] J . S . Weedon , “Representation in engineering practice : A case study of framing in a student design group , ” Tech . Commun . Quart . , vol . 26 , no . 4 , pp . 361 – 378 , 2017 . [ 30 ] B . Latour , “Visualization and cognition , ” Knowl . Soc . , vol . 6 , no . 6 , pp . 1 – 40 , 1986 . [ 31 ] Aristotle , On Rhetoric : A Theory of Civic Discourse . G . A . Kennedy , ( translator ) . New York , NY , USA : Oxford Univ . Press , 2006 . [ 32 ] N . J . Heidlebaugh , Judgment , Rhetoric , and the Problem of Incommensurability : Recalling Practical Wisdom . Columbia , SC , USA : University of South Carolina Press , 2001 . [ 33 ] M . Leff , “The habitation of rhetoric , ” J . Contemporary Rhetorical Theory : A Reader . L . Lucaites , C . Condit , and S . Caudill Eds . New York , NY , USA : Guilford Press , 1999 , pp . 52 – 64 . [ 34 ] P . J . Steinberger , “Hannah Arendt on judgment , ” Amer . J . Political Sci . , vol . 34 , no . 3 , pp . 803 – 831 , 1990 . [ 35 ] K . M . Bivens and K . C . Cook , “Coordinating distributed memory : An environmental engineer’s proposal - writing process using a product calculator , ” J . Bus . Tech . Commun . , vol . 32 , no . 3 , pp . 285 – 307 , 2018 . [ 36 ] N . Rivers , “Future convergences : Technical communication research as cognitive science , ” Tech . Commun . Quart . , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 412 – 442 , 2011 . [ 37 ] J . Dewey , Logic : The Theory of Inquiry . New York , NY , USA : Read Books Ltd . , 2013 . [ 38 ] D . A . Sch¨on , The Reﬂective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action . New York , NY , USA : Basic Books , 1994 . [ 39 ] C . S . Leverenz , “Design thinking and the wicked problem of teaching writing , ” Comput . Comp . , vol . 33 , pp . 1 – 12 , 2014 . [ 40 ] R . Marback , “Embracing wicked problems : The turn to design in composition studies , ” Coll . Comp . Commun . , vol . 61 , no . 2 , pp . 397 – 419 , 2009 . [ 41 ] C . Wickman , “Wicked problems in technical communication , ” J . Tech . Writing Commun , vol . 44 , no . 1 , 2014 , Art . no . 2342 . [ 42 ] J . Purdy , “What can design thinking offer writing studies ? , ” Coll . Comp . Commun . , vol . 65 , no . 4 , pp . 612 – 641 , 2014 . [ 43 ] J . Cushman , “Our unstable artistry : Donald Sch¨on’s counterprofessional practice of problem setting , ” J . Bus . Tech . Commun . , vol . 28 , no . 3 , pp . 327 – 351 , 2014 . [ 44 ] E . H . Phlugfelder , Communicating Mobility and Technology : A Material Rhetoric for Persuasive Transportation . London , UK : Routledge , 2016 . [ 45 ] S . Lane and A . Karatsolis , “Engineering innovation through rhetorical invention . , ” in Proc . IEEE Int . Prof . Commun . Conf . , 2016 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 46 ] J . Trevelyan , “Mind the gaps : Engineering education and practice , ” in Proc . 21st Annu . Conf . Austral . Assoc . , Eng . Educ . , Sydney , NSW , Australia , 2010 , pp . 383 – 390 . Scott Weedon received the Ph . D . degree in English from Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH , USA , in 2016 . He is currently an Assistant Professor of Technical Communication and Rhetoric with the Department of English , Texas Tech University , Lubbock , TX , USA .