Categorical ﬂexibility in children : Distinguishing response ﬂexibility from conceptual ﬂexibility ; the protracted development of taxonomic representations Agne ` s Blaye , Ve´ronique Bernard - Peyron and Jean - Louis Paour Universite´ de Provence , Centre PSYCLE , Aix en Provence , France Franc¸oise Bonthoux Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition , Universite´ Pierre Mendes , Grenoble , France This research explored the development of children’s use of multiple conceptual organizations ( thematic , taxonomic ) in sorting sets of pictures . Experiment 1 revealed that between 5 and 9 years , two forms of categorical ﬂexibility can be distinguished : response and conceptual ﬂexibility . It appeared that children’s multiple sorts do not necessarily reﬂect the use of diﬀerent conceptual organizations . Such a lag was mainly due to a diﬃculty in accessing taxonomic representations , speciﬁcally in the younger age groups . Therefore , Experiment 2 investigated the development of taxonomic representations using an original approach requiring participants to decide whether new items could be included into an existing taxonomic sort . This approach showed that taxonomic representations were only gradually diﬀerentiated from thematic and perceptual ones over the 5 to 10 years period . The discussion raises new hypotheses about the interaction between developing executive control ( speciﬁcally , increasing resistance to interference of irrelevant information ) and increasing conceptual knowledge in accounting for the development of conceptual ﬂexibility . Categorization is considered as a fundamental component of cognition and as a highly powerful tool for organizing the otherwise chaotic world with limited processing capacities ; it is often restricted to taxonomic categoriza - tion . Yet , other forms ( perceptual or thematic ) of categorization do exist Correspondence should be addressed to Agne ` s Blaye , Universite´ de Provence , Centre PSYCLE , 29 Avenue Robert Schuman , F - 13621 Aix en Provence cedex 1 , France . Email : a . blaye @ up . univ - aix . fr EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY 2006 , 3 ( 2 ) , 163 – 188 (cid:1) 2006 Psychology Press Ltd http : / / www . psypress . com / edp DOI : 10 . 1080 / 17405620500412267 and adaptive categorization can imply switching between these diﬀerent forms depending on one’s current goal . A ball has to be considered as a round thing if the point is to pack everything before moving to a new house , but as a thing that ‘‘goes with’’ a T - shirt and sport shoes ( thematic grouping ) if the goal is to play a football game ( Barsalou , 1983 ) . Although , recent empirical research ( see below ) suggests that early on , children can sort objects on a thematic or taxonomic basis , little is known about the development of categorical ﬂexibility per se ; i . e . , the ability to switch between diﬀerent categorical groupings of the same set of elements . Moreover , the extent to which switching between categorical responses ( i . e . , sorts ) reﬂects the actual activation of diverse types of categorical representations is an entirely open question . According to recent empirical studies , several ways of categorizing objects are available from the preschool period and even in infancy ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Dunham & Dunham , 1995 ; Fenson , Vella , & Kennedy , 1989 ; Houde´ & Milhet , 1997 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ; Walsh , Richardson , & Faulkner , 1993 ; Waxman & Namy , 1997 ) to adulthood ( Lin & Murphy , 2001 ; Murphy , 2001 ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ; Valle´e - Tourangeau , Anthony , & Austin , 1998 ) . We will focus here on two forms of conceptual categorization : thematic and taxonomic . Thematic categories involve heterogeneous members belonging to a common event or scene , and thus organized in spatial and / or temporal relations of contiguity ( Mandler , 1984 ; Nelson , 1983 , 1986 ) . In taxonomic categories , elements are linked together because they share common properties ; they are the ‘‘same sort’’ of thing ( Mandler , 1993 ) . Categorical ﬂexibility The tendency to organize objects thematically or taxonomically depends on various contextual variables such as labelling of the target in the match - to - sample task ( Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ) , type of task ( verbal vs . nonverbal ; Nelson , 1988 ) , instructions , or stimulus medium ( Waxman & Namy , 1997 ) . Although such data suggest that children do have several ways of categorizing objects , they do not address categorical ﬂexibility per se because the availability of thematic and taxonomic organizations is inferred from the comparison of independent groups of participants . ( Deak , 2003 ; Deak , Ray , & Pick , 2004 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 , exp . 3 ) . Categorical ﬂexibility is a within - subject variable corresponding to the ability to switch successively between diﬀerent representations of a given object ( or set of objects ) . Thus , the same target object ( e . g . , an apple ) must be cross - classiﬁed , being considered as a member of a taxonomic category ( e . g . , a fruit ) , a perceptual category ( e . g . , a round thing ) and a thematic category ( e . g . , a thing that goes in a school bag with school books ; Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ; Deak , 2003 ) . 164 BLAYE ET AL . The small amount of research that exists on the development of categorical ﬂexibility has mainly used variants of the match - to - sample task ( e . g . , Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ; Deak , 2000 ; Deak , Ray , & Pick , 2004 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . Participants ﬁrst must choose among several pictures the best match to a target picture and then they must choose other possible matches , each having a speciﬁc relation to the target ( either thematic , perceptual , taxonomic , or no relation ) . At about 4 years , children are able to associate diﬀerent matches to the same picture when given contrasted instructions ( same shape , same material , same part ; Deak , 2000 ) or without any hints when each associate is paired with a non - associate ( Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . Two successive matches have also been produced to a certain extent by preschoolers when a taxonomic choice was contrasted with a thematic choice ( Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) or with a perceptual one ( Melot & Houde´ , 1998 ) . From multiple matching to conceptual ﬂexibility An issue that has not yet been addressed concerns the extent to which multiple matchings correspond to ‘‘conceptual’’ ﬂexibility involving children’s knowl - edge of the diﬀerent types of relations underlying their responses . Although thematic and taxonomic organizations can easily be distinguished on the basis of children’s overt sorting responses , one might wonder whether they are conceived as truly diﬀerent in children’s minds . In fact , children can produce a taxonomic match on the basis of spatial and / or temporal contiguities ( e . g . , grouping of a tiger and a ﬁsh may be done on the basis of the taxonomic category ‘‘animal’’ , but it may also be done by children on the basis that ‘‘a tiger can eat a ﬁsh’’ ; Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ) . Moreover , Nelson ( 1986 ) has established that an intermediate level of categorization between script - based categories and superordinate taxonomic ones—namely ‘‘slot - ﬁller’’ cate - gories—corresponds to groupings of the same sort of objects ( thus , looking like taxonomic categories ) but still contextualized in a given schema ( e . g . , animals of the zoo , Lucariello & Nelson , 1985 ) . Hence , what appears to be a taxonomic grouping may well be a grouping organized by reference to event - based representations . In the matching task , when verbal justiﬁcations are required , most children younger than 4 years of age are unable to justify two matchings of the same target ( Greenﬁeld & Scott , 1986 ; Lucariello , Kyratzis , & Nelson , 1992 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ; Tversky , 1985 ) . We consider that it might be worth distinguishing two forms of categorical ﬂexibility : multiple categorical responses corresponding to response ﬂex - ibility ( estimated through children’s sorts ) and conceptual ﬂexibility corresponding to a switch between two diﬀerentiated representations of the organizations ( thematic or taxonomic ) underlying the same set of pictures . This last form is expected to develop later than the ﬁrst one . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 165 Match - to - sample task vs . free sorting The use of the match - to - sample task to study the development of multiple categorizations might not be the most appropriate for at least two reasons . Matching performance might be a poor indicator of true taxonomic categorization because , as already suggested , pairs of elements of the same kind could be sorted on the basis of other representations . Moreover , in requiring that children reason about pairs of pictures instead of larger samples , the match - to - sample task might underestimate taxonomic performance ( Blaye , Bernard - Peyron , & Bonthoux , 2000 ) . For example , studies on category - based inductions ( Gutheil & Gelman , 1997 ) have shown that children make use of information concerning sample size ( larger samples are a stronger basis of inference than smaller samples ) and sample diversity ( more diverse samples are better than more homogeneous samples ) in their inferences . Restricting the number of elements to two as in the match - to - sample task might prompt a process of research for thematic links—most of which involve functional relations between precisely two elements ( e . g . , dog [ eats ] bone ; thread [ goes through ] needle ) unlike taxonomic relations . Recent research has clearly established the critical role of comparison in abstracting common properties between elements ( Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Namy & Gentner , 2002 ) . Blaye et al . ( 2000 ) have provided data supporting this hypothesis , suggesting that free sorting of numerous pictures is a better context for revealing taxonomic abilities in younger children than the match - to - sample task . Hence , categorical ﬂexibility was investigated in the present research using a free sorting task . A large set of pictures ( 18 ) , which could be sorted taxonomically , thematically , or using slot - ﬁller categories , was used . The participants were ﬁrst required to sort this set in successive diﬀerent ways . Then , underlying representations were assessed using children’s labels for the diﬀerent subsets resulting after each free sort in Experiment 1 . Data revealed that taxonomic representations were less diﬀerentiated in young children . Thus , Experiment 2 was conducted to examine further the development of these representations and their progressive diﬀerentiation from perceptual and thematic representations . After having produced a taxonomic sort , participants were presented with additional pictures , half of which were perceptually similar to members of the sort already achieved , and half were actual members of the two schemas organizing the set of pictures already sorted . Participants had to decide whether these new items could be inserted into the taxonomic sortings they had just produced . Half of these pictures were ‘‘true intruders’’ and should therefore not be accepted while the other half were ‘‘potential members’’ . 166 BLAYE ET AL . EXPERIMENT 1 The ﬁrst objective of Experiment 1 was to sketch the developmental path of categorical ﬂexibility across childhood using a free - sorting task in which children were asked to recategorize items . A group of adults was also included in the study to determine how they do on the same task . The second objective was to determine whether response ﬂexibility , assessed through the number of diﬀerent sorts performed on a same set of elements , followed the same developmental time course as conceptual ﬂexibility , purported to underlie children’s overt responses . It was hypothesized that conceptual ﬂexibility develops later than response ﬂexibility because superordinate taxonomic representations appear to be partly organized through contextual similarities during early childhood ( e . g . , Lucariello & Nelson , 1985 ; Sell , 1992 ) and hence remain largely thematic . Labels provided by participants to qualify their sorts were taken as indicators of the representations underlying their responses . Our expectation was that discrepancies between the two forms of ﬂexibility might be highest during the preschool years and then gradually disappear with the development of more decontextualized taxonomic representations later in childhood . Method Participants . One hundred twenty children of average socioeconomic level participated in the experiment . They were assigned to four groups of age : thirty 4 - year - old children ( mean age ¼ 4 . 6 , range ¼ 4 . 4 – 5 . 1 ) ; thirty 5 - year - old children ( mean age ¼ 5 . 8 , range ¼ 5 . 5 – 6 . 2 ) ; thirty 6 - year - old children ( mean age ¼ 6 . 11 , range ¼ 6 . 7 – 7 . 1 ) ; and thirty 9 - year - old children ( mean age ¼ 9 . 8 , range ¼ 9 . 5 – 10 . 2 ) . A sample of 15 adults ( ﬁrst - year psychology students ) also took part in this experiment . Material . The material was composed of two sets ( M1 and M2 ) of 18 coloured drawings ( each one on a cardboard square of 5 . 5 6 5 . 5 cm ) . Each set was constructed so that it could be sorted on the basis of three diﬀerent organizations : ( 1 ) thematic : in each set , objects could be distributed into two situational schemas ( e . g . , farm and beach in M1 , circus and forest in M2 ; see Appendix 1 for a list of the speciﬁc items ) ; ( 2 ) taxonomic : three superordinate categories could be contrasted in each set ( e . g . , animals , vehicles , and people for M1 ; animals , tools , and people for M2 ) ; and ( 3 ) slot - ﬁller : each schema involved three slots corresponding to the three taxonomic categories ( e . g . , animals of the farm ) . The participants were given A4 sheets of paper that could be used as support for sorting . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 167 Familiarity with the schemas presented was tested by asking a separate group of twenty 5 - year - olds ( mean age ¼ 5 . 3 , range ¼ 4 . 11 – 5 . 8 ) to name the diﬀerent thematic groupings of pictures . The schemas ‘‘beach’’ , ‘‘farm’’ , ‘‘circus’’ and ‘‘forest’’ were retained because they were recognized by at least 75 % of the children . The taxonomic categories involved ( people , vehicles , animals , and tools ) are those traditionally used in this age range . Procedure . Participants received only one set of items ( M1 or M2 ) . They ﬁrst had to name the drawings that were successively presented to them . When they failed to do so , they were told the name used by the majority of their peers . The experimenter then placed the drawings on the table one at a time and asked participants to sort them : You see these drawings [ the experimenter showed the 18 drawings ] , they are all mixed up . I want you to put together the drawings that go well together . In order to do this , you can take the number of sheets you want . On each sheet , you will put together the drawings that go well together . There are several ways of putting together the drawings that go well together . Participants were then asked to label each subset of pictures : ‘‘How do you name this group ? ’’ The experimenter repeated the question for each subset . If children did not answer or only labelled one or more drawings , the question was asked diﬀerently : ‘‘Why did you put all these drawings together ? ’’ Participants were then given 18 new copies of the same set of pictures and were asked : ‘‘Can you ﬁnd a new way to sort these drawings , another way of putting together the drawings which go well together ? ’’ If a new way was found , a third request for a diﬀerent way to sort was made . A label for each produced group was also requested for these two new sorts . Two measures were used : ( 1 ) the number of correct 1 sorts produced on the same set of pictures ; and ( 2 ) the number of correct sorts correctly labelled , i . e . , labels produced were congruent with the observable organiza - tion ; ( e . g . , taxonomic labels for taxonomic sorts ) . Response ﬂexibility corresponds to the production of more than one correct sort on a given set of items ( maximum being 3 ) . Conceptual ﬂexibility requires , moreover , that at least two of the correct sorts are correctly labelled . Coding of labels . Participants had to name the diﬀerent subsets that constituted their sort ( three groups for the taxonomic sort for instance ) . A ﬁrst criterion used to consider a sort as correctly labelled was that the same kind of relation ( thematic , taxonomic , or slot - ﬁller ) was used to describe the diﬀerent 1 ‘‘Correct sorts’’ refer to sorts that could be unambiguously identiﬁed as either taxonomic , thematic or slot - ﬁller based on the principles of construction of the material . The coding of sorts was made independently of the produced labels . 168 BLAYE ET AL . constitutive groups ; this criterion was respected by all the participants . Labels were coded into three categories : thematic , taxonomic , and slot - ﬁller . A sample of 20 % of participants’ labels of their sorts were coded independently by two coders who had agreed beforehand on the following criteria . Inter - coder agreement reached 92 % . Disagreements were solved through discussion . Labels accepted for the thematic sort were the names of the schemas . Several utterances were accepted ( sea or beach , farm or countryside , for M1 ; circus or spectacle , forest or wood , for M2 ) . For the slot - ﬁller sorts , the accepted labels were the names of the subcategories . Here too , several utterances were accepted ( e . g . , animals of the sea or ﬁshes , vehicles that go on the sea or boats , sailors , farmers ) . Some ambiguous cases appeared like ‘‘animals of the ground’’ for ‘‘animals of the farm’’ ; they were accepted if the other categories of the sort were correctly and unambigu - ously labelled . For the taxonomic categories , two kinds of labels were accepted : a generic term ( animals , people , vehicles or means of transport ) or labels referring to potentially deﬁning properties ( example : ‘‘things which advance’’ for the vehicles ) . Results The development of ﬂexibility was studied from the age ( 4 years ) at which children are generally able to accept diﬀerent matches in a match - to - sample task ( see earlier ) . However , 43 % of the 4 - year - old children did not manage to carry out a sort with an identiﬁable underlying organization and all the others ( except two ) produced only one grouping . Consequently , this age group was not considered further in the analyses . Moreover , in none of the analyses did the type of material ( M1 vs . M2 ) signiﬁcantly aﬀect performance or interact with other factors . Hence , performances on the two sets were not distinguished . Results of the ﬁrst sort revealed that , at all ages , the three expected kinds of organizations ( thematic , superordinate taxonomic , and slot - ﬁller ) were produced ( see Table 1 ) ; incomplete or mixed sorts never exceeded 30 % of TABLE 1 Distribution across the different kinds of sort for each age - group ( 1st sort ) Age Thematic Slot - ﬁller Taxonomic Other a Five - years - old ( n ¼ 30 ) 11 3 10 6 Six - years - old ( n ¼ 30 ) 8 7 9 6 Nine - years - old ( n ¼ 30 ) 13 4 4 9 Adults ( n ¼ 15 ) 7 2 5 1 a This category refers to sorts that involve the composition of two categorical organizations or where no organization was identiﬁed . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 169 the productions of an age group . This conﬁrms the coexistence of several organizations , at least at a group level , from 5 years onwards . No signiﬁcant changes associated with age were found in the order ( 1st , 2nd or 3rd sort ) and distribution of the diﬀerent sorts . Measures of categorical ﬂexibility . Two diﬀerent analyses were done focusing on sorting responses and labelling of the correct sorts achieved , respectively . In order to discuss the development of both forms of ﬂexibility , the analyses focused on the number of participants producing more than one sort on a given set of items . Let us consider ﬁrst response ﬂexibility ( see Table 2 , column a ) . Adults showed response ﬂexibility : All but one sorted the material according to the three expected organizations and the last one produced two sorts . Among children , as expected , the number of participants using two or three categorical organizations increased with age . This evolution fell short of signiﬁcance with 37 % , 53 % and 67 % in 5 - , 6 - , and 9 - year - olds respectively ( w 22 ¼ 5 . 43 , p ¼ . 066 ) . Pairwise comparisons revealed that 9 - year - olds signiﬁcantly outperformed 5 - year - olds ( w 21 ¼ 5 . 41 , p ¼ . 02 ) . Turning now to the percentage of participants who produced at least two correctly labelled sorts and hence revealed what we called conceptual ﬂexibility ( Table 2 , column b ) , data showed that it was optimal in adults , all but one correctly labelling three sorts . Among children , a signiﬁcant increase was observed between 5 and 9 years ( w 22 ¼ 19 . 38 , p 5 . 001 ) . At age 5 , only two children ( 7 % ) correctly labelled more than one sort . This was the case for 37 % of 6 - year - olds , and 60 % of 9 - year - olds . Whereas such results reveal a clear - cut development of conceptual ﬂexibility during childhood , further analysis is required to address the question of a potential lag between response ﬂexibility and conceptual ﬂexibility . Our hypothesis was that conceptual ﬂexibility would develop later during childhood . As expected , no lag at all was observed in adults who correctly labelled all their sorts . Our measures were such that correct labels were considered only for correct TABLE 2 Distribution of responses as a function of age ( a ) Number of correct sorts ( b ) Number of correctly labelled sorts 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 Five - years - old 1 18 6 5 1 27 2 0 Six - years - old 0 14 13 3 0 19 9 2 Nine - years - old 1 9 11 9 1 11 10 8 Adults 0 0 1 14 0 0 1 14 170 BLAYE ET AL . sorts ; hence conceptual ﬂexibility assessed through labels necessarily implies response ﬂexibility . Response ﬂexibility , however , can be observed ( more than one correct sort ) alone , that is with no conceptual ﬂexibility ( i . e . , no more than one correctly labelled sort ) . Among children , there was a signiﬁcant eﬀect of age group on the distribution of children in these three categories : no ﬂexibility ( no more than one sort produced ) , response ﬂexibility only ( more than one correct sort but no more than one correctly labelled sort ) and conceptual ﬂexibility ( more than one correctly labelled sort ) : w 24 ¼ 19 . 91 , p 5 . 001 ( see Figure 1 ) . This evolution , however , is partly due to the increase in response ﬂexibility . Therefore , we now focus on the subset of children who showed response ﬂexibility and assessed the potential increase with age of the proportion of those exhibiting conceptual ﬂexibility . As shown in Figure 1 , this proportion increases signiﬁcantly from 18 % among 5 - year - olds to 69 % among 6 - year - olds and 90 % in 9 - year - olds , thus revealing the expected reduction of the lag between the two forms of ﬂexibility across childhood ( w 22 ¼ 16 . 38 , p 5 . 001 ) . Pairwise comparisons revealed a signiﬁcant increase between the two younger groups ( w 22 ¼ 6 . 68 , p 5 . 01 ) and between 5 - and 9 - year - olds ( w 22 ¼ 15 . 99 , p 5 . 001 ) . Diﬀerences between sorting responses and underlying representations assessed through labelling varied as a function of the type of sort . While Figure 1 . Percentages of participants showing either no ﬂexibility , only response ﬂexibility or conceptual ﬂexibility , as a function of age . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 171 thematic organizations were correctly labelled at all ages ( 4 90 % ) , as expected , the percentage of taxonomic sorts correctly labelled increased with age ( 48 % , 67 % , and 92 % in 5 - , 6 - , and 9 - year - olds , respectively ; w 22 ¼ 10 . 65 , p ¼ . 01 ) . Moreover , among 5 - year - olds , 57 % of incorrect labels for taxonomic sorts referred to schemas , thus revealing an underlying thematic representation 2 ( this percentage dropped to 40 % in 6 - year - olds ) . Discussion The procedure used in this experiment required participants to produce several successive sorts of the same set of pictures , using diﬀerent kinds of categorical organizations , and then to label each subset of their sorts . Results support the distinction between two forms of ﬂexibility : response ﬂexibility measured through the number of diﬀerent sorts produced on a given set of pictures and conceptual ﬂexibility , which involves the activation of alternative representations based on diﬀerent categorical organizations ( these representations were assessed using participants’ labels for their sorts ) . Although both forms improve throughout childhood to reach ceiling levels in adults , they developed at diﬀerent rates . As expected , the developmental lag between the two forms was highest among 5 - and 6 - year - olds ( 4 - year - olds were at ﬂoor level on both tasks ) and tended to disappear in 9 - year - olds . Further analysis of labels revealed that the lag observed in 5 - and 6 - year - olds between the two forms of ﬂexibility might largely be due to a deﬁcit in representation of superordinate taxonomic categories speciﬁcally , whereas thematic groupings were correctly labelled from 5 years onwards . This is congruent with Sell’s results ( 1992 ) showing that young children asked to explain diﬀerent matches tended to oﬀer event - based explanations for taxonomic pairs ( see also Lucariello et al . , 1992 , exp . 3 ) . Hence , Experiment 2 was conducted to further investigate the develop - ment of taxonomic representations across childhood . After having produced a taxonomic sort , participants were presented with additional pictures . They had to decide whether these new items could be inserted into the taxonomic categories of the sort that they had just produced . Half of these pictures were ‘‘true intruders’’ and should therefore not be accepted while the other half were ‘‘potential members’’ . The goal of this manipulation was to highlight the progressive diﬀerentiation of taxonomic representations from representations based on perceptual similarity and / or thematic relatedness . Conﬂicts between categorical organizations generally regarded as preferred by young children ( i . e . , thematic and perceptual ) and the taxonomic 2 Children did so by ‘‘ignoring’’ some elements of the taxonomic group ; for instance animals were labelled ‘‘animals of the circus’’ or even ‘‘the circus’’ . 172 BLAYE ET AL . organization were thus created . It is worth noting that this new procedure allowed us to assess whether children might rely on implicit taxonomic representations , in an age range in which taxonomic representations are not always explicit enough to be verbally told . EXPERIMENT 2 Experiment 2 assessed children’s representations of taxonomic categories by giving participants new candidates ( new drawings ) to add to a set of stimuli previously sorted into taxonomic categories . Half of these new drawings were potential members ( PMs ) , which could correctly be integrated into the existing sort and thus , should be accepted , whereas the other half were true intruders ( TIs ) and should be refused . Moreover , perceptual similarity and schematic membership were conjointly manipu - lated for both types of candidates . Half of the candidates of each type had low perceptual resemblance with all the members of the already - built categories , whereas the other half were highly similar to at least some member of the target categories ( see Appendix 2 and the ‘‘stimuli selection’’ section ) . Finally , for the low and high perceptually similar items , half were selected to be members of one of the two schemas constitutive of the material ( cf . Experiment 1 ) while the other half were nonmembers . Manipulation of these two relations ( perceptual similarity and schematic membership ) allowed a speciﬁc examination of children’s developing understanding of the intension of taxonomic categories . The rationale for this manipulation was based on the hypothesis that these two relations might interfere with true taxonomic decisions in younger children . This is a particularly critical issue because stimuli used in many empirical studies do not control for their inﬂuence . Many examples suggest a potential confounding of perceptual and / or thematic and taxonomic relatedness : carrot and tomato are often considered superordinate taxonomic associates ; they can , however , be considered as being perceptually related because both are red or / and thematically related because they are both bought in a given store . Membership of a common schema and perceptual similarity were expected to inﬂuence younger participants’ decisions through increasing the proportion of acceptances of both intruders and true exemplars into the taxonomic categories . On the one hand , the early work of Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , and Boyes - Braem ( 1976 ) and research on infant categorization have clearly established the perceptual basis of early taxonomic categorization ( e . g . , Baldwin 1992 ; Fenson , Cameron , & Kennedy , 1988 ; Mareschal , French , & Quinn , 2000 ; Quinn & Eimas , 1996 ) . Melkman , Tversky , and Baratz ( 1981 ) have demonstrated the relative importance of shape similarity over superordinate taxonomic FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 173 membership in a match - to - sample task in 4 - and 5 - year - olds , but not in 9 - year - olds . On the other hand , Nelson’s theory suggests that taxonomic representations very gradually emerge from event - based and highly contextualized categories ( Nelson , 1983 , 1986 ; see also Mandler , 2000 , 2003 ) . Lucariello et al . ( 1992 ) showed , for instance , that 4 - year - old children who were instructed to produce all the instances of a super - ordinate taxonomic category that they could think of , tended to produce one developed slot - ﬁller category within each superordinate one , that is , they produced clusters of items that could be substituted in the same slot as a given schema . This tendency decreased in 7 - year - olds . Such data suggest that common schematic membership can be used in certain conditions as a support in activating or using taxonomically organized knowledge . It does not , however , address the extent to which children and adults can ignore a thematic organization when it interferes with accurate taxonomic decisions . In the present experimental setting , perceptual similarity and schematic membership could either help a true taxonomic decision ( when their presence reinforced a decision of taxonomic acceptance or when their absence facilitated rejection of TIs ) , or conﬂict with these decisions when their consideration suggested a response that was diﬀerent from a true taxonomic decision . In other words , correct rejection of TIs was expected to be optimized when no other default criteria of relatedness could be relied upon , that is in the case of low perceptual similarity and no schematic membership of the intruders . For PMs , candidates with low perceptual similarity and no schematic membership were expected to be the least helpful because correct acceptance could only be judged on the basis of taxonomic membership . In contrast , PMs with high perceptual similarity and schematic membership of candidates were expected to be the most favourable in enhancing acceptance into the correct taxonomic category because participants could rely interchangeably on three criteria to support this correct response . However , this conﬁguration was supposed to be the most detrimental to correct rejection of TIs because participants had to resist responding according to these two interfering pseudo ‘‘good reasons’’ to insert the new candidate into the category . No speciﬁc predictions were made concerning intermediate conditions involving only one of the two extra - taxonomic criteria , except that they should both induce more acceptances than the strict taxonomic condition . Finally , an interaction between condition and age was expected . Taxonomic representations , based on a less fragile deﬁnition of category intensions in older children and adults compared to younger participants , should weaken the inﬂuence of both perceptual similarity and common schema membership leading to fewer incorrect acceptances of TIs or incorrect rejections of PMs . 174 BLAYE ET AL . Method Participants . Only participants having produced or accepted a taxo - nomic sort in a pre - experimental session ( see procedure ) were selected for this new study . Hence 80 children from four age groups were ﬁnally involved : twenty 5 - year - olds ( mean age ¼ 4 . 11 , range ¼ 4 . 7 – 5 . 4 ) ; twenty 6 - year - olds ( mean age ¼ 5 . 10 , range ¼ 5 . 6 – 6 . 3 ) ; twenty 7 - year - olds ( mean age ¼ 6 . 11 , range ¼ 6 . 6 – 7 . 4 ) ; and twenty 10 - year - olds ( mean age ¼ 9 . 11 , range ¼ 9 . 6 – 10 . 5 ) . A sample of 20 adults ( ﬁrst - year psychology students ) also took part in this experiment . Material . The material was composed of the two sets of drawings ( M1 and M2 ) used in Experiment 1 . Each set could be sorted into two schemas or into three taxonomic categories . For each set , 24 new drawings were added : 12 TIs and 12 PMs . Among the 12 members of each group , half had been judged highly perceptually similar to members of the target categories and half presented low perceptual similarity ( see the next section ) . In each of these subsets , three candidates actually belonged to one of the two schemas organizing the initial set and three did not ( see Appendix 2 ) . Stimuli selection . The degree of perceptual similarity between the additional drawings and members of the taxonomic categories was established using judgments from 10 adults . For each of the three taxonomic categories in each set , participants were presented successively with 24 new drawings in a random order ( 12 PMs and 12 TIs ) . They were instructed ( and familiarized with two examples ) to rate perceptual similarity between the new drawing and members of each of the three taxonomic categories . A 7 - point scale was used from 1 ( weak perceptual similarity ) to 7 ( strong perceptual similarity ) . The highest score obtained for each drawing was used as its degree of perceptual similarity with existing members of the categories . Systematic comparisons between scores for intended perceptually similar drawings and their non - similar counterparts all revealed statistically signiﬁcant ( t - tests , p s 5 . 001 ) . Another group of 10 adult judges were presented successively with schematic sorts for each material set ( M1 and M2 ) . For each candidate drawing , adults were asked whether or not it was a member of one of the two schemas ( i . e . , beach or farm for M1 and circus or forest for M2 ) . No statistical analyses were conducted because there was almost no variance between participants’ responses , thus conﬁrming our preselection . Procedure . In a pre - experimental session , participants received one set of drawings ( either M1 or M2 ) . They had to sort the pictures only once ( see Experiment 1 for instructions ) . Then , if they had not produced a taxonomic FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 175 sort , they were presented with one that was introduced as having been produced by one of their peers . They were asked to examine each subset carefully in order to decide whether drawings in each set really went well together . Only participants having constructed or accepted 3 the taxonomic sort were introduced to the new drawings . They had to decide whether each new drawing could be accepted as a member of one of the three taxonomic categories . The drawings were presented in a diﬀerent random order for each participant . The instructions were : Now , I just want to know your opinion about other drawings . I will show you drawings one at a time and for each of them , you will tell me if it can go on one of these sheets . Look at each of the three groups we’ve made and tell me if the drawing goes well in one of them . OK ? What do you see on this drawing ? [ If the child did not know , he / she was given the correct name . ] What do you think about this drawing ? Does it go on one of these sheets ? Results Whereas the number of correct decisions for both TIs and PMs appear to be the most straightforward dependent variable , it is irrelevant here since it would conceal the eﬀects of perceptual similarity and schematic member - ship . Note that each of these two variables is expected to increase correct responses ( i . e . , acceptances ) on PMs and simultaneously decrease correct responses ( i . e . , refusals ) on TIs . Hence , participants’ responses were analysed in terms of the number of acceptances of the new drawings into the target taxonomic category . Acceptance was a correct response in the case of PMs and an error in the case of TIs . Whatever the age , the type of material ( M1 vs . M2 ) had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on performance and was thus not further considered in the analyses . In addition , in accordance with our predictions , adults’ representations of the target taxonomic categories correctly excluded all TIs and accepted all PMs . Hence , adults’ performance was maximal for both types of candidates and revealed no inﬂuence of perceptual similarity or schematic membership ; consequently they were not included in the following analyses . The data were subjected to a four - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with age ( 5 - , 6 - , 7 - , vs . 10 - year - olds ) as a between - subject factor and type of candidate ( TIs vs . PMs ) , schematic membership ( schematic member vs . not ) and perceptual similarity ( high vs . low ) as within - subject factors . Given that participants were presented with 24 candidate drawings , the scores for each 3 The proportions of participants having produced or accepted a taxonomic sort were similar across the four child age groups and did not signiﬁcantly relate to performance ( p 4 . 36 in all age groups ) . It was therefore not considered in the analyses . 176 BLAYE ET AL . subtype ( type of candidate 2 6 schematic membership 2 6 perceptual simi - larity 2 ) varied between 0 and 3 . A correct representation of taxonomic categories should produce acceptances of PMs and refusals of TIs . Hence , using acceptance as a dependent variable , a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the type of candidate was expected , PMs being accepted more often than TIs . In addition , this variable should interact with age . As predicted , children accepted a mean of 2 . 50 PMs and 1 . 29 TIs , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 73 . 63 ; MSE ¼ 3 . 16 , p 5 . 0001 , suggesting that the task was at least globally adequate for assessing taxonomic representa - tions . There was also a main eﬀect of age , F ( 3 , 76 ) ¼ 2 . 75 ; MSE ¼ 1 . 06 , p 5 . 05 , and a signiﬁcant interaction between age and type of candidate , F ( 3 , 76 ) ¼ 14 . 40 ; MSE ¼ 3 . 16 , p 5 . 0001 , as illustrated in Figure 2 . Figure 2 clearly shows the lack of diﬀerentiation between TIs and PMs in the younger group who accepted both types of candidates almost equally often . Planned comparisons support this analysis revealing no signiﬁcant eﬀect of type of candidates at 5 years ( p 4 . 75 ) , a strong tendency at 6 years , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 3 . 83 ; MSE ¼ 3 . 16 , p 5 . 054 , and a signiﬁcant eﬀect among 7 - and 10 - year - olds , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 41 . 56 ; MSE ¼ 3 . 16 , p 5 . 0001 and F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 71 . 35 ; MSE ¼ 3 . 16 , p 5 . 0001 , respectively . In fact , 10 - year - olds’ performance was near ceiling for both TIs and PMs , suggesting taxonomic representations similar to those of adults . Figure 2 . Mean percentages of accepted new candidate ( PMs and TIs , respectively ) as a function of age . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 177 Overall , both perceptual similarity and schematic membership had signiﬁcant eﬀects on the proportion of acceptances , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 113 . 12 ; MSE ¼ . 68 , p 5 . 0001 and F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 61 . 03 ; MSE ¼ . 46 , p 5 . 0001 , respec - tively . Candidates ( be they PMs or TIs ) that belonged to one of the schemas were accepted more often than those that did not ( M ¼ 2 . 10 and M ¼ 1 . 69 , respectively ) . At the same time , perceptually similar candidates to members of the target categories were also accepted more often than candidates with low similarity ( M ¼ 2 . 24 and M ¼ 1 . 55 ) . Perceptual similarity and schematic membership also interacted with one another , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 19 . 13 ; MSE ¼ . 55 , p 5 . 0001 , each being more inﬂuential on decisions when the other one was low or absent ( cf . Figure 3 ) . In addition , only perceptual similarity interacted with type of candidate , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 5 . 43 ; MSE ¼ . 51 , p 5 . 025 , revealing a stronger inﬂuence of similarity on decisions about TIs ( M ¼ 1 . 71 vs . M ¼ . 88 between high and low perceptual similarity candidates ) than about PMs ( M ¼ 2 . 78 vs . M ¼ 2 . 22 ) . As age interacted signiﬁcantly with perceptual similarity and schematic membership , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 4 . 16 ; MSE ¼ . 068 , p 5 . 008 and F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 8 . 88 ; MSE ¼ . 46 , p 5 . 0001 , respectively , independent ANOVAs for each age group were conducted to provide a clearer picture of the inﬂuence of these two variables across development . Appendix 3 provides graphical represen - tations of the four groups’ mean acceptance level for each type of candidates . Figure 3 . Mean number of acceptances of candidates as a function of perceptual similarity and schematic membership . 178 BLAYE ET AL . As expected , both perceptual similarity and schematic membership inﬂuenced acceptance in a highly signiﬁcant way for the two younger groups’ decisions ( all p s 5 . 0001 ) , increasing the level of acceptance of both PMs and TIs ( no signiﬁcant interaction with the type of candidate ) . Seven - and ten - year - olds were inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly by perceptual similarity only ( both p s 5 . 03 ) . Individual patterns . The inﬂuence of nontaxonomic cues on taxonomic decisions was conﬁrmed through the analysis of individual patterns of performance . A criterion of success based on two out of three correct responses for both TIs and PMs was adopted . More precisely , we contrasted responses between the two extreme conditions , those providing either no alternative criteria supporting insertions of new candidates ( low perceptual similarity and no schematic membership ) and those providing both alternative criteria ( high perceptual similarity and schematic membership ) . Figure 4 reveals that performance in one or the other condition supports two rather diﬀerent developmental stories for taxonomic performance . That is , when nontaxonomic criteria converged with the correct taxonomic responses , they suggest that taxonomic representations are already well elaborated from 5 years onwards with a majority of children succeeding in Figure 4 . Proportion of children producing at least two ( out of three ) correct insertions of PMs and two ( out of three ) correct rejections of TIs in the two extreme conditions . Note : The ‘‘lenient criterion’’ refers to the conditions in which participants can make the right decision for ‘‘wrong’’ reasons . For PMs , it corresponds to the presence of the two nontaxonomic criteria for insertion ( i . e . , high perceptual similarity and schematic membership ) . By contrast , it corresponds to low perceptual similarity and no schematic membership for TIs . The ‘‘stringent criterion’’ refers to the conditions in which children’s correct decisions had to be based exclusively on a taxonomic criterion . For PMs , it involves low perceptual similarity and no schematic membership ; for TIs , it involves high perceptual similarity and schematic membership . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 179 our decision task . No signiﬁcant development occurs between 5 and 10 . However , when these criteria conﬂicted with participants’ decisions to include new items into taxonomic categories and children had to ignore them to reject true taxonomic intruders or when perceptual or schematic relations could not be used as a basis for making decisions about PMs , taxonomic performance was at ﬂoor at 5 years and progressed very gradually until age 10 , by which time adult patterns of categorization were beginning to emerge ( w 23 ¼ 27 . 45 , p 5 . 0001 ) . Discussion The results of this experiment were consistent with the preceding study in that young children’s taxonomic representations are diﬀerent from those of adults . Whereas adults decisions were not inﬂuenced by the two nontaxo - nomic cues , young children’s representations were more fragile and appeared to be highly susceptible to schematic and perceptual similarities . Correct acceptances of members and correct refusals of intruders in the taxonomic categories were both signiﬁcantly aﬀected . Perceptual similarity and schematic membership increased signiﬁcantly the proportion of acceptances and , conversely , their absence produced the rejection of almost half of the PMs for the youngest children . The interference of schematic membership appears , however , less long - lasting than the perceptual one , aﬀecting only 5 - and 6 - year - olds’ performances while the inﬂuence of perceptual similarity was still present in 7 - and 10 - year - olds’ decisions . Such results challenge the over - optimistic view that suggests that taxonomic representations are fully developed by the end of the preschool years . The reliance on match - to - sample tasks may be responsible for this optimistic picture of taxonomic understanding in children . We suggest that too many studies examining the development of children’s taxonomic categories have not systematically controlled for the presence of other possible nontaxonomic sources of taxonomic decision making that children might use to make their judgments . The examination of the individual patterns of responses in the two most extreme conditions clearly highlights how critical these nontaxonomic criteria might be in young children’s decision making . In fact , the results of the current experiment suggest a possible way to reconcile ﬁndings from recent empirical results revealing early taxonomic responses ( e . g . , Baldwin , 1992 ; Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Fenson et al . , 1989 ) with more traditional theoretical accounts of the development of categoriza - tion ( Piaget & Inhelder , 1959 ; Nelson , 1988 ) that have both ( in their own way ) emphasized the late development of taxonomic categories . That is , young children might be able to associate pictures in ways that look like they are using taxonomic representations to do so , but their overt behaviour may not be supported by underlying stable taxonomic representations . 180 BLAYE ET AL . GENERAL DISCUSSION The ﬁrst goal of this research was to examine the developmental course of categorical ﬂexibility in children and , more speciﬁcally , to ask to what extent do response ﬂexibility and conceptual ﬂexibility overlap . A second goal was to explore the underlying representations that children use to form taxonomic groupings at diﬀerent ages . The results of both studies revealed that the development of stable superordinate taxonomic representations follows a protracted development even when taxonomic groupings can be observed very early in childhood . Speciﬁcally , ﬂexibility was assessed in Experiment 1 by asking partici - pants to sort a given set of pictures several times using diﬀerent types of conceptual organization . Data revealed signiﬁcant increases in both conceptual and response ﬂexibility across childhood . More importantly , a discrepancy was observed between the ability to organize the set of pictures in diﬀerent ways ( what we called response ﬂexibility ) and the successive activation of diﬀerent conceptual representations ( conceptual ﬂexibility between thematic , taxonomic , or slot - ﬁller representations ) in young children . The results clearly show that conceptual ﬂexibility lags behind response ﬂexibility . However , they also reveal that this discrepancy decreases across childhood and disappears by adulthood . The recent literature has emphasized the development of cognitive ﬂexibility but in such setting conditions that it missed this important diﬀerentiation between these two forms of ﬂexibility . The recent interest in cognitive ﬂexibility has been primarily focused on debates around the interpretation of children’s performance in an experimental task designed by Frye and Zelazo ( Frye , Zelazo , & Palfai , 1995 ) , the Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task ( DCCS ) . This task requires children to switch between two perceptual rules for categorizing items ( namely , shape and colour ) . Examination of this literature lets one suppose that ( a ) preschool years are a critical period for going from perseveration to ﬂexibility and ( b ) despite numerous debates , failures in executive control considered either as a default of inhibition or attentional inertia are often described as critical ( but see Jacques , Zelazo , Kirkham , & Semcesen , 1999 ) . Our data cast serious doubts on these two points . Using an inductive categorization task , in which children have to generate multiple categorization criteria , we clearly demonstrated that the path to categorical ﬂexibility does not end with the end of preschool years . This result in itself suggests that executive control probably does not tell the entire story behind the development of cognitive ﬂexibility . Investigations studying the respective contributions of executive development and conceptual under - standing in explaining ﬂexibility between semantic representations support this hypothesis ( Blaye , Jacques , Bonthoux , & Cannard , 2003 ; Blaye , Paour , Perret , 2002 ) . It is tempting to assimilate children’s lack of ﬂexibility to a FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 181 perseverative bias interpreted as attentional inertia ( Kirkham , Cruess , & Diamond , 2003 ) or insuﬃcient inhibition ( Bjorklund & Harnishfegger , 1990 ) . However , our data revealed that younger children’s inability to produce several organizations of the material did correspond to a reproduction of their ﬁrst sort ( i . e . , perseveration ) on less than one third of times , both at 5 and 6 years . Perseveration is hence not necessarily the only manifestation of lack of ﬂexibility ( Deak , 2003 ) . The focus on perseveration as the only alternative to response ﬂexibility has led Jacques et al . ( 1999 ) to draw a distinction between a diﬃculty in response control and a lack of representational ﬂexibility to account for such perseverative responses . In using an error - detection design that eliminated the need for response control , these authors showed that representational ﬂexibility is critical : young children failed to use the post - switch rules in the DCCS task because of a failure in selecting the correct pair of rules although they knew both pairs of rules . Data from our ﬁrst study suggest that in a free - sorting task , older children are able to produce ﬂexible responses but are rarely able to switch between contrasted conceptual organizations . One can wonder whether this lag could be interpreted as a diﬃculty in selecting a new organization ( as in Jacques et al . ’s study ) or as a default in knowledge of taxonomic organizations . The results of Experiment 2 support , although indirectly , the latter hypothesis by showing that the development of conceptual ﬂexibility seems to follow the same path as the conceptual development of super - ordinate taxonomic categories . In the second experiment , we examined children’s underlying taxonomic representations by giving them a decision test on the membership of new elements to taxonomic categories in order to track the progressive diﬀerentiation of taxonomic representations from thematic and perceptual ones . The nonverbal method had the advantage of assessing their implicit awareness of taxonomic category membership , a technique that should surely be able to identify their highest level of understanding . However , the data revealed that early taxonomic representations are dependent on ( and open to interference from ) perceptual similarity and schematic common membership . Clearly , taxonomic representations cannot be described in an all - or - none fashion . We agree with Lautrey ( 1998 ) who stressed the lack of interest for the exact structure of taxonomic representations in most studies . This results in an imprecise deﬁnition of children’s understanding of taxonomic categorization , which might account for disagreements in the literature concerning the age at which children master this form of conceptual organization . A view of the development of taxonomic representations in terms of levels of conceptualization seems the most adequate . Whereas 5 - and 6 - year - olds’ representations seem highly sensitive to both perceptual and schematic similarity , older children’s ones seem only inﬂuenced by perceptual similarity . This reliance on perceptual similarity is , of course , highly adaptive 182 BLAYE ET AL . because perceptual similarity often underlies deeper structural similarities between members of a common taxonomic category . However , one could argue that the decreasing inﬂuence of nontaxonomic cues on children’s taxonomic representations may correspond more to improvements in executive control , namely resistance to interference , rather than to conceptual development itself . Recent developmental literature has emphasized the important development of resistance to interference or inhibition of irrelevant information during the school - years period ( e . g . , Bjorklund & Harnishfegger , 1990 ; Dempster & Brainerd , 1995 ; Houde´ , 2000 ) . Further investigation will be needed to contrast these interpretations . In a recent experiment , however , we used two isomorphic versions of a same task to compare ﬂexibility between ‘‘same shape’’ and ‘‘same colour’’ relations and ﬂexibility between thematic and taxonomic relations ( Blaye & Paour , 2004 ) . Results revealed that ﬂexibility was achieved by more than 80 % of children at 6 years for shape and colour and only at 10 years for thematic and taxonomic relations , even though knowledge of the associa - tions between pictures was controlled . As the two versions of the task were isomorphic , these data suggest , at the very least , that the ability to resist to the interference of an irrelevant sorting criterion depends on the level of representation of the criteria at hand ( see for instance , Karmiloﬀ - Smith , 1992 , for a similar proposal of a link between levels of explicitness of representations and cognitive ﬂexibility ) . Altogether , the two studies suggest new paths for research in young children’s categorical ﬂexibility . They point to the necessity for examining the development of cognitive ﬂexibility beyond the 3 - to 5 - year - old period , which has been the period of most investigations in the recent literature . By examining categorical ﬂexibility in the context of switching between complex semantic organizations of a variety of objects , we have had the opportunity to distinguish at least two forms of ﬂexibility : response ﬂexibility , which might be based on representations not yet diﬀerentiated , and conceptual ﬂexibility based on a representational switching between conceptual organizations . A prerequisite for conceptual ﬂexibility , however , is that all possible forms of conceptual organizations ( thematic , taxonomic , slot - ﬁller ) be more equally salient in the children’s minds ( Scheuner , Bonthoux , Cannard , & Blaye , 2004 ) . Our results suggest that diﬀerentiated super - ordinate taxonomic representations may not be fully present early in development . They correspond to representations that are too weak when they are put in competition with the stronger perceptual and thematic representations ( Munakata , 2001 ; Munakata & Yeris , 2001 ) and , hence , prevent conceptual ﬂexibility being achieved . Manuscript received 30 March 2005 Revised manuscript accepted 10 October 2005 FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 183 REFERENCES Baldwin , D . A . ( 1992 ) . Clarifying the role of shape in children’s taxonomic assumption . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 54 , 392 – 416 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory and Cognition , 11 , 211 – 227 . Bauer , P . J . , & Mandler , J . M . ( 1989 ) . Taxonomies and triads : Conceptual organization in one - to two - year - olds . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 156 – 184 . Bjorklund , D . F . , & Harnishfegger , K . K . ( 1990 ) . The resources construct in cognitive development : Diverse sources of evidence and a theory of ineﬃcient inhibition . Developmental Review , 10 , 48 – 71 . Blaye , A . , Bernard - Peyron , V . , & Bonthoux , F . ( 2000 ) . Au dela ` des conduites de cate´gorisation : Le de´veloppement des repre´sentations cate´gorielles entre 5 et 9 ans . Archives de Psychologie , 68 , 59 – 82 . Blaye , A . , & Bonthoux , F . ( 2001 ) . Thematic and taxonomic relations in preschoolers : The development of ﬂexibility in categorization choices . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 19 , 395 – 412 . Blaye , A . , Jacques , S . , Bonthoux , F . , & Cannard , C . ( 2003 , August ) . Switching between thematic and taxonomic relations in preschoolers : Is there more than cognitive ﬂexibility ? Paper presented at the XIth European Conference on Developmental Psychology , Milan , Italy . Blaye , A . , & Paour , J . L . ( 2004 ) . The development of categorical ﬂexibility in childhood . An interaction between conceptual development and the development of executive control . Paper presented at the 18th Biennal conference of the International Society of Behavioral Development , Ghent , Belgium . Blaye , A . , Paour , J . L . , & Perret , P . ( 2002 ) . Categorical ﬂexibility and levels of representation in children : A developmental perspective . Paper presented at the British Psychological Society Developmental Section Conference , Brighton , UK . Deak , G . O . ( 2000 ) . The growthofﬂexible problemsolving : Preschool childrenuse changingverbal cues to infer multiple word meanings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 157 – 191 . Deak , G . O . ( 2003 ) . The development of cognitive ﬂexibility and language abilities . In R . Vasta & R . Kail ( Eds . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 31 pp . 271 – 327 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Deak , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Pick , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Eﬀects of age , reminders , and task diﬃculty on young children’s rule - switching ﬂexibility . Cognitive Development , 19 , 385 – 400 . Dempster , F . N . , & Brainerd , C . J . ( 1995 ) . Interference and inhibition in cognition . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Dunham , P . , & Dunham , F . ( 1995 ) . Developmental antecedents of taxonomic and thematic strategies at 3 years of age . Developmental Psychology , 3 , 483 – 493 . Fenson , L . , Cameron , L . S . , & Kennedy , M . ( 1988 ) . Role of perceptual and conceptual similarity in category matching at age two years . Child Development , 59 , 897 – 907 . Fenson , L . , Vella , D . , & Kennedy , M . ( 1989 ) . Children’s knowledge of thematic and taxonomic relations at two years of age . Child Development , 60 , 911 – 919 . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 , 483 – 527 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 1999 ) . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Development , 14 , 487 – 513 . Greenﬁeld , D . B . , & Scott , M . S . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s preference for complementary pairs : Evidence against a shift to a taxonomic preference . Developmental Psychology , 22 , 19 – 21 . Gutheil , G . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1997 ) . Children’s use of sample size and diversity information within basic - level categories . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 64 , 159 – 174 . Houde´ , O . ( 2000 ) . Inhibition and cognitive development . Cognitive Development , 15 , 63 – 73 . 184 BLAYE ET AL . Houde´ , O . , & Milhet , S . ( 1997 ) . Polymorphisme de la cate´gorisation chez le be´be´ de douze a ` dix - huit mois : Contiguı¨te´ et substituabilite´ . Archives de Psychologie , 65 , 273 – 278 . Jacques , S . , Zelazo , P . D . , Kirkham , N . Z . , & Semcesen , T . K . ( 1999 ) . Rule selection versus rule execution in preschoolers : An error detection approach . Developmental Psychology , 35 , 770 – 780 . Karmiloﬀ - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) . Beyond modularity : A developmental perspective on cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kirkham , N . Z . , Cruess , L . , & Diamond , A . ( 2003 ) . Helping children apply their knowledge to their behavior on a dimension - switching task . Developmental Science , 6 , 449 – 476 . Lautrey , J . ( 1998 ) . La cate´gorisation apre ` s Piaget . In C . Meljac & R . Voyazopoulos ( Eds . ) , Piaget apre ` s Piaget . Grenoble : La pense´e sauvage . Lucariello , J . , Kyratzis , A . , & Nelson , K . ( 1992 ) . Taxonomic knowledge : What kind and when ? Child Development , 63 , 978 – 998 . Lucariello , J . , & Nelson , K . ( 1985 ) . Slot - ﬁller cate´gories as memory organizers for young children . Developmental Psychology , 21 , 272 – 282 . Lin , E . L . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Thematic relations in adults’ concepts . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 3 – 28 . Mandler , J . M . ( 1984 ) . Stories , scripts andscenes . Hillsdale , NJ : LawrenceErlbaumAssociates , Inc . Mandler , J . M . ( 1993 ) . On concepts . Cognitive Development , 8 , 141 – 148 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Perceptual and conceptual processes in infancy . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 3 – 36 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2003 ) . Conceptual categorization . In D . H . Rakison & L . M . Oakes ( Eds . ) , Early category and concept development . Making sense of the blooming buzzing confusion ( pp . 103 – 131 ) . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Mareschal , D . , French , R . M . , & Quinn , P . C . ( 2000 ) . A connectionist account of asymmetric category learning in early infancy . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 635 – 645 . Markman , E . M . , & Hutchinson , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Children’s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning : Taxonomic vs . thematic relations . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 1 – 27 . Melkman , R . , Tversky , B . , & Baratz , D . ( 1981 ) . Developmental trends in the use of perceptual and conceptual attributes in grouping , clustering , and retrieval . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 31 , 470 – 486 . Melot , A . M . , & Houde´ , O . ( 1998 ) . Categorization and theories of mind : The case of the appearance / reality distinction . Current Psychology of Cognition , 17 , 71 – 93 . Munakata , Y . ( 2001 ) . Graded representations in behavioral dissociations . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 5 , 309 – 315 . Munakata , Y . , & Yeris , E . ( 2001 ) . All together now : When dissociations between knowledge and action disappear . Psychological Science , 12 , 335 – 337 . Murphy , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Causes of taxonomic sorting by adults : A test of the thematic - to - taxonomic shift . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 8 , 814 – 839 . Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Makingasilkpurseoutoftwosow’sears : Youngchildren’suse of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 131 , 5 – 15 . Nelson , K . ( 1983 ) . The derivation of concepts and categories from event representations . In E . K . Scholnick ( Ed . ) , New trends in conceptual representations : Challenges to Piaget’s theory ? ( pp . 129 – 149 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Nelson , K . ( 1986 ) . Event knowledge : Structure and function in development . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Nelson , K . ( 1988 ) . Where do taxonomic categories come from ? Human Development , 31 , 3 – 10 . Nguyen , S . P . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2003 ) . An apple is more than just a fruit : Cross - classiﬁcation in children’s concepts . Child Development , 74 , 1783 – 1806 . Piaget , J . , & Inhelder , B . ( 1959 ) . La gene ` se des structures logiques e´le´mentaires . Neuchaˆtel : Delachaux et Niestle´ . FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 185 Quinn , P . C . , & Eimas , P . D . ( 1996 ) . Perceptual cues that permit categorical diﬀerentiation of animal species by infants . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 63 , 189 – 211 . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . D . , Johnson , D . M . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 382 – 439 . Ross , B . H . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1999 ) . Food for thought : Cross - classiﬁcation and category organization in a complex real - world domain . Cognitive Psychology , 38 , 495 – 553 . Scheuner , N . , Bonthoux , F . , Cannard , C . , & Blaye , A . ( 2004 ) . The role of associative strengths and conceptual relations in 4 - and 6 - year - olds children . International Journal of Psychology , 39 ( 4 ) , 290 – 304 . Sell , M . A . ( 1992 ) . The development of children’s knowledge structures : Events , slots , and taxonomies . Journal of Child Language , 19 , 659 – 676 . Smiley , S . A . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1979 ) . Conceptual preference for thematic or taxonomic relations : A nonmonotonic age trend from preschool to old age . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 28 , 249 – 257 . Tversky , B . ( 1985 ) . Development of taxonomic organization of named and pictured categories . Developmental Psychology , 21 , 1111 – 1119 . Valle´e - Tourangeau , F . , Anthony , S . H . , & Austin , N . G . ( 1998 ) . Strategies for generating multiple instances of common and ad hoc categories . Memory , 6 , 555 – 592 . Walsh , M . , Richardson , K . , & Faulkner , D . ( 1993 ) . Perceptual , thematic and taxonomic relations in children’s mental representations : Responses to triads . European Journal of Psychology of Education , 8 , 85 – 102 . Waxman , S . R . , & Namy , L . R . ( 1997 ) . Challenging the notion of a thematic preference in young children . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 555 – 567 . APPENDIX 1 Description of the material used in Experiment 1 and ﬁrst phase of Experiment 2 M1 : People Animals Vehicles Beach Girl in a swimming costume Crab Boat Woman in a swimming costume Dolphin Canoe Diver Fish Windsurf Farm Farmer Cow Cattle dray Woman farmer Sheep Tractor Boy farmer Chicken Hay dray M2 : People Animals Tools Circus Clown Elephant Skittle Juggler Lion Whip Tamer Horse Bike Forest Woodcutter Rabbit Power saw Walker Owl Wood saw Girl with walking shoes Squirrel Axe 186 BLAYE ET AL . Description of the candidate drawings offered to be inserted into the taxonomic sort Schematic member No schematic member Potential members High percept . sim . Low percept . sim . High percept . sim . Low percept . sim . M1 : animals / people / vehicles ( beach / farm ) Horse Seagull Tiger Monkey Boy in a swimming costume Diver Dancer Clown Milk van Pedal boat Ambulance Plane M2 : animals / people / tools ( circus / forest ) Tiger Butterﬂy Cow Fish Little Red Riding Hood Contortionist Mechanic Diver Circus bike Lions’ block Shovel Stethoscope Schematic member No schematic member True intruders High percept . sim . Low percept . sim . High percept . sim . Low percept . sim . M1 : Scarecrow Beach pail Rockinghorse String of pearls Duck - shaped rubber ring Cherry tree Doll Stethoscope Lorry - shaped mould for sand pie Beach towel Helping walk dray Banana M2 : Puppet Tent ( circus ) Teddy bear City bus Wild ﬂower Tree Scarecrow Dressing gown Road sign ( take care deer crossing ) Mushroom Ladle Book APPENDIX 2 FLEXIBILITY AND TAXONOMIC REPRESENTATIONS 187 A PPE N D I X 3 M ea n sc o r e o f a cc e p t a n c e o f c a nd i d a t e d r a w i ng s i n t h e t ax ono m i c c a t e go r i e s ( m ax i m u m ¼ 3 ) F i ve - y e a r - o l d s S i x - y e a r - o l d s P o t e n t i a l m e m b e rs T r u e i n t r ud e rs P o t e n t i a l m e m b e rs T r u e i n t r ud e rs S eve n - y e a r - o l d s T e n - y e a r - o l d s P o t e n t i a l m e m b e rs T r u e i n t r ud e rs P o t e n t i a l m e m b e rs T r u e i n t r ud e rs K e y : —— s c h e m a t i c m e m b e rs h i p ; - - - - - - - no s c h e m a t i c m e m b e rs h i p . 188