This article was downloaded by : [ UOV University of Oviedo ] On : 30 October 2014 , At : 04 : 11 Publisher : Taylor & Francis Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Technometrics Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / utch20 The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach Marvin H . J Gruber a a Rochester Institute of Technology Published online : 01 Jan 2012 . To cite this article : Marvin H . J Gruber ( 2002 ) The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach , Technometrics , 44 : 3 , 292 - 293 , DOI : 10 . 1198 / 004017002320256503 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1198 / 004017002320256503 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions 292 BOOK REVIEWS industry . It seems that Bayesian methodology has only recently been making inroads into the industrial realm of statistics and data analysis . Lately I have noticed an increase in articles using Bayesian methods appearing in journals like Technometrics and The Journal of Quality Technology . Most practitioners of statistics that Iknow personally have very little experience with these meth - ods . Nonetheless , many problems that commonly arise in industry , such as dealing with measurement error , missing data , design of experiments involv - ing prior knowledge , and uncertainty in regression coef(cid:142) cients , can be better approached from a Bayesian perspective . Because applying Bayesian methods can be dif(cid:142) cult in many real world situations , having software available to perform the computations is a real bene(cid:142) t . A major step toward ful(cid:142)lling this need is the BUGS software , and this book is an invaluable guide to its usage . Therefore , I would recommend this book to any industrial statistician as a good starting point for learning about Bayesian methodologyand also to those already familiar with Bayesian techniques as a helpful guide to developing pro(cid:142)ciency in using BUGS . To obtain the maximum bene(cid:142)t from this book , it is necessary to obtain install , and learn to use the BUGS software . This will enable the reader to run the approximately 200 examples provided by the author . All of the examples in the book are available via ftp at ftp : / / www . wiley . co . uk / pub / books / congdon . Installing and running the example programs should not be particularly dif - (cid:142) cult for anyone with even moderate computer skills . What may be more “challenging , ” however , is creating a new model that cannot be patterned after those provided . Assistance is available for those who attempt to do so in the form of an Internet discussion group devoted to the BUGS software . The BUGS website , maintained jointly by the MRC Biostatistics Unit in Cambridge and Imperial College School of Medicine at St . Mary’s , London , contains information on these matters . I would highly recommended that the reader visit this site . Some minor cosmetic problems were evident in the copy of the book that I reviewed . In Chapter 3 there is a gap in the numbering of the sections ; that is , Section 3 . 3 is missing , and Subsection 3 . 3 . 3 follows immediately after 3 . 2 . 2 . Also , in the reference section many of the citations are entered more than once ; for example , Carlin and Louis’s Bayes and Empirical Bayes Methods for Data Analysis appears three times . Stephen J . G anocy Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company REFERENCES Carlin , B . P . , and Louis , T . A . ( 1997 ) , Bayes and Empirical Bayes Methods for Data Analysis , London : Chapman and Hall . Gelman , A . , Carlin , J . B . , Stern , H . S . , and Rubin , D . B . ( 1995 ) , Bayesian Data Analysis , London : Chapman and Hall . The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach , by S . James P ress and Judith M . T anur , New York : Wiley , 2001 , IBSN 0 - 471 - 39685 - 0 , x C 274 pp . , $ 79 . 95 . Scientists often rely on intuition , hunches , and personal beliefs to make sense of empirical data . Press and Tanur show how 17 famous scientists used subjectivity to guide them in coming to their conclusions . They explain how probability—in particular , Bayes’ theorem—could have helped these scientists with their work . The book comprises (cid:142) ve chapters . Chapter 1 discusses how scientists might arrive at conclusions subjectively . Chapter 2 explains how the 12 scientists whose brief biographies are contained in Chapter 4 were chosen . Chapter 3 recounts some well - known stories of extreme subjectivity by (cid:142) ve scientists . According to the authors , these scientists “overstepped the bounds of what is considered acceptable scienti(cid:142) c practice in their zeal to rush to scienti(cid:142) c conclusions and have their work accepted by their peers . ” The (cid:142) nal , more technical chapter contains Bayes’ theorem and a discussion of how the scien - tists could have bene(cid:142) ted from its use . In Chapter 1 the authors explain what is meant by subjectivity and objec - tivity . Subjectivity means intuition , belief , and understanding about some hypothesis before collection of data or information . In contrast , objectivity means that a hypothesis is accepted or abandoned depending on whether or not the data support it . The 12 scientists chosen for study in Chapter 4 include Aristotle , Galileo Galilei , William Harvey , Sir Issac Newton , Antoine Lavoisier , Alexander Von Humboldt , Michael Faraday , Charles Darwin , Louis Pasteur , Sigmund Freud , Marie Curie , and Albert Einstein . These scientists were chosen because they were studied by Meadows ( 1987 ) . This book contains brief biographies of the scientists and explanations about the state of scienti(cid:142) c investigation during the time that they lived . The authors state that they chose the scientists studied by Meadows for the following reasons : 1 . A dozen of the most famous scientists in history were treated . 2 . The book is not a dictionary or encyclopedia and is relatively recent . 3 . The selection of scientists is diverse with respect to scienti(cid:142) c (cid:142) eld , nationality , and time period . 4 . The same amount of space was devoted to each of the 12 scientists . However , there is no discussion of Meadow’s reputation or quali(cid:142)cations as a historian of science . Chapters 3 and 4 include a brief biography of each scientist , including important professional accomplishments and a discussion of how subjectivity was used in each case to arrive at conclusions . The (cid:142) ve scientists studied in Chapter 3 are Johannes Kepler , Gre - gor Mendel , Robert Millikan , Cyril Burt , and Margaret Mead . It is claimed that these scientists overstepped their bounds by “fudging” data or not collecting enough of it . For example , citing Donahue ( 1988 ) , Press and Tanur point out that the numbers used to prove that the planet Mars has an elliptical orbit were computed by Kepler himself . The numbers were then fabricated to look like experimental data . The reviewer does not believe that Kepler knew enough about randomness to do this well . This kind of “fudging” would be easy today using computer simulation . Millikan , when reporting his results about the charge of an electron , used an average of the values he and other scientists had previously obtained . Margaret Mead claimed that adolescents growing up in Samoa were subjected to less stress than those growing up in the United States . The authors note that according to Freeman ( 1983 ) , her conclusions were not based on a proper probability sample . Moreover , Freeman claims that Mead manipulated the data to support her conclusions . A number of interesting examples of the use of subjectivity are given in Chapter 4 . Here are a few of them . William Harvey concluded that blood passes from arteries to veins without being able to physically see it . Newton often made claims that were not justi(cid:142)ed by empirical evidence ; one was that sound was not propagated through water vapor . Von Humboldt had a strong prior belief that rocks were precipitated out of the actions of oceans and rivers . Later , based on observation , he abandoned this view in favor of rocks being due to the action of volcanoes . A major source of informal subjectivity for Faraday was the religion of Sandemainism . Pasteur arrived at conclusions by understanding the underlying science rather than by con(cid:142)rming experiments . Curie was very tenacious about her scienti(cid:142) c beliefs whether they were correct or not . She did not realize that elements could be transmuted to elements with a lower atomic weight by radioactivity . Einstein often arrived at his results by the use of “thought experiments . ” Often there are two or more competing theories for the results of an inves - tigation . Chapter 4 concludes with some examples of how probability might have helped scientists decide between competing theories . For instance , a probability calculation could have helped Newton decide whether the par - ticle or wave theory of light was preferable ; De Broglie ( 1923 ) explained how both theories have their place . Darwin could have used probability to compare the likelihood of evolution versus . creationism , and Einstein could have used posterior odds ratios to compare competing theories of physics . The methodologies used by Aristotle and Freud do not lend themselves to statistical analysis . Chapter 5 explains the modern approach to subjectivity . First , it gives an informal discussion of probability and Bayes’ theorem . The long - range fre - quency de(cid:142) nition of probability and subjective probability are taken up . The mathematical formulationis then presented , with examples from medical diag - nosis , physics , and biology . Although the examples are somewhat arti(cid:142) cial , they give a good indication of how Bayes’ theorem can be used to combine subjective information with hard data to support conclusions . There is a list of references on Bayesian methods with good entry points to the literature . The book is carefully researched . Statements about subjectivity on the part of the scientists are backed up by appropriate references . The bibliographies contain many good references about the life , work , and times of the scientists . The mathematics in the last chapter is well within the reach of the scienti(cid:142) c community and the well - educated lay person . While criticizing the scientists , TECHNOMETRICS , AUGUST 2002 , VOL . 44 , NO . 3 D o w n l o a d e d by [ UOV U n i v e r s it y o f O v i e do ] a t 04 : 11 30 O c t ob e r 2014 BOOK REVIEWS 293 Press and Tanur do attempt to be “fair . ” For example , they note that some of Aristotle’s mistakes were due to a lack of proper scienti(cid:142) c instruments , and explain that Mendel often came to biased conclusions because today’s safeguards against experimental bias were not available . Perhaps the book would have been more accessible to the general reader if the informal discussion of Bayes’ theorem had been placed earlier in the book than the last chapter . Empirical Bayes methods that allow inferences to be made with incomplete prior information are not mentioned . Other complaints are minor . On p . 114 it is pointed out that Von Humbolt pioneered the practical use of guano , but it is not stated that guano is bat or bird excrement . On p . 177 dyslexic is misspelled . In summary , The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach rep - resents a valuable contribution to the history of ideas . Anyone interested in statistics or the history and philosophy of science can pro(cid:142) t from it . Marvin H . J . G ruber Rochester Institute of Technology REFERENCES De Broglie , L . ( 1923 ) , “Radiation – Waves and Quanta , ” Comptes Rendus , 177 , 505 – 510 . Donahue , W . H . ( 1988 ) , “Kepler’s Fabricated Figures : Covering Up the Mess in the New Astronomy , ” Journal for the History of Astronomy , 19 , 216 – 237 . Freeman , D . ( 1983 ) , Margaret Mead and Samoa : The Making and Unmaking of an Anthropological Myth , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Meadows Jack ( 1987 ) , The Great Scientists , New York : Oxford University Press . Workshop Statistics : Discovery With Data , A Bayesian Approach , by James H . A lbert and Allan J R ossman , Emeryville , CA : Key College Publishing 2001 , ISBN 1 - 930190 - 12 - 3 , xxxv + 532 pp . , $ 49 . 95 . This new book in the Workshop Statistics series presents introductorystatis - tics in a Bayesian framework . The approach emphasizes introductory data analysis and inference through a series of activities involving data collec - tion , manipulation , analysis , and interpretation and provides students with the opportunity to explore ideas and discover results with minimal in(cid:143)uence of the instructor . The role of the instructor is mainly as that of a facilitator , and the authors suggest using ‘mini - lectures’ to introduce the various ‘topics’ . There are some considerations in adopting this text ; namely , the appropri - ateness of active learning in the context of the course , a relatively nontechnical approach , and a Bayesian perspective of statistical inference . Given these goals , this text is an excellent choice . The book by Berry ( 1996 ) is a more technical Bayesian introductory text . Teaching introductory statistics from a Bayesian perspective is worth seri - ous consideration given the range of areas in which Bayesian analysis is now applied . In the Preface , the authors describe some of the simpli(cid:142) cations in interpretation available within a Bayesian framework and emphasize that these interpretations seem more natural to students . The (cid:142) rst half of the text resembles frequentist versions of Workshop Statistics , dealing mainly with exploratory data analysis . The (cid:142) rst (cid:142) ve topics provide an introduction to types of variables , descriptive statistics , and graphical methods . The next four cover descriptions of relationships between variables , namely association . Graph - ical methods such as scatterplots are introduced in topic 6 , the correlation coef(cid:142) cient in topic 7 , and linear regression in topic 8 . Topic 9 deals with relationships between categorical variables , using primarily segmented bar graphs . Again , no inference is involved , with the emphasis on using these measures for exploratory purposes . Although these are good chapters , one of their shortcomings is that the last three topics are introduced merely as descriptive tools and are not mentioned later in the inferential sections of the book . Linear regression is one of the main techniques familiar to most nonstatisticians who analyze data , and even a brief description of Bayesian inference in the context of linear regression would have been useful . The ideas of sampling and data collection , and the terminology associated with statistical modeling , are presented in topic 10 , whereas topics 11 – 14 provide an introduction to probability and distributions . A section in topic 11 often included in a classical introductory text , but with less emphasis than in this text , is on determination of personal probabilities . This is an excellent section in which students learn to elicit prior information very naturally . A set of activities from these topics ( activities 11 - 10 and 12 - 12 on eliciting prior probabilities about ‘tomorrow’s temperature’ and checking for consistency with basic probability rules ) were used in an introductory class by one of us ( Greenwood ) and found to be very effective . Topic 13 describes basic prob - ability distributions , and topic 14 introduces independence and conditional probabilitiesvia two - way probabilitytables . Through the (cid:142) rst 14 topics , a fea - ture distinguishingthis text from most other introductory texts is the emphasis on prior probabilities . The heart of the ‘Bayesian’ content of the book lies in topics 15 – 21 . Topic 15 introduces Bayesian modeling , Bayes’ rule , and the concepts of prior probabilities , likelihoods , and posterior probabilities through various activities . Computations are kept simple by using models with only a handful of events . Topics 16 and 17 present inference for a proportion . In 16 , a discrete prior is used and probability intervals for summarizing posterior information are introduced . In 17 , a beta prior is used in conjunction with a Bernoulli likelihood , resulting in a beta posterior . Again , calculations for the distribution are presented in a simple fashion , so students need only know how to pick the two parameters for the beta prior , and then count the number of successes and failures for the likelihood , to obtain the appropriate posterior probability intervals and percentiles . Topics 18 and 19 introduce inference for a mean using a normal likelihood with a discrete prior in 18 and continuous priors ( uniform and normal ) in 19 . Students now familiar with the use of Bayes’ rule need only change the form of the prior , likelihood , and the resulting posterior to obtain posterior intervals . The last two topics discuss designing experiments and conducting inference about two proportions . Although beta posteriors are obtained for the proportions , the posterior distribution for the difference needs to be simulated . This is the most complicated inferential procedure presented in the text . Each topic is accompanied by several activities , (cid:142) ve or six of which are to be used in class and the rest for homework . Many of these activities require that students collect data or elicit subjective prior information ; others use real or simulated datasets . Except for a couple ( e . g . , the familiar space shuttle O - ring failures ) , most of the datasets would not be encountered in the physical , chemical , or engineering sciences . Most of the data are somewhat of ‘popular’ interest ( e . g . , voting behavior in elections , employment rates for women ) and do not require knowledge from any speci(cid:142) c discipline . The text is written to be relatively free of a computer package , although Minitab output is presented . For computationally intensive Bayesian topics , a set of Minitab macros are available on the authors’ website . These macros are effective in providing the required computations for inference in topics 16 – 19 and 21 , yielding both numerical results and graphical descriptions under the different situations . These allow students to interact with different priors and data and help them gain an understanding of the models . Unfortunately , probability intervals are not always an explicit part of the macros . In addition , Javascript programs are available and provide web - based access to programs that are similar to the Minitab macros , along with additional activities for topics 13 and 15 . The interaction with these programs is often easier than with Minitab , but with less (cid:143) exibility and output available . Some additional materials available on the website may prove helpful to instructors . These include a gooddiscussion of ‘Why Bayesian ? ’ and solutions to some activities . However , there is no guide for instructors that steps through the text and provides help with activities and sections , although such guides are available for other Workshop Statistics books . Overall , this is a welcome addition to the books available for teaching introductory courses from a Bayesian perspective , especially while teaching to a general audience . Finally , as with all of the Workshop Statistics texts , this activity - based approach to teaching introductory statistics will work best with small groups of students . Snehalata V . H uzurbazar Mark C . G reenwood University of Wyoming REFERENCE Berry , D . ( 1996 ) , Statistics : A Bayesian Perspective . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth . TECHNOMETRICS , AUGUST 2002 , VOL . 44 , NO . 3 D o w n l o a d e d by [ UOV U n i v e r s it y o f O v i e do ] a t 04 : 11 30 O c t ob e r 2014