Introduction Leishmania are protozoan parasites that cause several human diseases called leishmaniases , which can display very different clinical aspects ( Peters and Killick - Kendrick , 1987b ) . The life cycle of Leishmania involves two kinds of hosts : dipteran insects ( sandﬂies ) and several mammals , in which they adopt a motile , ﬂagellated , promastigote form and a non - motile , amastigote form with a very short ﬂagellum , respectively ( Peters and Killick - Kendrick , 1987a ) . The promastigotes colonize the lumen of the digestive tract of sandﬂies , where they multiply and differentiate into metacyclic promastigotes , which are infectious for mammals ( Sacks , 1989 ) . Metacyclic 2303 Protozoan parasites Leishmania alternate between a ﬂagellated promastigote form and an amastigote form . In their mammalian hosts , Leishmania survive and multiply in macrophages . Both forms can be internalized by these host cells at different stages of the infectious process and eventually establish themselves within parasitophorous vacuoles exhibiting phagolysosomal properties . To determine whether the biogenesis of these organelles differs according to the parasitic stage used to initiate infection , we compared their formation kinetics after phagocytosis of either metacyclic promastigotes or amastigotes of L . amazonensis or of L . major by mouse bone - marrow - derived macrophages pre - exposed or not to IFN - g . After 10 minutes of contact , an accumulation of F - actin was observed around the promastigotes and amatigotes undergoing phagocytosis or those that had already been internalized . This accumulation was transient and rapidly disappeared at later times . At 30 minutes , most of the promastigotes were located in long , narrow organelles that were exactly the same shape as the parasites . The latter were elongated with their cell bodies near to the macrophage nucleus and their ﬂagella towards the periphery . This suggests that promastigote phagocytosis mainly occurs in a polarized manner , with the cell body entering the macrophages ﬁrst . Most , if not all , of the phagocytosed promastigotes were located in organelles that rapidly acquired phagolysosomal properties . At 30 minutes , lamp - 1 , macrosialin , cathepsins B and D were detected in 70 - 98 % of these compartments and about 70 % of them were surrounded by rab7p . These late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ were recruited through fusion with late endocytic compartments . Indeed , when late endosomes / lysosomes were loaded with ﬂuorescein dextran , 81 - 98 % of the promastigote - harbouring compartments contained the endocytic tracer 30 minutes after infection . Electron microscopy of infected macrophages previously loaded with peroxidase conﬁrmed that the phagosomes rapidly fused with late endocytic compartments . When the amastigote stage of L . amazonensis was used to initiate infection , the kinetics of acquisition of the different late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ by the phagosomes were similar to those measured after infection with metacyclics . However , more rab7p + - phagosomes were observed at early time points ( e . g . 90 % were rab7p + at 30 minutes ) . The early endosome ‘markers’ , EEA1 and the transferrin receptor , were hardly detected in parasite - containing compartments regardless of the parasitic stage used to infect macrophages and the time after infection . In conclusion , both metacyclic - and amastigote - containing phagosomes fuse with late endosomes / lysosomes within 30 minutes . However , with L . amazonensis , the time required for the formation of the huge parasitophorous vacuoles , which are characteristic of this species , was much shorter after infection with amastigotes than after infection with metacyclic promastigotes . This indicates that the initial fusions with late endosomes / lysosomes are followed by a stage - speciﬁc sequence of events . Movies available on - line Key words : Leishmania , Promastigote , Amastigote , Macrophage , Phagosome , Phagolysosome , Parasitophorous vacuole Summary Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring parasitophorous vacuoles following phagocytosis of the metacyclic promastigote or amastigote stages of the parasites Nathalie Courret 1 , Claude Fréhel 2 , Nelly Gouhier 3 , Marcel Pouchelet 3 , Eric Prina 1 , Pascal Roux 4 and Jean - Claude Antoine 1 , * 1 Unité d’Immunophysiologie et Parasitisme Intracellulaire , Institut Pasteur , 25 rue du Docteur Roux , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France 2 INSERM U411 , UFR de Médecine Necker - Enfants Malades , Paris , France 3 Laboratoire de Cinémicrographie INSERM , Le Vésinet , France 4 Unité de Biologie des Interactions Cellulaires , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : jantoine @ pasteur . fr ) Accepted 14 March 2002 Journal of Cell Science 115 , 2303 - 2316 ( 2002 ) ©TheCompanyofBiologistsLtd Research Article 2304 promastigotes are inoculated into the dermis of mammals during the bloodmeal of infected sandﬂies . They are then phagocytosed by macrophages where they transform into amastigotes within membrane - bound organelles of the endocytic pathway progressively acquiring late endosomal / lysosomal characteristics . This differentiation process starts in the hours following phagocytosis and takes at least 5 days ( Galvao - Quintao et al . , 1990 ; Courret et al . , 2001 ) . Amastigotes are the disseminating form in mammals and it is commonly admitted that , after their release from infected macrophages , they can be phagocytosed by adjacent macrophages . The morphologies of mature parasite - harbouring compartments , known as parasitophorous vacuoles ( PVs ) , vary depending upon the Leishmania species . Large communal PVs ( L . amazonensis , L . mexicana ) and tight individual PVs ( L . major , L . donovani ) have been identiﬁed . In spite of their very different aspects , they share some properties and features ( for a review , see Antoine et al . , 1998 ) . PVs are acidic compartments containing certain lysosomal enzymes . They are surrounded by a membrane enriched with late endosomal / lysosomal proteins , such as rab7p , macrosialin , lamp - 1 , lamp - 2 and vacuolar H + - ATPase , and with molecules of the antigen - presentation machinery ( MHC class II and H - 2M molecules ) in IFN - g - treated macrophages . Compared with our knowledge of the events following internalization of inert particles such as latex beads ( for reviews , see Desjardins , 1995 ; Garin et al . , 2001 ) , the biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring PVs is still poorly understood . However , it has been recently described that the formation of PVs occurs differently according to the stage of the parasites internalized , at least in terms of kinetics ( Desjardins and Descoteaux , 1997 ; Dermine et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , it has been shown that , after the phagocytosis of cultured stationary phase L . donovani promastigotes by the macrophage - like cells J774 , the parasites are transiently located in phagosomes with poor fusogenic properties towards late endocytic compartments ( Desjardins and Descoteaux , 1997 ) . In contrast , after their internalization , amastigotes are found in compartments that rapidly fuse with late endocytic organelles ( Lang et al . , 1994b ; Dermine et al . , 2000 ) . These distinctive features of the early phagosomes could be linked to the stage - speciﬁc expression of a high molecular weight glycolipid , the lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) , on the plasma membrane of the promastigotes , which may modify the fusion capacity of the phagosomal membrane , at least temporarily . ( Desjardins and Descoteaux , 1997 ; Scianimanico et al . , 1999 ; Dermine et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , it has been shown in these studies that most of the phagosomes containing LPG - bearing promastigotes display an impaired recruitment of the small GTPase rab7p , which is involved in the homotypic fusions of late endosomes or lysosomes and in the heterotypic fusions of late endosomes with lysosomes ( Scianimanico et al . , 1999 ) . A long - lasting ( more than 1 hour ) accumulation of ﬁlamentous ( F ) actin has also been noted around these phagosomes ( Holm et al . , 2001 ) . It is suspected that these anomalies reﬂect the transient lack of phagosome maturation or are involved in the maintenance of this property . This fusion restriction lasts several hours , which may allow the parasites to initiate their differentiation into amastigotes , which are more adapted to the lysosomal compartment . Such a proposal is consistent with the fact that L . major promastigotes that are unable to synthesize LPG survive poorly within mouse peritoneal macrophages ( Späth et al . , 2000 ) . The generality of this model was recently questioned by a study showing that stationary phase LPG - deﬁcient L . mexicana promastigotes bind to and multiply within mouse peritoneal macrophages as efficiently as , or even more efficiently than , wild - type promastigotes . This indicates that , at least for this Leishmania species , LPG is not a determining factor for the differentiation of promastigotes into amastigotes ( Ilg , 2000 ) . Consequently , the biological role of the transient restriction of fusion described for phagosomes containing L . major or L . donovani is not obvious , but it suggests that each Leishmania species has developed its own establishment strategy for mammalian macrophages ( Turco et al . , 2001 ) . We used different parasite - host cell combinations to study the maturation of Leishmania phagosomes . Previous studies on this topic were carried out on unselected and thus heterogeneous ( especially in terms of virulence ) stationary phase promastigotes . In contrast , we mainly focused on the early events following the phagocytosis of metacyclic promastigotes , which are pre - adapted to the encounter with mammals , in particular to intracellular conditions . We used immunoﬂuorescence confocal microscopy and quantitative analyses to determine whether the kinetics of association of late endosomal / lysosomal molecules to Leishmania - harbouring phagosomes varies according to the Leishmania species or the parasitic stage put into contact with the macrophages . We examined the association with phagosomes of the following molecules : the TfR , which , at steady state , is localized in early sorting and recycling endosomes ( for a review , see Gruenberg and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) ; EEA1 , a rab5p effector that is mainly detected on the cytosolic side of early endosomes ( Mu et al . , 1995 ) ; rab7p , which appears to control the aggregation and fusion of late endocytic structures / lysosomes ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ; Bucci et al . , 2000 ) ; macrosialin , a macrophage - speciﬁc membrane glycoprotein belonging to the lamp family and mainly expressed in late endosomes ( Rabinowitz et al . , 1992 ; Holness et al . , 1993 ) ; lamp - 1 , a major protein constituent of late endosomal and lysosomal membrane ( for a review , see Hunzinker and Geuze , 1996 ) ; cathepsins B and D , two acid hydrolases mainly concentrated in macrophage lysosomes ( Rodman et al . , 1990 ; Claus et al . , 1998 ) ; and MHC class II molecules , which are localized within antigen - presenting cells , in compartments called MIIC that have all of the characteristics of the late endosomes or lysosomes ( for a review , see Geuze , 1998 ) . We conclude that young phagosomes containing L . amazonensis promastigotes or amastigotes or L . major promastigotes rapidly acquire a competence to fuse with late endosomes / lysosomes . Materials and Methods Mice and parasites Two - to four - month - old female BALB / c and Swiss nu / nu mice were obtained from the breeding center of the Institut Pasteur ( Paris , France ) and Iffa Credo ( St Germain - sur - l’Arbresle , France ) , respectively . Amastigotes of L . amazonensis strain LV79 ( MPRO / BR / 1972 / M1841 ) and of L . major strain NIH173 ( MHOM / IR / - / 173 ) were puriﬁed from the feet of infected nude mice as described previously Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) 2305 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles ( Antoine et al . , 1989 ) . Metacyclic promastigotes of these two Leishmania strains were obtained from amastigotes cultured at 26°C ( Courret et al . , 1999 ) . They were puriﬁed by negative selection using the peanut agglutinin ( NIH173 ) ( Vector Laboratories , Burlingame , CA ) or the monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) 3A1 ( LV79 ) ( Sacks et al . , 1985 ; Courret et al . , 1999 ) . L . amazonensis stationary phase promastigotes submitted to the same cycle of washings and centrifugations as metacyclic promastigotes during their puriﬁcation , but not incubated with the mAb 3A1 , were also prepared . Macrophage infections Macrophages were obtained from BALB / c mice by in vitro differentiation of bone marrow precursor cells in 24 - well plates containing 12 mm diameter round glass coverslips for light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy studies , or in 35 mm culture dishes for transmission electron microscopy studies . For microcinematography , precursors were deposited in 60 mm cultures dishes containing 34 · 34 mm square coverslips . Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium ( Seromed , Berlin , Germany ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) heat - inactivated fetal calf serum ( Dutscher , Brumath , France ) , 50 U / ml penicillin , 50 m g / ml streptomycin and 20 % L - 929 ﬁbroblast - conditioned medium . After 5 days at 37°C in a 5 % CO 2 / 95 % air atmosphere , non - adherent cells were removed and adherent macrophages were further incubated in culture medium containing only 3 % of conditioned medium . At this step , cells were treated or not with rIFN - g ( 10 - 25 U / ml , Genentech , San Francisco , CA ) for 18 - 24 hours before the addition of the parasites . Macrophages were infected at a stationary phase promastigote - , metacyclic promastigote - or amastigote - host cell ratio of 3 : 1 to 5 : 1 . The parasites and macrophages were quickly brought into contact by centrifugation at 20°C ( 130 g , 5 minutes ) . Cultures were then incubated at 34°C ( L . amazonensis infections ) or 37°C ( L . major infections ) for 30 minutes before being washed with Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS , Seromed ) to remove free parasites . Macrophages were ﬁxed either immediately ( time point 30 minutes ) or after various times ( between 1 and 48 hours post - infection ) . In some experiments , cultures were centrifuged as above after the addition of the parasites and only incubated at 34 or 37°C for 5 minutes before ﬁxation ( time point 10 minutes ) . In this case , the cultures were not washed before ﬁxation . Control experiments ensured that centrifugation of the parasites did not modify the characteristics of the early events analysed in this study . Loading of macrophages with endocytic tracers Before infection , macrophages were incubated either for 2 hours at 37°C with 2 - 3 mg / ml anionic , lysine ﬁxable ﬂuorescein dextran ( FDex , average M r 10 , 000 , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , or for 30 minutes at 37°C with 25 m g / ml horseradish peroxidase ( HRP , RZ 3 , Sigma Chemical Co . , St Louis , MO ) . Cells were then thoroughly washed with cold PBS and chased for 140 - 160 minutes or overnight ( 17 - 20 hours ) in tracer - free medium . Antibodies and ﬂuorescent reagents The mAb 3A1 , a mouse IgG2b speciﬁc to the LPG of L . amazonensis log phase promastigotes ( Courret et al . , 1999 ) , was provided by D . L . Sacks ( Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases , NIAID , Bethesda , MD ) . A rabbit immune serum raised against L . mexicana leishmanolysin was obtained from P . Overath [ Max Planck Institute for Biology , Tübingen , Germany ( Bahr et al . , 1993 ) ] . The mAb RI7 217 . 1 . 3 , a rat IgG2a speciﬁc for the mouse transferrin receptor [ TfR ( Lesley et al . , 1984 ) ] , was a gift from D . Ojcius ( Institut Pasteur , Paris , France ) . Rabbit immune sera speciﬁc for EEA1 and rab7p were provided by M . Zerial ( Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) . Before use , the anti - rab7p immune serum was adsorbed on a L . amazonensis amastigote lysate . Hybridoma cells secreting the FA / 11 mAb , a rat anti - mouse macrosialin IgG2a ( Smith and Koch , 1987 ) , were obtained from G . Koch ( MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge , UK ) . The anti - mouse lamp - 1 ( CD107a ) mAb 1D4B , a rat IgG2a ( Chen et al . , 1985 ) , and the biotin - conjugated anti - mouse I - A d / I - E d mAb 2G9 [ rat IgG2a ( Becker et al . , 1992 ) ] were purchased from Pharmingen ( San Diego , CA ) . Rabbit IgG speciﬁc to rat cathepsin B or D and crossreacting with mouse cathepsin B or D were obtained from B . Wiederanders ( Friedrich - Schiller University , Jena , Germany ) and H . Kirschke ( University of Halle , Halle , Germany ) . A Leishmania - speciﬁc immune serum was prepared from L . amazonensis - infected BALB / c mice . The mAb JES6 - 1A12 , a rat IgG2a speciﬁc to mouse IL - 2 ( Abrams et al . , 1992 ) , and a normal rabbit serum , were used as controls for the speciﬁc primary Abs or immune sera described above . Primary Abs associated with cell preparations were detected by use of the following conjugates : ﬂuorescein - labeled F ( ab ¢ ) 2 fragments of donkey anti - rat or anti - rabbit Ig ; Texas Red - labeled F ( ab ¢ ) 2 fragments of donkey anti - mouse Ig ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , West Grove , PA ) ; and ﬂuorescein - labeled ExtrAvidin ( Sigma ) . Alexa Fluor 488 - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) was used to stain F - actin . Fluorescence microscopy Macrophages were ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde and then permeabilized ( Lang et al . , 1994a ) . They were labeled with primary Abs and ﬂuorescent conjugates according to standard procedures ( Lang et al . , 1994a ) . After simple immunolabelings , nucleic acids were stained with propidium iodide ( Lang et al . , 1994a ) . Cell preparations were mounted in Mowiol ( Calbiochem , San Diego , CA ) before observation under an Axiophot Zeiss epiﬂuorescence microscope or under a LSM 510 Zeiss confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss Microscopy , Jena , Germany ) . Confocal microscopy images were acquired and analysed by use of the 2 . 5 version of the LSM 510 software before being exported to Adobe PhotoShop ( Mountain View , CA ) . Transmission electron microscopy Infected macrophages exposed to HRP were ﬁxed for 1 hour at room temperature with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate , HCl buffer , pH 7 . 2 , containing 0 . 1 M sucrose . Cells were washed overnight at 4°C with sucrose - containing cacodylate buffer and incubated with 3 , 3 ¢ - diaminobenzidine tetrachlorhydrate and H 2 O 2 ( Malmgren and Olsson , 1977 ) before post - ﬁxation with osmium and Epon embedding . Sections were examined with a Jeol 100CXII electron microscope ( Jeol Ltd . , Akishima , Japan ) . Scanning electron microscopy Macrophages were exposed to L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes ( ﬁve parasites / host cell ) for 10 minutes at 34°C . Cells were then ﬁxed overnight at 4°C with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate , HCl buffer , pH 7 . 2 , containing 0 . 1 M sucrose . After three washes with sucrose - containing cacodylate buffer , cells were dehydrated in ethanol and processed for scanning electron microscopy according to standard protocols . Cells were examined at the Centre Inter - Universitaire de Microscopie Electronique ( CIME ) Jussieu ( Paris , France ) . Time - lapse microcinematography Coverslips with macrophages were mounted in observation microchambers known as Rose’s chambers ( Rose , 1954 ) , which were then placed on the stage of a thermostated ( 34°C ) Zeiss inverted microscope linked to an automated 16 mm Arriﬂex camera . The camera was programmed to take one or two pictures per second for 30 - 60 minutes . The grabbing sequences started when the 2306 promastigotes were placed in the Rose’s chambers . The images were analyzed on a NAC projector . Online supplemental material Movies 1 and 2 ( see http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental ) correspond to Fig . 1A and B and contain QuickTime sequences depicting the phagocytosis of metacyclic promastigotes by macrophages . Images were captured every 0 . 5 seconds over the course of 367 seconds ( Movie 1 ) or 125 seconds ( Movie 2 ) . Results Experimental conditions and time course of infection We studied the biogenesis of PVs between 10 minutes and 48 hours after the infection of mouse bone - marrow - derived macrophages with L . amazonensis or L . major metacyclic promastigotes or amastigotes . Unlike the other parasitic stages ( stationary phase promastigotes , amastigotes ) , puriﬁed metacyclic promastigotes have never been used in such a study . Thus , most of the data presented below concern the interactions between the macrophages and the metacyclics . Amastigotes were used only in some experiments for comparison . In many experiments , to enable us to follow the appearance of MHC class II molecules in the membrane of the phagocytic compartments , macrophages were pre - exposed to a low dose of IFN - g . We checked that this cytokine , at the concentration used , had no effect on the course of infection ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , for most of the analyzed parameters , very similar results were obtained with untreated or IFN - g - pre - treated macrophages ( see below ) . Compared with the initial values , determined 30 minutes after infection , the percentage of infected macrophages and the parasite load decreased only slightly at 48 hours when metacyclic promastigotes were used to initiate infection ( e . g . 70 - 75 and 75 - 80 % of the initial values , respectively , in experiments using L . amazonensis as infectious agents ) . As shown before , intermediate parasitic stages started to divide after 24 - 48 hours ( Courret et al . , 2001 ) . The percentage of infected macrophages was the same 30 minutes and 48 hours after infection with amastigotes of L . amazonensis , but the number of parasites increased during the period of observation . These data indicate that our experimental conditions allowed the intracellular establishment of most parasites regardless of the parasitic stage used . Entry of L . amazonensismetacyclic promastigotes into macrophages After the parasites bound to the macrophages , either long tubular pseudopods tightly encircling their cell body or their ﬂagellum ( Fig . 1A , C ) or ruffles ( Fig . 1B , D ) were formed . Very often , parasites were phagocytosed with the cell body entering ﬁrst ( Fig . 1 ; see also Movies 1 and 2 at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental ) , but ingestion starting by the ﬂagellum was also observed ( data not shown ) . In some cases , the parasites ﬁrst Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) Fig . 1 . Mechanisms of entry of L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes into macrophages . ( A , B ) Microcinematography of phagocytic events . Promastigote cell bodies and ﬂagella are indicated by white arrowheads and white arrows , respectively . ( A ) Parasite attachment occurs by the cell body . The promastigote is then progressively internalized through the formation of a long tubular pseudopod ( black arrowheads ) . ( B ) The parasite binds to the macrophage via the tip of the ﬂagellum . It then turns around , so that its cell body comes into contact with the cell surface of the macrophage . Ruffles are formed at this site ( black arrowheads ) . The promastigote is ﬁnally ingested via the cell body . The numbers indicated in the right hand corners correspond to the time ( in seconds ) elapsed from the ﬁrst contact of promastigotes with macrophages ( time 0 ) . QuickTime movie sequence versions of A and B are available online ( http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental ) . ( C , D ) Scanning electron micrographs showing the internalization of promastigotes via the formation of a closely apposed pseudopod ( C ) or of ruffles ( D ) . Macrophages were ﬁxed after 10 minutes of contact with the parasites . Bars , 10 m m ( A , B ) , 1 m m ( C , D ) . 2307 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles interacted with the macrophages via their ﬂagellum ( Fig . 1B , time points 0 to 15 seconds ) but they rapidly turned around ( Fig . 1B , time point 16 seconds ) and ﬁnally entered macrophages by the cell body ( Fig . 1B , time points 37 seconds to 61 seconds ) . We also observed the lateral attachment of the parasites to the macrophage cell surface . In these cases , the plasma membrane folds wrapped themselves around the parasites , and the different parts of the latter were simultaneously internalized ( data not shown ) . Complete phagocytosis took about 3 - 9 minutes . Polymerization of macrophage actin is a transient event during metacyclic promastigote or amastigote phagocytosis The metacyclic promastigotes and amastigotes of L . amazonensis were internalized by an actin - dependent process as shown by the accumulation of F - actin around the parasites during and after phagocytosis . To determine whether the duration of F - actin accumulation varied with the parasitic stage , macrophages were ﬁxed at different times after infection , and F - actin was stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . At 10 minutes , about 40 - 55 % of metacyclics or amastigotes were surrounded by F - actin . At this stage , most of the F - actin + - parasites were still in the process of phagocytosis . After completion of the internalization process , the percentage of F - actin + - parasites rapidly dropped to reach 5 - 10 % at 1 - 2 hours post - infection ( Fig . 2A ) . At the early time point , F - actin appeared generally as a thick ring around the promastigote cell bodies and amastigotes or adopted the shape of a sleeve around the promastigote ﬂagella ( Fig . 2B , C ) . With promastigotes , F - actin was often concentrated around either the cell body or the ﬂagellum and less frequently around both parts . This suggests that F - actin sequentially polymerizes and depolymerizes along the parasites during their internalization . Presence of F - actin in the ruffles formed at the entry point of some parasites was also noted ( data not shown ) . As with L . amazonensis , F - actin was detected around L . major metacyclic promastigotes in the process of phagocytosis . Thereafter , parasite - associated F - actin disappeared with a kinetics slower than that observed for L . amazonensis . Thus , 10 minutes , 30 minutes and 2 hours after adding parasites , 77 . 2 , 48 . 0 and 24 . 7 % of them were F - actin + , respectively . This , apparently , did not slow down the recruitment of endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ into phagosomes ( see below ) . Kinetics of PV formation following metacyclic promastigote or amastigote phagocytosis All the parasites still present in the cultures were completely internalized 30 - 60 minutes after the addition of L . amazonensis promastigotes to macrophage monolayers pre - exposed or not to IFN - g . Most of them ( about 70 % ) were elongated , with the cell body directed towards the macrophage nucleus and the ﬂagellum directed towards the periphery ( Fig . 3 , group 1 ; Fig . 4A ) . About 3 % of the parasites were in the opposite direction ( Fig . 3 , group 3 ) . The remainder ( about 30 % ) displayed no clear orientation and were in vacuoles already located near to the macrophage nucleus ( Fig . 3 , group 2 ) . At this step of the infectious process , most of the parasites were located in very long ( several tens of microns ) , narrow compartments , the membrane of which adopted their exact shape ( see below ) . The lumen of these organelles could not normally be seen under the light microscope ( Fig . 4A ) . Similar compartments were observed after infection of macrophages with L . major metacyclic promastigotes ( data not shown ) . At 5 hours post - infection , most of the parasites had lost their long ﬂagella and were located in smaller compartments gathered around the macrophage nucleus ( Fig . 4C ) . After amastigote phagocytosis , parasites were initially localized in peripheral , tight , ovoid vacuoles that then rapidly reached the macrophage cell center ( Fig . 4E ) . With L . amazonensis , which induces the formation of huge PVs , we noted that the time elapsed before the enlargement process began varied according to the parasitic stage used . The ﬁrst signs of dilatation were seen about 12 - 18 hours after infection with metacyclic promastigotes and 2 hours after infection with amastigotes ( Fig . 4F ) . At later times , large vacuoles containing numerous parasites began to appear . They displayed a similar size in macrophages infected for 18 / 24 hours with metacyclics or for 5 hours with amastigotes ( Fig . 4D , G ) . Fig . 2 . F - actin accumulation around parasites during or following phagocytosis . ( A ) Macrophages untreated ( n ) or treated with IFN - g ( m , d ) were infected with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes ( n , m ) or amastigotes ( d ) and then ﬁxed and permeabilized at the different time points indicated . F - actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin ( green staining ) and parasites with a mouse anti - Leishmania immune serum and a Texas Red conjugate ( red staining ) before examination of the cells by ﬂuorescence microscopy . The percentages of promastigotes or amastigotes surrounded by F - actin were determined after counting about 100 parasites for each time point . Data are the means±s . d . of three experiments ( m ) or are from a single experiment ( n , d ) . ( B , C ) Fluorescence confocal microscopy of macrophages incubated for 10 minutes with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes ( B ) or amastigotes ( C ) . F - actin and parasites were stained as in A . A 3D reconstruction and an optical section ( 0 . 5 m m thickness ) are shown in B and C , respectively . Bar , 2 m m . 2308 Kinetics of endosome / lysosome ‘marker’ recruitment into phagosomes containing initially metacyclic promastigotes It has been reported that huge communal PVs housing L . mexicana or L . amazonensis are formed by the fusion of small individual vacuoles between them and with compartments of the endocytic pathway ( for a review , see Antoine et al . , 1998 ) . To determine whether the different kinetics of PV formation described above were linked to the capacity of the early phagosomes to fuse with endocytic compartments , we studied the acquisition by these organelles of various soluble and membrane molecules known to be preferentially associated with early endosomes or with late endosomes / lysosomes ( TfR , EEA1 , rab7p , macrosialin , lamp - 1 , cathepsins B and D , and MHC class II molecules ) . We initially focused on the association of these molecules with phagosomes formed after metacyclic entry . In macrophages that had been pre - treated with IFN - g , no more than 10 - 15 % of the phagosomes formed after internalization of L . amazonensis metacyclics displayed the early endosome ‘markers’ TfR and EEA1 , even at the earliest time points ( 10 - 30 minutes ) ( Fig . 5A , B ) . In contrast , at 30 minutes , about 95 % of these compartments already contained macrosialin and lamp - 1 , about 75 and 90 % of them had acquired cathepsins B and D , respectively and 70 % were rab7p - positive ( Fig . 5A , B ; Fig . 6A - D ) . In macrophages expressing MHC class II molecules , about 50 % of the phagosomes / phagolysosomes contained class II at 30 minutes post - infection . At this infection stage , the soluble and membrane ‘markers’ detected in phagosomes were both closely associated with the promastigotes and surrounded the entire parasites , including the ﬂagella ( Fig . 6 ) . Later on , phagolysosomes were virtually all positive for macrosialin and lamp - 1 from 1 hour post - infection ( Fig . 5A , B ; Fig . 6E ) . The percentage of rab7p + and of class II + parasite - containing Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) Fig . 4 . Light microscopy analysis of PV formation . Macrophages treated with IFN - g were infected with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes ( A - D ) or amastigotes ( E - H ) . At the time points indicated , macrophages were ﬁxed and then examined by phase - contrast microscopy . In each panel , some parasites are indicated by white arrowheads . Bar , 10 m m . Fig . 3 . Promastigote orientation shortly after internalization . Macrophages untreated ( white bars ) or treated with IFN - g ( hatched and black bars ) were infected with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes . They were ﬁxed 30 minutes ( white and hatched bars ) or 60 minutes ( black bars ) after the addition of the parasites and permeabilized before staining with an anti - leishmanolysin or anti - Leishmania immune serum and adequate ﬂuorochrome conjugates . Cell preparations were then examined by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Three groups of intracellular parasites were distinguished according to their orientation as shown in the schemes below the histograms . Results are expressed as the means + s . d . of two ( white bars ) or three experiments ( hatched bars ) or are from a single experiment ( black bars ) . Percentages were determined after counting 703 , 2200 and 712 parasites , respectively . P a r as i t es ( i n % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 group n ° 1 group n ° 2 group n ° 3 2309 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles organelles gradually increased , reaching 100 % at 48 hours post - infection . About 60 - 80 % of the phagosomal compartments were cathepsin - positive between 2 and 18 hours , a time period during which enzymes were clearly detected in the lumen of the still small PVs ( Fig . 5A , B ; Fig . 6F ) . The percentage of cathepsin + - compartments dropped considerably at 48 hours ( Fig . 5A , B ) but this can easily be explained by the fact that soluble molecules like these enzymes are not retained in the large PVs during ﬁxation . As the results described above were obtained using IFN - g - pre - treated macrophages as host cells , we next examined whether the IFN - g treatment could modify the kinetics of PV maturation . Comparison of Fig . 5A , B and C clearly indicates that , at the dose used , IFN - g had no effect on the analyzed parameters . The metacyclic promastigotes used in the preceding experiments were prepared from stationary phase promastigotes by negative selection using the mAb 3A1 ( Courret et al . , 1999 ) . To see whether the treatment applied to the parasites could inﬂuence the biogenesis of the phagosomal compartments , a side - by - side comparison of phagosomes containing initially either stationary phase or metacyclic promastigotes of L . amazonensis was undertaken . Fig . 7 shows that phagosome formation , measured by the appearance in the phagosomal membrane or lumen of the transferrin receptor , rab7p , lamp - 1 or cathepsin B , was strictly similar in both conditions of infection . Study of the association of EEA1 , macrosialin and MHC class II molecules ended at the same conclusion ( data not shown ) . Likewise , similar data were obtained when metacyclic promastigotes of L . major , a species that does not induce the formation of large PVs , were used to initiate infection ( Fig . 8 ) . This suggests that the rapid acquisition of late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ by promastigote - containing organelles is a Leishmania species - independent process . As negative controls , promastigote - infected macrophages were incubated with an irrelevant mAb or normal rabbit serum instead of speciﬁc reagents . We also incubated puriﬁed metacyclic promastigotes with macrophage organelle - speciﬁc Abs . No staining or a very weak background staining could be detected on these preparations ( data not shown ) . Fusion of FDex - or HRP - loaded late endocytic compartments with phagosomes harbouring initially metacyclic promastigotes Previous data clearly showed that , at 30 minutes post - infection with metacyclic promastigotes , most parasite - containing organelles displayed molecules of the late endocytic compartments . We demonstrated that the recruitment of these molecules occurred through the fusion of late endocytic compartments with phagosomes as follows . Before infection with metacyclics , macrophages were pre - incubated with FDex for 2 hours , washed and then incubated for 2 - 3 hours or overnight to allow the preferential accumulation of the ﬂuorescent molecules in late endosomes or lysosomes , respectively . Regardless of the time of chase , FDex rapidly appeared in compartments containing initially metacyclic promastigotes . For example , at 30 minutes , 90 - 100 % and 80 - 85 % of these organelles were ﬂuorescent after infection with L . amazonensis and L . major metacyclics , respectively ( Fig . 9A ) . At this stage , phagosome - associated FDex was localized around the cell body and the ﬂagellum of the parasites and adopted their exact shape ( Fig . 9B , C ) . The percentage of ﬂuorescent parasite - containing organelles decreased slightly at later times of infection , which could be due to a redistribution of ﬂuorescent molecules or , in the case of L . amazonensis - containing compartments , to the loss of soluble FDex from the C B A P O S I T I VE P ARA S I T E - C O N T A I N I N G C O M P AR T M E N T S ( i n % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 HOURS POST - INFECTION 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 . 17 0 . 5 2 48 0 . 170 . 51 2 12 18 48 5 0 . 17 0 . 5 1 2 12 18 48 5 transferrin receptor cathepsin D rab7p macrosialin EEA1 lamp - 1 cathepsin B MHC class II Fig . 5 . Kinetics of endocytic ‘marker’ association with phagosomes containing initially L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes . Macrophages pre - exposed ( A , B ) or not exposed ( C ) to IFN - g were infected at a multiplicity of four parasites / host cell . Association of the following molecules with parasite - containing phagosomes was examined as a function of time : transferrin receptor , EEA1 , rab7p , macrosialin , lamp - 1 , cathepsin B , cathepsin D and MHC class II molecules . At the time points indicated , cell preparations were ﬁxed , permeabilized and incubated with immunological reagents before analysis by ﬂuorescence microscopy . For each experiment and at each time point , the percentages of parasite - containing compartments displaying the molecules listed above were determined after counting about 100 to 200 organelles . Each value represents the mean + s . d . of two to eight experiments ( A , B ) or is from a single experiment representative of two separate experiments ( C ) . 2310 enlarging organelles during ﬁxation . At this stage , FDex associated with the small individual PVs was clearly localized in the lumen of the organelles ( Fig . 9D , E ) . Very similar results were obtained with macrophages that had been pre - incubated for 30 minutes with HRP , chased for 160 minutes or overnight and then infected with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes . Electron microscopy analysis of these cells showed that HRP was present in the lumen of the parasite - containing compartments 30 minutes after infection ( Fig . 10A ) . Typical images of fusion of HRP - loaded late endosomes / lysosomes with phagosomes were observed ( Fig . 10B , C ) . As controls , macrophages that had not been incubated with HRP were infected and then processed as above . No staining could be detected under these conditions . Kinetics of endosome / lysosome ‘marker’ acquisition by phagosomes formed after amastigote ingestion PV maturation assessed by the acquisition of early endosome , late endosome or lysosome ‘markers’ was studied after the Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) Fig . 6 . Immunoﬂuorescence labeling of late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ associated with parasite - containing organelles at different time points after infection of IFN - g - treated macrophages with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes . Macrophages were processed for ﬂuorescence microscopy 10 minutes ( A ) , 30 minutes ( B - D ) , 2 hours ( E ) or 18 hours ( F ) after the addition of the parasites . Cell preparations were incubated with immune sera or Abs directed against rab7p ( A ) , macrosialin ( B ) , lamp - 1 ( C , E ) , cathepsin B ( D , F ) and then with adequate ﬂuorescein conjugates ( green staining ) . Except in B , macrophage nuclei and parasite nuclei and kinetoplasts were stained with propidium iodide ( red staining ) . In B , the parasites are indicated by arrows . Sections ( 0 . 3 - 0 . 5 m m thickness ) obtained by confocal microscopy are shown . The micrographs are representative of three to eight experiments . Bars , 2 m m . Fig . 7 . PV biogenesis in IFN - g - treated macrophages infected with either L . amazonensis stationary phase or metacyclic promastigotes . Macrophages were processed as described in the legend to Fig . 5 to determine the association of the transferrin receptor , rab7p , lamp - 1 and cathepsin B with phagosomes as a function of time . Results obtained after phagocytosis of stationary phase and metacyclic promastigotes are represented by broken and solid lines , respectively . 0 20 40 60 80 100 P O S I T I VE P ARA S I T E - C O N T A I N I N G C O M P AR T M E N T S ( i n % ) HOURS POST - INFECTION 0 . 5 2 18 48 transferrin receptor lamp - 1 cathepsin B rab7p Fig . 8 . PV biogenesis in IFN - g - treated macrophages infected with L . major metacyclic promastigotes . Macrophages were processed as described in Fig . 5 to determine the association of the different endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ with phagosomes as a function of time . Results are the means±range of two experiments . lamp - 1 cathepsin B EEA1 HOURS POST - INFECTION P O S I T I VE P ARA S I T E - C O N T A I N I N G C O M P AR T M E N T S ( i n % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 . 170 . 5 2 18 macrosialin transferrin receptor rab7p 2311 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles internalization of L . amazonensis amastigotes . The kinetics of ‘marker’ recruitment were rather similar to those we measured after the ingestion of metacyclic promastigotes ( Fig . 11 ) . However , small differences were noted ( compare Figs 5 and 7 with Fig . 11 ) . The percentage of rab7p + phagocytic compartments was slightly higher after amastigote internalization . For example , at 30 minutes and 12 hours post - infection , 90 % and 100 % of the amastigote - harbouring compartments displayed rab7p in their membrane ( Fig . 11 ; Fig . 12A ) , respectively , whereas , at the same times after infection with metacyclics , rab7p was detected on only 70 and 75 % of the parasite - containing compartments , respectively . Similar results were obtained for lamp - 1 and macrosialin with both parasitic stages ( Fig . 11 ; Fig . 12B ) , except that the percentages of positive compartments were higher at 10 minutes post - infection with amastigotes , indicating a slightly faster acquisition of the molecules . Likewise , class II molecules were acquired more quickly after infection with amastigotes . In contrast , although most amastigote - harbouring phagosomes had cathepsin B in their lumen at 30 minutes post - infection ( Fig . 11 , Fig . 12C ) , this enzyme , at later times , was more difficult to detect in these organelles than in compartments formed after phagocytosis of metacyclics . This is probably because of an earlier enlargement of the PVs which , during ﬁxation , lose a part of their soluble content . Negative controls performed as described previously for promastigote - infected macrophages gave only weak background staining ( data not shown ) . Discussion We examined early interactions between macrophages and the two Leishmania parasitic stages encountered in mammals , including the binding and phagocytosis of parasites and the formation of PVs , to determine whether these stages behaved similarly during these processes . We focused on metacyclic - macrophage interactions , which , so far , have been poorly investigated . Most of the studies on parasite entry into macrophages have concerned the multiple receptor - ligand systems involved in the binding and internalization of promastigotes and amastigotes ( Alexander and Russell , 1992 ; Guy and Belosevic , 1993 ; Love et al . , 1993 ; Peters et al . , 1995 ) and only a few reports have looked at the phagocytic events ( for a review , see Chang , 1983 ; Rittig et al . , 1998 ) . In particular , it is not yet clear whether Leishmania , which are strongly polarized cells , are bound preferentially by a pole or not . Likewise , it is not known whether the primary binding sites are the ﬁrst to be internalized . Our microcinematographic data indicate that the ﬁrst interactions between L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes and mouse bone - marrow - derived macrophages occur through the parasite ﬂagellum , the cell body or the entire parasite . We also found that the binding of the ﬂagellum can be followed by phagocytosis starting by the cell body . Scanning electron microscopy of similar cell preparations further indicated that 10 minutes after adding parasites to macrophage monolayers , ﬂagella are free or have established contacts with macrophage plasma membranes , but the only partial internalization processes observed involved parasite bodies . The fact that shortly after promastigote internalization ( 30 - 60 minutes ) , most of the parasites ( ~ 70 % ) are elongated with their cell bodies directed towards the macrophage nucleus and their ﬂagella directed towards the plasma membrane also suggests that promastigote phagocytosis mainly occurs in a polarized manner with the cell body entering macrophages ﬁrst . Although unlikely , a re - orientation of the parasites after Fig . 9 . ( A ) Kinetics of delivery of late endosome / lysosome - associated FDex into parasite - containing organelles formed after phagocytosis of metacyclic promastigotes . IFN - g - treated macrophages were incubated with FDex for 2 hours . After washings , they were chased either for 160 minutes or overnight before infection with L . amazonensis ( LV79 ) or L . major ( NIH173 ) metacyclic promastigotes . Macrophages were ﬁxed and permeabilized at various times post - infection and the parasites they contained were counted after staining with either a mouse anti - Leishmania immune serum and a Texas Red conjugate or propidium iodide . For each experiment and at each time point , the percentage of FDex - positive , parasite - containing compartments was determined after counting about 100 organelles . Results are from a single experiment ( LV79 ) or are the means + or – range of two experiments ( NIH173 ) . ( B - E ) Confocal microscopy of macrophages loaded with FDex , chased overnight in FDex - free medium and then infected with L . amazonensis metacyclics . Analysis was done 30 minutes ( B , C ) or 18 hours ( D , E ) after adding parasites . ( B , D ) and ( C , E ) are the differential interference contrast ( DIC ) and the ﬂuorescence images of the same cells , respectively . Optical sections ( 0 . 3 - 0 . 5 m m thickness ) are shown . The position of the parasites is indicated by arrows . Bar , 2 m m . 2312 phagocytosis or of the parasite - containing phagosomes just after their formation could also explain this preferential polarity of the intracellular parasites . Similar ﬁndings were obtained with L . major metacyclics as well as with unselected L . amazonensis stationary phase promastigotes . This indicates that this phenomenon is not linked to a particular Leishmania species and is not the consequence of the treatments used to obtain homogeneous metacyclics . Furthermore , identical patterns were noted in macrophages that had been pre - treated with IFN - g and those that had not . This supports the view that binding , phagocytosis and the ﬁrst steps of phagosome biogenesis are not greatly inﬂuenced by this cytokine , at least at low concentrations . Our data are consistent with earlier publications that showed that L . donovani promastigotes predominantly enter mouse or hamster macrophages by their posterior end ( Pulvertaft and Hoyle , 1960 ; Akiyama and Haight , 1971 ) . This method could not be used to determine whether amastigotes also bind and are phagocytosed in a polarized manner because the polarity of this parasitic stage is not as easy to assess by light microscopy as that of promastigotes . A quantitative electron microscopic study will be needed to examine this point . It is noteworthy that , within PVs , parasites are bound to PV membrane through their posterior pole ( Benchimol and De Souza , 1981 ; Antoine et al . , 1998 ; Courret et al . , 2001 ) . It would thus be very interesting to determine whether this particular area of the parasite plasma membrane is also used as a primary binding site for promastigotes and amastigotes with the macrophage plasmalemma or whether this interaction is engaged in the ﬁrst steps of phagocytosis . Morphologically distinct phagocytic events were observed after promastigote binding , including the formation of tubular pseudopodia in close contact with the parasites , as already noted by others ( Chang , 1979 ; Rittig et al . , 1998 ) , and ruffles . The fact that , shortly after internalization , most of the parasites are in very long , close - ﬁtting phagosomes that exactly follow their outline suggests that ingestion mainly occurs by a zipper mechanism sequentially engulﬁng the different parts of the parasites . Otherwise , phagocytosis following ruffle extension could be at the origin of the rare phagosomes displaying a distinct lumen , early after their formation ( such a phagosome is visible in Movie 1 ) . It is not yet known whether different Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) Fig . 10 . Fusion of HRP - loaded late endosomes / lysosomes with parasite - containing compartments as observed by electron microscopy . IFN - g - treated macrophages were incubated with HRP for 30 minutes . After extensive washings , they were chased for 160 minutes before infection with L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes . Thirty minutes after infection , macrophages were ﬁxed and processed for peroxidase cytochemistry . ( A ) HRP is located in numerous late endosomes / lysosomes ( arrows ) as well as in the lumen of the tight promastigote - harbouring compartment ( arrowheads ) . ( B , C ) Details of A showing the fusion of HRP - containing late endosomes / lysosomes with the phagolysosomal compartment ( arrows ) . The presence of HRP in the ﬂagellar pocket of the parasite is also observed ( arrowheads ) . Bars , 1 m m ( A ) , 0 . 2 m m ( B , C ) . 2313 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles receptor - ligand interactions are at the origin of the various phagocytic mechanisms observed . In any case , these mechanisms as well as amastigote phagocytosis are dependent upon actin polymerization , as shown by the rapid appearance of F - actin around the parasites . Actin is then rapidly shed from the newly formed phagosomes harbouring either L . amazonensis metacyclic promastigotes or amastigotes and at 30 minutes post - infection no more than 10 - 20 % of the phagosomes are still surrounded by F - actin . The data concerning amastigote infections are consistent with those of Love et al . , who showed that periphagosomal actin is rapidly lost when parasites are internalized ( Love et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , we found no evidence of a lasting accumulation of actin around promastigote - containing compartments ( more than 60 minutes ) as is the case , in J774 macrophages , for L . donovani - harbouring phagosomes ( Holm et al . , 2001 ) . These authors found that the persistence of actin is LPG - dependent , which is difficult to reconcile with our data showing that the kinetics of periphagosomal actin dissociation are similar after ingestion of L . amazonensis promastigotes or amastigotes , which express LPG or are devoid of LPG , respectively ( Courret et al . , 2001 ) . Whether this discrepancy is due to the different Leishmania species / host cells used in these experiments is unclear but it is interesting to note in this respect that we found a higher percentage of L . major metacyclic promastigotes surrounded by actin at the three time points examined after adding parasites to macrophages , namely 10 minutes , 30 minutes and 2 hours . After internalization , all of the promastigotes are located in membrane - bound compartments , including those that are in a phagosome not detected by phase - contrast microscopy . Indeed , at 30 minutes to 1 hour post - infection , all parasites are delineated by the integral membrane proteins lamp - 1 and macrosialin , indicating the presence of an endosomal / lysosomal membrane . These data do not agree with previous descriptions of cytosolic promastigotes within phagocytic cells ( Akiyama and Haight , 1971 ; Rittig et al . , 1998 ) . Even if such a localization could possibly occur , for example after the rupture of phagosomes , it must be extremely rare and must be formally proven . The formation of very long phagosomes , the membrane of which tightly follows the outline of promastigotes , has never been described before . Nevertheless , these results are reminiscent of the early stages of infection of ﬁbroblasts or epithelial cells by Trypanosoma cruzi trypomastigotes , which use a very different mode of entry ( Hall et al . , 1992 ) . It is currently not known how the integrity of these slender compartments containing highly motile parasites is maintained , but their binding to cytoskeletal elements could be 0 20 40 60 80 100 Col 9 vs rab7pmean Col 9 vs macrosialmean Col 9 vs tfrmean HOURS POST - INFECTION P O S I T I VE P ARA S I T E - C O N T A I N I N G C O M P AR T M E N T S ( i n % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 . 170 . 51 2 12 18 48 5 0 . 17 0 . 5 1 2 12 18 48 5 transferrin receptor rab7p macrosialin EEA1 lamp - 1 cathepsin B MHC class II Fig . 11 . Kinetics of endocytic ‘marker’ association with phagosomes formed after internalization of L . amazonensis amastigotes . IFN - g - treated macrophages were infected at a multiplicity of four parasites / host cell . At various times post - infection , they were processed as described in Fig . 5 and the association of the following molecules with parasite - containing compartments was examined : transferrin receptor , EEA1 , rab7p , macrosialin , lamp - 1 , cathepsin B and MHC class II molecules . For each experiment and at each time point , the percentages of parasite - containing organelles displaying the molecules listed above were determined after counting about 100 organelles . Data represent the means + or – range of two separate experiments . Fig . 12 . Confocal microscopy analysis of the association of late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ with early phagosomes formed after internalization of L . amazonensis amastigotes . IFN - g - pre - treated macrophages were infected ( four parasites / host cell ) and 30 minutes later processed for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Cell preparations were incubated with immune sera or Abs directed against rab7p ( A ) , lamp - 1 ( B ) or cathepsin B ( C ) and then with adequate ﬂuorescein conjugates ( green staining ) . In B and C , cells were also stained with propidium iodide to visualize macrophage nuclei and parasite nuclei and kinetoplasts ( red staining ) . Optical sections ( 0 . 3 - 0 . 5 m m thickness ) are shown . The micrographs are representative of two separate experiments . Bars , 2 m m . 2314 involved . At later time points ( 2 - 5 hours ) , the phagosomal membrane remains tightly associated with the parasites but the compartments become shorter . This reduction in size correlates with the progressive loss of the ﬂagellum , suggesting that the parasite remodeling is accompanied by the removal of phagosomal membrane . Our most important ﬁnding is that promastigote - containing phagosomes can fuse with late endocytic compartments very quickly after their formation , as shown by ( 1 ) the rapid acquisition by these organelles of both soluble and membrane molecules mainly associated with late endosomes / lysosomes , namely cathepsin B , cathepsin D , macrosialin , lamp - 1 and rab7p ; and ( 2 ) the transfer of the content of late endosomes / lysosomes previously loaded with FDex or HRP in the lumen of these organelles . This fusion capacity is consistent with the fact that F - actin is rapidly shed from the newly formed phagosomes . It is noteworthy that , compared with the other molecules that are acquired almost synchronously , except for MHC class II molecules , rab7p is present on a higher percentage of phagosomes at the earliest time point examined ( 10 minutes ) . This implies that rab7p is recruited sooner , and possibly by another way , for instance from the cytosol or from organelles other than late endocytic compartments . The presence of rab7p on a high percentage of early phagosomes ( 70 to 80 % ) is consistent with their ability to fuse with late endocytic compartments as recent data indicate that this protein is important for late endosome / lysosome fusion events ( Méresse et al . , 1995 ; Papini et al . , 1997 ; Bucci et al . , 2000 ) . Whereas rab7p associates only with latex bead phagosomes transiently ( between 10 and 200 minutes post - internalization ) ( Scianimanico et al . , 1999 ) , the percentage of parasite - containing compartments with rab7p on their surface progressively increases with time and reaches about 100 % at 48 hours . It is not yet known whether this occurs by a deregulation of rab7p function but these results suggest that PVs can retain their ability to fuse with late endocytic compartments for a long time , which could provide the parasites with a means of getting nutrients . The persistent expression of membrane - associated rab proteins has been described for phagosomes harboring other intracellular microorganisms . For example , Mycobacterium bovis BCG phagosomal compartments retain rab5p on their surface and , perhaps as a consequence of that , the capacity to fuse with early endosomes . However , these phagosomes do not acquire rab7p and are unable to fuse with late endocytic compartments ( Via et al . , 1997 ) . The slower kinetics of class II molecule association with parasite - containing compartments could be due to the fact that these molecules are located in subsets of late endosomes / lysosomes ( MIIC ) with different fusion capacities towards phagocytic compartments . On the other hand , at all time points , only very low numbers of phagocytic compartments were found to display the early endosome ‘markers’ TfR and EEA1 . This indicates that either low or , more likely , very transient interactions occur with early endocytic compartments just after completion of phagocytosis and that they are followed by rapid recycling of early endosome - associated molecules . The validity of our conclusions concerning PV biogenesis in promastigote - infected macrophages can be extended to phagocytic compartments containing different Leishmania species ( L . amazonensis , L . major ) as well as to PVs present in macrophages under different states of activation ( macrophages that were or were not pre - treated with IFN - g ) . Finally , the characteristics of PV formation are not biased by the treatment used to purify metacyclic forms . Indeed , we checked that phagosomes harbouring initially either L . amazonensis metacyclic or unselected stationary phase promastigotes behaved similarly in terms of late endosome / lysosome ‘marker’ acquisition . We also observed an early association of late endosome / lysosome ‘markers’ with parasite - containing compartments after the internalization of amastigotes . The recruitment of the different molecules examined was slightly more efficient than after ingestion of promastigotes because , at 10 minutes post - infection , a higher percentage of phagosomes displayed rab7p , macrosialin , lamp - 1 and MHC class II molecules in their membrane . At 30 minutes , the differences become blurred in terms of percentage of positive phagosomes but the immunolabeling intensity of the different molecules was generally slightly weaker for phagosomes / phagolysosomes harbouring initially promastigotes . Together , these data show that , after internalization of promastigotes and amastigotes , early phagosomes rapidly fuse with late endocytic compartments but that the rate of fusion is higher after amastigote internalization . This difference could be due to a lower association of rab7p with phagocytic compartments harbouring initially metacyclic promastigotes . This was suggested by Scianimanico et al . to explain the fusion properties of phagosomes containing L . donovani promastigotes ( Scianimanico et al . , 1999 ) , despite the fact that their results were clearly different from ours . These authors showed that these organelles , in contrast to phagocytic compartments containing amastigotes or LPG - deﬁcient promastigotes , have limited interaction with late endocytic organelles for several hours ( Desjardins and Descoteaux , 1997 ; Scianimanico et al . , 1999 ; Dermine et al . , 2000 ) . The origin of this discrepancy is not clear , but the very different characteristics of the host cells used ( J774 macrophages vs bone - marrow - derived macrophages ) are an important point to consider . In conclusion , we have demonstrated that both amastigote - and metacyclic - containing phagosomes interact with late endosomes / lysosomes in the minutes following parasite phagocytosis . Our phase - contrast microscopy study of L . amazonensis - infected macrophages also showed that the enlargement of the PVs harbouring this Leishmania species is delayed when promastigotes are used to initiate infection . Thus , as suggested by Desjardins , Descoteaux and colleagues , PV formation may be parasite stage - dependent , at least with certain Leishmania species . However , in our experimental conditions , the events at the origin of these differences seem to occur after the fusion of early phagosomes with late endosomes / lysosomes . As the formation of the huge PVs is due to the fusion of several individual vacuoles and to the fusion of these vacuoles with compartments of the endocytic pathway , our data suggest that the kinetics of PV formation can be modulated either by the release ( 1 ) shortly after phagocytosis , of promastigote - derived molecules that inhibit these processes [ e . g . LPG as proposed previously ( Dermine et al . , 2000 ) ] ; or ( 2 ) at later times of infection , of amastigote - speciﬁc molecules that alter the balance between fusion and ﬁssion events in favor of fusions . In this respect , it has been suggested that the proteophosphoglycan secreted by L . mexicana amastigotes in Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 ) 2315 Biogenesis of Leishmania - harbouring vacuoles the PV lumen could be involved in the expansion of PVs ( Peters et al . , 1997 ) . The co - infection of macrophages with promastigotes and amastigotes of L . amazonensis should allow us to determine whether the molecules expressed / synthesized by the promastigote / intermediate stages transiently block the enlargement of PVs in our experimental conditions . This work was funded by the Institut Pasteur , the Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque and by the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale . Nathalie Courret was the recipient of a fellowship from the Caisse Nationale d’Assurance Maladie et Maternité des Travailleurs Non Salariés des Professions Non Agricoles . The confocal microscope was purchased with a donation from Marcel and Liliane Pollack . We are grateful to H . Kirschke , G . L . E . Koch , D . Ojcius , P . Overath , D . L . Sacks , B . Wiederanders and M . Zerial for the kind gifts of immunological reagents , and to M . Grassé ( CIME Jussieu ) for her technical assistance . References Abrams , J . S . , Roncarolo , M . - G . , Yssel , H . , Andersson , U . , Gleich , G . J . and Silver , J . E . ( 1992 ) . Strategies of anti - cytokine monoclonal antibody development : immunoassay of IL - 10 and IL - 5 in clinical samples . Immunol . Rev . 127 , 5 - 24 . Akiyama , H . J . and Haight , R . D . ( 1971 ) . Interaction of Leishmania donovani and hamster peritoneal macrophages . A phase - contrast microscopical study . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 20 , 539 - 545 . Alexander , J . and Russell , D . G . ( 1992 ) . The interaction of Leishmania species with macrophages . Adv . Parasitol . 31 , 175 - 254 . Antoine , J . - C . , Jouanne , C . and Ryter , A . ( 1989 ) . Megasomes as the targets of leucine methyl ester in Leishmania amazonensis amastigotes . Parasitology 99 , 1 - 9 . Antoine , J . - C . , Prina , E . , Lang , T . and Courret , N . ( 1998 ) . The biogenesis and properties of the parasitophorous vacuoles that harbour Leishmania in murine macrophages . Trends Microbiol . 6 , 392 - 401 . Bahr , V . , Stierhof , Y . - D . , Ilg , T . , Demar , M . , Quinten , M . and Overath , P . ( 1993 ) . Expression of lipophosphoglycan , high - molecular weight phosphoglycan and glycoprotein 63 in promastigotes and amastigotes of Leishmania mexicana . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 58 , 107 - 121 . Becker , D . , Mohamadzadeh , M . , Reske , K . and Knop , J . ( 1992 ) . Increased level of intracellular MHC class II molecules in murine Langerhans cells following in vivo and in vitro administration of contact allergens . J . Invest . Dermatol . 99 , 545 - 549 . Benchimol , M . and de Souza , W . ( 1981 ) . Leishmania mexicana amazonensis : attachment to the membrane of the phagocytic vacuole of macrophages in vivo . Z . Parasitenkd . 66 , 25 - 29 . Bucci , C . , Thomsen , P . , Nicoziani , P . , McCarthy , J . and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Rab7 : a key to lysosome biogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 467 - 480 . Chang , K . - P . ( 1979 ) . Leishmania donovani : promastigote - macrophage surface interactions in vitro . Exp . Parasitol . 48 , 175 - 189 . Chang , K . - P . ( 1983 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of intracellular symbiosis in leishmaniasis . Int . Rev . Cytol . Suppl . 14 , 267 - 305 . Chavrier , P . , Parton , R . G . , Hauri , H . P . , Simons , K . and Zerial , M . ( 1990 ) . Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compartments . Cell 62 , 317 - 329 . Chen , J . W . , Pan , W . , D’Souza , M . P . and August , J . T . ( 1985 ) . Lysosome - associated membrane proteins : characterization of LAMP - 1 of macrophage P388 and mouse embryo 3T3 cultured cells . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 239 , 574 - 586 . Claus , V . , Jahraus , A . , Tjelle , T . , Berg , T . , Kirschke , H . , Faulstich , H . and Griffiths , G . ( 1998 ) . Lysosomal enzyme trafficking between phagosomes , endosomes , and lysosomes in J774 macrophages . Enrichment of cathepsin H in early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 9842 - 9851 . Courret , N . , Prina , E . , Mougneau , E . , Saraiva , E . M . , Sacks , D . L . , Glaichenhaus , N . and Antoine , J . - C . ( 1999 ) . Presentation of the Leishmania antigen LACK by infected macrophages is dependent upon the virulence of the phagocytosed parasites . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 762 - 773 . Courret , N . , Fréhel , C . , Prina , E . , Lang , T . and Antoine , J . - C . ( 2001 ) . Kinetics of the intracellular differentiation of Leishmania amazonensis and internalization of host MHC molecules by the intermediate parasite stages . Parasitology 122 , 263 - 279 . Dermine , J . - F . , Scianimanico , S . , Privé , C . , Descoteaux , A . and Desjardins , M . ( 2000 ) . Leishmania promastigotes require lipophosphoglycan to actively modulate the fusion properties of phagosomes at an early step of phagocytosis . Cell . Microbiol . 2 , 115 - 126 . Desjardins , M . ( 1995 ) . Biogenesis of phagolysosomes : the ‘kiss and run’ hypothesis . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 183 - 186 . Desjardins , M . and Descoteaux , A . ( 1997 ) . Inhibition of phagolysosomal biogenesis by the Leishmania lipophosphoglycan . J . Exp . Med . 185 , 2061 - 2068 . Galvao - Quintao , L . , Alﬁeri , S . C . , Ryter , A . and Rabinovitch , M . ( 1990 ) . Intracellular differentiation of Leishmania amazonensis promastigotes to amastigotes : presence of megasomes , cysteine proteinase activity and susceptibility to leucine - methyl ester . Parasitology 101 , 7 - 13 . Garin , J . , Diez , R . , Kieffer , S . , Dermine , J . - F . , Duclos , S . , Gagnon , E . , Sadoul , R . , Rondeau , C . and Desjardins , M . ( 2001 ) . The phagosome proteome : insight into phagosome functions . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 165 - 180 . Geuze , H . J . ( 1998 ) . The role of endosomes and lysosomes in MHC class II functioning . Immunol . Today 19 , 282 - 287 . Gruenberg , J . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 552 - 563 . Guy , R . A . and Belosevic , M . ( 1993 ) . Comparison of receptors required for entry of Leishmania major amastigotes into macrophages . Infect . Immun . 61 , 1553 - 1558 . Hall , B . F . , Webster , P . , Ma , A . K . , Joiner , K . A . and Andrews , N . W . ( 1992 ) . Desialylation of lysosomal membrane glycoproteins by Trypanosoma cruzi : a role for the surface neuraminidase in facilitating parasite entry into the host cell cytoplasm . J . Exp . Med . 176 , 313 - 325 . Holm , Å . , Tejle , K . , Magnusson , K . - E . , Descoteaux , A . and Rasmusson , B . ( 2001 ) . Leishmania donovani lipophosphoglycan causes periphagosomal actin accumulation : correlation with impaired translocation of PKC a and defective phagosome maturation . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 439 - 447 . Holness , C . L . , da Silva , R . P . , Fawcett , J . , Gordon , S . and Simmons , D . L . ( 1993 ) . Macrosialin , a mouse macrophage - restricted glycoprotein , is a member of the lamp / lgp family . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 9661 - 9666 . Hunziker , W . and Geuze , H . J . ( 1996 ) . Intracellular trafficking of lysosomal membrane proteins . BioEssays 18 , 379 - 389 . Ilg , T . ( 2000 ) . Lipophosphoglycan is not required for infection of macrophages or mice by Leishmania mexicana . EMBO J . 19 , 1953 - 1962 . Lang , T . , de Chastellier , C . , Fréhel , C . , Hellio , R . , Metezeau , P . , de Souza Leao , S . and Antoine , J . - C . ( 1994a ) . Distribution of MHC class I and of MHC class II molecules in macrophages infected with Leishmania amazonensis . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 69 - 82 . Lang , T . , Hellio , R . , Kaye , P . M . and Antoine , J . - C . ( 1994b ) . Leishmania donovani - infected macrophages : characterization of the parasitophorous vacuole and potential role of this organelle in antigen presentation . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 2137 - 2150 . Lesley , J . , Hyman , R . , Schulte , R . and Trotter , J . ( 1984 ) . Expression of transferrin receptor on murine hematopoietic progenitors . Cell . Immunol . 83 , 14 - 25 . Love , D . C . , Esko , J . D . and Mosser , D . M . ( 1993 ) . A heparin - binding activity on Leishmania amastigotes which mediates adhesion to cellular proteoglycans . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 759 - 766 . Love , D . C . , Kane , M . M . and Mosser , D . M . ( 1998 ) . Leishmania amazonensis : the phagocytosis of amastigotes by macrophages . Exp . Parasitol . 88 , 161 - 171 . Malmgren , L . and Olsson , Y . ( 1977 ) . A sensitive histochemical method for light and electron microscopic demonstration of horseradish peroxidase . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 25 , 1280 - 1283 . Méresse , S . , Gorvel , J . - P . and Chavrier , P . ( 1995 ) . The rab7 GTPase resides on a vesicular compartment connected to lysosomes . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 3349 - 3358 . Mu , F . T . , Callaghan , J . M . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Campbell , P . L . , McCluskey , J . , Yeo , J . - P . , Tock , E . P . C . and Toh , B . - H . ( 1995 ) . EEA1 , an early endosome - associated protein . EEA1 is a conserved a - helical peripheral membrane protein ﬂanked by cysteine ‘ﬁngers’ and contains a calmodulin - binding IQ motif . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13503 - 13511 . Papini , E . , Satin , B . , Bucci , C . , de Bernard , M . , Telford , J . L . , Manetti , R . , Rappuoli , R . , Zerial , M . and Montecucco , C . ( 1997 ) . The small GTP binding protein rab7 is essential for cellular vacuolation induced by Helicobacter pylori cytotoxin . EMBO J . 16 , 15 - 24 . Peters , C . , Aebischer , T . , Stierhof , Y . - D . , Fuchs , M . and Overath , P . ( 1995 ) . The role of macrophage receptors in adhesion and uptake of Leishmania mexicana amastigotes . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 3715 - 3724 . 2316 Peters , C . , Stierhof , Y . - D . and Ilg , T . ( 1997 ) . Proteophosphoglycan secreted by Leishmania mexicana amastigotes causes vacuole formation in macrophages . Infect . Immun . 65 , 783 - 786 . Peters , W . and Killick - Kendrick , R . ( 1987a ) . The Leishmaniases in Biology and Medicine . Vol . I : Biology and Epidemiology , pp . 1 - 550 . London : Academic Press . Peters , W . and Killick - Kendrick , R . ( 1987b ) . The Leishmaniases in Biology and Medicine . Vol . II : Clinical Aspects and Control , pp . 551 - 941 . London : Academic Press . Pulvertaft , R . J . V . and Hoyle , G . F . ( 1960 ) . Stages in the life - cycle of Leishmania donovani . Trans . R . Soc . Trop . Med . Hyg . 54 , 191 - 196 . Rabinowitz , S . , Horstmann , H . , Gordon , S . and Griffiths , G . ( 1992 ) . Immunocytochemical characterization of the endocytic and phagolysosomal compartments in peritoneal macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 95 - 112 . Rittig , M . G . , Schröppel , K . , Seack , K . - H . , Sander , U . , N’Diaye , E . - N . , Maridonneau - Parini , I . , Solbach , W . and Bogdan , C . ( 1998 ) . Coiling phagocytosis of trypanosomatids and fungal cells . Infect . Immun . 66 , 4331 - 4339 . Rodman , J . S . , Levy , M . A . , Diment , S . and Stahl , P . D . ( 1990 ) . Immunolocalization of endosomal cathepsin D in rabbit alveolar macrophages . J . Leuk . Biol . 48 , 116 - 122 . Rose , G . ( 1954 ) . A separable and multipurpose tissue culture chamber . Texas Reports Biol . Med . 12 , 1074 - 1083 . Sacks , D . L . ( 1989 ) . Metacyclogenesis in Leishmania promastigotes . Exp . Parasitol . 69 , 100 - 103 . Sacks , D . L . , Hieny , S . and Sher , A . ( 1985 ) . Identiﬁcation of cell surface carbohydrate and antigenic changes between noninfective and infective developmental stages of Leishmania major promastigotes . J . Immunol . 135 , 564 - 569 . Scianimanico , S . , Desrosiers , M . , Dermine , J . - F . , Méresse , S . , Descoteaux , A . and Desjardins , M . ( 1999 ) . Impaired recruitment of the small GTPase rab7 correlates with the inhibition of phagosome maturation by Leishmania donovani promastigotes . Cell . Microbiol . 1 , 19 - 32 . Smith , M . J . and Koch , G . L . E . ( 1987 ) . Differential expression of murine macrophage surface glycoprotein antigens in intracellular membranes . J . Cell Sci . 87 , 113 - 119 . Späth , G . F . , Epstein , L . , Leader , B . , Singer , S . M . , Avila , H . A . , Turco , S . J . and Beverley , S . M . ( 2000 ) . Lipophosphoglycan is a virulence factor distinct from related glycoconjugates in the protozoan parasite Leishmania major . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9258 - 9263 . Turco , S . J . , Späth , G . F . and Beverley , S . M . ( 2001 ) . Is lipophosphoglycan a virulence factor ? A surprising diversity between Leishmania species . Trends Parasitol . 17 , 223 - 226 . Via , L . E . , Deretic , D . , Ulmer , R . J . , Hibler , N . S . , Huber , L . A . and Deretic , V . ( 1997 ) . Arrest of mycobacterial phagosome maturation is caused by a block in vesicle fusion between stages controlled by rab5 and rab7 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13326 - 13331 . Journal of Cell Science 115 ( 11 )