ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 98 / 05 / 929 / 14 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , Number 4 , May 18 , 1998 929 – 942 http : / / www . jcb . org 929 Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane Revealed by Patching of Membrane Components Thomas Harder , Peter Scheiffele , Paul Verkade , and Kai Simons European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Cell Biology Programme , 69117 Heidelberg , Germany Abstract . Lateral assemblies of glycolipids and choles - terol , “rafts , ” have been implicated to play a role in cel - lular processes like membrane sorting , signal transduc - tion , and cell adhesion . We studied the structure of raft domains in the plasma membrane of non - polarized cells . Overexpressed plasma membrane markers were evenly distributed in the plasma membrane . We com - pared the patching behavior of pairs of raft markers ( defined by insolubility in Triton X - 100 ) with pairs of raft / non - raft markers . For this purpose we cross - linked glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins placental alkaline phosphatase ( PLAP ) , Thy - 1 , influ - enza virus hemagglutinin ( HA ) , and the raft lipid gan - glioside GM1 using antibodies and / or cholera toxin . The patches of these raft markers overlapped exten - sively in BHK cells as well as in Jurkat T – lymphoma cells . Importantly , patches of GPI - anchored PLAP ac - cumulated src - like protein tyrosine kinase fyn , which is thought to be anchored in the cytoplasmic leaflet of raft domains . In contrast patched raft components and patches of transferrin receptor as a non - raft marker were sharply separated . Taken together , our data strongly suggest that coalescence of cross - linked raft el - ements is mediated by their common lipid environ - ments , whereas separation of raft and non - raft patches is caused by the immiscibility of different lipid phases . This view is supported by the finding that cholesterol depletion abrogated segregation . Our results are con - sistent with the view that raft domains in the plasma membrane of non - polarized cells are normally small and highly dispersed but that raft size can be modulated by oligomerization of raft components . T he functional significance of lipid diversity in cell biological processes is now being unraveled . Recent developments show the involvement of specific lip - ids and lipid derivatives in membrane structure and dy - namics . For example phosphoinositides have been shown to be important mediators of membrane – cytoskeleton in - teractions ( Hirao et al . , 1996 ) and vesicular transport . Ad - ditionally , there is evidence for a role of phosphatidic acid in the formation of specific coats mediating the formation of transport vesicles ( Roth and Sternweis , 1997 ) . Consid - erable attention has recently been drawn to lateral assem - blies of glycosphingolipids and cholesterol ( termed rafts ) , which have been proposed to form platforms for numer - ous cellular events including membrane trafficking , signal - ing , and cell adhesion . Simons and Ikonen ( 1997 ) presented a model of gly - cosphingolipid – cholesterol rafts that predicts that attrac - tive forces between sphingolipids with saturated hydrocar - bon chains and cholesterol mediate the formation of lateral lipid assemblies in an unsaturated glycerophospho - lipid environment . The fundamental principle by which rafts exert their functions is a separation or concentration of specific membrane proteins and lipids in membrane mi - crodomains . These domains may serve as platforms in the TGN for apical membrane sorting and as foci for recruit - ment and concentration of signaling molecules at the plasma membrane . In polarized epithelial cells the apical and basolateral plasma membrane strongly differ in lipid and protein com - position ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Nelson , 1989 ) . This lat - eral plasma membrane asymmetry is maintained by tight junctions which act as diffusion barriers . Membrane trans - port from the TGN to the apical or basolateral plasma membrane is mediated by distinct transport vesicles ( Wan - dinger - Ness et al . , 1990 ; Ikonen et al . , 1995 ) . Micro - domains containing glycosphingolipid and cholesterol have been suggested to function as platforms for the generation of apically destined transport vesicles whereas specific sig - nals in the cytosolic tails of transmembrane proteins con - fer basolateral targeting ( Matter and Mellman , 1994 ; Si - mons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . Cells that are not overtly polarized use similar separate apical and basolateral cog - nate routes to the cell surface ( Müsch et al . , 1996 ; Yoshi - mori et al . , 1996 ) . Whereas in epithelial cells rafts accumu - T . Harder and P . Scheiffele contributed equally to this work . Address all correspondence to K . Simons , Cell Biology and Biophysics Programme , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , D - 69012 Heidelberg , Germany . Tel . : ( 49 ) 6221 387 334 . Fax : ( 49 ) 6221 387 512 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 930 late at the apical surface , in fibroblasts basolateral and apical markers can freely mix after arrival at the cell sur - face . The organization of raft membrane domains within the plasma membrane of non - polarized cells is therefore a critical issue for understanding raft function . The distribution of several raft markers including sphin - golipids and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) 1 - anchored proteins has been analyzed on the surface of different non - epithelial cell types using immunoelectron microscopy ( Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ; Fujimoto , 1996 ) . These mark - ers where shown either to be evenly distributed over the plasma membrane or in case of the ganglioside GM1 in A431 cells to be slightly enriched in caveolae ( Parton , 1994 ) . Thus if raft domains are maintained in the plasma membrane of non - polarized cells they must be dispersed and highly dynamic and thus cannot be resolved by the mi - croscopical techniques used ( Harder and Simons , 1997 ) . One major tool currently used to study rafts is their rela - tive resistance towards solubilization with Triton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) C . This leads to the isolation of a light membrane frac - tion termed detergent - insoluble glycolipid - enriched mem - branes ( DIGs ) , which are thought to contain the remnants of the cellular raft domains aggregated together ( Brown , 1992 ; Kurzchalia et al . , 1995 ; Parton and Simons , 1995 ) . Several membrane proteins are specifically enriched in the DIG fraction and thus considered to be raft proteins . These include a class of proteins that are anchored via a GPI moiety to the outer leaflet of the cellular membranes ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . Influenza virus hemagglutinin ( HA ) is a raft - associated transmembrane protein and its DIG association was shown to depend critically on amino acids in the transmembrane domain facing the outer leaf - let of the bilayer ( Scheiffele et al . , 1997 ) . Some cytoplas - mic proteins are found in the DIG fraction and are thus thought to be associated to raft domains via the cytoplas - mic leaflet of the lipid bilayer . These include several sig - naling molecules such as G (cid:97) subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins or the src - like protein tyrosine kinases lck , fyn , and lyn that depend on multiple acylation for DIG associ - ation ( Rodgers et al . , 1994 ; Shenoy - Scaria et al . , 1994 ; Mumby , 1997 ; Wolven et al . , 1997 ) . Triton X - 100 insolubility has proven a useful starting point for the analysis of raft domains and several lines of evidence indicate the validity of this criterion . Depletion of sphingolipids or cholesterol abolish the association of several proteins with the DIG fraction as predicted from their involvement in the formation of lateral lipid assem - blies ( Cerneus et al . , 1993 ; Hanada et al . , 1995 ; Scheiffele et al . , 1997 ) . Further support comes from the observation that HA as well as GPI - anchored placental alkaline phos - phatase ( PLAP ) become DIG associated upon biosyn - thetic transport indicating their incorporation into rafts af - ter entering the Golgi complex ( Skibbens et al . , 1989 ; Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . Moreover reconstitution experi - ments of GPI - anchored PLAP into liposomes of different lipid composition showed that the Triton X - 100 insolubil - ity of PLAP critically depends on a raft lipid environment ( Schroeder et al . , 1994 ) . Recently a tight correlation be - tween detergent insolubility and the formation of a liquid - ordered phase by sphingolipids and cholesterol in a liquid crystalline lipid bilayer could be demonstrated ( Ahmed et al . , 1997 ) . Nevertheless the characterization of raft domains using Triton X - 100 insolubility has its limitations . DIGs will not represent the actual organization of rafts in cellular mem - branes as raft markers were shown to coalesce upon ex - traction with Triton X - 100 ( Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ) . A further problem is that raft affinities of different markers are difficult to characterize . It is possible that relatively weak interactions with raft lipids cannot be detected using DIG association . Moreover , differential extraction does not demonstrate that the specific attraction between lipids and between lipids and proteins are responsible for the formation of raft domains . Here we used a different ap - proach to study these interactions . We examined mem - brane proteins and lipids cross - linked with antibodies or toxins . Based on copatching behavior of different mem - brane components , our data revealed attractive or repel - lant forces between clusters of different membrane pro - teins and lipids . Our data provide evidence for specific lipid – lipid and lipid – protein interactions in cell mem - branes governing raft dispersion and clustering . Materials and Methods Cells BHK - 21 cells were maintained at 37 (cid:56) C in 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmo - sphere in G - MEM ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) , 5 % FCS , 10 % tryptose phosphate ( GIBCO BRL ) , supplemented with penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) / streptomycin ( 100 (cid:109) g / ml ) and 2 mM glutamine ( all GIBCO BRL ) . 2B2318 T – hybridoma cells ( Blackman et al . , 1992 ) as well as Jurkat T – lymphoma line ( American Type Culture Collection , Rockville , MD ) were kept in RPMI 1640 medium ( GIBCO BRL ) , 10 % FCS , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) / streptomycin ( 100 mg / ml ) , 2 mM glutamine at 37 (cid:56) C in 5 % CO 2 in a hu - midified atmosphere . Antibodies and Expression Constructs Monoclonal mouse and polyclonal rabbit anti - PLAP antibodies were ob - tained from Dako ( Glostrup , Denmark ) , anti – human transferrin receptor ( hTfR ) mAb from Boehringer Mannheim ( Mannheim , Germany ) , anti – Thy - 1 monoclonal antibody from Serotec Ltd . ( Oxford , UK ) , and the rab - bit antibody against human transferrin from Zymed Labs Inc . ( South San Francisco , CA ) . Anti - HA ( japan - strain A / Japan / 305 / 57 ) rabbit serum No . 1 was a gift from M . Roth ( University of Texas , Dallas , TX ) . Anti - HA ( japan - strain A / Japan / 305 / 57 ) rabbit serum No . 2 was generated in our laboratory using a preparation of viral membrane proteins in micelles as antigen ( Scheiffele et al . , 1997 ) . Affinity - purified anti – vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein ( VSV - G ) was prepared in our laboratory . Anti – low density lipoprotein receptor ( LDL - R ) mAb C7 was a gift from K . Matter ( University of Geneva , Geneva , Switzerland ) . Anti – human fyn polyclonal antibodies were obtained from G . Alonso ( European Molecular Biology Laboratory [ EMBL ] , Heidelberg , Germany ) . Preabsorbed secondary FITC goat anti – rabbit or rhodamine goat anti – mouse antibodies , as well as 6 - nm colloidal gold goat anti – mouse and 12 - nm gold goat anti – rabbit were from Dianova ( Hamburg , Germany ) . A PLAP expression construct driven by Rous sarcoma virus ( RSV ) pro - moter was obtained from D . Brown ( State University of New York , Stony Brook , NY ; Brown et al . , 1989 ) , pSG - 5 expression construct for human fyn driven by SV - 40 early promoter was obtained from G . Alonso . All of the following expression constructs use the cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) pro - moter . The hTfR expression construct in pCMV5 was described previ - 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CTx , choleratoxin B subunit ; DIGs , detergent - insoluble glycolipid - enriched complexes ; GM1 , ganglioside GM1 ; GPI , glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ; HA , hemagglutinin ; hTfR , hu - man transferrin receptor ; LDL - R , low density lipoprotein receptor ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; PLAP , placental alkaline phosphatase ; VSV - G , ve - sicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein . Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 931 ously ( Harder and Gerke , 1993 ) . A hTfR deletion mutant ( hTfR del 5 – 41 ) lacking amino acids 5 – 41 that deletes the basolateral targeting as well as the endocytosis signal ( Odorizzi and Trowbridge , 1997 ) was constructed by PCR using the oligonucleotide 5 (cid:57) - TCCTGGGATCCCAGAATG - ATGGATCAAGCTGTAGATGAAGAAG - 3 (cid:57) and the oligonucleotide 5 (cid:57) - CTACGGAATTCTTACTTACCCAGGCGGTTCATTTCGATATCA - GTGTAAAACTCATTGTCAATGTCCC - 3 (cid:57) in a PCR reaction with the hTfR wild - type cDNA as template . The resulting product was cloned as a EcoRI – BamHI fragment into pcDNA3 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . HA wild type ( japan - strain A / Japan / 305 / 57 ) was cloned as a HindIII – BamHI fragment into pcDNA3 ( Invitrogen ) , pCB6 HA Y543 expression con - struct and wild - type HA cDNA were obtained from M . Roth . HA - tail mi - nus was constructed using HA wild - type cloned into pcDNA3 as a sub - strate for a PCR reaction using T7 primer ( Pharmacia Biotechnology , Inc . , Piscataway , NJ ) and the oligonucleotide 5 (cid:57) - CTACATCCAGAAA - GAGATCCCAGC - 3 (cid:57) , and then cloned into pcDNA3 . This introduced a stop codon at amino acid 536 , immediately after the transmembrane re - gion of HA , thus deleting the complete cytoplasmic tail region . The LDL - R constructs LDL YA - 18 and LDL YY - A18A35 in pCB6 were obtained from K . Matter ( Matter et al . , 1992 ) . All plasmids were purified using Qui - agen columns ( Quiagen , Inc . , Chatsworth , CA ) according to the manufac - turer’s instruction . Transfection and Viral Infection 1 / 300 ( or 1 / 200 for biochemical experiments ) from a confluent BHK cell 75 - cm 2 tissue culture flask ( Nalge ; Nunc Inc . , Naperville , IL ) were seeded in 2 ml of full medium on glass coverslips for immunofluorescence or Thermanox coverslips ( Nunc Inc . ) , for electron microscopy in 3 - cm tissue culture dishes . Per dish , 1 – 2 (cid:109) g of each expression plasmid was used for cotransfection . Transfections were performed in Opti - MEM ( GIBCO BRL ) with 2 – 4 (cid:109) l of lipofectamine ( GIBCO BRL ) according to the in - structions of the manufacturer . The DNA / lipofectamine was kept on the cells for 4 h . 5 (cid:51) 10 5 Jurkat T – lymphoma cells suspended in 1 ml Opti - MEM were transfected for 4 h using 4 (cid:109) l of lipofectamine and 2 (cid:109) g of plasmid DNA in Falcon 15 - ml polystyrene tubes ( Becton Dickinson lab - ware , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) . Cells were collected before and after transfec - tion by centrifugation at 800 rpm in a Megafuge 1 . 0 centrifuge ( Heraeus Sepatech , Hanau , Germany ) for 5 min . The transfected cells were ana - lyzed after 16 h incubation at 37 (cid:56) C in full medium . For infection with VSV , cells were washed with PBS and virus adsorp - tion was performed for 1 h at 37 (cid:56) C in Infection medium ( MEM , 50 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 3 , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) / streptomycin ( 100 (cid:109) g / ml ) , 0 . 2 % BSA ) using 20 pfu / cell . Infection was allowed to continue for 1 h and VSV - G was chased to the surface with a cycloheximide block ( 5 (cid:109) g / ml ) for 1 h . Immunofluorescence and Antibody - induced Patching For immunofluorescence , cells were fixed for 4 min in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS at 8 (cid:56) C and subsequent incubation in methanol at (cid:50) 20 (cid:56) C for 5 min ( Osborn et al . , 1988 ) . The fixed cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 (cid:56) C with the respective dilution of the antibodies in PBS , 2 mg / ml BSA ( PBS / BSA ) , and washed three times for 3 min at room temperature in PBS / BSA followed by incubation with the respective secondary antibodies for 1 h at 37 (cid:56) C . After washing , the cells were mounted in 20 mM Tris HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 80 % glycerol , 4 % ( wt / vol ) N - propyl gallate as anti - fade . For the patching experiments antibodies were dialyzed against PBS ( except the colloidal gold – labeled antibodies ) . Dilutions were made in MEM , 50 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 3 , 2 mg / ml BSA . The monoclonal as well as the polyclonal antibody against PLAP were diluted 1 : 35 . Anti - HA serum No . 1 was preabsorbed against nontransfected BHK cells and used 1 : 20 . Anti - HA serum No . 2 was used at 1 : 200 . Mouse mAb against LDL - R was used as 1 (cid:51) tissue culture supernatant , anti – VSV - G affinity - purified anti - serum at 1 : 200 , anti - transferrin rabbit polyclonal at 1 : 100 , anti - hTfR mono - clonal at 1 : 100 . Cells were incubated for 1 h at 12 (cid:56) C with the respective combination of antibodies , and then washed briefly at 4 (cid:56) C in PBS / BSA . Further cross - linking with secondary antibodies was performed at 12 (cid:56) C for 1 h . Either 1 : 100 dilution of the mixed fluorescence - labeled secondary or 1 : 20 of the colloidal gold secondary antibodies were used . In some ex - periments , the incubation with primary and secondary antibodies were performed at 37 (cid:56) C twice for 20 min . For fluorescence , cells were fixed and mounted as described above . Pictures exhibiting easily recognizable patches of the two respective markers were taken on an Axiophot micro - scope ( Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) coupled to a Colour Coolview 8 - bit CCD color camera ( Photonic Science , Millham , UK ) . Filter settings for simultaneous detection of FITC and rhodamine signals were used . The digital images were processed using Photoshop software ( Adobe Systems , Inc . , Mountain View , CA ) on a Macintosh computer ( Apple Computer Co . , Cupertino , CA ) . For better visualization , images showing a single color channel were transferred to a gray scale . We ensured that the linear signal intensities detected for both fluorophors were covered by a linear scale of the pixel intensities . Pictures were taken focusing on the apex of the cells . Under these conditions , fluorescence signal from the ventral side of the cells was not detected . For electron microscopy , colloidal gold – labeled cells on Thermanox plastic coverslips were fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( Serva , Heidelberg , Germany ) in 100 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 35 , for 30 min at room tem - perature , thoroughly rinsed in tri - distilled water incubated with 4 % OsO 4 for 30 min , rinsed again , and then incubated in 3 % uranyl acetate . After gradual dehydration in ethanol the coverslips were embedded in Epon . After removing the coverslips , ultrathin ( 50 – 70 nm ) sections were coun - terstained in 3 % uranyl acetate for 5 min , Reynold’s lead citrate for 1 min , and then analyzed on a 10 - C electron microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) . Choles - terol extraction was performed as described ( Klein et al . , 1995 ; Keller and Simons , 1998 a ) . Briefly , BHK cells were extracted with 10 mM methyl - (cid:98) - cyclodextrin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) in MEM , 50 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 3 , 0 . 35 g / liter carbonate ( low carbonate ) at 37 (cid:56) C on a rocking platform for 1 h , and subsequently processed as described above . Quantitation of Copatching The expression levels of the two transiently expressed markers varied from cell to cell on one coverslip . This and the differences in cell shape precluded a computer - based quantitation of the copatching . For quantita - tive analysis images of 20 randomly selected cells expressing each pair of markers were stored as digital files in a coded form . By inspection the im - ages were scored in a blinded fashion by an individual not involved in the recording into four categories of copatching / segregation : ( 1 ) coclustering ( (cid:46) 80 % overlap ) ; ( 2 ) partial coclustering ( clearly coinciding spots ) ; ( 3 ) random distribution ; and ( 4 ) segregation . Only areas of the cells that were in focus were considered for quantitation . The percentage of cells falling into the respective categories in at least four independent experiments ( each performed in parallel ) were expressed as average (cid:54) SD , thus ensur - ing objectivity and reproducibility of the scoring . Choleratoxin – FITC Labeling of GM1 Labeling Jurkat cells were transfected with PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 expression constructs as described above . Copatching of GM1 with PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 was performed by simultaneous incubation in suspension ( in 500 (cid:109) l MEM , 2 mg / ml BSA per 5 (cid:51) 10 5 cells ) at 12 (cid:56) C with the anti - PLAP or hTfR mAb and FITC – choleratoxin B subunit ( FITC - CTx ; Sigma Chemi - cal Co . ) ( 8 (cid:109) g / ml ) under gentle rocking . Subsequently , primary antibodies were further clustered with rhodamine anti – mouse antibodies . Cells were collected , washed before and between incubations by centrifugation at 2 , 000 rpm in a tabletop centrifuge ( Eppendorf , Hamburg , Germany ) at 4 (cid:56) C , and then suspending in 1 ml PBS / BSA . Cells were attached to polyly - sine ( 5 mg / ml ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) , coated microscope slides , fixed , and then mounted as described above . 2B2318 T – hybridoma cells were incu - bated with anti – Thy - 1 mAb and FITC - CTx followed by rhodamine anti – mouse antibodies as described above for the Jurkat cells . Flotation Gradients BHK cells on 3 - cm dishes expressing PLAP were used 16 h after transfec - tion . In parallel , untransfected cells in 3 - cm culture dishes were infected with VSV for 1 h followed by a 2 - h incubation at 37 (cid:56) C with a chase of cy - cloheximide during the last hour . Cells were washed in PBS , and VSV - G and PLAP were clustered as described above using affinity - purified , anti – VSV - G and anti - PLAP mAbs , followed by incubation with the respective secondary antibodies . Cells were washed twice in ice - cold PBS before , be - tween , and after the incubations . Cells were scraped in PBS and spun down at 2 , 000 rpm 4 (cid:56) C in an tabletop centrifuge ( Eppendorf ) . The cells were subsequently lysed in 200 (cid:109) l TNE ( 25 mM Tris HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , CLAP protease inhibitor cocktail ) , 10 % sucrose , 2 % Triton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) or 30 (cid:56) C , respectively . The cell pellet was resuspended thoroughly by pipetting through a 200 - (cid:109) l yellow pipetting tip and incubated for 20 min on ice or 30 (cid:56) C , respectively , and then mixed again after 10 min with 400 (cid:109) l of cold 60 % Optiprep™ ( Nycomed - Pharma , Oslo , Norway ) was added to the extract and the mix was trans - ferred to an SW60 centrifuge tube ( Beckman , München , Germany ) . The The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 932 sample was overlaid with a 600 - (cid:109) l step of each of 35 % , 30 % , 25 % , 20 % , 0 % Optiprep™ in TNE , 10 % sucrose , 2 % Triton X - 100 . The gradients were spun for 4 h , at 40 , 000 rpm at 4 (cid:56) C . Six fractions from the top of the gradient were collected . The fractions were TCA precipitated and ana - lyzed by Western blot with anti – VSV - G mAb P5D4 ( Kreis , 1986 ) and anti - PLAP rabbit polyclonal antibodies followed by HRP - coupled sec - ondary antibodies ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) and ECL ( Amersham Buchler GmbH , Braunschweig , Germany ) . Results Extracellularly exposed lipids and membrane proteins can be laterally cross - linked with specific antibodies or multi - valent bacterial toxins . This causes a redistribution of these plasma membrane elements which tend to form patches on the cell surface ( Spiegel et al . , 1984 ) . Here we studied the patching behavior of different proteins and lip - ids . We focused specifically on putative glycosphingolipid – cholesterol raft elements and compared their behavior to membrane components presumed to have low affinity for raft domains . The starting point to define raft - associated proteins and lipids was their association to the Triton X - 100 – insoluble DIG membrane fraction . Our aim was to analyze how raft and non - raft domains are organized in the plasma membrane . For this purpose we compared the patching behavior of pairs of either two raft membrane proteins or a raft pro - tein and non - raft protein in fibroblastoid BHK 21 cells . We then used fluorescence - labeled choleratoxin to visual - ize and patch the raft - associated ganglioside GM1 . The cells were incubated at low temperatures with a mouse mAb against one protein and a rabbit polyclonal antibody against the other protein marker followed by the two dif - ferent fluorescence - or colloidal gold – labeled secondary antibodies . The relative distribution of the patches of the two different markers could then be analyzed using immu - nofluorescence or electron microscopy , respectively . Copatching of Influenza HA and GPI - anchored PLAP We expressed as raft - associated protein markers the trim - eric transmembrane protein influenza hemagglutinin ( HA ) and the GPI - anchored dimeric protein placental alkaline phosphatase ( PLAP ) . A well - characterized artifact when studying the distribution of a GPI anchored on the cell surface proteins is the antibody - induced redistribution of these proteins into patches if the proteins are not properly cross - linked by the fixative ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . In our hands , paraformaldehyde fixation protocols resulted in varying degrees of patching of PLAP ( data not shown ) . We obtained reproducible results using a fixation protocol using brief formaldehyde fixation and subsequent incuba - tion in methanol at (cid:50) 20 (cid:56) C ( FA / MeOH - fixation ; Osborn et al . , 1988 ) . In cotransfected BHK cells , both markers were then evenly distributed over the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 , A – C ) . Thus this fixation procedure produces the dispersed patterns of distribution published for other GPI - anchored proteins in line with previous detailed studies that showed no indication for clustering of GPI - anchored proteins on the cell surface of mammalian cells ( Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ) . In cotransfected BHK cells , both markers were evenly distributed over the plasma mem - brane ( Fig . 1 , A – C ) . This is in line with previous detailed studies that showed no indication for clustering of GPI - anchored proteins on the cell surface of mammalian cells ( Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ) . The additional intracellular staining derived from Golgi and / or endosomal localization of the overexpressed proteins . For an immunofluores - cence analysis of antibody - induced cross - linking , we si - multaneously incubated the cells with an anti - PLAP mAb , and either one of two different polyclonal rabbit sera against influenza virus HA . This incubation was per - formed at 12 (cid:56) C , thus minimizing metabolic activity of the cells during the incubations ( transferrin is not internalized under these conditions ; data not shown ) . This was fol - lowed by an incubation with the respective FITC - and rhodamine - coupled secondary antibodies at 12 (cid:56) C . Micro - scopical inspection of the fluorescence signal showed re - distribution of both markers into patches . These patches overlapped in closely coinciding patches showing that the patches of the independently cross - linked markers coa - lesce ( Fig . 1 , D – J ) . The extensive overlap of the two cross - linked raft markers shows that there exist attractive forces between the independently formed patches of PLAP and HA . We then analyzed whether attractions between the independently cross - linked raft markers can still be de - tected when the cells are incubated at 37 (cid:56) C . We performed the patching experiments at 37 (cid:56) C with short antibody incu - bations ( 20 min for each the primary and the secondary antibodies , respectively ) . Endocytosis of PLAP and HA during these incubation time is (cid:44) 5 % ( Verkade , P . , and T . Harder , unpublished results ) . We observed that the cross - linked PLAP and HA copatch at the surface of the BHK cells ( Fig . 1 , K – M ) although not as extensively as at 12 (cid:56) C and the patches were often larger in size . These differ - ences are possibly due to shorter incubation times used and cellular responses to the patching of the membrane components . Nevertheless , this shows that the forces re - sponsible for copatching are not only detectable at 12 (cid:56) C but exist under physiological temperatures . To determine the properties of the HA molecules that are responsible for these attractive forces we analyzed the coclustering of mutants of the HA molecule . We used a mutant of HA where the cytoplasmic tail was deleted ( HA (cid:68)(cid:84) ) . Here , as with the wild - type HA , an extensive overlap of HA (cid:68)(cid:84) and PLAP was apparent ( Fig . 1 , N – P ) showing that copatching is not determined by a direct in - teraction between HA and cytosolic components . We then tested the HA mutant in which cysteine 543 is mutated to tyrosine ( HA Y543 ) . This variant of HA contains a baso - lateral targeting signal and is efficiently internalized via clathrin - coated pits ( Lazarovits and Roth , 1988 ; Brewer and Roth , 1991 ) . HA Y543 copatched with GPI - anchored PLAP after antibody - induced cross - linking to the same extent as wild - type HA ( Fig . 1 , R – T ) showing that a baso - lateral targeting signal and the potential to interact with a clathrin lattice does not perturb the interactions responsi - ble for the copatching . Segregation of Clustered PLAP from Patches of Transferrin Receptor and LDL Receptor To analyze whether a common preference for raft lipid en - vironment mediates the tight association of the cross - linked HA and PLAP we cross - linked membrane proteins not associating to DIGs . We tested copatching of the wild - Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 933 type hTfR , the LDL - R , and VSV - G in patching experiments with PLAP . Together with PLAP we transiently expressed hTfR and the LDL - R in BHK cells . Immunofluorescence on FA / MeOH - fixed cells showed that the hTfR and PLAP expression generated a strong staining that appeared evenly distributed over the whole plasma membrane ( Fig . 2 , A – C ) . We did not detect a concentration of the hTfR in coated pits most probably because the clathrin - dependent internalization pathway is saturated by the high number of receptors in the plasma membrane ( Warren et al . , 1997 ) . Intracellular staining derives from Golgi and endosomal localization of the overexpressed markers . We then fol - Figure 1 . Copatching of cross - linked PLAP with influenza HA . The left column shows PLAP distri - bution in different experiments , the middle column HA distribution , and the right column the merge of the two signals . ( A – C ) Immunoflu - orescence of PLAP and wild - type HA on fixed BHK cells . ( D – M ) Co - patching of PLAP with HA wild type . G – J show a detail of D – F . K – M show the copatching of PLAP and HA at 37 (cid:56) C . ( N – P ) Copatching of PLAP with HA tail minus , and ( R – T ) HA 543Y . PLAP antibodies were detected using rhodamine anti – mouse ( red ) , HA antibodies using FITC anti – rabbit - labeled ( green ) secondary antibodies . Bars : ( C ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( F ) 5 (cid:109) m ; ( J , M , P , and T ) 3 (cid:109) m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 934 lowed the behavior of cross - linked markers . Antibody - induced cross - linking of hTfR alone by incubation with a mouse mAb and respective secondary antibodies caused the formation of patches ( data not shown ) . If PLAP was simultaneously cross - linked with hTfR using a polyclonal rabbit antibody , the patches of the respective markers were separated from patched PLAP ( Fig . 2 , D – J ) . In cells ex - pressing high amounts of both markers this lead to a mosaic staining covering the complete cell surface . Importantly , the same results were obtained when a transferrin poly - clonal antibody was used in conjunction with a mouse anti - PLAP mAb to induce simultaneous cross - linking of hTfR and PLAP ( data not shown ) . Therefore segregation of the hTfR and PLAP patches was independent from the antibody combination used . These data clearly show that the attrac - tive forces between cross - linked HA and PLAP molecules are not detectable between patches of hTfR and PLAP . To rule out the possibility that interaction with clathrin - coated pits is responsible for the segregation , we con - structed a mutant of hTfR where the cytosolic amino acids 5 – 41 are deleted ( hTfR del 5 – 41 ) . This deletion destroys basolateral targeting and renders the receptor incapable of Figure 2 . Patching of PLAP and transmembrane proteins hTfR , hTfR del 5 – 41 , LDL - R YA18 , and VSV - G . The left column shows PLAP distri - bution . The middle column shows distribution of hTfR ( B , E , H , and L ) , LDL - R YA 18 mutant ( O ) , and VSV - G ( S ) . The right column shows the merge of the two signals . A – C shows immunofluores - cence of PLAP ( green ) and hTfR ( red ) on fixed BHK cells . D – J shows segregation of patched PLAP ( green ) and hTfR ( red ) . G – J shows a de - tail of D – F . K – M shows seg - regation patches of cross - linked PLAP ( green ) and hTfR del 5 – 41 ( red ) at 37 (cid:56) C . N – P shows patches of cross - linked PLAP ( green ) and LDL - R YA18 ( red ) . R – T show patches of PLAP ( red ) and VSV - G ( green ) . Bars : ( C ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( F ) 5 (cid:109) m ; ( J , M , P , and T ) 3 (cid:109) m . Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 935 interacting with clathrin - coated pits ( Odorizzi and Trow - bridge , 1997 ) . We observed that patches of hTfR del 5 – 41 were clearly segregated from cross - linked PLAP ( data not shown ) . Moreover , this mutant allowed us to test whether patched TfR and PLAP still segregate at 37 (cid:56) C . We per - formed patching in cells coexpressing hTfR del 5 – 41 and PLAP at 37 (cid:56) C . The incubation times were 20 min for the primary antibody and secondary antibody , respectively . Under these conditions patches of PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 were sharply separated at the surface of the BHK cells ( Fig . 2 , K – M ) showing that segregation of hTfR and PLAP can be detected at physiological temperatures . We then tested LDL - R in the patching experiments to - gether with PLAP . We expressed two mutants of the LDL - R . In the first mutant YA 18 the signal for coated pit localiza - tion—overlapping with the distal basolateral localization signal—is destroyed . The second mutant , YYA18A35 , has lost both basolateral targeting signals and clathrin - coated pit localization signal and is transported apically in MDCK cells ( Matter et al . , 1992 ) . We used a mouse mAb against LDL - R and a polyclonal anti - PLAP antibody followed by the respective fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies to compare the patches of LDL - R and PLAP . In both mu - tants there was little overlap visible ( Fig . 2 , N – P ; and data not shown ) . However , in some cells clearly coinciding spots could be detected . We performed a quantitative anal - ysis of the relative overlap of patched PLAP and the LDL - R YA 18 variant . 20 randomly taken fluorescence images of PLAP patched together with HA , VSV - G ( see below ) , LDL - R YA 18 , and hTfR were stored as coded digital files . The images were scored into four categories by an in - dividual not involved in the recording of the pictures : ( 1 ) coclustering ( (cid:46) 80 % overlap ) ; ( 2 ) partial coclustering ( clearly coinciding spots ) ; ( 3 ) random distribution ; and ( 4 ) segre - gation . The percentages of cells falling into the four differ - ent categories are shown as averages from four independent experiments ( Fig . 3 ) . The objectivity and reproducibility of the scoring is indicated by the relatively low variation of the scores for every pair of markers . This analysis showed that patches of LDL - R and PLAP did not exhibit the ex - tensive overlap seen for HA and PLAP clusters , nor were they as sharply separated as patches of hTfR and PLAP . We then tested the VSV - G protein , which is also soluble in Triton X - 100 . As none of the expression constructs ( in - cluding those that gave good expression in HeLa cells ) re - sulted in efficient VSV - G expression in our BHK 21 cell system we infected PLAP expressing BHK cells with ve - sicular stomatitis virus . VSV - G and PLAP were clustered with a rabbit polyclonal antibody and a mouse mAb , re - spectively . We observed partial coclustering ( Fig . 2 , R – T ) . Quantification showed that copatching was intermediate between that observed for HA and PLAP and that of LDL - R and PLAP , respectively ( Fig . 3 ) . Taken together we observed that different membrane proteins exhibit different degrees of copatching with PLAP ranging from a high degree of copatching of HA to a complete segregation in case of hTfR . Involvement of Glycosphingolipids and Cholesterol If HA and PLAP copatching is mediated by a common raft lipid preference raft lipids are predicted to copatch with PLAP . Glycosphingolipids are considered to be ma - jor constituents of raft domains because of their strong en - richment in the DIG membrane fraction . We therefore an - alyzed the patching behavior of the ganglioside GM1 . GM1 was detected and clustered together with PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 using FITC - CTx as a specific clustering agent . Importantly , cholera toxin is pentavalent for GM1 thus causing the formation of clusters of five GM1 mole - cules , but not of large GM1 lattices ( Merrit et al . , 1994 ) . BHK cells contain too low amounts of GM1 to be detected in our experiments . We therefore used Jurkat cells tran - siently expressing PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 . Binding of FITC - CTx to these cells was performed during the incuba - tion with the primary antibodies against PLAP and hTfR . By fluorescence microscopy the FITC - CTx / GM1 patches could be compared with the rhodamine signal of the sec - ondary antibodies used to cross - link the anti - PLAP anti - bodies . This analysis showed an extensive overlap between the antibody - induced patches of PLAP and the patches of ganglioside GM1 induced by CTx ( Fig . 4 , A – C ) . These data clearly show that the cross - linked glycosphingolipids copatch with PLAP supporting a specific involvement of lipid interactions in the copatching phenomenon . Importantly , in the control experiments clustered hTfR del 5 – 41 is excluded from patches of CTx – cross - linked GM1 showing again that hTfR clusters are segregated from the lipid domains of patched GM1 ( Fig . 4 , D – F ) . This strengthens the view that a distinct lipid environment of hTfR patches and PLAP / GM1 causes their separation . Figure 3 . Quantitation of copatching of influenza HA , VSV - G , LDL - R , and hTfR with cross - linked PLAP . Patches of the differ - ent membrane markers were scored into four categories : ( 1 ) co - patching ( (cid:46) 80 % overlap ) ; ( 2 ) partial copatching ( clearly overlap - ping regions ) ; ( 3 ) random distribution ; ( 4 ) segregation . The percentages of cells falling into each category are expressed as av - erages and SD from at least four experiments . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 936 We also tested whether of cholesterol depletion has an effect on the patching behavior . Cholesterol was extracted from the cells using methyl - (cid:98) - cyclodextrin , a cyclic sugar with a hydrophobic cavity that specifically binds choles - terol rendering it soluble in aqueous solution ( Klein et al . , 1995 ) . ( See Keller and Simons , [ 1998 a ] for detailed charac - terization of cholesterol depletion in BHK cells . ) This pro - cedure has been shown extract (cid:122) 70 % of cellular choles - terol from BHK cells ( Keller and Simons , 1998 a ) and to abolish association of several raft proteins with the Triton X - 100 – insoluble membranes indicating a weakening of in - teractions with raft domains ( Scheiffele et al . , 1997 ) . We followed the patching behavior of PLAP ( Fig . 5 A ) as well as hTfR ( Fig . 5 B ) in methyl - (cid:98) - cyclodextrin extracted cells . Indeed in comparison to control cells the clusters of PLAP in the cholesterol - depleted cells were much smaller and diffusely distributed over the cell surface suggesting that the forces responsible for the patching the antibody - induced clusters are disrupted . Importantly also the patch - ing of cross - linked hTfR was inhibited showing the impor - tance of cholesterol in both patching phenomena . Patches of GPI - anchored PLAP Accumulate src - like Tyrosine Kinase fyn Cross - linked raft components may sequester and stabilize raft lipid domains that coalesce to become large mem - brane patches . This predicts that these patches are en - riched in specific non – cross - linked raft membrane proteins which preferentially partition into these lipid domains . To test this we followed the distribution of non – cross - linked PLAP in cells with patched HA ( and vice versa ) . We could occasionally demonstrate enrichment of non – cross - linked PLAP in HA patches , this behavior was however quite variable ( data not shown ) . Possibly , movement of proteins with an extracellular domain into the patches is sterically hindered by tightly packed proteins and antibodies . To cir - cumvent this problem we studied whether patching of PLAP—associated to the outer leaflet of the plasma mem - brane via a GPI – lipid anchor—influences the distribution of raft proteins anchored in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane bilayer . In these experiments we stud - ied the distribution of the src - like protein tyrosine kinase fyn , which is anchored into the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane by two fatty acyl chains and may specif - ically partition into raft domains ( Wolven et al . , 1997 ) . BHK cells were transfected and transiently coexpressed fyn and PLAP . Immunofluorescence after FA / MeOH fix - ation using anti - fyn polyclonal antibodies showed that fyn was mostly evenly distributed over the plasma membrane ( Fig . 6 A ) . The morphological changes and formation of intracellular aggregates in fyn - overexpressing cells did not affect the analysis . PLAP patching was then induced at 12 (cid:56) C by incubation with anti - PLAP mAb and respective rhodamine labeled anti – mouse antibodies . Subsequently , the cells were fixed using FA / MeOH and the distribution of fyn was analyzed by immunofluorescence using poly - clonal rabbit anti - fyn antibodies and FITC - coupled sec - ondary antibodies . Most interestingly patching of PLAP ( Fig . 6 B ) caused a dramatic change in fyn pattern ( Fig . 6 C ) that became concentrated in domains of the plasma mem - brane that frequently coincided with patched PLAP ( see insert Fig . 6 , B and C ) . In control experiments the effect of TfR patching was analyzed in BHK cells coexpressing hTfR and fyn using anti - hTfR mAb for patching as de - scribed above . In most cells there was no visible effect of hTfR patching on the distribution of fyn that remained evenly distributed in the plasma membrane . Occasionally patching of hTfR induced concentration of fyn in subdo - mains of the plasma membrane that however did not sig - nificantly overlap with hTfR patches ( data not shown ) . These findings show that patches of outer leaflet - anchored PLAP attract inner leaflet components of the lipid bilayer and strongly support the notion that patches of PLAP rep - resent specific raft lipid domains . Coclustering of HA and PLAP Is Independent of Caveolae We used electron microscopy to study the morphology of Figure 4 . Patching of GM1 / cholera toxin with PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 in Jurkat T – lymphoma cells . FITC - CTx conjugate was used to patch and stain GM 1 ( green ) . Respective mAbs against PLAP or hTfR were used followed by incubation with rhodamine - coupled secondary antibodies ( red ) . PLAP ( A ) and GM1 ( B ) show extensive copatching ( merge in C ) . Patched hTfR del 5 – 41 ( D ) and GM1 patches ( E ) are largely exclusive ( merge in F ) . Bar , 5 (cid:109) m . Figure 5 . PLAP and hTfR patching depends on mem - brane cholesterol . BHK cells transiently expressing PLAP ( A ) and hTfR ( B ) were de - pleted of membrane choles - terol using cyclodextrin ex - traction . PLAP and hTfR were cross - linked using anti - PLAP and anti - hTfR mAb , respectively , followed by rhodamine - coupled second - ary antibodies . Patching of PLAP as well as hTfR is in - hibited under these condi - tions . Bar , 5 (cid:109) m . Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 937 the patched membrane components . First , PLAP and TfR were coexpressed in BHK cells and copatching was per - formed as described above . However , now colloidal gold - labeled secondary antibodies were used to detect and cross - link the respective primary antibodies . 6 - nm gold - labeled anti – mouse antibodies were used for the mouse mAb against hTfR and PLAP polyclonal rabbit antibodies were cross - linked with 12 - nm gold . The relative distribu - tion of the membrane proteins was analyzed in Epon sec - tions of the transfected cells . The analysis confirmed the sharp segregation of PLAP and hTfR patches seen in im - munofluorescence . Both patches covered large areas of the plasma membrane ( (cid:46) 500 nm ) and the transition of one domain to the other is very sharp ( Fig . 7 A , arrow - heads ) . PLAP patches are occasionally found in the vicin - ity of caveolar invaginations ( Fig . 7 C , arrowhead ) but were mostly detected at smooth domains of the plasma membrane . Importantly , hTfR patches only occasionally coincided with clathrin - coated invaginations ( Fig . 7 B , ar - row ) in line with our interpretation that the high level of hTfR overexpression saturates the plasma membrane AP2 / clathrin internalization pathway . This together with the segregation of patches of PLAP and hTfR del 5 – 41 shows that segregation is independent of the interaction of hTfR with clathrin - coated pits . We then studied the copatching of two raft markers us - ing PLAP - and HA - overexpressing cells in electron mi - croscopy . PLAP was cross - linked with anti - PLAP mAb followed by 6 - nm gold - labeled anti – mouse antibodies . 12 - nm gold antibodies were used for the detection and clustering of rabbit polyclonal anti - HA antibodies . As seen in immu - nofluorescence the two gold particles showed extensive colocalization on the cell surface showing that movement of the independently cross - linked raft markers into closely coinciding patches can be followed at the electron - micro - scopical level . Copatches of HA and PLAP are mostly found at non - invaginated regions of the PM ( Fig . 7 , E and F , arrow depicts clathrin - coated invagination ) . Thus the copatching of HA and PLAP cannot be explained by par - allel movement of the two raft markers into caveolae as described previously for coclustering of two different GPI - anchored proteins ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . Several reports describe a redistribution of raft markers into caveolae following cross - linking with antibodies or multivalent toxins ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ; Parton , 1994 ; Fujimoto , 1996 ) We therefore addressed not only the role of caveolae as defined by morphological criteria , but also the possible involvement of caveolin 1 , a cholesterol - bind - ing protein involved in the formation of caveolar invagina - tions . We performed copatching experiments in 2B2318 T – cell hybridoma cells . These cells have been shown not to express caveolin and as a consequence not to have caveolae ( Fra et al . , 1995 ) . As raft markers we used GPI - anchored Thy - 1 cross - linked with an mAb and GM1 cross - linked with FITC - CTx . After simultaneous incubation with anti – Thy - 1 antibodies and FITC - CTx followed by further cross - linking with the rhodamine anti – mouse antibody , we ob - served extensive overlap of the two markers ( Fig . 8 ) . These observations demonstrate that copatching of the two membrane elements requires neither caveolin nor caveolae . Stabilization of Membrane Domains by Antibody - induced Cross - linking Triton X - 100 insolubility has been used as a diagnostic tool to identify raft membrane proteins . We therefore asked how far detergent insolubility is related to antibody - induced patching , which we here used as an indication for Figure 6 . Accumulation of fyn in membrane domains formed by patched PLAP . A shows distribution of overexpressed fyn in FA / MeOH - fixed BHK cells . Patches of PLAP are shown in B , and the corresponding distribution of fyn in C . The inserts show a de - tail of the overlap between PLAP and fyn staining . The faint dif - fuse signal in the rhodamine ( PLAP ) channel that coincides with the intensely bright fyn aggregates ( FITC ) is most probably be - cause of a small overflow from the FITC to the rhodamine channel . The overlap between the patched PLAP and the signal from the fyn immunofluorescence at the cell surface is however clearly indepen - dent from the intracellular fyn aggregates . Bars : ( A ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( C ) 5 (cid:109) m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 938 specific raft lipid – protein interactions . We tested whether cross - linking with antibodies had an effect on the associa - tion of PLAP to a Triton X - 100 – insoluble membrane frac - tion . We transfected cells transiently with the PLAP ex - pression construct and cross - linked as described above with antibodies . Subsequently the cells were solubilized with 2 % Triton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) C and subjected to flotation by a Optiprep™ density gradient centrifugation in order iso - late a Triton X - 100 – insoluble membrane fractions . PLAP was detected after solubilization with Triton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) C by Western blot analysis of the gradient fractions ( Fig . 9 , left ) . PLAP floated to 20 % Optiprep™ irrespective of whether it was cross - linked with antibodies or not . Inter - estingly , the yield of PLAP in the light Triton X - 100 – resis - tant membrane fraction was significantly higher if PLAP was cross - linked with antibodies . Stabilization of DIG association by antibody - induced patching became even more evident if solubilization was performed at 30 (cid:56) C , at which temperature uncross - linked PLAP became com - pletely solubilized . Under these conditions a significant fraction of the patched PLAP floats with the detergent - resistant low density membranes . This protective effect was also observable if cells were cholesterol - depleted us - ing cyclodextrin , i . e . , under conditions that lead to reduc - tion of morphologically visible copatching and to a de - crease of insolubility of monomeric PLAP ( not shown ) . This indicates that either residual cholesterol may be suffi - cient to produce a raft - like environment in the clusters of PLAP or that the antibody cross - linked PLAP molecules gather lipids such as glycosphingolipids independently of cholesterol and that this assembly is then protected against Triton X - 100 solubilization . We next studied the effects of cross - linking on the Tri - ton X - 100 solubility of VSV - G . Cells were infected with VSV for 2 h and then treated with cycloheximide to chase VSV - G to the cell surface . After extraction with 2 % Tri - ton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) C VSV - G the samples were analyzed by Optiprep™ gradient centrifugation ( Fig . 9 , right ) . Even though VSV - G copatches to a certain extent with PLAP it is Triton X - 100 soluble and the bulk of VSV - G resided in Figure 7 . Electron microscopical anal - ysis of patched membrane compo - nents . A and B show separation of PLAP patches ( 12 - nm gold ) and hTfR patches ( 6 - nm gold ) . Arrowheads , the sharp boundaries between the patches . Arrows in B show a clathrin - coated in - vagination labeled for hTfR . C shows patches of PLAP surrounding caveo - lar - like , noncoated invaginations ( ar - rowhead ) . D and E show copatching of HA ( 12 - nm gold ) and PLAP ( 6 - nm gold ) on smooth membrane regions . Arrow in E marks clathrin - coated in - vagination . Bars : ( A – C ) 250 nm ; ( D and E ) 150 nM . Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 939 the heavy Optiprep™ fraction irrespective whether it was cross - linked with antibodies or not . Thus the lipid associ - ated to VSV - G clusters are less tightly bound than the lip - ids associated to cross - linked PLAP . Discussion Biophysical analysis on artificial membranes have demon - strated cohesive forces between glycosphingolipids them - selves and between sphingolipids and cholesterol ( for re - view see Brown , 1998 ) . These forces are thought to be responsible for the formation of domains in an environ - ment of unsaturated glycerophospholipids . In cell mem - branes these forces are postulated to mediate a similar as - sembly of sphingolipid – cholesterol raft domains predicted to be in a L o phase separated from an L d phase of the sur - rounding unsaturated phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) - rich envi - ronment . These different liquid membrane phases have been first described in model membranes containing cho - lesterol and PC with saturated acyl chains ( Sankaram and Thompson , 1991 ) . Cholesterol has then been shown to trigger separation of a detergent - insoluble L o phase from a L d phase in sphingolipid and unsaturated PC containing model membranes i . e . to be able to generate L o and L d phases in mixtures of naturally occurring lipids ( Ahmed et al . , 1997 ) . At high temperatures lipid bilayers have re - duced tendency to form coexisting L o and L d phases ( San - karam and Thompson , 1991 ) . However , the coexistence of L o and L d phases at 37 (cid:56) C could be demonstrated in artifi - cial bilayers mimicking the lipid composition of the plasma membrane ( Ahmed et al . , 1997 ) . In line with these find - ings , we find that at 12 (cid:56) C as well as at 37 (cid:56) C there exist spe - cific lipid - dependent attractive or repellant forces between patched membrane components . These forces have to be attributed to properties of the respective membrane com - ponents . Our observations do not exclude that these forces cause the formation of lipid domains as a consequence of cross - linking . However , we suggest that lateral cross - link - ing of a membrane component causes multiplication of membrane interactions and as a consequence intrinsically existing weak interactions become exaggerated and can be detected as specific repellant and attractive forces . We ob - served coalescence of patched raft markers such as GPI - anchored PLAP with Influenza HA , and the raft lipid gan - glioside GM1 as well as copatching of GPI - anchored Thy - 1 with GM1 . This suggests that copatching is a consequence of the coalescence of a common lipid microdomain con - taining the cross - linked raft membrane components . The patches of transferrin receptor are sharply separated from the patched raft components indicating that the lipids sur - rounding hTfR clusters are not miscible with raft domains . Coalescence of Lipid Domains Our data strongly suggest that copatching is mainly a lipid - mediated process . First , we observed extensive copatching of the raft lipid GM1 and different GPI - anchored proteins both linked via fatty acids to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane . This and the copatching of PLAP and HA lacking a cytoplasmic tail domain shows that no direct cytoplasmic interactions are involved in the process . Ac - tive rearrangements of cellular components are most prob - ably not involved as most experiments were performed at low temperatures . Patching of cross - linked PLAP as well as of cross - linked hTfR is inhibited by cyclodextrin extrac - tion of cellular cholesterol . This underlines the demon - strated role of cholesterol in raft integrity ( Scheiffele et al . , 1997 ) and in a separation of L d and L o phases in artificial Figure 8 . Copatching in T hybridoma cells . GM1 and Thy - 1 copatching was in - duced in 2B2318 T – hybri - doma cells by simultaneous incubation with anti – Thy - 1 mAb and FITC - CTx fol - lowed by incubation with rhodamine anti – mouse anti - bodies . A depicts distribution Thy - 1 patches and B distri - bution of the patches of GM1 CTx . Bar , 5 (cid:109) m . Figure 9 . Stabilization of membrane domains by antibody cross - linking . BHK cells expressed PLAP after transient transfection or VSV - G introduced by VSV infection . PLAP ( left ) and VSV - G ( right ) were patched using an mAb against PLAP and polyclonal antibodies against VSV - G , respectively , followed by the respec - tive secondary antibodies . Cells were subsequently lysed in 2 % Triton X - 100 at 4 (cid:56) or 30 (cid:56) C . Fractions of an Optiprep™ – sucrose flotation step gradient were analyzed by Western blot using anti - PLAP and anti – VSV - G antibodies . Antibody - induced patching ( (cid:49) Ab ) significantly increases the amount of PLAP associated to a Triton X - 100 – insoluble membrane fraction that floats to the in - terphase of 20 % Optiprep™ / 10 % sucrose and 0 % Optiprep™ / 10 % sucrose , whereas VSV - G remains in high density fraction ir - respective whether it was cross - linked or not . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 940 membranes ( Sankaram and Thompson , 1991 ; Ahmed et al . , 1997 ) and probably in the formation of different mem - brane phases in which clustered hTfR and PLAP reside . Why would cross - linking with antibodies or toxins in - duce patching ? Lateral cross - linking of membrane pro - teins or lipids causes multimerization of their membrane binding sites . If the monomeric membrane component has a preference for specific membrane microdomains multi - ple membrane interactions of the clustered constituents will cooperatively strengthen the association . In cellular membranes this may cause an accumulation of the lipid domains around the clusters . Therefore the clusters may have a stabilizing effect on raft lipid domains themselves and on the association of the cross - linked raft marker with these domains . Indeed , we found that cross - linking of GPI - anchored PLAP with antibodies stabilizes its associa - tion with the DIG fraction , leading to increased tempera - ture resistance to Triton X - 100 solubilization . Stabilized lipid membrane domains may coalesce which leads to co - patching of two clustered membrane components prefer - ring the same lipid environment . On the other hand patched membrane components with different lipid pref - erences are separated ( Fig . 10 ) . We therefore suggest that the copatching of the raft markers described here is the consequence of a shared preference for raft lipids . Different Affinities for Raft Association An important parameter governing raft dynamics is the specific partition coefficient which can be expected to de - termine the raft - associated fraction of all membrane pro - teins and lipids . Partial copatching of cross - linked LDL - R and to an even larger extent of VSV - G indeed indicates that certain proteins exhibit a weak but significant raft in - teraction which is not detectable by the DIG criterion . Upon multimerization these weak interactions are strength - ened and lead to formation of a raft lipid environment . The association of VSV - G to these domains is however not strong enough to confer DIG association . Therefore probably only proteins which strongly interact with rafts are Triton X - 100 insoluble , whereas weakly raft - associated proteins ( for example VSV - G ) are Triton X - 100 soluble . Tightly packed VSV - G in the budding virus may therefore weakly interact with raft domains and cause formation of microdomains and indeed VSV envelopes have been shown to be somewhat enriched in sphingomyelin and cholesterol , compared with the host plasma membrane ( Welti and Glaser , 1994 ) . Sequestration of raft lipid do - mains by viral proteins may also explain a phenomenon that has puzzled virologists for years namely that VSV particles specifically include antibody cross - linked GPI - anchored Thy - 1 while excluding other plasma membrane proteins ( Calafat et al . , 1983 ) . Cellular Structures Regulating Raft Dynamics Raft dynamics can be influenced by specific proteins . A good example are the caveolae ( flask - shaped invagina - tions of the plasma membrane ; see Lisanti et al . , 1995 ; Par - ton , 1996 ) . Caveolin proteins are essential components of caveolae . These proteins form large oligomers and , as demonstrated for caveolin 1 , avidly bind cholesterol ( Mu - rata et al . , 1995 ) . These properties together with multiple palmitoylation could enable caveolins to sequester raft lip - ids and to eventually form and organize large stabilized raft domains ( Dietzen et al . , 1995 ; Monier et al . , 1996 ) . Raft markers such as gangliosides , sphingomyelin , and GPI - anchored proteins have been shown move into caveo - lae if cross - linked laterally with antibodies or multivalent toxins ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ; Parton , 1994 ; Fujimoto , 1996 ) . Interestingly , copatching of two GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae has also been observed ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . Like the copatching of cross - linked raft markers this phenome - non may be driven by the coalescence of stabilized raft lipid domains . The caveolae may function as traps for these clustered microdomains . However , if the size of the patched regions become too large , then their entry into ca - veolae is restricted . The asymmetric lipid distribution of the apical and baso - lateral plasma membrane domains in polarized cells is es - tablished by a polarized delivery of transport vesicles with distinct lipid and protein composition ( Weimbs et al . , 1997 ; Keller and Simons , 1998 b ) . Tight junctions inhibit lateral exchange between these membrane domains . The specific enrichment of glycolipids and raft protein markers suggests that the apical membrane is a percolating raft do - main ( see below ) whereas the basolateral membrane is de - pleted of rafts and enriched in PC . In other cells such as osteoclasts , segregation of apical and basolateral markers is visible without tight junctions ( Salo et al . , 1996 ) . In these cells , distinct transport vesicles may fuse with different do - mains of the plasma membrane and lateral diffusion is re - duced possibly by extracellular matrix interactions or cy - toskeletal structures . Lateral cross - linking may play a role in the generation of patches of clustered rafts in intracellular membranes . This may be accomplished by adaptors which accumulate specific proteins or by intracellular lectins such as VIP 36 that may laterally cross - link glycosylated molecules ( Fiedler et al . , 1994 ) . Such mechanisms can generate subdomains in Figure 10 . Bulk separation of membrane phases caused by clus - tering of membrane components . ( A ) Microdomains and mem - brane proteins in these domains are dispersed in the plasma membrane . ( B ) Cross - linking generates large and stabilized membrane domains that coalesce to form patches . If two mem - brane components share a preference for a lipid environment such as raft microdomains the markers will copatch into tightly associated domains . If two markers partition into different mem - brane environments such as raft and non - raft markers the patches will be separated . Harder et al . Lipid Domain Structure of the Plasma Membrane 941 intracellular membranes and be an important element of intracellular sorting mechanisms . Raft Dispersion and Cellular Responses to Patching Here we suggest that rafts at steady state are small and highly dispersed in line with theoretical considerations ( Vaz and Almeida , 1993 ) . When the dispersed raft do - mains are induced to form patches by clustering of mem - brane components they coalesce into percolating large do - mains . These changes in the structure of raft domains may represent an important starting point for the generation of intracellular signals . According to this view , raft - associ - ated signaling molecules are normally separated in dis - persed non - percolating raft domains . In the large raft do - mains formed by patching these molecules come together and can interact with each other and their targets ( see dis - cussion in Vaz and Almeida , 1993 ) . This is supported by our finding that patches of PLAP an outer leaflet GPI - anchored protein accumulate intracellular src - related pro - tein tyrosine kinase fyn , which is anchored via double fatty acylation to the inner leaflet of the lipid bilayer ( Shenoy - Scaria et al . , 1994 ; Wolven et al . , 1997 ) . Specific interac - tions between outer leaflet raft lipids and the inner leaflet lipids may mediate a coupling between the two leaflets of the bilayer in raft domains . Possibly these interactions in - volve intercalation of outer leaflet lipid acyl chains into the inner leaflet and vice versa or may involve transbilayer cholesterol dimers ( Harris et al . , 1995 ) . Binding could also be mediated by other membrane proteins which serve as receptors for fyn . The data presented here suggest a mech - anism of signal transduction mediated by cross - linking of GPI - anchored proteins ( Brown , 1993 ) and strongly sup - port a role for raft lipid domains in the activation of dou - bly acylated src - like protein tyrosine kinases . Several cellular responses have been described after patching of membrane components , for example , non - clathrin – mediated endocytic events ( Deckert et al . , 1996 ) or activation of T - lymphocytes ( Brown , 1993 ) . Patches of cross - linked membrane components were moreover de - scribed to move in an actin - dependent manner to one pole of lymphocytes in a process called capping . Interestingly , the involvement of lipid domains in this process was sug - gested in early studies ( Karnovsky et al . , 1982 ) supported by the finding that cholesterol depletion inhibited capping ( Hoover et al . , 1983 ) . These studies however did not de - scribe an effect of cholesterol depletion on the actin - inde - pendent patching phenomenon . We suggest that this pro - cess involves coalescence of lipid microdomains leading to a copatching of small cross - linked entities with one an - other . Cross - linking of the IgE receptor Fc (cid:101) RI by multi - meric antigens is a well - studied example ( for review see Holowka and Baird , 1996 ) . This cross - linking induces the formation of lateral assemblies of Fc (cid:101) RI receptors , which in mast and basophilic cells mediate an allergic response such as secretion of histamines . At the sites of clustered IgE re - ceptors , specific lipid domains were shown to form that could be specifically stained with lipid dye DiI16 ( Thomas et al . , 1994 ) . The fraction of Fc (cid:101) RI which was found in a Triton X - 100 – resistant membrane fraction ( using very low amounts of detergent ) as well as the amount of DIG - asso - ciated tyrosine kinase lyn increased ( Field et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover antibody cross - linked ganglioside G1b copatched with clustered Fc (cid:101) RI receptors ( Pierini et al . , 1996 ) . There - fore the domains of patched Fc (cid:101) RI are very similar to the domains of clustered raft proteins and lipids that we de - scribe here . Our data presented here support the view that the formation of specific raft lipid domains at the sites of patched Fc (cid:101) RI are important for the signaling cascade af - ter Fc (cid:101) RI engagement . The generation of stabilized membrane lipid domains from a highly dispersed distribution by cross - linking of membrane components may represent a general mode of regulating membrane structure . Interaction with intracel - lular ( adaptors and coats ) or extracellular ligands ( multi - meric antigens binding to IgE ) will distribute proteins into patches that in turn recruit downstream effector mole - cules . Cooperativity ensures specificity and the regulation of the process . This lipid - mediated mechanism may play a role for different functions of the cell ranging from intra - cellular membrane sorting to signaling processes . We gratefully acknowledge Drs . D . Brown , M . Roth , K . Matter , and G . Alonso for the generous gifts of cDNA constructs and antibodies . We thank E . Levi for her help in constructing and analyzing expression con - structs , and T . Hyman for critically reading the manuscript . We moreover thank the participants of the 16 October 1997 EMBL Cell Biology Seminar for constructive criticism . The Simons lab helped with stimulating discus - sions throughout the work . T . Harder is supported by a Deutsche Forschurgsgemeinschaft research fellowship . Received for publication 4 November 1997 and in revised form 2 April 1998 . References Ahmed , S . N . , D . A . Brown , and E . London . 1997 . On the origin of sphingolipid / cholesterol - rich detergent - insoluble cell membranes : physiological concen - trations of cholesterol and sphingolipid induce formation of a detergent in - soluble , liquid ordered lipid phase in model membranes . Biochemistry . 36 : 10944 – 10953 . Blackman , M . A . , F . E . Lund , S . Surman , R . B . Corley , and D . L . Woodland . 1992 . Major histocompatibility complex restricted recognition of retroviral superantigens by V (cid:98) 17 (cid:49) T cells . J . Exp . Med . 176 : 275 – 280 . Brewer , C . B . , and M . G . Roth . 1991 . A single amino acid change in the cytoplas - mic domain alters the polarized delivery of influenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 413 – 421 . Brown , D . A . 1992 . Interactions between GPI - anchored proteins and mem - brane lipids . Trends Cell Biol . 2 : 338 – 343 . Brown , D . A . 1993 . The tyrosine kinase connection : how GPI - anchored proteins activate T cells . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 5 : 349 – 354 . Brown , D . A . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to gly - colipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the cell surface . Cell . 68 : 533 – 544 . Brown , D . A . , B . Crise , and J . K . Rose . 1989 . Mechanism of membrane anchor - ing affects polarized expression of two proteins in MDCK cells . Science . 245 : 1499 – 1501 . Brown , R . E . 1998 . Sphingolipid organisation in biomembranes : what physical studies of model membranes reveal . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 1 – 9 . Calafat , J . , H . Janssen , P . Demant , J . Hilgers , and J . Zavada . 1983 . Specific se - lection of host cell glycoproteins during assembly of murine leukaemia virus and vesicular stomatitis virus : presence of Thy - I glycoprotein and absence of H - 2 , Pgp1 and T - 200 glycoproteins on the envelopes of these virus particles . J . Gen . Virol . 64 : 1241 – 1253 . Cerneus , D . P . , E . Ueffing , G . Posthuma , G . J . Strous , and A . van der Ende . 1993 . Detergent insolubility of alkaline phosphatase during biosynthetic transport and endocytosis . Role of cholesterol . J . Biol Chem . 268 : 3150 – 3155 . Deckert , M . , M . Ticchioni , and A . Bernard . 1996 . Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins in human lymphocytes : Role of glycolipid - based domains , actin cy - toskeleton , and protein kinases . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 791 – 799 . Dietzen , D . J . , W . R . Hastings , and D . M . Lublin . 1995 . Caveolin is palmitoylated on multiple cysteine residues : Palmitoylation is not required for localization of caveolin to caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 6838 – 6842 . Fiedler , K . , R . G . Parton , R . Kellner , T . Etzold , and K . Simons . 1994 . VIP36 , a novel component of glycolipid rafts and exocytic carrier vesicles in epithelial cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 13 : 1729 – 1740 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 942 Field , K . A . , D . Holowka , and B . Baird . 1997 . Compartmentalized activation of the high affinity immunoglobulin E receptor within membrane domains . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 4276 – 4280 . Fra , A . M . , E . Williamson , K . Simons , and R . G . Parton . 1995 . De novo forma - tion of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VIP21 - caveolin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 8655 – 8659 . Fujimoto , T . 1996 . GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids , and sphingomy - elin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J . Histochem . Cy - tochem . 44 : 929 – 941 . Hanada , K . , M . Nishijima , Y . Akamatsu , and R . E . Pagano . 1995 . Both sphin - golipids and cholesterol participate in the detergent insolubility of alkaline phosphatase , a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein , in mamma - lian membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 6254 – 6260 . Harder , T . , and V . Gerke . 1993 . The subcellular distribution of early endo - somes is affected by the annexin II 2 p11 2 complex . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1119 – 1132 . Harder , T . , and K . Simons . 1997 . Caveolae , DIGs , and the dynamics of sphin - golipid - cholesterol microdomains . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 534 – 542 . Harris , J . S . , D . E . Epps , S . R . Davio , and F . J . Kezdy . 1995 . Evidence for transbi - layer , tail - to - tail cholesterol dimers in dipalmitoylglycerophosphocholine li - posomes . Biochemistry . 34 : 3851 – 3857 . Hirao , M . , N . Sato , T . Kondo , S . Yonemura , M . Monden , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1996 . Regulation mechanism of ERM protein / plasma membrane association : possible involvement of phosphatidyl inositol turnover and rho - dependent signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 37 – 52 . Holowka , D . , and B . Baird . 1996 . Antigen - mediated IgE receptor aggregation and signaling : a window on cell surface structure and dynamics . Ann . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 25 : 79 – 112 . Hoover , R . L . , E . A . Dawidowicz , J . M . Robinson , and M . J . Karnovsiky . 1983 . Role of cholesterol in the capping of surface immunoglobulin receptors on murine lymphocytes . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 73 – 80 . Ikonen , E . , M . Tagaya , O . Ullrich , C . Montecucco , and K . Simons . 1995 . Differ - ent requirements for NSF , SNAP , and Rab proteins in apical and basolateral transport in MDCK cells . Cell . 81 : 571 – 580 . Karnovsky , M . J . , A . M . Kleinfeld , R . L . Hoover , and R . D . Klausner . 1982 . The concept of lipid domains in membranes . J . Cell Biol . 94 : 1 – 6 . Keller , P . , and K . Simons . 1998 a . Cholesterol is required for surface transport of Influenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 1357 – 1367 . Keller , P . , and K . Simons . 1998 b . Post - Golgi biosynthetic trafficking . J . Cell Sci . 110 : 3001 – 3009 . Klein , U . , G . Gimpl , and F . Fahrenholz . 1995 . Alteration of the myometrial plasma membrane cholesterol content with (cid:98) - cyclodextrin modulates the binding affinity of the oxytocin receptor . Biochemistry . 34 : 13784 – 13793 . Kreis , T . E . 1986 . Microinjected antibodies against the cytoplasmic domain of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein block its transport to the cell surface . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 931 – 941 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , E . Hartmann , and P . Dupree . 1995 . Guilt by insolubility—does a protein’s detergent insolubility reflect caveolar location ? Trends Cell Biol . 5 : 187 – 189 . Lazarovits , J . , and M . Roth . 1988 . A single amino acid change in the cytoplas - mic domain allows the influenza virus haemagglutinin to be endocytosed through coated pits . Cell . 53 : 743 – 752 . Lisanti , P . L . , P . E . Scherer , Z . Tang , E . Kübler , A . J . Koleske , and M . Sargia - como . 1995 . Caveolae and human disease : functional roles in transcytosis , potocytosis , signalling , and cell polarity . Semin . Dev . Biol . 6 : 47 – 58 . Matter , K . , and I . Mellman . 1994 . Mechanisms of cell polarity : sorting and transport in epithelial cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 : 545 – 554 . Matter , K . , W . Hunziker , and I . Mellman . 1992 . Basolateral sorting of LDL re - ceptor in MDCK cells : the cytoplasmic domain contains two tyrosine - depen - dent targeting determinants . Cell . 71 : 741 – 753 . Mayor , S . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1995 . Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 929 – 944 . Mayor , S . , K . G . Rothberg , and F . R . Maxfield . 1994 . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science . 264 : 1948 – 1951 . Merrit , E . A . , S . Sarfaty , F . van den Akker , C . L’Hoir , J . A . Martial , and W . G . J . Hol . 1994 . Crystal structure of cholera toxin B - pentamer bound to receptor GM1 pentasaccharide . Protein Science . 3 : 166 – 175 . Monier , S . , D . J . Dietzen , W . R . Hastings , D . M . Lublin , and T . V . Kurzchalia . 1996 . Oligomerisation of VIP21 - caveolin in vitro is stabilized by long chain fatty acylation or cholesterol . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 388 : 143 – 149 . Mumby , S . M . 1997 . Reversible palmitoylation of signaling proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 148 – 154 . Murata , M . , J . Peranen , R . Schreiner , F . Wieland , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Si - mons . 1995 . VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 10339 – 10343 . Müsch , A . , H . Xu , D . Shields , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1996 . Transport of ve - sicular stomatitis virus G - protein to the cell surface is signal mediated in po - larized and nonpolarized cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 543 – 558 . Odorizzi , G . , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1997 . Structural requirements for basolateral sorting of the human transferrin receptor in the biosynthetic and endocytic pathways of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 1255 – 1264 . Osborn , M . , N . Johnsson , J . Wehland , and K . Weber . 1988 . The submembrane - ous location of p11 and its interaction with the p36 substrate of pp60 src ki - nase in situ . Exp . Cell Res . 175 : 81 – 96 . Parton , R . G . 1994 . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM1 is concen - trated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 : 155 – 166 . Parton , R . G . 1996 . Caveolae and caveolins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 : 542 – 548 . Parton , R . G . , and K . Simons . 1995 . Digging into caveolae . Science . 269 : 1398 – 1399 . Pierini , L . , D . Holowka , and B . Baird . 1996 . Fc epsilon RI - mediated association of 6 - micron beads with RBL - 2H3 mast cells results in exclusion of signaling proteins from the forming phagosome and abrogation of normal down - stream signaling . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 1427 – 1439 . Rodgers , W . , B . Crise , and J . K . Rose . 1994 . Signals determining protein ty - rosine kinase and glycosyl - phosphatidyl - anchored protein targeting to a gly - colipid - enriched membrane fraction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 : 5384 – 5391 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , and W . J . Nelson . 1989 . Morphogenesis of the polarized epithelial cell phenotype . Science . 245 : 718 – 725 . Roth , M . G . , and P . C . Sternweis . 1997 . The role of lipid signaling in constitutive membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 519 – 526 . Salo , J . , K . Metsikkö , H . Palokangas , P . Lehenkari , and H . K . Väänänen . 1996 . Bone - resorbing osteoclasts reveal a dynamic division of basal plasma mem - brane into two different domains . J . Cell Sci . 109 : 301 – 307 . Sankaram , M . B . , and T . E . Thompson . 1991 . Cholesterol - induced fluid - phase immiscibility in membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 8686 – 8690 . Scheiffele , P . , M . G . Roth , and K . Simons . 1997 . Interaction of influenza virus hemagglutinin with sphingolipid - cholesterol membrane domains via its transmembrane domains . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 16 : 5501 – 5508 . Schroeder , R . , E . London , and D . Brown . 1994 . Interactions between saturated acyl chains confer detergent resistance to lipids and glycosylphosphatidyli - nositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins : GPI - anchored proteins in liposomes and cells show similar behavior . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 12130 – 12134 . Shenoy - Scaria , A . M . , D . J . Dietzen , J . Kwong , D . C . Link , and D . M . Lublin . 1994 . Cysteine ( 3 ) of Src family protein tyrosine kinases determines palmi - toylation and localization in caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 353 – 363 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts in membrane trafficking and signalling . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . Skibbens , J . E . , M . G . Roth , and K . S . Matlin . 1989 . Differential extractability of influenza virus hemagglutinin during intracellular transport in polarized epi - thelial cells and nonpolar fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 821 – 832 . Spiegel , S . , S . Kassis , M . Wilchek , and P . H . Fishman . 1984 . Direct visualization of redistribution and capping of fluorescent gangliosides on lymphocytes . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1575 – 1581 . Thomas , J . L . , D . Holowka , B . Baird , and W . W . Webb . 1994 . Large - scale co - aggre - gation of fluorescent lipid probes with cell surface proteins . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 795 – 802 . Vaz , W . L . , and P . F . Almeida . 1993 . Phase topology and percolation in multi - phase bilayers : is the biological membrane a domain mosaic ? Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 3 : 482 – 488 . Wandinger - Ness , A . , M . K . Bennet , C . Antony , and K . Simons . 1990 . Distinct transport vesicles mediate the delivery of plasma membrane proteins to the apical and basolateral domains of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 987 – 1000 . Warren , R . A . , F . A . Green , and C . A . Enns . 1997 . Saturation of the endocytic pathway for the transferrin receptor does not affect the endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 2116 – 2121 . Weimbs , T . , S . H . Low , S . J . Chapin , and K . Mostov . 1997 . Apical targeting in polarised cells : there’s more afloat than rafts . Trends Cell Biol . 7 : 393 – 399 . Welti , R . , and M . Glaser . 1994 . Lipid domains in model and biological mem - branes . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 73 : 121 – 137 . Wolven , A . , H . Okamura , Y . Rosenblatt , and M . D . Resh . 1997 . Pamitoylation of p59fyn is reversible and sufficient for plasma membrane association . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 1159 – 1173 . Yoshimori , T . , P . Keller , G . M . Roth , and K . Simons . 1996 . Different biosyn - thetic transport routes to the plasma membrane in BHK and CHO cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 247 – 256 .