Enhancing Creativity in Groups – Proposition of an Integrated Framework for Designing Group Creativity Support Systems Matthias Voigt Katrin Bergener University of Münster , European Research Center for Information Systems ( ERCIS ) { matthias . voigt | katrin . bergener } @ ercis . uni - muenster . de Abstract In organizations , creative work is predominantly approached in groups . They develop new services or products like advertising campaigns or movie scripts . Group creativity support systems ( GCSS ) can have a positive impact on the creative performance of these groups . However , current literature on GCSS design requires system designers to consider a magnitude of aspects when constructing systems that support the creative group process . In a literature review we identify recurring topics in design recommendations , drawing both on design - oriented and experimental research , and develop an integrated set of design principles . We apply these design principles to generic GCSS components , resulting in an integrated GCSS framework , which provides guidance in system implementation . Future research directions that could complement the field are indicated . 1 . Motivation Organizations gain their competitive advantage mainly from the creative potential and dedication of their employees [ 1 ] . Creativity is a phenomenon occurring in the interplay of a person and its socio - cultural context [ 2 ] , and has been on the IS research agenda for decades already [ 3 ] . Creative group processes ( CGPs ) are the collaborative effort of a group to generate and evaluate ideas [ 4 , 5 ] . Especially in business settings , where the development of complex products or services cannot be handled by an individual alone , CGPs are part of the daily work practice . Industry examples are projects for software development , advertising campaigns or the development of a movie script . Due to globalized business contexts and resource restrictions , groups have to increasingly collaborate virtually . Systems tailored to the needs of CGPs can influence the output of groups in a positive way . Numerous experiments in electronic group brainstorming underpin this argument [ 6 , 7 ] : for groups with more than 8 participants , electronic brainstorming groups consistently outperform nominal and e - nominal groups , i . e . groups of individuals that work isolated . However , group support systems ( GSS ) go far beyond brainstorm functionality . We refer to the definition of Nunamaker et al . , stating that “Group support system are interactive computer - based environments that support concerted and coordinated team effort toward completion of joint tasks [ 8 , p . 165 ] . ” We focus on a particular subset of GSS : systems that specifically support the CGP [ 9 ] . We refer to these systems as Group Creativity Support Systems ( GCSS ) . They embrace several types of information systems , e . g . Group Decision Support Systems [ 10 , 11 ] , Knowledge Management Systems [ 12 ] , or Computer - mediated Communication [ 13 ] , which commonly support the process of idea generation ( divergence ) , and idea evaluation and selection ( convergence ) in groups . In that way , GCSS combine the properties of individual creativity support with collaboration and coordination support [ 10 , 14 ] . Numerous design - oriented contributions address singular aspects of the design of those systems . Moreover , there is a considerable body of knowledge on experimental findings in the application of GSS in creativity contexts . While these publications provide valuable insights to specific aspects of GCSS design , integrated guidance is still missing . Thus , we strive to answer the following research question : How shall Group Creativity Support Systems be designed in order to support the creative group process ? A first unification of eight design theories in a unified design theory for creativity - support systems has already been proposed by Voigt et al . [ 15 ] . We extend on this work in that we focus on the support for groups , and not for individuals only . Further we put an emphasis on design - guidance in proposing an integrated set of design principles , rather than focusing on quantitative evaluation of design theories . In their analysis of the prospects of the concept of creativity in IS research , Seidel et al . [ 16 ] conclude : 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 1530 - 1605 / 12 $ 26 . 00 © 2012 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2013 . 195 224 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 1530 - 1605 / 12 $ 26 . 00 © 2012 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2013 . 195 225 “Analyzing and explaining how IT should be designed in order to support the creative process , rather than assessing the effect of a given system on creative performance , will amplify the existing body of IS knowledge [ … ] [ 16 , p . 235 ] . ” We thus contribute with the development of an integrated GCSS framework to guide the design of GCSS , consisting of both system components , and design principles on how to implement these components . The paper is structured as follows : Section 2 introduces related work , namely collaboration patterns of the CGP and their support with generic GCSS components . In Section 3 our research method is described , while the design principles are presented in Section 4 . Those are then integrated into the GCSS framework in section 5 . In Section 6 we conclude our findings and indicate limitations , together with future research directions . 2 . Related Work Creative processes in general are understood as iterative interplay of divergence and convergence [ 17 ] . Divergence is “to move from having fewer to having more [ ideas ] [ 18 , p . 3 ] ” , whereas convergence is “to move from having many concepts to a focus on and understanding of a few deemed worthy of further attention [ 18 , p . 3 ] ” . We draw from the field of collaboration engineering to refine this understanding of creative processes in groups . We distinguish six collaboration patterns as generic sub - processes of CGPs [ 19 ] . The first three fit divergence : (cid:2) Inspire is the process of group members to mutually cause stimulation to bring along new associations and ideas . (cid:2) Collect is the process of gathering and sharing ideas amongst the members . (cid:2) Create is the process of individually producing and documenting ideas , to then collectively refine them . The other three sub - processes aim at convergence : (cid:2) Organize is the process to relate ideas in order to reduce the complexity of the idea space and to foster a common understanding of ideas in the group . (cid:2) Evaluate is the process of assessing the value of ideas to fulfill the goal of the CGP . (cid:2) Select is the process of negotiating and deciding on which ideas shall be selected for further elaboration and implementation . We argue that each sub - process has to be distinctively supported by GCSS . Thus , we propose generic GCSS components addressing each sub - process ( see Section 5 , Figure 1 ) . Divergent components support divergent processes , whilst convergent components support convergent processes . Firstly , we indicate the divergent components : gathering and sharing of first , rough ideas ( collect ) shall be supported by the component shared idea space , where ideas can be ‘dropped’ and shared with group members . The production and documentation of more concrete ideas ( create ) has to be supported by a shared idea editor . Dependent on the complexity of ideas ( as text , graphical sketches , images , sounds etc . ) , different editors have to be provided ( word processor , drawing tool , composing tool ) . The reciprocal inspiration of group members to generate novel ideas ( inspire ) will be facilitated by both the shared idea space and the idea editor . Moreover , a communication component shall facilitate communication in divergence . As a non - group process specific option , an extra component may support individual inspiration for ideas . Secondly , components for convergence have to be provided : a shared idea space visualizer helps to organize and reduce the complexity of the ideas that have been generated and collected ( organize ) . Ideas may be related in mind maps or hierarchical folder structures . The assessment of ideas ( evaluate ) shall be supported by an evaluation component , allowing to vote for or comment upon ideas . Lastly , the selection of ideas for further elaboration ( select ) shall be supported by means of communication . This can be facilitated using the communication component , also provided for reciprocal inspiration . Accordingly , the communication component supports both divergent and convergent group processes . The shared idea space is the component where the ideas are “administered” . It is the central component , which integrates all other components ( see Section 5 , Fig . 1 ) . In the remainder of this paper , we will present the results of our literature analysis on the body of knowledge in G ( C ) SS design . These findings are clustered and transformed in design principles , providing a more “tangible insight” on how to implement the generic GCSS components . 3 . Research Method Design principles are “governing the development or selection of system features [ 20 , p . 186 ] . ” Design principles for GCSS shall ( eventually ) lead to tool designs that allow for increased creative group performance , which is determined by the number of ideas generated ( idea fluency , [ 21 ] ) , and the quality of ideas , assessed with the criteria of idea novelty , workability , relevance and specificity [ 22 ] . We follow Webster & Watson’s [ 23 ] approach for systematic literature reviews : after searching the literature , major topics emerged from the articles 225 226 considered to be relevant . From those , we derive design principles to inform the design of GCSS . In terms of Cooper’s [ 24 ] taxonomy we analyze and integrate research outcomes of articles out of different domains for a formulation of design principles based on design - oriented and empirical literature . Thus , we draw from prescriptive ( design theories ) as well as explanatory ( experiments ) research [ 25 ] . In our analysis we focus on literature from the areas of social psychology , creativity research , and IS . The literature search was conducted using Google Scholar , JSTOR , and ACM Digital Library with the following search terms and combinations of those : creative groups , group creativity support , creativity support , creativity support tools / systems , idea generation , creative process , creative group process , computer - mediated creativity support , eCollaboration , virtual teams , convergence , divergence , groupware , collaboration , group decision support . The keyword search was followed by forward and backward search in order to achieve higher quality search results [ 23 ] . We paid attention to the field of HCI , prominently represented by Jay Nunamaker and colleagues ( 13 publications considered ) , GSS and collaboration engineering , considerably advanced by Robert O . Briggs and colleagues ( 6 publications considered ) , creativity support tools as research focus of Ben Shneiderman and colleagues ( 4 publications ) , group communication investigated by Jerry Fjermestad and colleagues ( 3 publications ) , and design - oriented paper for GSS in creativity contexts in general , considering in total 26 experimental and 22 design - oriented paper . We identified various aspects crucial to purposeful GCSS design . In the following section , we stepwise elaborate the design principles for GCSS . 4 . Design Principles In the literature analysis of the 48 selected sources , five topics emerged : the first two topics are divergence and convergence in the CGP . The third topic is communication , where the design principles address issues of trust in communication and synchronicity of media used for the communication . The fourth and fifth topics are group awareness and iteration in the CGP . These topics provide categories for the clustering of our design principles . Divergence . Inspiration shall allow leaving beaten tracks of thinking . Müller - Wienbergen et al . [ 26 ] propose a design theory for systems that support both divergent and convergent thinking of individuals . Their research proposes that previous knowledge ( collective or individual ) , retrieved from archives or repositories , provides a central source of information to inspire for new ideas [ 26 ] . Furthermore , according to Hilliges et al . [ 27 ] , a person is more likely to be creative , i . e . to have unexpected associations during idea generation , when s / he is exposed to stimuli from social contexts . GCSS allow for information and knowledge exchange , and thereby cause “mutual association activation” [ 27 ] , in that it affects cognitive association patterns that would otherwise not be affected . The Cognitive Network Model ( CNM ) of creativity states that external stimuli , i . e . the ideas from others , can trigger one’s own cognitive activities and can make teams more creative during idea generation [ 28 ] . Thus , DP1 : Foster mutual inspiration : In divergent processes of the CGP , provide the possibility to share ideas to foster mutual inspiration . Specific process losses , namely evaluation apprehension and free riding , have a negative impact on the divergent group performance , especially on collecting and creating ideas . To overcome evaluation apprehension , i . e . withholding ideas or comments because of the fear of negative evaluation , anonymous entering of ideas is often stated as an important feature of tools that support idea generation [ 8 , 29 – 32 ] . Group members are more willing to contribute and feel less criticized if they put their idea forth in an anonymous setting [ 30 ] . The importance of anonymity may decreases with growing trust in teams . Correspondingly , DP2 : Support anonymity : In divergent processes of the CGP , support anonymous contribution of ideas , to reduce evaluation apprehension . However , anonymity can also have a negative effect on the group performance , since it invokes free riding , i . e . to benefit from contributions of other group members , while not contributing to the discussion . Shepherd et al . [ 29 ] present an approach to overcome this double bind of anonymity , by including an overview of the contributions of the group and a comparison to an imaginary “average” group in their electronic brainstorming tool . According to Social Comparison Theory [ 33 ] people want to be perceived as contributing fully to the group . Groups working in comparison to the imaginary “average” group performed better than groups without this comparison . These results are supported by Selker [ 34 ] , who states that people perform better with social feedback . Thus , invoking social comparison reduces free riding and enhances group productivity . DP3 : Invoke social comparison : In divergent processes of the CGP , invoke social comparison , to reduce free riding . 226 227 In divergence , group members work alone , in pairs or in larger groups to gather and share ideas amongst each other and to produce and document increasingly specific ideas . Hailpern et al . [ 35 ] observed that designers naturally maintain a private working area , containing ideas not yet ready for presentation to the group . At a certain development stage , ideas were then moved to a public working area . GCSS accordingly have to provide for both group and individual working modes [ 32 , 33 ] . Generated content shall be transferable from previous sessions to current ones as well as from individual to group related sessions . Correspondingly , DP4 : Support different working modes : In divergent processes of the CGP , provide the possibility for individual and group working modes , to increase creative group performance . Convergence . Different sets of convergence activities have been proposed [ 38 – 40 ] , the majority in line with the convergent CGPs . In the following , we will refer to the two most recurring ones : Organize is the process to relate ideas in order to reduce the complexity of the complete set of ideas and to foster a shared understanding of ideas in the group . Duncan & Paradice [ 10 ] propose cognitive maps , where conceptual elements ( nodes ) are related with connecting edges , denoting causation . Prante et al . [ 41 ] emphasize the importance of incremental structuring of ideas , i . e . building up a structure in the course of group discussions and defer premature formalization of the overall idea space . Ideas can be related in two ways [ 42 ] : in synthesis , ideas are related in is - part - of relationships , where a more complex idea consists of several sub - ideas . In generalization , ideas are related in is - a relationship , where a general type of idea is specialized in more concrete ideas [ 18 ] . Moreover , the semantics of the relationships between ideas may be chosen freely , e . g . idea A is opposed to idea B . Approaches have been proposed to support the organization of ideas automatically [ 39 , 40 ] . Consequently , DP5 : Support idea organization : In convergent processes of the CGP , the relation of ideas shall be facilitated , to foster common understanding . Evaluate is the process of assessing the value of ideas to fulfill the goal of the CGP [ 45 ] . Evaluation involves the judgment or estimation of the ideas’ value , both by quantitative means ( rating , prioritizing , or polling ) , and qualitative means . “GSS polling can be used to clarify communication , focus discussion , reveal patterns of consensus , or stimulate thinking [ 8 , p . 185 ] . ” Dean et al . [ 22 ] propose to quantitatively assess ideas with regard to four dimensions : novelty , workability , relevance , and specificity . Each dimension should be assessed with a Likert scale . Qualitative evaluation can be either conducted through group discussions or through the assessment of the ideas by domain experts [ 46 ] . S elect is the process of negotiating and deciding which ideas shall be selected for further elaboration and implementation . In democratic groups , this process of consensus building may take the form of complex communication processes [ 47 ] , which can also be a challenging and time consuming process for the group [ 44 ] . In case group members have managerial authorities against other group members , this process may be simplified in replacing negotiation by single member decision . Since ideas were generated anonymously in the divergent processes , group members will not fear to express their opinion in convergence . Thus , group pressure is mitigated if ideas are generated anonymously [ 31 ] . Correspondingly , DP6 : Support idea evaluation and selection : Support quantitative and qualitative idea evaluation and selection , to foster the selection of the best ideas . The process of convergence in groups bares the risk to exclude valuable ideas as a consequence of prioritizing [ 36 ] . In situations of collaborative decision making , superior decisions may be hidden to the group , since not all distributed information amongst the group members is brought to the table ( hidden profiles ) [ 48 ] . Hence , continuous and evolutionary documentation of the process is required . The documentation process shall avoid unnecessary interruptions and remarks shall be traceable along the timeline of their occurrence . Thus , DP7 : Trace decisions : Trace the decision making processes , to avoid the exclusion of valuable ideas . Communication . Information and knowledge exchange is the basis for collaboration [ 49 , 50 ] , both in divergence and convergence . We identified two sub - aspects of communication , trust and synchronicity , which have influence on the communication processes of a creative group . Trust . Members of creative teams will only expose their ideas in an environment of trust [ 51 – 53 ] . GCSS can be supportive , in that they provide a safe environment and records of contributions , allowing group members to present their ideas to a defined group of users . Session histories allow users to trace 227 228 content modifications of each user [ 54 ] . This archiving capability is an important advantage of virtual teams applying GCSS compared to face - to - face teams [ 55 ] . It ensures that ideas are protected since their origin can be retraced to its creator [ 52 , 56 ] . Team members can review and reread all ideas and comments at their own pace , have the possibility to get back to “old ideas” and possibly individually generate new ones after the group idea generation phase . Furthermore , according to empirical data of Herrmann [ 36 ] , it is helpful to complement archiving with dialogue mapping . In doing so it is possible to map conversations to the joint material ( generated ideas ) , in order to be able to trace the communication that led to ideas . Hence , session histories support idea reflection and information storage within the group [ 57 ] , as well as tracing the development of ideas by means of dialogue mapping . This will also lead to a development of strong interpersonal ties that are essential for the knowledge transfer and use within the group [ 51 , 58 ] . Correspondingly , DP8 : Support session histories : Provide session histories and dialogue mapping , to support idea reflection and information storage to build trust within the group . Synchronicity . Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) proposes that “group communication processes , regardless of task outcome objectives , are composed of two primary processes , conveyance and convergence” [ 59 ] , which are analogous to divergence and convergence in the CGP . It is stated that different communication needs in both processes emerge : Becker et al . [ 60 ] reasoned that the divergent processes of the CGP are best supported by asynchronous groupware functionalities while the convergent processes are best supported by synchronous communication . This is in line with the hypothesis of MST [ 59 ] and empirical findings [ 61 – 63 ] . Hence , for ideal communication support , a GCSS should provide distinct communication channels , depending on the CGP : DP9 : Support asynchronous communication : Support asynchronous communication in divergent processes of the CGP , to reduce process losses . DP10 : Support synchronous communication : Support synchronous communication in convergent processes of the CGP , to reduce process losses . Group awareness . The visibility of actions of group members ( awareness ) prevents the isolation of individuals and fosters indirect coordination of the group process [ 27 ] . According to Gutwin & Greenberg , “awareness is a design concept that holds promise for significantly improving the usability of real - time distributed groupware [ 64 , p . 411f ] . ” One kind of awareness , workspace awareness , i . e . the up - to - date information about other group members’ actions in a shared workspace [ 64 ] , is particularly important in the CGP , where group members stimulate each other and profit from continuous update of the other’s ideas and progress . A lack of awareness can imply the breakdown of the CGP , since it leads to disorientation of group members about the plans , activities and understanding of their peers [ 54 ] . Correspondingly , DP11 : Support group awareness : Support group awareness in the CGP , to avoid coordination problems and foster reciprocal inspiration . Iteration . In the course of the CGP , preliminary ideas are advanced to complex creative products . Due to uncertainties with respect to the product characteristics , the output has to be permanently modified and adjusted to existent and emerging requirements [ 65 ] . In consequence , multiple iterations between convergent and divergent processes are performed . Prante et al . [ 41 ] emphasize the importance of the prevention of turn - taking between those processes . From a group perspective group members shall be allowed to concurrently contribute and evaluate ideas . However , from an individual’s perspective , the current mode of thinking can be either divergent , or convergent , without mixing them up or blurring the boundaries between them [ 66 ] . Pendergast & Hayne [ 67 ] proposed the Shared Concept Model ( SMC ) for GSS . It is to provide shared data , shared views , and shared understanding to all group members to perform problem definition , discussion , identification of solutions , and order votes of issues in parallel . It is argued that switching between divergent and convergent modes can lead to time - consuming integration issues and overhead causing process losses . Correspondingly , DP12 : Prevent turn - taking : Prevent turn - taking between divergent and convergent processes , to increase the creative group performance . Iterative design improvements can be achieved by continuously comparing and advancing alternative preliminary design solutions of ideas [ 68 ] . To capitalize on the creative potential of a group as a whole , single members’ contributions have to be considered in a balanced way [ 69 ] . This is facilitated by observation of members activities and participatory processes [ 70 ] . Thus , multiple idea representations 228 229 created by different contributors have to be comparable simultaneously . This also provides for rapid transition between divergent and convergent thinking [ 35 ] . Correspondingly , DP13 : Facilitate comparison : Facilitate simultaneous comparison of alternative ideas , to balance group member contributions . In the following section , we relate the design principles to the generic GCSS components , and give examples on which component features might satisfy the design principles . 5 . Integrated GCSS framework In Figure 1 , the generic GCSS components are associated with the design principles that specify the components’ implementation . DP2 and DP9 pertain to all divergent components , while DP10 pertains to all convergent components . DP4 and DP11 are related to both the shared idea space editor and the shared idea space . DP1 refers to the communication component and the shared idea space . All other DPs are associated with one component only . The relationships of the DPs to the components will be explained in the remainder of this section . Mutual inspiration in groups ( DP1 ) is fostered by two components : ideas can be discussed verbally in the communication component , allowing the group members to reflect and build upon feedback of the group members . Indirect communication on ideas is facilitated by the shared idea space , where group members may use existing ideas as source of inspiration . As mentioned above , supporting anonymity ( DP2 ) is a design principle that applies to all divergent components . Thus , the shared idea editor , the communication component and the shared idea space shall allow contribution to the group’s ideas without revealing identities of the contributors ( this is not necessary for the individual inspiration component , since it is used individually only ) . Social comparison ( DP3 ) in groups should be facilitated within the shared idea space , since it represents the central space where all ideas are stored . An idea count of an imaginary average group could be indicated together with the Figure 1 . Integrated GCSS framework Convergent components Divergent components Individual Inspiration component Shared idea editor DP1 : Foster mutual inspiration DP2 : Support anonymity DP3 : Invoke social comparison DP5 : Support idea organization DP6 : Support idea evaluation and selection DP7 : Trace decisions DP8 : Support session histories DP9 : Support asynch . communication DP10 : Support synch . communication DP12 : Prevent turn - taking DP13 : Allow simultaneous comparison Evaluation component Shared idea space visualizer Shared idea space Communication component DP11 : Support awareness DP4 : Support different working modes 229 230 groups own , real idea count . Different working modes ( DP4 ) apply both for the shared idea editor , and the shared idea space . Ideas should be creatable or editable in a private editor mode , so that no other group member can track the modifications . Moreover , group members should be able to store private ideas in a private idea space . Idea organization ( DP5 ) should be facilitated by the shared idea space visualizer . Idea clustering should be supported with visual aids , such as mind maps . Idea evaluation and selection ( DP6 ) is supported by the evaluation component . Quantitative assessment should be facilitated , e . g . in allowing to rate ideas with respect to idea quality dimensions [ 22 ] . A web 2 . 0 based feature to implement user votes on these dimensions could be a five star rating system . Qualitative assessment of ideas should be supported , e . g . by allowing for comments on ideas in threaded forum discussions . Complex discussion processes for selecting ideas can be supported within the communication component ( see later on synchronous communication in convergence , DP10 ) . Tracing of the decision making process ( DP7 ) is subject to the evaluation component . Both idea ratings and comments on ideas shall be provided in a complete history , reflecting the complete decision process chronologically ( DP8 , Session history ) . Asynchronous communication for divergence ( DP9 ) shall be ingrained in all divergent components . The shared idea editor and shared idea space naturally support asynchronous communication , in that ideas are developed and stored over multiple working sessions and modifications to ideas can be made at any time . The communication component supports asynchronous communication ( DP9 ) with text - based communication . Web 2 . 0 features like wikis of blogs are possible implementation examples . Synchronous communication ( DP10 ) may be implemented with “conversation” features ( chat , VoIP , video conversations ) . Further , synchronous communication ( DP10 ) shall be supported by all other convergent components . This is “naturally” the case for the shared idea space visualizer , the evaluation component and the shared idea space , where ideas can be immediately compared , discussed , evaluated and developed according to the feedback of the other group members . Being aware about what the other group members are currently working on ( DP 11 ) is particularly relevant in the shared idea editor and the shared idea space since it fosters reciprocal inspiration and helps to better coordinate the group’s progress . Example features from web 2 . 0 could be graphical indications or automatically generated messages to group members , if idea modifications or comments have been made . Turn - taking ( DP12 ) is prevented , in that all divergent and convergent components shall be usable throughout the whole GCP . New ideas can be added whilst concurrently existing ones may be evaluated . Simultaneous comparison of ideas ( DP13 ) shall be facilitated in the idea space visualizer . It shall allow comparing different ideas and versions of ideas , e . g . if ideas are documented in a graphical way , by depicting multiple images on one screen . For textual ideas text differences could automatically be identified and highlighted . 6 . Conclusion , Limitations and Outlook The contribution of our paper is twofold : first , we identified and consolidated existent design principles to inform the development of systems that support the CGP and thus enhance the creative performance of groups . The resulting set of 13 principles were derived from a literature analysis , covering both design - oriented as well as experimental work from social psychology , creativity research , and IS . We stated that GCSS shall distinctively support the divergent and convergent processes of the CGP . Furthermore they shall support communication ( particularly the aspects of trust and synchronicity ) as well as group awareness and iteration . Second , we applied the design principles to six generic GCSS components , two supporting divergent group processes ( individual inspiration component , shared idea editor ) , two supporting convergent group processes ( shared idea space visualizer , evaluation component ) and two for both process types ( communication component , shared idea space ) . We provided example features , satisfying the design principles . All design recommendations were subsumed in the integrated GCSS framework , which provides guidance in GCSS implementation . As to our design principles , there is a considerable overlap with findings of prior work on the effects to be achieved by G ( C ) SS ( expressed in impact on dependent variables ) . In the late 1990s , Fjermestadt and Hiltz conducted an analysis of 200 GSS experiments [ 71 ] . Process gains and losses , efficiency , effectiveness and satisfaction were among the most employed dependent variables . In our design principles , process losses are discussed with respect to communication synchronicity ( DP9 , DP10 ) . Moreover , the specific process losses evaluation apprehension and free riding ( DP2 , DP3 ) are considered . Creative group performance ( DP1 , DP12 ) relates to ( process ) efficiency and ( output ) effectiveness . However , satisfaction was not considered in the literature we analyzed . A meta - reflection on the findings of our literature analysis reveals the following promising future directions in research on GSS in creativity context ( or GCSS respectively ) : 230 231 1 . Rigor empirical studies ( both qualitative and quantitative ) on GSS design evaluations in creativity contexts are rare ( see literature analyses from [ 3 , 16 ] ) . Design heuristics , field reports , and experiments abstracting from potential design choices , prevail . Future studies should focus on systems features and evaluate in accordance with rigor methodology [ 72 – 74 ] . 2 . Empirical studies on GSS in creativity contexts could merit from professionals’ applications in real business context . Overemphasizing evaluations in student classes could bring bias to the assessment of industry eligibility of GSS . 3 . Industry field studies should also focus on the integration of GCSS into daily activities . One research setting could be the investigation of the influence of asynchronous idea generation on the CGP by observing R & D teams using a GCSS in their daily working routine . 4 . Most design recommendations refer to interface design , stemming from HCI . More research should be conducted for the major areas of interest in CSCW ( e . g . collaboration components ) and IS ( e . g . social - technical considerations ) . 5 . In comparison to research on GSS support for divergence , convergence support is rather under - researched . Especially the area of decision support could bring a plethora of fruitful insights to research on GSS in creativity contexts . We are aware of the fact that the research method of literature analysis is challengeable in that there is a possibility of missing studies or of an imbalance of considered research ( for further advantages and criticism on meta - analysis see [ 75 ] ) . Furthermore , evidence for our design principles to foster creative group performance has to be gained through empirical validation . This shall be subject to the evaluation of our proposed GCSS framework , focusing on the dependent variable of creative group performance . References [ 1 ] G . Fischer , E . Giaccardi , H . Eden , M . Sugimoto , and Y . Ye , “Beyond binary choices : Integrating individual and social creativity” , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 63 , pp . 482 – 512 , 2005 . [ 2 ] Y . Engeström , “Expansive Learning at Work : toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization” , Journal of Education and Work , vol . 14 , no . 1 , pp . 133 – 156 , 2001 . [ 3 ] J . D . Couger , “A framework for research on creativity / innovation in IS organizations” , Proceedings of the 29th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 30 – 38 , 1996 . [ 4 ] A . B . van Gundy , Managing Group Creativity . New York : American Management Association , 1984 . [ 5 ] M . Basadur , P . Pringle , G . Speranzini , and M . Bacot , “Collaborative Problem Solving Through Creativity in Problem Definition (cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:11)(cid:15) ” , Creativity and Innovation Management , no . 3 , pp . 54 – 76 , 2000 . [ 6 ] A . Pinsonneault , H . Barki , R . B . Gallupe , and N . Hoppen , “Electronic Brainstorming (cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:17)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:4) (cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:11)(cid:22)(cid:9)(cid:4) (cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:4) Productivity” , Information Systems Research , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pp . 110 – 134 , 1999 . [ 7 ] D . Derosa , C . Smith , and D . Hantula , “The medium matters : Mining the long - promised merit of group interaction in creative idea generation tasks in a meta - analysis of the electronic group brainstorming literature” , Computers in Human Behavior , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 1549 – 1581 , 2005 . [ 8 ] J . F . Nunamaker , R . O . Briggs , D . D . Mittleman , D . R . Vogel , and P . A . Balthazard , “Lessons from a dozen years of group support systems research : A discussion of lab and field findings” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 13 , no . 3 , pp . 163 – 207 , 1996 . [ 9 ] R . P . Bostrom and M . Nagasundaram , “Research in Creativity and GSS” , in Proceedings of the 31st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 1998 , pp . 391 – 405 . [ 10 ] N . Duncan and D . Paradice , “Creativity in GDSS : An integration of creativity , group dynamics , and problem solving theory” , Proceedings of the 25th Hawaii International Conference on Information Systems Sciences , pp . 277 – 287 , 1992 . [ 11 ] J . F . Nunamaker , L . M . Applegate , and B . R . Konsynski , “Facilitating group creativity : Experience with a group decision support system” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 3 , no . 4 , pp . 5 – 19 , 1987 . [ 12 ] L . Candy and E . A . Edmonds , “Creative design of the Lotus bicycle : implications for knowledge support systems research” , Design Studies , vol . 17 , pp . 71 – 90 , 1996 . [ 13 ] R . J . Mejias , “The Interaction of Process Losses , Process Gains , and Meeting Satisfaction Within Technology - Supported Environments” , Small Group Research , vol . 38 , no . 1 , pp . 156 – 194 , 2007 . [ 14 ] F . Forster and M . Brocco , “Understanding creativity - technique based problem solving processes” , in Knowledge - Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems , 2008 , pp . 806 – 813 . [ 15 ] M . Voigt , B . Niehaves , and J . Becker , “Towards a Unified Design Theory for Creativity Support Systems” , in Proceedings of the Design Science Research in Information Systems , 2012 , pp . 152 – 173 . [ 16 ] S . Seidel , F . Müller - Wienbergen , and J . Becker , “The Concept of Creativity in the Information Systems Discipline : Past , Present , and Prospects” , Communications of the AIS , vol . 27 , no . 1 , p . 14 , 2010 . [ 17 ] R . Finke , T . Ward , and S . M . Smith , Creative Cognition : Theory , Research and Application . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press , 1992 . [ 18 ] G . - J . De Vreede and R . O . Briggs , “Collaboration Engineering : Designing Repeatable Processes for High - Value Collaborative Tasks” , in Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2005 , pp . 1 – 10 . 231 232 [ 19 ] R . O . Briggs , G . - J . De Vreede , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Collaboration Engineering with ThinkLets to Pursue Sustained Success with Group Support Systems” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 31 – 64 , 2003 . [ 20 ] M . L . Markus , A . Majchrzak , and L . Gasser , “A Design Theory for Systems that Support Emergent Knowledge Processes” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 26 , no . 3 , pp . 179 – 212 , 2002 . [ 21 ] J . P . Guilford , “Creativity” , The American Psychologist , vol . 5 , no . 9 , pp . 444 – 454 , 1950 . [ 22 ] D . L . Dean , J . M . Hender , T . L . Rodgers , and E . L . Santanen , “Identifying quality , novel , and creative Ideas : Constructs and scales for idea evaluation” , Journal of the AIS , vol . 7 , no . 1 , pp . 646 – 699 , 2006 . [ 23 ] J . Webster and R . T . Watson , “Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : Writing a literature review” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 26 , no . 2 , p . 3 , 2002 . [ 24 ] T . W . Malone and K . Crowston , “What is coordination theory and how can it help design cooperative work systems ? ” , in Proceedings of the 1990 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work , 1990 , pp . 357 – 370 . [ 25 ] S . Gregor , “The nature of theory in information systems” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 30 , no . 3 , pp . 611 – 642 , 2006 . [ 26 ] F . Müller - Wienbergen , O . Müller , S . Seidel , and J . Becker , “Leaving the Beaten Tracks in Creative Work – A Design Theory for Systems that Support Convergent and Divergent Thinking” , Journal of the AIS , vol . 12 , no . 11 , pp . 714 – 740 , 2011 . [ 27 ] O . Hilliges , L . Terrenghi , S . Boring , D . Kim , H . Richter , and A . Butz , “Designing for collaborative creative problem solving” , in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition , 2007 , pp . 137 – 146 . [ 28 ] E . L . Santanen , R . O . Briggs , and G . - J . De Vreede , “The cognitive network model of creativity : a new causal model of creativity and a new brainstorming technique” , in Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2000 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 29 ] M . Shepherd , R . O . Briggs , B . Reinig , J . Yen , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Invoking social comparison to improve electronic brainstorming : beyond anonymity” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 155 – 170 , 1995 . [ 30 ] J . S . Valacich , L . M . Jessup , A . R . Dennis , and J . F . Nunamaker , “A conceptual framework of anonymity in group support systems” , Group Decision and Negotiation , vol . 1 , no . 3 , pp . 219 – 241 , 1992 . [ 31 ] T . Connolly , L . M . Jessup , and J . S . Valacich , “Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups” , Management Science , vol . 36 , no . 6 , pp . 689 – 703 , Jun . 1990 . [ 32 ] L . M . Jessup , T . Connolly , J . Galegher , and B . L . M . Jessup , “The Effects of Anonymity on GDSS Group Process With an Idea - Generating Task” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 14 , no . 3 , pp . 313 – 321 , 1990 . [ 33 ] G . R . Goethals and J . M . Darley , “Social comparison theory : Self - evaluation and group life” , in Theories of Group Behavior , B . Mullen and G . R . Goethals , Eds . New York : Springer - Verlag , 1987 , pp . 21 – 47 . [ 34 ] T . Selker , “Fostering motivation and creativity for computer users” , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 63 , pp . 410 – 421 , 2005 . [ 35 ] J . Hailpern , E . Hinterbichler , C . Leppert , D . Cook , and B . P . Bailey , “TEAM STORM : demonstrating an interaction model for working with multiple ideas during creative group work” , in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition , 2007 , pp . 193 – 202 . [ 36 ] T . Herrmann , “Design Heuristics for Computer Supported Collaborative Creativity” , in Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference an System Sciences , 2009 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 37 ] M . P . Farrell , Collaborative Circles Friendship Dynamics & Creative Work . Chicago : The University Of Chicago Press , 2001 . [ 38 ] R . O . Briggs , G . - J . De Vreede , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Collaboration Engineering with ThinkLets to Pursue Sustained Success with Group Support Systems” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 31 – 64 , 2003 . [ 39 ] R . O . Briggs , G . Kolfschoten , and D . L . Dean , “Defining Key Concepts for Collaboration Engineering” , in Proceedings of 12th Americas Conference on Information Systems , 2006 . [ 40 ] J . H . Helquist , J . Kruse , and M . Adkins , “Participant - Driven Collaborative Convergence” , in Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2008 . [ 41 ] T . Prante , C . Magerkurth , and N . Streitz , “Developing CSCW tools for idea finding - empirical results and implications for design” , in ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 2002 , pp . 106 – 115 . [ 42 ] O . K . Ferstl and E . Sinz , Grundlagen der Wirtschaftsinformatik . München : Oldenburg , 2006 . [ 43 ] J . F . Nunamaker , “A Singular Value Decomposition Approach to Automatic Concept Classification in Group Support Systems” , in International Conference on Information Systems , 2007 . [ 44 ] H . Chen , P . Hsu , R . Orwig , L . Hoopes , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Automatic Concept Classification of Text from Electronic Meetings” , Communications of the ACM , vol . 37 , no . 10 , 1994 . [ 45 ] G . Kolfschoten and E . Santanen , “Reconceptualizing Generate thinkLets : the Role of the Modifier” , in Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2007 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 46 ] B . Massetti , “An Empirical Examination of the Value of Creativity Support Systems on Idea Generation” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 20 , no . 1 , p . 83 , 1996 . [ 47 ] R . O . Briggs and G . L . Kolfschoten , “Toward a Theoretical Model of Consensus Building” , Proceedings of 11th Americas Conference on Information Systems , 2005 . [ 48 ] G . Stasser and D . Stewart , “Discovery of hidden profiles by decision - making groups : Solving a problem versus making a judgment” , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , vol . 63 , no . 3 , pp . 426 – 434 , 1992 . 232 233 [ 49 ] G . P . Huber , “Issues in the Design of Group Decision Support Sytems” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 8 , no . 3 , p . 195 , 1984 . [ 50 ] M . Jelassi , “An Integrated Framework for Group Decision Support Systems Design” , Information & Management , vol . 13 , no . 3 , pp . 143 – 153 , 1987 . [ 51 ] P . L . Curseu , R . Schalk , and I . Wessel , “How do virtual teams process information ? A literature review and implications for management” , Journal of Managerial Psychology , vol . 23 , no . 6 , pp . 628 – 652 , 2008 . [ 52 ] M . Resnick , B . Myers , K . Nakakoji , B . Shneiderman , R . Pausch , T . Selker , and M . Eisenberg , “Design Principles for Tools to Support Creative Thinking” , in Institute for Software Research , Paper 816 , 2005 . [ 53 ] B . Shneiderman , “Creativity support tools : accelerating discovery and innovation” , Communications of the ACM , vol . 50 , no . 12 , 2007 . [ 54 ] U . Farooq , J . M . Carroll , and C . H . Ganoe , “Supporting creativity with awareness in distributed collaboration” , in Proceedings of the international ACM conference on Conference on supporting group work , 2007 , pp . 31 – 40 . [ 55 ] J . E . Nemiro , “The Creative Process in Virtual Teams” , Creativity Research Journal , vol . 14 , no . 1 , pp . 69 – 83 , 2002 . [ 56 ] K . Nakakoji , Y . Yamamoto , S . Takada , and B . N . Reeves , “Two - dimensional spatial positioning as a means for reflection in design” , in Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques , 2000 , pp . 145 – 154 . [ 57 ] B . Shneiderman , “Creating creativity : user interfaces for supporting innovation” , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 7 , no . 1 , pp . 114 – 138 , 2000 . [ 58 ] S . L . Jarvenpaa and D . E . Leidner , “Communication and trust in global virtual teams” , Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , vol . 3 , no . 4 , 1998 . [ 59 ] A . R . Dennis and J . S . Valacich , “Rethinking media richness : towards a theory of media synchronicity” , in Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 1999 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 60 ] J . Becker , K . Bergener , and M . Voigt , “Supporting Creative Group Processes – Design Principles for Appropriate Groupware” , in Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Information Systems , 2010 . [ 61 ] D . DeLuca and J . S . Valacich , “Virtual teams in and out of synchronicity” , Information Technology & People , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 323 – 344 , 2006 . [ 62 ] R . Ocker , J . Fjermestad , S . R . Hiltz , and K . Johnson , “Effects of four modes of group communication on the outcomes of software requirements determination” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 15 , no . 1 , pp . 99 – 118 , 1998 . [ 63 ] J . Fjermestad , “An analysis of communication mode in group support systems research” , Decision Support Systems , vol . 37 , no . 2 , pp . 239 – 263 , 2004 . [ 64 ] C . Gutwin and S . Greenberg , “A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real - time groupware” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 11 , pp . 411 – 446 , 2002 . [ 65 ] S . Seidel , F . Müller - Wienbergen , and M . Rosemann , “Pockets of creativity in business processes” , Communications of the AIS , vol . 27 , no . 1 , pp . 415 – 436 , 2010 . [ 66 ] A . Cropley , “In Praise of Convergent Thinking” , Creativity Research Journal , vol . 18 , no . 3 , pp . 391 – 404 , 2006 . [ 67 ] M . Pendergast and S . C . Hayne , “Alleviating convergence problems in Group Support Systems : The Shared Context Approach” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 28 , 1994 . [ 68 ] T . T . Hewett , “Informing the design of computer - based environments to support creativity” , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 63 , pp . 383 – 409 , 2005 . [ 69 ] W . G . Bennis and P . W . Biederman , Organizing Genius : The Secrets of Creative Collaboration , no . November . Reading ( MA ) : Addison - Wesley Publishing Company , 1997 . [ 70 ] B . Shneiderman , G . Fischer , M . Czerwinski , M . Resnick , B . Myers , L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , M . Eisenberg , E . Giaccardi , T . T . Hewett , and Others , “Creativity support tools : Report from a US National Science Foundation sponsored workshop” , International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 20 , no . 2 , pp . 61 – 77 , 2006 . [ 71 ] J . Fjermestad and S . R . Hiltz , “An assessment of group support systems experimental research : methodology and results” , Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 7 – 149 , 1998 . [ 72 ] P . Antunes , V . Herskovic , and S . Ochoa , “Structuring dimensions for collaborative systems evaluation” , ACM Computing Surveys , 2008 . [ 73 ] D . Pinelle and C . Gutwin , “Group Task Analysis for Groupware Usability Evaluations” , in Proceedings of the IEEE WETICE , 2001 . [ 74 ] T . T . Hewett , M . Terry , J . F . Nunamaker , L . Candy , and B . Kules , “Creativity support tool evaluation methods and metrics” , in Creativity Support Tools , 2005 . [ 75 ] R . Rosenthal and M . R . DiMatteo , “Meta - analysis : recent developments in quantitative methods for literature reviews” , Annual Review of Psychology , vol . 52 , pp . 59 – 82 , 2001 . 233 234