Organization Science Vol . 23 , No . 4 , July – August 2012 , pp . 988 – 1007 ISSN 1047 - 7039 ( print ) (cid:151) ISSN 1526 - 5455 ( online ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1110 . 0673 ©2012 INFORMS The Core and Cosmopolitans : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Linus Dahlander ESMT European School of Management and Technology , 10178 Berlin , Germany , linus . dahlander @ esmt . org Lars Frederiksen Aarhus University , Business and Social Sciences , 8210 Aarhus V , Denmark , l . frederiksen @ asb . dk U sers often interact and help each other solve problems in communities , but few scholars have explored how these relationships provide opportunities to innovate . We analyze the extent to which people positioned within the core of a community as well as people that are cosmopolitans positioned across multiple external communities affect innovation . Using a multimethod approach , including a survey , a complete database of interactions in an online community , content coding of interactions and contributions , and 36 interviews , we specify the types of positions that have the strongest effect on innovation . Our study shows that dispositional explanations for user innovation should be complemented by a relational view that emphasizes how these communities differ from other organizations , the types of behaviors this enables , and the effects on innovation . Key words : innovation ; communities ; collaboration ; network ; users ; online History : Published online in Articles in Advance July 5 , 2011 ; revised August 10 , 2011 . Introduction An individual often lacks sufﬁcient expertise to inno - vate alone when the knowledge frontier is complex and expanding . Instead , collaboration in communities becomes an attractive means to tap diverse expertise to be recombined into innovations . Detailed studies of people who at ﬁrst glance appear to be lone geniuses reveal that they have been embedded in a wider circle of friends and colleagues that enabled their innovations ( Uzzi and Spiro 2005 ) . Prominent examples of this pro - cess include Adam Smith , Edison , and Beethoven . What is remarkable about their stories is that although talent is distributed , often only a fortunate few are recognized as innovators . In user communities , talent is distributed , and the innovative process is highly collaborative . When solu - tions to their problems are not available in the market - place , users often have strong incentives to innovate ( von Hippel 1988 ) , and they share ideas and build on each other’s work . User communities constitute a social struc - ture woven from continuous interactions among individ - uals focused around shared interests and common prac - tices , as well as usage of the same tools and products ( van Maanen and Barley 1984 , Wellman et al . 1996 ) . Users interact to solve problems collectively in these communities , yet only a few innovate , share their inno - vations , and earn recognition for their achievements . Innovation by users has not only become common but has major implications for scholars of organizations . Organizational theorists have become intrigued by how these processes work and how they can be harnessed for the mutual beneﬁt of companies and communities ( O’Mahony and Bechky 2008 ) . It is thus not surpris - ing that we have ample evidence of how users inno - vate ( von Hippel 1988 ) , but the explanations have been oddly disconnected from the social structures in commu - nities where the users are embedded . A social structure emerges when users interact and help each other solve problems , which provide different opportunities for peo - ple to innovate . We argue that communities differ from other organizational forms in important dimensions and that this difference enables behaviors that affect innova - tiveness . More speciﬁcally , we ask , why are some users considered more innovative than others as a result of their relationships inside and outside a community ? There are features of communities that enable behav - iors that would be unlikely and potentially unaccepted in other organizations . Communities and other organiza - tions differ with respect to mode of governance , mem - bership , ownership , and control of production ( Lee and Cole 2003 , O’Mahony and Bechky 2008 ) . First , com - munities are typically built on voluntary participation . In contrast to many other organizations , communities often lack central hierarchical authority ( Magee and Galinsky 2009 ) —no one is in charge of telling peers what to do . People can spend as much or as little time on their preferred task as they like , and they can work with whom they want to , without sanctions ( Dahlander and O’Mahony 2011 ) . By extension , a small core of devoted people account for the vast majority of the interac - tions in the community . This practice produces a social structure with a densely connected core and a loosely 988 Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 989 attached periphery . Although a few accounts discuss the core / periphery structure in online communities ( Garton et al . 1997 ) , we have limited knowledge about how positions in these structures inﬂuence innovation . Peo - ple at the core of the community have better opportuni - ties for innovation than those on the periphery because of superior access to information ﬂows ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 ) . Nevertheless , core members can become too entrenched in the prevailing conventions of a com - munity and thus be averse to discard existing knowl - edge and practices . Therefore those core members tend to ignore the potential contributions of new ideas from the outside ( Fleck 1935 , Schilling 2005 ) . Second , communities have more permeable bound - aries than most other organizations because little prevents individuals from being members of multiple communities . People can engage in multiple communi - ties to discover and adapt new ideas and solutions to problems that have been solved elsewhere ( Brown and Duguid 1991 , Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . We refer to people spanning community boundaries as cosmopoli - tans . Individuals who span multiple communities are thus more likely to be innovative . Too much boundary spanning may turn detrimental , however , as the person faces problems in allocating attention and connecting divergent information . We examine these arguments in the context of an online community hosted by the Swedish ﬁrm Propeller - head , which develops and sells award - winning computer - controlled musical instruments . The community was established to encourage and support interaction among users of the Propellerhead products as well as between users and the ﬁrm ( Jeppesen and Frederiksen 2006 , Jeppesen and Laursen 2009 ) . Our study combines mul - tiple methods , including interviews , network and con - tent analysis of data from a database of interactions on community members’ interactions , and an online survey instrument . We use “appropriate observers” embedded in the domain to rank individuals’ innovations ( Amabile 1982 ) . Overall , our study shows that dispositional expla - nations for user innovation should be complemented by a relational view that emphasizes both the social structure inside a community and multiple external communities . Theory and Hypotheses Innovation is the result of a process in which previously disconnected chunks of knowledge are integrated and recombined into novel products , concepts , and practices to create value ( Schumpeter 1934 ) . Van de Ven’s ( 1986 ) view of how individuals innovate highlights that innova - tions emerge when people foster , develop , carry through , react to , and modify ideas , which are then adopted and adapted in an appropriate market . The original invention needs to be brought to the market to be considered an innovation ( Schumpeter 1934 ) . In user communities , the “market” is not necessarily someone buying a product or service but an idea or artifact that is being used by peers in the community ( von Hippel 2005 ) . Individuals are thus innovative if peers perceive them as contribut - ing something novel . This aligns with Csikszentmiha - lyi’s ( 1996 , p . 23 ) view of creativity : “If by creativity we mean an idea or action that is new and valuable , then we cannot simply accept a person’s own account as the cri - terion for its existence . There is no way to know whether a thought is new except with reference to some stan - dards , and there is no way to tell whether it is valuable until it passes social evaluation . ” Finding agreed - upon objective criteria to judge innovativeness is a challenge that often requires intersubjective assessments . Kline and Rosenberg ( 1986 , p . 283 ) make a similar claim : “It is a serious mistake to treat an innovation as if it were a well - deﬁned , homogeneous thing that could be identiﬁed as entering the economy at a precise date—or becom - ing available at a precise point in time . ” This is often the case in user communities , where there are few estab - lished formal institutions that deﬁne what constitutes an innovation . Some people come up with inventions they think are novel in the privacy of their homes , but if the inventions are not shared with others , and hence subject to evaluation by others , they cannot be evaluated by the community and potentially be considered innovative . More generally , scholars have wrestled with the rela - tion between social structures and innovation . One stream of thought analyzes how position in social networks within organizations ( typically , research and development ( R & D ) laboratories ) inﬂuences innova - tion ( Perry - Smith and Shalley 2003 , Perry - Smith 2006 ) . These studies argue that relationships within and beyond the boundaries of the traditional organizational settings are crucial ( Allen 1977 , Shalley et al . 2004 ) . Signiﬁ - cantly less attention has been paid to how an individ - ual’s position within a community inﬂuences innovative behavior ( Wasko and Faraj 2005 ) . Core : Core / Periphery Position Inside a Community A few people typically account for the vast majority of contributions in user communities ( Garton et al . 1997 , Lakhani and von Hippel 2003 ) . Members can self - select tasks and collaboration partners , and there are few , if any , sanctions for those who contribute only occasion - ally ( Dahlander and O’Mahony 2011 ) . The result is that these communities resemble a core / periphery structure with a cohesive subgroup of core actors and a set of peripheral actors who are loosely connected to the core ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 ) . The idea that some organi - zations have core / periphery structures has enjoyed con - siderable attention in social network analysis . A person’s position can range on a continuum from core to periph - eral . Extending this reasoning , we contend that one’s position in the core / periphery structure within a commu - nity affects innovation . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 990 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS As Podolny ( 2001 ) argues , relationships serve as both pipes for information and prisms that induce differen - tiation between various actors . People at the core are more likely to capture information beneﬁts that emerge ( pipes ) as well as to be recognized for their innovations ( prisms ) . In other words , the core is favorably positioned to mobilize resources because much vital information is funneled through them ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 ) . Relationships also induce differentiation among com - munity members . Core individuals are more likely than peripheral members to gain credit for their ideas ( Merton 1949 , Crane 1972 ) . This is the central idea of the Matthew effect : recognition accrues disproportionately to actors who already have plenty . As Hargadon ( 2005 ) says , because individuals closer to the core typically are deeply immersed in their social system of belief , rules , values , and norms , they can leverage their credibility among other community participants and hence secure the support needed to defend their achievements from scrutiny by skeptics . However , a position too close to the core can have negative effects . Some researchers suggest that periph - eral people may not “face the same level of social pres - sure to conform and are less likely to forgo opportuni - ties from which new creative ideas originate” ( Cattani and Ferriani 2008 , p . 827 ) . Simmel ( 1950 ) and Merton ( 1972 ) emphasize that strangers , fringe players , and out - siders transfer ideas that are less likely to be created by people who are more socially embedded in established ways of thinking . Peripherally positioned people can escape the “homogenizing effects typical of an estab - lished institutional framework” ( Cattani and Ferriani 2008 , p . 827 ) and thus focus on developing their inno - vation even if they do not conform to accepted standards and practices of the community . Whereas a position on the periphery of a community’s social structure allows people to explore ideas and infor - mation that the core members have ignored , the core is more effective in mobilizing support for those ideas . Uzzi ( 1997 ) stresses the information beneﬁts that arise from strong ties that simultaneously constrain behaviors . McLaughlin’s ( 2001 ) study about optimal marginality and innovation in the development of modern psycho - analysis implicitly claims that innovative performance is higher among people who occupy an intermediate position on a core / periphery continuum . In his view , people who have the legitimacy of the core but reach out to the periphery are likely to be innovative . To sum up , we posit that people on an intermediate position on a core / periphery continuum are more likely to be innovative . Hypothesis 1 . There is an inverted U - shaped rela - tionship between the position in the core / periphery structure inside a community and the extent to which an individual is innovative . Cosmopolitans : Boundary Spanning Across Multiple Communities There are rich insights into how practices evolve and how individuals make sense of events by calling on their prior experiences and expertise in communities ( van Maanen and Barley 1984 ) . However , this stream of literature has often overlooked how members forge relationships with people outside the community or organization ( Perry - Smith 2006 ) . To consider relation - ships with external constituents is important , because some people are cosmopolitans who choose to be part of multiple communities ( Gouldner 1958 ) . When indi - viduals are part of multiple communities , they can transfer , translate , and transform experiences from one community to another ( Dougherty 1992 , Bechky 2003 , Carlile 2004 ) . We argue that the extent to which peo - ple span multiple communities affects whether they are innovative because easy access to many sources of diverse knowledge from external communities provides increased opportunities for recombination . The boundary - spanning literature ( Allen 1977 , Tushman and Scanlan 1981 , Ancona and Caldwell 1992 ) has illuminated how individuals within R & D depart - ments go outside their organization to ﬁnd new ideas and resources . In bureaucracies there exist hierarchies that distribute authority and delegate tasks to their employ - ees . In contrast , the boundaries of communities are per - meable ; there are no sanctions on members who span them . Individuals can be part of multiple communities and decide for themselves when and where to allocate their attention . They can “drop in” to ask questions or browse existing suggestions and ideas available in the community ( Jeppesen and Laursen 2009 , Kollock 1999 ) . This behavior is perceived as normal by com - munity members and , therefore , does not disturb any behavioral assumptions . In contrast to most organiza - tions where , for example , legal contracts may prevent employees from maintaining membership in competing organizations , this norm creates a world in which people often belong to multiple communities . People have an opportunity to learn and reuse practices , ideas , and references from various knowl - edge domains . These communities represent different “thought worlds” ( Dougherty 1992 ) that expose partici - pants to alternative ways of framing problems and het - erogeneous expertise . Solutions to problems , or parts of the solutions , often already exist , because the prob - lems have been solved outside a focal domain of exper - tise . Jeppesen and Lakhani’s ( 2010 ) work , for instance , shows how companies broadcast unsolved problems to a diverse pool of solvers : solvers of complex technical problems frequently come from a background different from those who distributed the problem . People who span multiple communities are therefore more likely to be aware of existing solutions and ways of framing prob - lems ; they tackle problems from a fresh angle ( Hargadon and Sutton 1997 , Burt 2005 ) . External communities also Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 991 serve as a means of validation and offer suggestions for improvement of ideas that challenge the proposer to advance the idea further . External knowledge is often scarcer , and it can be valued higher than knowledge that emerged inside the organization ( Menon and Pfef - fer 2003 ) . Csikszentmihalyi ( 1996 , p . 9 ) submits that there are beneﬁts of spanning diverse contexts , but at the same time , “ [ I ] t is important to recognize that given how little attention we have to work with , and given the increasing amounts of information that are constantly being added to domains , specialization seems inevitable . ” This sug - gests that there may be downsides to spanning multiple communities and hence drawing too much on external sources of knowledge . Information processing is both expensive and time consuming . Information needs to be noted , encoded , and interpreted to be useful . A poten - tial attention problem may surface ( Ocasio 1997 ) : peo - ple can allocate only a certain amount of attention to a limited number of activities . Simon ( 1971 , pp . 40 – 41 ) remarks that in an information - rich world , the wealth of information means a dearth of something else : a scarcity of what - ever it is that information consumes . What information consumes is rather obvious : it consumes the attention of its recipients . Hence , a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention and a need to allocate that atten - tion efﬁciently among the overabundance of information sources that might consume it . An overabundance of information makes it difﬁcult for one to prioritize and , by extension , to absorb it . Koput ( 1997 ) , for instance , says that too many ideas and too much information can be harmful to innovative perfor - mance . In sum , we posit that people that span an inter - mediate number of external communities are more likely to be innovative . Hypothesis 2 . There is an inverted U - shaped rela - tionship between spanning multiple external communi - ties and the extent to which an individual is innovative . The Contingent Effect of Core and Cosmopolitans There is a boundary challenge in network studies : researchers are forced to assume where the network ends ( Wasserman and Faust 1994 , p . 31 ) . When focusing on a single community , one could take for granted that peripheral members lack relationships . In reality , some of them could be cosmopolitans , embedded in a wide network outside their focal community ( Gouldner 1958 ) . It is thus important to consider the joint effects of span - ning multiple communities and core / periphery position on innovation . Scholars of boundary spanning in ﬁrms have docu - mented in detail how certain people link internal and external groups in organizations . According to this lit - erature , “communication stars” situated in core posi - tions of organizations are better positioned to sustain and beneﬁt from external relationships . Tushman and Scan - lan ( 1981 , p . 292 , italics in original ) state that “infor - mational boundary spanning will be accomplished only by those individuals who are well connected to exter - nal information areas and who also are well connected internally and thus able to disseminate new informa - tion and new ideas to their more locally oriented col - leagues . ” Whereas boundary - spanning scholars suggest a positive association between centrality within an orga - nization and being a cosmopolitan who spans multi - ple communities , others have argued that it is difﬁcult to do both simultaneously . Core members have legiti - macy in the community but are often blind to alterna - tive ways of solving problems . In a study of innova - tion in an R & D lab , Perry - Smith ( 2006 ) demonstrates that people with few connections inside the organiza - tion gain the most from having external relationships . Those at the periphery are less embedded in the orga - nization and better positioned to beneﬁt from diver - gent ideas developed through relationships to external actors . Perry - Smith ( 2006 , p . 89 ) submits that “these ideas can emerge without the constraints of worrying what key others will say or experiencing personal stress from potentially going against some accepted tenets of the network . ” Individuals on the periphery are less con - strained by what is feasible according to the established logic of the community ( Kuhn 1970 , Crane 1972 ) . In contrast , core members face the risk of becoming too inward looking because they focus on established ways of working ( Schilling 2005 ) . They may start to over - value the information and contributions from the internal community and fail to appreciate ideas from the outside ( Katz and Allen 1982 ) . Core members may therefore be less able to become innovative from their engagement in multiple communities . Individuals have ﬁnite capacities to maintain relation - ships , and they thus face trade - offs to span multiple external communities as well as maintain their position in the core of the local community ( Whittington et al . 2009 ) . This suggests a substitution effect between span - ning multiple external communities and a core / periphery position . Hence , individuals who are not spanning com - munity boundaries receive more and potentially better ideas for innovation from becoming positioned more in the core of the community than those who are active boundary spanners . In other words , the position in the core can alleviate the challenge of not spanning multiple communities . Hypothesis 3 . Core / periphery position and spanning multiple external communities are substitutes ; thus increasing the effect of one dampens the effect of the other on innovation . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 992 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS Research Setting : Propellerhead’s Online Community We studied people in a public , unrestricted online user community established by the Swedish ﬁrm Propeller - head . We chose this setting for multiple reasons . First , the community encompasses a large number of people who differ substantially in experience , product use , and degree of participation in the community . Second , the initial qualitative phase of our research revealed that a number of people in the community were involved in multiple external communities . Third , we could relate participation in inside and external communities to why some individuals were more innovative than others . Fourth , Propellerhead is a mature online community , in existence for more than 10 years . Its longevity gave us the opportunity to study a community whose social structure has evolved . Fifth , this online setting allowed us to collect both self - reported and actual behavioral data from a database of interactions . Last , we were moti - vated to think about innovation in a ﬁeld where most traditional measures of innovation ( such as , for exam - ple , patents ) do not apply . As in other immature ﬁelds , there is no clear deﬁnition of what constitutes innova - tion in online communities . Therefore it proves difﬁcult to codify what is labeled as innovation . In 1994 , Propellerhead’s ﬁrst product was released , and the ﬁrm quickly became a market leader within its segment . Software - based musical instruments are tools for sound production , processing , and recording . They provide musicians and music technicians with a num - ber of features used in the creation of musical con - tent , such as sound - producing modules , sound effects , and tools for sound organizing . The main difference between these software - based instruments and “normal” instruments is that a single piece of software com - bines making , processing , and recording music . Before Propellerhead established its own community , a group of devoted musicians had founded another community in which they electronically shared ideas for how to use and improve the product . In 1999 , this community prompted Propellerhead to establish and host its own ofﬁcial online user community on the ﬁrm’s website . During our interviews ( described in the next section ) , a community member explained , “Over time , Propeller - head turned its community into the dominant nexus for communication about product use and sharing of prod - uct alterations on the Internet . ” Individuals in the community help each other use the products in new or better ways , share ideas , offer assis - tance in solving each other’s problems , and comment on designs and suggestions made by other community members without any ﬁnancial rewards ( Constant et al . 1996 , Bagozzi and Dholakia 2006 ) . 1 Individual members rarely directly change the source code of Propellerhead’s products , but they can indirectly inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s decisions about product features and functionalities . Pro - pellerhead has also encouraged signiﬁcant additional applications invented around the original product by users . These innovations are called mods and extras . 2 One such extra was an application that linked the Propellerhead software to moving pictures . This user - developed application opened the door for the ﬁrm into a new market : using the music software for developing and editing ﬁlm scores and commercials . A quotation from one of the three founders of Propellerhead exempli - ﬁes the ﬁrm’s support for innovative user contributions for the development of new products : There’s a parallel to games in the way we approach modi - ﬁcations . The gaming world has spawned a whole subcul - ture of modding [ changing functions , features , or design of the original product ] , so when modiﬁed versions of ReBirth 1 . 0 surfaced back in 1997 , we responded like id Software [ a games company that encourages users to develop modiﬁcations ] . This kind of reverse engineering by users was cool with us . In fact , we encouraged it ! We published mods and eventually we built mod support into the software . When the ﬁrm releases a new product version or an entirely new product , people in the community detect bugs and errors and comment on missing product fea - tures . Feedback , product modiﬁcations , and applications are developed and shared in the community . Propeller - head employees can then make decisions about what suggestions , applications , and modiﬁcations can be inte - grated into the product development process or live on as stand - alone applications . Innovations to communi - ties take many different forms , such as idea generation , idea realization , prototyping , and transfer and diffusion . Each of these is recognized as valuable by both the Pro - pellerhead employees and the user community members ( Nambisan and Baron 2010 ) . The CEO stated , Communities are built on the innovation by users . If we only had individuals asking and answering questions , we’d have a support forum , not a community . Methods Data Collection We use multiple methods for our study ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ) . Both qualitative and quantitative meth - ods complement each other to improve the validity of ﬁndings ( Jick 1979 ) and produce deeper theoreti - cal insights . We conducted 36 interviews with users in the community and Propellerhead employees to gain a deeper contextual understanding of the research setting and the people involved , as well as to identify and val - idate variables useful for our quantitative study . The interviews were carried out before and in parallel with the survey . We used insights from the interviews to build a survey instrument that captured the community’s lan - guage and style . After the survey was distributed , we Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 993 conducted additional interviews to get face validity and interpret our emerging ﬁndings . As a consequence , the qualitative data analysis took place iteratively , moving back and forth between data , relevant literature , and embryonic theory ( Dougherty 2002 ) . The interviews were selected through a nonrandom purposive snowballing technique ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ) . We began with several interviews within the ﬁrm ( the CEO , head of product development , head of user support , and marketing personnel ) . We then inter - viewed community members who the ﬁrm recommended that we talk to in order to acquire deeper insight into how users innovate . When we had gained some exper - tise about the community , we selected experienced and inexperienced users in the community for additional interviews . In total , 12 interviews were conducted with 6 people from the Propellerhead ﬁrm ; the remaining 24 interviews were conducted with users in the online community . We carried out both face - to - face and telephone inter - views . We recorded and transcribed 30 interviews ; the remaining interviews took place during lunch meetings and coffee breaks where recording would have been inappropriate . In these instances , we wrote a lengthy memo of the central issues during and after the inter - views . Initially , we asked open - ended questions about how the ﬁrm used its user community , how the com - munity had evolved , what features constituted innova - tion , and who the respondent perceived to be the most innovative users in the community . We also asked about the ways community members engaged in external com - munities . As our study progressed and ﬁndings began to emerge , we conducted additional interviews directed toward establishing the link between engagement inside and outside the community and its association with indi - vidual innovation . When questions emerged after the interviews , we followed up via e - mail correspondence . We analyzed the interview data with manual coding . We derived speciﬁc categories such as “forms and drivers of multiple community participation , ” “position in the social structure of the community , ” and “forms of inno - vation . ” From the categories , we collected illustrative quotations . Before initiating the quantitative study , we read through 1 , 000 posts from our downloaded data from a database of interactions to gain a rich understanding about the context of “work” activities . We discovered discussions around new topics , suggestions for new use of products , advice , and even sharing of beta versions of software applications that had migrated from other online communities . We combined a database of the interactions in the community with the responses to a questionnaire dis - tributed to the community . Our data set combines sur - vey data on individual attributes and attitudes with behavioral archival data to increase validity and cir - cumvent common method bias ( Doty and Glick 1998 ) . The database of interactions contained 151 , 092 mes - sages posted by 8 , 640 individuals . In addition to the subject and full message , the database also included the date of the message’s posting , information on the mes - sage poster , information about which discussion thread the message belonged to , and whether it was in response to a particular message . We used this data source to study the interactions of the community members and to content code the 5 , 000 most recent postings before the distribution of the survey . 3 The survey was hosted on the Propellerhead website . It appeared when a person logged on to the online community . People could then choose to participate or return to the community pages . The survey was posted in May 2008 and was open for 31 days . We received 280 responses useful for analysis out of 966 individ - uals who posted in the community during this period , equivalent to a 29 % effective response rate . The ques - tionnaire inquired about users’ personal attributes : levels of technical competence , motivations for participating in the community , product experience level , professional status , and engagement in other communities . For the survey data , we used both procedural and statistical remedies to cope with the potential threat of common method bias . Following the suggestion by Podsakoff et al . ( 2003 ) , we protected anonymity , counterbalanced question order , and used several scale anchors and scale formats . We used Harman’s single - factor test when ana - lyzing the responses to the survey . 4 In the next step , we matched the people who were active in the community when the survey was distributed with their responses to the online survey . We used the unique user name of each person in the community to do the matching . Our method overcomes the problems inherent in many studies of online communities related to reliance solely on self - reported data . We thus avoided any problems of a social desirability bias for some of our key constructs ( Podsakoff and Organ 1986 ) . In addition , the content coding exercise of user posts took us “inside” the discussions , the languages , and the codes of conduct in the community ( Barley and Kunda 2001 ) , and hence it took us closer to the innovation process . Variables and Measures Dependent Variable . Our theoretical concern is indi - vidual innovation in the context of a user community . Inspired by Amabile’s studies on creativity in which “a product or response is deemed creative to the extent that appropriate observers independently agree it is cre - ative” ( 1982 , p . 1001 ) , we measure individual innova - tion by asking expert judges . This allowed us to move beyond respondents’ self - reported perceptions , which could be biased toward social desirability ( Podsakoff and Organ 1986 ) . Innovation indicators such as patents , R & D investments , and new product introductions are Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 994 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS useful in mature industries , but they potentially disre - gard innovations in emerging domains . In our context , for a process or an original prototype application to be accepted as innovative depends on whether the traits of novelty , difference , or importance are recognized as signiﬁcant by experts in the community ( Burt 2004 , Obstfeld 2005 ) . 5 To develop the dependent variable , we asked Pro - pellerhead and four experienced people in the commu - nity to independently rank our 280 survey respondents on a scale of 0 , 1 , or 2 for whether each had been inno - vative in the community in their view . The expert judge from the ﬁrm was the manager in charge of product sup - port and the moderator of the community . He had been with Propellerhead for more than three years and has extensive knowledge of innovation related to the tech - nology and the product . The four judges selected from the community are all experts in the area . 6 To incen - tivize care in the ranking process by the expert judges , we offered to pay them a small amount of money for their time and effort . The instruction we gave the expert coders for the ranking exercise was as follows : “Please identify users in the community who have made inno - vative , new , and valuable contributions to the commu - nity . These could be mods / GUI , extras , and new appli - cations . However , beta testers should not be nominated as delivering innovations . ” This single - item criterion was built to capture the wide range of user innovation activ - ities in the community . Following the literature on user innovation , we include innovations ranging from solu - tions to speciﬁc technical problems to more concrete innovations such as product modiﬁcations and beta ver - sions of software applications . One of the authors has spent considerable time with the ﬁrm and within the community over the last ﬁve years . On the basis of this knowledge , we reasoned that a broad and open - ended question was the best way to capture the various types of innovation created and shared by users in the com - munity . The question focuses mainly on technological innovation ; a few of the expert coders , however , revealed that some of the people singled out as particularly inno - vative in the community contributed both technological solutions and content - based innovation , such as patch ﬁles of new sounds . After the judges e - mailed us their evaluation lists , we contacted them by telephone . Together , we went through their individual lists and asked them in detail why certain community participants had achieved their rank . Judges thus had to explain their evaluation to us to ensure a high degree of reliability in the coders’ ranking . The judges evaluated whether they thought the respon - dents in our sample had contributed anything innova - tive . After they had given a score to each , we asked them to evaluate how novel they thought the people they had ranked as innovative were . In the left columns of Table 1 ( a ) , we show the Spearman correlations between the rankings considering the degree to which the judges thought the innovations were signiﬁcant ( 0 = not inno - vative , 1 = innovative , 2 = very innovative ) . In the right columns , we show the tetrachoric correlations ( 0 = not innovative , 1 = innovative ) between the coders’ evalua - tions . Table 1 ( a ) illustrates that the expert judges were often in agreement , but not always . We developed two composite scores of how innovative individuals were by summing the scores from the judges . The ﬁrst variable captures whether people are ranked as innovative or not . The second measures the degree to which they were con - sidered innovative . Table 1 ( b ) shows the distribution of the innovative scores of the people in our sample . The quotation below gives an example of a user who was considered very innovative by our judges . He came up with a radically different way of producing sounds that Propellerhead had overlooked : I know one guy who’s working on a Hammond B3 plus , a spinning Leslie cabinet patch for Reason . And up until now that stuff has been purely sample based . People have actually gone out to sample actual sound . Like Propeller - head went out and recorded an actual Hammond B3 in a Leslie cabinet at Abbey Road studio , but it’s all sample based , so it’s dependent on samples . Whereas this other guy is based upon what is the sound of Hammond ? How is it made ? And then he analyzes what the B3 does and it’s all just sine waves , so he’s recreated a Hammond B3 out of just sound waves . He studied the physical proper - ties of a Leslie cabinet and ﬁgured out how fast the base rotor spins , how fast does a treble rotor spin , what’s the acceleration time based upon the motors in that thing . This re - creation is just amazing . In cases where the user innovation took a form dif - ferent from a novel process or original way of perform - ing or combining certain features or functions—but had materialized into a prototype—we were often able to ﬁnd mods , extras , or patch ﬁlls online , emerging from someone included in our survey sample . Independent Variables . Core / periphery position . A network has a core / pe - riphery structure if it has a core of individuals who are densely tied to each other and a periphery whose mem - bers have more relationships to core members than to each other ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 ) . We measured all individuals’ positions on a core / periphery continuum using Borgatti and Everett’s ( 1999 ) algorithm . Follow - ing Cattani and Ferriani ( 2008 ) , we chose a continuous core / periphery model , because we were interested in the continuum rather than in assigning people to either the core or the periphery ( Fleck 1935 ) . 7 The Borgatti and Everett ( 1999 , p . 378 ) algorithm attributes “large values for pairs of nodes that are both high in coreness , mid - dling values for pairs of nodes in which one is high in coreness and the other is not , and low values for pairs of nodes that are both peripheral . ” Although all individ - uals in the core of the community are central as calcu - lated by most social network measures , the reverse is Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 995 Table 1 ( a ) Correlations Between Coder Evaluations Spearman ( using 0 , 1 , and 2 ) Tetrachoric ( using 0 and 1 ) 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 Propellerhead judge 1 1 2 Community judge 1 0 (cid:48) 48 1 0 (cid:48) 72 1 3 Community judge 2 0 (cid:48) 52 0 (cid:48) 69 1 0 (cid:48) 67 0 (cid:48) 92 1 4 Community judge 3 0 (cid:48) 59 0 (cid:48) 54 0 (cid:48) 53 1 0 (cid:48) 72 0 (cid:48) 81 0 (cid:48) 76 1 5 Community judge 4 0 (cid:48) 45 0 (cid:48) 38 0 (cid:48) 32 0 (cid:48) 44 1 0 (cid:48) 64 0 (cid:48) 50 0 (cid:48) 51 0 (cid:48) 69 1 Notes . Spearman correlations using the degree of contribution from each coder ( 0 , 1 , and 2 ) . Tetrachoric correlations between contributions ranked ≥ 1 . Table 1 ( b ) Composite Innovative Scores Using 0 , 1 , and 2 Using 0 and 1 Innovative score Frequency % Cumulative % Innovative score Frequency % Cumulative % 0 166 59 (cid:48) 29 59 (cid:48) 29 0 166 59 (cid:48) 29 59 (cid:48) 29 1 51 18 (cid:48) 21 77 (cid:48) 5 1 60 21 (cid:48) 43 80 (cid:48) 71 2 23 8 (cid:48) 21 85 (cid:48) 71 2 18 6 (cid:48) 43 87 (cid:48) 14 3 11 3 (cid:48) 93 89 (cid:48) 64 3 17 6 (cid:48) 07 93 (cid:48) 21 4 11 3 (cid:48) 93 93 (cid:48) 57 4 12 4 (cid:48) 29 97 (cid:48) 5 5 10 3 (cid:48) 57 97 (cid:48) 14 5 7 2 (cid:48) 5 100 6 1 0 (cid:48) 36 97 (cid:48) 5 7 3 1 (cid:48) 07 98 (cid:48) 57 8 1 0 (cid:48) 36 98 (cid:48) 93 9 3 1 (cid:48) 07 100 Total 280 100 280 100 not always true . Each core member may have a high degree of centrality because of connections to various cohesive parts of the community but may not have any connections to other core members ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 , p . 393 ) . We used UCINET to calculate positions on the core / periphery continuum ( Borgatti et al . 2002 ) . 8 Spanning multiple external communities . In the online survey , we asked for a yes or no answer to the following question : “Have you actively participated in other online communities NOT hosted by Propellerhead during the last three years ? ” For respondents who ticked the Yes box , there was a follow - up question about the commu - nities in which they participated : “Please list the names of other online communities not hosted by Propellerhead that you most actively spend time in . It is no requirement to list ten . ” Respondents were then offered 10 slots for free text to list each community they found important . 9 Afterward , we used Google and other search engines to identify the communities mentioned by respondents to content code them by type . We excluded general social network communities such as Facebook . We used the number of communities listed by each respondent as the measurement for boundary - spanning activities . Con - trary to the method used , for example , by Perry - Smith ( 2006 ) for measuring external relationships , we do not focus on the person’s direct ties to a speciﬁed other but rather on the focal individual’s access to and use of additional knowledge bases . We reasoned that exter - nal relationships in the online setting are not contingent on speciﬁc individual relationships but rather depend on involvement with other communities as repositories of knowledge . To further this analysis , we subdivided the number of communities into technical and artistic ( see Table 2 ) . Control variables . Based on previous research and our interviews with Propellerhead community members and employees , we included several variables to control for various individual - level factors that can affect a person’s probability to innovate . We hypothesized that innovation is affected by the core / periphery position within the community and span - ning external communities . We thus need to rule out the effect of the sheer number of postings in the community . However , the quality of the contributions varies consid - erably : some postings are sophisticated—for example , asking for suggestions to solve difﬁcult technical prob - lems while creating a new mod—whereas others are just “thank you” messages and other less relevant informa - tion . Following earlier research on online communities ( Constant et al . 1996 ) , we decided to content code 5 , 000 postings . 10 We developed the content coding following the advice of Weber ( 1990 ) . In preparation for coding , we read through a large number of postings , which we divided into distinct categories . From this preliminary analysis , we developed a coding scheme with four different cate - gories : ( 1 ) question , ( 2 ) answer / response , ( 3 ) comment , and ( 4 ) other . We discussed the coding scheme with two Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 996 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS Table 2 Coding of External Communities Category Description of community Examples of communities Technical Focused on practices , function , and features of software that both compete with and complement Propellerhead’s applications . These communities concern products technologically similar to Propellerhead’s software . —KVR—Appleton—DigiTech—Line6—Cubase—Logic ( Apple ) —MP3 Artistic Focused on creation , production , and recording of music mainly by use of software . These communities are used for sharing suggestions , evaluations and recommendations for gear and sampling , as well as communities for DJ activities . —Harmony Central —ReasonStation—SoundonSound—Reasonfreaks—EM411—CombinatorHQ Note . The examples listed are the most commonly mentioned communities by respondents in our sample . of the coders who had originally studied the messages independently . After categorizing the ﬁrst 200 posts , we achieved 86 % agreement and a Cohen’s ( 1960 ) kappa of 0 . 83 . We discussed sources of disagreement and how they could be overcome . Once we had ensured this level of reliability between the two coders , we developed two samples of 2 , 700 posts for each coder . We included an overlap to ensure good intercoder reliability throughout the process . The checks were similar to the ﬁrst test for intercoder reliability , and they suggested that the coders were consistent over time . A Cohen’s kappa of 0 . 83 is usually considered a good score of intercoder reliability ( Cohen 1960 ) , especially for a new coding scheme . The coders proved very able at separating appropriate ques - tions from relevant answers / responses , and agreement for these two categories was 95 % . We counted the num - ber of questions by the content - coded posts . These posts to other members of the community included requests for information , clariﬁcation , or elaboration to solve a problem . We also measured the number of answers by counting only when a respondent provided an answer to a question from someone else . We controlled for community tenure by counting the number of years a person has been active in the commu - nity since her ﬁrst posting . People with a longer presence in the community will be more familiar with it , which should increase their likelihood of being innovative . We expect that product experience inﬂuences the abil - ity to innovate , because people who have used the prod - uct for a long time may be more aware—or more in need—of possible improvements . This is measured by the number of years of product experience . People who spend more time in the community will have more chances to be innovative by virtue of being accustomed to the dialogue and being able to recog - nize new opportunities . We controlled for time spent outside the community by asking how many hours a week on average were spent in external communities , divided by the number of hours spent in Propellerhead’s community . According to von Hippel ( 1988 ) , lead users are char - acterized by their ability to ( 1 ) foresee general mar - ket trends because their needs are heterogeneous , and ( 2 ) expect innovation - related beneﬁts from a solution , which increases the motivation to innovate . von Hippel argues that lead users are likely to be innovators because they will try to ﬁnd novel solutions to their unique problems . To control for this alternative explanation , we drew on Morrison et al . ( 2000 ) to construct a measure of degree of lead user characteristics . After pretesting the survey and analyzing the results with factor analy - sis and Cronbach’s alpha , we amended some items to increase the reliability of the measure . Following Morri - son et al . ( 2000 ) , we captured von Hippel’s ( 1988 ) deﬁ - nition of a lead user with a series of items . 11 Each item was scored on a seven - point Likert scale , ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree . ” We constructed the degree of lead user attributes variable by summariz - ing the scores assigned to these statements . The Cron - bach’s alpha for this measure was 0 . 76 . We control for a familiarity bias that may exist between the expert coders used for establishing our dependent variable and respondents in our sample . It is possible that coders recognize individuals with whom they have had previous interactions and poten - tially assign them a higher ranking as innovative . To assess this possibility , we count the number of judges a respondent had at least one interaction with in the community . 12 Estimation Technique The dependent variable innovation is an ordinal variable that ranks the extent to which a person is judged as inno - vative by experts in the community . We therefore use an ordered probit regression to ascertain the effects of the independent and control variables on the likelihood Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 997 of individual innovation ( Greene 1997 ) . 13 As an alterna - tive speciﬁcation strategy , we also use quasi - maximum - likelihood ( QML ) Poisson regressions to predict inno - vation . This strategy is suitable because the dependent variable is a count variable taking only positive values . Because the Poisson model is in the linear exponen - tial family , the coefﬁcient estimates remain consistent as long as the mean of the dependent variable is correctly speciﬁed . QML Poisson standard errors are consistent even if the underlying data - generating process is not Poisson ( Gourieroux et al . 1984 ) . QML Poisson is suit - able because it imposes little structure on the underlying data distribution and in general is a more conservative estimate of the coefﬁcients because of larger standard errors . More active members of the community might be more inclined to complete the survey , resulting in a nonrandom sample . We compared information on respondents and nonrespondents over the period that we content coded and found that respondents are slightly more active in the community ( see the appendix for details about respondents and nonrespondents ) . To restrict our analysis to respondents could potentially bias our results because it would not account for what affected the selection process for inclusion in the sam - ple . To counteract this potential problem , we ﬁrst esti - mate the inverse Mills ratio as a selection parameter using information from the nonrespondents taken from the database of interactions ( Heckman 1979 ) . To calcu - late the selection parameter , we used the information on nonrespondents—namely , the numbers of answers and questions as well as tenure in the community . The num - ber of questions a person asks in the community was cor - related with submitting the survey , but it did not affect individual innovation . The inverse Mills ratio is inte - grated into our regressions . 14 Results Table 3 presents descriptive statistics and correlations between the variables . The highest correlation is 0 . 75 between the number of answers and the position in the core / periphery structure . We therefore assessed mul - ticollinearity by deriving the variance inﬂation factors ( VIFs ) . The highest VIF score was 5 . 8 , well below the generally accepted threshold level of 10 ( Greene 1997 ) . We also included the independent variable step - wise to assess whether coefﬁcients were consistent across the different models . Following Aiken and West ( 1991 ) , we standardized our variables before developing the quadratic terms and the interaction effect that we hypothesized . Table 4 presents the results from the regressions predicting individual innovation using three alternative strategies . Models 1 – 4 are results from ordered pro - bit regressions predicting individual innovation using the dummy variables of the scores from the judges . Models 5 – 8 analyze the same dependent variable using QML Poisson regressions . Models 9 – 12 use QML Pois - son regressions to predict individual innovation , also including the novelty scores . Across these regressions , the independent variables are remarkably consistent . In Table 4 , the ﬁrst model for each estimation strategy is the baseline model , including only the control vari - ables . The second model adds variables for boundary spanning to multiple external communities and position in the core / periphery structure as well as their squared terms to test for the inverted U - shaped effect that we hypothesized . The third model includes the interaction effect between external boundary spanning and position in the core / periphery structure . The fourth model parses out differences in spanning technical or artistic commu - nities . Because the results are very similar , we use the results from Model 12 to interpret our results . Hypothesis 1 We hypothesized that individuals at an intermediate position on a core / periphery continuum are most likely to be innovative . In support of this hypothesis , the coef - ﬁcient for core / periphery position in the third model is signiﬁcant at the 1 % level , and the squared term is nega - tive and signiﬁcant at the 5 % level . The magnitude of the squared effect , however , is not so great that we observe an inverted U - shaped relationship within the range of our data , but rather evidence of diminishing returns . In other words , to be innovative , a person beneﬁts from being more core , but this effect tapers off : as the per - son moves closer to the core , the effect on innovation becomes weaker . Our interviews underscored the bene - ﬁts of a position at the core to become innovative . The expectation of new contributions from people positioned in the core tends to be higher than for the average com - munity member : It takes a bit of data mining to get to really good infor - mation and you have to learn about the way people post—who’s posting , who’s a reliable source , things like that (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . But if you just show up and just sort of arbitrar - ily post once or twice about something you’ve learned , people probably won’t pay attention to your contribution and no one is going to trust you . I think at this point now that I’ve been at the Propeller - head forum for ﬁve or six years , I think I’ve developed enough of a name for myself there (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . People would say , oh , that’s Ed , yeah , deﬁnitely listen to Ed—they know who I am . When discussing why the periphery face obstacles to be innovate , a user said , If you’re out on the periphery of the community , I think you’d have to invest a lot of time into making a name for yourself , for being known for quality . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 998 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS Table 3 Descriptive Statistics ( n = 280 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 Innovative ( dummy ) 1 2 Innovative ( ranking ) 0 (cid:48) 96 1 3 Spanning multiple external 0 (cid:48) 2 0 (cid:48) 17 1 communities 4 Spanning multiple external 0 (cid:48) 16 0 (cid:48) 13 0 (cid:48) 61 1 communities ( technical ) 5 Spanning multiple external 0 (cid:48) 14 0 (cid:48) 12 0 (cid:48) 81 0 (cid:48) 03 1 communities ( artistic ) 6 Core / periphery position 0 (cid:48) 48 0 (cid:48) 51 0 (cid:48) 13 0 (cid:48) 12 0 (cid:48) 08 1 7 Degree of lead user attributes 0 (cid:48) 22 0 (cid:48) 23 0 (cid:48) 2 0 (cid:48) 03 0 (cid:48) 24 0 (cid:48) 08 1 8 Time spent outside the community − 0 (cid:48) 1 − 0 (cid:48) 12 0 (cid:48) 49 0 (cid:48) 25 0 (cid:48) 43 − 0 (cid:48) 16 0 (cid:48) 03 1 9 ln ( 1 + Number of answers 0 (cid:48) 43 0 (cid:48) 46 0 (cid:48) 17 0 (cid:48) 1 0 (cid:48) 14 0 (cid:48) 75 0 (cid:48) 1 − 0 (cid:48) 15 1 to questions ) 10 Product experience 0 (cid:48) 2 0 (cid:48) 18 0 (cid:48) 22 0 (cid:48) 17 0 (cid:48) 16 − 0 (cid:48) 07 0 (cid:48) 28 0 (cid:48) 04 − 0 (cid:48) 04 1 11 Tenure in the community 0 (cid:48) 36 0 (cid:48) 37 0 (cid:48) 12 0 (cid:48) 08 0 (cid:48) 09 0 (cid:48) 33 0 (cid:48) 15 − 0 (cid:48) 15 0 (cid:48) 33 0 (cid:48) 2 1 12 Familiarity bias 0 (cid:48) 10 0 (cid:48) 12 0 (cid:48) 02 0 (cid:48) 08 − 0 (cid:48) 03 0 (cid:48) 44 0 (cid:48) 12 − 0 (cid:48) 07 0 (cid:48) 29 0 (cid:48) 10 0 (cid:48) 12 1 Mean 0 (cid:48) 821 1 (cid:48) 021 2 (cid:48) 311 0 (cid:48) 889 1 (cid:48) 421 0 (cid:48) 015 3 (cid:48) 413 0 (cid:48) 538 0 (cid:48) 258 4 (cid:48) 254 1 (cid:48) 629 1 (cid:48) 475 SD 1 (cid:48) 288 1 (cid:48) 762 2 (cid:48) 187 1 (cid:48) 275 1 (cid:48) 737 0 (cid:48) 037 0 (cid:48) 775 0 (cid:48) 258 0 (cid:48) 604 0 (cid:48) 853 1 (cid:48) 883 0 (cid:48) 306 Min 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 (cid:48) 375 0 0 2 0 1 Max 5 9 10 7 9 0 (cid:48) 274 5 1 3 (cid:48) 296 5 5 3 Several users mentioned that there was an informal competition going on in the core of the community . This competition regarded solving particularly difﬁcult problems that community members faced . These users tried to circumvent a particular critical problem in the most elegant and innovative way possible . They used functions of the current product in novel ways or intro - duced a new piece of software . Solving difﬁcult prob - lems earned them recognition as innovators . Our results demonstrate that being too core in a com - munity may cause individuals to become inward looking and blind to novelty from external communities . A user told this story : I remember mentioning to one user that his list and func - tions of orchestra samples could have been enhanced if he’d looked at some outside sampling packs , but he seemed , well (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . I wouldn’t say hostile . He wasn’t hos - tile about it , but he was deliberately uninterested in it because he was very interested in promoting his work within Reason . And in fact , Propellerhead has used some of his stuff because his arrangements were so good (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . I simply had suggested that perhaps he use more sophisti - cated orchestra samples inspired by what was going on outside the Prop community , and I made some speciﬁc comment about which samples he could look at ; it would probably enhance the process a little bit . And he didn’t seem very interested in that option . He wanted to stick with Reason . This story implies that core members often become focused on established ways of solving problems . Core members also have greater expectations of delivering high - quality solutions . This sometimes results in per - formance anxiety . Consistent with Schilling’s ﬁndings ( 2005 ) , our interviewees noted that people embedded in the core experienced a homogenizing effect of beliefs and evaluation of activities , making them reluctant to contribute novelty to the ﬁeld . At some point , being too core can limit members’ ability to innovate . Hypothesis 2 We proposed that external boundary spanning has an inverted U - shaped relationship to innovation . In partial support of our reasoning , the third model shows that the main effect of external boundary spanning is signiﬁcant at the 5 % level . However , in contrast to our reasoning , the squared term is insigniﬁcant , which suggests that the idea of an inverted U shape could not be supported . This implies that participating in a variety of communities is not detrimental to innovation . People who spanned communities were confronted by other means of solving problems that spurred their abil - ity to innovate and provoked the community members to think differently . Explaining the import and export of ideas between communities , an interviewee proposed , People take ideas from other communities focused on music software and introduce this in the Prop community . People mention features of other software and platforms that Reason doesn’t do , and a lot of times those things show up and you give suggestions for them (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . Someone will come along and say , you can do that in Reason . It’s not in the same manner that you can do it in other software and here’s how you do it (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) or use this small software application to enable this function . Respondents use multiple external communities for a variety of activities that complement the activities in Propellerhead’s community . An interviewee suggested that “external communities work as a kind of hunting ground for ideas for users’ individual projects and clues to how to solve a particular problem in an alternative Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 999 T a b l e 4 P r e d i c t i n g I nno va t i on U s i ng Th r ee D i ff e r e n t S t r a t e g i es M o d e l 1 M o d e l 2 M o d e l 3 M o d e l 4 M o d e l 5 M o d e l 6 M o d e l 7 M o d e l 8 M o d e l 9 M o d e l 10 M o d e l 11 M o d e l 12 D e p en d en t v a r i a b l e : I nno v a t i v e ( d u mm y ) I nno v a t i v e ( d u mm y ) I nno v a t i v e ( r an k i n g ) E s t i m a t i on s t r a t e g y : O r d e r e d p r o b i t Q M L P o i ss on Q M L P o i ss on C o n t r o l v a r i a b l e s D e g r ee o f l ea d u s e r a tt r i b u t e s 0 (cid:48) 147 + 0 (cid:48) 133 + 0 (cid:48) 133 + 0 (cid:48) 143 + 0 (cid:48) 159 + 0 (cid:48) 144 0 (cid:48) 16 4 + 0 (cid:48) 168 + 0 (cid:48) 224 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 218 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 246 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 246 ∗∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 077 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 078 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 078 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 080 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 092 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 094 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 09 1 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 094 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 091 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 096 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 092 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 093 (cid:53) T i m e s p en t ou t s i d e co mm un i t y 0 (cid:48) 019 − 0 (cid:48) 077 − 0 (cid:48) 084 − 0 (cid:48) 05 0 (cid:48) 009 − 0 (cid:48) 094 − 0 (cid:48) 12 − 0 (cid:48) 073 − 0 (cid:48) 011 − 0 (cid:48) 082 − 0 (cid:48) 119 − 0 (cid:48) 072 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 071 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 087 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 088 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 087 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 083 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 111 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 10 3 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 098 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 088 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 118 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 103 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 096 (cid:53) l n ( 1 + N u m b e r o f an s w e r s t o q ue s t i on s ) 0 (cid:48) 340 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 008 − 0 (cid:48) 001 − 0 (cid:48) 024 0 (cid:48) 299 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 027 − 0 (cid:48) 01 6 − 0 (cid:48) 041 0 (cid:48) 324 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 017 − 0 (cid:48) 011 − 0 (cid:48) 038 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 075 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 110 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 109 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 114 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 062 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 098 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 09 1 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 103 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 059 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 109 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 098 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 111 (cid:53) P r o d uc t e x p e r i en c e 0 (cid:48) 278 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 275 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 284 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 289 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 271 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 277 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 29 5 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 307 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 207 + 0 (cid:48) 226 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 249 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 263 ∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 081 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 088 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 091 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 091 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 099 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 10 6 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 106 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 110 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:53) Fa m ili a r i t y b i a s 0 (cid:48) 204 − 0 (cid:48) 078 − 0 (cid:48) 029 − 0 (cid:48) 063 0 (cid:48) 123 − 0 (cid:48) 152 − 0 (cid:48) 05 8 − 0 (cid:48) 105 0 (cid:48) 125 − 0 (cid:48) 155 − 0 (cid:48) 06 − 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 190 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 229 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 233 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 239 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 183 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 216 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 21 6 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 218 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 191 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 219 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 228 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 230 (cid:53) Tenu r e i n t he co m m un i t y 0 (cid:48) 160 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 115 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 115 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 118 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 174 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 123 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 11 8 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 125 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 199 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 144 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 139 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 146 ∗∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 041 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 043 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 044 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 043 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 048 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 051 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 05 1 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 051 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 050 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 053 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 053 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 053 (cid:53) I n d e p en d en t v a r i a b l e s Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s 0 (cid:48) 213 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 219 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 235 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 29 6 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 186 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 275 ∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 104 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 105 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 107 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 12 5 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 086 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 131 (cid:53) Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l − 0 (cid:48) 062 − 0 (cid:48) 053 − 0 (cid:48) 091 + − 0 (cid:48) 06 6 − 0 (cid:48) 096 + − 0 (cid:48) 071 co mm un i t i e s 2 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 052 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 052 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 054 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 05 8 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 054 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 064 (cid:53) C o r e / p e r i p he r y p o s i t i on 0 (cid:48) 683 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 692 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 797 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 622 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 62 7 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 760 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 684 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 690 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 840 ∗∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 167 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 160 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 170 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 188 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 15 4 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 152 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 208 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 160 (cid:53) 0 (cid:48) 161 (cid:53) C o r e / p e r i p he r y p o s i t i on 2 − 0 (cid:48) 067 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 066 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 071 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 068 + − 0 (cid:48) 06 0 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 062 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 075 + − 0 (cid:48) 065 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 069 ∗∗ (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 029 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 027 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 027 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 036 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 02 5 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 022 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 041 (cid:53) 0 (cid:48) 027 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 023 (cid:53) C o r e / p e r i p he r y p o s i t i on ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 077 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 12 0 ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 141 ∗ Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 028 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 05 1 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 056 (cid:53) Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s 0 (cid:48) 096 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 117 ∗∗ 0 (cid:48) 108 ∗ ( t echn i ca l ) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 044 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 044 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 047 (cid:53) Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s 0 (cid:48) 047 0 (cid:48) 064 0 (cid:48) 052 ( a r t i s t i c ) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 054 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 061 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 061 (cid:53) C o r e / p e r i p he r y p o s i t i on ∗ − 0 (cid:48) 062 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 071 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:48) 078 ∗∗ Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s ( t echn i ca l ) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 021 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 019 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 020 (cid:53) C o r e / p e r i p he r y p o s i t i on ∗ 0 (cid:48) 002 − 0 (cid:48) 028 − 0 (cid:48) 036 Sp ann i n g m u l t i p l e e x t e r na l co mm un i t i e s ( a r t i s t i c ) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 038 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 036 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 035 (cid:53) I n v e r s e M ill s r a t i o Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s Y e s C o n s t an t 3 (cid:48) 246 ∗∗ 1 (cid:48) 745 ∗ 1 (cid:48) 844 ∗∗ 1 (cid:48) 959 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:48) 191 ∗ 0 (cid:48) 394 0 (cid:48) 19 3 0 (cid:48) 083 − 1 (cid:48) 120 + 0 (cid:48) 544 0 (cid:48) 344 0 (cid:48) 249 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 613 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 714 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 715 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 700 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 554 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 595 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 58 9 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 552 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 576 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 631 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 615 (cid:53) (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 566 (cid:53) W a l d C h i s q ua r e 82 (cid:48) 1 115 (cid:48) 9 125 (cid:48) 5 149 (cid:48) 5 159 (cid:48) 4 170 (cid:48) 9 190 (cid:48) 7 195 (cid:48) 0 177 (cid:48) 0 194 (cid:48) 7 241 (cid:48) 8 250 (cid:48) 9 Lo g li k e li hoo d − 308 (cid:48) 9 − 295 (cid:48) 6 − 290 (cid:48) 0 − 289 (cid:48) 2 − 326 (cid:48) 3 − 314 (cid:48) 9 − 308 (cid:48) 6 − 307 (cid:48) 7 − 375 (cid:48) 4 − 360 (cid:48) 7 − 354 (cid:48) 9 − 353 (cid:48) 9 N u m b e r o f o b s e r v a t i on s 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 280 D e g r ee s o f f r ee d o m 7 11 12 13 7 11 12 13 7 11 12 13 N o t e s . S t an d a r d i z e d coe f ﬁ c i en t s . R o b u s t s t an d a r d e rr o r s a r e i n p a r en t he s e s . C u t p o i n t s a r e s u pp r e ss e d i n t he o r d e r e d p r o b i t r e g r e ss i on s . + p < 0 (cid:48) 1 ; ∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 01 ( t w o - t a il e d t e s t s ) . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 1000 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS way . ” In this context , external boundary spanning pro - duces beneﬁts from accessing mixing competencies : I interact with people in other communities who are pro - fessional composers and sound designers and / or music technicians . They hang out in these community spaces and you can pick their brains about things in ways that you’d have to have gone to college or you would have to spend all of your time hunting these people down and trying to talk to them in person . And now you can just do it online and everybody can do it all at once . It’s pretty amazing . This comment suggests that users need a degree of familiarity with the topics present in the external com - munity to see the options for beneﬁcial interfacing with the Propellerhead software . We therefore infer that users allocate some time to activities in external communities before they gain anything from such participation . One user in the Propellerhead community summarized the beneﬁts of spanning external boundaries : When being involved in different communities you get a broader sense of opportunities and options . I mean for me as a professional musician , I’m looking for work . I’m often looking for new tools that will help me do my work faster and easier and the more things—the more per - sons you touch base with , the more you’re going to have opportunities to have more work , to have more chances to learn about new software and different opportunities that are coming out (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . So the upside is lots of informa - tion (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) . You kind of have to ﬁnd a path for yourself in there to help you move forward with your career , what - ever that may be . Propellerhead did not discourage boundary spanning to multiple communities , as a product manager described : If there is a strong , positive spirit in one community , I think that that spreads across to other , adjacent commu - nities , through this system that people are visiting more than one community . And that they pick up a notion , an idea , or get some feedback about a new feature , and the new software that they haven’t tried out themselves . But they get that piece of information there , and it’s like a little seed of information that grows . And then they can either conﬁrm it themselves , or they get the conﬁrmation from other users , and then they spread that to a second community , or a third community , and so on . So there is cross - contamination , if you like , between communities . Our interviews , as well as coding of external communi - ties , show that participants typically spanned two types of communities : technical and artistic ( see Table 2 ) . We decided to analyze these types separately to gain a better understanding of their effect on innovation . Some people interact in communities of professional composers and sound designers , whereas others sought communities of a more technical nature . The technical communities are engaged in developing and improving the software , whereas the artistic communities focus on developing the artistic content and thus are oriented toward using the music software . In the fourth model , we parse out these differences by separating the number of technical and artistic communities a person participates in . The coefﬁcient for technical boundary spanning was signiﬁ - cant , but the coefﬁcient for boundary spanning to artistic communities was not . This ﬁnding underlines the impor - tance of considering types of boundary spanning when we investigate individual - level innovation . Technical communities are similar to the Propeller - head community and are focused around software ; they include user interaction about improved technical use and features , sharing of code and prototypes , and pieces of alternative software , which are more directly useful to innovate . Information from technical communities serves as inputs into processes of innovation . When this type of information is integrated into the prototypes and mods of the Propellerhead community , it is easy for commu - nity peers to to identify and evaluate it as innovative . Artistic communities , in contrast , deal with outputs of the software ; it is use - related knowledge that is more difﬁcult to recognize when integrated into contributions from the Propellerhead’s community . Artistic communi - ties are thus more distant from the innovation process , and hence spanning these communities has no effect on innovation . Hypothesis 3 We argued that there is a substitution effect between external boundary spanning and position within the core / periphery structure on innovation . In support of our argument , we found that the interaction effect between spanning multiple communities and position in the core / periphery structure was negative and signiﬁcant at the 5 % level . Using the coefﬁcients from the ﬁnal model , Figure 1 graphs the inﬂuence of the core / periphery posi - tion on the predicted innovativeness score with three lev - els of boundary spanning in the full sample : those at the 10th percentile , mean , and 90th percentile . The graph shows that increasing one’s core position enhances inno - vation . Participants who span multiple external commu - nities ( i . e . , 90th percentile ) are more likely to be innova - tive than those who are not ( 10th percentile ) . However , the low boundary spanners garner the greatest reward from increasing their core position , and these people surpass the most active boundary spanners at the very highest levels of core / periphery . The three lines cross at the 94th percentile in core / periphery position , meaning that for about 17 individuals in the sample , boundary spanning is detrimental for innovation . We see two main implications of this ﬁgure . First , spanning multiple external boundaries remains a posi - tive delineator for most people , especially those that are not among the most core individuals ( those with less than a 94th percentile position on the core / periphery continuum ) . 15 This ﬁnding is illustrated by the line for high boundary spanners at low levels of core / periphery Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 1001 Figure 1 Predicted Innovativeness Score as Core / Periphery Position Changes , by Three Levels of Boundary Spanning to External Communities Position in the core / periphery structure P r ed i c t ed i nno v a t i v ene ss sc o r e = Low boundary spanning = Medium boundary spanning = High boundary spanning Low score High score 2 4 6 8 10 Note . The ﬁgure is based on Model 12 in Table 4 , with all other variables held at their mean . position . Many peripheral people are cosmopolitans who have no ambition to become part of the core in the com - munity but enjoy spanning multiple external communi - ties . They have a sense of autonomy and feel that they could easily move between communities to ﬁnd solu - tions to their problems . These users explained that they have lower expectations than people who were closer to the core . When they contributed , they could draw on experiences from other communities and develop artifacts that other community members recognized as innovative . One such story concerned a woman who developed graphical “skins” that changed the appearance and function of the software : There’s this one girl named Wendy , and she makes skins . So whenever she comes on the community and says , I have a new skin , she’s known for her quality and inno - vative work . So there’s no question of who is this and what is the skin and , oh , that’s garbage . It’s always like , well , it’s Wendy , it’s got to be good . And she comes in and out of the community ; she hasn’t posted in a while but gets known for what she does . The second implication is that for the most core mem - bers , boundary spanning can be detrimental for innova - tion . The line for low boundary spanning in Figure 1 illustrates that at very high levels , people who are close to the core and low on boundary spanning surpass those who are more active boundary spanners . These individu - als play a different role in the community . Many of them reach out for inspiration within the community . They offer help and gain ideas from peripheral users without being involved in boundary spanning to external com - munities . One of the most core persons said , I’m on the community all the time . People think I just live there . (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) So I sit at my desk editing video on my computer and then when the computer’s busy doing a one - minute render of some video ﬁle or graphics or something , I’ll just hop over to the music software forum and see if there’s anything new that I can answer or reply back to a message—solve a problem in a new way . In this way I gain a lot of new inspiration as well . This comment suggests that core members partly depend on peripheral users in the focal community to span mul - tiple communities . We continued by analyzing the interaction effect between core / periphery and the two forms of commu - nities : technical and artistic . This analysis shows that the contingent effect is driven by technical boundary spanning . This is consistent with the arguments pre - sented above for Hypothesis 2 . A person’s position in the core / periphery continuum in the community is inter - acting with the type of external boundary spanning on its effect on innovation . Robustness Checks We conducted several robustness checks . First , our results control for a potential familiarity bias if the per - son being evaluated had interacted with one of the judges at least once before the survey was distributed . An alter - native measure is the number of interactions between judges and users , but using this measure did not change our results . Second , the effect of artistic boundary span - ning was insigniﬁcant in our regressions . It could be that this effect is important only in combination with technical boundary spanning . We assessed this poten - tial interaction effect , but it was insigniﬁcant . Third , we experimented with various ways to deﬁne an individual’s tenure in the community . It is plausible that some peo - ple have been part of the community for years but con - tribute only occasionally . We thus weighted the tenure by quantity of postings in the community and found no changes to the results . Fourth , we assessed differ - ent ways of deﬁning a tie between individuals . In the reported results , we used the most intuitive measure : a tie exists if two people interacted at least once . The results did not change when we used at least two and three interactions as different cutoff points . Discussion Theoretical Contributions This paper demonstrates how relationships inside and outside user communities affect why some individu - als are considered innovative . Our ﬁndings have broad implications for scholars of user innovation . Research has shown that contributions from users to a community can create value for both contributors and ﬁrms ( Urban and von Hippel 1988 , Lilien et al . 2002 ) . Central to this research is explaining innovation by examining various individual characteristics , such as user attributes ( Urban Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 1002 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS and von Hippel 1988 , Lerner and Tirole 2002 ) . This lit - erature has documented how users form communities to solve problems and ﬁnd like - minded people with whom they share interests ( Moon and Sproull 2008 ) . Our work deepens this literature by considering how the commu - nity forms a social structure that provides opportunities for individuals to innovate . Our ﬁrst important ﬁnding is how one’s position in the core / periphery structure of a user community , controlled for alternative explanations , is consequential for innovating . Hence our ﬁndings indi - cate that even being an early member of a community with a high level of product experience is not enough to be innovative . The effects of being at the core and being a cosmopolitan who spans multiple communities trump the effects of individual characteristics such as lead user attributes , which implies that researchers need to consider a relational view that inﬂuences the condi - tions under which users innovate . Our ﬁndings also speak to organizational scholars studying communities . Research has underlined the chal - lenges of transferring knowledge from one community to another within organizations ( Dougherty 1992 , Bechky 2003 , Carlile 2004 ) . In the community literature , schol - ars have been primarily concerned with how communi - ties organize inside ( see , e . g . , Lave and Wenger 1991 ) and overlooked membership in multiple external com - munities ( Jeppesen and Laursen 2009 , Wolfe 2006 ) . When community boundaries are permeable and there are few sanctions for those who span them , individuals can draw on more divergent ideas and mind - sets than a single community could offer . We demonstrate that spanning multiple communities has a positive effect on the likelihood that a person will innovate . Our interviews illustrate how this boundary spanning enables Propeller - head’s users to import ideas and ﬁnd information that could be reused in a new community . We deepened this analysis by coding all communi - ties in which our survey respondents were engaged and divided them into two categories : technical and artis - tic . There are signiﬁcant differences in the magnitude of the direct effects on individual innovation : bound - ary spanning had a positive effect only when spanning to other technical communities . Without separating the speciﬁc behaviors , it would have been easy to mistak - enly attribute our ﬁndings to boundary spanning in gen - eral . This discovery emphasizes the need to consider different types of boundary spanning between organiza - tions ( Tortoriello and Krackhardt 2010 ) , or in our case , communities . Information from technical communities serves as inputs to the innovation process , whereas artis - tic communities deal with outputs of the software . Infor - mation transferred from external technical communities is closer to the innovation process . In an interview , a user suggested that boundary spanning to technical com - munities is seen as providing real innovative ideas for developing the features and functions of the software , which was not the case when spanning boundaries to communities engaged with “doing music and just using the software . ” In ﬁrms , managers have the authority to make deci - sions about who is supposed to work with whom , employees are accountable if they do not contribute , and there are formalized communication channels between organizational units . As a result , network structures are often fractionalized with only a few relationships across groups ( Kleinbaum et al . 2009 ) . Communities , by contrast , have a much more skewed distribution of contribution rates because of the possibility of multiple memberships and lack of vertical authority . By exten - sion , there is a dedicated core of participants and a loosely attached periphery ( Borgatti and Everett 1999 ) . We elaborated on this argument by investigating what types of positions were associated with innovation . Prior work has resulted in conﬂicting arguments , contending that both periphery and core are more innovative ( Crane 1972 , Cattani and Ferriani 2008 ) . A common lament in this literature is the focus on a single network or community . Our study suggests that both the broader social context of external communi - ties and social structures within communities need to be considered in tandem . Ignoring the internal social structure in arguments about external boundary span - ning can result in an unintended omission of important social features that inﬂuence innovation . Communities do not evolve in isolation , and cosmopolitans who can span community boundaries are in a good position to assimilate divergent information . The “boundary problem” is commonly observed in studies of networks within organizations when scholars are forced to make assumptions where the network ends ( Wasserman and Faust 1994 , p . 31 ) . Our work points to the need to consider the social structure within commu - nities and link these features to varying forms of exter - nal collaboration . Whereas Perry - Smith ( 2006 ) connects this to an individual’s number of relationships within an organization , we link it to the core / periphery structure of the community . For most users , our results suggest that the combination of being core and a cosmopolitan who spans multiple communities has the greatest rewards on innovation . The effect of being core is stronger for low boundary spanners , however ; for those who are located closest to the core , it could potentially be better for inno - vation to span few boundaries . In other words , there exists a substitution effect where the most core individ - uals do not become more innovative by spanning exter - nal communities . Instead , these individuals use other users located on the periphery of the focal community as sources of novel ideas for innovation , whereas periph - eral users often span boundaries to other communities to become innovative . In sum , organization and com - munity scholars are well advised to consider both inter - nal and external relationships in tandem , because each Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 1003 explanation alone could miss how individuals engage in different forms of collaboration to be innovative . Managerial Implications In recent years , ﬁrms have invested signiﬁcant resources in community - based innovation strategies , for example , creating online communities that tap into user - driven innovation processes . These companies hope to increase their competitiveness by gaining access to product - speciﬁc , difﬁcult - to - imitate assets such as ideas for improvements , modiﬁcations , and applications ( Williams and Cothrel 2000 ) . This is a cumbersome task : von Krogh ( 2006 ) shows that a large number of user communities fade away because they cannot develop enough inno - vation to sustain interest . How can organizations pre - vent this ? von Hippel ( 1988 ) has stressed identiﬁcation of the “right” set of technically skilled users and the correct incentive structures to promote innovation . In contrast , our study underlines the signiﬁcance of look - ing beyond individual users and investigating collabora - tions inside and outside communities . Cherry - picking a few people with certain attributes risks overlooking other more unexpected sources of innovation . The social web of relationships within and between communities exer - cises strong effects on innovation , over and beyond indi - vidual attributes . Firms typically store the interactions within their com - munity in a database . Investigating these data from a social network perspective yields insights into where— and potentially how—innovations emerge . Our study points to the need to integrate social network perspec - tives inside communities with the ways in which indi - viduals span multiple external communities . Firms can easily collect data on where members surf next when leaving their Internet community , and in combination with the social network data , they may discover unparal - leled conclusions about individual behavior and its asso - ciation with innovation . If companies invest resources in creating and moder - ating their communities , they may be tempted to pre - vent users from spanning community boundaries . They want users to spend the maximum time and attention within the ﬁrm’s community . However , online commu - nities can become too locked into a particular techno - logical domain or solution space to be useful to the ﬁrm . The pitfalls of provincialism have been shown at the organizational level ( Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) , and our study supports this argument by providing evidence at the community level : spanning multiple communities sparks innovation . To keep their communities vibrant , ﬁrms should not deter individuals from membership in external communities . Propellerhead’s product develop - ment director said , If you’re going to dedicate all that time to a community , you as a user of Propellerhead products want to dedi - cate it in a community of people where you get lots of feedback , where you have possibilities to develop your own music and get help , and where new mods and soft - ware applications are created and shared . Surprises of ideas from outside the community are useful . I would much rather work in a less good , technologically , soft - ware environment , with a huge , energetic , friendly , good community , rather than a perfect software [ environment ] , with no community . So the community , I think , it is a vital , and a very important , part of why Reason [ Pro - pellerhead’s key product ] has been so successful . Users in external communities are just a click away , and they can contribute new ideas even if they con - tribute only occasionally . Firms can even explicitly pro - mote external communities that are particularly helpful for users to visit to get complementary information . For instance , we found different effects for technical and artistic communities . Depending on a person’s position inside the community ( not only her personal attributes , which are commonly considered today ) , ﬁrms could tai - lor messages pointing her to other selected sites . Generalizability and Future Directions We focused on a single community , but we can elabo - rate on scope conditions of our theory . First , permeable boundaries allow for membership in multiple communi - ties ( Shah 2006 ) . This is not always the case ; ﬁrms often have mechanisms that prevent employees from revealing company - speciﬁc information . Although permeability is pertinent in the online world , where other communities are a click away , it is also present in off - line communi - ties . Some organizations promote their technically skilled employees to be “cosmopolitans” who search for external information from various constituents to keep pace with an expanding knowledge frontier . Second , our theoreti - cal argument is applicable when individuals collectively explore a knowledge frontier , as in user communities or science . In these cases , innovation occurs through collab - oration , yet some innovators get more recognition than others ( Douglas 1986 ) . Future studies could replicate our research in various forms of communities and could val - idate the arguments or reﬁne scope conditions . Our suggestions for future research stem from the limitations of our study . First , a reverse - causality expla - nation is a possibility : innovative individuals from the periphery could be dragged to the core , driven by their aspiration to be seen as important and loyal commu - nity members ( Jetten et al . 2003 ) . Although it is difﬁ - cult to rule out that possibility , several points speak to our proposed direction . We include several controls that have been pointed out in prior work to inﬂuence inno - vation : tenure in the community , level of education , and lead user attributes that control for individuals’ ability to generate innovations . 16 Our proposed effects persist and retain their statistical signiﬁcance when we include these factors . When our interviewees told stories about how individuals contributed to the community over time , Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 1004 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS they often explained that people start by lurking and then ask questions . They gradually come closer to the core of the community and begin to answer messages from fellow members , and then they post their innova - tions . Other people strategically choose to span multiple communities to advance their knowledge . We collected a number of stories about people who were peripheral yet not dragged to the core , supporting our line of reason - ing . This led us to conclude that our results are difﬁcult to reconcile with a theory built on reverse causality . Sec - ond , our survey and our judges’ assessments of innova - tion come from a single point in time . Longitudinal data to capture how individuals move in the core / periphery structure could enrich our work . Finally , there are multi - ple ways to deﬁne individual innovation . We used judges to rank individuals’ innovations because patents or new product introduction is not an appropriate measure in this context . In the Propellerhead case , we believe expert judges are appropriate because this method captures various forms of contributions . In extending the same research design to other contexts , however , other mea - sures of innovation may be more suitable . We believe our ﬁndings are important for organiza - tional scholars in light of how common user communi - ties have become as a means to spur innovation . Users form relationships within and outside communities that provide opportunities to innovate . Acknowledgments The authors thank the editor Deborah Dougherty , the anony - mous reviewers , Erkko Autio , Emily Cox , Paola Criscuolo , Simone Ferriani , Alfonso Gambardella , Gerry George , Lars Bo Jeppesen , Louise Mors , Siobhan O’Mahony , Jaideep Prabhu , Francesco Rullani , Ammon Salter , Kaisa Snellman , and sem - inar participants at Cass Business School , Imperial College London , SKEMA Business School , the DRUID conference , the Academy of Management conference , and the EURAM con - ference for comments and ideas . L . Dahlander thanks Handels - bankens Forskningsstiftelser and the Sweden - America Foun - dation for their generous support . The authors are grateful to EPSRC’s Innovation Studies Center at Imperial College Lon - don , where this research was initiated . The authors acknowl - edge the time and effort by Propellerhead and individuals in the user community for supporting this project . All errors remain the authors’ responsibility . Both authors contributed equally to this work . They have no ﬁnancial interest in Propellerhead . Appendix Because we had coded all 5 , 000 posts in the community before distributing the survey , we could compare respondents and nonrespondents . Respondents were more likely to answer questions and less likely to pose questions in the community . Individuals who posed questions were likely to respond to the survey , but this variable was not correlated with individual innovation . The idea that individuals who pose questions were not associated with innovation was also conﬁrmed in inter - views with community members . Table A1 shows the mean numbers of the variables and a t - test of the differences . Table A1 t - Test Comparing Respondents and Nonrespondents Respondents Nonrespondents Variable ( n = 280 ) ( n = 686 ) t - test Number of answers 0 . 77 0 . 41 ∗∗ Number of questions 0 . 48 0 . 81 ∗∗ Tenure in the community 1 . 62 1 . 51 + p < 0 (cid:48) 1 ; ∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 01 . Table A2 Correlations Matrix Variable 1 2 3 1 ln ( 1 + Number of answers ) 1 2 ln ( 1 + Number of questions ) 0 (cid:48) 32 1 3 Tenure in the community 0 (cid:48) 22 − 0 (cid:48) 07 1 Note . n = 966 . Table A3 Probit Regression Predicting Response to Survey Variable Model A Tenure in the community − 0 (cid:48) 011 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 024 (cid:53) ln ( 1 + Number of answers ) 0 (cid:48) 441 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 094 (cid:53) ∗∗ ln ( 1 + Number of questions ) − 0 (cid:48) 811 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 101 (cid:53) ∗∗ Constant − 0 (cid:48) 353 (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 066 (cid:53) ∗∗ Log likelihood − 545 (cid:48) 49 Number of observations 966 Number of selected observations 280 Notes . n = 966 . Robust standard errors are in parentheses . + p < 0 (cid:48) 1 ; ∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 01 ( two - tailed tests ) . Next we used a probit regression to predict the probabil - ity to respond to the survey . Table A2 shows the correlations between the variables , and Table A3 shows the results from the regression . Table A3 illustrates that the number of ques - tions has a negative effect on the probability of responding to the survey ( newbies are slightly less likely to be part of the survey ) . From this result we developed the inverse Mills ratio that we include in our analysis in Table 4 . Including the inverse Mills ratio in our regressions did not alter the direction of coefﬁcients or signiﬁcance of our results . Endnotes 1 Although some Propellerhead employees post messages in the community , we were fortunate to receive their user IDs . We could thus include and exclude them from our analysis to see whether there were any differences . No Propellerhead employees responded to our survey . 2 Users have developed about 250 – 300 mods and extras in the Propellerhead community since the inception of the community . 3 Here , we included postings from individuals in our sample as well as other people . We elaborate more on this procedure in the variable description . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 1005 4 We included all survey items used in the paper in the factor analysis . No single factor emerged that accounted for a large proportion of the total variance , which provides support for our claim that the survey does not suffer from common method bias ( Podsakoff et al . 2003 ) . 5 Our study is comparable to the research of Fauchart and von Hippel ( 2008 ) that explores disputes among French chefs over allocating intellectual property rights to certain dishes , ingre - dients , cooking processes , or presentations . These disputes emerge because a lack of consensus of what is considered innovative has not been clearly deﬁned by the community . 6 Two of the coders were considered core in the community , and two were peripheral . We found no difference between the experts in how they ranked individuals depending on their position in the core / periphery structure . 7 Fleck ( 1935 , p . 39 ) believed that “thought collectives” can be deﬁned as “a community of persons mutually exchanging ideas or maintaining intellectual interaction . ” Online communities resemble thought collectives because they have a particular character that determines their evolution . Fleck argued that such collectives consist of a relatively small esoteric circle of experts and much bigger exoteric circles of people who apply rather than advance new knowledge . 8 The core / periphery measure for each person was calculated from the prior 5 , 000 posts before the survey was conducted . These were also the posts we content coded . We also used all posts in the community , and the results were similar . 9 Only one person in our sample from the Propellerhead com - munity indicated participation in 10 additional communities . 10 Any member in the community posted these ( i . e . , not only people who replied to the survey ) . 11 The items were as follows : “I ﬁnd out about new products and solutions earlier than others in the community , ” “I would beneﬁt by early adoption and use of new products , ” “I have tested prototype versions of new products , ” “I use Propeller - head’s products more regularly than other software - related products , ” “I have made suggestions for how to improve Propellerhead’s products , ” “I often identify important ideas or trends related to Propellerhead’s community before other members in the community , ” “I am interested in doing pro - totype evaluation on products before public release , ” and “I would be willing to spend plenty of time to get access to novel information before others . ” 12 We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this measure . 13 Ordered probit regressions rest on the proportional odds assumption—that the effect from moving from 0 to 1 is the same as moving from 1 to 2 . We ran the regressions using ordered logistic regressions and pursued the Brant test . Our regressions did not violate the proportional odds assumption . 14 Including the inverse Mills ratio does not change our results . 15 This ﬁgure does not report conﬁdence intervals for the lines to increase readability . That said , there are very few observa - tions after the point where the lines cross . 16 Our models also included controls for the number of answers in the community that measure the sheer volume someone posts . References Aiken , L . S . , S . G . West . 1991 . Multiple Regression : Testing and Interpreting Interactions . Sage , Newbury Park , CA . Allen , T . J . 1977 . Managing the Flow of Technology . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Amabile , T . M . 1982 . Social psychology of creativity : A consen - sual assessment technique . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 43 ( 5 ) 997 – 1013 . Ancona , D . G . , D . F . Caldwell . 1992 . Bridging the boundary : External activity and performance in organizational teams . Admin . Sci . Quart . 37 ( 4 ) 634 – 665 . Bagozzi , R . P . , U . M . Dholakia . 2006 . Open source software user communities : A study of participation in Linux user groups . Management Sci . 52 ( 7 ) 1099 – 1115 . Barley , S . R . , G . Kunda . 2001 . Bringing work back in . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 1 ) 76 – 95 . Bechky , B . A . 2003 . Sharing meaning across occupational communi - ties : The transformation of understanding on a production ﬂoor . Organ . Sci . 14 ( 3 ) 312 – 330 . Benkler , Y . 2004 . “Sharing nicely” : On shareable goods and the emer - gence of sharing as a modality of economic production . Yale Law J . 114 ( 2 ) 273 – 358 . Borgatti , S . P . , M . G . Everett . 1999 . Models of core / periphery struc - tures . Soc . Networks 21 ( 4 ) 375 – 395 . Borgatti , S . P . , M . G . Everett , L . C . Freeman . 2002 . UCINET 6 for Windows : Software for Social Network Analysis . User’s manual , Analytic Technologies , Harvard , MA . Brown , J . S . , P . Duguid . 1991 . Organizational learning and communities - of - practice : Toward a uniﬁed view of working , learning , and innovation . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 40 – 57 . Burt , R . S . 2004 . Structural holes and good ideas . Amer . J . Sociol . 110 ( 2 ) 349 – 399 . Burt , R . S . 2005 . Brokerage and Closure : An Introduction to Social Capital . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . Carlile , P . R . 2004 . Transferring , translating , and transforming : An integrative framework for managing knowledge across bound - aries . Organ . Sci . 15 ( 5 ) 555 – 568 . Cattani , G . , S . Ferriani . 2008 . A core / periphery perspective on indi - vidual creative performance : Social networks and cinematic achievements in the Hollywood ﬁlm industry . Organ . Sci . 19 ( 6 ) 824 – 844 . Cohen , J . 1960 . A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales . Ed . Psych . Measurement 20 ( 1 ) 37 – 46 . Constant , D . , L . Sproull , S . Kiesler . 1996 . The kindness of strangers : The usefulness of electronic weak ties for technical advice . Organ . Sci . 7 ( 2 ) 119 – 135 . Crane , D . 1972 . Invisible Colleges : Diffusion of Knowledge in Scien - tiﬁc Communities . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Csikszentmihalyi , M . 1996 . Creativity : Flow and Psychology of Dis - covery and Invention . HarperCollins , New York . Dahlander , L . , S . O’Mahony . 2011 . Progressing to the center : Coor - dinating project work . Organ . Sci . 22 ( 4 ) 961 – 979 . Doty , H . D . , W . H . Glick . 1998 . Common methods bias : Does common methods variance really bias results ? Organ . Res . Methods 1 ( 4 ) 374 – 406 . Douglas , M . 1986 . How Institutions Think . Syracuse University Press , Syracuse , NY . Dougherty , D . 1992 . Interpretive barriers to successful product inno - vation in large ﬁrms . Organ . Sci . 3 ( 2 ) 179 – 202 . Dougherty , D . 2002 . Grounded theory research methods . J . A . C . Baum , ed . The Blackwell Companion to Organizations . Black - well , Oxford , UK , 849 – 866 . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities 1006 Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS Fauchart , E . , E . von Hippel . 2008 . Norms - based intellectual property systems : The case of French chefs . Organ . Sci . 19 ( 2 ) 187 – 201 . Fleck , L . 1935 . Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache . Einführung in die Lehre vom Denkstil und Denkkollek - tiv . Schwabe und Co . , Verlagsbuchhandlung , Basel , Switzerland . Fleming , L . , D . M . Waguespack . 2007 . Brokerage , boundary span - ning , and leadership in open innovation communities . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 2 ) 165 – 180 . Garton , L . , C . Haythornthwaite , B . Wellman . 1997 . Studying online social networks . J . Comput . - Mediated Comm . 3 ( 1 ) http : / / jcmc . indiana . edu / vol3 / issue1 / garton . html . Gouldner , A . W . 1958 . Cosmopolitans and locals : Toward an analysis of latent social roles . Admin . Sci . Quart . 2 ( 3 ) 281 – 306 . Gourieroux , C . , A . Monfort , A . Trognon . 1984 . Pseudo maximum - likelihood methods : Applications to Poisson models . Economet - rica 52 ( 3 ) 701 – 720 . Greene , W . H . 1997 . Econometric Analysis . Prentice - Hall , Upper Sad - dle River , NJ . Hargadon , A . B . 2005 . Bridging old worlds and building new ones : Towards a microsociology of creativity . L . Thompson , H . - S . Choi , eds . Creativity and Innovation in Organizational Teams . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , 199 – 216 . Hargadon , A . B . , R . I . Sutton . 1997 . Technology brokering and inno - vation in a product development ﬁrm . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 ( 4 ) 716 – 749 . Heckman , J . J . 1979 . Sample selection bias as a speciﬁcation error . Econometrica 47 ( 1 ) 153 – 161 . Hertel , G . , S . Niedner , S . Herrmann . 2003 . Motivation of software developers in open source projects : An Internet - based survey of contributors to the Linux kernel . Res . Policy 32 ( 7 ) 1159 – 1177 . Jeppesen , L . B . , L . Frederiksen . 2006 . Why do users contribute to ﬁrm - hosted user communities ? The case of computer - controlled music instruments . Organ . Sci . 17 ( 1 ) 45 – 63 . Jeppesen , L . B . , K . R . Lakhani . 2010 . Marginality and problem - solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organ . Sci . 21 ( 5 ) 1016 – 1033 . Jeppesen , L . B . , K . Laursen . 2009 . The role of lead users in knowl - edge sharing . Res . Policy 38 ( 10 ) 1582 – 1589 . Jetten , J . , N . R . Branscombe , R . Spears , B . M . McKimmie . 2003 . Predicting the paths of peripherals : The interaction of identiﬁca - tion and future possibilities . Personality Soc . Psych . Bull . 29 ( 1 ) 130 – 140 . Jick , T . D . 1979 . Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods : Trian - gulation in action . Admin . Sci . Quart . 24 ( 4 ) 602 – 611 . Katz , R . , T . J . Allen . 1982 . Investigating the not invented here ( NIH ) syndrome : A look at the performance , tenure , and communi - cation patterns of 50 R & D project groups . R & D Management 12 ( 1 ) 7 – 20 . Kleinbaum , A . , T . Stuart , M . Tushman . 2009 . Communication ( and coordination ? ) in a modern , complex organization . HBS Work - ing Paper 09 - 004 , Harvard Business School , Boston . Kline , S . J . , N . Rosenberg . 1986 . An overview of innovation . R . Lan - dau , N . Rosenberg , eds . The Positive Sum Strategy : Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth . National Academies Press , Washington , DC , 275 – 305 . Kollock , P . 1999 . The economies of online cooperation : Gifts and public goods in cyberspace . M . A . Smith , P . Kollock , eds . Com - munities in Cyberspace . Routledge , London , 219 – 239 . Koput , K . W . 1997 . A chaotic model of innovative search : Some answers , many questions . Organ . Sci . 8 ( 5 ) 528 – 542 . Kuhn , T . S . 1970 . The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions , 2nd ed . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Lakhani , K . R . , E . von Hippel . 2003 . How open source soft - ware works : “Free” user - to - user assistance . Res . Policy 32 ( 6 ) 923 – 943 . Lave , J . C . , E . C . Wenger . 1991 . Situated Learning : Legiti - mate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge University Press , New York . Lee , G . K . , R . E . Cole . 2003 . From a ﬁrm - based to a community - based model of knowledge creation : The case of the Linux ker - nel development . Organ . Sci . 14 ( 6 ) 633 – 649 . Lerner , J . , J . Tirole . 2002 . Some simple economics of open source . J . Indust . Econom . 50 ( 2 ) 197 – 234 . Lilien , G . L . , P . D . Morrison , K . Searls , M . Sonnack , E . von Hip - pel . 2002 . Performance assessment of the lead user generation process for new product development . Management Sci . 48 ( 8 ) 1042 – 1059 . Magee , J . C . , A . D . Galinsky . 2008 . Social hierarchy : The self - reinforcing nature of power and status . Acad . Management Ann . 2 351 – 398 . McLaughlin , N . 2001 . Optimal marginality : Innovation and orthodoxy in Fromm’s revision of psychoanalysis . Sociol . Quart . 42 ( 2 ) 271 – 288 . Menon , T . , J . Pfeffer . 2003 . Valuing internal versus external knowl - edge : Explaining the preference for outsiders . Management Sci . 49 ( 4 ) 497 – 513 . Merton , R . K . 1949 . Social Theory and Social Structure . Free Press , Glencoe , IL . Merton , R . K . 1972 . Insiders and outsiders : A chapter in the sociology of knowledge . Amer . J . Sociol . 78 ( 1 ) 9 – 47 . Miles , M . B . , A . M . Huberman . 1994 . Qualitative Data Analysis : An Expanded Sourcebook , 2nd ed . Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA . Moon , J . Y . , L . S . Sproull . 2008 . The role of feedback in managing the Internet - based volunteer work force . Inform . Systems Res . 19 ( 4 ) 494 – 515 . Morrison , P . D . , J . H . Roberts , D . F . Midgley . 2000 . Opinion leader - ship amongst leading edge users . Australian Marketing J . 8 ( 1 ) 5 – 14 . Nambisan , S . , R . A . Baron . 2010 . Different roles , different strokes : Organizing virtual customer environments to promote two types of customer contributions . Organ . Sci . 21 ( 2 ) 554 – 572 . Obstfeld , D . 2005 . Social networks , the tertius iungens orienta - tion , and involvement in innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 50 ( 1 ) 100 – 130 . Ocasio , W . 1997 . Towards an attention - based view of the ﬁrm . Strate - gic Management J . 18 ( S1 ) 187 – 206 . O’Mahony , S . , B . A . Bechky . 2008 . Boundary organizations : Enabling collaboration between unexpected allies . Admin . Sci . Quart . 53 ( 3 ) 422 – 459 . Perry - Smith , J . E . 2006 . Social yet creative : The role of social rela - tionships in facilitating individual creativity . Acad . Manage - ment J . 49 ( 1 ) 85 – 101 . Perry - Smith , J . E . , C . E . Shalley . 2003 . The social side of creativity : A static and dynamic social network perspective . Acad . Man - agement Rev . 28 ( 1 ) 89 – 106 . Podolny , J . M . 2001 . Networks as the pipes and prisms of the market . Amer . J . Sociol . 107 ( 1 ) 33 – 60 . Podsakoff , P . M . , D . W . Organ . 1986 . Self - reports in organizational research : Problems and prospects . J . Management 12 ( 4 ) 531 – 544 . Dahlander and Frederiksen : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 988 – 1007 , ©2012 INFORMS 1007 Podsakoff , P . M . , S . B . MacKenzie , J . - Y . Lee , N . P . Podsakoff . 2003 . Common method biases in behavioral research : A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies . J . Appl . Psych . 88 ( 5 ) 879 – 903 . Rosenkopf , L . , A . Nerkar . 2001 . Beyond local research : Boundary - spanning , exploration , and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management J . 22 ( 4 ) 287 – 306 . Schilling , M . A . 2005 . A “small - world” network model of cognitive insight . Creativity Res . J . 17 ( 2 – 3 ) 131 – 154 . Schumpeter , J . A . 1934 . The Theory of Economic Development . Har - vard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Shah , S . K . 2006 . Motivation , governance , and the viability of hybrid forms in open source software development . Management Sci . 52 ( 7 ) 1000 – 1014 . Shalley , C . E . , J . Zhou , G . R . Oldham . 2004 . The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity : Where should we go from here ? J . Management 30 ( 6 ) 933 – 958 . Simmel , G . 1950 . The stranger . K . H . Wolff , ed . The Sociology of Georg Simmel . Free Press , New York , 402 – 408 . Simon , H . A . 1971 . Designing organizations for an information - rich world . M . Greenberger , ed . Computers , Communications and the Public Interest . John Hopkins Press , Baltimore , 38 – 52 . Tortoriello , M . , D . Krackhardt . 2010 . Activating cross - boundary knowledge : The role of Simmelian ties in the generation of inno - vations . Acad . Management J . 53 ( 1 ) 167 – 181 . Tushman , M . L . , T . J . Scanlan . 1981 . Boundary spanning individuals : Their role in information transfer and their antecedents . Acad . Management J . 24 ( 2 ) 289 – 305 . Urban , G . L . , E . von Hippel . 1988 . Lead user analyses for the development of new industrial products . Management Sci . 34 ( 5 ) 569 – 582 . Uzzi , B . 1997 . Social structure and competition in interﬁrm net - works : The paradox of embeddedness . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 ( 1 ) 35 – 67 . Uzzi , B . , J . Spiro . 2005 . Collaboration and creativity : The small world problem . Amer . J . Sociol . 111 ( 2 ) 447 – 504 . Van de Ven , A . H . 1986 . Central problems in the management of innovation . Management Sci . 32 ( 5 ) 590 – 607 . van Maanen , J . , S . Barley . 1984 . Occupational communities : Culture and control in organizations . B . M . Staw , L . L . Cummings , eds . Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 6 . JAI Press , Green - wich , CT , 287 – 365 . von Hippel , E . 1988 . The Sources of Innovation . Oxford University Press , New York . von Hippel , E . 2005 . Democratizing Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . von Krogh , G . 2006 . Customers demand their slice of IP . Harvard Bus . Rev . ( February ) 45 – 46 . Wasko , M . M . , S . Faraj . 2005 . Why should I share ? Examining social capital and knowledge contribution in electronic networks of practice . MIS Quart . 29 ( 1 ) 35 – 57 . Wasserman , S . , K . Faust . 1994 . Social Network Analysis : Methods and Applications . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Weber , R . P . 1990 . Basic Content Analysis . Sage , London . Wellman , B . , J . Salaff , D . Dimitrova , L . Garton , M . Gulia , C . Haythornthwaite . 1996 . Computer networks as social net - works : Collaborative work , telework , and virtual community . Annual Rev . Sociol . 22 213 – 238 . Whittington , K . B . , J . Owen - Smith , W . W . Powell . 2009 . Networks , propinquity , and innovation in knowledge - intensive industries . Admin . Sci . Quart . 54 ( 1 ) 90 – 122 . Williams , R . L . , J . Cothrel . 2000 . Four smart ways to run online communities . Sloan Management Rev . 41 ( 4 ) 81 – 91 . Wolfe , A . W . 2006 . Network perspectives on communities . Struc - ture Dynam . : eJournal Anthropol . Related Sci . 1 ( 4 ) http : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 8184j9bq . Linus Dahlander is an assistant professor at ESMT Euro - pean School of Management and Technology . He received his Ph . D . from Chalmers University of Technology , Sweden , and was a postdoctoral fellow at Stanford University . He studies how innovations emerge in communities and networks . Lars Frederiksen works at the Department of Marketing and Statistics , Aarhus University , Business and Social Sci - ences , Denmark . He earned his Ph . D . in innovation manage - ment from Copenhagen Business School , Denmark . He spe - cializes in the management of innovation and technology with particular emphasis on community - based strategies , distributed and user innovation , project - based organizing of innovation , and entrepreneurship . CORRECTION In this article , “The Core and Cosmopolitans : A Relational View of Innovation in User Communities” by Linus Dahlander and Lars Frederiksen ( ﬁrst published in Articles in Advance July 5 , 2011 , Organization Science , DOI : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1110 . 0673 ) , the following reference has been added to the reference list and cited in text : Jeppesen , L . B . , K . Laursen . 2009 . The role of lead users in knowledge sharing . Res . Policy 38 ( 10 ) 1582 – 1589 .