Rostrolateral Prefrontal Cortex Involvement in Relational Integration during Reasoning Kalina Christoff , * Vivek Prabhakaran , † Jennifer Dorfman , ‡ Zuo Zhao , * James K . Kroger , § Keith J . Holyoak , ¶ and John D . E . Gabrieli * * Department of Psychology and † Program in Neurosciences , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 ; ‡ Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois 60208 ; § Department of Psychology , Princeton University , Princeton , New Jersey 08544 ; and ¶ Department of Psychology and Brain Research Institute , University of California at Los Angeles , Los Angeles , California 90095 Received March 22 , 2001 Patient and neuroimaging studies indicate that complex reasoning tasks are associated with the pre - frontal cortex ( PFC ) . In this study , we tested the hy - pothesis that the process of relational integration , or considering multiple relations simultaneously , is a component process of complex reasoning that selec - tively recruits PFC . We used fMRI to examine brain activation during 0 - relational , 1 - relational , and 2 - rela - tional problems adapted from the Raven’s Progressive Matrices and hypothesized that PFC would be prefer - entially recruited by the 2 - relational problem type . Event - related responses were modeled by convolving a canonical hemodynamic response function with the response time ( RT ) associated with each trial . The re - sults across different analyses revealed the same pat - tern : PFC activation was speciﬁc to the comparison between 2 - and 1 - relational problems and was not ob - served in the comparison between 1 - and 0 - relational problems . Furthermore , the process of relational inte - gration was speciﬁcally associated with bilateral ros - trolateral PFC ( RLPFC ; lateral area 10 ) and right dor - solateral PFC ( areas 9 and 46 ) . Left RLPFC showed the greatest speciﬁcity by remaining preferentially re - cruited during 2 - relational problems even after com - parisons were restricted to trials matched for RT and accuracy . The link between RLPFC and the process of relational integration may be due to the associated process of manipulating self - generated information , a process that may characterize RLPFC function . © 2001 Academic Press INTRODUCTION Patient studies have shown that the prefrontal cor - tex ( PFC ) is essential for the complex cognitive pro - cesses underlying reasoning and problem solving ( e . g . , Luria , 1966 ; Milner , 1963 , 1964 ) . Neuroimaging stud - ies have supported this view by demonstrating PFC activation across many reasoning tasks ( Berman et al . , 1995 ; Baker et al . , 1996 ; Nagahama et al . , 1996 ; Owen et al . , 1996 ; Goel et al . , 1997 , 1998 , 2000 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 , 2001 ; Rao et al . , 1997 ; Goldberg et al . , 1998 ; Osherson et al . , 1998 ; Ragland et al . , 1998 ; Dagher et al . , 1999 ; Goel and Dolan , 2000 ; Wharton et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , several neuroimaging studies have shown that PFC activation increases as a consequence of increasing problem difﬁculty ( Baker et al . , 1996 ; Owen et al . , 1996 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ; Dagher et al . , 1999 ) . There are at least two possible explanations regard - ing such prefrontal activations . One hypothesis is that they are due to the longer duration of processing asso - ciated with increasing problem difﬁculty . An alterna - tive hypothesis is that prefrontal activations are due to novel types of processes invoked by speciﬁc reasoning demands . In line with the second hypothesis , it has been pro - posed that PFC is essential for particular reasoning processes characterized by a requirement to consider multiple relations simultaneously ( Robin and Holyoak , 1995 ) . In general , the relational complexity of a prob - lem ( Halford and Wilson , 1980 ; Halford et al . , 1998 ) can be deﬁned in terms of the number of related di - mensions , or sources of variation , that need to be con - sidered simultaneously in order to arrive at a correct solution . Halford et al . identiﬁed at least three levels of complexity : ( i ) 0 - relational , in which no dimensional variation needs to be considered ; ( ii ) 1 - relational , in which a single dimension of variation needs to be con - sidered at any moment of time ; and ( iii ) 2 - relational , in which two dimensions of variation need to be consid - ered simultaneously and , therefore , integrated . The process of relational integration , or processing multiple relations simultaneously , is required only at the last , 2 - relational level . Relational integration appears to be a speciﬁc kind of mental computation that develops slowly in humans and so late in primate evolution as to be unique to humans . Children under 5 years of age can solve 0 - and NeuroImage 14 , 1136 – 1149 ( 2001 ) doi : 10 . 1006 / nimg . 2001 . 0922 , available online at http : / / www . idealibrary . com on 1136 1053 - 8119 / 01 $ 35 . 00 Copyright © 2001 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . 1 - relational problems , but fail to solve 2 - relational problems that demand integration of multiple rela - tions , even when matched for working memory load to the 1 - relational problems ( Halford , 1984 ) . Nonhuman primates can solve 1 - relational problems , but cannot solve problems that require processing multiple rela - tions simultaneously ( reviewed in Tomosello and Call , 1997 ) . Robin and Holyoak ( 1995 ) proposed that failures in relational integration may be attributable to the relatively slow frontal lobe maturation in humans ( as indexed by myelination and other markers of cortical development ) and to the great expansion of frontal cortex in human evolution . Such ontogenetic and phy - logenetic developmental evidence supports the hypoth - esis that the PFC has a selective role in the process of relational integration . To test this hypothesis , Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) examined the performance of patients with frontal variant of frontotemporal dementia during two tasks : a deductive reasoning task involving transitive inference and an inductive reasoning task involving problems adapted from the Raven’s Progressive Matrices ( RPM ) test . For both tasks , patients performed at normal levels for 0 - relational and 1 - relational problems , but were im - paired on 2 - relational problems . These ﬁndings sug - gest that the ability to integrate multiple relations demands the integrity of PFC . In this study , we used fMRI to examine brain acti - vation in healthy volunteers during 0 - relational , 1 - re - lational , and 2 - relational problems adapted from the RPM test . The relational complexity of each problem was deﬁned as the number of relations that had to be considered simultaneously in order to solve the prob - lem . Verbal protocol and eye - movement analyses have shown that RPM problems are solved using a sequen - tial , reiterative strategy for inducing and encoding the rules or relationships of change within each problem ( Carpenter et al . , 1990 ) . Thus , the method we employed for deﬁning the number of relations in each problem had been shown to be valid both psychologically ( Car - penter et al . , 1990 ) and neuropsychologically ( Waltz et al . , 1999 ) . Our goal was to test whether PFC has a selective role in the process of relational integration in healthy young volunteers and to determine whether speciﬁc PFC subregions mediate this role . We hypothesized that increases in PFC activation would be speciﬁc to the 2 - relational problems and would be observed inde - pendently of increases in duration of processing . We used an event - related procedure that allowed random - ized presentation of different problem types , so that participants were unable to anticipate what type of problem would be presented next . In addition , the du - ration spent working on each problem was recorded and used in modeling each event - related response . In this way , we were able to identify regions activated by novel processes separately from regions activated by longer engagement of processes common to solving all problem types . MATERIALS AND METHODS Participants Ten right - handed volunteers from the Stanford com - munity ( 6 female ) took part in the experiment . Partic - ipants were 18 to 29 years of age ( mean age 22 . 2 ) and were native speakers of English . Data from 2 addi - tional participants were collected but excluded , one due to an unusually severe susceptibility - related sig - nal dropout and the second due to technical problems with the presentation software . All participants gave informed , written consent to participate in the experi - ment . The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Stanford University . Cognitive Task Problems had the general form of the Raven’s Pro - gressive Matrices ( Raven , 1938 ) . Each problem con - sisted of a 3 3 3 matrix of ﬁgures , with the bottom right ﬁgure missing ( Fig . 1 ) . After considering the relation - ship among the given matrix ﬁgures , participants had to infer the missing ﬁgure and select it from among the four choice alternatives presented on the right side of the matrix . Three different types of problems were created : 0 - re - lational , 1 - relational , and 2 - relational . The 0 - relational problems ( Fig . 1a ) involved no relationship of change and required no relational processing in order to be solved . The 1 - relational problems ( Fig . 1b ) involved a change in either the horizontal or the vertical dimen - sion and , therefore , required processing of a single relation . Finally , the 2 - relational problems ( Fig . 1c ) involved two relations of change , in both the horizontal and the vertical direction . Inferring the correct answer required considering the converging change along both dimensions . Thus , the 2 - relational problems required that two relations be integrated , or considered simul - taneously . Behavioral Procedure The different problem types were presented in a pseudorandom order , consistent across participants . Each trial lasted 30 s and started with a visual cue ( a 500 ms ﬁxation cross ) to alert participants to the be - ginning of a new trial ( Fig . 2 ) . After a 1500 - ms period following the cue’s offset , a problem appeared and par - ticipants started solving it . When ready , they pressed one of four buttons , indicating which ﬁgure they had selected as their answer . The time from the problem onset to the participant’s response deﬁned the response time ( RT ) for each trial . Problems were pretested so that none of them took more than 14 s to be solved , and 1137 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX all responses during the experiment occurred within the response deadline ( or 16 s after the problem onset ) . This allowed for at least 12 s of rest between prob - lems—time necessary for the hemodynamic response to return to baseline before the next trial’s onset . The instructions emphasized accuracy over speed of re - sponse , and participants were reminded to mentally rest in the period between their response and the next ﬁxation cross . Stimuli were generated from a computer and back - projected onto a screen located above the participant’s head via a magnet - compatible projector . Visual images were viewed from a mirror mounted above the partic - ipant’s head . Before scanning , participants were given brief practice on the RPM test ( six problems total , two problems in each of the three conditions ) . During scan - ning , participants responded with their right hand , using their index , middle , ring , and small ﬁngers to press one of four buttons on a hand - held button - box . The four keys corresponded to the four possible choice answers . MRI Scanning Procedure Imaging was performed using a 1 . 5 T whole - body MRI scanner ( General Electric Medical Systems Signa , Rev . 5 . 5 , Waukesha , WI ) . A top - hat elliptical quadra - ture birdcage head - coil was positioned around the par - ticipant’s head to obtain the activation signal . Head movement was minimized using a bite - bar , formed with each participant’s dental impression . Prior to functional imaging , 16 axial - oblique ﬂow - compensated spin echo T1 - weighted anatomic images [ repetition time ( TR ) 5 500 ms ; minimum echo time ( TE ) 5 40 ms ; ﬁeld of view ( FOV ) 20 3 20 cm 2 ; slice thickness 7 mm ; in - plane resolution 3 . 125 mm ] were acquired parallel to the anterior commissure / posterior commissure line . Following this , functional images were obtained ( TR 5 2000 ms ; TE 5 40 ms ; ﬂip angle 87° ; FOV 20 3 20 cm 2 ; 64 3 64 voxels ) in the same slice locations used for anatomic images . These functional images contained BOLD contrast intensity values and were acquired continuously during task performance . The volumes covered the whole brain ( 16 contiguous slices , each 7 mm thick ; 1 - interleaved ) and were acquired using a T2 * - weighted 2D gradient - echo spiral pulse sequence ( Noll et al . , 1995 ; Glover and Lai , 1998 ) , which is rel - atively insensitive to motion artifacts due to pulsatility ( Glover and Lee , 1995 ) . A total of 1080 functional vol - umes were acquired for each participant over 36 min ( three sessions , 12 min each ) . Three discarded volumes ( a total of 6 s ) were acquired at the beginning of each session to allow for T1 stabilization . Finally , a high - resolution T1 - weighted multislice anatomical image was acquired in axial orientation , using a 3D spoiled GRASS ( SPGR ) pulse sequence ( TR 5 50 ms ; minimum TE ; ﬂip angle 15° ; 124 contiguous slices of 1 . 5 mm thickness ; 256 3 192 matrix ; FOV 24 3 24 cm 2 ) . FIG . 2 . Sequence of events within a trial . Each trial lasted 30 s and started with a ﬁxation cue , followed by a problem’s onset . The problem remained on the screen until the participant responded . The time from the problem onset to the participant’s response deﬁned the response time for each trial . All responses occurred before the re - sponse deadline , or within 16 s after the problem onset , thus allow - ing at least 12 s of rest between problems—time necessary for the hemodynamic response to return to baseline before the next trial’s onset . FIG . 1 . Examples of problem types used in the experiment : ( a ) 0 - relational , ( b ) 1 - relational , and ( c ) 2 - relational . Participants had to infer the missing ﬁgure and select it among the four choice alterna - tives . Correct answers for the examples given here are ( a ) 3 , ( b ) 2 , and ( c ) 4 . 1138 CHRISTOFF ET AL . Data Preprocessing Image reconstruction was performed ofﬂine by trans - ferring the raw data to a Pentium II running RedHat 5 . 2 Linux ( Red Hat , Inc . , Durham , NC ) . Image prepro - cessing and statistical analysis were performed using SPM99b ( Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurol - ogy , http : / / www . ﬁl . ion . ucl . ac . uk / spm ) . To account for the different sampling times of the different slices , voxel time series were interpolated using sinc interpo - lation and resampled using the ﬁrst ( bottom ) slice as a reference point . All T2 * - weighted volumes were re - aligned to the ﬁrst one in the time series to correct for between - scan motion . The structural T1 - weighted vol - umes were spatially normalized to a standard template ( the MNI brain of Cocosco et al . , 1997 ) in the space of Talairach and Tournoux ( 1988 ) using a 12 - parameter afﬁne normalization and 12 nonlinear iterations with 7 3 8 3 7 basis functions ( Ashburner and Friston , 1999 ) . The spatial transformations derived from nor - malizing the structural volume taken in the functional acquisition plane were applied to the realigned T2 * - weighted volumes . After normalization , all volumes were resampled in 2 3 2 3 4 mm voxels using sinc interpolation in space . Finally , all T2 * - weighted vol - umes were smoothed with an 8 - mm full width at half - maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel to compensate for residual between - subject variability after spatial nor - malization and permit application of Gaussian random ﬁeld theory to provide for corrected statistical infer - ence ( Friston et al . , 1994 ) . Voxel - wise Analyses Initial exploratory analyses were performed to as - sess the magnitude of pairwise differences between the different problem types at each voxel . As part of these analyses , two further preprocessing steps were per - formed using routines within SPM99b . First , to remove low - frequency drifts in the BOLD signal , data were high - pass ﬁltered , using an upper cut - off period of 150 s , by constructing a convolution matrix for the ﬁrst few basis functions of a one - dimensional discrete co - sine transform . In addition , to remove effects due to global intensity ﬂuctuations in the signal , data were proportionally scaled to a global mean of 100 . Condition effects at each voxel were estimated ac - cording to the general linear model ( Friston et al . , 1995 ) . The model included : ( i ) the observed time series of intensity values , representing the dependent vari - able ; ( ii ) covariates modeling session - speciﬁc effects , later treated as confounds ; and ( iii ) regressor functions constructed on the basis of a synthetic hemodynamic response function ( HRF ) , modeling the hemodynamic response that would be expected to occur if a region is recruited by a particular problem type . Fixed HRF Analysis The traditional approach to constructing regressor functions for event - related analysis is to use an HRF of ﬁxed duration and amplitude to model the BOLD re - sponse time - locked to the stimulus onset for each trial ( Josephs et al . , 1997 ) . This method , however , models responses in all trials as having the same shape ( Fig . 3a ) . Although it is possible to include ﬁrst - order time or dispersion derivatives in order to accommodate for small deviations in the shape of the hemodynamic re - sponse across trials ( Friston et al . , 1998 ) , when large differences in response duration are present , this method may not provide an appropriate model . RT - Convolved HRF Analysis Given that the period of time participants spent working on different trials varied extensively ( RTs ranged approximately between 1 and 9 s , excluding responses that occurred more than 2 standard devia - tions away from the mean ) , we employed a modiﬁca - tion of the above approach . For each participant , we constructed regressor functions that took into account the speciﬁc RT associated with each trial . Figure 3 illustrates the process of regressor construction for the ﬁrst six trials of a session . FIG . 3 . Construction of regressor functions taking into account the different time participants spent working on the problem in each trial . ( a ) Regressor function based on the canonical hemodynamic response function ( HRF ) having a ﬁxed shape , identical for each trial . ( b ) Boxcar function based on the participant’s response time ( RT ) for each trial . ( c ) Regressor function resulting from convolving the HRF - based regressor in ( a ) with the RT - based boxcar function in ( b ) . The shape of the response in ( c ) varies from trial to trial thus modeling increases in duration and amplitude of response that would be expected because of increased time spent working on a problem . Note . The regressor functions used to model the response at each voxel spanned the entire session length ( 360 s ) while the ﬁgure illustrates only the ﬁrst six trials of a session . In addition , the regressor functions were continuous with values corresponding to zero during trials in which problem types other than the type being modeled were presented . These zero values are omitted to make visual comparisons between the different regressors easier . 1139 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX All constructed functions were continuous , with val - ues corresponding to zero during trials in which prob - lem types other than the types being modeled were presented . ( These zero values are omitted from Fig . 3 to make visual comparisons between the different re - gressors easier . ) First , nine regressors ( 3 conditions 3 3 sessions ) were constructed using the canonical HRF to model the occurrence of problems of each type , within each session ( Fig . 3a ) . Second , nine analogous RT - based boxcar functions were constructed with val - ues corresponding to 1 during the period between a problem’s onset and the participant’s response , and 0 otherwise ( Fig . 3b ) . Finally , each of the canonical HRF regressors was convolved with the corresponding box - car function . Convolution was done separately for each trial , using ﬁnite impulse response digital ﬁltering as implemented in MATLAB5 ( Mathworks , Inc . , Sher - born , MA ) . The shape of the response in the resulting regressors ( Fig . 3c ) varied from trial to trial , thus mod - eling increases in duration and amplitude of response that would be expected because of increased duration of processing . The model including these RT - based regressors was used to interrogate the data as a primary form of analysis . In addition , to ensure compatibility with pre - viously reported neuroimaging studies of reasoning , we performed an analysis with regressors constructed by using a ﬁxed HRF spanning a period of 16 s after each problem’s onset ( the maximum duration spent on an individual problem ) . The results from this latter anal - ysis are brieﬂy presented and later discussed in rela - tion to the results from the primary analysis . Regionally speciﬁc effects were estimated using lin - ear contrasts to compare the parameter estimates for regressors modeling particular problem types . The two comparisons of interest were ( i ) 1 - relational versus 0 - relational problems and ( ii ) 2 - relational versus 1 - re - lational problems . Because the regressors in the pri - mary analysis were constructed to take into account the duration of time spent working on each problem , these comparisons could be used to identify regions where the BOLD response increased above and beyond the increases attributable to duration of processing . Contrasts were tested by a voxel - speciﬁc repeated - measures t test across participants , thus effecting a random effects model . The t maps were subsequently transformed to the unit normal Z distribution to create a statistical parametric map for each contrast . The areas reported below consist of voxels that survived a threshold of P , 0 . 001 ( Z . 3 . 09 ) uncorrected for mul - tiple comparisons . The hypothesized differences between conditions concern differences due to greater increase in the evoked BOLD response between conditions ( i . e . , differ - ential extent of response above baseline ) and not dif - ferences due to greater decrease in BOLD response ( i . e . , differential extent of response below baseline ) . This distinction was necessary because , while event - related increases in BOLD response are known to be associated with neural activity , the physiological inter - pretation of event - related decreases in BOLD signal is still unclear and currently under investigation ( e . g . , Raichle , 1998 ; Raichle et al . , 2001 ) . To identify only voxels showing signiﬁcant increase in response above baseline , we created mask images for each of the prob - lem types , containing voxels showing signiﬁcant nega - tive correlation with the regressors for this problem type . The threshold for these mask images was set at P , 0 . 001 ( same as the activation threshold used to report results for the comparisons of interest ) , and they were applied to the analysis of reasoning - related brain activation to exclude areas in which the BOLD signal showed signiﬁcant event - related decrease . The foci of maximum activation were localized on a high - resolution anatomical image created by averaging the normalized individual high - resolution anatomical images . The locations of these maxima in terms of Brodmann areas ( Brodmann , 1909 ) were determined using the nomenclature given by Talairach and Tour - noux ( 1988 ) , after adjustment for differences between the MNI and Talairach coordinate systems ( http : / / www . mrc - cbu . cam . ac . uk / Imaging / mnispace . html ) . Anatomical Regions of Interest ( ROI ) Analysis In addition to the voxel - wise analysis , we conducted an independent analysis in anatomically deﬁned ROIs for the PFC only . Thirty ROIs were deﬁned ( see Ap - pendix ) as regions of intersection between gyri and Brodmann areas ( BAs ) ( see Fig . 5 for ROI outlines ) . The ROIs were constructed using labels from the Talairach Daemon database ( http : / / ric . uthscsa . edu / projects / talairachdaemon . html ) and were transformed into MNI space , as we have described elsewhere ( Brett et al . , 2001 ) . The raw signal intensities from all voxels within an ROI were averaged and the corresponding values were treated as a time series spanning the entire length of the experiment . The time series derived from each ROI underwent a series of preprocessing steps to minimize noise - related components . First , to remove extreme values associ - ated with scanner noise , outliers with an absolute Z score . 2 were replaced with the trimmed mean for the time series . Second , session - speciﬁc grand mean scal - ing was applied by dividing the values within each session by the mean across this session and multiply - ing the resulting value by 100 . Third , within - session linear detrending was performed by removing the best straight - line linear ﬁt . Finally , a band - pass second - order Butterworth ﬁlter was designed and applied to the time series to reduce low - frequency confounds ( by attenuating frequencies below 0 . 0156 Hz ) and high - frequency noise ( by attenuating frequencies above 0 . 0417 Hz ) . 1140 CHRISTOFF ET AL . The time series was then separated into 30 s trial blocks containing the fMRI signal changes related to each problem’s onset . The trial blocks corresponding to a particular problem type were treated as replications and were later trial - averaged to compare the hemody - namic response for different problem types within a given ROI . For reasons stated earlier , only those ROIs showing a nonnegative average response were used in subsequent analysis . No shifts were performed with respect to the value of the ﬁrst point in the average time courses . RESULTS Behavioral Performance Participants were highly accurate with 93 . 8 % overall accuracy ( accuracy and mean response time for each problem type are shown in Table 1 ) . Increasing rela - tional complexity resulted in reduced accuracy ( F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 14 . 91 , P , 0 . 001 ) and slower latency of response ( F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 124 . 96 , P , 0 . 001 ) . One - tailed post hoc linear comparisons revealed that RTs were signiﬁ - cantly longer for 2 - relational than for 1 - relational ( t 5 3 . 19 , df 5 27 , P , 0 . 001 ) and for 1 - relational than for 0 - relational problems ( t 5 3 . 17 , df 5 27 , P , 0 . 001 ) . Accuracy was signiﬁcantly lower for 2 - relational than for 1 - relational problems ( t 5 3 . 69 , df 5 27 , P , 0 . 001 ) and tended to be lower for 1 - relational than for 0 - rela - tional problems ( t 5 0 . 92 , df 5 27 , P 5 0 . 09 ) . Neuroimaging Results Voxel - Wise Analysis RT - convolved HRF . The activation maxima from the primary analysis using RT - convolved HRF are given in Table 2 and are illustrated in Fig . 4a . No voxels surviving the P , 0 . 001 ( Z . 3 . 09 ) threshold at the voxel level were revealed in the 1 - relational vs 0 - relational comparison . Two small clusters in the pro - motor cortex approached signiﬁcance when the voxel threshold was relaxed to P , 0 . 01 , but there were no PFC differences even at this level . The 2 - relational vs 1 - relational comparison yielded activation in the PFC bilaterally . There were two left - lateralized cortical regions of activation . The ﬁrst was a cluster in the left posterior and promotor PFC , ex - tending over the inferior prefrontal and precentral gyri , including BA 44 and 6 . The second cluster was located in the left anterior PFC , extending over the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex ( RLPFC ) , including the lateral portion of BA10 . The activation maxima in both of these left PFC regions survived correction for mul - tiple comparison ( correction was performed using a mask of all prefrontal cortex voxels showing signiﬁcant main effect of reasoning ) . TABLE 1 Mean Accuracy and Latency Data for the Different Conditions ( 6 SE ) Problem type Percentage correct Response time ( s ) 0 - relational 99 . 6 ( 6 0 . 4 ) 2 . 78 ( 6 0 . 25 ) 1 - relational 96 . 7 ( 6 1 . 2 ) 4 . 19 ( 6 0 . 31 ) 2 - relational 85 . 0 ( 6 3 . 6 ) 5 . 66 ( 6 0 . 36 ) Note . Response time statistics are computed for accurate re - sponses only . SE , standard error of the mean response across the 10 participants . TABLE 2 Maxima of Regions Showing Signiﬁcant Signal Changes in a Voxel - wise Analysis Using RT - Convolved HRF Region of activation L / R BA No . of voxels Talairach coordinates Z value P value x y z 1 - relational vs 0 - relational no signiﬁcant differences — — — — — — — — 2 - relational vs 1 - relational Inferior frontal gyrus L 44 40 ( 167 ) 2 44 4 33 3 . 65 , 0 . 05 * Precentral gyrus L 6 2 38 0 37 3 . 59 , 0 . 001 Middle frontal gyrus L 10 2 ( 17 ) 2 34 50 9 3 . 33 , 0 . 05 * Head of caudate L — 48 ( 76 ) 2 14 2 4 4 . 62 , 0 . 001 Middle frontal gyrus R 46 5 ( 40 ) 38 26 13 3 . 48 , 0 . 001 Middle frontal gyrus R 9 1 ( 24 ) 28 8 36 3 . 12 , 0 . 001 Head of caudate R — 17 ( 61 ) 10 6 4 4 . 35 , 0 . 001 Note . Activation maxima for voxels surviving P , 0 . 001 ( Z . 3 . 09 ) are reported . The number of voxels per cluster at this threshold is given , followed by the number of voxels ( in parentheses ) surviving at P , 0 . 005 ( Z . 2 . 59 ) . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcance values surviving correction for multiple comparisons . Where the cluster encompassed more than one region ( either BA or gyrus ) , more than one activation foci are reported for representativeness . Talairach coordinates have been adjusted for differences between the MNI and the Talairach coordinate system ( http : / / www . mrc - cbu . cam . ac . uk / Imaging / mnispace . html ) . Abbreviations : L , left ; R , right ; BA , Brodmann area . 1141 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX The right - lateralized regions of activation for this comparison included the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ) , including BA 9 and 46 , with maxima of activa - tion in the middle frontal gyrus ( MFG ) . At a lower thresh - old level ( P , 0 . 01 ) , the two clusters merged into a single large right PFC cluster of activation , extending in ante - rior direction to include the RLPFC ( lateral BA10 ) . In addition to PFC activations , the 2 - relational vs 1 - re - lational comparison yielded robust activation in the head of the caudate nucleus bilaterally . No other suprathresh - old activations were observed for this comparison . Fixed HRF . Comparing 1 - relational vs 0 - relational problems by using ﬁxed HRF ( Fig . 4b ) revealed no suprathreshold PFC activations . There was bilateral activation in the extrastriate visual cortex ( fusiform and lingual gyri , BA19 ) , left lateralized activation in the superior parietal lobule ( BA7 ) , and a cluster of activation in the right thalamus . Activations in bilat - FIG . 4 . Results from voxel - wise analysis ( a ) using RT - convolved HRF and ( b ) using ﬁxed HRF . Regions showing signiﬁcant increase in event - related response across all participants for the two main comparisons of interest . The results are rendered on axial slices of the group mean anatomical image , created by averaging the normalized individual high - resolution anatomical images . Results are thresholded at P , 0 . 01 uncorrected for multiple comparisons , with an extent threshold of 5 voxels . Details on individual maxima of activation for ( a ) are given in Table 2 . Individual maxima of activation for ( b ) are discussed in the text ( see Results ) . Abbreviations : 0rel , 0 - relational ; 1rel , 1 - relational ; 2rel , 2 - relational . 1142 CHRISTOFF ET AL . eral extrastriate cortex and superior parietal lobule were also observed in the 2 - relational vs 1 - relational comparison . In addition , this second comparison re - vealed activations in left DLPFC ( middle frontal gyrus , BA46 ) and left RLPFC ( middle and superior frontal gyri , BA10 ) , as well as bilateral activation in the infe - rior frontal gyrus ( BA44 and 6 ) and a medial cluster of activation in the cingulate gyrus ( BA32 ) . Anatomical ROI Analysis Differential responses among problem types : all tri - als . The peak values from all trial - related evoked re - sponses were used to perform a repeated measures F test , with participants treated as a random variable and different responses within each problem type treated as replications . Five anatomical ROIs ( left BA10 – MFG , left BA44 , right BA10 – MFG , right BA9 – MFG , and right BA46 ) overlapped with or included regions activated in the primary voxel - wise analysis . The main effect of problem type in four of these ﬁve anatomical ROIs reached or approached signiﬁcance at the P , 0 . 05 level : left BA10 – MFG ( P , 0 . 05 , F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 4 . 26 ) , right BA10 – MFG ( P , 0 . 01 , F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 6 . 25 ) , right BA46 ( P 5 0 . 07 , F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 3 . 01 ) , and right BA9 – MFG ( P 5 0 . 07 , F [ 2 , 18 ] 5 3 . 17 ) . The response in the remaining 25 PFC ROIs ( see Appendix ) did not reveal a main effect of problem type , a ﬁnding consistent with the results from the voxel - wise analysis . Post hoc lin - FIG . 5 . Anatomical ROI analysis on trials matched for RT and accuracy ( see Table 3 for statistics for the RT distributions across problem types ) . The event - related plots show the average time course for different problem types . Yellow contour indicates the ROI ( left RLPFC ) that preserved a pattern of signiﬁcant differential response consistent with the pattern observed in the ROI analysis including all trials . Bold white contour indicates the ROIs ( right RLPFC and the ROIs comprising the right DLPFC ) that showed the predicated pattern of differential response when analysis was performed on all trials , but did not show such pattern when comparisons were restricted to RT - matched trials . Outlines of all other anatomical ROIs in prefrontal cortex are also shown ( see Appendix for a list of all ROIs ) . All contours have been overlaid on axial slices of a subject - averaged T1 - weighted anatomical image . Statistical signiﬁcance was assessed by a signed - order pair - wise Wilcoxon test at the response peaks ( see Results for more details ) . Peak response points are indicated with circles . Abbreviations : BA , Brodmann area ; MFG , middle frontal gyrus . 1143 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX ear comparisons between problem types were per - formed on the peak values in each of the four ROIs approaching or showing signiﬁcant main effect . The results were again consistent with the pattern ob - served in the voxel - wise analysis ; 2 - relational prob - lems were associated with higher peaks than both 1 - re - lational and 0 - relational problems and there was no signiﬁcant difference between 1 - relational and 0 - rela - tional problems . Differential responses among problem types : RT - matched trials . Differences in peaks across problem types may be driven not only by increases in relational complexity , but also by increases in other sources of difﬁculty ( e . g . , visuospatial complexity of processing ) . To try to separate the effects of increasing relational complexity from the effects of other sources of difﬁ - culty , we selected 108 trials so that they formed 36 RT - matched triplets , each containing one trial for ev - ery one of the three problem types . All trials within a triplet were selected from the same subject and corre - sponded to problems that were answered correctly with roughly equal RT . This resulted in three groups of problems equated for overall level of difﬁculty in terms of RT and accuracy . Statistics for the RT distributions across problem types are given in Table 3 . In addition , problems were selected so that within each group they had a counterbalanced history ; i . e . , each problem type was preceded by all different problem types in equal proportion . This was necessary in order to eliminate differences between problem types that may be caused by residual lag of hemodynamic response from preced - ing trials . For each of the four ROIs approaching or showing signiﬁcant main effect of problem type , the peaks of responses were compared across problem types , to ﬁnd out if the effect of increasing relational complexity is preserved after equating for accuracy and RT . The average time courses across problem types are shown in Fig . 5 . To test for differences in activation , we performed a nonparametric analysis using the signed - order Wilcoxon test for pairwise differences between groups . In left BA10 – MFG , the previously observed pattern was preserved : 2 - relational problems yielded higher peaks than both 1 - relational ( T 5 227 , n 5 36 , P , 0 . 05 , one - tailed ) and 0 - relational ( T 5 158 , n 5 36 , P , 0 . 005 , one - tailed ) , whereas 1 - relational and 0 - re - lational did not differ . In the three right PFC ROIs , however , this pattern was not preserved . In right BA10 – MFG , 2 - relational problems yielded signiﬁ - cantly higher peaks than 1 - relational ( T 5 201 , n 5 36 , P , 0 . 05 , one - tailed ) , but 0 - relational were not signif - icantly different from any of the other two types . In right BA9 – MFG , there were no signiﬁcant differences among problem types . Similarly , in right BA46 , there were no signiﬁcant differences , except for a difference between 0 - relational and 2 - relational problems that reached signiﬁcance , but in the opposite of the ex - pected direction ( 0 - relational higher than 2 - relational , T 5 218 , n 5 36 , P , 0 . 05 , one - tailed ) . DISCUSSION The results across different analyses revealed the same pattern : PFC activation was speciﬁc to the com - parisons between 2 - and 1 - relational problems and was not observed in the comparisons between 1 - and 0 - re - lational problems . In left RLPFC , this pattern contin - ued to hold even after equating for RT and accuracy among problem types . These results converge with the patient ﬁndings by Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) and support the hypothesis that PFC is selectively involved during the process of relational integration . The results are also consistent with the view that PFC is preferentially engaged during relationally complex processes ( Robin and Holyoak , 1995 ) and conﬁrm that , as proposed by Halford et al . ( 1998 ) , the relational complexity of a task can be successfully used to predict PFC recruitment . One of the main goals of the present study was to identify regions activated by novel reasoning processes separately from regions activated by increased dura - tion of processes shared among conditions . This dis - tinction was important , because the comparisons be - tween problem types were designed hierarchically so that each condition required processing an additional relation . This parametric increase in relational com - plexity was inherently associated with an overall in - crease in processing duration . Several aspects of the present results point to the fact that the PFC activations observed in the compar - ison between 2 - and 1 - relational problems were asso - ciated with a novel reasoning process , rather than in - creased duration of processing . First , although there were virtually identical increases in processing dura - tion between 1 - and 0 - relational and between 2 - and 1 - relational problems , as measured by response laten - cies , PFC activations were not observed for the com - parison between 1 - and 0 - relational problems . Instead , these activations were found only in the comparison between 2 - and 1 - relational problems , when the pro - cess of relational integration was introduced . Second , the analysis using RT - convolved HRF revealed that TABLE 3 Response Time Distribution Statistics for the RT - Matched Trials Problem type Mean ( s ) Median ( s ) Standard deviation ( s ) 0 - relational 4 . 05 4 . 01 0 . 68 1 - relational 4 . 07 4 . 08 0 . 70 2 - relational 4 . 07 4 . 03 0 . 66 Note . A total of 108 correctly answered trials were selected , 36 for each problem type . 1144 CHRISTOFF ET AL . PFC regions activated in the comparisons between 2 - and 1 - relational problems increased in response be - yond the increase that would be expected from differ - ences in duration of processing alone . Third , at least one PFC region , left RLPFC , remained activated even after comparisons were restricted to trials matched for accuracy and RT among problem types . Together , these results strongly argue that the observed PFC activa - tions were associated with a novel process speciﬁcally recruited during 2 - relational problems , rather than with the associated increase in processing duration . Novel Types of Processes vs Longer Duration of Processing Distinguishing between these two sources of activa - tion is a widespread issue that has received only lim - ited attention in the neuroimaging literature so far . In general , when interpreting the results from compari - sons based on the cognitive subtraction principle , acti - vations are frequently assumed to reﬂect a novel pro - cess unique to one of the conditions . If there is a systematic difference in response latency between con - ditions , however , it may also contribute to the activa - tion pattern—a contribution that may reﬂect not a novel process , but instead , a longer engagement of the same processes . D’Esposito et al . ( 1997 ) discussed this problem in the context of blocked design studies and emphasized the importance of considering the spacing between trials within a block when interpreting acti - vations . They proposed that activations can be inter - preted by comparing the results from a ﬁxed - paced experiment with the results from the same experiment repeated under self - paced conditions . The RT - convolution method presented here may al - low for such discrimination in the context of event - related observations , by comparing the results from different types of analyses performed on a given data set . In the present study , signiﬁcant differences in PFC regions were revealed both by the analysis using RT - convolved HRF and by the analysis using ﬁxed HRF . On the other hand , activations in posterior cortical regions , including extrastriate visual cortex and supe - rior parietal lobule , were observed only in the analysis using ﬁxed HRF . This suggests that these posterior activations reﬂect increases that can be fully accounted for by the increase in duration of processing . We there - fore interpret these activations as reﬂecting longer en - gagement of processes shared among conditions ( e . g . , visual inspection or attentional engagement ) . The pre - frontal activations identiﬁed by the RT - convolved HRF analysis , on the other hand , reﬂected increase in re - sponse exceeding the increase that would be expected from differences in duration of processing alone . We therefore interpret these prefrontal activations as re - ﬂecting a novel process , the process of relational inte - gration , uniquely engaged by the 2 - relational problem type . The analysis using RT - convolved HRF also re - vealed right PFC and caudate activations that were not observed in the ﬁxed - HRF analysis , a difference that may be attributable to an improved sensitivity of the RT - convolved HRF analysis , resulting from incorporat - ing knowledge about processing duration in the model of each event - related response . Both the event - related method presented here and the blocked design method described by D’Esposito et al . ( 1997 ) rely on the assumption that an increase in duration of processing is linearly related to a corre - sponding increase in BOLD signal . The relationship between duration of processing and neuroimaging sig - nal has been investigated for several primary cortical regions and a linear relationship has been found to provide a good approximation ( Boynton et al . , 1996 ; Cohen , 1997 ) . Some nonlinearities , however , have been observed for processing durations of roughly 3 s or shorter ( Boynton et al . , 1996 ; Vazquez and Noll , 1998 ; Glover , 1999 ) . Approximately 35 % of the responses in the present study occurred within 3 s from the prob - lem’s onset . The general pattern of PFC activation , however , remained consistent among the RT - convolved HRF , the ﬁxed HRF , and the anatomical ROI analysis including all trials , suggesting that none of these anal - yses were differentially inﬂuenced by nonlinear effects . Prefrontal and Subcortical Involvement in Complex Reasoning In the present study , complexity - dependent in - creases in activation exceeding the effects of processing duration were observed only for PFC , suggesting that this may be the only cortical region sensitive to in - creasing reasoning complexity . Similar PFC speciﬁcity was noted by Dagher et al . ( 1999 ) , who used the Tower of London , a reasoning task in which complexity can be deﬁned as the minimum number of moves needed to arrive at a correct solution ( Owen et al . , 1990 ) . Dagher et al . found that performance of the Tower of London recruited a widely distributed network of prefrontal , visual , and parietal regions , but that task complexity correlated only with PFC activation . The present study supports the view that such PFC activation reﬂects reasoning complexity rather than the longer duration associated with additional moves . The only other brain structure that revealed an ef - fect of increasing reasoning complexity in both the present study and the study reported by Dagher et al . ( 1999 ) was the caudate nucleus . The caudate is ana - tomically related to PFC through multiple frontostria - tal connections ( Alexander et al . , 1986 ) , and caudate lesions are known to produce speciﬁc impairments in complex reasoning processes such as planning , orga - nizing , and sequencing ( Mendez et al . , 1989 ; Petty et al . , 1996 ) . Similar deﬁcits in complex reasoning also occur in caudate - lesioned animals ( Divac et al . , 1967 ; 1145 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX Van den Bercken and Cools , 1982 ) and in early Hun - tington’s disease ( Caine et al . , 1978 ; Singh et al . , 1992 ) , a disorder whose primary pathology involves the cau - date nuclei . Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated caudate activation for multiple reasoning tasks ( Owen et al . , 1996 ; Rao et al . , 1997 ; Goldberg et al . , 1998 ; Goel et al . , 2000 ; Osherson et al . , 1998 ; Dagher et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , there is converging evidence that the PFC and the caudate are major components of a neural system mediating complex reasoning . Relational Complexity and Prefrontal Function In addition to reasoning , prefrontal cortex activation has been associated with a variety of complex cognitive functions , such as planning ( e . g . , Baker et al . , 1996 ) , management of dual tasks ( D’Esposito et al . , 1995 ) , and working memory ( e . g . , Cohen et al . , 1997 ) . Many of these tasks involve relational processing . Thus , com - plex planning requires working with multiple subgoals and organizing them in a subgoal hierarchy ( Carpenter et al . , 1990 ; Shallice and Burgess , 1991 ) . Building an optimal subgoal hierarchy would require considering multiple subgoal relations simultaneously ( Halford et al . , 1998 ) . Similarly , dual tasks require executing two action sequences in parallel . The management of dual tasks , therefore , would demand the integration of the temporal relations between these action sequences . Likewise , working memory tasks often require par - ticipants to integrate multiple relations , such as the relative temporal or spatial order among stimuli . Vari - ations in complexity of processing during the n - back task , for instance , can be deﬁned in terms of processing relations between items in time ( Waltz et al . , 1999 ) . Identifying the item that is “one - back” requires pro - cessing of a single relation , while identifying the item that is “two - back” requires integration of two temporal relations . Thus , relational processes and , in particular , complex relational processes , such as relational inte - gration , occur in a wide range of tasks that depend on PFC . The integration of relations , therefore , may be one of the common factors linking diverse prefrontal functions , such as planning , reasoning , and working memory . Prefrontal Subregions Involved in Relational Integration The present results converge with the patient ﬁnd - ings by Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) and recent neuroimaging ﬁndings by Kroger et al . ( in press ) , suggesting that relational integration may be one of the speciﬁc com - ponent processes of reasoning that are invoked with increasing problem difﬁculty and lead to PFC recruit - ment . Furthermore , our results extend the patient ﬁndings by identifying speciﬁc PFC subregions : Rela - tional integration was associated with bilateral RLPFC and right DLPFC activations , although left RLPFC showed the greatest speciﬁcity by preserving its sensitivity to relational integration even after re - stricting comparisons to trials matched for RT and accuracy . On the other hand , the fact that RT matching eliminated the effect of relational complexity in right RLPFC and right DLPFC implies that these two re - gions may be sensitive not only to relational integra - tion , but also to other processes inﬂuencing problem difﬁculty . The analysis based on RT matching had several lim - itations . Selection was performed post hoc , based on dependent measures . Given the systematic increase in response latencies across problem types , the 0 - and 2 - relational problems selected by RT matching were most likely unrepresentative for their type and may have been associated with atypical recruitment of pro - cesses . In addition , this analysis had a diminished statistical power due to the limited number ( 36 ) of trials per problem type . Given this , it is striking that left RLPFC remained sensitive to the process of rela - tional integration even after RT matching , in a situa - tion in which the effects of increasing relational com - plexity were most likely counteracted by the effects of other factors inﬂuencing problem difﬁculty . This im - plies that relational integration may be one of the speciﬁc processes characterizing left RLPFC . RLPFC and Complex Cognition RLPFC activations have been observed during highly complex tasks across a wide range of domains . Based on a review of studies reporting activation in this region ( Christoff and Gabrieli , 2000 ) , we have pro - posed that it may be selectively involved in active pro - cessing , such as manipulation or evaluation , performed upon self - generated information . The present ﬁndings bear interesting implications relating to this hypothe - sis . First , they are consistent with it : The relational information associated with a problem from the RPM test is not given in the problem , but has to be inferred , or self - generated , on the basis of given information ( the individual object features such as shape , texture , and size ) . The observed link between RLPFC activation and the process of relational integration , therefore , could be due to the associated process of manipulating the self - generated information about the change among objects . Second , our results suggest the presence of a hemi - spheric asymmetry within the RLPFC . The majority of reported RLPFC activations have been right lateral - ized and are most consistently observed during tasks involving episodic retrieval ( Cabeza and Nyberg , 2000 ) . In the present study , however , RLPFC activa - tion was left lateralized . In general , reasoning tasks involving relational inferences have been associated with exclusively left lateralized pattern of PFC activa - tion . Thus , Wharton et al . ( 2000 ) used an analogical reasoning task that involved matching relations be - 1146 CHRISTOFF ET AL . tween items ; they found activation in multiple left PFC regions , including RLPFC , but no activation in right PFC . Similarly , Goel et al . ( 1998 ) used a reasoning task , involving deductive relational inferences and , again , observed exclusively left - lateralized pattern of PFC activation . None of these studies , however , have focused on the RLPFC speciﬁcally , while our results bear direct implications for the functions of this pre - frontal subregion . We propose that while right RLPFC may be preferentially involved in the evaluation of self - generated information ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ) , left RLPFC may be involved in manipulating self - gener - ated information for the purposes of further abstract - ing new information . Such functional role would be consistent with the present results demonstrating spe - ciﬁc involvement of left RLPFC in the process of rela - tional integration . The precise functions of the RLPFC , as well as the presence and nature of hemispheric specialization within it , remain objects of further discussion . It is likely , however , that this region plays a central role in complex cognitive processes . Therefore , elucidating its functions further may prove crucial for understanding the neural basis of reasoning . APPENDIX A List of the Prefrontal Anatomical ROIs Used in the ROI - Based Analysis , with Their Volumetric Size in Cubic Centimeters Region Volume ( cm 3 ) Left hemisphere BA8 , middle frontal gyrus 7 . 9 BA8 , superior frontal gyrus 7 . 8 BA9 , middle frontal gyrus 7 . 8 BA9 , superior frontal gyrus 6 . 0 BA10 , middle frontal gyrus 6 . 8 BA10 , superior frontal gyrus 9 . 6 BA11 , orbitofrontal and middle frontal gyri 4 . 3 BA11 , superior frontal gyrus 3 . 6 BA44 , inferior frontal gyrus 2 . 9 BA45 , inferior frontal gyrus 3 . 8 BA46 , middle and inferior frontal gyri 8 . 8 BA47 , inferior frontal gyrus 12 . 1 Right hemisphere BA8 , middle frontal gyrus 7 . 6 BA8 , superior frontal gyrus 7 . 8 BA9 , middle frontal gyrus 8 . 6 BA9 , superior frontal gyrus 6 . 5 BA10 , middle frontal gyrus 7 . 8 BA10 , superior frontal gyrus 9 . 7 BA11 , orbitofrontal and middle frontal gyri 3 . 5 BA11 , superior frontal gyrus 3 . 6 BA44 , inferior frontal gyrus 2 . 7 BA45 , inferior frontal gyrus 3 . 7 BA46 , middle and inferior frontal gyri 9 . 2 BA47 , inferior frontal gyrus 11 . 5 MedialBA9 – 8 , medial frontal gyrus 10 . 5 BA10 , medial frontal gyrus 9 . 9 BA11 , medial frontal and rectal gyri 9 . 2 BA24 – 32 , anterior cingulate 15 . 2 BA24 , cingulate gyrus 13 . 7 BA32 , cingulate gyrus 8 . 4 Note . BA , Brodmann area . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Support for the research reported herein came from grants from the National Institute of Aging ( NIAC - AG12995 and NIAC - AG112 ) to J . D . E . G . and a Stanford New Democracy Fellowship Award to K . C . We thank Shelley Zulman and Courtney Dirksen for help in preparing the stimuli , Amy Shelton for advice on statistical issues , and Matthew Brett for help on the Talairach to MNI transform used in ROI deﬁnition and for developing the slice display routine used in creating Fig . 5 . We are also grateful to Lera Boroditsky , Boicho Kokinov , and three anonymous reviewers , for providing thoughtful remarks and suggestions regarding earlier versions of the manu - script . REFERENCES Alexander , G . E . , DeLong , M . R . , and Strick , P . L . 1986 . Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal gan - glia and cortex . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 9 : 357 – 381 . Ashburner , J . , and Friston , K . J . 1999 . Nonlinear spatial normaliza - tion using basis functions . Hum . Brain Mapp . 7 : 254 – 266 . Baker , S . C . , Rogers , R . D . , Owen , A . M . , Frith , C . D . , Dolan , R . J . , Frackowiak , R . S . J . , and Robbins , T . W . 1996 . Neural systems engaged by planning : A PET study of the Tower of London task . Neuropsychologia 34 : 515 – 526 . Berman , K . F . , Ostrem , J . L . , Randolph , C . , Gold , J . , Goldberg , T . E . , Coppola , R . , Carson , R . E . , Herscovitch , P . , and Weinberger , D . R . 1995 . Physiological activation of a cortical network during perfor - mance of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test : A positron emission tomography study . Neuropsychologia 33 : 1027 – 1046 . Boynton , G . M . , Engel , S . A . , Glover , G . H . , and Heeger , D . J . 1996 . Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging in human V1 . J . Neurosci . 16 : 4207 – 4221 . Brett , M . , Christoff , K . , Cusak , R . , and Lancaster , J . 2001 . Using the Talairach atlas with the MNI template . NeuroImage 13 : S85 . Brodmann , K . 1908 . Beitraege zur histologischen Lokalisation der Grosshirnrinde . VI Mitteilung . Die Cortexgliederung des Men - schen . J . Psychol . Neurol . 10 : 213 – 246 . Cabeza , R . , and Nyberg , L . 2000 . Imaging cognition . II . An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies . J . Cognit . Neurosci . 12 : 1 – 47 . Caine , E . , Hunt , R . , Weingartner , H . , and Ebert , M . 1978 . Hunting - ton’s dementia : Clinical and neuropsychological features . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 35 : 377 – 384 . Carpenter , P . A . , Just , M . A . , and Shell , P . 1990 . What one intelli - gence test measures : A theoretical account of the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices Test . Psychol . Rev . 97 : 404 – 431 . Christoff , K . , and Gabrieli , J . D . E . 2000 . The frontopolar cortex and human cognition : Evidence for a rostrocaudal hierarchical organi - zation within the human prefrontal cortex . Psychobiology 28 : 168 – 186 . Christoff , K . , Geddes , L . P . T . , and Gabrieli , J . D . E . 2001 . Rostro - lateral prefrontal cortex involvement in evaluating self - generated information . NeuroImage 13 : S649 . Cocosco , C . , Kollokian , V . , Kwan , R . , and Evans , A . 1997 . Brainweb : Online interface to a 3D MRI simulated brain database . Neuro - Image 5 : 425 . 1147 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX Cohen , M . S . 1997 . Parametric analysis of fMRI data using linear systems methods . NeuroImage 6 : 93 – 103 . Cohen , J . D . , Perlstein , W . M . , Braver , T . S . , Nystrom , L . E . , Noll , D . C . , Jonides , J . , and Smith , E . E . 1997 . Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a working memory task . Nature 386 : 604 – 608 . Dagher , A . , Owen , A . M . , Boecker , H . , and Brooks , D . J . 1999 . Mapping the network for planning : A correlational PET activation study with the Tower of London task . Brain 122 : 1973 – 1987 . D’Esposito , M . , Detre , J . A . , Alsop , D . C . , Shin , R . K . , Atlas , S . , and Grossman , M . 1995 . The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory . Nature 378 : 279 – 281 . D’Esposito , M . , Zarahn , E . , Aguirre , G . K . , Shin , R . K . , Auerbach , P . , and Detre , J . A . 1997 . The effect of pacing of experimental stimuli on observed functional MRI activity . NeuroImage 6 : 113 – 121 . Divac , I . , Rosvold , H . E . , and Szwarcbart , M . K . 1967 . Behavioral effects of selective ablation of the caudate nucleus . J . Comp . Physiol . Psychol . 63 : 184 – 190 . Friston , K . J . , Worsley , K . J . , Frackowiak , R . S . J . , Mazziotta , J . C . , and Evans , A . C . 1994 . Assessing the signiﬁcance of focal activa - tions using their spatial extent . Hum . Brain Mapp . 1 : 210 – 220 . Friston , K . J . , Holmes , A . P . , Worsley , K . J . , Poline , J . P . , Frith , C . D . , and Frackowiak , R . S . J . 1995 . Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging : A general linear approach . Hum . Brain Mapp . 2 : 189 – 210 . Friston , K . J . , Fletcher , P . , Josephs , O . , Holmes , A . , Rugg , M . D . , and Turner , R . 1998 . Event - related fMRI : Characterizing differential responses . NeuroImage 7 : 30 – 40 . Glover , G . H . 1999 . Deconvolution of impulse response in event - related BOLD fMRI . NeuroImage 9 : 416 – 429 . Glover , G . H . , and Lai , S . 1998 . Self - navigated spiral fMRI : Inter - leaved versus single - shot . Magn . Reson . Med . 39 : 361 – 368 . Glover , G . H . , and Lee , A . T . 1995 . Motion artifacts in fMRI : Com - parison of 2DFT with PR and spiral scan methods . Magn . Reson . Med . 33 : 624 – 635 . Goel , V . , Gold , B . , Kapur , S . , and Houle , S . 1997 . The seats of reason ? An imaging study of deductive and inductive reasoning . Neuro - Report 8 : 1305 – 1310 . Goel , V . , Gold , B . , Kapur , S . , and Houle , S . 1998 . Neuroanatomical correlates of human reasoning . J . Cognit . Neurosci . 10 : 293 – 302 . Goel , V . , Buchel , C . , Frith , C . , and Dolan , R . J . 2000 . Dissociation of mechanisms underlying syllogistic reasoning . NeuroImage 12 : 504 – 514 . Goel , V . , and Dolan , R . J . 2000 . Anatomical segregation of component processes in an inductive inference task . J . Cognit . Neurosci . 12 : 110 – 119 . Goldberg , T . E . , Berman , K . F . , Fleming , K . , Ostrem , J . , Van Horn , J . D . , Esposito , G . , Mattay , V . S . , Gold , J . M . , and Weinberger , D . R . 1998 . Uncoupling cognitive workload and prefrontal cortical physiology : A PET rCBF study . NeuroImage 7 : 296 – 303 . Halford , G . S . 1984 . Can young children integrate premises in tran - sitivity and serial order tasks ? Cognit . Psychol . 16 : 65 – 93 . Halford , G . S . , and Wilson , W . H . 1980 . A category theory approach to cognitive development . Cognit . Psychol . 12 : 356 – 411 . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , and Phillips , S . 1998 . Processing capacity deﬁned by relational complexity : Implications for compar - ative , developmental , and cognitive psychology . Behav . Brain Sci . 21 : 803 – 831 . Josephs , O . , Turner , R . , and Friston , K . 1997 . Event - related fMRI . Hum . Brain Mapp . 5 : 243 – 248 . Koechlin , E . , Basso , G . , Pietrini , P . , Panzer , S . , and Grafman , J . 1999 . The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human cogni - tion . Nature 399 : 148 – 151 . Kroger , J . K . , Saab , F . W . , Fales , C . L . , Bookheimer , S . Y . , Cohen , M . S . , and Holyoak , K . J . Recruitment of anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning : A parametric study of rela - tional complexity . Cerebral Cortex , in press . Luria , A . R . 1966 . Higher Cortical Functions in Man . Tavistock , London . Mendez , M . F . , Adams , N . L . , and Lewandowski , K . S . 1989 . Neu - robehavioral changes associated with caudate lesions . Neurology 39 : 349 – 354 . Milner , B . 1963 . Effects of different brain lesions on card sorting . Arch . Neurol . 9 : 90 – 100 . Milner , B . 1964 . Some effects of frontal lobectomy in man . In The Frontal Granular Cortex and Behavior ( J . M . Warren and K . Akert , Eds . ) , pp . 313 – 334 . McGraw – Hill , New York . Nagahama , Y . , Fukuyama , H . , Yamauchi , H . , Matsuzaki , S . , Koni - shi , J . , Shibasaki , H . , and Kimura , J . 1996 . Cerebral activation during performance of a card sorting test . Brain 119 : 1667 – 1675 . Noll , D . C . , Cohen , J . D . , Meyer , C . H . , and Schneider , W . 1995 . Spiral K - space MR imaging of cortical activation . J . Magn . Reson . Imaging 5 : 49 – 56 . Osherson , D . , Perani , D . , Cappa , S . , Schnur , T . , Grassi , F . , and Fazio , F . 1998 . Distinct brain loci in deductive versus probabilistic rea - soning . Neuropsychologia 36 : 369 – 376 . Owen , A . M . , Downes , J . J . , Sahakian , B . J . , Polkey , C . E . , and Robbins , T . W . 1990 . Planning and spatial working memory following frontal lobe lesions in man . Neuropsychologia 28 : 1021 – 1034 . Owen , A . M . , Doyon , J . , Petrides , M . , and Evans , A . 1996 . Planning and spatial working memory : A positron emission tomography in humans . Eur . J . Neurosci . 8 : 353 – 364 . Petty , R . G . , Bonner , D . , Mouratoglou , V . , and Silverman , M . 1996 . Acute frontal lobe syndrome and dyscontrol associated with bilat - eral caudate nucleus infarctions . Br . J . Psychiatry 168 : 237 – 240 . Prabhakaran , V . , Smith , J . A . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . H . , and Gabrieli , J . D . 1997 . Neural substrates of ﬂuid reasoning : An fMRI study of neocortical activation during performance of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test . Cognit . Psychol . 33 : 43 – 63 . Prabhakaran , V . , Rypma , B . , and Gabrieli , J . D . E . 2001 . Neural correlates of mathematical reasoning : An fMRI study of neocorti - cal activation during performance of the Necessary Arithmetic Operations Test . Neuropsychology 15 : 115 – 127 . Ragland , J . D . , Gur , R . C . , Glahn , D . C . , Censits , D . M . , Smith , R . J . , Lazarev , M . G . , Alavi , A . , and Gur , R . E . 1998 . Frontotemporal cerebral blood ﬂow change during executive and declarative mem - ory tasks in schizophrenia : A positron emission tomography study . Neuropsychology 12 : 399 – 413 . Raichle , M . E . 1998 . The neural correlates of consciousness : An analysis of cognitive skill learning . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London B Biol . Sci . 353 : 1889 – 1901 . Raichle , M . E . , MacLeod , A . M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Powers , W . J . , Gus - nard , D . A . , and Shulman , G . L . 2001 . A default mode of brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 676 – 682 . Rao , S . M . , Bobholz , J . A . , Hammeke , T . A . , Rosen , A . C . , Woodley , S . J . , Cunningham , J . M . , Cox , R . W . , Stein , E . A . , and Binder , J . R . 1997 . Functional MRI evidence for subcortical participation in conceptual reasoning skills . NeuroReport 8 : 1987 – 1993 . Raven , J . C . 1938 . Standardization of progressive matrices . Br . J . Med . Psychol . 19 : 137 – 150 . Robin , N . , and Holyoak , K . J . 1995 . Relational complexity and the functions of prefrontal cortex . In The Cognitive Neurosciences 1148 CHRISTOFF ET AL . ( M . S . Gazzaniga , Ed . ) , 1st ed . , pp . 987 – 997 . MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Singh , J . , Gabrieli , J . D . E . , and Goetz , C . G . 1992 . Impairment of working memory in patients with Huntington’s disease . Neurology 42 : 280 . Shallice , T . , and Burgess , P . W . 1991 . Higher - order cognitive impair - ments and frontal lobe lesions in man . In Frontal Lobe Function and Dysfunction ( H . S . Levin , H . M . Eisenberg , and A . L . Benton , Eds . ) , pp . 125 – 138 . Oxford Univ . Press , New York . Shallice , T . , Fletcher , P . , Frith , C . D . , Grasby , P . , Frackowiak , R . S . J . , and Dolan , R . J . 1994 . Brain regions associated with acquisition and retrieval of verbal episodic memory . Nature 368 : 633 – 635 . Talairach , J . , and Tournoux , P . 1988 . Co - planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain . Thieme , Stuttgart / New York . Tomasello , M . , and Call , J . 1997 . Primate Cognition . Oxford Univ . Press , New York . Van den Bercken , J . H . L . , and Cools , A . R . 1982 . Evidence for a role of the caudate nucleus in the sequential organization of behavior . Behav . Brain Res . 4 : 319 – 337 . Vazquez , A . L . , and Noll , D . C . 1998 . Nonlinear aspects of the BOLD response in functional MRI . NeuroImage 7 : 108 – 118 . Waltz , J . A . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Boone , K . B . , Mishkin , F . S . , de Menezes Santos , M . , Thomas , C . R . , and Miller , B . L . 1999 . A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal cor - tex . Psychol . Sci . 10 : 119 – 125 . Wharton , C . M . , Grafman , J . , Flitman , S . S . , Hansen , E . K . , Brauner , J . , Marks , A . , and Honda , M . 2000 . Toward neuroanatomical mod - els of analogy : A positron emission tomography study of analogical mapping . Cognit . Psychol . 40 : 173 – 197 . 1149 RELATIONAL PROCESSING AND THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX