1 Excitable Actin Dynamics in Lamellipodial Protrusion and Retraction Gillian L . Ryan , † Heather M . Petroccia , †‡ Naoki Watanabe , § and Dimitrios Vavylonis † † Department of Physics , Lehigh University , Bethlehem , Pennsylvania ; ‡ Department of Physics , Villanova University , Villanova , Pennsylvania ; and § Laboratory of Single - Molecule Cell Biology , Tohoku University Graduate School of Life Sciences , Sendai , Miyagi , Japan SUPPORTING MATERIAL 1 . Materials and Methods Live Cell Imaging Live cell imaging was carried out as described in ( 1 ) . XTC cells transiently expressing EGFP - and mCherry - tagged proteins were trypsinized and allowed to spread on a poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) - coated glass coverslip in 70 % L - 15 medium without serum . Some cells were stimulated by addition of FCS , as indicated . The flow cell was then placed on the stage of Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with Cascade II : 512 ( Roper Scientific ) or BX52 microscope equipped with CoolSNAP HQ ( Roper Scientific ) . A restricted area near the cell edge was illuminated using a 75 W xenon illumination system . Imaging acquisition was carried out at 21 - 23 °C using the Metamorph software ( Molecular Devices ) and an Olympus oil objective , PlanApo 100× ( NA 1 . 40 ) . Under the experimental conditions described , most of cells form flat , well - spread lamellipodia and we chose cells without ruffles for analysis . The body of the cell did not move significantly during the analysis . Measurements of Protrusion Rate and Intensity The leading edges of cells expressing fluorescent proteins were tracked over time by modifying JFilament ( 2 ) . Active contours were fit to the intensity gradient between the interior and exterior of the cell at the leading edge . The software allowed for the semi - automated tracking of the leading edge by evolving the contour from the previous time point . Manual interaction allowed correction of tracking failures . We selected cells that were well - spread and near - circular in shape in order to convert the contours to polar coordinates at 1 - degree intervals , see Fig . 1 E ( 3 ) . When only a fraction of a cell was visible , we estimated the position of the cell center . The normal leading edge velocity was calculated at each angle as the change in radial distance of the leading edge from the cell center . To measure the local intensity of fluorescent proteins along the cells’ leading edges , we generated a ribbon of leading edge ( see Fig . 1 F ) . We integrated the intensity within the ribbon to get the total intensity as a function of angle . Measurements of Retrograde Flow To measure retrograde flow we performed fluorescent single molecule fluorescence microscopy experiments , sampling at 1 s intervals . Individual speckles were tracked using Speckle TrackerJ ( 4 ) . Measurements were reproducible by an independent user . The measurements produced x - and y - coordinates for each speckle over time ( See . Fig . S1 A ) . Speckle velocities were calculated by calculating the local line of best fit to both the x - and y - 2 coordinates of the trajectories over 20 s intervals . In Fig . S1 , the average error in the x - and y - velocity of these fits was 2 . 7 nm / s , being smaller than 4 nm / s for 93 % of the fits . The standard deviation of measured speckle position from lines of best fit were 0 . 06 pixels in the x - direction , and 0 . 08 pixels in the y - direction ( 1 pixel = 80 nm ) . This approaches the limit of our spatial resolution : when measuring immobile EGFP speckles stuck to the glass outside the cell we found standard deviations in the x - and y – positions over time of 0 . 02 - 0 . 13 pixels . Speckle lifetimes sample a large distribution ( 1 , 5 ) . We did not calculate velocities for speckles with lifetimes less than 20 s . To correlate retrograde flow with leading edge speed , the leading edge was tracked with JFilament . Since the leading edge is difficult to detect in cells expressing low levels of fluorescent labels , the movie that was tracked with JFilament was first time - averaged , so that each frame was a moving average of 20 frames ( an interval smaller than the typical period of protrusion / retraction cycles ) . This averaging enhanced contrast at the leading edge . For the speckle data , we calculated the protrusion velocity of the leading edge using a moving average over 40 s . The intersection of a linear fit of the total speckle trajectory and the active contour at the leading edge identified the leading edge position to which the speckle corresponded . Correlation Analysis Cross - correlation coefficients between f ( t , s ) and g ( t , s ) , c f * g , were calculated as a function of time interval  t and arc - length distance  s using : ( ) ∑ ∑ ( ( ) ̅ ) ( ( ) ̅ ) ( ) ( ) , ( S1 ) where f and g are the quantities being correlated . N denotes the number of time points and M the number of positions . ̅ and ̅ are averages of the functions and and indicate standard deviations of f and g , respectively . Auto - correlation functions used identical f and g . Computer Simulation Simulations were run in one dimension along a line of size L ( see table S1 ) , representing the arc - length of the cell , with periodic boundary conditions . The model was solved by integrating the partial differential equations numerically , using a fourth order Runge - Kutta method . The value of the noise term was selected from a Gaussian probability distribution with zero mean and width t x d d / s 0 , where dt = 0 . 005 s is the integration time step . The lattice spacing is A dtD dx 2 5  . The system was relaxed for a minimum of 2000 s before data was taken . 2 . Choice of Non - linear Terms and Dependence of System Behavior on Parameter Values . 2 . 1 Choice of Non - linear Terms We modeled the negative feedback in Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) using an exponential cutoff , . This term prevents F - actin from accumulating in amounts that far exceed . Excitations away from steady state are driven by the autocatalytic term  ( B ) = in Eq . ( 4 ) . As explained 3 below , we chose a quadratic form because it is a simple non - linear function that is adequate to reproduce the observed phenomena . During an excitation , the concentration of actin near the leading edge approximately doubles ( see Fig . 1 and 4 ) . Given the rate constants of Table S1 and a period of ~ 150 s , we anticipate a change of similar magnitude in the concentration of free barbed ends . Now the term  ( ) should have approximately the same value at both steady state , B = B * and F = F * and at the instant in time when the free barbed end concentration is at a maximum , B ≈ 2 B * and F =  F * . Since B and F are out of phase , we estimate 1 . 1 <  < 1 . 5 . It is easy to show that , assuming a power law ,  ( B ) ~ B n , would require For the work presented here we chose the smallest integer exponent consistent with this requirement . We also include a constant term , r 0 in  ( B ) to prevent unphysical fixed points with very small concentrations of free barbed ends . 2 . 2 Choice of Parameters and Linear Stability Analysis We display model parameter values in Table S1 . In choosing model parameters , we used numbers from experiments when possible . For example , and were taken from experiment . This left four undetermined rate constants . We used four constraints to calculate their values . One of the constraints was that the resulting average concentration of F - actin is ~ 1000 µM ( 6 - 8 ) . The concentration of free barbed ends within a band of width d ~ 2 µm near the leading edge is approximately 1 µM ( 1 ) . In the model , which does not distinguish distance from the leading edge , this corresponds to a barbed end concentration 1 µM × d / w = 0 . 4 µM , where w ~ 5 µm is the width of the lamellipodium . Thus , a second condition was that the average value of the barbed end concentration is ~ 0 . 4 µM . The third condition was that the system is in a region of parameter space in which relaxation to steady state occurs with underdamped oscillations . The fourth condition was that the period of the oscillations is ~ 130 sec , as observed experimentally . Finally , the diffusion coefficient of the activator was selected to match the width of the spatial correlation function in Fig . 2 B . In the following two subsections we describe how we selected parameters using the above constraints and linear stability analysis . 2 . 2 . 1 Linear Stability Analysis In this section we perform stability analysis of the model described by Eq . ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) of the main text , without the noise term : ( ) ( S2 ) ( S3 ) We used linear stability analysis to calculate the stability of the steady - state solutions . We show that parameters can be chosen such that the system is in a stable region , close to the boundary of an unstable region . The addition of a noise term in Eq . ( S1 ) then transiently perturbs the stable state of the system , generating spontaneous excitations . 4 Stability analysis is performed around a homogeneous steady state B = B * and F = F * . Fixed points B * and F * are defined by the nullclines of a homogeneous system ( i . e . no dependence on arc length distance )     , 0 , , * * * *   F B v F B u where ( ) ( ) , ( S4 ) ( ) , ( S5 ) While Eqs . ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) can have up to 3 fixed points , for parameter values near those of Table 1 , there is a single fixed point , see Fig . S6 . Defining * ) , ( ) , ( B t x B t x b   and * ) , ( ) , ( F t x F t x f   , considering sufficiently small deviations from the fixed point , and Fourier transforming x  q , we obtain from Eqs . ( S1 ) and ( S2 ) :      q q q q f b J f b   , where                F F F F s A A F F k k e F B r r q D k e B r J s s / 2 * 2 0 2 / * 2 * * ) ( 2 . ( S9 ) Here , J is the Jacobian matrix . The characteristic equation for this system is 0 det 2    J TrJ   . Solving this for λ we get two wave - number dependent eigenvalues of the form ) . ( " ) ( ' ) ( q i q q      We may use these eigenvalues to distinguish between parameter sets based on the type of behaviors they elicit within the model . We separate these into three distinct cases : ( I ) both eigenvalues real , ( II ) both eigenvalues complex with negative real part that give unstable solutions to the linearized equation , and ( III ) both eigenvalues complex with positive real part that generate stable solutions . Case I . Two real eigenvalues occur when 0 ) ( "  q  . This requires that 4 ) ( det 2 TrJ J  , or       . ) ( 2 4 1 ) ( 2 2 / * 2 / 2 * 2 0 2 / * 2 * * *                    F A A F F F F F s F A A F F k q D k e B r k e F B r r k q D k e B r s s s ( S10 ) Real  indicate stable or unstable fixed points , depending on the sign of  . Since we search for systems with excitable behavior , we do not search for parameter values in this region . Case II . Two complex eigenvalues result from parameter sets in which       . ) ( 2 4 1 ) ( 2 2 / * 2 / 2 * 2 0 2 / * 2 * * *                    F A A F F F F F s F A A F F k q D k e B r k e F B r r k q D k e B r s s s ( S11 ) The real component of both eigenvalues is negative when TrJ < 0 , or , equivalently 2 2 / * 2 * r k q D k e B F A A F F s       . ( S12 ) 5 A system fulfilling ( S10 ) and ( S11 ) will have an unstable fixed point . However , because the system of equations ( S1 ) and ( S2 ) gives bounded solutions , this indicates that the solution would evolve into a limit cycle , in which the system would produce oscillatory behavior . The period of these oscillations , estimated from the linear stability analysis is ( ) . Case III . Here , condition in Eq . ( S10 ) is fulfilled , but the real component of the eigenvalues is positive , or TrJ > 0 : 2 2 / * 2 * r k q D k e B F A A F F s       . ( S13 ) A system fulfilling Eq . ( S10 ) and ( S12 ) will have a stable solution at its fixed point . If perturbed , such a system will relax back to the stable solution in an oscillatory manner . The predicted period of the oscillations in this case is ( ) . The relaxation rate is described by the dimensionless damping ratio √ ( here > 1 is overdamped , < 1 is underdamped , and = 0 is undamped ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . Selection of Parameter Values using Linear Stability Analysis We used experimental values to estimate many of the rate constants in Table 1 . In selecting values for the four unknown rate constants r 2 and r 0 , F s , and , we required the system to satisfy the following four conditions ( i ) have a fixed point with B * ≈ 0 . 4  M , ( ii ) have a fixed point with F * ≈ 1500  M , ( iii ) the q = 0 case of the linear stability analysis lies in a type III region , but not far from a type II region such that the damping ratio is sufficiently small ≈ 0 . 25 ( to get excitable behavior with only moderate damping ) , and ( iv ) the period is approximately 130 sec , as observed experimentally . Fig . S7 A and B shows linear stability diagrams for q = 0 as a function of two model parameters , k - A and k - F , and r 0 and r 2 , respectively . Stars indicate the parameter set of Table I , for which the system belongs to Case III and has fixed point close to B * ≈ 0 . 4  F * ≈ 1500  Fig . S7 C and D display the damping ratio as a function of the same parameters as in Fig . S7 A and B , for q = 0 ( is only plotted for Case III ) . The damping ratio approaches zero close to the region of Case II . The values of and must both exceed a threshold for to become sufficiently low . The value of r 2 must exceed an r 0 - dependent threshold for to become sufficiently low . The point corresponding to Table I has ≈ 0 . 25 , as required . Fig . S7 E and F display the period  as a function of the same parameters as in Fig . S7 A and B , for q = 0 . The period of oscillation is sensitive to changes in the off - rates and , with a range  = 25 - 500 s depicted . Either of and must be sufficiently low for large  to be around 130 s . The period is less sensitive to changes in r 2 . It is within a range 130 - 220 s for the values of r 0 shown in the figure . The point corresponding to Table 1 has period  ≈ 130 s , which was observed experimentally . Finally , to select the value of the diffusion coefficient of the activator , D A , we required that the damping ratio ( q ) increases to ~ 1 at a wavenumber q ≈ 1 µm - 1 . D A = 0 . 1 µm 2 / s fulfills this and reproduces a width for the spatial correlation function similar to that in Fig . 2 B ( full - 6 width - half maximum approximately 5 . 2 µm ) . A decrease to D A = 0 . 05 µm 2 / s results in a full - width - half - maximum of 3 . 4 µm , while an increase to D A = 0 . 4 µm 2 / s results in a full - width - half - maximum of 8 . 8 µm . The effect of varying q with fixed D A is shown in in Fig . S8 . We find that increasing the value of q leads to shrinkage of the unstable region II ( see Fig . S8 A and B ) . We also find that short wavelengths are more strongly damped compared to longer wavelengths . This is evident from the increase of the damping ratio with increase in wavenumber , shown in Fig . S8 C . For the parameters in Table 1 , we find that the system switches from an underdamped regime ( Case III ) to an overdamped case ( Case I ) at a wavenumber q = 0 . 97µm - 1 ( oscillatory solutions are not possible for wavenumbers above this value of q ) . This is further evidenced by examining the dependence of the period  on q ( Fig . S8 D ) . The period is approximately constant for low values of q but diverges as q →0 . 97 µm - 1 , indicating that oscillatory solutions are not possible for smaller wavelengths . 3 . Arp2 / 3 Complex as Indicator of Activator Mechanism Here , we explore the relationship of Arp2 / 3 complex concentration with the concentration of barbed ends , B , and F - actin , F , in the model of Eqs . ( 1 ) - ( 4 ) of the main text . We specifically examine the expected behavior of the Arp2 / 3 complex concentration assuming that the Arp2 / 3 complex accumulates at a rate proportional to the activator concentration ( i . e . the Arp2 / 3 complex is downstream of the assumed autocatalytic activation ) . In such a case , we argue that the spikes of the total Arp2 / 3 complex concentration would occur in between those of barbed ends ( or activator ) and those of F - actin . We find however that the simulated time delay between peaks of Arp2 / 3 complex concentration and F - actin concentration is shorter by ~ 14 % of the oscillation period compared to the time delay measured experimentally in Fig . 4 D in the main text . This indicates that the Arp2 / 3 complex may have a more direct role in the proposed autocatalytic amplification mechanism . If we assume that the activator A recruits the Arp2 / 3 complex , we describe the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex within the actin network in a manner similar to Eq . ( 2 ) of the main text : P k B k k k P k A k t P P B P B P P               , ( S14 ) after using , see discussion preceding Eq . ( 4 ) . Here P denotes the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex associated with the actin meshwork and k P + and k P - govern the rates of branch nucleation and Arp2 / 3 complex dissociation by debranching , respectively . Existing literature provides us with estimates of the the Arp2 / 3 complex rate constants . Measurement of lifetimes of single Arp2 / 3 complex subunits within the actin network indicated k P - = 0 . 048 s - 1 ( 1 ) . The average Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated nucleation rate has been estimated to be 0 . 11µM s - 1 ( 9 ) . Assuming , as in the main text , an average barbed end concentration of approximately 0 . 4 µM , we estimate    B P B k k k /  0 . 28 s - 1 . Given the above estimates of the rate constants , we used Eq . ( S14 ) to calculate the time - depedent concentration of bound Arp2 / 3 complex concentration from the concentration of 7 barbed ends calculated by the model of Eq . ( 1 ) - ( 4 ) . We provide an example of the bound Arp2 / 3 complex concentration predicted by this model in Fig . S10 A . This figure shows that spikes of free barbed end concentration precede those of Arp2 / 3 complex , which in turn precede those of F - actin . To measure the relative timing of various concentration changes , auto - and cross - correlation functions were calculated in Fig . S10 B , similarly to the curves in Fig . 3 F and 4 D in the main text . From these calculations we find that spikes in concentration of free barbed ends precede spikes in bound Arp2 / 3 complex by an average time  B - P = 10 s . We measure an average time delay between peaks in of Arp2 / 3 complex and spikes of F - actin concentration of  P - F = 8 s . This value of  P - F is smaller by 14 % of the period compared to the time delay we would anticipate from experiment ( the time delay  P - F in Fig . 4 D is 35 s for a cell with period 180 s ; the period in the simulation was 130 s so the expected  P - F is ~ 25 s ) . The time delays of the preceding paragraph depend mainly on  P k . Consider the response of the Arp2 / 3 complex concentration to changes in the activator concentration as a perturbation to the steady state ( A * , P * ) . In Section 2 of the Supplementary Materials we showed that the system exhibits underdamped oscillatory response to sufficiently small perturbation for the parameter set from Table 1 . Thus , for small damping , the peaks in P will trail peaks in A by a phase difference φ : t i e A A t A   * * ) (   , ( S15 ) ) ( * * ) (       t i e P P t P . ( S16 ) Here ω denotes the angular frequency of the oscillations . Substituting in Eq . ( S14 ) , we find that the phase difference depends on the angular frequency and the debranching rate , but not on  P k :   P k   tan . ( S17 ) From this an estimate of the phase offset can be calculated as a function of the off - rate  P k . Simulations of the model are in agreement with the  P k - dependent phase difference in Eq . S17 , which corresponds to the time delay  B - P . Fig . S10 C displays how  B - P and  P - F vary with the Arp2 / 3 complex off - rate , k P - . We find that increases in k P - lead to decreases in  B - P . As well , we find that increases in k P - result in increases in  P - F ( the reason is that we assumed that the delay between peaks of free barbed end concentration and peaks of the F - actin concentration ,  B - F , is independent of  P k and  B - F =  B - P +  P - F ) . Fig . S10 C demonstrates that matching  P - F  0 . 2  of Fig . 4 D in the main text requires a  P k > 0 . 1 s - 1 , much faster than k P - = 0 . 048 s - 1 ( 1 ) . It is likely , therefore , that Arp2 / 3 complex does not passively follow activator dynamics , as modeled in Eq . S10 , but is itself part of the activation mechanism ( based on the assumptions of our model ) . 8 4 . Comparison to Previous Theoretical Studies We focus on actin dynamics during protrusion and retraction in the lamellipodium , unlike other models of lamellipodia that looked at steady state properties ( 10 - 15 ) . In the main text we compare our work to those of Hecht et al . ( 16 ) and Xiong et al . ( 17 ) who modeled pseudopodia formation in Dictyostelium as an excitable system . Our model has similarities to models of traveling actin waves and patches in the interior of Dictyostelium and neutrophils cells by Weiner et al . ( 18 ) , Doubrovinski and Kruse ( 19 ) , Whitelam et al . ( 20 ) and Carlsson ( 21 ) . Most of these models ascribe the propagation of the F - actin structure to the diffusion of an actin nucleation promoting factor . The activator promotes individual actin filament growth and branching events . The resulting growth of the F - actin causes delayed inhibition and removal of the activator . Our model suggests that related mechanisms to those in actin waves may also play a role in lamellipodia . Enculescu et al . ( 22 ) modeled the I and V protrusion and retraction patterns observed in PtK1 , epithelial cells and MEFs adhered to a substrate . The protrusions and retractions of the XTC cell in Fig . 1 H are reminiscent of the V patterns , though the V shapes are less pronounced as compared to ( 23 ) . We modeled this pattern as a system with underdamped linear relaxation kinetics ( Fig . 3E that corresponds to Case III in Fig . S7 , see also Fig . S9 ) . We found that systems with parameter values corresponding to undamped oscillations ( Case II in Fig . S7 ) exhibit I state patterns , i . e . coherent oscillation across the cell circumference . These V to I transitions result from different underlying biological mechanisms compared to that in ( 22 ) . Enculescu et al . attributed protrusion and retraction to different fractions of filaments attached to the cell membrane while the concentration of barbed ends was constant . Our model , by contrast attributes importance to the changing number of barbed ends . Which of the two mechanisms dominates ? The changing concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex ( see Fig . 4 B ) supports our model . Also , the mechanism in ( 22 ) suggests that the protrusion rate is approximately proportional to the polymerization rate ( a relationship we did not explicitly model ) . However , polymerization rate and protrusion may be out of phase ( see Discussion ) . We note that an extension of the model in ( 22 ) to include actin filament nucleation and capping ( 24 ) generates oscillations in both velocity and free barbed concentration . Future studies may help distinguish between the relative importance of membrane filament attachment and new barbed generation in protrusion and retraction dynamics . Wolgemuth ( 25 ) proposed a coarse - grained mechanical model of leading edge protrusion and retraction , approximating the lamellipodial actin network as a 1 - dimensional gel extending into the cell . He included stick - slip adhesion interactions with the substrate . In this model , lamellipodial growth during protrusion leads to rising stress . Contraction is triggered once a stress threshold is reached . This model does not require a self - recruiting activation process to galvanize F - actin assembly . While this model may capture the biophysics of the protrusion and retraction patterns that arise from changes in leading edge contraction ( 26 - 28 ) , in our system the rate of retrograde flow is approximately constant . We also provided evidence suggesting feedbacks involving changes in actin polymerization kinetics . Other models accounting for the actin meshwork as a contractile fluid , have been developed by Alt and Dembo ( 29 ) and Kuusela and Alt ( 30 ) . In these models protrusion results from membrane disconnection from the actin meshwork followed by membrane expansion , driven by 9 solvent flow . Protrusion ceases when the F - actin accumulates in the vicinity of the lamellipodium tip . This leads to F - actin accumulation following the initiation of protrusion events . This sequence of events could be consistent with our observations . Future experiments may be able to determine if the initial stages of protrusion are driven by actin polymerization , or by osmotic pressure , as suggested by Alt and co - workers . Models by Gov and co - workers on cell - shape changes emphasize the role of curvature - sensing membrane - bound proteins ( 31 - 34 ) . Gov and Gopinathan present a model in which membrane proteins diffuse along the membrane and locally activate actin polymerization ( 31 ) . An elastic cell membrane deforms in response to protrusive forces generated by the induced actin polymerization , and the resulting deformation may recruit more membrane proteins . This could be the origin of the autocatalytic mechanism assumed in our model . Proteins with negative spontaneous curvature generate static sinusoidal patterns along the membrane . Shlomovitz and Gov found that addition of myosin - induced contraction to the model of ( 31 ) leads to membrane protrusions that travel as waves along the membrane ( 32 ) . Thus , each point along the membrane undergoes rounds of protrusion and retraction . Here , we suggest a mechanism for that does not rely on periodic changes in myosin contraction ( the latter should cause changes in retrograde flow rate ) . We also do not rely specifically on membrane curvature . The origin of the proposed feedback mechanisms may involve other components , in addition to curvature . The role of signaling molecules in leading edge protrusion and retraction has not been considered extensively in modeling studies . Cirit et al . ( 35 ) proposed a model that included feedbacks between Rac - mediated membrane protrusion and rapid turnover of nascent adhesions , and myosin - dependent maturation of adhesions that inhibit protrusion . Simulations reproduced the extracellular matrix - dependent protrusions and retractions . Similarly to our model , protrusions and retractions were generated by a combination of feedback loops . This model focused on myosin and protrusion velocity as independent variables while here we emphasized actin dynamics . Despite these differences , the negative feedback by focal adhesions assumed in Cirit et al . ( 35 ) may correspond to our assumed actin - dependent inhibition and Rac may correspond to the activator in our model . References 1 . Miyoshi , T . , T . Tsuji , … , and N . Watanabe . 2006 . Actin - turnover dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent filament severing . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 947 - 955 . 2 . Smith , M . B . , H . Li , T . … , and D . Vavylonis . 2010 . Segmentation and tracking of cytoskeletal filaments using open active contours . Cytoskeleton . 67 : 693 – 705 . 3 . Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , G . Giannone , … , and M . P . Sheetz . 2004 . Nanometer Analysis of Cell Spreading on Matrix - Coated Surfaces Reveals Two Distinct Cell States and STEPs . Biophys . J . 86 : 1794 - 1806 . 4 . Smith , M . B . , E . Karatekin , … , and D . Vavylonis . 2011 . Interactive , Computer - Assisted Tracking of Speckle Trajectories in Fluorescence Microscopy : Application to Actin Polymerization and Membrane Fusion . Biophys . J . i 101 : 1794 - 1804 . 5 . Watanabe , N . , and T . J . Mitchison . 2002 . Single - Molecule Speckle Analysis of Actin Filament Turnover in Lamellipodia . Science . 295 : 1083 - 1086 . 10 6 . Koestler , S . A . , K . Rottner , … , and J . V . Small . 2009 . F - and G - Actin Concentrations in Lamellipodia of Moving Cells . PLoS One 4 : e4810 . 7 . Abraham , V . C . , V . Krishnamurthi , … , and F . Lanni . 1999 . The Actin - Based Nanomachine at the Leading Edge of Migrating Cells . Biophys . J . 77 : 1721 - 1732 . 8 . Schaub , S . , J . J . Meister , and A . B . Verkhovsky . 2007 . Analysis of actin filament network organization in lamellipodia by comparing experimental and simulated images . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 1491 - - 1500 . 9 . Tsuji , T . , T . Miyoshi , C… , and N . Watanabe . 2009 . An Order of Magnitude Faster AIP1 - Associated Actin Disruption than Nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 Complex in Lamellipodia . PLoS One 4 : e4921 . 10 . Mogilner , A . , and L . Edelstein - Keshet . 2002 . Regulation of Actin Dynamics in Rapidly Moving Cells : A Quantitative Analysis . Biophys . J . 83 : 1237 - 1258 . 11 . Atilgan , E . , D . Wirtz , and S . X . Sun . 2006 . Mechanics and Dynamics of Actin - Driven Thin Membrane Protrusions . Biophys . J . 90 : 65 - 76 . 12 . Schaus , T . E . , E . W . Taylor , and G . G . Borisy . 2007 . Self - organization of actin filament orientation in the dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 : 7086 - 7091 . 13 . Huber , F . , J . Käs , and B . Stuhrmann . 2008 . Growing Actin Networks Form Lamellipodium and Lamellum by Self - Assembly . Biophys . J . 95 : 5508 - 5523 . 14 . Schreiber , C . H . , M . Stewart , and T . Duke . 2010 . Simulation of cell motility that reproduces the force - velocity relationship . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 : 9141 - 9146 . 15 . Michalski , P . J . , and A . E . Carlsson . 2010 . The effects of filament aging and annealing on a model lamellipodium undergoing disassembly by severing . Phys . Biol . 7 : 026004 . 16 . Hecht , I . , D . A . Kessler , and H . Levine . 2010 . Transient localized patterns in noise - driven reaction - diffusion systems . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 : 158301 . 17 . Xiong , Y . , C . - H . Huang , … , and P . N . Devreotes . 2010 . Cells navigate with a local - excitation , global - inhibition - biased excitable network . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 : 17079 - 17086 . 18 . Weiner , O . D . , W . A . Marganski , … , and M . W . Kirschner . 2007 . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 : e221 . 19 . Doubrovinski , K . , and K . Kruse . 2008 . Cytoskeletal waves in the absence of molecular motors . Europhys . Lett . 83 : 18003 . 20 . Whitelam , S . , T . Bretschneider , and N . J . Burroughs . 2009 . Transformation from spots to waves in a model of actin pattern formation . Phys Rev Lett 102 : 198103 . 21 . Carlsson , A . E . 2010 . Dendritic actin filament nucleation causes traveling waves and patches . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 : 228102 . 22 . Enculescu , M . , M . Sabouri - Ghomi , … , and M . Falcke . 2010 . Modeling of protrusion phenotypes driven by the actin - membrane interaction . Biophys . J . 98 : 1571 - 1581 . 23 . Machacek , M . , and G . Danuser . 2006 . Morphodynamic profiling of protrusion phenotypes . Biophys . J . 90 : 1439 - 1452 . 24 . Faber , M . , M . Enculescu , and M . Falcke . 2010 . Filament capping and nucleation in actin - based motility . Euro . Phys . J . Special Topics 191 : 147 - 158 . 25 . Wolgemuth , C . W . 2005 . Lamellipodial Contractions during Crawling and Spreading . Biophys . J . 89 : 1643 - 1649 . 26 . Ji , L . , J . Lim , and G . Danuser . 2008 . Fluctuations of intracellular forces during cell protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 1393 - 1400 . 11 27 . Burnette , D . T . , S . Manley , … , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2011 . A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 371 - 382 . 28 . Giannone , G . , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , … , and M . P . Sheetz . 2004 . Periodic lamellipodial contractions correlate with rearward actin waves . Cell . 116 : 431 - 443 . 29 . Alt , W . , and M . Dembo . 1999 . Cytoplasm dynamics and cell motion : two - phase flow models . Math . Biosci . 156 : 207 - 228 . 30 . Kuusela , E . , and W . Alt . 2009 . Continuum model of cell adhesion and migration . Journal of Mathematical Biology 58 : 135 - 161 . 31 . Gov , N . S . , and A . Gopinathan . 2006 . Dynamics of Membranes Driven by Actin Polymerization . Biophys . J . 90 : 454 - 469 . 32 . Shlomovitz , R . , and N . S . Gov . 2007 . Membrane Waves Driven by Actin and Myosin . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 : 168103 . 33 . Veksler , A . , and N . S . Gov . 2007 . Phase Transitions of the Coupled Membrane - Cytoskeleton Modify Cellular Shape . Biophys . J . 93 : 3798 - 3810 . 34 . Peleg , B . , A . Disanza , … , and N . Gov . 2011 . Propagating Cell - Membrane Waves Driven by Curved Activators of Actin Polymerization . PLoS One 6 : e18635 . 35 . Cirit , M . , M . Krajcovic , … , and J . M . Haugh . 2010 . Stochastic Model of Integrin - Mediated Signaling and Adhesion Dynamics at the Leading Edges of Migrating Cells . PLoS Comput . Biol . 6 : e1000688 . 12 Table S1 . Model Parameters Parameter Physical Meaning Value F s F - actin saturation concentration 200 µM a k F + Effective actin assembly rate 66 s - 1 b k F - Effective actin disassembly rate 0 . 01s - 1 c k A - Activator deactivation rate 0 . 03 s - 1 a D A Activator diffusion coefficient 0 . 1µm 2 s - 1 d r 0 Activation rate constant 5 µM s - 1 a r 2 Nonlinear activation rate constant 60 µM - 1 s - 1 a L Membrane Length 40 µm e s 0 Noise Coefficient 0 . 02 µM µm 1 / 2 s - 1 / 2 f a Values for these four rate constants were calculated based on four conditions ( see SI Text ) : ( i ) the average F - actin concentration is between 500 - 1500µM ( 6 - 8 ) ; ( ii ) the average barbed end concentration is ~ 0 . 4  M ; ( iii ) the system is in an excitable region with underdamped oscillations ; ( iv ) the period of the oscillations is ~ 130 sec , as observed experimentally . b A value 66 subunits / s was estimated in ( 1 ) . c Value chosen close to the inverse of time required for an actin subunit to traverse the lamellipodium by retrograde flow , s 100 / retro lam  v d , where nm / s 50 retro  v is typical retrograde flow speed under our conditions , and m 5 lam   d is typical lamellipodium width . We note that single actin - GFP speckles in the lamellipodium disassemble at a rate ~ 0 . 03 s - 1 ( 5 ) . This faster rate likely includes remodeling processes within the lamellipodium that are not explicitly addressed in the present model . d Value chosen to be similar to typical diffusion coefficients of proteins in eukaryotic cell membrane , but fit specifically to match the width of the spatial correlation function in Fig . S3 B . e Length similar to arc length of membrane imaged experimentally . f Value chosen to reproduce noise - induced excitations with a rate similar to the experiments of Fig . 1 . 13 Figure S1 . Single molecule fluorescent speckle microscopy measurements of retrograde flow rate for actin speckles . ( A ) EGFP - actin speckles from Fig . 1 E ( 1 frame / s , 200 s total ) . White arrow indicates site of speckle appearance . Speckle trajectory is shown in green during speckle lifetime . The tracked position of the leading edge is shown in red . ( B ) Kymographs of EGFP - actin speckles from Fig . 1 E . Individual speckle trajectories appear linear , suggesting a constant rate of retrograde flow over time . ( C ) Measurements of retrograde flow rates of EGFP - actin speckles from the cell in Fig . 1 C , as a function of leading edge speed . We included velocity measurements for all speckles that could be tracked . The graph includes measurements of velocity for the same speckles over each frame for which velocity calculation was possible . Line of best fit , shown in red , has negative slope 0 . 016 , indicating a less than 2 % change in retrograde flow compared to leading edge speed , on average . Similar results were obtained by analysis of a 400 s movie at 0 . 5 frame / s . ( D ) Measurements of retrograde flow rates of EGFP - actin speckles , as in panel B , however speckles were selected from regions visibly protruding ( blue ) or retracting ( green ) . The separation between the data points indicates that regions of the cell whose leading edge velocity differ by 30 nm / s present retrograde flow rates which differ by less than 5 nm / s . ( E ) Retrograde flow rates of EGFP - actin speckles from the cell in Fig . 1 C , as a function of distance from the leading edge . ( F ) Average retrograde flow rates of EGFP - actin speckles from the cell in Fig . 1 C , as a function of distance from the leading edge . Error bars are standard error of the mean . 14 Figure S2 . Single molecule fluorescent speckle microscopy measurements of retrograde flow rate with EGFP - p21 ( A ) XTC cell expressing EGFP - p21 at low concentration ( 1 frame / s , 200 s total ) . ( B ) Average retrograde flow rates of EGFP - p21 speckles from the cell in panel A , as a function of leading edge speed . Error bars are standard error of the mean . ( C ) Measurements of retrograde flow rates of EGFP - p21 speckles from the cell in panel A , as a function of leading edge speed . We included velocity measurements for all speckles that could be tracked . The graph includes measurements of velocity for the same speckles over each frame for which velocity calculation was possible . Line of best fit , shown in red , has negative slope 0 . 086 , indicating a less than 10 % change in retrograde flow compared to leading edge speed , on average . Similar results were obtained by analysis of a 160 s movie at 0 . 5 frame / s . ( D ) Measurements of retrograde flow rates of EGFP - p21 speckles , as in panel C , however speckles were selected from regions visibly protruding ( blue ) or retracting ( green ) . The separation between the data points indicates that regions of the cell whose leading edge velocity differ by 30 nm / s present retrograde flow rates which differ by less than 5 nm / s . ( E ) Retrograde flow rates of EGFP - p21 speckles from the cell in panel A , as a function of distance from the leading edge . ( F ) Average retrograde flow rates of EGFP - p21 speckles from the cell in panel A , as a function of distance from the leading edge . Error bars are standard error of the mean . 15 Figure S3 . Two - Dimensional correlation functions of leading edge velocity and LifeAct - mCherry intensity ( for cell in Fig . 1G of the main text ) . ( A ) Average autocorrelation coefficients for leading edge velocity vs . arc length and time indicate periodicity and wave - like propagation . Here , arc - length is calculated by multiplying angular positions in Figs . 1 H and I by a constant cell radius . The diagonal stripe patterns reflect the wave - like propagation of protrusion and F - actin assembly suggested by Fig . 1 H and I . Because of the random direction of propagation , the direction of the tilt of the stripes depends on the dominant wave feature in the movie . In some cells , this is found to be in the opposite direction as compared to panel A while others do not show any diagonal features . ( B ) Average autocorrelation coefficients for LifeAct - mCherry intensity within the first 5µm of the leading edge , as a function of position and time . The pattern is similar to panel A . ( C ) The cross - correlation coefficients between LifeAct - mCherry intensity and leading edge velocity vs . position and time . The cross - correlation has a minimum near the origin , indicating that velocity and actin dynamics are almost exactly out of phase . Figure S4 . Two - Dimensional correlation functions of free barbed end concentration and F - actin concentration ( for simulation in Fig . 3 of the main text ) . ( A ) Average autocorrelation coefficients for free barbed end concentration from Fig . 3D in the main text , as a function of arc length and time . The diagonal striping indicates diffusive propagation of free barbed ends along the membrane . ( B ) Same as panel A , for F - actin of Fig . 3E in the main text . ( C ) Average cross - correlation coefficients between free barbed ends and F - actin vs . arc length and time . The position of the largest peak to the right of the origin indicates that the free barbed end concentration spikes precede those of F - actin . 16 Figure S5 . Two - Dimensional correlation functions of p21 - EGFP intensity and LifeAct - mCherry intensity ( for cell in Fig . 4 of the main text ) . ( A ) Average autocorrelation for p21 - EGFP intensity for the cell in Fig . 4A in the main text , as a function of time and arc length . The diagonal striping indicates diffusive propagation of the Arp2 / 3 complex along the membrane . ( B ) Average autocorrelation for LifeAct - mCherry intensity as a function of time and arc length . ( C ) Average cross - correlation for p21 - EGFP and LifeAct - mCherry as a function of time and arc length . Fig . S6 . Fixed points of the system . Phase plot of the concentration of F and B for the parameter set in Table 1 . The nullclines u ( B , F ) = 0 and v ( B , F ) = 0 are shown in red and blue , respectively . The vector field indicates a flow towards the stable fixed point where the nullclines intersect . The trajectory of the vector field indicates that perturbations from the fixed point result in a spike of A , followed by a spike in F , before returning to the stable steady - state solution . 17 Figure S7 . Stability analysis predicts characteristics of model solutions . ( A ) Results of linear stability analysis as function of and with other parameters as in Table 1 , and with wave number q = 0 . The exact point desccribed by Table 1 is indicated by the black star . Fixing all parameters and varying only one allows for switching between regions of parameter space . Case I ( black ) : non - oscillatory solutions ; Case II ( dark gray ) : unstable oscillatory solutions ; Case III ( light gray ) : stable oscillatory solutions . ( B ) Same as panel A , as function of r 2 and r 0 . ( C , D ) Damping ratio , calculated for regions of parameter space within Case III , for the parameter spaces shown in panels A , B . Regions of parameter space producing solutions for Case I or Case II are in black . The exact point desccribed by Table 1 is indicated by the white star . ( E , F ) Similar to panels C , D , but displaying period  for both Case II and Case III solutions  18 Figure S8 . Dependence of results of stability analysis on wave - number , q . ( A ) Results of linear stability analysis as function of and 2 with other parameters as in Table 1 , and with wave number q = 0 . The exact point desccribed by Table 1 is indicated by the black star . Fixing all parameters and varying only one allows for switching between regions of parameter space . Case I ( black ) : non - oscillatory solutions ; Case II ( dark gray ) : unstable oscillatory solutions ; Case III ( light gray ) : stable oscillatory solutions . ( B ) Same as panel A , showing that with increasing wavenumber q the region of instability shrinks . ( C ) Damping ratio for the parameter set in Table 1 , as a function of wavenumber , q . The oscillations are more damped for larger q values , transitioning to overdamped solutions at q ≈ 0 . 97µm - 1 ( D ) Similar to panel C , but for period of oscillations ,  . The transition to a non - oscillatory solution at q ≈ 0 . 97 µm - 1 results in a rapid divergence of the period . 19 Figure S9 . Simulated response of system to point excitation of a steady - state . We find similar tear - drop shapes to those of Hecht . et al ( 16 ) , but less ‘V’ shaped compared to Enculescu et al . ( 22 ) . ( A ) Free barbed end concentration , generated by localizing noise , s ( t ) = 0 . 1 µM s - 1 , at a single point ( at 20  m ) along the membrane for 1 . 5 s . Simulations were run with the parameters from Table S1 , except the noise term , which was zero outside the region described above . Excitations spread from the region at which noise was applied with a speed of approximately 0 . 17  m / s . This is similar to the speed of protrusion propagation in Fig . 1 H . In the presence of multiple sources of noise , in the model these excitations combine into transient wave - like patterns . ( B ) F - Actin concentration corresponding to the free barbed concentration shown in panel A . 20 Fig . S10 . Model of Arp2 / 3 complex concentration , compared to free - barbed end and F - actin concentrations . ( A ) Model - generated barbed end concentration B ( red , multiplied by a factor of 4 ) , and F - actin F ( blue ) vs time . Data generated using the parameters in Table 1 . The concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex , P , was calculated from Eq . ( S10 ) with    B P B k k k / 1 028 . 0   s and 1 048 . 0    s k P . Spikes of P ( green ) follow spikes in B , but precede spikes in F . ( B ) The correlation functions of the data from panel A , including the auto - correlation of P ( green ) , cross - correlation of P with B ( red ) , and cross - correlation of P with F ( blue ) . The relative offsets of the cross - correlation peak indicates that , on average , spikes in B precede spikes in P by  B - P = 10 s , while spikes in P precede spikes in F by  P - F = 8 s . ( C ) The fractional offsets  B - P /  and  P - F /  vary with changes in the P off - rate ,  P k , consistent with Eq . ( S13 ) . Figure S11 . Spatial dependence of Arp2 / 3 complex and LifeAct correlation with leading edge velocity . ( A ) Cross - correlation of p21 - EGFP intensity with leading edge velocity for the cell in Fig . 4 A . The p21 - EGFP intensity was measured in ribbons of width 1 µm at various distances from the leading edge of the cell . The maximum peaks of the cross - correlation functions occur at negative time delays , indicating that peaks in leading edge velocity precede peaks in Arp2 / 3 complex concentration . ( B ) The magnitude of the time delay calculated from the cross - correlation peaks in panel A increases with distance from the leading edge , suggesting that Arp2 / 3 complex at the leading edge closely follows changes in leading edge velocity , while there is a longer delay to coordination within the interior of the lamellipodium . ( C ) Cross - correlation of LifeAct - mCherry intensity with leading edge velocity for the cell in Fig . 1 G . The LifeAct - mCherry intensity was measured in ribbons of width 1 µm at various distances from the leading edge of the cell . LifeAct within 1  m of the leading edge is less anticorrelated than the LifeAct in other regions . Unlike panel A for p21 , we do not observe a clear trend for the time delay , likely because of many mechanisms that modify F - actin during a protrusion and retraction cycle . 21 Movies Movie S1 . XTC cell expressing LifeAct - EGFP at low concentrations . Cell has been on substrate for 100 min . Resolution is 80nm / pixel . Images acquired at 100ms / frame . Movie S2 . XTC cell expressing LifeAct - mCherry in Fig . 1A . Cell has been on substrate for 60min . Resolution is 160nm / pixel . Images acquired at 10s / frame . Movie S3 . XTC cell expressing LifeAct - mCherry in Fig . 1G . Cell has been on substrate for 40min . Resolution is 80nm / pixel . Images acquired at 10s / frame . Movie S4 . XTC cell expressing LifeAct - mCherry ( red ) and p21 - EGFP ( green ) in Fig . 4 . Cell has been on substrate for 180 min . Resolution is 80nm / pixel . Images acquired at 5s / frame . Movie S5 . XTC cell expressing LifeAct - mCherry ( red ) and p21 - EGFP ( green ) in Fig . 5 . Cell has been on substrate for 4 hours and is treated with fetal calf serum at frame 41 . Resolution is 80nm / pixel . Images acquired at 5s / frame .