Adam Smith on Education of All People 1 An Inquiry into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith ( 1776 ) Book V : Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth CHAPTER I : Of the Expenses of the Sovereign or Commonwealth PART 3 : Of the Expense of Public Works and Public Institutions ARTICLE III Of the Expense of the Institutions for the Instruction of People of all Ages The institutions for the instruction of people of all ages are chiefly those for religious instruction . This is a species of instruction of which the object is not so much to render the people good citizens in this world , as to prepare them for another and a better world in a life to come . The teachers of the doctrine which contains this instruction , in the same manner as other teachers , may either depend altogether for their subsistence upon the voluntary contributions of their hearers , or they may derive it from some other fund to which the law of their country may entitle them ; such as a landed estate , a tithe or land tax , an established salary or stipend . Their exertion , their zeal and industry , are likely to be much greater in the former situation than in the latter . In this respect the teachers of new religions have always had a considerable advantage in attacking those ancient and established systems of which the clergy , reposing themselves upon their benefices , had neglected to keep up the fervour of faith and devotion in the great body of the people , and having given themselves up to indolence , were become altogether incapable of making any vigorous exertion in defense even of their own establishment . The clergy of an established and well - endowed religion frequently become men of learning and elegance , who possess all the virtues of gentlemen , or which can recommend them to the esteem of gentlemen : but they are apt gradually to lose the qualities , both good and bad , which gave them authority and influence with the inferior ranks of people , and which had perhaps been the original causes of the success and establishment of their religion . Such a clergy , when attacked by a set of popular and bold , though perhaps stupid and ignorant enthusiasts , feel themselves as perfectly defenseless as the indolent , effeminate , and full - fed nations of the southern parts of Asia when they were invaded by the active , hardy , and hungry Tartars of the North . Such a clergy , upon such an emergency , have commonly no other resource than to call upon the civil magistrate to persecute , destroy or drive out their adversaries , as disturbers of the public peace . It was thus that the Roman Catholic clergy called upon the civil magistrates to persecute the Protestants , and the Church of England to persecute the Dissenters ; and that in general every religious sect , when it has once enjoyed for a century or two the security of a legal establishment , has found itself incapable of making any vigorous defense against any new sect which chose to attack its doctrine or discipline . Upon such occasions the advantage in point of learning and good writing may sometimes be on the side of the established church . But the arts of popularity , all the arts of gaining proselytes , are constantly on the side of its adversaries . In England those arts have been long neglected by the well - endowed clergy of the established church , and are at present chiefly cultivated by the Dissenters and by the Methodists . The inde pendent provisions , however , which in many places have Space for Notes ↓ Adam Smith on Education of All People 2 been made for dissenting teachers by means of voluntary subscriptions , of trust rights , and other evasions of the law , seem very much to have abated the zeal and activity of those teachers . They have many of them become very learned , ingenious , and respectable men ; but they have in general ceased to be very popular preachers . The Methodists , without half the learning of the Dissenters , are much more in vogue . In the Church of Rome , the industry and zeal of the inferior clergy are kept more alive by the powerful motive of self - interest than perhaps in any established Protestant church . The parochial clergy derive , many of them , a very considerable part of their subsistence from the voluntary oblations of the people ; a source of revenue which confession gives them many opportunities of improving . The mendicant orders derive their whole subsistence from such oblations . It is with them as with the hussars and light infantry of some armies ; no plunder , no pay . The parochial clergy are like those teachers whose reward depends partly upon their salary , and partly upon the fees or honoraries which they get from their pupils , and these must always depend more or less upon their industry and reputation . The mendicant orders are like those teachers whose subsistence depends altogether upon the industry . They are obliged , therefore , to use every art which can animate the devotion of the common people . The establishment of the two great mendicant orders of St . Dominic and St . Francis , it is observed by Machiavel , revived , in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries , the languishing faith and devotion of the Catholic Church . In Roman Catholic countries the spirit of devotion is supported altogether by the monks and by the poorer parochial clergy . The great dignitaries of the church , with all the accomplishments of gentlemen and men of the world , and sometimes with those of men of learning , are careful enough to maintain the necessary discipline over their inferiors , but seldom give themselves any trouble about the instruction of the people . " Most of the arts and professions in a state , " says by far the most illustrious philosopher and historian of the present age , " are of such a nature that , while they promote the interests of the society , they are also useful or agreeable to some individuals ; and in that case , the constant rule of the magistrate , except perhaps on the first introduction of any art , is to leave the profession to itself , and trust its encouragement to the individuals who reap the benefit of it . The artisans , finding their profits to rise by the favour of their customers , increase as much as possible their skill and industry ; and as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious tampering , the commodity is always sure to be at all times nearly proportioned to the demand . " But there are also some callings , which , though useful and even necessary in a state , bring no advantage or pleasure to any individual , and the supreme power is obliged to alter its conduct with regard to the retainers of those professions . It must give them public encouragement in order to their subsistence , and it must provide against that negligence to which they will naturally be subject , either by annexing particular honours to the profession , by establishing a long subordination of ranks and a strict dependence , or by some other expedient . The persons employed in the finances , fleets , and magistracy , are instances of this order of men . " It may naturally be thought , at first sight , that the ecclesiastics belong to the first class , and that their encouragement , as well as that of lawyers and physicians , may safely be entrusted to the liberality of individuals , who are attached to their doctrines , and who find benefit or consolation from their s piritual ministry and assistance . Their industry and vigilance will , no doubt , Adam Smith on Education of All People 3 be whetted by such an additional motive ; and their skill in the profession , as well as their address in governing the minds of the people , must receive daily increase from their increasing practice , study , and attention . " But if we consider the matter more closely , we shall find that this interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise legislator will study to prevent ; because in every religion except the true it is highly pernicious , and it has even a natural tendency to pervert the true , by infusing into it a strong mixture of superstition , folly , and delusion . Each ghostly practitioner , in order to render himself more precious and sacred in the eyes of his retainers , will inspire them with the most violent abhorrence of all other sects , and continually endeavour , by some novelty , to excite the languid devotion of his audience . No regard will be paid to truth , morals , or decency in the doctrines inculcated . Every tenet will be adopted that best suits the disorderly affections of the human frame . Customers will be drawn to each conventicle by new industry and address in practising on the passions and credulity of the populace . And in the end , the civil magistrate will find that he has dearly paid for his pretended frugality , in saving a fixed establishment for the priests ; and that in reality the most decent and advantageous composition which he can make with the spiritual guides , is to bribe their indolence by assigning stated salaries to their profession , and rendering it superfluous for them to be farther active than merely to prevent their flock from straying in quest of new pastures . And in this manner ecclesiastical establishments , though commonly they arose at first from religious views , prove in the end advantageous to the political interests of society . " But whatever may have been the good or bad effects of the independent provision of the clergy , it has , perhaps , been very seldom bestowed upon them from any view to those effects . Times of violent religious controversy have generally been times of equally violent political faction . Upon such occasions , each political party has either found it , or imagined it , for its interest to league itself with some one or other of the contending religious sects . But this could be done only by adopting , or at least by favouring , the tenets of that particular sect . The sect which had the good fortune to be leagued with the conquering party necessarily shared in the victory of its ally , by whose favour and protection it was soon enabled in some degree to silence and subdue all its adversaries . Those adversaries had generally leagued themselves with the enemies of the conquering party , and were therefore the enemies of that party . The clergy of this particular sect having thus become complete masters of the field , and their influence and authority with the great body of the people being in its highest vigour , they were powerful enough to overawe the chiefs and leaders of their own party , and to oblige the civil magistrate to respect their opinions and inclinations . Their first demand was generally that he should silence and subdue an their adversaries : and their second , that he should bestow an independent provision on themselves . As they had generally contributed a good deal to the victory , it seemed not unreasonable that they should have some share in the spoil . They were weary , besides , of humouring the people , and of depending upon their caprice for a subsistence . In making this demand , therefore , they consulted their own ease and comfort , without troubling themselves about the effect which it might have in future times upon the influence and authority of their order . The civil magistrate , who could comply with this demand only by giving them something which he would have chosen much rather to take , or to keep to himself , was seldom very forward to grant it . Necessity , however , always forced him to submit at last , though frequently not till after many delays , evasions , and affected excuses . Adam Smith on Education of All People 4 But if politics had never called in the aid of religion , had the conquering party never adopted the tenets of one sect more than those of another when it had gained the victory , it would probably have dealt equally and impartially with all the different sects , and have allowed every man to choose his own priest and his own religion as he thought proper . There would in this case , no doubt ' have been a great multitude of religious sects . Almost every different congregation might probably have made a little sect by itself , or have entertained some peculiar tenets of its own . Each teacher would no doubt have felt himself under the necessity of making the utmost exertion and of using every art both to preserve and to increase the number of his disciples . But as every other teacher would have felt himself under the same necessity , the success of no one teacher , or sect of teachers , could have been very great . The interested and active zeal of religious teachers can be dangerous and troublesome only where there is either but one sect tolerated in the society , or where the whole of a large society is divided into two or three great sects ; the teachers of each acting by concert , and under a regular discipline and subordination . But that zeal must be altogether innocent where the society is divided into two or three hundred , or perhaps into as many thousand small sects , of which no one could be considerable enough to disturb the public tranquility . The teachers of each sect , seeing themselves surrounded on all sides with more adversaries than friends , would be obliged to learn that candour and moderation which is so seldom to be found among the teachers of those great sects whose tenets , being supported by the civil magistrate , are held in veneration by almost all the inhabitants of extensive kingdoms and empires , and who therefore see nothing round them but followers , disciples , and humble admirers . The teachers of each little sect , finding themselves almost alone , would be obliged to respect those of almost every other sect , and the concessions which they would mutually find it both convenient and agreeable to make to one another , might in time probably reduce the doctrine of the greater part of them to that pure and rational religion , free from every mixture of absurdity , imposture , or fanaticism , such as wise men have in all ages of the world wished to see established ; but such as positive law has perhaps never yet established , and probably never will establish , in any country : because , with regard to religion , positive law always has been , and probably always will be , more or less influenced by popular superstition and enthusiasm . This plan of ecclesiastical government , or more properly of no ecclesiastical government , was what the sect called Independents , a sect no doubt of very wild enthusiasts , proposed to establish in England towards the end of the civil war . If it had been established , though of a very unphilosophical origin , it would probably by this time have been productive of the most philosophical good temper and moderation with regard to every sort of religious principle . It has been established in Pennsylvania , where , though the Quakers happen to be the most numerous , the law in reality favours no one sect more than another , and it is there said to have been productive of this philosophical good temper and moderation . But though this equality of treatment should not be productive of this good temper and moderation in all , or even in the greater part of the religious sects of a particular country , yet provided those sects were sufficiently numerous , and each of them consequently too small to disturb the public tranquillity , the excessive zeal of each for its particular tenets could not well be productive of any very harmful effects , but , on the contrary , of several good ones : and if the government was perfectly decided both to let them all alone , and to oblige them all to let alone one another , there is little danger that they would not of their own accord subdivide themselves fast enough so as soon to become sufficiently numerous . Adam Smith on Education of All People 5 In every civilized society , in every society where the distinction of ranks has once been completely established , there have been always two different schemes or systems of morality current at the same time ; of which the one may be called the strict or austere ; the other the liberal , or , if you will , the loose system . The former is generally admired and revered by the common people : the latter is commonly more esteemed and adopted by what are called people of fashion . The degree of disapprobation with which we ought to mark the vices of levity , the vices which are apt to arise from great prosperity , and from the excess of gaiety and good humour , seems to constitute the principal distinction between those two opposite schemes or systems . In the liberal or loose system , luxury , wanton and even disorderly mirth , the pursuit of pleasure to some degree of intemperance , the breach of chastity , at least in one of the two sexes , etc . , provided they are not accompanied with gross indecency , and do not lead to falsehood or injustice , are generally treated with a good deal of indulgence , and are easily either excused or pardoned altogether . In the austere system , on the contrary , those excesses are regarded with the utmost abhorrence and detestation . The vices of levity are always ruinous to the common people , and a single week ' s thoughtlessness and dissipation is often sufficient to undo a poor workman for ever , and to drive him through despair upon committing the most enormous crimes . The wiser and better sort of the common people , therefore , have always the utmost abhorrence and detestation of such excesses , which their experience tells them are so immediately fatal to people of their condition . The disorder and extravagance of several years , on the contrary , will not always ruin a man of fashion , and people of that rank are very apt to consider the power of indulging in some degree of excess as one of the advantages of their fortune , and the liberty of doing so without censure or reproach as one of the privileges which belong to their station . In people of their own station , therefore , they regard such excesses with but a small degree of disapprobation , and censure them either very slightly or not at all . Almost all religious sects have begun among the common people , from whom they have generally drawn their earliest as well as their most numerous proselytes . The austere system of morality has , accordingly , been adopted by those sects almost constantly , or with very few exceptions ; for there have been some . It was the system by which they could best recommend themselves to that order of people to whom they first proposed their plan of reformation upon what had been before established . Many of them , perhaps the greater part of them , have even endeavoured to gain credit by refining upon this austere system , and by carrying it to some degree of folly and extravagance ; and this excessive rigour has frequently recommended them more than anything else to the respect and veneration of the common people . A man of rank and fortune is by his station the distinguished member of a great society , who attend to every part of his conduct , and who thereby oblige him to attend to every part of it himself . His authority and consideration depend very much upon the respect which this society bears to him . He dare not do anything which would disgrace or discredit him in it , and he is obliged to a very strict observation of that species of morals , whether liberal or austere , which the general consent of this society prescribes to persons of his rank and fortune . A man of low condition , on the contrary , is far from being a distinguished member of any great society . While he remains in a country village his conduct may be attended to , and he may be obliged to attend to it himself . In this situation , and in this situation only , he may have what is called a character to lose . But as soon as he comes into a great city he is sunk in obscurity and darkness . His conduct is observed and attended to b y nobody , and he is Adam Smith on Education of All People 6 therefore very likely to neglect it himself , and to abandon himself to every sort of low profligacy and vice . He never emerges so effectually from this obscurity , his conduct never excites so much the attention of any respectable society , as by his becoming the member of a small religious sect . He from that moment acquires a degree of consideration which he never had before . All his brother sectaries are , for the credit of the sect , interested to observe his conduct , and if he gives occasion to any scandal , if he deviates very much from those austere morals which they almost always require of one another , to punish him by what is always a very severe punishment , even where no civil effects attend it , expulsion or excommunication from the sect . In little religious sects , accordingly , the morals of the common people have been almost always remarkably regular and orderly ; generally much more so than in the established church . The morals of those little sects , indeed , have frequently been rather disagreeably rigorous and unsocial . There are two very easy and effectual remedies , however , by whose joint operation the state might , without violence , correct whatever was unsocial or disagreeably rigorous in the morals of all the little sects into which the country was divided . The first of those remedies is the study of science and philosophy , which the state might render almost universal among all people of middling or more than middling rank and fortune ; not by giving salaries to teachers in order to make them negligent and idle , but by instituting some sort of probation , even in the higher and more difficult sciences , to be undergone by every person before he was permitted to exercise any liberal profession , or before he could be received as a candidate for any honourable office of trust or profit . If the state imposed upon this order of men the necessity of learning , it would have no occasion to give itself any trouble about providing them with proper teachers . They would soon find better teachers for themselves than any whom the state could provide for them . Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition ; and where all the superior ranks of people were secured from it , the inferior ranks could not be much exposed to it . The second of those remedies is the frequency and gaiety of public diversions . The state , by encouraging , that is by giving entire liberty to all those who for their own interest would attempt without scandal or indecency , to amuse and divert the people by painting , poetry , music , dancing ; by all sorts of dramatic representations and exhibitions , would easily dissipate , in the greater part of them , that melancholy and gloomy humour which is almost always the nurse of popular superstition and enthusiasm . Public diversions have always been the objects of dread and hatred to all the fanatical promoters of those popular frenzies . The gaiety and good humour which those diversions inspire were altogether inconsistent with that temper of mind which was fittest for their purpose , or which they could best work upon . Dramatic representations , besides , frequently exposing their artifices to public ridicule , and sometimes even to public execration , were upon that account , more than all other diversions , the objects of their peculiar abhorrence . In a country where the law favoured the teachers of no one religion more than those of another , it would not be necessary that any of them should have any particular or immediate dependency upon the sovereign or executive power ; or that he should have anything to do either in appointing or in dismissing them from their offices . In such a situation he would have no occasion to give himself any concern about them , further than to keep the peace among them in the same manner as amon g the rest of his subjects ; that is , to hinder them from Adam Smith on Education of All People 7 persecuting , abusing , or oppressing one another . But it is quite otherwise in countries where there is an established or governing religion . The sovereign can in this case never be secure unless he has the means of influencing in a considerable degree the greater part of the teachers of that religion . The clergy of every established church constitute a great incorporation . They can act in concert , and pursue their interest upon one plan and with one spirit , as much as if they were under the direction of one man ; and they are frequently , too , under such direction . Their interest as an incorporated body is never the same with that of the sovereign , and is sometimes directly opposite to it . Their great interest is to maintain their authority with the people ; and this authority depends upon the supposed certainty and importance of the whole doctrine which they inculcate , and upon the supposed necessity of adopting every part of it with the most implicit faith , in order to avoid eternal misery . Should the sovereign have the imprudence to appear either to deride or doubt himself of the most trifling part of their doctrine , or from humanity attempt to protect those who did either the one or the other , the punctilious honour of a clergy who have no sort of dependency upon him is immediately provoked to proscribe him as a profane person , and to employ all the terrors of religion in order to oblige the people to transfer their allegiance to some more orthodox and obedient prince . Should he oppose any of their pretensions or usurpations , the danger is equally great . The princes who have dared in this manner to rebel against the church , over and above this crime of rebellion have generally been charged , too , with the additional crime of heresy , notwithstanding their solemn protestations of their faith and humble submission to every tenet which she thought proper to prescribe to them . But the authority of religion is superior to every other authority . The fears which it suggests conquer all other fears . When the authorized teachers of religion propagate through the great body of the people doctrines subversive of the authority of the sovereign , it is by violence only , or by the force of a standing army , that he can maintain his authority . Even a standing army cannot in this case give him any lasting security ; because if the soldiers are not foreigners , which can seldom be the case , but drawn from the great body of the people , which must almost always be the case , they are likely to be soon corrupted by those very doctrines . The revolutions which the turbulence of the Greek clergy was continually occasioning at Constantinople , as long as the eastern empire subsisted ; the convulsions which , during the course of several centuries , the turbulence of the Roman clergy was continually occasioning in every part of Europe , sufficiently demonstrate how precarious and insecure must always be the situation of the sovereign who has no proper means of influencing the clergy of the established and governing religion of his country . Articles of faith , as well as all other spiritual matters , it is evident enough , are not within the proper department of a temporal sovereign , who , though he may be very well qualified for protecting , is seldom supposed to be so for instructing the people . With regard to such matters , therefore , his authority can seldom be sufficient to counterbalance the united authority of the clergy of the established church . The public tranquillity , however , and his own security , may frequently depend upon the doctrines which they may think proper to propagate concerning such matters . As he can seldom directly oppose their decision , therefore , with proper weight and authority , it is necessary that he should be able to influence it ; and be can influence it only by the fears and expectations which he may excite in the greater part of the individuals of the order . Those fears and expectations may consist in the fear of deprivation or other punishment , and in the expectation of further preferment . Adam Smith on Education of All People 8 In all Christian churches the benefices of the clergy are a sort of freeholds which they enjoy , not during pleasure , but during life or good behaviour . If they held them by a more precarious tenure , and were liable to be turned out upon every slight disobligation either of the sovereign or of his ministers , it would perhaps be impossible for them to maintain their authority with the people , who would then consider them as mercenary dependents upon the court , in the security of whose instructions they could no longer have any confidence . But should the sovereign attempt irregularly , and by violence , to deprive any number of clergymen of their freeholds , on account , perhaps , of their having propagated , with more than ordinary zeal , some factious or seditious doctrine , he would only render , by such persecution , both them and their doctrine ten times more popular , and therefore ten times more troublesome and dangerous , than they had been before . Fear is in almost all cases a wretched instrument of government , and ought in particular never to be employed against any order of men who have the smallest pretensions to independency . To attempt to terrify them serves only to irritate their bad humour , and to confirm them in an opposition which more gentle usage perhaps might easily induce them either to soften or to lay aside altogether . The violence which the French government usually employed in order to oblige all their parliaments , or sovereign courts of justice , to enregister any unpopular edict , very seldom succeeded . The means commonly employed , however , the imprisonment of all the refractory members , one would think were forcible enough . The princes of the house of Stewart sometimes employed the like means in order to influence some of the members of the Parliament of England ; and they generally found them equally intractable . The Parliament of England is now managed in another manner ; and a very small experiment which the Duke of Choiseul made about twelve years ago upon the Parliament of Paris , demonstrated sufficiently that all the parliaments of France might have been managed still more easily in the same manner . That experiment was not pursued . For though management and persuasion are always the easiest and the safest instruments of governments , as force and violence are the worst and the most dangerous , yet such , it seems , is the natural insolence of man that he almost always disdains to use the good instrument , except when he cannot or dare not use the bad one . The French government could and durst use force , and therefore disdained to use management and persuasion . But there is no order of men , it appears , I believe , from the experience of all ages , upon whom it is so dangerous , or rather so perfectly ruinous , to employ force and violence , as upon the respected clergy of any established church . The rights , the privileges , the personal liberty of every individual ecclesiastic who is upon good terms with his own order are , even in the most despotic governments , more respected than those of any other person of nearly equal rank and fortune . It is so in every gradation of despotism , from that of the gentle and mild government of Paris to that of the violent and furious government of Constantinople . But though this order of men can scarce ever be forced , they may be managed as easily as any other ; and the security of the sovereign , as well as the public tranquillity , seems to depend very much upon the means which he has of managing them ; and those means seem to consist altogether in the preferment which he has to bestow upon them . In the ancient constitution of the Christian church , the bishop of each diocese was elected by the joint votes of the clergy and of the people of the episcopal city . The people did not long retain their right of election ; and while they did retain it , they almost always acted under the influence of the clergy , who in such spiritual matters appeared to be their natural guides . The clergy , however , soon grew weary of the trouble of managing them , and found it easier to elect their own bisho ps themselves . The abbot , in the same manner , was elected by Adam Smith on Education of All People 9 the monks of the monastery , at least in the greater part of the abbacies . All the inferior ecclesiastical benefices comprehended within the diocese were collated by the bishop , who bestowed them upon such ecclesiastics as he thought proper . All church preferments were in this manner in the disposal of the church . The sovereign , though he might have some indirect influence in those elections , and though it was sometimes usual to ask both his consent to elect and his approbation of the election , yet had no direct or sufficient means of managing the clergy . The ambition of every clergyman naturally led him to pay court not so much to his sovereign as to his own order , from which only he could expect preferment . Through the greater part of Europe the Pope gradually drew to himself first the collation of almost all bishoprics and abbacies , or of what were called Consistorial benefices , and afterwards , by various machinations and pretences , of the greater part of inferior benefices comprehended within each diocese ; little more being left to the bishop than what was barely necessary to give him a decent authority with his own clergy . By this arrangement the condition of the sovereign was still worse than it had been before . The clergy of all the different countries of Europe were thus formed into a sort of spiritual army , dispersed in different quarters , indeed , but of which all the movements and operations could now be directed by one head , and conducted upon one uniform plan . The clergy of each particular country might be considered as a particular detachment of that army , or which the operations could easily be supported and seconded by all the other detachments quartered in the different countries round about . Each detachment was not only independent of the sovereign of the country in which it was quartered , and by which it was maintained , but dependent upon a foreign sovereign , who could at any time turn its arms against the sovereign of that particular country , and support them by the arms of all the other detachments . Those arms were the most formidable that can well be imagined . In the ancient state of Europe , before the establishment of arts and manufactures , the wealth of the clergy gave them the same sort of influence over the common people which that of the great barons gave them over their respective vassals , tenants , and retainers . In the great landed estates which the mistaken piety both of princes and private persons had bestowed upon the church , jurisdictions were established of the same kind with those of the great barons , and for the same reason . In those great landed estates , the clergy , or their bailiffs , could easily keep the peace without the support or assistance either of the king or of any other person ; and neither the king nor any other person could keep the peace there without the support and assistance of the clergy . The jurisdictions of the clergy , therefore , in their particular baronies or manors , were equally independent , and equally exclusive of the authority of the king ' s courts , as those of the great temporal lords . The tenants of the clergy were , like those of the great barons , almost all tenants at will , entirely dependent upon their immediate lords , and therefore liable to be called out at pleasure in order to fight in any quarrel in which the clergy might think proper to engage them . Over and above the rents of those estates , the clergy possessed in the tithes , a very large portion of the rents of all the other estates in every kingdom of Europe . The revenues arising from both those species of rents were , the greater part of them , paid in kind , in corn , wine , cattle poultry , etc . The quantity exceeded greatly what the clergy could themselves consume ; and there were neither arts nor manufactures for the produce of which they could exchange the surplus . The clergy could derive advantage from this immense surplus in no other way than by employing it , as the great barons employed the like surplus of their revenues , in the most profuse hospitality , and in the most extensive Adam Smith on Education of All People 10 charity . Both the hospitality and the charity of the ancient clergy , accordingly , are said to have been very great . They not only maintained almost the whole poor of every kingdom , but many knights and gentlemen had frequently no other means of subsistence than by travelling about from monastery to monastery , under pretence of devotion , but in reality to enjoy the hospitality of the clergy . The retainers of some particular prelates were often as numerous as those of the greatest lay - lords ; and the retainers of all the clergy taken together were , perhaps , more numerous than those of all the lay - lords . There was always much more union among the clergy than among the lay - lords . The former were under a regular discipline and subordination to the papal authority . The latter were under no regular discipline or subordination , but almost always equally jealous of one another , and of the king . Though the tenants and retainers of the clergy , therefore , had both together been less numerous than those of the great lay - lords , and their tenants were probably much less numerous , yet their union would have rendered them more formidable . The hospitality and charity of the clergy , too , not only gave them the command of a great temporal force , but increased very much the weight of their spiritual weapons . Those virtues procured them the highest respect and veneration among all the inferior ranks of people , of whom many were constantly , and almost all occasionally , fed by them . Everything belonging or related to so popular an order , its possessions , its privileges , its doctrines , necessarily appeared sacred in the eyes of the common people , and every violation of them , whether real or pretended , the highest act of sacrilegious wickedness and profaneness . In this state of things , if the sovereign frequently found it difficult to resist the confederacy of a few of the great nobility , we cannot wonder that he should find it still more so to resist the united force of the clergy of his own dominions , supported by that of the clergy of all the neighbouring dominions . In such circumstances the wonder is , not that he was sometimes obliged to yield , but that he ever was able to resist . The privilege of the clergy in those ancient times ( which to us who live in the present times appear the most absurd ) , their total exemption from the secular jurisdiction , for example , or what in England was called the benefit of the clergy , were the natural or rather the necessary consequences of this state of things . How dangerous must it have been for the sovereign to attempt to punish a clergyman for any crime whatever , if his own order were disposed to protect him , and to represent either the proof as insufficient for convicting so holy a man , or the punishment as too severe to be inflicted upon one whose person had been rendered sacred by religion ? The sovereign could , in such circumstances , do no better than leave him to be tried by the ecclesiastical courts , who , for the honour of their own order , were interested to restrain , as much as possible , every member of it from committing enormous crimes , or even from giving occasion to such gross scandal as might disgust the minds of the people . In the state in which things were through the greater part of Europe during the tenth , eleventh , twelfth , and thirteenth centuries , and for some time both before and after that period , the constitution of the Church of Rome may be considered as the most formidable combination that ever was formed against the authority and security of civil government , as well as against the liberty , reason , and happiness of mankind , which can flourish only where civil government is able to protect them . In that constitution the grossest delusions of superstition were supported in such a manner by the private interests of so great a number of people as put them out of all danger from any assault of human reason : because though human reason might perhaps have been able to unveil , even to the eyes of the common people , some of the delusions of Adam Smith on Education of All People 11 superstition , it could never have dissolved the ties of private interest . Had this constitution been attacked by no other enemies but the feeble efforts of human reason , it must have endured for ever . But that immense and well - built fabric , which all the wisdom and virtue of man could never have shaken , much less have overturned , was by the natural course of things , first weakened , and afterwards in part destroyed , and is now likely , in the course of a few centuries more , perhaps , to crumble into ruins altogether . The gradual improvements of arts , manufactures , and commerce , the same causes which destroyed the power of the great barons , destroyed in the same manner , through the greater part of Europe , the whole temporal power of the clergy . In the produce of arts , manufactures , and commerce , the clergy , like the great barons , found something for which they could exchange their rude produce , and thereby discovered the means of spending their whole revenues upon their own persons , without giving any considerable share of them to other people . Their charity became gradually less extensive , their hospitality less liberal or less profuse . Their retainers became consequently less numerous , and by degrees dwindled away altogether . The clergy too , like the great barons , wished to get a better rent from their landed estates , in order to spend it , in the same manner , upon the gratification of their own private vanity and folly . But this increase of rent could be got only by granting leases to their tenants , who thereby became in a great measure independent of them . The ties of interest which bound the inferior ranks of people to the clergy were in this manner gradually broken and dissolved . They were even broken and dissolved sooner than those which bound the same ranks of people to the great barons : because the benefices of the church being , the greater part of them , much smaller than the estates of the great barons , the possessor of each benefice was much sooner able to spend the whole of its revenue upon his own person . During the greater part of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the power of the great barons was , through the greater part of Europe , in full vigour . But the temporal power of the clergy , the absolute command which they had once had over the great body of the people , was very much decayed . The power of the church was by that time very nearly reduced through the greater part of Europe to what arose from her spiritual authority ; and even that spiritual authority was much weakened when it ceased to be supported by the charity and hospitality of the clergy . The inferior ranks of people no longer looked upon that order , as they had done before , as the comforters of their distress , and the relievers of their indigence . On the contrary , they were provoked and disgusted by the vanity , luxury , and expense of the richer clergy , who appeared to spend upon their own pleasures what had always before been regarded as the patrimony of the poor . In this situation of things , the sovereigns in the different states of Europe endeavoured to recover the influence which they had once had in the disposal of the great benefices of the church , by procuring to the deans and chapters of each diocese the restoration of their ancient right of electing the bishop , and to the monks of each abbacy that of electing the abbot . The re - establishing of this ancient order was the object of several statutes enacted in England during the course of the fourteenth century , particularly of what is called the Statute of Provisors ; and of the Pragmatic Sanction established in France in the fifteenth century . In order to render the election valid , it was necessary that the sovereign should both consent to it beforehand , and afterwards approve of the person elected ; and though the election was still supposed to be free , he had , however , all the indirect means which his situation necessarily afforded him of influencing the clergy in his own dominions . Other regulations of a similar tendency were established in other parts of Europe . But the power of the pope in the collation of the great benefices of the church seems , before the Adam Smith on Education of All People 12 Reformation , to have been nowhere so effectually and so universally restrained as in France and England . The Concordat afterwards , in the sixteenth century , gave to the kings of France the absolute right of presenting to all the great , or what are called the consistorial , benefices of the Gallican Church . Since the establishment of the Pragmatic Sanction and of the Concordat , the clergy of France have in general shown less respect to the decrees of the papal court than the clergy of any other Catholic country . In all the disputes which their sovereign has had with the pope , they have almost constantly taken party with the former . This independency of the clergy of France upon the court of Rome seems to be principally founded upon the Pragmatic Sanction and the Concordat . In the earlier periods of the monarchy , the clergy of France appear to have been as much devoted to the pope as those of any other country . When Robert , the second prince of the Capetian race , was most unjustly excommunicated by the court of Rome , his own servants , it is said , threw the victuals which came from his table to the dogs , and refused to taste anything themselves which little been polluted by the contact of a person in his situation . They were taught to do so , it may very safely be presumed , by the clergy of his own dominions . The claim of collating to the great benefices of the church , a claim in defense of which the court of Rome had frequently shaken , and sometimes overturned the thrones of some of the greatest sovereigns in Christendom , was in this manner either restrained or modified , or given up altogether , in many different parts of Europe , even before the time of the Reformation . As the clergy had now less influence over the people , so the state had more influence over the clergy . The clergy , therefore , had both less power and less inclination to disturb the state . The authority of the Church of Rome was in this state of declension when the disputes which gave birth to the Reformation began in Germany , and soon spread themselves through every part of Europe . The new doctrines were everywhere received with a high degree of popular favour . They were propagated with all that enthusiastic zeal which commonly animates the spirit of party when it attacks established authority . The teachers of those doctrines , though perhaps in other respects not more learned than many of the divines who defended the established church , seem in general to have been better acquainted with ecclesiastical history , and with the origin and progress of that system of opinions upon which the authority of the church was established , and they had thereby some advantage in almost every dispute . The austerity of their manners gave them authority with the common people , who contrasted the strict regularity of their conduct with the disorderly lives of the greater part of their own clergy . They possessed , too , in a much higher degree than their adversaries all the arts of popularity and of gaining proselytes , arts which the lofty and dignified sons of the church had long neglected as being to them in a great measure useless . The reason of the new doctrines recommended them to some , their novelty to many ; the hatred and contempt of the established clergy to a still greater number ; but the zealous , passionate , and fanatical , though frequently coarse and rustic , eloquence with which they were almost everywhere inculcated , recommended them to by far the greatest number . The success of the new doctrines was almost everywhere so great that the princes who at that time happened to be on bad terms with the court of Rome were by means of them easily enabled , in their own dominions , to overturn the church , which , having lost the respect and veneration of the inferior ranks of people , could make scarce any resistance . The court of Rome had disobliged Adam Smith on Education of All People 13 some of the smaller princes in the northern parts of Germany , whom it had probably considered as too insignificant to be worth the managing . They universally , therefore , established the Reformation in their own dominions . The tyranny of Christian II and of Troll , Archbishop of Upsala , enabled Gustavus Vasa to expel them both from Sweden . The pope favoured the tyrant and the archbishop , and Gustavus Vasa found no difficulty in establishing the Reformation in Sweden . Christian II was afterwards deposed from the throne of Denmark , where his conduct had rendered him as odious as in Sweden . The pope , however , was still disposed to favour him , and Frederick of Holstein , who had mounted the throne in his stead , revenged himself by following the example of Gustavus Vasa . The magistrates of Berne and Zurich , who had no particular quarrel with the pope , established with great ease the Reformation in their respective cantons , where just before some of the clergy had , by an imposture somewhat grosser than ordinary , rendered the whole order both odious and contemptible . In this critical situation of its affairs , the papal court was at sufficient pains to cultivate the friendship of the powerful sovereigns of France and Spain , of whom the latter was at that time Emperor of Germany . With their assistance it was enabled , though not without great difficulty and much bloodshed , either to suppress altogether or to obstruct very much the progress of the Reformation in their dominions . It was well enough inclined , too , to be complaisant to the King of England . But from the circumstances of the times , it could not be so without giving offence to a still greater sovereign , Charles V , King of Spain and Emperor of Germany . Henry VIII accordingly , though he did not embrace himself the greater part of the doctrines of the Reformation , was yet enabled , by their general prevalence , to suppress all the monasteries , and to abolish the authority of the Church of Rome in his dominions . That he should go so far , though he went no further , gave some satisfaction to the patrons of the Reformation , who having got possession of the government in the reign of his son and successor , completed without any difficulty the work which Henry VIII had begun . In some countries , as in Scotland , where the government was weak , unpopular , and not very firmly established , the Reformation was strong enough to overturn , not only the church , but the state likewise for attempting to support the church . Among the followers of the Reformation dispersed in all the different countries of Europe , there was no general tribunal which , like that of the court of Rome , or an oecumenical council , could settle all disputes among them , and with irresistible authority prescribe to all of them the precise limits of orthodoxy . When the followers of the Reformation in one country , therefore , happened to differ from their brethren in another , as they had no common judge to appeal to , the dispute could never be decided ; and many such disputes arose among them . Those concerning the government of the church , and the right of conferring ecclesiastical benefices , were perhaps the most interesting to the peace and welfare of civil society . They gave birth accordingly to the two principal parties of sects among the followers of the Reformation , the Lutheran and Calvinistic sects , the only sects among them of which the doctrine and discipline have ever yet been established by law in any part of Europe . The followers of Luther , together with what is called the Church of England , preserved more or less of the episcopal government , established subordination among the clergy , gave the sovereign the disposal of all the bishoprics and other consistorial benefices within his dominions , and thereb y rendered him the Adam Smith on Education of All People 14 real head of the church ; and without depriving the bishop of the right of collating to the smaller benefices within his diocese , they , even to those benefices , not only admitted , but favoured the right of presentation both in the sovereign and in all other lay - patrons . This system of church government was from the beginning favourable to peace and good order , and to submission to the civil sovereign . It has never , accordingly , been the occasion of any tumult or civil commotion in any country in which it has once been established . The Church of England in particular has always valued herself , with great reason , upon the unexceptionable loyalty of her principles . Under such a government the clergy naturally endeavour to recommend themselves to the sovereign , to the court , and to the nobility and gentry of the country , by whose influence they chiefly expect to obtain preferment . They pay court to those patrons sometimes , no doubt , by the vilest flattery and assentation , but frequently , too , by cultivating all those arts which best deserve , and which are therefore most likely to gain them the esteem of people of rank and fortune ; by their knowledge in all the different branches of useful and ornamental learning , by the decent liberality of their manners , by the social good humour of their conversation , and by their avowed contempt of those absurd and hypocritical austerities which fanatics inculcate and pretend to practice , in order to draw upon themselves the veneration , and upon the greater part of men of rank and fortune , who avow that they do not practice them , the abhorrence of the common people . Such a clergy , however , while they pay their court in this manner to the higher ranks of life , are very apt to neglect altogether the means of maintaining their influence and authority with the lower . They are listened to , esteemed , and respected by their superiors ; but before their inferiors they are frequently incapable of defending , effectually and to the conviction of such hearers , their own sober and moderate doctrines against the most ignorant enthusiast who chooses to attack them . The followers of Zwingli , or more properly those of Calvin , on the contrary , bestowed upon the people of each parish , whenever the church became vacant , the right of electing their own pastor , and established at the same time the most perfect equality among the clergy . The former part of this institution , as long as it remained in vigour , seems to have been productive of nothing but disorder and confusion , and to have tended equally to corrupt the morals both of the clergy and of the people . The latter part seems never to have had any effects but what were perfectly agreeable . As long as the people of each parish preserved the right of electing their own pastors , they acted almost always under the influence of the clergy , and generally of the most factious and fanatical of the order . The clergy , in order to preserve their influence in those popular elections , became , or affected to become , many of them , fanatics themselves , encouraged fanaticism among the people , and gave the preference almost always to the most fanatical candidate . So small a matter as the appointment of a parish priest occasioned almost always a violent contest , not only in one parish , but in all the neighbouring parishes , who seldom failed to take part in the quarrel . When the parish happened to be situated in a great city , it divided all the inhabitants into two parties ; and when that city happened either to constitute itself a little republic , or to be the head and capital of a little republic , as is the case with many of the considerable cities in Switzerland and Holland , every paltry dispute of this kind , over and above exasperating the animosity of all their other factions , threatened to leave behind it both a new schism in the church , and a new faction in the state . In those small republics , therefore , the magistrate very soon found it necessary , for the sake of preserving the public peace , to assume to himself the ri ght of presenting to all vacant benefices . In Scotland , the most Adam Smith on Education of All People 15 extensive country in which this Presbyterian form of church government has ever been established , the rights of patronage were in effect abolished by the act which established Presbytery in the beginning of the reign of William III . That act at least put it in the power of certain classes of people in each parish to purchase , for a very small price , the right of electing their own pastor . The constitution which this act established was allowed to subsist for about two - and - twenty years , but was abolished by the 10th of Queen Anne , c . 12 , on account of the confusions and disorders which this more popular mode of , election had almost everywhere occasioned . In so extensive a country as Scotland , however , a tumult in a remote parish was not so likely to give disturbance to government as in a smaller state . The 10th of Queen Anne restored the rights of patronage . But though in Scotland the law gives the benefice without any exception to the person presented by the patron , yet the church requires sometimes ( for she has not in this respect been very uniform in her decisions ) a certain concurrence of the people before she will confer upon the presentee what is called the cure of souls , or the ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the parish . She sometimes at least , from an affected concern for the peace of the parish , delays the settlement till this concurrence can be procured . The private tampering of some of the neighbouring clergy , sometimes to procure , but more frequently to prevent , this concurrence , and the popular arts which they cultivate in order to enable them upon such occasions to tamper more effectually , are perhaps the causes which principally keep up whatever remains of the old fanatical spirit , either in the clergy or in the people of Scotland . The equality which the Presbyterian form of church government establishes among the clergy , consists , first , in the equality of authority or ecclesiastical jurisdiction ; and , secondly , in the equality of benefice . In all Presbyterian churches the equality of authority is perfect : that of benefice is not so . The difference , however , between one benefice and another is seldom so considerable as commonly to tempt the possessor even of the small one to pay court to his patron by the vile arts of flattery and assentation in order to get a better . In all the Presbyterian churches , where the rights of patronage are thoroughly established , it is by nobler and better arts that the established clergy in general endeavour to gain the favour of their superiors ; by their learning , by the irreproachable regularity of their life , and by the faithful and diligent discharge of their duty . Their patrons even frequently complain of the independency of their spirit , which they are apt to construe into ingratitude for past favours , but which at worst , perhaps , is seldom any more than that indifference which naturally arises from the consciousness that no further favours of the kind are ever to be expected . There is scarce perhaps to be found anywhere in Europe a more learned , decent , independent , and respectable set of men than the greater part of the Presbyterian clergy of Holland , Geneva , Switzerland , and Scotland . Where the church benefices are all nearly equal , none of them can be very great , and this mediocrity of benefice , though it may no doubt be carried , too far , has , however , some very agreeable effects . Nothing but the most exemplary morals can give dignity to a man of small fortune . The vices of levity and vanity necessarily render him ridiculous , and are , besides , almost as ruinous to him as they are to the common people . In his own conduct , therefore , he is obliged to follow that system of morals which the common people respect the most . He gains their esteem and affection by that plan of life which his own interest and situation would lead him to follow . The common people look upon him with that kindness with which we naturally regard one who approaches somewhat to our own condition , but who , we think , ought to be in a higher . Their kindness naturally provokes his kindness . He becomes Adam Smith on Education of All People 16 careful to instruct them , and attentive to assist and relieve them . He does not even despise the prejudices of people who are disposed to be so favourable to him , and never treats them with those contemptuous and arrogant airs which we so often meet with in the proud dignitaries of opulent and well - endowed churches . The Presbyterian clergy , accordingly , have more influence over the minds of the common people than perhaps the clergy of any other established church . It is accordingly in Presbyterian countries only that we ever find the common people converted , without persecution , completely , and almost to a man , to the established church . In countries where church benefices are the greater part of them very moderate , a chair in a university is generally a better establishment than a church benefice . The universities have , in this case , the picking and choosing of their members from all the churchmen of the country , who , in every country , constitute by far the most numerous class of men of letters . Where church benefices , on the contrary , are many of them very considerable , the church naturally draws from the universities the greater part of their eminent men of letters , who generally find some patron who does himself honour by procuring them church preferment . In the former situation we are likely to find the universities filled with the most eminent men of letters that are to be found in the country . In the latter we are likely to find few eminent men among them , and those few among the youngest members of the society , who are likely , too , to be drained away from it before they can have acquired experience and knowledge enough to be of much use to it . It is observed by Mr . de Voltaire , that Father Porrie , a Jesuit of no great eminence in the republic of letters , was the only professor they had ever had in France whose works were worth the reading . In a country which has produced so many eminent men of letters , it must appear somewhat singular that scarce one of them should have been a professor in a university . The famous Gassendi was , in the beginning of his life , a professor in the University of Aix . Upon the first dawning of his genius , it was represented to him that by going into the church he could easily find a much more quiet and comfortable subsistence , as well as a better situation for pursuing his studies ; and he immediately followed the advice . The observation of Mr . de Voltaire may be applied , I believe , not only to France , but to all other Roman Catholic countries . We very rarely find , in any of them , an eminent man of letters who is a professor in a university , except , perhaps , in the professions of law and physic ; professions from which the church is not so likely to draw them . After the Church of Rome , that of England is by far the richest and best endowed church in Christendom . In England , accordingly , the church is continually draining the universities of all their best and ablest members ; and an old college tutor , who is known and distinguished in Europe as an eminent man of letters , is as rarely to be found there as in any Roman Catholic country . In Geneva , on the contrary , in the Protestant cantons of Switzerland , in the Protestant countries of Germany , in Holland , in Scotland , in Sweden , and Denmark , the most eminent men of letters whom those countries have produced , have , not all indeed , but the far greater part of them , been professors in universities . In those countries the universities are continually draining the church of all its most eminent men of letters . It may , perhaps , be worth while to remark that , if we expect the poets , a few orators , and a few historians , the far greater part of the other eminent men of letters , both of Greece and Rome , appear to have been either public or private teachers ; generally either of philosophy or of rhetoric . This remark will be found to hold true from the days of Lysias and Isocrates , of Plato and Aristotle , down to those of Plutarch and Epictetus , of Suetonius and Quintilian . To im pose upon any man the necessity of teaching , year after year , any particular Adam Smith on Education of All People 17 branch of science , seems , in reality , to be the most effectual method for rendering him completely master of it himself . By being obliged to go every year over the same ground , if he is good for anything , he necessarily becomes , in a few years , well acquainted with every part of it : and if upon any particular point he should form too hasty an opinion one year , when he comes in the course of his lectures to reconsider the same subject the year thereafter , he is very likely to correct it . As to be a teacher of science is certainly the natural employment of a mere man of letters , so is it likewise , perhaps , the education which is most likely to render him a man of solid learning and knowledge . The mediocity of church benefices naturally tends to draw the greater part of men of letters , in the country where it takes place , to the employment in which they can be the most useful to the public , and , at the same time , to give them the best education , perhaps , they are capable of receiving . It tends to render their learning both as solid as possible , and as useful as possible . The revenue of every established church , such parts of it excepted as may arise from particular lands or manors , is a branch , it ought to be observed , of the general revenue of the state which is thus diverted to a purpose very different from the defense of the state . The tithe , for example , is a real land - tax , which puts it out of the power of the proprietors of land to contribute so largely towards the defense of the state as they otherwise might be able to do . The rent of land , however , is , according to some , the sole fund , and , according to others , the principal fund , from which , in all great monarchies , the exigencies of the state must be ultimately supplied . The more of this fund that is given to the church , the less , it is evident , can be spared to the state . It may be laid down as a certain maxim that , all other things being supposed equal , the richer the church , the poorer must necessarily be , either the sovereign on the one hand , or the people on the other ; and , in all cases , the less able must the state be to defend itself . In several Protestant countries , particularly in all the Protestant cantons of Switzerland , the revenue which anciently belonged to the Roman Catholic Church , the tithes and church lands , has been found a fund sufficient , not only to afford competent salaries to the established clergy , but to defray , with little or no addition , all the other expenses of the state . The magistrates of the powerful canton of Berne , in particular , have accumulated out of the savings from this fund a very large sum , supposed to amount to several millions , part of which is deposited in a public treasure , and part is placed at interest in what are called the public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe ; chiefly in those of France and Great Britain . What may be the amount of the whole expense which the church , either of Berne , or of any other Protestant canton , costs the state , I do not pretend to know . By a very exact account it appears that , in 1755 , the whole revenue of the clergy of the Church of Scotland , including their glebe or church lands , and the rent of their manses or dwelling - houses , estimated according to a reasonable valuation , amounted only to £68 , 514 1s . 5 1 / 12d . This very moderate revenue affords a decent subsistence to nine hundred and forty - four ministers . The whole expense of the church , including what is occasionally laid out for the building and reparation of churches , and of the manses of ministers , cannot well be supposed to exceed eighty or eighty - five thousand pounds a year . The most opulent church in Christendom does not maintain better the uniformity of faith , the fervour of devotion , the spirit of order , regularity , and austere morals in the great body of the people , than this very poorly endowed Church of Scotland . All the good effects , both civil and religious , which an established church can be supposed to produce , are produced by it as completely as by any other . The greater part of the Protestant churches of Switzerland , which in general are not better endowed than the Church of Scotland , produce those effects in a still higher de gree . In the greater part of the Protestant cantons there is not a single person Adam Smith on Education of All People 18 to be found who does not profess himself to be of the established church . If he professes himself to be of any other , indeed , the law obliges him to leave the canton . But so severe , or rather indeed so oppressive a law , could never have been executed in such free countries had not the diligence of the clergy beforehand converted to the established church the whole body of the people , with the exception of , perhaps , a few individuals only . In some parts of Switzerland , accordingly , where , from the accidental union of a Protestant and Roman Catholic country , the conversion has not been so complete , both religions are not only tolerated but established by law . The proper performance of every service seems to require that its pay or recompense should be , as exactly as possible , proportioned to the nature of the service . If any service is very much underpaid , it is very apt to suffer by the meanness and incapacity of the greater part of those who are employed in it . If it is very much overpaid , it is apt to suffer , perhaps , still more by their negligence and idleness . A man of a large revenue , whatever may be his profession , thinks he ought to live like other men of large revenues , and to spend a great part of his time in festivity , in vanity , and in dissipation . But in a clergyman this train of life not only consumes the time which ought to be employed in the duties of his function , but in the eyes of the common people destroys almost entirely that sanctity of character which can alone enable him to perform those duties with proper weight and authority .