Cyborg Assemblages : How autistic adults construct sociotechnical networks to support cognitive function How autistic adults construct sociotechnical networks to support cognitive function Rua M . Williams Purdue University , Computer Graphics Technology rmwilliams @ purdue . edu ABSTRACT Autism has become a popular context for accessible technology researchers , yet a majority of HCI projects for autism and ADHD do not engage in participatory methods or otherwise involve dis - abled stakeholders in the project and research design . Prior inquiry has identifed executive function as a common difculty for which technologies may provide novel benefts . In this study , we explore how autistic adults currently use technologies , broadly defned , to augment executive function and support themselves in day - to - day tasks . We collect qualitative data from narratives elicited during informal asynchronous interviews to conduct a digital eth - nomethodology . Following from principles of Design Justice , crip technoscience , and cyborg assemblage theory , we investigate how autistic adults articulate their own sociotechnical environments into technologically mediated assemblages of executive function and interpersonal webs of care . These patterns of sociotechnical formation inform future work in research and design for tools that can mediate executive function for all users . CCS CONCEPTS • Social and professional topics → User characteristics ; People with disabilities ; • Human - centered computing → Collaborative and social computing ; Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing ; Ubiquitous and mobile computing ; Empirical studies in ubiquitous and mobile computing . KEYWORDS digital ethnomethodology , disability in adulthood , executive func - tion , contextual inquiry , critical disability studies ACM Reference Format : Rua M . Williams and Chorong Park . 2023 . Cyborg Assemblages : How autis - tic adults construct sociotechnical networks to support cognitive function : How autistic adults construct sociotechnical networks to support cognitive function . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581556 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581556 Chorong Park Purdue University , Computer Graphics Technology park1187 @ purdue . edu 1 INTRODUCTION : CYBORG ASSEMBLAGES Ideas about humans as embedded within extended networks of human and computer agents inspired initial inquiry into HCI as a discipline working toward a human - machine symbiotic future [ 26 ] . While the imaginary of human - machine symbiosis may be thought of as a utopic or at least a romantic one , there are already people living today in a state of technological symbiosis . Disabled people may use adaptive or assistive technology to augment , sustain , or enable their very mobility . Others rely on computer systems to support their cognition or allow access to information in alternate sensorial modes . Some may even rely on medical devices to supply their oxygen , compress their lungs , pump their blood , or supply essential chemicals . Despite the intimacy of these human - machine relationships , the design of these systems may not always center the needs and desires of disabled people themselves . As noted in prior work , a majority of HCI projects for autism and ADHD do not engage in participatory methods or otherwise involve disabled stakeholders in the project and research design [ 51 , 54 ] . Autism has become a popular context for accessible technology re - searchers , due in part to rising rates of diagnosis and rising sources of funding support for this work [ 68 ] . In a recent survey of accessi - ble technology literature in SIGCHI and SIGACCESS , authors noted that while direct participation of disabled stakeholders is common in accessibility research , this trend is reversed in research about people with cognitive , intellectual , and developmental disabilities [ 27 ] . Technology design “for” autistic users has thus been a site of epistemic injustice [ 70 ] , wherein researchers and designers have tended to defer to the interests of parents , therapists , and teachers over the desires of autistic technology users themselves [ 69 ] . Referring to the 10 principles of Design Justice from the Design Justice Network [ 17 ] , in this study , we prioritize inquiry that “cen - ter ( s ) the voices of those who are directly impacted” [ 17 : Principle 2 ] . In our analysis , we treat autistic participant testimony as “expert” testimony of their own lived experience [ 17 : Principle 6 ] . Most im - portantly , the purpose of this study is to “look for what is already working” [ 17 : Principle 10 ] to better inform future design in this space . Building from prior engagement between HCI , feminist theory , and science and technology studies , we use the concept of “Cyborg Assemblages” as an analytical frame from which we observe autistic testimony about technology in their day - to - day lives . By “cyborg assemblages” we mean that we recognize Cyborgs as “those of us whose life and cognition are reliant on and co - constituted by the existence of an interface between fesh and technology” [ 66 : 3 ] , and that this co - constitution relies on an understanding that people are always already enmeshed within complex sociotechnical networks CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park that contextualize and “assemble” their experiences and actions [ 37 ] . This articulation of body and technology has been described by STS scholars Hamraie and Fritch as “crip technoscience” , an episte - mological means of understanding and reimagining sociotechnical systems and relations based on the experiences and expertise of disabled people in ever - day life [ 21 ] . Although autism is primar - ily understood as a neurological and thus “brain - based” condition , there are motor and physiological symptoms that , if not a result of autism per se , are common among autistic people who share a plethora of co - occurring conditions [ 16 ] . Anyway , we reject binary divisions of mind and body which would dictate that one could not be a cyborg in mind only . As the Cyborg Jillian Weise notes , “Cyborg ontology is the brain - meld between self and computerized leg” [ 59 ] . It’s not the leg itself , it’s how cognition integrates it . Most autistic people do not have computerized legs , but they do rely on complex networks of other technologies – mobile , ubiquitous , networked , mechanical , medicinal , and even social – to navigate this world . In this study , we investigate how autistic adults articulate their own sociotechnical environments into digitally enhanced and me - diated assemblages of executive function and interpersonal webs of care . When reviewing the data , we examined how participants managed difculties in daily life with various digital and analog technologies , and through these sociotechnical assemblages , pro - duced unique strategies for coping with and managing daily tasks . We noted four domains of strategic implementation : mental , em - bodied , environmental , and social . In Section 2 , we provide a background for executive function as a topic of inquiry and dis - cuss other HCI work in interventions and supports for executive function in the autistic and ADHD population . In Section 3 , we outline our method for collecting testimonies , analyzing data , and generating insights into thematic similarities between participants in strategy development , maintenance , and care . In Section 4 , we describe characteristics of our participants and common features of the data . In Section 5 , we produce three vignettes of three diferent personas generated from our participants testimony to illustrate common experiences among our participants . Here we also describe how rarer strategies coincided with an openness to social networks of reciprocal support and an awareness of how societal ableism contributes to their daily struggles . Each vignette in Section 5 is concluded with design implications for future executive function support technology . We recognize and agree with the critique of “design implications” by Dourish as potentially prescriptive and limiting , often employed out of a sense of justifying ethnographic work in a traditionally quantitative discipline [ 18 ] . However , in this particular context , we feel that readers may lack the personal con - nection to neurodivergent community and therefore could beneft from more explicitly expressed design practice implications to guide them in their future relationships to neurodivergent participants . 2 BACKGROUND : EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND HCI Scholarship in Human - Computer Interaction has historically re - lied on insights from cognitive psychology for organizing theories and experimental designs . Distributed Cognition , Situated Action , and Social Activity theories are central to how HCI researchers understand our complex sociotechnical landscape [ 46 ] . HCI has a traditional interest in human factors of efciency and error , partic - ularly in military , medical , industrial , and corporate contexts . In clinical psychology , the cognitive processes that govern task plan - ning , initiation , continuation , and completion are called “Executive Functions [ 31 ] ” . In technology research , when the context is the “average” user in the action of labor , executive functions are often regarded as human factors for informing design . However , when the context is a disabled user , executive functions become a problem for intervention and rehabilitation , rather than a design constraint . 2 . 1 Executive Function and Neurodevelopmental Disability Executive function ( EF ) difculties are common in autistic people and people with ADHD [ 31 ] . EF difculties may also manifest as communication and socialization difculties [ 20 ] . Prior studies have found distinct correlations between EF difculties and difculties with adaptive function ( AF , or daily living skills ) [ 20 , 38 , 63 ] . As a group , autistic girls tend to have lower EF scores by parent - report , and consequent lower AF scores [ 38 , 63 ] . Autistic girls scoring above average on measures of IQ were also less likely to meet crite - ria on the ADI - R autism diagnosis measure despite still showing impaired adaptive functioning via parent report [ 38 ] . These fndings may point to biases in diagnostic measures that prevent girls from receiving diagnosis despite signifcant impacts to daily living . It is also possible that the perception of adaptive functioning defcits in autistic girls is unduly infuenced by social norms which expect girls to perform better hygiene and domestic skills . The executive function issues that impact adaptive function may not dispropor - tionately afect girls per se —yet bias in diagnosis still prevents girls from receiving adequate understanding and support . Regardless of diferences in trait expression among genders , these correlations suggest technologies that support domains of executive function may also improve adaptive functioning and social communication outcomes . 2 . 2 HCI and Executive Dysfunction Interventions While most HCI technology research “for” autism tends to be related to social skills training [ 68 ] , autistic people themselves report prob - lems with executive function , attention , and emotional regulation , as primary concerns [ 34 ] . Several prior studies have investigated technological tools and interventions to support and improve EF skills and outcomes in autistic children and children with ADHD . Hashemian and Gotsis [ 22 ] present a game environment controlled by the user’s physical body that is intended to support mastery and generalization of executive function skills such as impulse in - hibition and sustained attention . The study targets children with ADHD , who have been shown to beneft from physical activity [ 39 ] . Further study is needed to assess the generalizability of executive function priming in VR to real - world contexts [ 64 , 65 ] . As noted in Section 2 . 1 , executive function may impact social ex - periences of autistic people . Kenworthy et al . [ 23 ] compared social skills interventions to a specialized executive function intervention , Unstuck and On Target ( UOT ) , and found that while both groups Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany of autistic children showed improvement in fexibility and transi - tion tolerance , the UOT intervention group had signifcantly larger improvements across school and home contexts . Social skills inter - ventions prioritize normalization of autistic children through script - ing and drilling social pretense expectations , while UOT provides metacognitive strategies to navigate executive function difculties which may ameliorate social isolation . Li et al . [ 25 ] developed a game which combined social and non - social executive function tasks . They found behavioral consistencies between autistic participants that difered from non - autistic partic - ipants . These fndings suggest that performance on EF tasks may serve as a means of detecting and designing for autistic play char - acteristics and tracking skill development between the social and non - social domains . Other projects more directly leveraged the user’s social environ - ment to augment their executive function capacity . For example , the MyCalandar app [ 1 ] was created to serve as a communication aid between autistic children and their teachers and families . Im - ages taken throughout the day provided context to adults between settings that helped them engage minimally speaking children in conversation about past and future events . Similar applications may support emotional regulation and executive function by scafolding the autistic person’s awareness of shifting time and space . Similarly , Weisberg et al . [ 62 ] present a user - centered design session informing guidelines for developing executive function aids for ADHD children . TangiPlan is a set of physical , tangible objects with the fexibility to represent daily tasks and support schedule internalization , integration , and rearrangement . In a 2 - case study evaluation of the TangiPlan , Zuckerman et al . [ 72 ] suggest that tangible aids may improve outcomes of technological interventions for task management . A future study should compare outcomes between tangible and digital - only apps . Zimmerman et al . [ 71 ] found lower Executive Function scores correlated to higher anxiety , while higher EF scores correlated to lower self - concept and self - esteem . Interventions experienced in childhood which focused on EF and / or adaptive skills may have caused the internalization of poor self - concept as they learned these skills with the implication that they were inherently defcient . Other studies suggest that social camoufaging , often reinforced in intervention , also contribute to depression and suicidality [ 7 , 14 , 15 ] . These fndings stress the importance of delivering EF skills as metacognitive strategies that can help everyone , rather than as targeted interventions that may inadvertently imply an inherent defcit to participants . Most of the HCI interventions for executive function described above difer from the majority of social skills interventions in HCI in that they provide conceptual or physical metacognitive scafolds for tasks while also integrating the system into the existing social and material environment . There is also an emerging body of literature lead by neurodivergent HCI researchers that presents alternative foundations for inquiry and participant relation . 2 . 3 Neurodivergent HCI Large collaborations of neurodivergent and otherwise disabled scholars have organized workshops and other narratological projects in an attempt to galvanize reform in HCI’s relationship to disabled people [ 53 , 58 , 66 , 70 ] . Neurodivergent HCI researchers have been critiquing and reforming the discipline’s approach to neurodivergence for the past several years . In “Perseverations of the Academy” , Autistic scholar Rua M . Williams identifes trends in autism - HCI work which focus on social skills training and the “normaliz [ ation ] of autistic diference” [ 68 ] . Similarly , in an analysis of ADHD - HCI research , neurodivergent scholars identify the feld’s fxation on detection , classifcation , and correction of neurodiver - gence as reliant on narratives of disabled children as burdens to their families and society [ 54 ] . Katta Spiel has led a series of publications examining the nature of participation in autism - HCI research , noting a distinct lack of agency and authority provided to disabled children in participation [ 51 ] , while also attending to the complexities of participatory design with children [ 50 ] , and providing clear actions for refecting on participatory practices [ 55 ] . Kathryn E . Ringland and colleagues have investigated how cooperative applications and video games aford alternative forms of interaction that undermine assumptions about autistic sociality [ 8 , 41 , 42 ] . Spiel and Gerling additionally note that despite the empowering possibilities of virtual play spaces , video games in HCI research for disabled children are leveraged toward correction of divergent traits [ 52 ] rather than the spaces of afnity and self - expression identifed by Ringland [ 40 ] . In this study , we perform a series of digital ethnomethodological explorations into autistic adult technology use for self - mediation of executive function in day - to - day contexts . We seek to understand and detail how autistic adults are currently leveraging ubiquitous technologies using an autism - as - culture lens as a prerequisite to propose designs for technological tools and strategies for EF me - diation . Cultural Anthropologists have proposed that disability , including autism , is a culturally mediated phenomenon , productive of identity , afnity , and political coalition within and between other vectors of marginalization [ 2 ] . In our results , we intentionally de - ploy neurodivergent rhetorical forms , such as echoing , cascading , and abrupt transitions [ 43 ] . We do this both as an expression of our own neurodivergence and as a sign of respect to our participants . In leaving their testimony unaltered and presented bare , we allow them to speak directly to the readers for which their lives are often pre - processed through a clinical flter . This work attempts to bridge ethnomethodology as understanding and ethnomethodology as de - sign praxis to produce new modes of inquiry in assistive technology research [ 28 ] . 3 METHODOLOGICAL ASSEMBLAGES We combine theoretical and methodological orientations from Re - fexive HCI [ 13 , 36 ] , Feminist HCI [ 5 , 45 ] , and Digital Anthropology in HCI [ 44 ] to guide our research protocol and data analysis in producing a meaningful impression of the particular sociotechnical constructions of autistic adults . 3 . 1 Collection We conducted our study in 4 rounds , and although our research aims remained consistent , there were slightly diferent conditions for recruitment and interview protocol in each . In all rounds , the in - formal interview questions were delivered and answered in an asyn - chronous text - based format to support the most - often preferred CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park communication format of our autistic participant group [ 30 , 47 , 61 ] . The frst three rounds of our study adapted the Delphi - style sur - vey to elicit narratives from self - identifed autistic adults about their technology use in relation to self - mediation of executive func - tion . Delphi - style surveys contain a limited number of open - ended questions approximating an informal interview . Because the Delphi - method allows participants to answer in their own time and does not require participants to be present in the same place at the same time , it is particularly well suited to qualitative data collection with autistic adults who are a highly distributed sub - population [ 19 ] . Un - like the traditional Delphi which uses the same participant group for multiple rounds of questions , however , we used each round to refne the questions for a future sample of participants . This allowed us to make contextual changes to the phrasing of interview questions which elicited richer responses while still being able to analyze responses between rounds . In Round 1 , our interview questions were informed by litera - ture on executive function impacts on daily living [ 20 , 31 , 38 , 63 ] , as well as autistic - authored content on independent living strate - gies [ 3 , 33 , 56 ] . These questions elicit narratives of self - constructed means of coping with executive function difculties ( refer to Ap - pendix A . 1 ) . In Round 2 , we switched the context of questions from daily living tasks to specifc kinds of technologies ( refer to Appen - dix A . 2 ) . In analysis of testimonies between rounds , we found that while there were noted similarities between the described strategies , participants in Round 2 were more likely to be distracted by ftting their testimony into the specifc technological contexts , while in round 1 they were better able to describe their strategies as depen - dent upon , but not controlled by , specifc technological constraints . This led us to return to questions contextualized by specifc do - mains of daily living and adaptive functioning in Round 3 , with additional questions based on similar testimonies between prior rounds ( refer to Appendix A . 3 ) . These same questions were used in Round 4 , where the mode of asynchronous interview was altered from large survey text entry to encrypted chat , allowing for a back and forth between participant and researcher , clarifying questions , and deeper exploration of similarities to prior participants . A full list of questions per round can be found in Appendix A . All participants ( N = 27 ) were adults living in the United States or Canada . All participants self - identifed as autistic , though some ( N = 12 ) voluntarily supplied evidence of formal diagnosis . Partici - pants in Round 1 ( N = 5 ) and 2 ( N = 5 ) were recruited from an online support group for autistic adults with permission of the moder - ator team . Participants in Round 3 ( N = 5 ) were recruited from a student support group hosted by the disability resource center of the University of Florida , and Santa Fe State College . Participants in Round 4 ( N = 12 ) were recruited from the peripheral social net - work of the Principal Investigator . This was a deliberate choice to employ “Friendship as Method” to elicit more detailed intimate participant refections while maintaining an ethic of care , respect , and mutuality [ 60 ] . Participants from all rounds were compensated with 25 USD via a Visa , Amazon , or Target gift card . Research pro - tocol for Rounds 1 - 3 were reviewed by University of Florida IRB # 201900816 and funded by department discretionary funds . Round 4 was reviewed by Purdue University IRB # 2020 - 1778 and funded by PI discretionary funds . 3 . 2 Analysis The clinical paradigm for autism research would have us scrutinize our participant’s testimony , looking for pathological responses to environmental and social stimuli . We reject this frame and focus instead on the premise that autistic people are situated within com - plex , pervasive , and ubiquitous sociotechnical networks that may not be designed to aford the kinds of experiences they desire . This premise compels us to think of our participant testimony as refec - tions of situated actions in which their behavior is both enabled and constrained by the environmental , cultural , and social afordances in their present space [ 57 ] . We conducted our analysis attending to Braun and Clarke’s body of work on Refexive Thematic Analysis ( RTA ) [ 9 – 11 ] . We guided ourselves according to Braun and Clarke’s “six phases for analysis” [ 12 ] : ( 1 ) familiarizing yourself with the dataset , ( 2 ) coding – by features , iteratively , ( 3 ) generating initial themes – identify broader patterns of meaning from intersections of codes , ( 4 ) developing and reviewing themes – iteratively identi - fying broader patterns of meaning into an illustrative and cohesive story , ( 5 ) refning , defning , and naming themes – defning themes by scope , focus , and story , ( 6 ) writing up – contextualizing analysis in relevant literature . Braun & Clarke’s approach to thematic anal - ysis has been popular in HCI research [ 13 ] for its fexibility and expansive potential for capturing rich insights – not only about the quality of user experience , but about the very nature and context of experiences with technology . Martin and Sommerville assert that ethnomethodological inquiry can produce generalizable design insights through the researcher’s refexive identifcation of patterns of cooperative interaction in par - ticipant testimonies [ 29 ] . This Cooperative Interactions Framework ( CIF ) organizes ethnomethodological data into vignettes describing the “sociotechnical confguration ( s ) of people and artifacts in a par - ticular setting” and the “social practices by which work is achieved given that confguration” [ 29 : 69 ] . In this study , “work” encapsu - lates tasks of daily living , including tasks of employment , education , so - called “adulting” , and personal ( physiological and emotional ) regulation . Martin and Sommerville’s framework leverages the fol - lowing topics for framing analysis of ethnomethodological data : ( 1 ) sequentiality and temporality , ( 2 ) Working division of labor ( egological - alteriological principles ) , ( 3 ) Plans and procedures ( rep - resentations ) , ( 4 ) Routines , rhythms , patterns ( orderliness in self - organizing systems ) , ( 5 ) ( Distributed ) coordination , ( 6 ) Awareness of work , and ( 7 ) Ecology and afordances [ 29 : 69 ] . Again , although Martin and Sommerville’s framework was originally intended for the workplace context , here we are extending it to the daily - life context of autistic adults . As the data will show , this application of the CIF works despite this seemingly “individual” context precisely because our participants demonstrate a conscious and agential as - semblage of digital and human collaborators to organize tasks of daily living . We coded interview texts in iterative rounds , integrating pro - cedures from RTA and CIF ( refer to Figure 1 ) . We familiarized ourselves with the data , beginning from basic concepts related to domains of struggle and technologies for management . In our next iteration , we began to identify larger patterns of alteriological and sociotechnical organization within and between subjects . Next , the researchers noted similarities between participant testimony of Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 1 : Methodological integration of RTA and CIF . using technology to self - mediate executive dysfunction and iden - tifed these similarities as various metacognitive strategies . By re - examining these strategies in the context of externalized and distributed cognition , and comparing results within and between participants , we generated insights into the unique motivations , purposes , and functions of autistic metacogni - tive strategy development that have implications for how technologies are rejected or accepted within an individual’s sociotechnical assemblage . We aggregated , or assembled , these insights into coherent vignettes that encapsulate diferent patterns of organization based on participant’s orientation to disability com - munity . These vignettes are built from the impressionist digital ethnographic form for HCI as described by Rode [ 44 ] . From these vignettes , paired with exemplar quotations of testimony , we discuss implications for designers and researchers working in this space . 4 RESULTS In this section , we provide a descriptive overview of the partici - pants’ demographic , nominal , and thematic data . First , we cover demographic information of the participants . Second , we outline the kinds of technologies explicitly named by participants , includ - ing a total count of participants mentioning those technologies per round . Third , we identify frequently mentioned areas of struggle , noting whether that area is explicitly mentioned in the questions themselves , including a total count of participants referring to this struggle per round . Fourth , we identify common phrases or frames used by participants to describe their own strategies for mediat - ing executive function . Next , although the questions did not refer to executive function by - name , several participants mentioned it themselves , and so we provide participant descriptions of executive function as a baseline for how the participants conceived of this collection of cognitive traits . Finally , we provide a diagram and justifcation of the relationships between the derived themes across the mental , environmental , embodied , and social domains . 4 . 1 Demographics Demographic information was self - report . Four of the participants in Rounds 1 - 3 chose not to report any information . The demo - graphic survey from Rounds 1 - 3 was aggregated and cannot be mapped directly to any specifc round . A majority of the partici - pants identifed as white , with 10 / 12 from Round 4 and 8 / 11 from Rounds 1 - 3 . This racial bias is refective of the bias in access to diagnosis for people of color [ 4 ] . There were few male participants , with only 1 man participating in Round 4 and 2 in rounds 1 - 3 . There were a total of 6 women , 4 from Rounds 1 - 3 and 2 from Round 4 . Most participants identifed as Non - binary , agender , or genderfuid . This bias may be a result of both the social networks from which participants were recruited and the overall higher rates of transgen - der identity among autistic people [ 24 ] . All rounds had a diverse range of education , with most participants having received or were currently working toward their bachelor’s degree . Average age of participants in Round 4 was 30 . 41 years . Average age in Rounds 1 - 3 trended slightly lower , at 26 . 18 , due to Round 3’s recruitment from a disability services support group on campus . Full demographic tables can be found in Appendix B ( Table 1 Race , Table 2 Gender , Table 3 Income , Table 4 Age ) . 4 . 2 Response Length Because participants were able to respond to questions on their own time , in open text felds , average word counts are similar in Rounds 1 - 3 . In Round 2 , when the context of questions was technology focused , the average word count is roughly 400 words fewer than in Round 1 . In Round 4 , the average word count is much higher at 3456 . 41 words . This is both because there are three more questions than in Round 1 and because in the Round 4 protocol , the PI was able to ask follow - up questions to elicit deeper responses . A full table of these word count stats can be found in Appendix C , Table 5 . 4 . 3 Common Technologies Participants mentioned several specifc technologies that were not included in the question prompts . These include visual aids ( such as visual schedules or using an object as a reminder ) , sensory fd - gets and other sensory input items , smart - lights , voice - controlled assistants , and AAC ( augmentative and alternative communication ) devices . Headphones and speakers for noise regulation and music were the most popular technology elicited from the questions them - selves ( Q5 in R2 and Q7 in R3 - 4 ) , with 80 % of participants in those rounds describing their use of music via headphones or speakers to regulate noise or focus . Though not explicitly mentioned in any question text , every participant in every round described using visual aids as reminder tools for meeting daily needs , focusing , or remembering important tasks . A full table of specifc technologies referenced by participants , including those elicited from the ques - tions themselves , with head counts of participants mentioning that technology per round , can be found in Appendix C , Table 6 . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park “Errands around people ( groceries etc ) require head - phones with music from my phone” P4J “My apartment has a variety of picture communication cards velcroed to the walls to help with fast low tech communication and . . . that show where things in the house go for cleaning and helping keep organized” P2C “I have various stim toys around my work area and my work area had a designated chair that rolls and spins cuz I basically need to be constantly moving” P4E 4 . 4 Common Struggles Although the questions did not directly ask participants to describe ways in which they struggle day to day , many participants gave detailed accounts of various domains of daily living that they fnd challenging or disruptive . Nineteen participants discussed difculty managing medication , tracking symptoms , and communicating with medical professionals . Nineteen participants relayed difcul - ties with emotional regulation , often requiring relief through sen - sory equipment . Eighteen participants described needing extra sup - port in meeting daily needs – such as eating and sleeping – which they coordinated through technology and social relationships . Thir - teen participants described themselves as being inherently disorga - nized , forgetful , or distractible – and specifcally mentioned having difculty remembering even very important things if it was not visible to them in some way . A full table of domains of struggle with head counts per round can be found in Appendix C , Table 7 . “It’s hard for me to stay focused because I feel like my thoughts go in lots of diferent directions at once . Often I’ll start doing one thing , like writing an email , and then remember something else , like remembering to text a friend . ” P1A “A lot of my life is managing health , where it feels like I’m always on this edge and need to be aware of every - thing because anything can knock me into symptoms that can have me in bed for days or need a doctor and i hate it . ” P4A “ . . . I would make a plan or set an intent , and then discover that I couldn’t move myself to follow through or take actions toward the plan . . . every few weeks I’d ask my therapist why other people seemed to be able to make and follow through with plans , and I seemed not to be able to do that . ” P4H “I use [ redacted brand ] and sometimes my phone’s mu - sic app for sensory seeking and emotional regulation , which helps me motivate myself to do stuf like keeping myself clean , making myself food , and other household tasks like folding laundry and stuf . ” P4D “What helps me most is to tell a friend ( via Facebook messenger usually ) about what I need to do and ask them to tell me to do it . ” P1C 4 . 5 Participant Understandings of Executive Function “Executive Function” was not mentioned anywhere in the question - naires , and the PI never named it unless a participant brought it up frst . Despite this , there were many participants who named executive function when describing their strategies or struggles . One participant from Round 1 , one from Round 2 , and 7 from Round 4 mention executive function in their testimonies . This fnding is interesting because it suggests that many Autistic Adults are aware of the clinical terms used to describe their struggles and may use this knowledge to fnd resources as well as connect with others over a topic more specifc than the autism diagnosis itself . During Round 4 , the PI asked some participants to give their personal defnition of executive function : “Executive function is the ability to imagine some kind of desired future state , maybe make a plan for how to do it , and then to be able to trust myself that I will take these steps and be efective getting closed [ sic ] to that desired state I initially imagined . ” P4H “How to do stuf . How to plan and execute what you mean to do when you mean to and how you mean to . . . just , doing what you meant to . Except it’s also really really hard . ” P4A This description of the participant pool and overview of the resulting collection of testimonies provides a foundation for under - standing and relating to the interconnected domains of strategy implementation we defne next . 4 . 6 Socio - Material Strategy Domains As described in Section 3 , our approach to thematic analysis inte - grated practices of Refexive Thematic Analysis [ 9 , 13 ] with Martin and Sommerville’s Cooperative Interactions Framework [ 29 ] . The CIF frame—with its direct attention to socio - material ecologies as context for extended and distributed cognition , rules and patterns— provided guidance as we sought to interpret participant testimony in the context of situated action rather than pathology . This method facilitated our understanding of strategies as constrained by the cognitive or socio - material domain in which they could be imple - mented : mental , embodied , social , and environmental . The interview questions did not specify or describe strategies for self - regulation or task management , yet there were similar strate - gies mentioned across all rounds . Eighteen participants detailed explicit rules and routines through which they governed daily liv - ing skills they usually found difcult . These rules were described as non - habitual , in that participants had to intentionally think about them to execute and maintain their self - management . Another 18 participants described using visual aids as reminders , including using physical objects as “obstructive” reminders . For example , one participant would put empty food containers in front of their door to remind them what they needed to restock . Another would tape bills or other important paperwork to their computer monitor so that it would have to be the frst thing they took care of that day . Nineteen participants told us about ways that they seek support from others to prompt task initiation and memory , and many also described giving this support to others , even when that support was for something they were notedly bad at doing for themselves . Seventeen participants illustrated how they used environmental management or means of controlling space , including manipulat - ing lighting , sound , physical comfort , and even changing locations as a cue to support sensory and emotional regulation , focus , and Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 2 : Strategies organized by domain of implementation – mental , embodied , social , and environmental . attention . A full table of strategies with head counts per round can be found in Appendix C , Table 8 . Many strategies were primarily metacognitive , in the sense that they were maintained by explicit mentalizing processes that gov - erned the creation of rules and routines . Often these rules were then embedded into environments through visual cues . Participants also bridged their cognitive and physical capacities with strategies that supported sensory regulation and “spoon management” [ 22 ] : in which disabled and chronically ill people manage what they do now in order to ensure they have enough energy for what they plan to do later . Most importantly , and perhaps most surprisingly ( to non - autistic researchers , anyway ) , most of our participants de - scribed social reciprocal relationships that allowed them to give and receive care in the form of mutual executive function collaboration . Future technology designs for executive function management may beneft from attention to the cognitive demands they place on users , how they may or may not attend to the physical contexts in which their users live , and an explicit attention to how they provide or inhibit the creation of mutually supportive social networks . Figure 2 delineates common strategies across and between the mental , embodied , social , and environmental domains . Below , we further describe these domains and their attendant strategies , sup - ported by direct quotation from the participant testimonies . 4 . 6 . 1 Mental . This domain is characterized by strategies which take place largely “inside” the participants’ mind . The rules and rou - tines that govern these strategies may be facilitated or augmented by material things , but the aim is personal awareness , control , and recall . “Every time something I need to do comes to my atten - tion , it is critical that I can write it down somewhere where my ( or other people’s ) processes will later pick it up to be worked on , and then allow myself to forget about it and trust my process that I will pick it up again later . To do this , my basic mental model of organizing tasks is to have a series of queues feeding into each other . ” P4H “What helps me is sticking to a concrete and unchanging schedule ( i , e . laundry done every Saturday , washcloth changed Wednesdays and Sundays etc ) . This helps me not waste mental energy thinking of when a task was last done or wondering if it should be done . ” P1A “Gamifcation is what I use to try to " blitz " a set of tasks . . . I might tell myself , " Every time you walk from one end of the room to the other , you need to cor - rect / clean / put away three things as a toll , " or " You can watch TV , but every commercial break you have to race yourself to see how many things you can get done . " ” P1A 4 . 6 . 2 Embodied . This domain is characterized by strategies which rely on or are implemented through the participants’ physical body . These strategies are concerned with physical and physiological regulation through stimulation of the body’s sensorium . “i have a lot of various sensory toys and tools such as chews , spinners , like i said my hammock and yoga ball and lights , and a fdget snap thing , magnetic balls , and snad [ sic ] and a sensory bin . The rocking chair ect all of which are critical tools i use daily . ” P2C “Instead of trying to stay focused when I know that I’m losing focus , I tend to switch gears and do something diferent – take a break / walk , move on to a diferent task . ” P1D 4 . 6 . 3 Social . This domain involves the conscious and agential del - egation / collaboration of memory , movement , and care to or with other social agents . These strategies rely on interpersonal relation - ships between human and non - human persons . Most importantly , it is through social relationships that disabled people internalize new cultural norms and shed ableist shame which may hinder their ability to cope with complex situations . “But that’s also the funny thing right ? That sometimes I can’t get my own needs met or get myself unstuck from a task I’m working on or whatever but if one of my friends is struggling I can pull myself together to help them . ” P4C “sometimes I’ll text someone and be like hey can you text me a reminder to do the thing tomorrow . . . ” P4E 4 . 6 . 4 Environmental . This domain involves the transference of mental labor to the physical environment through intentional infu - ence over the structure of material objects and contextual signifers . This includes direct environmental control of lighting , atmosphere , and noise , as well as textual / symbolic augmentations to physical space through the placement of signs and signifying objects . “In my experience in work and school , typically the best tip for focusing is a controlled environment” P3C CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park “Yeah , I don’t have enough space to give everything it’s own room , but I try not to shit post or doomscroll in places I should be productive haha . So my desk is strictly for work . For fb I have to move a few feet over haha . ” P4K “When I have to work by lamp light I need it to be a particular level of brightness for diferent tasks so I’m always turning of or turning on lamps and I have a bunch of lamp options in my ofce” P4L “Mostly I just put objects in the way of things in my routine . So if I need to clean the toilet soon , I’ll put the bottle of cleaner on top of the toilet lid to remind me” P4E 4 . 6 . 5 Domain Intersections . These domains also overlap , forming unique clusters of strategies that rely on the interaction between multiple domains . For example , Mental x Environmental strategies involve rules for the material environment , such as task - delimited spaces or the replication of rules and routines in physical form through signs or material reminders . Mental x Embodied strate - gies relate to mental accounting of physical capacity or to physical stimulation which supports mental processes . Embodied x Social strategies leverage social relationships to facilitate physical action . This is commonly referred to in autistic spaces as “body doubling” or “echopraxia” . Social x Environmental strategies implicate broader social and cultural norms in the accessibility of physical space and may leverage social relationships to enact modifcations or accom - modations to an inaccessible environment . These might also involve relying on pets or service animals to trigger certain activities within the environment . Environmental x Mental : “I also use the placemet [ sic ] of objects as a sort of to do list ( e . g . if I need to mail a letter , it gets put on the ground immediately in front of the door so I can’t forget it ) . ” P4B Environmental x Mental : “Multi color lights , and LED color changing lights for both decompressing and re - laxing but also to help with recovering from overload meltdowns and just getting the sensory input i need . ” P2C Mental x Embodied : “One trick that has helped me , of the psychological variety rather than technical , is to be realistic about what my current capacity is , and to allow myself to prioritize work that I can do , over work that I ought to do but lack capacity for . ” P4H Mental x Embodied : “If I get bored / need a break , I tab over to Facebook , my school email , or work for another class for a moment and then tab back to my notes to refocus” P1C Embodied x Social : “I also do a lot of body doubling on days where I have a lot of administrative tasks to complete at work . I’ll hop in discord with some other friends who work from home , and we’ll keep each other company while we work . ” P4C Social x Environmental : “ [ a weighted blanket ] helps me wind down at the end of the day . Plus the cat that climbs on my legs , too . An extra 10lb . ” P4J Social x Environmental : “I have limited fexibility in my work area . However , on occasion I do have an emo - tional breakdown or other issue requiring me to step away . For this , I ensured my supervisors are aware . . . In the rare cases that it becomes too much , I am often ofered the opportunity to go home . ” P3C In the next section , we assemble the testimonies of our partici - pants into exemplar narratives or vignettes , as is called for in Mar - tin and Sommerville’s Cooperative Interactions Framework [ 28 ] . These stories enable further discussion of the patterns of Autistic sociotechnical assemblage and inform design insights for future work in HCI for executive function in the context of a digitally distributed and entangled society . 5 AUTISTIC PATTERNS OF TECHNOCULTURAL ASSEMBLAGE Extending from Rode’s “Refexivity in Digital Anthropology” , we take up the impressionist position to collate and aggregate testimo - nial data into illustrative scenarios [ 44 ] that capture the afective and phenomenological experiences of our participants [ 49 ] . In our analysis , we attend to the manner in which broader sociopolitical contexts might infuence patterns of participant testimony [ 5 , 67 ] , particularly in relation to expressions of powerlessness , oppression , stigma , and the resistance of such . In addition , we acknowledge to how our own experiences as disabled and neurodivergent re - searchers necessarily infuence how we frame our research inquiry , how we collect data , and especially how we interpret our partici - pants’ testimony as we generate insights [ 13 ] . 5 . 1 Factors in Tech Adoption 5 . 1 . 1 Vignete 1 : Moss . Moss grunts as their alarm beeps at them desperately for the 5 th time this morning . They reluctantly rise , sort through unfolded laundry , select their favorite shirt and jeans , and head out the door . As they leave , they pass a stack of unused planners , but a note by the door reminds them to grab their wallet , keys , phone , and to check that their backpack has their headphones and sunglasses . Moss puts on their headphones and sunglasses as they exit their apartment building . By blasting their favorite music , they can remain calm as they wait for the bus at a crowded stop . Someone bumps into them as they board the bus , and they sense a food of overwhelm . Quickly , they reach into the pockets of their hoody and fnd a fdget ring that they use to calm their nerves as they wait for their stop . The sunglasses will help prevent them from getting a migraine , and they leave them on as they head into work . They nod to their coworkers as they settle into their desk . They check their calendar to see that they missed a doctor’s appointment by accident . They haven’t found a reminder system that works for them . Moss does their job well , but they always feel like they are one mistake away from catastrophe . Cyborg Assemblages They check their phone and see a chat notifcation from a friend . Moss thinks about telling them how difcult things are for them right now , but they don’t want to be a burden , and they don’t know how their friend could help , anyway . “I’ve seen other people do this , where they directly came and supported each other when they had a hard time functioning but I haven’t done that ; I’ve always had the sense that it would either be a burden or they couldn’t actually help me . ” P4H 5 . 1 . 2 Discussion . In this frst vignette , we follow Moss on their commute to work . They struggle with sleep regulation and with keeping track of their things . They use tools to prevent sensory overload because they are not able to avoid distressing sensory situations . They have tried planners before to help them study or keep track of work projects , but they never keep up with them for long . They also have been unsuccessful using technologies to keep them on top of important meetings and events . Every “solution” feels like more work than the original problem . “When you use an app you have to open it , usually close a pop up ad about upgrading to pro or whatever , or deal with these distracting ads , and then you have to navigate a new interface and fnd where you input your data , and then do that , and maybe save it . . . Too many steps . ” P4L In many of our interviews , participants described being unable to adopt technologies because they exacerbated the very condition they were meant to alleviate – cognitive overload . Participants wanted only fexibility and customization , but specifcally for a lack of assumption on the part of interfaces about how the user wants the app to “manage” or augment their executive function . Autistic users are expressing a need for autonomy in their relationships with management apps . This essential need for agency and consent over apps designed to notify , prompt , regulate , and in some ways , control the user is a critical fnding that warrants further attention in future intervention design . Other technologies are easier to adopt , often because they are simple tools that serve a specifc function that can be adapted to diferent contexts . Many participants described using headphones , but they would use them diferently in diferent situations . Some - times they were for eliminating noise , other times for producing it . Sometimes they were for focusing , and other times for relaxing . “If I don’t have music audio input my brain wanders of to do it’s own thing . The music lets me focus to get done what I need to get done . ” P4J “Noise Cancelling Headphones for hypersensitive indi - viduals such as myself can be quite useful . ” P3C 5 . 1 . 3 Implications for Design Practices . Our results demonstrate that successful and sustained system adoption is dependent upon the cognitive overhead the new system requires . When designing for extended cognition in the context of executive function , de - signers and researchers must engage with and iterate based on participants’ cognitive capacity before , during , and after system integration . Tools with specifc mechanical or sensory purposes CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany may be easier to adopt cognitively but will be more dependent on personal preferences for comfort and style . 5 . 2 Tech and Autonomy 5 . 2 . 1 Vignete 2 : Leaf . Leaf wakes up as the lights in their room gently fade on . Last year , they purchased a set of smart lights and programmed them to adjust throughout the day in a way that supports their sleep schedule . Leaf pulls a pair of pants and a shirt from a drawer , and chuckles at how many of the clothes are the same cut in diferent colors . They like what they like . Leaf works from home , so it’s very important to them that their space is well “delineated” so that they can maintain a sense of routine and order even though they don’t often leave the house . Their desk is tidy , but only because they force themselves to clean it every night so that it is fresh for them the next day . As Leaf settles into work , they realize that their stom - ach hurts and that they are getting a headache . They sigh with relief because they have built an entire li - brary of preset emails and detailed “how to” docu - ments so that they can continue working even when they don’t feel their best . Leaf often feels guilty when they think about how fexible their work is – they worry about other autistic people who don’t have the autonomy and freedom to control their own lives . At noon , their smartwatch vibrates gently with a re - minder “eat a sandwich ! ” . At twelve - ffteen , they real - ize they still haven’t eaten when they glance at their calendar and see the color - coded block of time labeled “no really , go eat” . At twelve - thirty - seven , they get a text message from their friend , “Have you eaten yet ? ” . Leaf responds “y . . . . no , ” and laughs when their friend sends them a selfe with a bowl of cereal . Leaf goes to make their sandwich . 5 . 2 . 2 Discussion . Participants who had the most control over their living and working conditions often had the most robust and intri - cate technological supports . One participant who is a home - maker organizes their entire schedule , including care for their children , spouse , pets , and home , with a detailed series of smart watch re - minders . Another participant who works from home and lives alone has spent years establishing protocols for organizing their life and their work . Many participants actually described reusing materials for work and building in redundant reminder systems to support them through daily living tasks . “I suppose the fact that I have smart bulbs in my bed - room that I can change the color on via Alexa ( along with the rest of my lamps ) might be considered a techno - logical solution , but that’s more for my general sensory anxiety than for sleep itself . ” P1A “I use a bunch of hacks to save time , especially since a combination of physical and cognitive impairments makes me work slower than an abled NT . Some of my clients need the same resources like legal aid or credit CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany building products so I might copy paste the same lan - guage or almost the same language between emails . ” P4G Many participants were aware of how ableism impacts their daily lives and note how societal bias about what “counts” as an adult life contributes to their difculties . In particular , their awareness of how ableism dictates what kinds of activities and relationships are appropriate led them to question norms and establish new ways of relating to themselves , work , and each other . “I mean I’m not trying to compensate for my brain not meeting my expectations , I’m trying to compensate for my brain not matching societal ableism . ” P4A “It took a long time for me to open up and be more honest about things or ask for help . What helped me open up was how they have always been pretty open about their struggles with executive dysfunction , burn out , or overload . ” P4L 5 . 2 . 3 Implications for Design Practices . Designers might attend not only to the level of autonomy they hope their system will pro - vide , but also the level of autonomy their users might currently ( not ) have . Designing under the assumption that all users have equal access to agency and choice in their living conditions may disenfranchise users that are striving for this agency but are cur - rently struggling against societal ableism and paternalistic attitudes toward disabled people . Design can reinforce or contest existing narratives of disability as a source and cause for shame . Designs which actively produce afordances against systemic ableism may transform societal accessibility through an abolition of disability shame . 5 . 3 Embedded in Community 5 . 3 . 1 Vignete 3 : Echo . Echo wakes up when their cat , Tizzy , demands that they be fed . The cat has obviously never been fed before in its life . As they head to the kitchen , they pass visual aids on the wall that their roommate uses to communicate and to remember tasks . The truth is , everyone in the house uses them , even though they are only “for” Abby , who is non - speaking . There’s a sticky - note on the cat food bin that reminds Echo to give Tizzy medication with breakfast . Echo adds Tizzy’s medicine to the bowl . Then they make themselves a bowl of cereal and take their own meds . They look at Tizzy and say , “what a pair we are . ” Echo looks over and notices the paperwork for their legal name change is sitting unfnished on the kitchen table . They groan . They have had the forms for 4 months and can’t ever get through them . They text their friend , “why are forms” . Their friend responds , “lol mood . ” Their friend is trying to apply for a new job but keeps getting frustrated by the online forms . Echo starts a video chat with their friend , “okay . We both hate forms . We both have forms . Let’s both fll out forms . ” They sit online together , working through their paperwork . Occasionally , one will complain Rua Williams and Chorong Park about their form . The other commiserates . In just 20 minutes , they both have completed something they had been putting of for a long time . “What a pair we are , ” says Echo . “Executive Support Squad , activate ! ” says their friend . Echo remembers a time when they felt embarrassed and ashamed about their forgetfulness and disorga - nization and would never ask for help or tell other friends that they were struggling . They are so grateful now to be living in physical and digital community with people who care for one another . 5 . 3 . 2 Discussion . In this vignette , we follow Echo as they rely on technologically mediated social support to complete important tasks . Echo’s contentment is dependent upon a strong sense of community and a conviction that “standards” of what it means to be a “proper adult” are arbitrary and inefective . Throughout our interviews , we noted that the attitude participants had toward receiving support from others often determined how integrated they were with both local and digital communities . “I use to do lists to remind me to feed [ my pet ] , to give her medicine if she gets sick . . . forget very easily for my own tasks , but her tasks are very easy for me because they’re automatic and very important to me . She’s one of the frst things on my mind a lot of the time . ” P4I “Or like , days where words are hard . I never considered myself to be non - speaking before but recently , through these friendships with other people who are like me , I’ve been able to let down the layers and layers of masking and have days where I can’t communicate in words , only pictures / emojis . Or days where I ask my friends to help me remember to do x y z . And vice versa . Where I provide that accountability and support . ” P4C “Mutually supportive relationships are hugely impor - tant , and are also one of the things i hadn’t fgured out until i was an adult because nobody had supported or suggested such a thing when I was younger . I needed to both get to know other autistic people , and learn how to try to live on my own - and crash at that - to fnd that others were also struggling but we could struggle together . ” P4A “I can’t be always - on and I wonder if the way that things like ADHD and autism are classifed leads to the implicit standard that to be normal is to be perfect and therefore to be functional is to be infallible and so if we are to function to the standards of normies , we can never goof of . . . ” P4F This strategy of interdependence is important not only because of its frequency and consistency , but because of its ties to broader disability activism and culture . These digital interdependence strate - gies are most notably refective of “care webs” as described by Leah Lakshmi Piepzna - Samarasinha and “access intimacy” as defned by Mia Mingus . Mingus describes access intimacy as “that elusive , hard to describe feeling when someone else ‘gets’ your access needs” [ 32 ] . To Piepzna - Samarasinha , collective care webs are “experiments in ‘crip - made access’ . . . turning on its head the model that disabled Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany people can only passively receive care , not give it or determine what kind of care we want” [ 35 : 41 ] . Autistic care webs upturn notions that autistic people must be made perfectly independent to avoid institutionalization , and instead point to collective and coalitional futures of disabled solidarity for communal care practices . 5 . 3 . 3 Implications for Design Practices . Design for cognition , ac - cess , and care that recognizes the inherently and pervasively inter - connected nature of humanity will be better suited to supporting people who do not ft dominant capitalist narratives of the fully independent individual citizen . Rather than fguring technology as a product which either normalizes the body or innovates it , design which respects and encourages interdependence and communal relation compliments autistic patterns of shame - refusing cooper - ative care . Researchers and designers may fnd that the extent to which their artifacts enable users to form and maintain care webs can have signifcant impacts on device and service adoption and user outcomes . 6 CONCLUSION Research in technologies “for” autism is currently experiencing a crisis of epistemological commitments . Prior work has noted how HCI for neurocognitive disability has been dominated by motiva - tions of “fxing” [ 28 ] , paternalistic ideas about what disabled people should want and need [ 51 , 54 , 69 ] , and inaccurate assumptions that disabled people are not already themselves engaged in technology design [ 6 , 21 , 66 ] . Recent research has identifed executive func - tion as a possible target for novel designs that may be embraced by autistic technology users [ 34 ] . Executive function difculties impact autistic people throughout their lifespan , afecting adaptive functioning [ 20 , 38 , 63 ] , anxiety [ 71 ] , and social communication domains [ 20 , 25 ] . EF interventions that target autistic traits as in - herent defcits may inadvertently impact self - esteem in negative ways [ 71 ] . Sharmin et al . [ 48 ] make important observations about factors of cultural relevancy and the digital divide in designs of smart tech - nologies for autism . Technology developed for autistic people in the United States will not automatically translate to efective adoption in other cultural contexts . Within the US , the costs of technology , combined with insurance policies which deny technology coverage based on requirements for " durable medical equipment " , cause in - creased outcome disparities between low - income and middle - class autistic people , which disproportionately afect people of color . The researchers also discuss important matters of privacy , wherein the increased use of technology for intervention cause increased vulnerability of disabled people to surveillance and control . Addi - tionally , the researchers acknowledge limited work in technology to support autistic people’s strengths and capabilities as well as understudied applications of technology for autistic adults . It is important not only to design technologies with the limitations of technology policy and current social factors in mind , but also to maintain this awareness in the analysis of existing technologies and in the generation of future design implications . Guided by a frame of autistic technology adoption as a practice of creating “Cyborg Assemblages” [ 66 ] , we explored how autistic adults form intentional , agential , self - mediated EF management strategies to inform future designs that support autistic self - efcacy and self - determination . By supporting a sense of user - directed fexibility and control , and by enabling user - directed formation of collective care networks , future assistive technologies for EF can more efectively address the needs of autistic children and adults . These fndings may support design strategies for other populations afected by EF difculties , including traumatic - brain injury and stroke survivors , as well as non - disabled users . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our participants for sharing their experiences with us . Special thanks got to Autistic Activist and Executive Function Sup - port Consultant Oswin Lattimer for their advice and guidance . This work was made possible in part by the Social Science Research Council’s Just Tech Fellowship . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Muhammad Haziq Lim Abdullah and Margot Brereton . 2015 . MyCalendar : Fos - tering Communication for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder Through Photos and Videos . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction on - OzCHI ’15 , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838785 [ 2 ] Sara Maria Acevedo . 2018 . Enabling geographies : neurodivergence , self - authorship , and the politics of social space . Open Access Graduate Works . Re - trieved June 19 , 2018 from https : / / search . proquest . com / docview / 2050059952 ? pq - origsite $ = $ gscholar [ 3 ] Kassiane Asasumasu . 2012 . AUTISTIFYING MY HABITAT ! ! Radical Neurodiver - gence Speaking . Retrieved April 15 , 2019 from http : / / timetolisten . blogspot . com / 2012 / 08 / autistifying - my - habitat . html [ 4 ] Brandon S . Aylward , Diana E . Gal - Szabo , and Sharief Taraman . 2021 . Racial , Ethnic , and Sociodemographic Disparities in Diagnosis of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder . Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics 42 , 8 : 682 – 689 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / DBP . 0000000000000996 [ 5 ] Shaowen Bardzell and Jefrey Bardzell . 2011 . Towards a feminist HCI methodol - ogy : Social science , feminism , and HCI . In Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems - Proceedings , 675 – 684 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979041 [ 6 ] Cynthia L Bennett and Daniela K Rosner . 2019 . The Promise of Empathy : Design , Disability , and Knowing the “Other . ” In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300528 [ 7 ] Monique Botha and David M . Frost . 2020 . Extending the Minority Stress Model to Understand Mental Health Problems Experienced by the Autistic Population . Society and Mental Health 10 , 1 : 20 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2156869318804297 [ 8 ] Louanne E . Boyd , Kathryn E . Ringland , Oliver L . Haimson , Helen Fernan - dez , Maria Bistarkey , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2015 . Evaluating a Collaborative iPad Game’s Impact on Social Relationships for Children with Autism Spec - trum Disorder . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing 7 , 1 : 3 : 1 - 3 : 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2751564 [ 9 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2019 . Refecting on refexive thematic analysis . Qualitative Research in Sport , Exercise and Health 11 , 4 : 589 – 597 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 2159676X . 2019 . 1628806 [ 10 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2020 . One size fts all ? What counts as quality practice in ( refexive ) thematic analysis ? https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14780887 . 2020 . 1769238 18 , 3 : 328 – 352 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14780887 . 2020 . 1769238 [ 11 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2021 . Can I use TA ? Should I use TA ? Should I not use TA ? Comparing refexive thematic analysis and other pattern - based qualitative analytic approaches . Counselling and Psychotherapy Research 21 , 1 : 37 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / CAPR . 12360 [ 12 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . Doing Refexive TA . Retrieved September 15 , 2022 from https : / / www . thematicanalysis . net / doing - refexive - ta / [ 13 ] Emeline Brule and Samantha Finnigan . 2020 . Thematic analysis in HCI . Design and Society . Retrieved April 25 , 2020 from https : / / sociodesign . hypotheses . org / 555 [ 14 ] Sarah Cassidy , Louise Bradley , Rebecca Shaw , and Simon Baron - Cohen . 2018 . Risk markers for suicidality in autistic adults . Molecular Autism 9 , 1 : 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13229 - 018 - 0226 - 4 [ 15 ] Sarah Cassidy , Paul Bradley , Janine Robinson , Carrie Allison , Meghan McHugh , and Simon Baron - Cohen . 2014 . Suicidal ideation and suicide plans or attempts in adults with asperger’s syndrome attending a specialist diagnostic clinic : A clinical cohort study . The Lancet Psychiatry 1 , 2 : 142 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S2215 - 0366 ( 14 ) 70248 - 2 [ 16 ] Martin Cederlöf , Henrik Larsson , Paul Lichtenstein , Catarina Almqvist , Eva Serlachius , and Jonas F . Ludvigsson . 2016 . Nationwide population - based cohort CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park study of psychiatric disorders in individuals with Ehlers - Danlos syndrome or hypermobility syndrome and their siblings . BMC psychiatry 16 : 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12888 - 016 - 0922 - 6 [ 17 ] Design Justice Network . 2018 . Design Justice Principles . Design Justice Network . Retrieved March 31 , 2022 from https : / / designjustice . org / read - the - principles [ 18 ] Paul Dourish . 2006 . Implications for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’06 ) , 541 – 550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124855 [ 19 ] Peter Francis , David Mellor , and Lucy Firth . 2009 . Techniques and recommenda - tions for the inclusion of users with autism in the design of assistive technologies . Assistive Technology 21 , 2 : 57 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400430902945561 [ 20 ] Lisa Gilotty , Lauren Kenworthy , Lisa Sirian , David O . Black , and Ann E . Wagner . 2002 . Adaptive Skills and Executive Function in Autism Spectrum Disorders . Child Neuropsychology 8 , 4 : 241 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1076 / chin . 8 . 4 . 241 . 13504 [ 21 ] Aimi Hamraie and Kelly Fritsch . 2019 . Crip Technoscience Manifesto . Catalyst : Feminism , Theory , Technoscience 5 , 1 : 1 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 28968 / cftt . v5i1 . 29607 [ 22 ] Yasaman Hashemian and Marientina Gotsis . 2013 . Adventurous Dreaming High - fying Dragonn - A Full Body Game for Children with Attention Defcit Hyper - activity Disorder ( ADHD ) . In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Wireless Health - WH ’13 , 1 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2534088 . 2534101 [ 23 ] Lauren Kenworthy , Laura Gutermuth Anthony , Daniel Q . Naiman , Lynn Cannon , Meagan C . Wills , Caroline Luong - Tran , Monica Adler Werner , Katie C . Alexan - der , John Strang , Elgiz Bal , Jennifer L . Sokolof , and Gregory L . Wallace . 2014 . Randomized controlled efectiveness trial of executive function intervention for children on the autism spectrum . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 55 , 4 : 374 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jcpp . 12161 [ 24 ] Marianthi Kourti . 2021 . Working with Autistic Transgender and Non - Binary People . Jessica Kingsley Publishers . Retrieved September 15 , 2022 from https : / / us . jkp . com / products / working - with - autistic - transgender - and - nonbinary - people [ 25 ] Beibin Li , Quan Wang , Marilena Mademtzi , Mary Best , Frederick Shic , Adham Atyabi , Minah Kim , Erin Barney , Amy Yeojin Ahn , Yawen Luo , Madeline Auber - tine , Sarah Corrigan , and Tanya St . John . 2018 . Social Infuences on Executive Functioning in Autism . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174017 [ 26 ] J . C . R . Licklider . 1960 . Man - Computer Symbiosis . IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics HFE - 1 , 1 : 4 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / THFE2 . 1960 . 4503259 [ 27 ] Kelly Mack and Emma McDonnell . 2021 . What do we mean by accessibility research ? a literature survey of accessibility papers in chi and assets from 1994 to 2019 . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445412 [ 28 ] Jennifer Mankof , Gillian R . Hayes , and Devva Kasnitz . 2010 . Disability studies as a source of critical inquiry for the feld of assistive technology . In Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility - ASSETS ’10 , 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1878803 . 1878807 [ 29 ] David Martin and Ian Sommerville . 2004 . Patterns of cooperative interaction : Linking ethnomethodology and design . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 11 , 1 : 59 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 972648 . 972651 [ 30 ] Rachael Maun , Marc Fabri , and Pip Trevorrow . 2021 . Adapting Participatory Design Activities for Autistic Adults : A Review . In Design , User Experience , and Usability : Design for Diversity , Well - being , and Social Development ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , 300 – 314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 78224 - 5 _ 21 [ 31 ] Lynn Meltzer ( ed . ) . 2018 . Executive Function in Education : From Theory to Practice , Second Edition . Guilford Press , New York , New York , USA . [ 32 ] Mia Mingus . 2011 . Access Intimacy : The Missing Link . Leaving Evidence . Re - trieved February 17 , 2019 from https : / / leavingevidence . wordpress . com / 2011 / 05 / 05 / access - intimacy - the - missing - link / [ 33 ] Cal Montgomery . 2019 . Little Red Wagons . Cal’s Blog . Retrieved February 11 , 2022 from https : / / montgomerycal . wordpress . com / 2019 / 12 / 29 / little - red - wagons / [ 34 ] Elizabeth Pellicano , Adam Dinsmore , and Tony Charman . 2014 . What should autism research focus upon ? Community views and priorities from the United Kingdom . Autism 18 , 7 : 756 – 770 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361314529627 [ 35 ] Leah Lakshmi Piepzna - Samarasinha . 2018 . Care Work : Dreaming Disability Justice . Aresenal Pulp Press , Vancouver , CA . [ 36 ] Suvi Pihkala and Helena Karasti . 2016 . Refexive Engagement - Enacting Refexivity in Design and for “Participation in Plural . ” In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full papers - Volume 1 . Retrieved June 13 , 2021 from http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940302 [ 37 ] Jasbir K . Puar . 2011 . “I would rather be a cyborg than a goddess” : Becoming - intersectional in assemblage theory . philoSOPHIA 2 , 1 : 49 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1353 / phi . 2012 . 0006 [ 38 ] Allison B . Ratto , Lauren Kenworthy , Benjamin E . Yerys , Julia Bascom , Andrea Trubanova Wieckowski , Susan W . White , Gregory L . Wallace , Cara Pugliese , Robert T . Schultz , Thomas H . Ollendick , Angela Scarpa , Sydney Seese , Kelly Register - Brown , Alex Martin , and Laura Gutermuth Anthony . 2018 . What About the Girls ? Sex - Based Diferences in Autistic Traits and Adaptive Skills . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 48 , 5 : 1698 – 1711 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 017 - 3413 - 9 [ 39 ] Andrea Ridgway , John Northup , Angie Pellegrin , Robert LaRue , and Anne High - tsoe . 2003 . Efects of Recess on the Classroom Behavior of Children With and Without Attention - Defcit Hyperactivity Disorder . School Psychology Quarterly 18 , 3 : 253 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1521 / scpq . 18 . 3 . 253 . 22578 [ 40 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , LouAnne Boyd , Heather Faucett , Amanda L . L . Cullen , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2017 . Making in Minecraft : A Means of Self - Expression for Youth with Autism . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) , 340 – 345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079749 [ 41 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , Christine T . Wolf , LouAnne E . Boyd , Mark S . Baldwin , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2016 . Would You Be Mine : Appropriating Minecraft as an Assis - tive Technology for Youth with Autism . In Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ’16 ) , 33 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2982142 . 2982172 [ 42 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , Christine T . Wolf , Heather Faucett , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2016 . “Will I always be not social ? ” : Re - Conceptualizing Sociality in the Context of a Minecraft Community for Autism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , 1256 – 1269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858038 [ 43 ] Julia Miele Rodas . 2018 . Autistic Disturbances : Theorizing Autism Poetics from the DSM to Robinson Crusoe . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor , MI , USA . [ 44 ] Jennifer A . Rode . 2011 . Refexivity in digital anthropology . In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 , 123 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1978961 [ 45 ] Jennifer A . Rode . 2011 . A theoretical agenda for feminist HCI . Interacting with Computers 23 , 5 : 393 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2011 . 04 . 005 [ 46 ] Yvonne Rogers . 2012 . HCI Theory : Classical , Modern , and Contemporary . Synthe - sis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics 5 , 2 : 1 – 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2200 / s00418ed1v01y201205hci014 [ 47 ] Christina Seery , Margo Wrigley , Fiona O’Riordan , Ken Kilbride , and Jessica Bramham . What adults with ADHD want to know : A Delphi consensus study on the psychoeducational needs of experts by experience . Health Expectations n / a , n / a . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / hex . 13592 [ 48 ] Moushumi Sharmin , Md Monsur Hossain , Abir Saha , Maitraye Das , Margot Maxwell , and Shameem Ahmed . 2018 . From Research to Practice : Informing the Design of Autism Support Smart Technology . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173676 [ 49 ] Jonathan A . Smith and Mike Osborn . 2007 . Interpretive Phenomenalogical Anal - ysis . In Qualitative Psychology : A Practical Guide to Research Methods , Jonathan A . Smith ( ed . ) . [ 50 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geral - dine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference on Full Papers - PDC ’18 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 51 ] Katta Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , Os Keyes , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Agency of Autistic Children in Technology Research—A Critical Liter - ature Review . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 26 , 6 : 1 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3344919 [ 52 ] Katta Spiel and Kathrin Gerling . 2020 . The Purpose of Play : How HCI Games Research Fails Neurodivergent Populations . Transactions in Computer Human Interaction preprint . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / nnnnnnn . nnnnnnn [ 53 ] Katta Spiel , Kathrin Gerling , Cynthia L Bennett , Emeline Brulé , Rua M Williams , Jennifer Rode , and Jennifer Mankof . 2020 . Nothing About Us Without Us : Investigating the Role of Critical Disability Studies in HCI . In Extended Ab - stracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375150 [ 54 ] Katta Spiel , Eva Hornecker , Rua Mae Williams , and Judith Good . 2022 . ADHD and Technology Research – Investigated by Neurodivergent Readers . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517592 [ 55 ] Katta Spiel , Laura Malinverni , Judith Good , and Christopher Frauenberger . 2017 . Participatory Evaluation with Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 , 5755 – 5766 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025851 [ 56 ] stinkyzen . 2019 . Elements of Executive Function : Road Trip Without a Map . Neu - roClastic . Retrieved February 11 , 2022 from https : / / neuroclastic . com / elements - of - executive - functioning - dysfunction / [ 57 ] Lucy Suchman . 2006 . Human - Machine Reconfgurations : Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511808418 [ 58 ] Cella M Sum , Rahaf Alharbi , Franchesca Spektor , Cynthia L Bennett , Christina N Harrington , Katta Spiel , and Rua Mae Williams . 2022 . Dreaming Disability Justice in HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’22 ) , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3503731 [ 59 ] The Cyborg Jillian Weise . 2021 . The Pandemic Made Me Realize My Brain Is Already Cyborg . WIRED - Ideas . Retrieved June 8 , 2022 from https : / / www . wired . com / story / cyborg - brain - mind - pandemic - philosophy / [ 60 ] Lisa M . Tillmann - Healy . 2003 . Friendship as Method . Qualitative Inquiry 9 , 5 : 729 – 749 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077800403254894 Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 61 ] Wesley Vernon . 2009 . The Delphi technique : A review . International Journal of Therapy and Rehabilitation 16 , 2 : 69 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12968 / ijtr . 2009 . 16 . 2 . 38892 [ 62 ] Orad Weisberg , Ayelet GalOz , Ruth Berkowitz , Noa Weiss , Oran Peretz , Shlomi Azoulai , Daphne KoplemanRubin , and Oren Zuckerman . 2014 . TangiPlan : Design - ing an Assistive Technology to Enhance Executive Functioning Among Children with ADHD . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children - IDC ’14 , 293 – 296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2610475 [ 63 ] Emily I . White , Gregory L . Wallace , Julia Bascom , Anna C . Armour , Kelly Register - Brown , Haroon S . Popal , Allison B . Ratto , Alex Martin , and Lauren Kenworthy . 2017 . Sex diferences in parent - reported executive functioning and adaptive behavior in children and young adults with autism spectrum disorder . Autism Research 10 , 10 : 1653 – 1662 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aur . 1811 [ 64 ] Rua M . Williams , Kiana Alikhademi , and Juan E . Gilbert . 2022 . Design of a toolkit for real - time executive function assessment in custom - made virtual experiences and interventions . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 : 102734 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2021 . 102734 [ 65 ] Rua M . Williams , Kiana Alikhademi , Imani Munyaka , and Juan E . Gilbert . 2022 . MetaCogs : Mitigating Executive Dysfunction via Agent - Based Modeling for Metacognitive Strategy Development . Transactions in Accessible Computing . [ 66 ] Rua M . Williams and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . Cyborg Perspectives on Computing Research Reform . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’19 , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310421 [ 67 ] Rua M . Williams and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . “Nothing about us without us” : Trans - forming participatory research and ethics in human systems engineering . In Advancing Diversity Inclusion and Social Justice Through Human Systems Engi - neering , Rod Roscoe and Erin Chiou ( eds . ) . Taylor & Francis Group . [ 68 ] Rua M . Williams and Juan E . Gilbert . 2020 . Perseverations of the academy : A survey of wearable technologies applied to autism intervention . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 143 : 102485 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2020 . 102485 [ 69 ] Rua Mae Williams . 2019 . Metaeugenics and Metaresistance : from manufacturing the ‘includeable body’ to walking away from the broom closet . Canadian Journal of Children’s Rights / Revue canadienne des droits des enfants 6 , 1 : 60 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22215 / cjcr . v6i1 . 1976 [ 70 ] Anon Ymous , Os Keyes , Rua M Williams , Judith Good , Eva Hornecker , and Cynthia L Bennett . 2020 . “I am just terrifed of my future” - Epistemic Violence in Disability Related Technology Research . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3381828 [ 71 ] David Zimmerman , Tamara Ownsworth , Analise O’Donovan , Jacqueline Roberts , and Matthew J Gullo . 2017 . Associations between executive functions and mental health outcomes for adults with autism spectrum disorder . Psychiatry Research 253 : 360 – 363 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . psychres . 2017 . 04 . 023 [ 72 ] Oren Zuckerman , Ayelet Gal - Oz , Neta Tamir , and Daphne Kopelman - Rubin . 2015 . Initial validation of an assistive technology to enhance executive functioning among children with ADHD . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’15 , 299 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771901 A A INTERVIEW QUESTIONS A . 1 Round 1 1 . How do you help yourself stay focused during work and / or school ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , com - puter or smartphone apps for this ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 2 . What tools and tricks do you use to make your job or study - ing easier ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or smartphone apps for this ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 3 . How do you make sure you don’t miss appointments , meet - ings , dates with friends or partners , or other events that are not part of your daily routine ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or smartphone apps for this ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 4 . Do you have trouble waking up , going to sleep , or staying asleep ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , com - puter or smartphone apps for this ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 5 . Have you tried tools or tricks to help you with other day - to - day tasks that you fnd hard ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or smartphone apps for this ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 6 . Is there anything else these questions have made you want to write about ? Please use this space to tell us ! A . 2 Round 2 1 . Do you use simple tools ( like planners , journals , note paper , sticky notes , whiteboards , chalkboards , and so on ) to manage your day , work , or study ? Do these tools work for you ? Why or why not ? 2 . Cloud - based apps are apps that sync between your computer and your phone . Do you use cloud - based apps ( like calendar apps , note apps , to - do - list apps , and so on ) to manage your day , work , or study ? Do these apps work for you ? Why or why not ? 3 . Do you use computer apps to manage your day , your work , or your study ? Which apps have you tried ? Do these apps work for you ? Why or why not ? 4 . Do you use smartphone apps or wearable devices ( like the ft - bit ) to manage your day , your work , or your study ? Which apps have you tried ? Do these apps work for you ? Why or why not ? 5 . Do you make changes to your home or work space to help you manage routines , stay focused , or feel more comfortable ? These changes might be music , lighting , favorite chairs or blankets , and so on . Do you use any technology or apps for this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? 6 . Have you used any of the strategies and tools you have told us about in questions 1 - 5 to manage your health or mood ? What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? 7 . Is there anything else these questions have made you want to write about ? Please use this space to tell us ! A . 3 Rounds 3 and 4 1 . How do you help yourself stay focused during work and / or school ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , com - puter or smartphone apps for this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? 2 . What tools and tricks do you use to make your job or study - ing easier ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or smartphone apps for this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? 3 . How do you make sure you don’t miss appointments , meet - ings , dates with friends or partners , or other events that are not part of your daily routine ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or smartphone apps for this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? 4 . Do you have trouble waking up , going to sleep , or staying asleep ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , com - puter or smartphone apps for this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Rua Williams and Chorong Park Table 1 : Participant Demographics - Race . 23 participants reporting out of 27 . Race Round 4 ( 12 ) Rounds 1 - 3 combined ( 11 ) White 10 8 White Hispanic 0 1 White Mixed 0 2 Southeast Asian 1 0 Metis 1 0 a 12 / 12 reporting from Round 4 . 11 / 15 reporting from Rounds 1 - 3 ( aggregated ) . Table 2 : Participant Demographics - Gender . 23 participants reporting out of 27 . Gender Round 4 ( 12 ) Rounds 1 - 3 combined ( 11 ) Man 1 2 Woman 2 4 Non - Binary 9 5 a 12 / 12 reporting from Round 4 . 11 / 15 reporting from Rounds 1 - 3 ( aggregated ) . Table 3 : Participant Demographics – Highest Earned Degree . 23 participants reporting out of 27 . Highest Earned Degree Round 4 ( 12 ) Rounds 1 - 3 combined ( 11 ) High School or GED 2 3 Associate’s degree 0 3 Bachelor’s degree 6 3 Master’s degree 3 1 Doctorate 1 1 a 12 / 12 reporting from Round 4 . 11 / 15 reporting from Rounds 1 - 3 ( aggregated ) . Table 4 : Participant Demographics – Age . 23 participants reporting out of 27 . Age Round 4 ( 12 ) Rounds 1 - 3 combined ( 11 ) Mean 30 . 41 26 . 18 Median 30 . 50 27 Standard Deviation 5 . 21 5 . 25 a 12 / 12 reporting from Round 4 . 11 / 15 reporting from Rounds 1 - 3 ( aggregated ) . 5 . Have you tried tools or tricks to help you with other day - blankets , and so on . Do you use any technology or apps for to - day tasks that you fnd hard ( like errands or chores ) ? this ? What works for you and what doesn’t ? Do you use any tools like journals , planners , computer or 8 . Do you connect with friends or family in - person or on - line smartphone apps for this ? What works for you and what to support them in daily tasks , and to seek support in re - doesn’t ? turn ? Can you tell us about your experiences with mutually 6 . Have you used any of the strategies and tools you have told supportive relationships ? us about in questions 1 - 5 to manage your health or mood ? 9 . Is there anything else these questions have made you want What has worked for you and what hasn’t ? to write about ? Please use this space to tell us ! 7 . Do you make changes to your home or work space to help B B DEMOGRAPHIC TABLES you manage routines , stay focused , or feel more comfortable ? These changes might be music , lighting , favorite chairs or C C DESCRIPTIVE DATA Cyborg Assemblages CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 5 : Average word count per round . Average Words Round 4 ( 12 ) Round 3 ( 5 ) Round 2 ( 5 ) Round 1 ( 5 ) Mean 3456 . 41 1 , 134 909 . 2 1 , 338 Median 2 , 982 970 714 854 Standard Deviation 1523 . 42 515 . 25 503 . 23 1267 . 61 Table 6 : Number of participants per round referencing specifc technology . Technology Round 1 ( 5 ) Round 2 ( 5 ) Round 3 ( 5 ) Round 4 ( 12 ) Visual schedules and reminders 5 5 5 12 Calendar apps 4 5 1 11 Headphones and Music 2 4 4 10 Sensory fdgets and aids 2 3 3 10 Physical journal / planner / scrap paper 2 2 2 10 To - Do or Task Tracking apps 4 2 1 5 Journaling and Note - taking apps 4 3 1 5 Smart / Fitness watch 2 2 0 2 Smart - Lights 2 1 0 1 Voice Controlled Assistant 1 0 2 1 Communication Tools ( AAC ) * 0 1 0 1 a AAC = Augmentative and Alternative Communication . Table 7 : Domains of struggle expressed by participants per round . Domain of Struggle Round 1 ( 5 ) Round 2 ( 5 ) Round 3 ( 5 ) Round 4 ( 12 ) Medicine and Health 2 3 3 11 Meeting Daily Needs 4 2 2 10 Emotional Regulation 1 5 4 9 Prospective Memory 2 2 1 8 Sensory Distress 1 0 1 7 Focus and Attention 3 3 3 6 Finances 0 1 1 5 Disruptions to Routine 0 0 1 4 Task Initiation 2 1 1 2 Table 8 : Common strategies for mitigating executive dysfunction expressed by participants per round . Common Strategies Round 1 ( 5 ) Round 2 ( 5 ) Round 3 ( 5 ) Round 4 ( 12 ) Setting explicit routine or rule 3 2 2 11 Visual Cues 3 2 2 11 Interdependence / Mutual Aid 3 0 5 11 Controlling Space 2 3 2 10 Sensory Regulation 1 4 2 10 Reusing presets / scripting 1 0 0 10 “Spoon Management” 4 2 0 4 Hyperactivity Hacks 3 0 0 3 Task Chunking 1 0 0 3 Time strategies 1 1 2 3 Combining or “hacking” tools 3 2 4 2 Self - imposed consequences 3 0 1 2