Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 Distraction during relational reasoning : The role of prefrontal cortex in interference control Daniel C . Krawczyk a , b , ∗ , Robert G . Morrison c , Indre Viskontas d , Keith J . Holyoak e , Tiffany W . Chow f , Mario F . Mendez e , Bruce L . Miller d , Barbara J . Knowlton e a The University of Texas at Dallas , United States b University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas , United States c Northwestern University , United States d University of California , San Francisco , United States e University of California , Los Angeles , United States f University of Toronto , Canada Received 18 September 2007 ; received in revised form 8 December 2007 ; accepted 1 February 2008 Available online 7 February 2008 Abstract We compared the reasoning performance of patients with frontal - variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration ( FTLD ) with that of patients with temporal - variant FTLD and healthy controls . In a picture analogy task with a multiple - choice answer format , frontal - variant FTLD patients performed less accurately than temporal - variant FTLD patients , who in turn performed worse than healthy controls , when semantic and perceptual distractors were present among the answer choices . When the distractor answer choices were eliminated , frontal - variant patients showed relatively greater improvement in performance . Similar patient groups were tested with a relational - pattern reasoning task that included manipulations of one or two relations and both perceptual and semantic extraneous information . Frontal - variant patients showed performance deﬁcits on all tasks relative to the other subject groups , especially when distracted . These results demonstrate that intact prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) is necessary for controlling interference from perceptual and semantic distractors in order to reason from relational structure . © 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Reasoning ; Distraction ; Interference ; Relational ; Control ; Attention 1 . Introduction Reasoning requires the coordinated activity of several brain regions . The subprocesses of reasoning include manipulation of information in working memory , formation of transient connections between individual problem elements , and inhibi - tion of inappropriate responses . These cognitive processes are thought to be governed largely by the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) ( D’Esposito et al . , 1995 ; Fuster , 2000 ; Smith & Jonides , 1999 ; Wallis , Anderson , & Miller , 2001 ) . Patientswithfrontotemporallobardegeneration ( FTLD ) have a form of dementia that causes atrophy to cortical regions within ∗ Corresponding author at : Center for BrainHealth ® , The University of Texas at Dallas , 2200 Mockingbird Lane , Dallas , TX 75235 , United States . Tel . : + 1 972 883 3234 ; fax : + 1 214 905 3026 . E - mail address : daniel . krawczyk @ utdallas . edu ( D . C . Krawczyk ) . the frontal and temporal lobes ( Knibb , Kipps , & Hodges , 2006 ; Rosen et al . , 2002 ; Snowden , Neary , & Mann , 2007 ) . Onset of cortical atrophy may begin in either the frontal or anterior tem - poral regions and progress to include both areas , but instances can be found in which cortical damage is restricted to either the frontal or temporal lobes ( Chow , Miller , Boone , Mishkin , & Cummings , 2002 ) . In such cases it is possible to dissociate the patient groups based on behavioral and cognitive symptoms and neuroimaging . Frontal and temporal variants of FTLD provide models that can assist us in better characterizing the contribu - tions of the PFC to reasoning performance , and speciﬁcally to examine the role of the PFC in control of interference from distracting information during relational reasoning . Prior studies indicate that frontal - variant FTLD ( fvFTLD ) leads to reasoning deﬁcits that can be characterized as fail - ures in manipulating and integrating multiple relations in order to solve problems ( Waltz et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , deﬁcits in interference control also contribute to relational reasoning 0028 - 3932 / $ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2008 . 02 . 001 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2021 impairments in fvFTLD patients ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) . Inter - ferencecontrolisanimportantaspectofrelationalreasoning ( see Morrison , Doumas , & Richland , 2006 ; Morrison et al . , 2004 ; Richland , Morrison , & Holyoak , 2006 ; Viskontas , Morrison , Holyoak , Hummel , & Knowlton , 2004 ) , as it is necessary to avoid compelling semantic or perceptual matches that com - pete with matching based on relational structure ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Krawczyk , Holyoak , & Hummel , 2004 , 2005 ; Markman , 1997 ) . While the PFC has historically been considered to be important for inhibitory pro - cesses that may underlie interference control ( Butter , 1969 ; Iverson & Mishkin , 1970 ; Miller & Cohen , 2001 ; Quintana , Fuster , & Yajeya , 1989 ; Shimamura , 2000 ) , this function has had relatively little direct investigation in the domain of reasoning . The current investigation speciﬁcally tests the extent to which interference control is important for visual reasoning tasks in which suppressing semantically and perceptually related items is essential for accurate performance . Studies of the neural underpinnings of relational reasoning initially focused on the PFC and its contribution to the ability to coordinate attention and working memory ( Holyoak & Kroger , 1995 ; Robin & Holyoak , 1995 ) . Several of these studies were based on the framework advanced by Halford ( e . g . Halford , Wilson , & Phillips , 1998 ) , which quantiﬁes relational com - plexity of information as the number of variables that must be integrated in order to solve a problem . The relational complexity metric has been applied to reasoning studies in development ( e . g . Andrews & Halford , 2002 ; Birney , Halford , & Andrews , 2006 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) , aging ( Viskontas , Holyoak , & Knowlton , 2006 ) , and chromosomal disorders ( Fales et al . , 2003 ) . This approach is exempliﬁed by studies in which PFC - damaged subjects were compared to other subject groups that lacked frontal impairments . Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) tested fvFTLD patients on a version of the Raven’s progressive matrices ( RPM ; Raven , 1941 ) , and a transitive inference task . The RPM has been considered to encapsulate many of the skills that comprise ﬂuid intelligence ( Duncan et al . , 2000 ; Snow , Kyllonen , & Marshalek , 1984 ) . Notably , this task requires the ability to maintain differ - ent pieces of relational information ( about changes in different dimensions ) and integrate them to form a solution . Findings showed that frontal - damaged groups failed selectively on prob - lem types that required the integration of multiple relations , compared to those problems in which only one relation was required for a correct solution . Similar ﬁndings were obtained with frontally impaired Alzheimer’s disease patients on matri - ces problems and relational working memory problems ( Waltz et al . , 2004 ) . Recent studies ( Morrison et al . , 2006 ; Viskontas et al . , 2004 ) have suggested that developmental and patient differences in relational reasoning as characterized by relational complexity can best be accounted for by variation in inhibitory con - trol , a suggestion consistent with the importance of PFC in relationally complex reasoning . The involvement of the PFC in analogical and relational reasoning studies has received further support from neuroimaging studies . Early studies investigated the neural correlates of variations of the RPM . Prabhakaran , Smith , Desmond , Glover , and Gabrieli ( 1997 ) found predominantly PFC and parietal lobe activation in an fMRI study of this task . Similar results have been reported by Christoff et al . ( 2001 ) and Kroger et al . ( 2002 ) , both of whom reported anterior rostrolateral PFC regions to be selectively active for the most complex matrix problems that required integrating across several dimensions . Relational pro - cessing has also been shown to activate PFC in neuroimaging studies of geometric and mathematical reasoning ( Melrose , Poulin , & Stern , 2007 ; Prabhakaran , Rypma , & Gabrieli , 2001 ) . Recent functional neuroimaging studies of analogical rea - soning have revealed evidence of further PFC specialization . Across several studies , investigators have reported left - anterior PFC activation that appears to be selective for the relational mapping aspect of analogical reasoning ( Bunge , Wendelken , Badre , & Wagner , 2005 ; Green , Fugelsang , Kraemer , Shamosh , & Dunbar , 2006 ; Luo et al . , 2003 ) . In one study , Bunge et al . ( 2005 ) found both left - anterior and ventrolateral PFC areas to be associated with processing analogies ; however , the ventrolateral PFC alone was also sensitive to word association strength , sug - gesting that this region was more involved in semantic retrieval than relational integration . The other studies also found broad PFC activation in response to processing analogy problems , but the anterior portion of the PFC has been found to be most sen - sitive speciﬁcally to the relational demands of the tasks . This pattern of ﬁndings indicates that relational reasoning appears to selectively recruit rostrolateral PFC , but that the process overall involves more of the PFC as well as relevant posterior regions ( Wharton et al . , 2000 ) . This movement toward separation of function of PFC areas in complex reasoning is consistent with recent theoretical claims that the PFCcan be divided into subpro - cessing regions linked by an anterior control system ( Christoff & Owen , 2006 ; Koechlin , Ody , & Kouneiher , 2003 ; Koechlin & Summerﬁeld , 2007 ) . A second important feature of many tasks that are sensi - tive to frontal impairments is the need to control interference from extraneous information . For example , in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test the tendency to respond based on a consistent dimension must be suppressed in order to shift response dimen - sions at the appropriate time . Similar impairments have been shown in both the human and animal literature with reversal learning deﬁcits following PFC damage , in which responses to a previously rewarded stimulus must be suppressed in order to respond correctly to a previously unrewarded stimulus ( Butter , 1969 ; Iverson & Mishkin , 1970 ; O’Doherty , Kringelbach , Rolls , Hornak , & Andrews , 2001 ; Rolls , Hornak , Wade , & McGrath , 1994 ) . In a prior study we demonstrated that frontal - variant FTLD patients show a speciﬁc deﬁcit in solving two - choice A : B : : C : D style verbal analogy problems when a semantic dis - tractor item , closer in association to the C term than the correct D term , was presented as a possible answer choice ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , we showed in a picture analogy task that fvFTLD patients tended to provide many perceptu - ally similar answers , rather than analogical answers , compared to healthy control subjects . This aspect of analogical reasoning has received relatively little direct investigation in PFC - impaired patients . 2022 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 The current study seeks to more precisely characterize fvFTLD deﬁcits in relational reasoning problems that involve the need to suppress semantic and perceptual distractors . In the study of Morrison et al . ( 2004 ) , we demonstrated that fvFTLD patients show deﬁcits in verbal analogy performance due to close semantic distractor items , and independently demonstrated that they tended to match to perceptually similar items over rela - tional items in a separate picture analogy task . A limitation of the latter task was that it utilized a free - choice procedure , in which participants looked for what they considered to be the generally best match , but were not speciﬁcally required to try to ﬁnd relational analogy matches . Thus , it was not clear if patients were actually impaired in suppressing distracting information , or if this information was simply very salient to the patients . Because we did not include both semantic and perceptual dis - tractors in the same analogy task , we were unable to determine whether semantic or perceptual sources of distraction introduce greater task difﬁculty for patients with frontal lobe impairments . In Experiment 1 we addressed these issues by directly testing frontal - and temporal - variant FTLD ( tvFTLD ) patients on an explicit analogy task requiring subject to try to make relational matches , while simultaneously including both perceptual and semantic distractors as answer choices . Further , we re - tested several of the subjects at a later time with a version of the task that eliminated semantic or perceptual distractors in order to determine whether fvFTLD patients would show an increase in the ability to give relational answers when sources of distraction were removed . As noted earlier , prior reasoning tasks have focused on the integration of multiple relations as a critical aspect of task per - formance that requires intact PFC ( Waltz et al . , 1999 , 2004 ) . Several attempts have been made to study the interaction of relational complexity and distraction in development ( Morrison et al . , 2006 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ; Viskontas et al . , 2004 ) and in healthy young adults ( Cho , Holyoak , & Cannon , 2007 ) ; how - ever , possible interactions have yet to be systematically studied in patient populations . In Experiment 2 we present data from a relational - pattern task that requires subjects to detect rela - tional changes in one or two dimensions and integrate these changes to answer the problems . The problems are similar to the Raven’s matrices task , but are somewhat simpler and involve only one or two levels of relational complexity . In addition to the relational complexity manipulation , we added seman - tic and perceptual information extraneous to the problems in order to test the hypothesis that fvFTLD patients will show a deﬁcit on problems involving distracting information , and to test whether this deﬁcit speciﬁcally interacts with relational complexity level . While this paper focuses on assessing the reasoning per - formance of fvFTLD patients , we also consider the impact of tvFTLD on reasoning performance . We hypothesize that tvFTLD patients will show some impairment on picture analo - gies due to their loss of semantic knowledge . They are less likely to show impairments based on distraction and overall we pre - dicted that their performance on both tasks would be superior to that of fvFTLD patients . 2 . Methods ( Experiment 1 ) 2 . 1 . Participants The characteristics of all participants are summarized in Table 1 . Patients were recruited on the basis of neurological diagnoses of FTLD following the guidelines of Neary et al . ( 1998 ) . The classiﬁcation of patients as frontal or temporal variant was made using imaging data and cognitive and behavioral symptoms ( SPECT , PET , or structural MRI ) . MMSE scores were above 20 for all participants . This experiment received approval from the Institutional Review Boards of UCLA , UCSF , and USC and has therefore been performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki . All participants provided informed consent to participate . There were no signiﬁcant differences in age or education among any of the par - ticipant groups . A subset of the participants were tested at their homes and paid $ 10 for their participation , while others were tested at a clinic as part of a battery of cognitive testing . Two problem sets were used in Experiment Table 1 Participant characteristics for Experiment 1 : picture analogies Measure fvFTLD patients tvFTLD patients Healthy controls Distractor set No - distractor set Distractor set No - distractor set Distractor set No - distractor set n M n M n M n M n M n M CharacterizingAge 10 61 . 00 5 57 . 00 6 60 . 00 4 60 . 00 10 64 . 00 8 61 . 00 Education 10 15 . 10 5 16 . 40 6 17 . 75 4 17 . 25 10 16 . 95 8 17 . 19 MMSE 10 25 . 90 5 25 . 40 6 26 . 17 4 25 . 75 – – – – ExecutiveWCST 7 36 . 00 3 32 . 00 1 14 . 00 1 14 . 00 – – – – Stroop A 6 62 . 50 1 77 . 00 1 36 . 00 0 – – – – – Stroop B 5 71 . 60 0 – 1 29 . 00 0 – – – – – Stroop C 5 108 . 25 0 – 1 88 . 00 0 – – – – – Working memory Digit Fwd 8 7 . 25 3 8 . 67 3 6 . 67 3 6 . 67 – – – – Digit Bkwd 7 4 . 43 2 4 . 50 3 5 . 67 3 5 . 67 – – – – Semantic memory BNT ( 60 items ) 7 74 . 43 % 2 78 . 5 % 1 83 . 00 % 1 97 . 00 % – – – – D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2023 1 , the distractor set and the no - distractor set . The distractor set was com - pleted by 10 fvFTLD patients , 6 tvFTLD patients , and 10 healthy control participants . The no - distractor set was completed by 5 of the 10 fvFTLD patients , 4 of the 6 tvFTLD patients , and 8 of the 10 healthy control sub - jects . This difference in participant numbers between the two problem sets was due to the fact that we had initially begun testing the patients with the distractor set before developing the no - distractor set for comparisons in perfor - mance . 2 . 2 . Materials Picture analogy problems were presented in the format A : B : : C : D , where the D item was absent and needed to be completed with one of four answer choices presented beneath the problem ( see Fig . 1A ) . The A and B items ( e . g . sandwich and lunchbox ) were presented to the left of a vertical line . The C item ( hammer ) and a question mark were presented to the right of this line . There were four answer choices presented below the problem in all instances . Two versions of the problem set were presented , the distrac - tor set and the no - distractor set . A subset of the analogy problems were modiﬁed versions of problems from the Goranson Analogy Test ( Goranson , 2002 ) . The distractor set consisted of 16 problems . Answer choices included the correct analogical answer ( the toolbox in Fig . 1A ) , a semantically related dis - tractor item that came from the same semantic category as the C item of the analogy ( the nail ) , a perceptually related distractor that looked similar to the C item ( the gavel ) , and an unrelated distractor item that had no strong rela - tionship to the C item ( the ribbon ) . The speciﬁc ordering of answer choices was randomized throughout the problem set and the order of presentation was randomized across all participants . The serial position of the answer choices was counterbalanced such that each answer type appeared an equal num - ber of times in each of the answer choice positions throughout the problem set . Refer to Appendix A for a complete list of the items used in the prob - lems . Fig . 1 . A sample problem from the picture analogy set . ( A ) Analogy item from the distractor set—sandwich : lunchbox : : hammer : ? in which the answer choices are the correct analogical answer ( toolbox ) , an unrelated item ( ribbon ) , a per - ceptual distractor ( gavel ) , and a semantic distractor ( nail ) . ( B ) Representation of the same problem from the no - distractor set . Note that three unrelated answer choices have replaced the three incorrect answer choices shown in ( A ) . The no - distractor set was identical to the ﬁrst set with two exceptions : the correct answer appeared in a different spatially ordered position among the answer choices than it had in the distractor set , and the semantic and perceptual incorrect answer choices used in the distractor set were replaced with items unrelated to the C term of the problem ( the chicken and witch in Fig . 1B ) . The no - distractor set was also presented in a new randomized order across all participants . The correct analogical answer appeared an equal number of times in each of the answer choice positions . Refer to Appendix B for a complete list of the items used in the no - distractor problems . 2 . 3 . Procedure Participants were initially tested on the distractor set . All instructions and problems were presented on a laptop computer positioned at a comfortable dis - tance from the participant . The experimenter read a series of instructions stating that the participant should think about the relationship between the ﬁrst two pictures to the left of the vertical line , and consider what would go with the third picture to the right of the vertical line to complete a similar relationship . Participants were instructed that they would ﬁrst see each problem and should consider what they thought the relationship between the items to the left of the vertical line was , and that after a brief amount of time ( 2s ) the answer choices wouldappearbeneaththeproblem . Twoexampleproblemswereincludedduring the instruction period . After each practice problem the experimenter explained which answer was correct and clariﬁed the inter - item relationships that made it the correct answer . Following the instructions , participants completed the dis - tractor set . The experimenter pointed to each picture item presented in each problem and named it in order to clarify what each picture represented . Partici - pants chose their answer by pointing to the choice on the screen or saying their answer choice aloud . The experimenter entered the key corresponding to the chosen answer . The No - Distraction condition followed a delay of 30 – 45min during which the participant completed an unrelated cognitive task . The same instructions were presented to the participants in the no - distractor set condition as they had received for the distractor set condition . The example problems were the same , but included three unrelated incorrect choices along with the correct analogical answer ( refer to Fig . 1B ) . Following the instructions , participants completed the no - distractor set using the same procedure that had been used in the distractor set condition . 2 . 4 . Statistics Differencesinaccuracybetweenthedifferentpatientgroupsonthedistractor problemsetwereevaluatedusinganalysesofvariancewithBonferroni - corrected post hoc tests to determine whether speciﬁc differences were robust . Additional ANOVAs were carried out to test whether other answer choices were signif - icantly different among the groups . Performance on the no - distractor set was compared to that on the distractor set using a repeated - measures ANOVA , while speciﬁc within - group comparisons were made using Bonferroni - corrected post hoc tests . 3 . Results ( Experiment 1 ) 3 . 1 . Distractor set Fig . 2 shows the mean percentages of different answer choices made by each of the participant groups . The number of correct analogical answers was initially compared among the three participant groups using a one - way ANOVA , which revealed a signiﬁcant difference among the three groups , F ( 2 , 23 ) = 17 . 91 , p < . 001 . Bonferroni - corrected post hoc tests ( p < . 05 ) showed that normal controls provided a signiﬁcantly greater percentage of correct answers than both fvFTLD patients and tvFTLD patients . In addition , tvFTLD patients provided more correct answers than fvFTLD patients . These ﬁndings establish that both patient groups showed lowered performance 2024 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 Fig . 2 . Results of the distractor set in the picture analogy task . fvFTLD patients reported fewer correct answers compared to tvFTLD patients and healthy con - trols . tvFTLD patients also showed decreased correct responding relative to healthy controls . Furthermore , only fvFTLD patients failed to report more cor - rect matches than semantic distractor matches . on the analogy task , with fvFTLD patients showing the greatest impairment . We conducted similar analyses on the other answer cate - gories ( semantic distractor , perceptual distractor , and unrelated item ) . In these analyses we found a signiﬁcant difference among the participant groups for number of semantic distractors , F ( 2 , 23 ) = 11 . 57 , p < . 001 , with Bonferroni post hoc tests ( p < . 05 ) revealing that fvFTLD patients made more semantic distractor choices than healthy controls . No other differences were signif - icant for the semantic distractor items . A signiﬁcant difference was also found for perceptual distractor items , F ( 2 , 25 ) = 3 . 41 , p = . 05 , with Bonferroni post hoc tests revealing that fvFTLD patients made more perceptual distractor choices than healthy controls . There were no signiﬁcant differences among unre - lated answer choices among any of the participant groups . These results indicate that fvFTLD patients were especially prone to making errors that involved choosing either the semantic or per - ceptual distractor item relative to control subjects . In addition , temporal - variant patients tended to select distractor items at a greater level than normal controls , perhaps due to semantic deﬁcits . To further test our hypothesis that fvFTLD patients would be particularly susceptible to making errors based on semantic relatedness , we conducted dependent - samples t - tests compar - ing the numbers of semantic errors to correct analogical answers within each subject group . These analyses revealed that fvFTLD patients showed no signiﬁcant difference between the percent - age of correct analogical answers ( M = 49 % ) and incorrect semantic distractor answers ( M = 36 % ) , t ( 9 ) = 0 . 90 , p = . 39 . These differences were signiﬁcant for tvFTLD patients ( ana - logical M = 73 % , semantic M = 20 % ) , t ( 5 ) = 5 . 29 , p < . 01 , and for healthy control participants ( analogical M = 98 % , semantic M = 2 % ) , t ( 9 ) = 51 . 00 , p < . 001 . This pattern of results supports the hypothesis that control of semantic interference is a cogni - tive function supported by the PFC , as only the frontal - variant patients failed to provide reliably more analogically correct answers than semantic distractor answers . Fig . 3 . Mean improvement in correct analogical answers from the distractor set to the no - distractor set in the picture analogy task . Only fvFTLD patients showed a reliable improvement between the two sets with distractors removed . Error bars denote standard error of the mean . 3 . 2 . No - distractor set The number of analogically correct answers was compared among the three subject groups using a 3 ( group ) × 2 ( test session ) repeated - measures ANOVA . This analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of test , F ( 1 , 14 ) = 50 . 59 , p < . 001 and a signiﬁcant task by group interaction , F ( 2 , 14 ) = 16 . 11 , p < . 001 . Bonferroni - corrected post hoc tests ( p < . 05 ) revealed that normal controls provided signiﬁcantly more correct answers ( M = 100 % ) than frontal - variant FTLD patients ( M = 84 % ) . No other comparisons were signiﬁcant . These data are summarized in Fig . 3 . We further analyzed the degree of improvement between tests for the three subject groups using Bonferroni - corrected dependent - samples t - tests ( p < . 05 ) . These analyses revealed a signiﬁcant improvement for fvFTLD patients , who gave a greater number of analogical answers on the no - distractor set compared to the distractor set , t ( 4 ) = 5 . 03 , p < . 01 . There were no reliable differences in improvement for the other participant groups . ThisresultindicatesthatfvFTLDpatientsdisproportion - ately beneﬁted from the absence of distraction from perceptually andparticularlysemanticallyrelatedanswersintheno - distractor set . This ﬁnding is consistent with the hypothesis that a source of performance failure in reasoning in fvFTLD patients is the inability to suppress related but incorrect answers . 4 . Methods ( Experiment 2 ) 4 . 1 . Participants The characteristics of the 17 participants are summarized in Table 2 . Three of the fvFTLD patients and two of the tvFTLD patients had also participated in Experiment 1 . Patients with FTLD were recruited on the basis of neurological diagnosis following the guidelines of Neary et al . ( 1998 ) . The extent of dam - age to either the frontal or temporal cortex was determined using imaging data ( SPECT , PET , or structural MRI ) . Mini - mental Status Exam scores were above 20 for all participants . This experiment received approval from the Institutional Review Boards of UCLA , UCSF , and USC and has therefore been performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki . All participants provided informed consent to participate . There were no signiﬁcant differences in age or education among any of the participant D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2025 Table 2 Participant characteristics for Experiment 2 : relational - pattern reasoning task Measure fvFTLD patients tvFTLD patients Healthy controls n M n M n M CharacterizingAge 9 58 . 89 4 61 . 50 6 59 . 00 Education 9 16 . 50 4 18 . 13 6 17 . 75 MMSE 9 26 . 22 4 25 . 50 6 – ExecutiveWCST 2 43 . 00 1 9 . 00 – – Stroop A 2 69 . 50 0 – – – Stroop B 0 – 0 – – – Working memory Digit Fwd 6 6 . 83 3 6 . 00 – – Digit Bkwd 7 3 . 75 2 5 . 50 – – Semantic memory BNT ( 60 items ) 2 78 . 5 % 1 100 % – – groups . Frontal - variant participants were ﬁrst screened to determine whether they could reliably solve one - relation / no distraction problems in the practice phase prior to the task . Participants were either tested at their home and paid $ 10fortheirparticipation , orinaclinicenvironmentaspartofacognitivetesting battery . 4 . 2 . Materials A set of 80 relational - pattern reasoning problems was presented in this task . Each problem followed the same format , showing three cartoon pic - tures of a person with arrows indicating that the cartoons should be viewed from left to right ( see Fig . 4 ) . There were four versions of cartoon peo - ple that appeared in equal numbers in the problem set . Each problem featured one version of a cartoon person exclusively . Two male and two female cartoon people were used in the problems . The males wore red and blue clothes , respectively , and the females wore green or magenta clothes . Clothing color was ﬁxed for each cartoon character . The variations of cloth - ing color and gender of the cartoon people were included to make the task less - reliant upon perceptual features only , and to discourage persever - ative responding based on speciﬁc features of the stimuli in the patient groups . Problems were constructed to include one - relation and two - relation prob - lems . One - relation problems showed either a size change , in which the cartoon person started small and became progressively larger in the next two images ( see Fig . 4A ) , or showed a color change in which the cartoon person’s outﬁt started in a light shade and became progressively darker shades of the same color in the next two images ( see Fig . 4A ) . Two - relation problems showed both size and color shade changes in the same three cartoon images ( see Fig . 4A ) . The problems were counterbalanced so that each of the four cartoon people was included in 25 % of the problems within each relational and distraction category . Participants had to judge whether a complete relation change occurred for all relations present in each problem . For example , a “true” one - relation size problem showed the cartoon person starting small and becoming larger Fig . 4 . Examples of the relational - pattern reasoning problems . ( A ) Representations of different types of “true” problems from the task showing a one - relation size change , a one - relation color change , and a two - relation change in which both size and color change . ( B ) Representations of different “false” problems showing instances in which person 1 and 2 change , but person 3 does not . 2026 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 in each image ( see Fig . 4A ) , or starting with light shade clothes and becom - ing darker in each image . A “false” one - relation problem showed a change occurring from the ﬁrst cartoon image to the second , but no change occur - ring from the second cartoon to the third ( see Fig . 4B ) . For “true” two - relation problems both relations showed complete patterns ( both size and color shade would change progressively from the ﬁrst to the third cartoon image ) . In a “false” two - relation problem , the cartoon person showed a complete pat - tern for one relation ( e . g . size ) , but an incomplete pattern for the other ( e . g . color shade ; refer to Fig . 4B ) . Problems were counterbalanced so that size and color shade represented the false relation an equal number of times in the one - relation and two - relation problems . In addition , the prob - lem set included 40 relationally true problems and 40 relationally false ones ; these appeared in equal proportions for one - relation and two - relation prob - lems . 4 . 3 . Semantic - Distraction In addition to relational change , several subsets of the problems included distracting clothing or accessories added to the three cartoon people . These accessories were included in order to provide a relatively familiar source of distraction from the correct relational answer to the problems . One semantic - distraction ( S - D ) problem subset consisted of 32 problems to which two theme - related accessories were added to each cartoon person in the problem . For example , there was a ﬁreﬁghter theme that showed the ﬁrst character with a ﬁre hose and coat , the second with a ﬁre hat and axe , and the third with a ﬁre extinguisher and boots . Refer to Appendix C for a list of the theme - related items that were added to the cartoon people . In addition to the ﬁreﬁghter theme there was a western theme , a ﬁshing theme , and a baseball theme . Anadditional32S - Dproblemswereconstructedbyincludingtheme - related clothing in each of the three people in a given problem . For example , one such problem included the western theme clothing in which each cartoon person wore a separate version of the western clothing ( see Appendix C ) . It should be noted that in this case the western theme uniﬁes the three people ; how - ever , the speciﬁc clothing items were never repeated in these problems to avoid additional perceptual similarity . A subset of 16 of the S - D problems was theme consistent meaning that a particular theme clothing set appeared for each of the three cartoon people ( e . g . all ﬁshing - themed , see Fig . 5A ) . The remaining 16 S - D problems were theme - inconsistent , meaning the theme - related clothing accessories for the ﬁrst two cartoon people were from the same category ( e . g . all ﬁshing - themed ) , but the clothing theme was differ - ent for the third cartoon person ( e . g . ﬁreﬁghter - themed , see Fig . 5A ) . This manipulation enabled us to include problems in which the theme - related acces - sories would aid participants in solving them ( relationally true / theme - consistent and relationally false / theme - inconsistent problems ) , as well as problems in which the theme - related accessories would hinder participants ( relationally true / theme - inconsistent and relationally false / theme - consistent problems ) . The S - D problems were counterbalanced so that an equal number of relationally true and relationally false problems appeared with theme - consistent and theme - inconsistent accessories . 4 . 4 . Perceptual - Distraction Thirty - twoperceptuallydistracting ( P - D ) itemswereincludedintheproblem set . In these cases three identical sets of accessories were included for each car - toon person in the problem . For instance all three cartoon people may have had a cowboy hat and a lasso . These problems were either perceptually consistent , with all three people wearing identical accessories ( see Fig . 5B ) , or perceptually inconsistent , with one person wearing a different set of items from the same theme ( e . g . person 1 and person 2 wore a baseball hat and held a baseball , while person 3 wore a baseball shirt and held a baseball bat ; see Fig . 5B ) . As with the S - D problems , the use of consistent and inconsistent distractor accessories allowedustoconstruct16perceptuallyconsistentproblemsinwhichthedistrac - tor items could potentially help participants to solve the problems ( relationally true / perceptually consistent and relationally false / perceptually inconsistent ) , as well as 16 perceptually inconsistent problems that potentially led participants away from the correct answer ( relationally true / perceptually inconsistent and relationally false / perceptually consistent problems ) . The P - D problems were counterbalancedsothatanequalnumberofrelationallytrueandrelationallyfalseproblemsappearedwithperceptuallyconsistentandperceptuallyinconsistentaccessories . 4 . 5 . Procedure Participants were initially told that they would see three pictures of a person that should be viewed from left to right on the screen and that they should look for all of the ways that the person changes . The experimenter then showed examples of the one - relation change problems and described the manner in which each change occurred . The experimenter further explained that both color and size may change in one problem and an example of this type was shown . Participants were then told that they should respond “true” if all changes were complete in the problem . Examples of true one - relation problems in which size or color changed were shown . An example of a true two - relation problem was also shown . Participants were next told that they should respond “false” to any problem in which any of the changes were not complete . Examples of one - relation color and size problems were then shown , as was an example of a false two - relation problem . The experimenter fully explained the types of changes and why each one was either true or false , as well as pointing out the visual characteristics that should be attended to . At this time the participant completed a practice phase consisting of 10 problems . Includedinthispracticephasewereexamplesofeachtypeofproblem thatwouldbeencounteredintheactualtest , includingbothone - relationandtwo - relation problems , each type of true and false problem , each type of one - relation change , and each of the four cartoon people . After this phase , participants were shown example problems with the S - D and P - D accessories and were told to ignore the accessories when they appeared and to answer the problems based on the instructions given previously . Participants then completed a second practice phaseconsistingof10representativeproblemsbasedonanswertypeandnumberofrelationalchangespresent . Half of the problems in this set were S - D and half were P - D . The experimenter answered participant questions about the problems Fig . 5 . Examples of the types of distracting information included in the relational - pattern reasoning problems . Semantically distracting information included all people having extraneous clothing from the same class of items ( e . g . ﬁshing gear ) , or from different classes of items ( e . g . ﬁshing gear and ﬁre - ﬁghting gear ) . Perceptually distracting information involved all people wearing identical outﬁts ( e . g . baseball caps and gloves ) , or all people wearing semantically related outﬁts , but one of the three having perceptually different accessories than the others . D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2027 and explained each answer during the practice phases . The full 80 problem set was then completed . 5 . Results ( Experiment 2 ) We tested for differences in performance among the differ - ent subject groups and levels of relational complexity using an analysis of variance with Bonferroni - corrected post hoc tests . This was followed up with speciﬁc tests of the frontal patient performance using the d ’ statistic , which is sensitive to detect - ing response criteria based on signal detection theory ( Wickens , 2001 ) . A repeated - measures ANOVA was carried out to test whetherfrontalpatientsperformeddifferentlyonproblemsvary - ing in distraction and in relational complexity . Fig . 6A shows the mean proportion correct for the one - relation and two - relation problems for each group with and without distraction present . The proportion of correct one - relation and two - relation problems was analyzed using a 2 ( relation - level ) × 3 ( distraction - type ) × 3 ( participant group ) mixed ANOVA . This analysis revealed a signiﬁcant difference among the three groups , F ( 2 , 16 ) = 17 . 51 , p < . 001 . Bonferroni - corrected post hoc tests ( p < . 05 ) revealed that a greater percentage of correct answers were provided by normal con - trols ( M = 99 % ) and tvFTLD patients ( M = 99 % ) than fvFTLD patients ( M = 68 % ) . There were no other signiﬁcant differences found in this initial analysis . Fig . 6 . Performance on the relational - pattern reasoning task . ( A ) Overall , fvFTLD patients provided fewer relationally correct answers than the other groups . Furthermore , this group showed a selective deﬁcit for distraction prob - lems over non - distraction problems . ( B ) Data from the fvFTLD patients who were non - perseverative . This group showed evidence of distraction being a key factor in the performance impairment of this group . Error bars denote standard error of the mean . Some subjects in the fvFTLD group showed a tendency to perseverate in the way they responded during the task , relying predominantly on only the true or the false response across the majority of problems . In order to account for this performance difﬁculty , we computed d ’ measures based on signal detection theory ( Wickens , 2001 ) in order to assess the extent to which subjects were sensitive to balancing hit rates with false alarm rates . This analysis revealed that a subset of four subjects in this group had been indiscriminant in their responses as computed by d ’ . We eliminated those four subjects who failed to achieve a d ’ measure above 0 . 50 from subsequent analyses . This choice of threshold eliminated only those subjects who had shown strong evidence of perseveration . The data from the subgroup of fvFTLD subjects that survived the d ’ elimination were tested using a 2 ( distraction ) × 2 ( rela - tion ) repeated - measures ANOVA . This planned - comparison resulted in a main effect of distraction F ( 1 , 4 ) = 17 . 75 , p < . 05 , such that these subjects solved signiﬁcantly more no - distractor problems ( M = . 86 ) than distractor problems ( M = . 78 ) . There was no reliable effect of relational complexity , though these meanswerenumericallydifferentinthepredicteddirection ( one - relation M = . 81 , two - relation M = . 73 ) . There was no signiﬁcant interaction between distraction and relational complexity level . These data indicate that distraction is an important factor inﬂu - encing the errors made by this subject group . 6 . Discussion These results illustrate the importance of the PFC for intact reasoning performance on tasks that require relational pro - cessing in the presence of competing perceptual and semantic information , suggesting that control of interference may be a critical factor necessary for properly appreciating the relational structure relevant to reasoning . In Experiment 1 , we demonstrated that both groups of FTLD patients were impaired on picture analogy performance relative to healthy controls . This ﬁnding is similar to our prior results with verbal analogy materials ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) . In that paper , we applied a neurally plausible computational model of analogy ( LISA ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 , 2005 ) to sup - port the hypothesis that fvFTLD patient’s analogy deﬁcits may stem largely from inhibitory control problems . This position is consistent with our current picture analogy results ( Experiment 1 ) , where fvFTLD patients performed worse than temporal - variant patients and healthy controls on the problems containing semantically or perceptually attractive distractor items ( distrac - tor set ) . Importantly , when these distractor items were removed and replaced with less attractive alternatives ( no - distractor set ) , fvFTLD patients improved more than temporal - variant patients . The ﬁnding suggests that fvFTLD patients may have been able to solve the analogies reasonably well in the absence of dis - tractor choices and that the presence of particularly semantic distractors may be sufﬁcient to disrupt analogical reasoning when the inhibitory control functions of PFC are operating sub - optimally . A potential alternative interpretation is that performance improved in the no - distractor condition because participants 2028 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 were not actually attempting to solve the analogy task , but rather just selecting the answer choice most semantically related to the C term of the analogy . However , if this strategy had been employed we would have expected fvFTLD performance to be near ceiling in the no - distractor condition , where the cor - rect answer ( i . e . , the D term ) was almost always the most semantically related term among the choices present . In fact , fvFTLD patients made a substantial number of errors even when no semantic distractors were present among the choices , sug - gesting that these patients were not simply selecting the most associated term . Although this pattern of results weakens the plausibility of this alternative interpretation , it still may be the case that fvFTLD patients rely on semantic association more than controls in analogy tasks due to poor relational process - ing . The presence of perceptual distractors in the distractor ver - sion also appears to have contributed to deﬁcient performance in fvFTLD patients but to a lesser degree than the semantic dis - tractors as greater proportions of semantic errors were obtained in Experiment 1 . Perceptual distractors have been shown to decrease responding based on relational information in frontal - variant patients in our previous study with scene analogies ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) . The tvFTLD patients performed better than fvFTLD patients but worse than healthy controls in the picture analogy tasks . This deﬁcit in tvFTLD subjects on the distractor set in Exper - iment 1 appears to be related to the semantic concept loss commonly seen in these patients . This group does not gen - erally show speciﬁc deﬁcits in interference control ( Neary , Snowden , Northen , & Goulding , 1988 ) ; rather , their perfor - mance deﬁcit in the distractor set may have been due to loss of speciﬁc relational category information necessary to solve the analogies . While we did not speciﬁcally vary the association strength of various answer choices , inspection of the choices ( see Appendix A ) suggests that the semantic distractors may on the whole be more associated to their respective C terms than were the correct relational terms . Importantly , the tvFTLD group did not beneﬁt from the no - distractor set to the degree that the fvFTLD patients did . Presumably the temporal - variant patients had lost the relational category linking the C and D terms , and thus lacked the necessary information to solve the analogy regardless of presence of a distractor . This ﬁnding is also consistent with the hypothesis that interference control is principally dependent on PFC and not anterior temporal cor - tex . The results of Experiment 1 are consistent with the hypoth - esis that suppressing compelling semantic or perceptual , but relationally incorrect , mappings is a core cognitive skill nec - essary for correct analogical reasoning . Current computational models of analogy have considered inhibitory control to be an important mechanism ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 , 2005 ) , but few prior studies have directly tested the extent to which deﬁcits in interference control are responsible for failures of analogical reasoning . Our results , along with our previous work ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) , support the hypothesis that inhibitory control is critical for analogical reasoning and that it is linked to the PFC . In Experiment 2 we tested the extent to which relational reasoning can be disrupted by relational complexity and by inhibition of extraneous information in PFC - damaged patients . The results of this study show a clear performance deﬁcit for fvFTLD patients over tvFTLD patients and controls . Anal - ysis of the fvFTLD group performance indicated that these patients had the greatest difﬁculty on problems that required control of interference from irrelevant extraneous information . This ﬁnding demonstrates strong support for a frontal deﬁcit in control of interference during reasoning . All subjects had received prior training on how to solve the problems relation - ally and had been explicitly and repeatedly told to ignore all of the extraneous information by the experimenter . The fact that fvFTLD patients could not ignore the extra information is particularly striking under these conditions . In Experiment 1 , the distractors represented an alternative answer choice that had to be considered to select the correct relational choice ; however , in Experiment 2 the relevant relations necessary for solving the problems had nothing to do with the extraneous perceptual and semantic distractors and yet these features still interfered with fvFTLD patient performance . fvFTLD patients were reminded by the experimenter that they were to focus on the relevant color and size relations only and to ignore the additional clothing distraction prior to the actual task , yet they still exhibited sporadic difﬁculties due to these fac - tors . The deﬁcit in interference control for fvFTLD patients in Experiment 2 was observed for both semantic and perceptual forms of distraction . We had designed the task to allow for subjects to inappropriately solve the problems based on alter - native strategies related to the distractor clothing . For example , subjects could have answered “true” for problems in which the extra clothing worn by the characters made them percep - tually or semantically similar or dissimilar . The results failed to support the use of such strategies , but rather indicated that fvFTLD patients tended to perform at lower levels when any distraction was present in the problems . It is also important to note that these patients did not perform at ceiling levels for non - distractor problems , suggesting that their deﬁcit involves additional processes besides distraction from the extraneous features . Contrary to our predictions , we did not observe a signiﬁcant effect of relational complexity on fvFTLD patient performance in Experiment 2 , although performance on higher relational complexity problems was relatively worse in the fvFTLD group than in the other groups . The integration of two or more rela - tions in solving matrix problems has previously been argued to be a frontally mediated process ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ; Waltz et al . , 1999 , 2004 ) . The low number of non - perseverant subjects in Experiment 2 may have limited the statistical power to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relational complexity difference . Another factor that may have contributed to the lack of a clear complexity difference is that the relations of size and color were poten - tially decomposable in this task . Decomposable relations can be considered independently and thus processed serially . By this interpretation , correct two - relation performance requires D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2029 intact maintenance of independent relational solutions , but not necessarily relational integration . The lack of completely non - decomposable relations may have worked against ﬁnd - ing a strong relational complexity effect . It should also be noted that the fvFTLD group was somewhat impaired rela - tive to controls in the one - relation , no distraction problems . This difference may be an indication that relational process - ing deﬁcits are a core feature of the frontal - damaged proﬁle , which may have been exacerbated by the presence of distrac - tion . It is also interesting to note that while tvFTLD patient perfor - mance was compromised in Experiment 1 , which required use of previously learned category information , these patients were more successful in Experiment 2 , which required participants to learn and use several new categories . This result is consis - tent with recent category learning results with FTLD patients ( Koenig , Smith , & Grossman , 2006 ) , which suggests that the PFC is more important than anterior temporal cortex for learn - ing new categories , whereas anterior temporal cortex is critical for the long - term storage of category information . The results of these two experiments converge to demonstrate that intact PFC is necessary for effective relational reasoning . These results , as well as those reported previously ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) , indicate that distracting semantic associates , whether presented verbally or visually , tend to interfere with the ability of fvFTLD patients to select the correct relational choice for an analogy . These data extend the ﬁndings from neuroimaging studies of frontal involvement in relational reasoning ( Bunge et al . , 2005 ; Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Green et al . , 2006 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ; Luo et al . , 2003 ; Wharton et al . , 2000 ) , indicat - ing that a core function of the PFC is to avoid distraction and maintain a goal - directed focus on forming the correct relational answer . Recent models of working memory suggest close intercon - nections between inhibition and the binding of concepts in working memory . Oberauer ( 2005 ) has argued that binding of concepts in working memory can explain results that appear to stem from deﬁcits in inhibitory control . This position fundamen - tally assumes that difﬁculties in working memory arise from the limited capacity to bind together information . This position is broadly consistent with our working memory model based on LISA ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 ) , which proved capable of simulating verbal analogy performance under high distrac - tion conditions ( Morrison et al . , 2004 ) . In this simulation , the joint factors of reduced learning rate and impaired ability to ﬁlter alternative items resulted in successful simulation of the fvFTLD deﬁcit in that analogy task . Thus variations in these two factors can jointly lead to impairment of dynamic binding in working memory . Data from the current study do not deﬁni - tively demonstrate whether the fvFTLD deﬁcit stems from a binding problem , or more purely an inhibitory problem ( Hasher & Zacks , 1988 ) . These two positions are not incompatible , but rather may both constitute cognitive effects of frontal impair - ment , as we have argued in connection with working memory changes during cognitive development ( Morrison et al . , 2006 ) and aging ( Viskontas et al . , 2004 ) . Our results demonstrate how two core PFC functions , inter - ference control and relational integration in working memory , are related to speciﬁc forms of problem solving . While the func - tion of the frontal lobes has been widely considered to include various forms of cognitive control ( Aron , 2007 ; Butter , 1969 ; Iverson & Mishkin , 1970 ; Rubia , Smith , Brammer , & Taylor , 2003 ) , the present results show that interference can disrupt the reasoning process in cases in which distractors are present , even when distracting information is completely unrelated to the rules that deﬁne the problem . Theories of relational reasoning should thus include interference control as a central cognitive operation required for successful problem solving . Acknowledgements This project was supported by NIH Grant MH072613 ( KJH and BJK ) , the Northwestern University Mechanisms of Aging and Dementia Training Grant funded by the National Institute of Aging ( 2T32AG020506A ; RGM ) , and a National Research Service Award from the National Institute of Mental Health ( MH - 064244 ; RGM ) . We thank Catherine Pace - Savitsky at UCSF , Jill Shapira at UCLA , and Kyle Boone at Harbor UCLA for their help with participant recruitment and neuropsychologi - cal testing information . We also thank Tamara Goranson for help with the picture analogy materials . Members of the USC Rancho Los Amigos Rehabilitation Center Frontotemporal Dementia Research Group and Graeme Halford provided useful comments on the experimental materials . We express our deepest gratitude to the participants and caregivers who generously devoted their time and effort by participating in our experiments . 2030 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 Appendix A Analogy problem Correct answer Perceptual distractor Semantic distractor Unrelated answer Practice set Gas pump : car , candy bar : ? Boy Book Mint candy Tree Squirrel : tree , ﬁsh : ? Glass bowl Rocket Hook Camera Distractor set Radio : ear , television : ? Eyes Spaceship TV remote Ship Fork : salad , glass : ? Milk carton Trash can Baby bottle Dice House : tree , igloo : ? Ice Tea kettle Eskimo Maid Toothbrush / paste : teeth , soap : ? Hands Book Hand towels Sofa Sling : arm , cane : ? Leg Candy cane Walker Ladder Rake : gardener , scissors : ? Seamstress Pliers Tape Clown Lamp : light bulb , candle : ? Fire Rocket Flashlight Envelope Dentist : drill , doctor : ? Stethoscope Conductor Medical logo Bananas Baseball : baseball player , football : ? Football player Lemon Soccer ball Scale Airplane : bird , boat : ? Fish Factory Locomotive Boot Grapes : wine , pumpkin : ? Pie Basketball Witch Books Plant : gardener with water , boy : ? Woman w / food Robot Toys Scale Typewriter : page sewing machine : ? Dress Electric mixer Needle & thread Bread Shirt / tie : luggage , paper : ? Briefcase Towel Pencil Electric plug Sandwich : lunchbox , hammer : ? Toolbox Gavel Nail Ribbon Cheese : cow , fried egg : ? Chicken Amoeba Bacon Violin Appendix B Analogy problem Correct answer Unrelated answer Unrelated answer Unrelated answer Practice set Gas pump : car , candy bar : ? Boy Baseball Dice Trashcan Squirrel : tree , ﬁsh : ? Glass bowl Needle / thread Book Bread No - distractor set Radio : ear , television : ? Eyes Pencil Ring Envelope Fork : salad , glass : ? Milk carton Rocket Tree Hook House : tree , igloo : ? Ice Nail Toolbox Gas pump Toothbrush / paste : teeth , soap : ? Hands Train Rocket Bacon Sling : arm , cane : ? Leg Bacon Ladder Amoeba Rake : gardener , scissors : ? Seamstress Cow Violin Mixer Lamp : light bulb , candle : ? Fire Teeth Tape Pliers Dentist : drill , doctor : ? Stethoscope Book Towel Electric plug Baseball : baseball player , football : ? Football player Sandwich Lamp Pliers Airplane : bird , boat : ? Fish Boot Toys Eskimo Grapes : wine , pumpkin : ? Pie Books Car Tree Plant : gardener with water boy : ? Woman w / food Factory Locomotive Scale Typewriter : page , sewing machine : ? Dress Mint candy Camera Fish Shirt / tie : luggage , paper : ? Briefcase Light bulb Robot Nail Sandwich : lunchbox , hammer : ? Toolbox Chicken Witch Ribbon Cheese : cow , fried egg : ? Chicken Tree Walker Violin D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 2031 Appendix C Theme / version Accessory 1 Accessory 2 Baseball A Baseball cap Baseball Baseball B Baseball glove Cleats Baseball C Baseball shirt Baseball bat Fireﬁghter A Coat Fire hose Fireﬁghter B Fireﬁghter hat Axe Fireﬁghter C Fire extinguisher Boots Fishing A Net Fishing hat Fishing B Fishing vest Fish on line Fishing C Fishing pole Wading boots Western A Cowboy hat Lasso Western B Sheriff vest Cowboy boots Western C Holsters Bolo tie References Andrews , G . , & Halford , G . S . ( 2002 ) . A cognitive complexity metric applied to cognitive development . Cognitive Psychology , 45 , 153 – 219 . Aron , A . R . ( 2007 ) . The neural basis of inhibition in cognitive control . Neuro - scientist , 13 , 214 – 228 . Birney , D . P . , Halford , G . S . , & Andrews , G . ( 2006 ) . Measuring the inﬂuence of complexity on relational reasoning : The development of the Latin Square Task . Educational and Psychological Measurement , 66 , 146 – 171 . Bunge , S . A . , Wendelken , C . , Badre , D . , & Wagner , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Analogi - cal reasoning and prefrontal cortex : Evidence for separable retrieval and integration mechanisms . Cerebral Cortex , 15 , 239 – 249 . Butter , C . M . ( 1969 ) . Perseveration in extinction and in discrimination reversal tasks following selective prefrontal ablations in Macaca mulatta . Physiology & Behavior , 4 , 163 – 171 . Cho , S . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Cannon , T . ( 2007 ) . Analogical reasoning in work - ing memory : Resources shared among relational integration , interference resolution , and maintenance . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 1445 – 1455 . Chow , T . W . , Miller , B . L . , Boone , K . , Mishkin , F . , & Cummings , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Frontotemporal dementia classiﬁcation and neuropsychiatry . Neurologist , 8 , 263 – 269 . Christoff , K . , & Owen , A . M . ( 2006 ) . Improving reverse neuroimaging infer - ence : Cognitive domain versus cognitive complexity . Trends in Cognitive Science , 10 , 352 – 353 . Christoff , K . , Prabhakaran , V . , Dorfman , J . , Zhao , Z . , Kroger , J . K . , Holyoak , K . J . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during reasoning . NeuroImage , 14 , 1136 – 1149 . D’Esposito , M . , Detre , J . A . , Alsop , D . C . , Shin , R . K . , Atlas , S . , & Grossman , M . ( 1995 ) . Theneuralbasisofthecentralexecutivesystemofworkingmemory . Nature , 378 , 279 – 281 . Duncan , J . , Seitz , R . J . , Kolodny , J . , Bor , D . , Herzog , H . , Ahmed , A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A neural basis for general intelligence . Science , 289 , 457 – 460 . Fales , C . L . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Geschwind , D . H . , Swerdloff , R . S . , & Gonzalo , I . G . ( 2003 ) . Working memory and relational reasoning in Klinefeltersyndrome . JournaloftheInternationalNeuropsychologySociety , 9 , 839 – 847 . Fuster , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Executive frontal functions . Experimental Brain Research , 133 , 66 – 70 . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . Goranson , T . E . ( 2002 ) . On diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease : Assessing abstract thinkingandreasoning . DissertationAbstractsInternational : SectionB : The Sciences and Engineering , 62 , 4785 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . , Shamosh , N . A . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2006 ) . Frontopolar cortex mediates abstract integration in analogy . Brain Research , 22 , 125 – 137 . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , & Phillips , S . ( 1998 ) . Processing capacity deﬁned by relational complexity : Implications for comparative , developmental , and cognitive psychology . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 803 – 864 . Hasher , L . , & Zacks , R . T . ( 1988 ) . Workingmemory , comprehension , andaging : A view and a new view . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( pp . 193 – 225 ) . New York : Academic Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 323 – 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Kroger , J . K . ( 1995 ) . Forms of reasoning : Insight into pre - frontalfunctions ? InJ . Grafman , K . J . Holyoak , & F . Boller ( Eds . ) , Structure andfunctionsofthehumanprefrontalcortex ( pp . 253 – 263 ) . NewYork : New York Academy of Sciences . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributedrepresentationsofstructure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) . Asymbolic - connectionisttheoryofrela - tional inference and generalization . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 – 264 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Relational reasoning in a neurally - plausible cognitive architecture : An overview of the LISA project . Current Directions in Cognitive Science , 14 , 153 – 157 . Iverson , S . D . , & Mishkin , M . ( 1970 ) . Perseverative interference in monkey followingselectivelesionsoftheinferiorprefrontalconvexity . Experimental Brain Research , 11 , 367 – 386 . Knibb , J . A . , Kipps , C . M . , & Hodges , J . R . ( 2006 ) . Frontotemporal dementia . Current Opinion in Neurology , 19 , 565 – 571 . Koechlin , E . , Ody , C . , & Kouneiher , F . ( 2003 ) . The architecture of cognitive control in the human prefrontal cortex . Science , 302 , 1181 – 1185 . Koechlin , E . , & Summerﬁeld , C . ( 2007 ) . An information theoretical approach to prefrontal executive function . Trends in Cognitive Science , 11 , 229 – 235 . Koenig , P . , Smith , E . E . , & Grossman , M . ( 2006 ) . Semantic categorisation of novel objects in frontotemporal dementia . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 23 , 541 – 562 . Krawczyk , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Hummel , J . E . ( 2004 ) . Structural con - straints and object similarity in analogical mapping and inference . Thinking & Reasoning , 10 , 85 – 104 . Krawczyk , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Hummel , J . E . ( 2005 ) . The one - to - one con - straint in analogical mapping and inference . Cognitive Science , 29 , 29 – 38 . Kroger , J . K . , Saab , F . W . , Fales , C . L . , Bookheimer , S . Y . , Cohen , M . S . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2002 ) . Recruitment of anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning : A parametric study of relational complexity . Cerebral Cortex , 12 , 477 – 485 . Luo , Q . , Perry , C . , Peng , D . , Jin , Z . , Xu , D . , Ding , G . , et al . ( 2003 ) . The neural substrateofanalogicalreasoning : AnfMRIstudy . CognitiveBrainResearch , 17 , 527 – 534 . Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Constraints on analogical inference . Cognitive Science , 21 , 373 – 418 . Melrose , R . J . , Poulin , R . M . , & Stern , C . E . ( 2007 ) . An fMRI investigation of the role of the basal ganglia in reasoning . Brain Research , 1142 , 146 – 158 . Miller , E . K . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 , 167 – 202 . Morrison , R . G . , Doumas , L . A . A . , & Richland , L . E . ( 2006 ) . The development of analogical reasoning in children : A computational account . In Proceed - ings of the twenty - ninth annual conference of the cognitive science society . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Morrison , R . G . , Krawczyk , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , Hummel , J . E . , Chow , T . W . , Miller , B . L . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A neurocomputational model of analogical reasoning and its breakdown in frontotemporal lobar degeneration . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 16 , 260 – 271 . Neary , D . , Snowden , J . S . , Gustafson , L . , Passant , U . , Stuss , D . , Black , S . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Frontotemporal lobar degeneration : A consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria . Neurology , 51 , 1546 – 1554 . Neary , D . , Snowden , J . S . , Northen , B . , & Goulding , P . ( 1988 ) . Dementia of frontal lobe type . Journal of Neurology , Neurosurgery & Psychiatry , 51 , 353 – 361 . Oberauer , K . ( 2005 ) . Binding and inhibition in working memory : Individual and age differences in short - term recognition . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : General , 134 , 368 – 387 . O’Doherty , J . P . , Kringelbach , M . L . , Rolls , E . T . , Hornak , J . , & Andrews , C . ( 2001 ) . Abstract reward and punishment representations in the human orbitofrontal cortex . Nature Neuroscience , 4 , 95 – 102 . 2032 D . C . Krawczyk et al . / Neuropsychologia 46 ( 2008 ) 2020 – 2032 Prabhakaran , V . , Rypma , B . , & Gabrieli , J . D . ( 2001 ) . Neural substrates of mathematical reasoning : A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of neocortical activation during performance of the necessary arithmetic operations test . Neuropsychology , 15 , 115 – 127 . Prabhakaran , V . , Smith , A . L . , Desmond , J . , Glover , G . , & Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 1997 ) . Neural substrates of ﬂuid reasoning : An fMRI study of neocorti - cal activation during performance of the Raven’s progressive matrices test . Cognitive Psychology , 33 , 43 – 63 . Quintana , J . , Fuster , J . M . , & Yajeya , J . ( 1989 ) . Effects of cooling parietal cortex on prefrontal units in delay tasks . Brain Research , 503 , 100 – 110 . Raven , J . C . ( 1941 ) . Standardization of progressive matrices , 1938 . British Journal of Medical Psychology , 19 , 137 – 150 . Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s develop - mentofanalogicalreasoning : Insightsfromsceneanalogyproblems . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 271 . Robin , N . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1995 ) . Relational complexity and the functions of prefrontal cortex . In M . S . Gazzaniga ( Ed . ) , The cognitive neurosciences ( pp . 987 – 997 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rolls , E . T . , Hornak , J . , Wade , D . , & McGrath , J . ( 1994 ) . Emotion - related learn - ing in patients with social and emotional changes associated with frontal lobe damage . Journal of Neurology , Neurosurgery & Psychiatry , 57 , 1518 – 1524 . Rosen , H . J . , Gorno - Tempini , M . L . , Goldman , W . P . , Perry , R . J . , Schuff , N . , Weiner , M . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Common and differing patterns of brain atrophy in frontotemporal dementia and semantic dementia . Neurology , 58 , 198 – 208 . Rubia , K . , Smith , A . B . , Brammer , M . J . , & Taylor , E . ( 2003 ) . Right inferior prefrontalcortexmediatesresponseinhibitionwhilemesialprefrontalcortexisresponsibleforerrordetection . NeuroImage , 20 , 351 – 358 . Shimamura , A . P . ( 2000 ) . The role of the prefrontal cortex in dynamic ﬁltering . Psychobiology , 28 , 207 – 218 . Smith , E . E . , & Jonides , J . ( 1999 ) . Storage and executive processes in the frontal lobes . Science , 283 , 1657 – 1661 . Snow , R . E . , Kyllonen , C . P . , & Marshalek , B . ( 1984 ) . The topography of ability and learning correlations . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( pp . 47 – 103 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Snowden , J . , Neary , D . , & Mann , D . ( 2007 ) . Frontotemporallobardegeneration : Clinical and pathological relationships . Acta Neuropathology ( Berlin ) . Viskontas , I . V . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Knowlton , B . J . ( 2006 ) . Integrating multiple relations : Working memory capacity constrains reasoning ability in older adults . Thinking & Reasoning . Viskontas , I . V . , Morrison , R . G . , Holyoak , K . J . , Hummel , J . E . , & Knowlton , B . J . ( 2004 ) . Relational integration , inhibition and analogical reasoning in older adults . Psychology and Aging , 19 , 581 – 591 . Wallis , J . D . , Anderson , K . C . , & Miller , E . K . ( 2001 ) . Single neurons in pre - frontal cortex encode abstract rules . Nature , 411 , 953 – 956 . Waltz , J . A . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Boone , K . B . , Back - Madruga , C . , McPherson , S . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Relational integration and executive function in Alzheimer’s disease . Neuropsychology , 18 , 296 – 305 . Waltz , J . A . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Boone , K . B . , Mishkin , F . S . , de Menezes Santos , M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal cortex . Psychological Science , 10 , 119 – 125 . Wharton , C . M . , Grafman , J . , Flitman , S . S . , Hansen , E . K . , Brauner , J . , Marks , A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Toward neuroanatomical models of analogy : A positron emission tomography study of analogical mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 40 , 173 – 197 . Wickens , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Elementary signal detection theory . Oxford University Press .