University of Pennsylvania ScholarlyCommons Journal Articles ( Literacy . org ) Literacy . org 1978 Review of R . V . Kail , Jr . and J . W . Hagen ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition , and D . G . Bobrow and A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Representation and Understanding : Studies in Cognitive Science Daniel A . Wagner University of Pennsylvania , wagner @ literacy . upenn . edu Follow this and additional works at : https : / / repository . upenn . edu / literacyorg _ articles Part of the Child Psychology Commons , Cognitive Psychology Commons , Early Childhood Education Commons , Educational Psychology Commons , and the Language and Literacy Education Commons This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons . https : / / repository . upenn . edu / literacyorg _ articles / 26 For more information , please contact repository @ pobox . upenn . edu . Recommended Citation Wagner , Daniel A . , " Review of R . V . Kail , Jr . and J . W . Hagen ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition , and D . G . Bobrow and A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Representation and Understanding : Studies in Cognitive Science " ( 1978 ) . Journal Articles ( Literacy . org ) . 26 . https : / / repository . upenn . edu / literacyorg _ articles / 26 Review of R . V . Kail , Jr . and J . W . Hagen ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition , and D . G . Bobrow and A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Representation and Understanding : Studies in Cognitive Science Abstract The use of narrative and other prose forms as a tool for investigating mental processes is not new . Psychologists such as Jean Piaget and F . C . Bartlett both used stories in research on complex cognitive skills in children and adults . However , with the advent of Ebbinghaus ' monumental work on memory using " non - sense syllables , " theoretical psychology turned away from the use of meaningful material . With the use of nonsense syllables , researchers hoped to isolate the variables of memory and individual content associations . Recently , there has been a renewal of interest in the study of narrative and memory due to the recognition that narrative taps certain processes that syllables and isolated words do not . In addition , narrative and memory studies have generated interest among those researchers concerned with the applicability of memory studies to educational settings . Disciplines Child Psychology | Cognitive Psychology | Early Childhood Education | Education | Educational Psychology | Language and Literacy Education This review is available at ScholarlyCommons : https : / / repository . upenn . edu / literacyorg _ articles / 26 VOL . 22 KEYSTONE FOLKLORE NO . 1 - 2 BOOK REVIEWS Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition By R . V . Kail , Jr . and J . W . Hagen ( Editors ) . Hillsdale , New Jersey : L . Erlbaum , 1977 - 498 pp . $ 20 . 00 Representation and Understanding : Studies in Cognitive Science . By D . G . Bob row and A . Collins ( Editors ) . New York : Academic Press . 427 pp . ( Price unavailable ) . Reviewed by Amy Shuman and Daniel A . Wagner , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The use of narrative and other prose forms as a tool for investigating mental processes is not new . Psychologists such as Jean Piaget and F . C . Bartlett both used stories in research on complex cognitive skills in children and adults . However , with the advent of Ebbinghaus ' monumental work on memory using " non sense syllables , " theoretical psychology turned away from the use of meaningful material . With the use of nonsense syllables , re searchers hoped to isolate the variables of memory and individual content associations . Recently , there has been a renewal of interest in the study of narrative and memory due to the recogni tion that narrative taps certain processes that syllables and isolated words do not . In addition , narrative and memory studies have generated interest among those researchers concerned with the applicability of memory studies to educational settings . While no single volume yet exists devoted solely to the study of narrative and cognition , several important studies have appeared in recent books . In " Notes on a Schema for Stories " ( in Bobrow and Collins ) , Rumelhart develops a scheme for the structure of narra tive based on the work of the folklorist Vladimir Propp . Specifi cally , Rumelhart outlines a simple story grammar , explains its components , and hypothesizes that more structured stories are easier to recall than less structured stories . Unfortunately , Rumelhart ' s story grammar is oversimplified and does not reflect structural and formal analysis beyond Propp . Rummelhart ' s work is complemented by other , more sophisticated , research on specific aspects of story structure as related to recognition and recall memory . For example , Stein and Glenn ' s , " The Role of Structural Variation in Children ' s Recall of Simple Stories , " investigates the hypothesis that various causal relationships within stories 103 VOL . 22 KEYSTONE FOLKLORE NO . 1 - 2 influenced subsequent accuracy of recall of those stories . Other chapters of potential interest in the Bobrow and Collins volume include : Schank ' s , " The Structure of Episodes in Memory " and Kuiper ' s , " A Frame for Frames . " In Kail and Hagen ' s , Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition , narrative plays an important part in the investigation of a variety of cognitive processes in children . In particular , narrative is used in research on inference , sequential structure , logical reasoning , and metamemory . In most cases , the narratives used in such studies are simplified , sequentially ordered sentences , and are best considered for their contribution to cognition rather than narrative research . In Flavell and Well - man ' s paper entitled , " Metamemory " , the authors have found that even very young children are able both to describe how they would go about remembering and to assess how well they might remember . Flavell and Wellman give rich descriptions of ontogenetic change in metamemory abilities . This work parallels recent studies by folklorists and others into a developmental approach to verbal genres ( e . f . Sutton - Smith in this issue of Keystone Folklore ) . In another chapter in Kail and Hagen , Paris and Lindauer ( " Construc tive Aspects of Children ' s Comprehension and Memory " ) delineate how the implied and explicit statements in a story are elaborated in children ' s recall . Other chapters that will be of interest to folklorists include , Cole and Scribner ' s , " Cross - Cultural Studies of Memory and Cognition " which includes a brief report of studies utilizing narrative , and Rohwer and Dempster ' s " Memory Development and Educational Processes " , which , unfortunately is only marginally concerned with the practical problems of applying memory research to education . The psychological interest in narrative and memory has genei— ated numerous articles and conference sessions . Although most of the research has utilized narrative as a resource for understand ing memory , some studies have also included investigations into the subject of narrative itself , and the use of narrative as a teaching device . Folklorists might benefit from the psychological investigation of the cognitive components of narrative ; at the same time , folklorists might criticize these studies for their narrow selection of stories and for their insens i ti vi ty to those very elements of diversity in narrative structure , such as repe tition and elaboration , which might influence cognitive analysis . The study of narrative and memory is a potential forum for the collaboration of folklorists and cognitive psychologists . 104 V0L - 22 KEYSTONE FOLKLORE NO . 1 - 2 REFERENCES CITED Bartlett , F . C . 1932 Remembering . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Piaget , Jean I960 The Language and Thought of the Child . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . ( Original : 1926 . ) Propp . V . 1968 Morphology of the Folktale . Austin : University of Texas Press . ( Original : 1928 . ) Stein , Nancy L . and Glenn , Christine G . 1977 The Role and Structural Variation in Children ' s Recall of Simple Stories . Paper presented at the Society for Research in Child Development , New Orleans . FORTHCOMING IN VOLUME 22 , NO . 3 Response to the call for papers for the Folklore and Education Issue was great ; publication of a double issue could not accommodate all of the material received . Featured in the next issue of Keyetone Folklore will be Dennis Coelho ' s article " The Folklorist as Folk Artist in Residence . " We are pleased to be able to present this case of folklore in the schools , and thus continue the discussion of the place of folklore in educa tional systems , and curricula , as well as in educational theory and phi losophy . The Editorial Board 105