Current Biology 19 , R762 – R771 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 06 . 053 Review The Shape of Motile Cells Alex Mogilner 1 , * and Kinneret Keren 2 Motile cells — fan - like keratocytes , hand - shaped nerve growth cones , polygonal ﬁbroblasts , to name but a few — come in different shapes and sizes . We discuss the origins of this diversity as well as what shape tells us about the physics and biochemistry underlying cell movement . We start with geometric rules describing cell - edge kinetics that govern cell shape , followed by a discussion of the underlying biophysics ; we consider actin treadmilling , actin – myosin contraction , cell - membrane deformations , adhesion , and the complex interactions between these modules , as well as their regulation by microtubules and Rho GTPases . Focusing on several different cell types , including keratocytes and ﬁbroblasts , we dis - cuss how dynamic cell morphology emerges from the interplay between the different motility modules and the environment . Introduction Cells come in different shapes and sizes . The beautifully changing cell shape reﬂects dynamic cellular processes , most importantly remodeling of the cytoskeleton underlined by biochemical signaling . Cell geometry affects cell fate in processes such as cell growth and death [ 1 ] , development [ 2 ] and tumor growth [ 3 ] . In this review , we focus on in - dividual migrating cells [ 4 ] and do not discuss other phenomena , such as the shapes of dividing cells [ 5 ] or inter - acting cells within tissues [ 6 ] . The diverse migratory behavior of different cell types is manifested by the spectrum of their shapes ( Figure 1 ) , from the simple circular shape of stationary cells spread on a ﬂat surface [ 7 ] ( Figure 1A ) and the half - moon shape of motile ﬁsh keratocytes [ 8 ] ( Figure 1B ) , through to more elongated ﬁbroblasts [ 9 ] ( Figure 1C ) and the hand - like shape of neuronal growth cones [ 10 ] ( Figure 1D ) , and on to the pulsating amoeboid shape of neutrophils [ 11 ] ( Figure 1E ) . In the inﬂuential treatise On Growth and Form [ 12 ] , D’Arcy Thomson suggested that the diversity of structures in morphogenesis can be explained by forces and motion and that biological forms correlate with mechanical phenomena . Here we attempt to apply this idea to individual cells . We begin this review by analyzing cell geometry and boundary kinetics phenomenologically , followed by a brief overview of the different types of motile appendages created by dynamic actin structures . We then present keratocytes and ﬁbroblasts as relatively simple model systems for whole - cell motility research and discuss what is known about cell - shape determination in these cells . This is fol - lowed by a discussion of the role of biochemical regulators and microtubules in cell - shape regulation . Finally , we focus on motile cells in a 3D environment and highlight the similar - ities and differences between crawling in 2D and movement in 3D . Geometry : Boundary Kinetics of a Motile Cell The shape of migrating cells ( Figure 1 ) is deﬁned by their dynamic boundaries , which , in turn , are determined by the local balance between expansion and retraction . Before diving into the details of the biochemical and biophysical processes governing the kinetics of the cell’s boundary , let us consider phenomenological descriptions of cell shape dynamics that are based on simple geometric principles . An elegant example is the graded radial extension ( GRE ) model [ 13 ] , which describes the movement of one of the simplest migrating cells — a ﬁsh keratocyte . The GRE model describes a steady - state situation in which local extension of the cell boundary is perpendicular to the cell’s edge . To maintain steady shape , the magnitude of extension must be graded , from a maximum at the center of the leading edge to zero at the sides ( Figure 2A ) . Similarly , at the rear the retraction rate is maximal at the midpoint and decreases towards the sides . According to a simple trigonometric formula ( Figure 2A ) , this graded extension rate deﬁnes the cell’s shape . The question of how a cell regulates the exten - sion rates along its boundary in such a coordinated fashion is left unanswered by this model . More complex movements and shapes , which are not necessarily in steady state , can be described by a rule - based geometric model , in which a cell is modeled by its perimeter [ 14 ] ( Figure 2B ) . The local rates of protrusion and retraction are regulated by a model that incorporates local stimulation and global inhibition of protrusive activity . Evolution of local protrusion is calculated from lateral prop - agation and decay of protrusion signals , with a stochastic positive feedback loop accounting for increased protrusion in already - protruding regions . The retraction signal is spec - iﬁed by a simple global inhibition rule , in which the retraction rate is constant along the boundary and proportional to the total protrusive activity . For computational simplicity , rather than extending in a direction locally normal to the boundary , the points along the cell perimeter either protrude or retract along imaginary spokes radiating from the centroid of the cell ( Figure 2B ) . This rule - based model was able to reproduce the characteristic shape and trajectory of amoeboid Dictyostelium cells . Furthermore , by simply varying the parameters , the model was also able to mimic other motile cell shapes with surprising reliability ; addition of focal adhesions , which were modeled as anchorage points resisting retraction , resulted in wedge - shaped cells with tails , characteristic of ﬁbroblasts . Alternatively , an increase in the protrusive positive feedback was able to produce stable and persistent half - moon keratocyte - like shapes . These models illustrate that dynamic cell shapes can emerge from relatively simple boundary kinetics and that few changes in the distribution of protrusion / retraction along the boundary are sufﬁcient to recapitulate the observed diversity in cell shapes . To advance beyond these phenom - enological descriptions we need to consider the underlying 1 DepartmentofNeurobiology , PhysiologyandBehaviorandDepartment of Mathematics University of California , Davis , CA 95616 , USA . 2 Department of Physics and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute , Technion - Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 32000 , Israel . * E - mail : mogilner @ math . ucdavis . edu B C E D A Current Biology Figure 1 . Diverse shapes of motile cells . ( A ) Phase contrast image of a live stationary keratocyte . The cell body is at the center , surrounded by a ﬂat lamellipodium . ( B ) Phase contrast ( top ) and ﬂuorescence ( bottom ) images of a motile keratocyte ﬁxed and stained with phalloidin to visualize actin ﬁla - ments . The broad lamellipodium at the front has a characteristic criss - cross pattern of actin staining , while bundles of actin appear near the cell body at the rear . ( C ) Fluores - cence image of a cultured mouse embryo ﬁbroblast ﬁxed and stained with phalloidin . Fluorescence signal from the lamellipodial actin meshwork and from linear actin struc - tures , including arcs at the base of the lamel - lipodium , linear stress ﬁbers and peripheral bundles [ 94 ] is visible , together with auto - ﬂuorescence from the cell nucleus ( copyright : Tatyana Svitkina , courtesy of the Biology Image Library : http : / / biologyimagelibrary . com / imageID = 48799 ) . ( D ) A neural growth cone from a live rat commissural neuron . ( Image courtesy of P . T . Yam , McGill Univer - sity . ) ( E ) A human neutrophil surrounded by red blood cells chasing a bacterium ( image taken from a movie by D . Rogers , Vanderbilt University ) . Bars , 10 m m . biophysics and biochemistry and , in particular , the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton . Shape and Movement on Fine Scales Cell shape is largely determined by the cooperative dynamics of the actomy - osin cytoskeleton , adhesions and the cell membrane within the motile appendages at the cell periphery , so theﬁne - scalegeometryoftheseappendagesplaysanimpor - tant role in cell - shape determination . One of the better under - stood cytoskeletal structures is the lamellipodium [ 15 ] , a broad and ﬂat network of actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 3A ) . The la - mellipodium is usually many microns in length and width , but only w 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 m m high [ 16 ] . Within the lamellipodium the actin cytoskeleton forms a treadmilling dendritic array [ 17 , 18 ] : nascent ﬁlaments nucleate from Arp2 / 3 complexes at the side of existing ﬁlaments and elongate until growth is terminated by capping proteins . ADF / coﬁlin action coupled to ATP hydrolysis facilitates actin ﬁlament disassembly , and actin monomer diffusion — coupled with reactions with proﬁlin — recycles the monomers to the leading edge . The front - to - rear length of the treadmilling lamellipodial actin network is governed by the dynamics of this biochemical cycle in which actin is being continuously converted from monomer to polymer and back again [ 19 , 20 ] . The actin ﬁlaments in the lamellipodium are oriented with their barbed ends toward the leading edge [ 17 ] , and this arrangement is crucial for maintaining lamellipodial structure . Thispreferredﬁlamentorientationcouldarise , accordingto2D theoretical models , from suppression of capping at the very leading edge ; ﬁlaments growing away from the leading edge are rapidly capped , while forward - growing ﬁlaments are protected and ‘win’ resources such as Arp2 / 3 [ 21 , 22 ] . This , of course , requires actin nucleators to localize to the leading edge . One attractive possibility is that myosin motors transport these nucleators in the direction in which barbed ends point [ 23 ] , providing a positive feedback loop that can maintain both barbed ends and nucleators at the front of the cell . Recent simulations of dendritic actin arrays demonstrated thatthemechanicsoftheﬂexibleﬁlamentsandthemembraneensurethatlocallythelamellipodialleadingedgeisalmoststraight [ 24 ] . Another study [ 25 ] , however , suggests that if activators of actin polymerization , such as the GTPase Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , which diffuse in the membrane , are incorporated into the picture , then a positive feedback between actin growth , membrane curvature and activator density could lead to a locally wavy leading edge and even instabilities — precur - sors of ﬁlopodial protrusions . One recent study [ 26 ] reports observations of such non - random undulating leading edge dynamics and suggests that the shape ﬂuctuations result from more complex self - organizing oscillatory dynamics involving GTPases , in which RhoA is activated during protru - sion , while Rac1 and Cdc42 are activated with a delay of w 40 secondsbehind the leading edge , reinforcing protrusion tran - siently through control of adhesion dynamics . The recently discovered actin polymerization waves , emerging from yet another set of mechanochemical interactions [ 27 , 28 ] , could also lead to local undulations of the cell’s leading edge . Special Issue R763 Why is the lamellipodium ﬂat ? Perhaps the simplest idea to explain the thinness of the lamellipodium is that some molec - ular complex spans the lamellipodium and , in a way , ‘staples’ the dorsal surface to the ventral one [ 7 ] ; however , there is no evidence for the existence of such a complex . A different model suggests that myosin - powered contraction contrib - utes to lamellipodial ﬂatness by pulling the lamellipodial network toward the substrate and thus restricting its height [ 29 ] . Alternatively , actin - ﬁlament growth may be conﬁned to the proximity of the ventral surface either because of inhi - bition by factors in the dorsal membrane or due to the need for activation in close contact with adhesion complexes at the ventral surface . Finally , an elegant biophysical model [ 30 ] proposes a positive feedback loop in which polymerizing barbed ends push and curve the leading edge membrane . Hypothetical membrane - associated actin - nucleation com - plexes could have curved membrane domains that preferen - tially target them to membrane regions with high curvature . These nucleation complexes will therefore concentrate at the curved leading edge and focus polymerization in the forward direction there . This proposed feedback process could also explain the preferential orientation of ﬁlaments with their barbed ends directed toward the leading edge . Curiously , when Arp2 / 3 complexes are activated every - where in the cell ( and not just at the leading edge ) the actin network swells up [ 31 ] . The protrusive appendages in many cells consist of two overlapping but molecularly and functionally distinct actin networks – the lamellipodium and the lamella [ 32 ] . The lamel - lipodium assembles at the leading edge but then disassem - bles within a few microns . It is coupled to a second network , the lamella , where myosin contraction is integrated with substrate adhesion . Interesting shapes and dynamics asso - ciated with the interaction between these two networks can be gleaned from two recent studies . Alexandrova et al . [ 33 ] observed a boundary , demarcated by periodically spaced focal adhesions , between the lamellipodium and the lamella ( Figure 3B ) . The boundary attained a characteristic concave arc shape between focal adhesions , as if the rapid retro - grade ﬂow of the lamellipodial actin network , created by polymerization at the membrane , breaks against the adhe - sions , which act like jetties , and arches between them . Inter - estingly , nascent focal adhesions appeared in the lamellipo - dium ahead of the boundary , and within seconds , the boundary advanced locally towards these new adhesions , concurrent with local protrusion of the lamellipodial leading edge . Giannone et al . [ 34 ] , on the other hand , collected data suggesting that the lamellipodial actin network lies above the lamellar network ( Figure 3C ) and that myosin clus - ters periodically pull the lamellipodium rearward relative to the lamella , which leads to buckling upward of the whole leading edge . The resulting breaking and re - growth of the lamellipodium lead to cycles of protrusion – retraction , hark - ening back to the classic descriptions of protrusion – retrac - tion cycles in the early Abercrombie studies [ 35 ] . In many cases , the lamellipodial leading edge is inter - spersed with ﬁlopodia — bundles of actin ﬁlaments that are tightly packed together and protrude forward ( Figure 3A ) . Current evidence shows that lamellipodial ﬁlaments can bend together and zipper into such parallel bundles [ 36 ] . What regulates the number and length of bundled ﬁlaments and their spacing along the leading edge ? Recent experi - ments [ 37 ] and modeling [ 38 , 39 ] shed some light on possible answers , suggesting , for example , that the number of bundled ﬁlaments could be a compromise between the deliveryofnecessaryproteinstotheﬁlopodialtipandmechan - ical stability of the ﬁlopodia : it is harder to supply proteins for thicker bundles but thinner bundles could buckle . Another study [ 40 ] suggests that competition between the bending and adhesion energies of ﬁlaments plays an important role in ﬁlopodia formation , by demonstrating that the spacing and thickness of ﬁlopodia - like structures in vitro is largely A Membrane tension C Actin polymerization Adhesions B Extension Retraction Centroid Current Biology Figure 2 . Geometric and dynamic models of motile cell shape . ( A ) The graded radial extension model [ 13 ] . The cell boundary of a keratocyte is shown before ( solid ) and after ( dashed ) displacement . In order to maintain constant shape , the locally normal protrusion ( light ) and retraction ( dark ) have tobegraded along theboundary as shown . The extension rate as a function of arc length , l , is denoted V ( l ) . Cell shape is determined from the local angle between the vector normal to the boundary and the directionofcrawling , q ( l ) , whichisgivenbythetrigonometricequationshown . ( B ) The‘rule - based’modelforcellshape [ 14 ] . Ateachpositionalong the perimeter of the cell , the boundary extends / retracts ( light / dark arrows ) along radial spokes from the centroid of the cell . The extension and retraction rates are deﬁned by a reaction – diffusion system with positive feedback for the protrusion signal and global inhibition of the retraction signal . Shading corresponds to the sum of protrusion – retraction signals , which at the edge is proportional to the local protrusive activity ( dark , high protrusion ; light , high retraction ) . ( C ) Force balance model of keratocyte shape [ 42 ] . Membrane tension generates a constant load along the cell boundary . The density of actin ﬁlaments is graded along the leading edge , so the force - per - ﬁlament varies . This force is minimal in the high - density regions at the center and increases toward the sides of the cell where ﬁlament density is low and ﬁlament growth is stalled . The disas - sembled actin network is pushed forward at the rear by membrane tension . The adhesion complexes at the rear sides inhibit the lamellipodial actin network and thus contribute indirectly to a higher actin density at the center front . Current Biology Vol 19 No 17 R764 determined by two parameters — the length of the ﬁlaments and the lamellipodial mesh size , which determines the distance between ﬁlaments . Longer ﬁlaments that are closer together are easier to bend into a parallel bundle and thus can form a ﬁlopodium . The Simplest Motile Cell – A Fish Keratocyte Keratocytes are an ideal model system for investigating the mechanisms of cell - shape determination because they maintain nearly constant cell shape , speed , and direction over many cell lengths [ 41 ] . Keratocytes assume a stereotyp - ical shape with a broad ﬂat lamellipodium characterized by rapid actin dynamics and turnover [ 15 ] . The microscopic actin - growth dynamics predict a locally straight boundary along the cell’s leading edge [ 24 ] , but additional ingredients are required in order to understand how the characteristic fan - shaped lamellipodium ( Figures 1B and 2C ) evolves and how the cell boundary curves on cellular length scales . As mentioned earlier , the GRE model ( Figure 2A ) describes the kinematics of keratocyte shape , but does not explain what determines cell shape in the ﬁrst place or how the molecular dynamics generate the graded extension rates responsible for maintaining cellular geometry . Two observations — that cell area is constant [ 42 ] , and that the density of ﬁlamentous actin along the leading edge is graded [ 43 ] — led to a proposed mechanism of keratocyte shape regulation [ 42 ] ( Figure 2C ) . This mechanism is predicated on previous observations that the lamellipodial actin network treadmills , with net assembly at the leading edge and net disassembly toward the rear [ 15 ] . Polymerizing actin ﬁlaments push the cell membrane from within , generating tension which rapidly equilibrates across the ﬂuid membrane . At the center of the leading edge , where actin - ﬁlament density is high , the membrane resistance per ﬁlament is small , allowing ﬁla - ments to grow rapidly and generate protrusion . As ﬁlament density gradually decreases toward the cell sides , the load force per ﬁlament due to membrane tension increases . As a result , local protrusion rates decrease smoothly from the center toward the sides of the leading edge . Assuming that protrusion is locally perpendicular to the cell boundary , this impliesthatthesidesoftheleadingedgelagbehindthecenter , causing the leading edge to become curved as observed ( Figures 1B and 2C ) . Finally , actin polymerization is stalled at the far sides of the cell , which therefore neither protrude nor retract . At the rear of the cell , where the actin network disas - sembles , membrane tension , assisted by myosin contraction , crushes the weakened network and moves actin debris forward , thereby retracting the cell rear ( Figure 2C ) . Overall , the picture is very simple ( Figure 2C ) : actin - network treadmilling drives from within the forward protru - sionofaninextensiblemembranebag . Thisbasicmechanism appears to be sufﬁcient to explain the persistent and coordi - nated movement of keratocytes without incorporating sig - naling molecules or microtubules , suggesting that , at least inkeratocytes , theseelementsaredispensable orredundant ; indeed , microtubules are not necessary for keratocyte move - ment [ 41 ] . The model highlights the important global regula - tory role of membrane tension in cell shape : local actin assembly at the leading edge and disassembly at the cell rear are both modulated and coupled by forces imposed on the actin network by the membrane . The graded distribution of actin ﬁlament density is crucial for generating graded protrusion along the leading edge in this model . An attractive hypothesis is that this spatial grading results from a self - organization process [ 43 , 44 ] . Along the leading edge , growing ﬁlaments compete for resources ( the molecular identity of which is unknown , but Arp2 / 3 and / or VASP may be involved ) to branch out nascent ﬁlaments , while existing ﬁlaments get capped and lag behind the protruding edge . At the rear corners of the cell , the density of actin ﬁlaments is reduced , perhaps by the large adhesion complexes there that appear to compete with actin - polymerization processes for some molecular re - source , the identity of which is again unknown , although VASP is a likely candidate [ 43 ] ( Figure 2C ) . Filaments at the center of the leading edge can out - compete ﬁla - ments at the sides because they are not inhibited by the adhesions at the sides , so the actin density peaks at the A B Lamellipodium Lamella Current Biology C Lamella Lamellipodium Myosin Nucleators Actin Adhesions 500nm Focaladhesions Figure 3 . Dynamic actin structures at the cell periphery . ( A ) Platinum replica electron micrograph of the leading edge of a cultured B16F1 mouse mela - nomacellshowingabranchednetworkofactinﬁlamentsinthelamellipodiumandparallelbundlesofactinﬁlamentsintheﬁlopodium . Filopodial ﬁlaments begin in the lamellipodium and converge to form a bundle ( copyright Tatyana Svitkina , courtesy of the Biology Image Library : http : / / biologyimagelibrary . com / imageID = 48811 ) . ( B ) Schematic depiction of the boundary between a ﬁbroblast’s lamelli - podium and lamella as observed in [ 33 ] . The boundary is demarcated by periodically spaced focal adhesions and attains a charac - teristic concave arc shape between them . Nascent focal adhesions appear in the lamel - lipodium ahead of the boundary . ( C ) Sug - gested leading edge dynamics of a motile ﬁbroblast [ 34 ] . The lamellipodium sits on top of the lamella ( upper panel ) . Myosin motors pull on the lamellipodial network causing it to buckle and retract ( middle panel ) . Conse - quently , the lamellipodium breaks , and then resumes growth at the leading edge , resulting in protrusion ( lower panel ) . Special Issue R765 center . Together these processes can yield an inverted para - bolic actin - ﬁlament distribution , as observed experimentally [ 42 , 43 ] . Myosin does not seem to be crucial for movement ; kerato - cytes continue to move after myosin inhibition , albeit more slowlyandwithlessregularshapes [ 42 ] . However , themyosin moleculesthat areswepttotherear asthecellmovesforward do contribute to the motility process . Myosin contracts the actin network weakened by depolymerization , probably contributing to the process of pulling the cell body forward [ 45 ] and to pulling the cell sides inward , thereby containing their spread , as well as contributing to actin - network disas - sembly , leading to faster actin turnover . In addition , without myosin stationary keratocytes cannot polarize and start moving [ 46 – 48 ] . An adhesion module must act together with the minimal ‘actin treadmill in the membrane bag’ module to translate actin treadmilling into forward translocation of the cell . Adhesion complexes form at the very leading edge and remain nearly stationary with respect to the substrate as the cell moves forward . In many cases , it appears that adhe - sion is graded — stronger at the front , and weaker at the rear [ 49 , 50 ] . How this graded adhesion is generated and regu - lated is unclear . One attractive hypothesis [ 49 , 50 ] is that rapid assembly of integrin , talin , vinculin and other adhesion molecules takes place at the front where nascent actin network forms , followed by slower aging of the adhesion complexes , which leads to weakening of adhesions as they approach the cell rear . Cell area was found to be intrinsic to each cell and constant through time [ 42 ] . It remains unclear what deter - mines cell area and the manner by which it is regulated . The simplest explanation would be that cell area is deter - mined by the amount of available plasma membrane , which Current Biology R = F / T Adhesions T F F MT A B Figure 4 . Fibroblast shape . ( A ) Phase contrast image ( adapted from [ 9 ] ) and ( B ) scheme of a migrating ﬁbroblast . Bar , 20 m m . The cell has adhesion sites at the outer edge corners . These sites are con - nected by actin ﬁbers , which form inward - curved circular arcs . The shape of these arcs is determined by a balance between elastic line tension in the actin ﬁbers , F , and surface tension , T . A weak adhesion formed along the middle of the arc ( dark ellipse ) does not mature because it is pulled apart by canceling forces , whereas the adhesions in the corners mature since they are pulled inward . The microtubules ( MT ) could possibly be focused in the forward direction by forces due to myosin contraction ( wide arrows ) . can be regulated mostly by exchange with intracellular membrane sources [ 51 ] . Adhesions and myosin may play a role in supplementing membrane area regulation and controlling cell size . For example , data in ﬁbroblasts suggest that cell size can be deter - mined by a balance between actin outward growth and myosin - powered centripetal actin ﬂow [ 52 – 55 ] . Yet another possibility is that the number of adhesion molecules involved in cell attachment is limiting [ 56 ] . Observations in ﬁbroblasts suggest a model in which a certain number of adhesion molecules per unit area are needed to support motility , so cell area is proportional to the number of adhesion molecules at the ventral surface . New molecules are added to the ventral surface at a rate proportional to cell mass , while retraction removes molecules from the ventral surface ( with a mean rate proportional to cell area ) , a fraction of which is lost and the rest are recycled . This model correctly predicts that cell area is proportional to cell mass [ 56 ] . Note that this model works equally well if , instead of adhesion molecules , another actin accessory protein , such as Arp2 / 3 , is the limiting factor . Fibroblasts and Cell Shape As indicated by the geometric model of Satulovsky et al . [ 14 ] , the characteristic keratocyte shape can be ‘converted’ into a ﬁbroblast shape ( Figures 1C and 4 ) by simply decreasing the lateral coherence of the protrusion activity and introducing focal adhesions along the cell boundary . Indeed , ﬁbroblasts often have discrete mature adhesion sites at their outer edge [ 57 ] . Protrusive activity between the adhesions is slow , and these sites are connected by actin ﬁbers , which mainly outline the cellular periphery in a sequence of inward - curved circular arcs [ 58 , 59 ] ( Figure 4 ) ; similar arcs and ﬁbers overhang non - adhesive regions when cells are planted on Y - shaped adhesive islands [ 60 ] . The ﬁrst elegant explanation for the shape and radius of these concave arcs [ 59 ] was based on a balance between elastic line tension in the actin ﬁbers , F , and surface tension , T , of the cell membrane / actin cortex ( Figure 4 ) , described by Laplace law : T = F / R . Thus , the edges between adhesions have to be circular , with a radius R = F / T . If line tension of actin ﬁbers is primarily generated Current Biology Vol 19 No 17 R766 by myosin contraction , then inhibition of myosin is ex - pected to lead to a decrease in line tension , resulting in increased curvature of the boundary . This prediction compares well with experiments which show that the cell boundary can be well ﬁt with a sequence of circular arcs , the radii of which decreases when myosin is inhibited [ 60 ] . A more advanced theory explains the detailed arc shape by deformations of the actin gel modeled as a contractile cable network [ 58 ] . One of the predictions of this theory — that the arc radius is proportional to the distance between adhesions — was conﬁrmed by experi - ments in which ﬁbroblasts were plated on a lattice of ﬁbro - nectin dots [ 58 ] . Fibroblast shape depends on the location of the discrete adhesion sites , but at the same time , the generation of these adhesions depends on cell shape [ 57 , 61 , 62 ] . This depen - dence is exempliﬁed by experiments in which cells were plated on polygonal adhesive islands [ 63 ] : focal adhesions connected by stress ﬁbers developed at the corners of these islands . One possible explanation is that adhesion maturation is triggered and maintained by force [ 64 ] . At the corners , stress ﬁbers from both sides pull the adhesion inward , so these forces add and cause adhesion maturation [ 65 ] . Along the smooth parts of the cell boundary , the stress ﬁber forces pulling on an adhesion site act in opposite direc - tions and cancel each other out , so adhesions disassemble ( Figure 4 ) . This discussion points out that perhaps the main reason for the different shape of keratocytes and ﬁbroblasts is the nature of adhesions in these cells . In keratocytes , discrete strong adhesions play a minor role , whereas in ﬁbroblasts their role is signiﬁcant , disrupting the coherent protrusion of the actin network . This hypothesis , if true , predicts that temporal variation of the relative magnitude of protrusion and contraction and / or adhesion activities in the same cell would correlate with shape changes . Notably , ﬁbroblasts can assume two interconvertible morphologies — a trian - gular tailed shape , and a tailless form that resembles a half - moon - shaped keratocyte [ 66 ] — whereas keratocytes can occasionally develop a transient tail and assume a trian - gular form [ 67 ] . Related to this hypothesis , Paul et al . [ 68 ] developed an adhesion – contraction model of the lamellipodial network ( complementing the actin – membrane model of Keren et al . [ 42 ] ) , which is described as a ﬂat contractile cable network adhering to the substrate at the periphery . In the model , the peripheral adhesions are assumed to break when stressed above a threshold . In addition , there are internal contractile forces pulling the cell body forward , toward the leading edge . Interestingly , when one starts with an ellipsoidal cell with a broad leading edge and narrow sides , the adhesions at the broad rear edge break , sharp rear corners emerge , and the cell assumes the char - acteristic crescent keratocyte - like shape . On the other hand , if one considers an ellipsoidal cell with a narrow leading edge and broad sides , then the adhesions at the rear halves of the sides break , but the adhesions at the very rear survive , and a triangular tailed ﬁbroblast - like shape emerges , with concave sides . These studies hint again that the extent of lateral spread of actin protrusive activity at the cell front coupled with global retraction ( gov - erned by myosin and / or membrane tension ) and force - dependent adhesion dynamics may control the vast diver - sity of motile cell shapes . Box 1 Some shape - related regulatory pathways . Actin accessory proteins : Treadmilling of the actin network and ultimately cell shape and speed are regulated by actin accessory proteins . Asmallsubset oftheseincludes : thebranching regulatorArp2 / 3 ; capping protein ; ADF / coﬁlin , which acceleratesactin networkdisassembly ; proﬁlin , which enhances polymerization [ 15 ] ; VASP , which helps to focus polymerization to the leading edge [ 43 ] ; and coronin and cortactin , which regulate the lamellipodial network architecture [ 95 ] . Adhesion molecules : Treadmilling of adhesion molecules — sequential activation and binding of integrins followed by clustering , association with talin , vinculin and other adhesion molecules , myosin - force - mediated maturation , and then detachment and recycling — is another important factor in cell - shape regulation and motility [ 96 ] . Membrane transport : The mechanisms of forward translocation of the plasma membrane in motile cells are largely unclear . In some cell types , rapiddiffusion of lipid molecules within the lipid bilayer maybe sufﬁcient for forward translocation of the membrane . However , in most cell types membrane translocation and recycling probably occur primarily by spatially segregated exocytosis / endocytosis [ 97 , 98 ] ( Figure 5 ) , regulated by microtubule - motor transport . Rho family GTPases : A crucial feature of motile cells is their polarity — protruding front , retracting rear and quiescent sides . It is likely that in keratocytes mechanics alone are sufﬁcient for maintaining cell polarity [ 47 , 48 ] , but in ﬁbroblasts [ 4 ] , Dictyostelium [ 99 , 100 ] and neutrophils [ 11 ] polarization depends on the activity of Rho - family proteins Rac , Rho and Cdc42 ( Figure 5 ) . Many groups have reported intricate pathways that amount to an antagonism between Rac / Cdc42 and Rho [ 101 ] . This mutual inhibition of Rac / Cdc42 and Rho can lead to a bistable system , which , in the presence of rapid diffusion of inactive Rho GTPases in the cytosol , supports a stable spatial segregation of Rho proteins in polarized cells [ 74 ] . Indeed , epithelial cells and neuronal growth cones are characterized by increased concentration of Rac1 andCdc42activity towardsthelamellipodialmembraneprotrusion , whileRhoAactivity iselevatedbothattheleadingprotrudingandtherear retracting boundaries [ 102 ] . Rho GTPases regulate the activity of numerous proteins that affect the cytoskeleton , forming a link to the mechanical module [ 103 ] . To name but a few pathways , Rac stimulates branching and polymerization of actin ﬁlaments via the Arp2 / 3 complex , inhibits capping of actin ﬁlaments via PIP 2 and stimulates LIM kinase , which inactivates coﬁlin . Rho , on the other hand , stimulates myosin light chain phosphorylation via its downstream target Rho kinase , thereby increasing contractility , and promotes actin bundling by activating the formin mDia1 [ 104 ] . Thus , the self - polarizing Rac / Rho reaction – diffusion system can stably maintain protrusive activity at the front and contractile action at the rear thereby regulating cell shape . In addition to this system , some pathways , such as the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / PTEN system [ 105 ] , can be ‘gradient ampliﬁers’ , enhancing the spatial Rac / Rho segregation . Special Issue R767 Shape Regulators : Biochemical Pathways and Microtubules The mechanics of the actin – myosin – adhesion – membrane system discussed so far are fairly complex , yet they are only part of the picture . Motile cells are not simply mechan - ical machines , they are mechanochemical systems and there are multiple feedbacks and crosstalk between biochemical pathways and mechanical modules [ 4 , 69 , 70 ] . We brieﬂy discuss some relevant biochemical and cytoskeletal regula - tors [ 4 , 15 , 71 ] in Box 1 ( see also Figure 5 ) . In particular , there is a tight relationship between cellular geometry and biochemical pathways [ 72 , 73 ] : activation and distribution of signaling molecules strongly depend on cell shape ; in turn , these molecular distributions affect cytoskeletal dynamics and , ultimately , cell shape . One of the reasons for this dependence is that signaling molecules are often activated at the plasma membrane , and then diffuse and get de - activated in the cytoplasm , leading to a cell - shape - dependent gradient in the distribution of these activated signaling molecules . An open question regarding signaling reaction – diffusion systems that is most relevant for cell - shape dynamics is whether these systems support stable spatial molecular distributions that scale with cell size in a speciﬁc dynamic geometry [ 74 ] , or Turing - like patterns that have intrinsic spatial scales [ 75 ] . Microtubules play an important role in cell polarity and motility in many cell types [ 76 ] ( Figure 5 ) ; a number of studies suggest that microtubule lengths and densities are the main parameters regulating the length of some motile cells [ 54 ] . One of the main respective mechanisms is the antagonism between microtubules and actomyosin contractility [ 77 ] . This antagonism can be a result of several issues : the mechanical properties of microtubules , which are stiff compressed struts that resist myosin - powered contraction [ 78 ] ; the role of microtubules as tracks on which kinesins deliver regulators of actomyosin dynamics to cell edges [ 71 ] ; ﬁnally , the interaction of microtubules with , and the Current Biology Endocytosis Exocytosis Golgi MT Nucleus Adhesion disassembly Integrin Talin Paxillin Vinculin Adhesion assembly p o e ADF / cofilin Thymosin Profilin Actinpolymerization Rac Rho Figure 5 . Regulation modules governing cell shape and movement ( only a few modules and respective molecules are shown ) . Details of actin and adhesion accessory proteins involved in treadmilling of the actin meshwork and adhesion complexes are shown schematically . The microtubule sys - tem promotes assembly of the lamellipodial actin network at the front , myosin contraction at the middle , and adhesion disassembly at the tail by serving as tracks for polarized , motor - mediated transport of regulatory proteins . Antagonistic interactions between the Rho GTPases coupled with diffusion lead to chemical polarization in the cell , which is an important part of the mechanochemical shaping mechanism . depletion of , molecular activators of actomyosin contractility [ 79 ] . The actomyosin activity feeds back to microtubules : the transient binding of microtubules to the actin network , which ﬂows centripetally inward , restricts microtubule expansion [ 80 ] . Microtubules can interconnect with cell shape in a number of other ways as well . It is possible that microtubule plus ends are reeled into the cell’s leading edge by dynein motors localized there , thus orienting the microtubule - organizing center and Golgi apparatus toward the leading edge [ 81 ] . In turn , microtu - bule - mediated delivery of Golgi - derived vesicles to the leading edge provides membrane and associated proteins needed for forward protrusion [ 82 ] ( Figure 5 ) . A few other mechanochemical ‘microtubule – actin – myosin – adhesion modules’ are described in [ 71 ] . Shape and Movement in a 3D Environment The discussion above has focused on cells crawling on 2D surfaces . While this provides important insights into the molecular basis of cell shape and movement , our ultimate goal is to understand how cells migrate through tissue in vivo . A central question — whether motile structures such as the lamellipodium and ﬁlopodium observed in 2D also exist in 3D — does not yet have a deﬁnitive answer , but it is likely that cells in vivo employ similar structures [ 83 , 84 ] . Notable ﬁne - scale actin structures found in vivo are invadopodia and podosomes that protrude from the ventral surface of the ﬂat pseudopodia of cancer cells , invading and degrading the basement membrane covering blood vessels [ 85 , 86 ] . Podosomes have a characteristic ring - like morphology with a core consisting of numerous small actin ‘dots’ surrounded by a vinculin - rich structure , while invado - podia are ﬁnger - like projections that extend deep into the extracellular matrix . Both structures are dependent on actin dynamics involving the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 – cortactin – dynamin machinery , resembling in this respect lamellipodia and ﬁlo - podia . However , podosomes and invadopodia have a number of unique characteristics , including co - localization of focal adhesion proteins and actin , dependence on Src kinase signaling and enrichment in matrix - degrading prote - ases . A recent combined modeling and experimental study suggests that the size of invadopodia is determined by a peculiar stochastic dynamic instability process ( not unlike Current Biology Vol 19 No 17 R768 that which occurs in microtubules ) , in which invadopodia start growing with constant rates and retreat with rates dependent on the properties of the extracellular matrix [ 87 ] . The molecular mechanisms behind this process remain largely unknown . On larger scales , there are also signiﬁcant differences in overall cell morphology and movement between 2D and 3D environments . While the rear ( cell body and tail ) and leading ( lamellipodial ) zones of cells in 2D and 3D look rather similar , theintermediatezones ( lamella ) areverydifferent . Thelamella in 3D consists of ramiﬁedcylindricalprotrusions , whilein 2D it spreads wide in close apposition to the substratum [ 88 ] . Adhesion complexes , which are primarily localized to the cell periphery in cells crawling on 2D substrates , are found along the entire length of the cell in 3D [ 89 ] . These differences in shape correlate with different movement strategies [ 89 ] . Cells moving in a 3D environment are generally faster , more dependent on myosin contraction for rapid migration , and , unlike in 2D , inefﬁcient tail retraction does not hinder leading edgeprotrusion . A plausible explanation forthesedifferences is related to the changes in the topology of the substrate contact area andinmembrane geometry . In 2D , thelamellipo - dium and lamella spread far and wide , so the membrane is stretched and tense . The membrane tension can then assist in rear retraction , making this process less dependent on myosin contraction [ 42 ] . At the same time , if the cell rear gets stuck , membrane tension hinders protrusion of the leading edge of the cell [ 67 ] . In 3D , the membrane area is not the limiting factor , so the rear does not restrain the front . A cell can move faster in this case , but it must rely primarily on myosin contraction to pull up the rear since the reduced membrane tension is less effective in retraction . The characteristics of 3D environments can be variable : the extracellular matrix can be dense and rigid , or loose and soft , or somewhere between these extremes . Some cells are able to transition between smoother , mesenchymal translocation when moving through dense tissue to a more convulsive , amoeboid motility when crawling through softer tissue [ 84 , 90 ] . The former mode involves making protru - sions , adhering to the extracellular matrix ﬁbers , and pulling up the cell body using actin – myosin contraction and is largely similar to 2D migration . However , there is at least one important difference : when the rigid pores in the tissue are signiﬁcantly smaller than the cell’s nucleus size , the cell deploys matrix metalloproteinases to cleave the matrix ﬁbrils [ 91 ] . Interestingly , this matrix breakdown is localized several microns behind the leading edge [ 92 ] . Matrix breakdown is the limiting step in this type of migration [ 91 ] , so perhaps cells switch to amoeboid motility when the nucleus can squeeze through the malleable pores . This way of migration relies on pushing , rather than pulling the cell body , probably by generating a hydrostatic pressure behind the nucleus with the help of myosin contraction , and the resulting cytoplasmic streaming carrying the cell body forward [ 84 , 90 ] . Recent advances in understanding the blebbing phenomenon [ 93 ] , in which myosin contraction generates hydrostatic pres - sures that squeeze the cytoplasm through poroelastic cyto - skeleton and force the membrane to bulge in regions where the membrane and cytoskeleton adhere weakly , could be very relevant for elucidating the 3D amoeboid movements . Conclusions Cell shape and motility emerge from the interplay between several components , most notably the cytoskeleton , the cell membrane , and cell – substrate adhesions . We know a fair deal about the characteristics of each of these com - ponents separately ; moreover , some general principles regarding the behavior of the system as a whole are begin - ning to unfold . Geometric theories [ 13 , 14 ] illustrate the dynamic relationship between the kinetics of the cell’s boundary and cell shape , and emphasize important parameters in cell - shape determination . Studies on ﬁsh keratocytes — likely the simplest model system for cellular motility — suggest a minimal motility module consisting of a treadmilling actin network within an inextensible membrane bag [ 42 ] . It is clear that this mechanical system is neither rigid nor unique : cells have numerous feedbacks and redundant mechanisms ( myosin - powered inward ﬂow of actin , force - and - geometry - dependent adhesions , reac - tion – diffusion biochemical regulators , microtubule - medi - ated pathways ) , so they are able to compensate and substi - tute for missing modules . Recent studies are beginning to shed light on the intricacies of the spatio - temporal coordi - nation between these modules in the motility process ( reviewed in [ 4 , 8 , 15 , 71 ] ) . The brilliant idea of D’Arcy Thomson [ 12 ] — that mechanics is a fundamental determinant of biological form — provides aunifyingthesis ; thechallengeistounderstandhowbehavior at the cellular level arises from the local dynamics . Pains - taking combined efforts of experimentalists and theorists will help to untangle the molecular modules and the mechan - ical / biochemical feedbacks of the cell’s motility machinery . One cannot expect a ‘one size ﬁts all’ model explaining the shapes of all motile cell types , but hopefully a ﬁnite number of quantitative principles will emerge and these will help us predict form and movement from molecular mechanics and biochemical interactions . Acknowledgments We thank Erin Barnhart and Erez Braun for critical reading of the manuscript and Patricia Yam for the image included in Figure 1 . This work was supported by NIH grant NIGMS U54 GM64346 and by NSF grant DMS - 0315782 to A . M . , and by grants from the European Research Council , the Morasha Program of the ISF ( 1832 / 07 ) , the Wolfson Foundation , the Converging Technologies Program and Allon Fellowship of the Israel Council for Higher Education , and a Horev fellowship from the Technion to K . K . References 1 . Chen , C . S . , Mrksich , M . , Huang , S . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science 276 , 1425 – 1428 . 2 . Nelson , W . J . ( 2003 ) . Adaptation of core mechanisms to generate cell polarity . Nature 422 , 766 – 774 . 3 . Vasiliev , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Cytoskeletal mechanisms responsible for invasive migration of neoplastic cells . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 48 , 425 – 439 . 4 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Cell migration : in - tegrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . 5 . Thery , M . , and Bornens , M . ( 2006 ) . Cell shape and cell division . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 648 – 657 . 6 . Farhadifar , R . , Roper , J . C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . , andJulicher , F . ( 2007 ) . The inﬂuence of cell mechanics , cell - cell interactions , and proliferation on epithelial packing . Curr . Biol . 17 , 2095 – 2104 . 7 . Bereiter - Hahn , J . ( 2005 ) . Mechanics of crawling cells . Med . Eng . Phys . 27 , 743 – 753 . 8 . Rafelski , S . M . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Crawling toward a uniﬁed model of cellmobility : spatialandtemporalregulationofactindynamics . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 73 , 209 – 239 . 9 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . L . , and Dembo , M . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of mechanical interactions between ﬁbroblasts and the substratum by stretch - activated Ca2 + entry . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 85 – 92 . 10 . Schaefer , A . W . , Schoonderwoert , V . T . , Ji , L . , Mederios , N . , Danuser , G . , and Forscher , P . ( 2008 ) . Coordination of actin ﬁlament and microtubule dynamics during neurite outgrowth . Dev . Cell 15 , 146 – 162 . Special Issue R769 11 . Inoue , T . , and Meyer , T . ( 2008 ) . Synthetic activation of endogenous PI3K and Rac identiﬁes an AND - gate switch for cell polarization and migration . PLoS ONE 3 , e3068 . 12 . Thompson , D . A . W . ( 1942 ) . On Growth and Form , 2nd Edition ( Cambridge : Cambridge Univ . Press ) . 13 . Lee , J . , Ishihara , A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1993 ) . Principles of locomotion for simple - shaped cells . Nature 362 , 167 – 171 . 14 . Satulovsky , J . , Lui , R . , andWang , Y . L . ( 2008 ) . Exploringthecontrolcircuitof cell migration by mathematical modeling . Biophys J . 94 , 3671 – 3683 . 15 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 16 . Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys J . 77 , 1721 – 1732 . 17 . Borisy , G . G . , and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing the enve - lope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . 18 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , andPollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . TheinteractionofArp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 . 19 . Mogilner , A . , andEdelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2002 ) . Regulationofactindynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophys J . 83 , 1237 – 1258 . 20 . Bindschadler , M . , and McGrath , J . L . ( 2007 ) . Relationships between actin regulatory mechanisms and measurable state variables . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 35 , 995 – 1011 . 21 . Maly , I . V . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11324 – 11329 . 22 . Schaus , T . E . , Taylor , E . W . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2007 ) . Self - organization of actin ﬁlament orientation in the dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7086 – 7091 . 23 . Kerber , M . L . , Jacobs , D . T . , Campagnola , L . , Dunn , B . D . , Yin , T . , Sousa , A . D . , Quintero , O . A . , and Cheney , R . E . ( 2009 ) . A novel form of motility in ﬁlopodia revealed by imaging myosin - X at the single - molecule level . Curr . Biol . 19 , 967 – 973 . 24 . Schaus , T . E . , andBorisy , G . G . ( 2008 ) . Performanceofapopulationofinde - pendent ﬁlaments in lamellipodial protrusion . Biophys J . 95 , 1393 – 1411 . 25 . Gov , N . S . , and Gopinathan , A . ( 2006 ) . Dynamics of membranes driven by actin polymerization . Biophys J . 90 , 454 – 469 . 26 . Sabouri - Ghomi , M . , Wu , Y . , Hahn , K . , and Danuser , G . ( 2008 ) . Visualizing and quantifying adhesive signals . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 541 – 550 . 27 . Bretschneider , T . , Anderson , K . , Ecke , M . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . , Schroth - Diez , B . , Ishikawa - Ankerhold , H . C . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2009 ) . The three - dimensional dynamics of actin waves , a model of cytoskeletal self - organization . Biophys . J . 96 , 2888 – 2900 . 28 . Weiner , O . D . , Marganski , W . A . , Wu , L . F . , Altschuler , S . J . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2007 ) . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 , e221 . 29 . Kruse , K . , Joanny , J . F . , Julicher , F . , and Prost , J . ( 2006 ) . Contractility and retrograde ﬂow in lamellipodium motion . Phys . Biol . 3 , 130 – 137 . 30 . Atilgan , E . , Wirtz , D . , andSun , S . X . ( 2005 ) . Morphologyofthelamellipodium and organization of actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of crawling cells . Biophys J . 89 , 3589 – 3602 . 31 . Shao , D . , Forge , A . , Munro , P . M . , and Bailly , M . ( 2006 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerisation occurs on speciﬁc pre - existing networks in cells and requires spatial restriction to sustain functional lamellipod extension . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 395 – 414 . 32 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Danuser , G . ( 2004 ) . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 . 33 . Alexandrova , A . Y . , Arnold , K . , Schaub , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , Meister , J . J . , Bershadsky , A . D . , and Verkhovsky , A . B . ( 2008 ) . Comparative dynamics of retrograde actinﬂow and focaladhesions : formation of nascent adhesions triggers transition from fast to slow ﬂow . PLoS ONE 3 , e3234 . 34 . Giannone , G . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Rossier , O . , Cai , Y . , Chaga , O . , Jiang , G . , Beaver , W . , Dobereiner , H . G . , Freund , Y . , Borisy , G . , etal . ( 2007 ) . Lamellipo - dial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 128 , 561 – 575 . 35 . Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . , and Pegrum , S . M . ( 1970 ) . The locomo - tion of ﬁbroblasts in culture . I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp . Cell Res . 59 , 393 – 398 . 36 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 . 37 . Bohil , A . B . , Robertson , B . W . , andCheney , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Myosin - Xisamolec - ular motor that functions in ﬁlopodia formation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 12411 – 12416 . 38 . Lan , Y . , and Papoian , G . A . ( 2008 ) . The stochastic dynamics of ﬁlopodial growth . Biophys J . 94 , 3839 – 3852 . 39 . Pronk , S . , Geissler , P . L . , and Fletcher , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Limits of ﬁlopodium stability . Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 258102 . 40 . Ideses , Y . , Brill - Karniely , Y . , Haviv , L . , Ben - Shaul , A . , and Bernheim - Groswasser , A . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 branched actin network mediates ﬁlopo - dia - like bundles formation in vitro . PLoS ONE 3 , e3297 . 41 . Euteneuer , U . , and Schliwa , M . ( 1984 ) . Persistent , directional motility of cells and cytoplasmic fragments in the absence of microtubules . Nature 310 , 58 – 61 . 42 . Keren , K . , Pincus , Z . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Marriott , G . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Mechanism of shapedeterminationin motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 . 43 . Lacayo , C . I . , Pincus , Z . , VanDuijn , M . M . , Wilson , C . A . , Fletcher , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Emergence of large - scale cell morphology and movement from local actin ﬁlament growth dynamics . PLoS Biol . 5 , e233 . 44 . Grimm , H . P . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , Mogilner , A . , and Meister , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Anal - ysisofactindynamicsattheleadingedgeofcrawlingcells : implicationsfor the shape of keratocyte lamellipodia . Eur . Biophys J . 32 , 563 – 577 . 45 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1997 ) . Analysisoftheactin - myosinIIsysteminﬁshepidermalkeratocytes : mech - anism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 . 46 . Yam , P . T . , Wilson , C . A . , Ji , L . , Hebert , B . , Barnhart , E . L . , Dye , N . A . , Wiseman , P . W . , Danuser , G . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Actin - myosin network reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarized cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 1207 – 1221 . 47 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . 9 , 11 – 20 . 48 . Kozlov , M . M . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2007 ) . Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophys J . 93 , 3811 – 3819 . 49 . Lee , J . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1997 ) . The composition and dynamics of cell - substratum adhesions in locomoting ﬁsh keratocytes . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 2833 – 2844 . 50 . Anderson , K . I . , and Cross , R . ( 2000 ) . Contact dynamics during keratocyte motility . Curr . Biol . 10 , 253 – 260 . 51 . Raucher , D . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Cell spreading and lamellipodial extensionrateisregulatedbymembranetension . J . CellBiol . 148 , 127 – 136 . 52 . Zhang , X . , Jiang , G . , Cai , Y . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2008 ) . Talin depletion reveals independence of initial cell spreading from integrin activation and traction . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1062 – 1068 . 53 . Lyass , L . A . , Bershadsky , A . D . , Gelfand , V . I . , Serpinskaya , A . S . , Stavrovskaya , A . A . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Gelfand , I . M . ( 1984 ) . Multinuclea - tion - induced improvement of the spreading of transformed cells on the substratum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 81 , 3098 – 3102 . 54 . Kharitonova , M . A . , and Vasiliev , J . M . ( 2008 ) . Controlling cell length . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 480 – 484 . 55 . Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Hofman , J . M . , Cai , Y . , Xenias , H . , Spielman , I . , Shneidman , A . V . , David , L . A . , Dobereiner , H . G . , Wiggins , C . H . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2008 ) . Quantiﬁcation of cell edge velocities and traction forces revealsdistinctmotilitymodulesduringcellspreading . PLoSONE 3 , e3735 . 56 . Dunn , G . A . , and Zicha , D . ( 1995 ) . Dynamics of ﬁbroblast spreading . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 1239 – 1249 . 57 . Chen , C . S . , Alonso , J . L . , Ostuni , E . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Cell shape provides global control of focal adhesion assembly . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 307 , 355 – 361 . 58 . Bischofs , I . B . , Klein , F . , Lehnert , D . , Bastmeyer , M . , and Schwarz , U . S . ( 2008 ) . Filamentous network mechanics and active contractility determine cell and tissue shape . Biophys J . 95 , 3488 – 3496 . 59 . Bar - Ziv , R . , Tlusty , T . , Moses , E . , Safran , S . A . , and Bershadsky , A . ( 1999 ) . Pearling in cells : a clue to understanding cell shape . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 10140 – 10145 . 60 . Thery , M . , Pepin , A . , Dressaire , E . , Chen , Y . , and Bornens , M . ( 2006 ) . Cell distribution of stress ﬁbres in response to the geometry of the adhesive environment . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 341 – 355 . 61 . Lehnert , D . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , David , C . , Weiland , U . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , and Bastmeyer , M . ( 2004 ) . Cell behaviour on micropatterned substrata : limits of extracellular matrix geometry for spreading and adhe - sion . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 41 – 52 . 62 . James , J . , Goluch , E . D . , Hu , H . , Liu , C . , and Mrksich , M . ( 2008 ) . Subcellular curvature at the perimeter of micropatterned cells inﬂuences lamellipodial distribution and cell polarity . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 841 – 852 . 63 . Brock , A . , Chang , E . , Ho , C . C . , LeDuc , P . , Jiang , X . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Geometric determinants of directional cell motility revealed using microcontact printing . Langmuir 19 , 1611 – 1617 . 64 . Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Riveline , D . , Goichberg , P . , Tzur , G . , Sabanay , I . , Mahalu , D . , Safran , S . , Bershadsky , A . , Addadi , L . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 . 65 . Novak , I . L . , Slepchenko , B . M . , Mogilner , A . , and Loew , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Coop - erativity between cell contractility and adhesion . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 , 268109 . 66 . Lewis , L . , Verna , J . M . , Levinstone , D . , Sher , S . , Marek , L . , andBell , E . ( 1982 ) . The relationship of ﬁbroblast translocations to cell morphology and stress ﬁbre density . J . Cell Sci . 53 , 21 – 36 . Current Biology Vol 19 No 17 R770 67 . Lee , J . , Ishihara , A . , Oxford , G . , Johnson , B . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of cell movement is mediated by stretch - activated calcium channels . Nature 400 , 382 – 386 . 68 . Paul , R . , Heil , P . , Spatz , J . P . , and Schwarz , U . S . ( 2008 ) . Propagation of mechanical stress through the actin cytoskeleton toward focal adhesions : model and experiment . Biophys J . 94 , 1470 – 1482 . 69 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Choi , C . K . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2009 ) . Integrins in cell migration – the actin connection . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 199 – 206 . 70 . Broussard , J . A . , Webb , D . J . , and Kaverina , I . ( 2008 ) . Asymmetric focal adhesion disassembly in motile cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 85 – 90 . 71 . Rodriguez , O . C . , Schaefer , A . W . , Mandato , C . A . , Forscher , P . , Bement , W . M . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Conserved microtubule - actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 599 – 609 . 72 . Neves , S . R . , Tsokas , P . , Sarkar , A . , Grace , E . A . , Rangamani , P . , Taubenfeld , S . M . , Alberini , C . M . , Schaff , J . C . , Blitzer , R . D . , Moraru , I . I . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Cell shape and negative links in regulatory motifs together control spatial information ﬂow in signaling networks . Cell 133 , 666 – 680 . 73 . Meyers , J . , Craig , J . , andOdde , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Potentialforcontrolofsignaling pathways via cell size and shape . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1685 – 1693 . 74 . Maree , A . F . , Jilkine , A . , Dawes , A . , Grieneisen , V . A . , and Edelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2006 ) . Polarization and movement of keratocytes : a multiscale model - ling approach . Bull . Math . Biol . 68 , 1169 – 1211 . 75 . Meinhardt , H . , and Gierer , A . ( 2000 ) . Pattern formation by local self - activa - tion and lateral inhibition . Bioessays 22 , 753 – 760 . 76 . Small , J . V . , Geiger , B . , Kaverina , I . , and Bershadsky , A . ( 2002 ) . How do microtubules guide migrating cells ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 957 – 964 . 77 . Danowski , B . A . ( 1989 ) . Fibroblast contractility and actin organization are stimulated by microtubule inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 93 , 255 – 266 . 78 . Brangwynne , C . P . , MacKintosh , F . C . , Kumar , S . , Geisse , N . A . , Talbot , J . , Mahadevan , L . , Parker , K . K . , Ingber , D . E . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Microtu - bules can bear enhanced compressive loads in living cells because of lateral reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 733 – 741 . 79 . Chang , Y . C . , Nalbant , P . , Birkenfeld , J . , Chang , Z . F . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2008 ) . GEF - H1 couples nocodazole - induced microtubule disassembly to cell contractility via RhoA . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2147 – 2153 . 80 . Burnette , D . T . , Ji , L . , Schaefer , A . W . , Medeiros , N . A . , Danuser , G . , and Forscher , P . ( 2008 ) . Myosin II activity facilitates microtubule bundling in the neuronal growth cone neck . Dev . Cell 15 , 163 – 169 . 81 . Dujardin , D . L . , Barnhart , L . E . , Stehman , S . A . , Gomes , E . R . , Gundersen , G . G . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 2003 ) . A role for cytoplasmic dynein and LIS1 in directed cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1205 – 1211 . 82 . Prigozhina , N . L . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Decreased polarity and increased random motility in PtK1 epithelial cells correlate with inhibi - tion of endosomal recycling . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3571 – 3582 . 83 . Yamaguchi , H . , Wyckoff , J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration in tumors . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 559 – 564 . 84 . Even - Ram , S . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration in 3D matrix . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 524 – 532 . 85 . Weaver , A . M . ( 2006 ) . Invadopodia : specialized cell structures for cancer invasion . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 23 , 97 – 105 . 86 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . , andMcNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Footandmouth : podo - somes , invadopodia and circular dorsal rufﬂes . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 657 . 87 . Enderling , H . , Alexander , N . R . , Clark , E . S . , Branch , K . M . , Estrada , L . , Crooke , C . , Jourquin , J . , Lobdell , N . , Zaman , M . H . , Guelcher , S . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Dependence of invadopodia function on collagen ﬁber spacing and cross - linking : computational modeling and experimental evidence . Biophys . J . 95 , 2203 – 2218 . 88 . Martins , G . G . , and Kolega , J . ( 2006 ) . Endothelial cell protrusion and migra - tion in three - dimensional collagen matrices . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 101 – 115 . 89 . Doyle , A . D . , Wang , F . W . , Matsumoto , K . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2009 ) . One - dimensional topography underlies three - dimensional ﬁbrillar cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 184 , 481 – 490 . 90 . Wolf , K . , Mazo , I . , Leung , H . , Engelke , K . , vonAndrian , U . H . , Deryugina , E . I . , Strongin , A . Y . , Brocker , E . B . , and Friedl , P . ( 2003 ) . Compensation mecha - nism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 267 – 277 . 91 . Zaman , M . H . , Trapani , L . M . , Sieminski , A . L . , Mackellar , D . , Gong , H . , Kamm , R . D . , Wells , A . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Matsudaira , P . ( 2006 ) . Migrationoftumorcellsin3Dmatricesisgovernedbymatrixstiffnessalongwithcell - matrix adhesion and proteolysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10889 – 10894 . 92 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2009 ) . Proteolytic interstitial cell migration : a ﬁve - step process . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 28 , 129 – 135 . 93 . Mitchison , T . J . , Charras , G . T . , and Mahadevan , L . ( 2008 ) . Implications of a poroelastic cytoplasm for the dynamics of animal cell shape . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 215 – 223 . 94 . Small , J . V . , and Resch , G . P . ( 2005 ) . The comings and goings of actin : coupling protrusion and retraction in cell motility . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 517 – 523 . 95 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 . 96 . Puklin - Faucher , E . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Themechanicalintegrincycle . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 179 – 186 . 97 . Sheetz , M . P . , Felsenfeld , D . , Galbraith , C . G . , and Choquet , D . ( 1999 ) . Cell migration as a ﬁve - step cycle . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 233 – 243 . 98 . Bretscher , M . S . ( 2008 ) . On the shape of migrating cells — a ‘front - to - back’ model . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2625 – 2628 . 99 . Maeda , Y . T . , Inose , J . , Matsuo , M . Y . , Iwaya , S . , and Sano , M . ( 2008 ) . Orderedpatternsofcellshapeand orientationalcorrelationduringsponta - neous cell migration . PLoS ONE 3 , e3734 . 100 . Del Alamo , J . C . , Meili , R . , Alonso - Latorre , B . , Rodriguez - Rodriguez , J . , Aliseda , A . , Firtel , R . A . , andLasheras , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Spatio - temporalanalysis of eukaryotic cell motility by improved force cytometry . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 13343 – 13348 . 101 . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1999 ) . Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1235 – 1244 . 102 . Kurokawa , K . , Nakamura , T . , Aoki , K . , and Matsuda , M . ( 2005 ) . Mechanism and role of localized activation of Rho - family GTPases in growth factor - stimulated ﬁbroblasts and neuronal cells . Biochem . Soc . Trans 33 , 631 – 634 . 103 . Mackay , D . J . , and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20685 – 20688 . 104 . Xu , J . , Wang , F . , Van Keymeulen , A . , Herzmark , P . , Straight , A . , Kelly , K . , Takuwa , Y . , Sugimoto , N . , Mitchison , T . , andBourne , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Divergent signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self - organizing polarity in neutrophils . Cell 114 , 201 – 214 . 105 . Devreotes , P . , andJanetopoulos , C . ( 2003 ) . Eukaryoticchemotaxis : distinc - tions between directional sensing and polarization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 20445 – 20448 . Special Issue R771