Neuron , Vol . 45 , 715 – 726 , March 3 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 01 . 023 Vimentin - Dependent Spatial Translocation of an Activated MAP Kinase in Injured Nerve Eran Perlson , 1 Shlomit Hanz , 1 Keren Ben - Yaakov , 1 tracellular distances in nonvesiculated signaling com - plexes . Yael Segal - Ruder , 1 Rony Seger , 2 and Mike Fainzilber 1 , * Retrograde injury - signaling mechanisms in lesioned nerve provide an intriguing example of a nonvesicu - 1 Department of Biological Chemistry 2 Department of Biological Regulation lated long - distance signaling complex . Mammalian pe - ripheral and invertebrate central nerves are capable of Weizmann Institute of Science 76100 Rehovot functional regeneration , in part due to intrinsic mecha - nisms activated in the neuronal cell body ( Goldberg , Israel 2003 ) . The cell body response can be triggered or en - hanced by protein injury signals retrogradely trans - Summary ported from lesion sites ( Perlson et al . , 2004a ) . We have recently shown that injury - induced regulation of impor - How are phosphorylated kinases transported over tins in axons provides a mechanism for retrograde sig - long intracellular distances , such as in the case of naling after lesion , due to a constitutive interaction of axon to cell body signaling after nerve injury ? Here , importin α with dynein . The signaling is thought to de - we show that the MAP kinases Erk1 and Erk2 are pend on endogenous regeneration - modulating proteins phosphorylated in sciatic nerve axoplasm upon nerve that utilize the nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) binding injury , concomitantly with the production of soluble site of the importins for retrograde transport ( Hanz et forms of the intermediate filament vimentin by local al . , 2003 ) . translation and calpain cleavage in axoplasm . Vimen - The precise identity of the NLS - bearing retrograde tin binds phosphorylated Erks ( pErk ) , thus linking signals is still unknown , but others have implicated a pErk to the dynein retrograde motor via direct binding MAP kinase Erk1 / 2 homolog in retrograde injury signal - of vimentin to importin (cid:1) . Injury - induced Elk1 activa - ing in Aplysia neurons ( Sung et al . , 2001 ) . Nuclear im - tion and neuronal regeneration are inhibited or de - port of most Erk family members is not dependent on layed in dorsal root ganglion neurons from vimentin classical NLS binding to importin α / β heterodimers null mice , and in rats treated with a MEK inhibitor or ( Whitehurst et al . , 2002 ) . Do activated MAP kinases ac - with a peptide that prevents pErk - vimentin binding . cess the same retrograde injury - signaling mechanism ? Thus , soluble vimentin enables spatial translocation We used differential proteomics as a nonbiased method of pErk by importins and dynein in lesioned nerve . to seek out components of the system and identified soluble cleavage products of an intermediate filament Introduction ( IF ) protein as a major component of the retrograde pro - tein ensemble after nerve lesion in a mollusk ( Perlson How are kinase signals propagated over long distances et al . , 2004b ) . Truncation mutants of the closely related within a cell ? This fundamental question in cell biology mammalian type III IF vimentin can translocate from cy - is especially acute in the case of neurons , which are toplasm to nucleus in transfected cells ( Rogers et al . , highly polarized and differentiated cells with axonal and 1995 ) . Moreover , vimentin is known to interact with sig - dendritic processes that extend over distances of milli - naling molecules ( Paramio and Jorcano , 2002 ) . We meters to meters in large mammals . Local generation therefore examined potential roles of mammalian type of signal in an axon or dendrite by phosphorylation of III intermediate filaments in retrograde injury signaling a signaling kinase must be followed in many cases by in the sciatic nerve and in neurons of the dorsal root propagation of the signal back to the cell body and the ganglia ( DRG ) . Here , we show that vimentin expression nucleus . Quantitative theoretical analyses have shown is elevated in sciatic nerve axoplasm after injury . Vi - that under typical protein diffusion rates and cytosolic mentin links pErk to importin β in the retrograde injury - phosphatase activity levels , activated MAP kinases signaling complex and enables retrograde transport of should be dephosphorylated to basal levels within a activated MAP kinases in sensory axons . few microns of the site of activation ( Kholodenko , 2003 ) , unless the signal is protected or regenerated en Results route . A number of possibilities have been suggested , including lateral propagation from kinase to kinase at The molluscan IF identified in our proteomics screen the cell surface ( Reynolds et al . , 2003 ) , formation of was found to be most homologous to the vertebrate multivesicular bodies that package the phosphorylated type III IF vimentin ( Figure 1A ) . In the nervous system , kinase ( Weible and Hendry , 2004 ) , or generation of sig - vimentin is most prominently expressed in glial cells naling endosomes containing both ligand and receptor ( Menet et al . , 2003 ) , but it is also expressed in neurons ( Howe and Mobley , 2004 ) . Despite this diversity of po - early in development and following injury , where it has tential mechanisms for membrane - associated signals , been suggested to play a role in early generation and to date there is no experimental data demonstrating extension of neurites ( Boyne et al . , 1996 ; Dubey et al . , how a kinase signal might be transported over long in - 2004 ) . peripherin is another closely related type III IF that is highly expressed in peripheral nerve axons and upregulated by injury ( Lariviere and Julien , 2004 ) . We * Correspondence : mike . fainzilber @ weizmann . ac . il Neuron716 Figure 1 . Vimentin and Peripherin Are Upreg - ulated in Axoplasm after Nerve Injury ( A ) A phylogenetic tree constructed using ClustalX reveals the evolutionary relatedness of vertebrate vimentin and other type III in - termediate filaments to the Lymnaea inter - mediate filament RGP51 . ( B ) Immunostaining of adult wild - type and vi - mentin − / − DRG neurons after 2 days in cul - ture reveals expression of vimentin ( red ) in the wild - type but not in the vimentin − / − neu - rons , and β - gal ( blue ) in vimentin − / − but not in wild - type . Colocalization with the axonal marker NFH ( green ) showed vimentin ex - pression in both cell body and neurites . Cell counts revealed that 64 % of the wild - type NFH - positive neurons expressed vimentin , while 58 % of the vimentin − / − neurons ex - pressed β - gal . Scale bar , 20 (cid:1) m . ( C ) Western blot analysis of postlesion axo - plasm reveals upregulation of vimentin and peripherin . Adult rats were anesthetized and subjected to sciatic nerve crush , and axo - plasm was obtained from nerves dissected at the indicated times postlesion . Aliquots ( 40 (cid:1) g ) of axoplasm were analyzed by West - ern blot and quantified in reference to the level of vimentin and peripherin at 6 hr . Cal - peptin ( 100 (cid:1) M ) , cycloheximide ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml ) , or actinomycin - D ( 5 (cid:1) g / ml ) was applied to the nerve by injection concomitantly with the injury . β - tubulin was used to confirm equal loading . The quantification is in percent of protein levels at 6 hr postlesion ( averages ± standard deviation ; n = 3 ) . examined the expression of vimentin or peripherin in jured nerve . Vimentin was observed to coprecipitate with dynein in increasing amounts with time after injury the sciatic nerve and DRG and observed vimentin immunostaining in the cell body and processes of ap - ( Figure 2A ) . In contrast , peripherin was not found in any of the precipitates , despite the high levels of peripherin proximately 60 % of adult wild - type NFH - positive sen - sory neurons in culture ( Figure 1B ) . A corresponding found in axoplasm at these time points ( see Figure 1C ) . The increased amounts of vimentin coprecipitating with fraction of vimentin null neurons stained positively for β - galactosidase ( β - gal ) , thus confirming expression of dynein over time after injury are a direct consequence of the increasing amounts of vimentin and importin β , the vimentin locus after lesion . We then examined oc - currence of both IFs in sciatic nerve axoplasm in vivo , since analyses of precipitated over input levels re - vealed similar pull - down efficiency at the different time after verifying purity of the axoplasm preparations by lack of immunoreactivity for S100 and RCC1 ( data not points ( data not shown ) . As reported previously , impor - tin α 4 was found in the complex in both uninjured and shown ) , as well as lack of other glial or nuclear markers ( see Figure S1 in the Supplemental Data available with lesioned nerve , while importin β levels increased in the coprecipitate after injury ( Figure 2A ) . Reciprocal coim - this article online ) . Little or no IF was found in axoplasm before injury , but within 30 min of a lesion we observed munoprecipitations with an antibody directed against vimentin revealed increasing amounts of dynein , impor - the appearance of soluble forms of both vimentin and peripherin ( Figure 1C ) . Levels of these proteins in - tin α , and importin β with time after injury ( Figure 2B ) . Does vimentin access the NLS binding site in the com - creased during 8 hr following injury , and it was possible to block the increase by injecting the nerve with cyclo - plex ? We addressed this issue by conducting copreci - pitation experiments of dynein with vimentin in the heximide ( CHX ) , an inhibitor of translation , but not with actinomycin - D ( ACTD ) , an inhibitor of transcription . The presence of excess NLS peptide or reverse - NLS pep - tide as control . As shown in Figure 2C , the interaction lower molecular masses of both IFs were lost upon treatment of the nerve with the calpain inhibitor calpep - of vimentin with dynein is not competed by excess NLS . Silver staining of 2D - PAGE from such pull - downs tin . Addition of calpeptin to already extracted axoplasm had no effect on the vimentin pattern observed ( data revealed other protein spots that are displaced from the dynein complex by NLS peptide ( data not shown ) . not shown ) . Thus , soluble forms of vimentin and periph - erin are produced in injured sciatic nerve axoplasm by Moreover , vimentin coprecipitates from axoplasm to - gether with the importins in NLS pull - downs ( Figure a combination of local translation and calpain cleav - age activity . 2D ) , indicating that a vimentin - importin interaction can - not be mediated via the NLS binding site . A number of We then examined coimmunoprecipitation of vimen - tin or peripherin with the dynein motor complex in in - nonclassical importin cargoes undergo nuclear uptake Vimentin - Dependent Translocation of Activated Erk 717 Figure 2 . Vimentin Interacts with the Dynein / Importin Complex after Nerve Injury ( A ) Vimentin , importin β , and importin α but not peripherin were coprecipitated with dynein from axoplasm ( 500 (cid:1) g input per lane ) at 0 – 6 hr postlesion . ( B ) Dynein , importin β , and importin α were coprecipitated with vimentin at the indicated times postlesion . Quantification in both ( A ) and ( B ) is in reference to protein levels at 6 hr postlesion ( averages ± standard deviation ; n = 3 ) . ( C ) Coprecipitation of vimentin with dynein was not affected by coincubation with NLS or reverse - NLS ( REV ) peptides at 2 (cid:1) M concentration . “C , ” axoplasm from control nerve ; “I , ” axoplasm from injured nerve 6 hr postlesion . ( D ) Vimentin coprecipitates in an NLS pull - down assay . Biotinylated NLS peptide ( 30 (cid:1) g ) was injected to sciatic nerve before extraction of axoplasm , and an additional 5 (cid:1) g peptide was added to 0 . 5 mg axoplasm protein and incubated for 1 hr at room temperature , followed by pull - down on streptavidin dynabeads . Proteins were eluted with 0 . 1 % TFA and subjected to Western blot analysis . ( E ) Direct interaction of importin β and vimentin in vitro . GST - importin β ( 1 (cid:1) g ) was incubated with vimentin ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) g ) for 2 hr at 37°C before GST pull - down . GST alone was used as a negative control . The experiments in ( C ) – ( E ) were each repeated at least three times with similar results . ( F ) GST - importin β ( 1 (cid:1) g ) was incubated with axoplasm ( 500 (cid:1) g ) from 0 – 6 hr postlesion for 2 hr at 37°C . The pull - down revealed coprecipitation of vimentin but not peripherin . Quantification of pulled - down vimentin is shown in reference to protein levels at 6 hr postlesion ( averages ± standard deviation ; n = 3 ) . by direct binding to importin β ( Harel and Forbes , 2004 ) . ing amounts of vimentin but not peripherin ( Figure 3C ) . We then examined retrograde transport of vimentin and We therefore tested for a direct interaction of vimentin with importin β by in vitro coprecipitation of vimentin pErk after sciatic nerve lesion in vivo . Crushed nerves from adult rats at increasing times after lesion were di - with a GST - importin β fusion protein . Purified recombi - nant vimentin was readily pulled down with GST - impor - vided into consecutive segments as shown in Figure 4A . Axoplasm from each segment was subjected to dy - tin β but did not precipitate with GST alone ( Figure 2E ) . Finally , GST - importin β was incubated with axoplasm nein immunoprecipitation , and precipitates were then analyzed by Western blot for presence of vimentin and from different times after lesion , and Western blots of pull - downs were probed for both vimentin and periph - pErk . Both molecules moved retrogradely together with dynein over the time course of the experiment , arriving erin . As shown in Figure 2F , increasing amounts of vi - mentin were found in the pull - downs in correlation with at the L4 / L5 DRGs approximately 20 hr after the lesion . Interestingly , vimentin remained associated with dynein time after lesion , whereas peripherin could not be de - tected at any of the time points examined . up to the 24 hr time point in the DRG , whereas the pErk was not found in the complex shortly after arrival in Having established that soluble forms of vimentin in - teract with the importin - dynein retrograde complex af - the ganglia ( Figure 4A ) , thus potentially freeing the MAP kinase for interaction with cytoplasmic or nuclear sub - ter nerve injury , we wished to determine the role of this intermediate filament molecule in the complex . Vimen - strates in the cell body . Erks modulate gene expression by directly phosphorylating transcription factors such tin has been suggested to act as a scaffold or carrier for signaling molecules ( Paramio and Jorcano , 2002 ) or as the ETS domain factor Elk1 . We therefore examined the time course of Elk1 phosphorylation in L4 / L5 DRG to directly modulate nuclear architecture and / or tran - scription ( Traub and Shoeman , 1994 ) . The Aplysia data after sciatic nerve lesion in adult rats . Two peaks of Elk1 phosphorylation were observed in DRG lysates : an implicating Erk - like kinases in retrograde injury signal - ing ( Sung et al . , 2001 ) suggested that vimentin might initial , very rapid event that may be in response to membrane depolarization caused by the crush and a act as a scaffold for the retrograde transport of Erks in mammalian nerve . We therefore examined the activa - second , more sustained phosphorylation that com - mences upon arrival of pErk in the ganglia ( Figure 4B ) . tion of MAP kinases in lesioned rat sciatic nerve and observed phosphorylation of axoplasmic Erk1 / 2 within We verified that the later phosphorylation event indeed occurs in neurons by immunostaining of L4 / L5 ganglion 30 min and lasting at least 8 hr after injury ( Figure 3A ) . Immunoprecipitation of either vimentin or dynein from sections for NFH and pElk1 . As shown in the right panel of Figure 4B , phosphorylated Elk1 is concentrated in axoplasm revealed coprecipitation of pErk increasing with time after lesion ( Figure 3B ) . Incubation of recom - nuclei of NFH - positive neuronal cell bodies 24 hr after sciatic nerve lesion . binant GST - pErk2 with axoplasm from different time points after lesion revealed coprecipitation of increas - The discrepancy between dissociation times of vi - Neuron718 Figure 3 . Vimentin Interacts with pErk in Lesioned Nerve Figure 4 . Retrograde Transport of Vimentin and pErk ( A ) Western blot analysis of 40 (cid:1) g aliquots of axoplasm from 0 to 8 ( A ) Coimmunoprecipitation of vimentin and pErk with dynein from hr postlesion reveals phosphorylation of Erk1 and Erk2 after injury . 300 (cid:1) g aliquots of axoplasm obtained from lesioned sciatic nerve Reprobing of the blot with a general Erk antibody was used to con - segments I – III and DRG extract IV as indicated in the schematic . I trol for equal loading . Quantification is in percentage of pErk levels indicates the segment adjacent to the lesion site . The DRG extrac - at 6 hr postlesion ( average ± standard deviation ; n = 3 ) . tion ( IV ) was in lysis buffer . Sampling at 0 – 24 hr postlesion revealed ( B ) Immunoprecipitation of dynein or vimentin from 500 (cid:1) g axo - retrograde movement of both pErk and vimentin with dynein until plasm taken at 0 – 6 hr postlesion shows an increase in coprecipitat - arrival in the DRG at 20 hr postlesion . At the 24 hr time point , only ing pErk with time . The quantification is in reference to coprecipi - vimentin was still found in association with dynein in the DRG . Dy - tating pErk levels at 6 hr postlesion ( average ± standard deviation ; nein was used as a loading control for all lanes in the time series . n = 3 ) . General Erk and dynein were used as loading controls ( 40 Graphs to the right of each set of gels quantify the corresponding (cid:1) g protein per lane ) . distribution of dynein - associated vimentin and pErk along the ( C ) GST - pErk pull - down from axoplasm 0 – 6 hr postlesion reveals nerve as percent of maximum ( average ± standard deviation ; n = 4 ) . coprecipitation of vimentin but not peripherin . The quantification ( B ) Phosphorylation of Elk1 in L4 / L5 DRGs from the experiment of shows coprecipitating vimentin as percent of maximum ( aver - ( A ) . ( Left ) Aliquots ( 50 (cid:1) g ) of DRG lysates from the indicated post - ages ± standard deviation ; n = 3 ) . The GST - pErk ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) g ) was incu - lesion times ( hr ) were analyzed by Western blot for pElk1 . General bated with 500 (cid:1) g of axoplasm protein obtained at the indicated Erk was used as the loading control ( 50 (cid:1) g total protein per lane ) . postlesion times . General Erk and dynein were used as loading ( Right ) Immunostaining of a DRG cross - section 24 hr postlesion for controls , and axoplasm levels of vimentin and importin β are also the neuronal marker NFH ( green ) and pElk1 ( red ) . Scale bar , 50 (cid:1) m . shown for comparison ( 40 (cid:1) g axoplasm protein per lane ) . Repeated three times with similar results . interactions and found that vimentin binding to pErk2 mentin and pErk from the dynein complex upon arrival at the ganglia suggested differential regulation of these in vitro was calcium dependent , increasing at calcium concentrations of up to 1 (cid:1) M ( Figure 5A ) . In contrast , two interactions . Nerve injury is known to cause a sig - nificant increase in intracellular calcium levels in axons changing calcium concentrations had little or no effect on the vimentin - importin β interaction . Similar experi - ( Mandolesi et al . , 2004 ) . We therefore tested the effects of calcium on the pErk - vimentin and vimentin - importin ments with nonphosphorylated Erk2 revealed that bind - Vimentin - Dependent Translocation of Activated Erk 719 ing of nonphosphorylated Erk to vimentin is reduced at high calcium concentrations ( data not shown ) . There - fore , another possible explanation for the apparent dissociation of pErk in the cell body might be de - phosphorylation of the kinase . We examined this issue by testing the effects of increasing concentrations of vimentin on Erk phosphorylation in the presence of al - kaline phosphatases ( APs ) or of sciatic nerve axo - plasm . Strikingly , vimentin levels in the range of 3 - fold to 6 - fold molar ratio of vimentin to pErk provided al - most complete in vitro protection of pErk2 from the phosphatases , while similar levels of neurofilament ( NF ) had no effect ( Figure 5B ) . The protection of pErk by vimentin was specific , as identical concentrations of vi - mentin had no effect on hydrolysis of p - nitrophenyl phosphate ( pNPP ) by AP ( data not shown ) . The calcium dependence of pErk binding to vimentin prompted us to examine if the in vitro phosphatase protection pro - vided by vimentin could also be modulated by calcium . As shown in Figure 5C , vimentin protected pErk2 from dephosphorylation in vitro in a calcium - dependent manner , and in the same range of calcium concentra - tions that support pErk - vimentin binding . The data described thus far indicate that soluble forms of vimentin interact with the importin - dynein ret - rograde complex in injured rat sciatic nerve and thereby enable transportation of pErk from the lesion site to ac - tivate substrates such as Elk1 in neuronal cell bodies . We tested these findings by comparing immunoprecipi - tates of dynein from sciatic nerve axoplasm of wild - type and vimentin − / − mice . The pErks coprecipitated with dynein in injury axoplasm from wild - type mice but not from vimentin nulls ( Figure 6A ) . Injury - induced Erk phosphorylation was similar in wild - type and vimentin − / − axoplasm ; thus , the specific difference was the lack of interaction of pErk with the dynein complex in vimentin null animals . We then examined retrograde accumula - tion of p - Erk in a lesion - ligation paradigm in sciatic nerves of wild - type versus vimentin null mice . As shown in Figure 6B , pErk accumulated retrogradely at Figure 5 . Effects of Calcium on Vimentin - pErk Binding and Erk the ligation site in wild - type but not in vimentin − / − sci - Phosphorylation atic nerve . Erk and Elk1 phosphorylation were subse - ( A ) GST - pErk ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) g ) or GST - importin β ( 1 (cid:1) g ) was incubated with quently examined in ganglia from wild - type or vimen - vimentin ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) g ) in NTB with the indicated calcium concentrations tin − / − mice , after lesion of the nerve close to the entry or with 2 mM EGTA for 2 hr at 37°C . GST alone was used as nega - tive control . The gel standard ( Std ) is 50 ng vimentin . Quantification points to the DRG ( Figure 6C ) . In these experiments , is shown as percent of input vimentin ( average ± standard devia - phosphorylated Erks appeared in wild - type ganglia tion ; n = 3 ) . from 10 min after the crush , and Elk1 phosphorylation ( B ) Concentration - dependent phosphatase protection of pErk by kinetics was similar to that of the Erks . In contrast , gan - vimentin . Importin β ( 2 (cid:1) g ) was incubated with GST - pErk ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) g ) glia from vimentin − / − mice exhibited little or no Erk or and with the indicated amounts ( (cid:1) g ) of vimentin or neurofilament Elk1 phosphorylation over the time course of these ( NF ) for 2 hr in NTB containing 1 (cid:1) M calcium at 37°C . Alkaline phos - experiments ( Figure 6C ) . Because Western blots of phatase ( AP ; 2 U ) or axoplasm from injured nerve 6 hr postlesion ( AX ; 100 (cid:1) g ) was added for an additional 30 min before performing ganglia were by necessity conducted from whole gan - GST pull - down followed by Western blotting for pErk . Vimentin pro - glion lysates , we verified that the observed Elk1 phos - tected pErk from dephosphorylation in a concentration - dependent phorylation occurs within neurons by immunostaining manner . The gel standard ( Std ) is 20 ng GST - pErk . Quantification of ganglion sections . As shown in Figure 6D , Elk1 phos - is shown as percent of input pErk ( average ± standard deviation ; phorylation is concentrated in nuclei of NFH - positive n = 3 ) . neuronal cell bodies from wild - type animals but is not ( C ) Phosphatase protection of pErk by vimentin is calcium depen - observed in corresponding neurons from vimentin nulls . dent . The experiment was carried out as described in ( B ) at a single concentration ( 2 (cid:1) g ) of vimentin or NF and at the indicated concen - In order to assess the contribution of pErk and vi - trations of calcium or 2 mM EGTA . Note that calcium dependence mentin to the cell body response to injury , we pro - of the phosphatase protection parallels the calcium dependence of ceeded to examine in vitro regenerative outgrowth of vimentin - pErk binding shown in ( A ) . adult DRG neurons from vimentin − / − mice . Neurite out - growth from vimentin − / − cells 48 hr in culture was signif - icantly reduced compared to wild - type neurons , and Neuron720 Figure 6 . Retrograde Transport of pErk and pElk1 Activation in vimentin − / − Mice ( A ) pErk does not coprecipitate with dynein in sciatic nerve axoplasm from vimentin − / − mice . Aliquots ( 300 (cid:1) g ) of axoplasm from control and 6 hr postlesion nerve were subjected to dynein immunoprecipitation followed by Western blots for the indicated components . Note that , although Erk phosphorylation is comparable in axoplasm of wild - type and vimentin − / − mice , there is no interaction of pErk with the dynein complex in vimentin − / − mice . This experiment was repeated three times with similar results . ( B ) Retrograde accumulation of pErk at a ligation site in injured sciatic nerve . Sciatic nerves of wild - type and vimentin − / − mice underwent crush lesion and ligation between the lesion site and the ganglia . At the indicated times , nerves were removed and sectioned longitudinally over the ligation area before staining for NFH ( green ) and pErk ( red ) . Sections are shown oriented so that the lesioned side is to the left , and the ligation is on the right . Scale bars are 100 (cid:1) m for the time series and 10 (cid:1) m for the higher - magnification zoom panel . Note that pErk accumulates at the ligation site in wild - type nerve but not in the vimentin nulls . This experiment was repeated twice with equivalent results . ( C ) pErk and pElk1 activation in mouse DRG . DRG processes were lesioned approximately 1 mm from the ganglia . After incubation for the indicated times , ganglia were lysed and subjected to Western blot analyses as shown . Concomitant activation of pErk and pElk1 was observed in ganglia from wild - type but not from vimentin − / − mice . The quantification is percent of maximum , average ± standard deviation of three experiments . ( D ) Cross - sections of ganglia from the experiment described in ( C ) immunostained for NFH ( green ) and pElk1 ( red ) show pElk1 activation in wild - type but not vimentin null neurons . Scale bar , 50 (cid:1) m . the difference was even more pronounced when com - switch from arborizing to long - distance neurite out - growth upon peripheral axotomy by a previous ( condi - paring only the β - gal - positive neurons from the knock - out to vimentin - positive neurons from wild - type mice tioning ) lesion of the sciatic nerve ( Smith and Skene , 1997 ) , and this effect is mediated by the retrograde sig - ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . There was no observable differ - ence in outgrowth capacity of vimentin null / β - gal - nega - naling complex ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) . We therefore exam - ined the conditioning lesion response in DRG of vimen - tive neurons as compared to wild - type / vimentin - nega - tive neurons . Trituration of vimentin null neurons with tin − / − mice . Sciatic nerve crush was performed 3 days prior to culture of neurons from the L4 / L5 DRGs of vi - calpain - treated recombinant vimentin rescued the out - growth deficit in β - gal - positive cells and had no effect mentin null and wild - type mice . After 18 hr in culture , prelesioned conditioned neurons from wild - type mice on neurons that did not express β - gal , as shown by comparing outgrowth of β - gal - expressing neurons ( those extended neurites that were on average 2 - fold longer than those of naive controls ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . A sim - originally destined to express vimentin ) with similar cells from the same ganglia that did not express β - gal ( Fig - ilar effect was observed in neurons from vimentin null mice that did not express β - gal . In contrast , β - gal - posi - ures 7A , 7B , and S2A ) . We examined the capacity of calpain - treated vimentin for polymerization by compar - tive neurons from vimentin − / − DRG did not extend longer neurites as a result of the conditioning crush ing pelleted versus soluble vimentin after ultracentrifu - gation ( Figure S2B ) and by comparative observation of ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . Thus , both in vitro and in vivo , a vimentin - mediated signal facilitates the regenerative vimentin filaments by electron microscopy ( Figure S2C ) . Both assays showed that calpain - treated vimentin was response of DRG neurons . In order to ask whether the vimentin - mediated signal not capable of polymerizing into filamentous struc - tures ; thus , the outgrowth rescue activity obtained by is pErk , we tested a series of synthetic peptides de - signed to mimic surface - exposed regions of Erk for trituration of the protein cannot be due to cytoskeletal roles of vimentin . their capacity to interfere with pErk - vimentin binding ( Figure 7E ) . Out of five peptides examined in this way , a DRG neurons undergo a transcription - dependent Vimentin - Dependent Translocation of Activated Erk 721 Figure 7 . Neurite Outgrowth and Regenera - tion Responses to Vimentin and pErk ( A and B ) Comparison of outgrowth of adult mice DRG neurons after 48 hr in culture . Green indicates immunostaining for NFH , and red indicates vimentin ( wild - type ) or β - gal ( vimentin − / − ) . Each row includes two panels with predominantly vimentin - or β - gal - positive cells and two panels with cells pre - dominantly negative for these markers . The third ( lower ) row shows vimentin − / − neurons triturated with calpain - cleaved vimentin ( 6 . 7 (cid:1) g per ganglion ) before plating . Quantifica - tion of three independent experiments is shown in ( B ) , measuring at least 250 cells per experiment ( average ± standard error of mean ) . Significant differences are revealed in neurite outgrowth between the vimentin null and wild - type neurons in the total population ( p < 0 . 05 ) . These differences are even more pronounced when comparing vimentin - posi - tive to β - gal - positive neurons ( p < 0 . 01 ) , while there was no difference between wild - type vimentin - negative and vimentin null β - gal - negative cells . Trituration of calpain - treated vimentin to vimentin null neurons be - fore plating enhanced the outgrowth of β - gal - positive cells and had no effect on cells that did not express the β - gal marker . Vimentin uptake after trituration was verified by immunostaining , and we analyzed only those cultures in which over 50 % of the cells contained vimentin 3 hr after trituration . Tri - turation of calpain - treated neurofilament had no effect , and calpain - treated vimentin was found to be incapable of polymerization ( Fig - ure S2 ) . Scale bar , 50 (cid:1) m . ( C and D ) Effects of sciatic nerve conditional lesion in vimentin − / − mice . Sciatic nerves were crushed as described , and L4 / L5 DRG neurons were cultured 3 days after the con - ditioning lesion . Neurons were fixed after 18 hr in culture and stained , and neurite out - growth was measured . Wild - type neurons and vimentin null neurons negative for β - gal revealed accelerated neurite outgrowth after a conditioning crush ( > 100 neurons measured from two independent experiments ; p < 0 . 01 ) , whereas no change was observed in vimentin null β - gal - positive cells ( 250 neurons measured from two independent experiments ; average ± standard error of mean ) . Scale bar , 100 (cid:1) m . ( E ) Effects of five Erk - derived synthetic peptides ( sequences shown on the left ) on the interaction of vimentin with pErk . Five different peptides were incubated with vimentin ( 20 : 1 molar ratio ) in PBS for 2 hr at 37°C , followed by GST - pErk pull - down . A single peptide designated Erk89 clearly inhibits pErk - vimentin binding , and the inhibition was shown to be concentration dependent . This experiment was repeated three times with similar results . ( F and G ) Effects of the MEK inhibitor UO126 and the Erk89 peptide on conditioning lesion responses in adult rat DRG neurons . Sciatic nerves were injected with 10 (cid:1) M UO126 or 250 (cid:1) g of Erk89 or Erk312 peptides , concomitantly with a conditioning crush injury . Five days after the lesion , L4 / L5 DRG neurons were cultured in vitro for 18 hr , fixed , and stained for NFH before measurement of neurite outgrowth . Both the percentage of sprouting neurons ( n = 300 for each treatment ; p < 0 . 01 ) and the neurite length in those that did sprout ( n > 60 for each treatment ; p < 0 . 05 ) were significantly reduced by UO126 or Erk89 , whereas the Erk312 peptide had no effect . The experiment was repeated three times with two animals for each treatment , totaling six independent animal assays for each treatment ( average ± standard error of mean ) . Scale bar , 100 (cid:1) m . ( H ) Recovery of sensory responses after lesion of the sciatic nerve in vivo . Wild - type and vimentin null mice ( 14 animals in each group ) underwent sciatic nerve lesion and were then monitored daily for up to 30 days postlesion . At each monitoring session , the animal’s response to toe pinch was tested for each individual digit , and the response was plotted as percent of responding digits . There was an immediate and essentially complete cessation of response in both groups of animals immediately after the lesion , with a clear difference in recovery kinetics between wild - type and vimentin null animals . GAP43 immunostaining was performed to compare ( AU , arbitrary units ) regeneration in longitudi - nal sections totaling 1 cm nerve length adjacent to the lesion site . This analysis revealed significant differences between wild - type and vimentin null nerves 6 days after lesion ( average ± standard deviation ) . Scale bar , 100 (cid:1) m . single peptide designated Erk89 ( numbering is the first tides on the conditioning lesion response in adult rats . In parallel experiments , we also examined the effects residue of the peptide as found in human Erk2 ) was found to inhibit vimentin - pErk binding in a concentra - of the MEK inhibitor UO126 . The peptides or the inhibi - tor were injected into sciatic nerve concomitantly with tion - dependent manner . We therefore tested the effects of the Erk89 in comparison with another one of the pep - a conditioning sciatic nerve crush , and outgrowth of Neuron722 Figure 8 . A Model for Vimentin - Dependent Retrograde Transport of Phosphorylated MAP Kinases Local synthesis of vimentin at the axonal lesion site ( left ) , together with phosphoryla - tion of Erk ( yellow ) , allows linkage of pErk to the retrograde complex via a direct interac - tion of vimentin with importin β . The complex may protect pErk from phosphatases due to steric hindrance , and pErk should remain bound to vimentin as long as the complex is within a high - calcium microenvironment . Upon arrival in the cell body , pErk dissoci - ates from vimentin and is then available to downstream targets in the cell body or the nucleus . L4 / L5 DRG neurons was examined 5 days later . Both vimentin at the lesion site . Recently , it has become ap - UO126 and Erk89 significantly inhibited the condition - parent that local axonal translation occurs for a wide ing lesion response in rat DRG neurons , whereas the range of gene products , contributing to diverse pro - Erk312 peptide had no effect ( Figures 7F and 7G ) . The cesses of growth cone navigation in the embryonic ner - UO126 results show that pErk is required for efficient vous system or regeneration in the adult ( Giuditta et al . , retrograde injury signaling , and the effects of the Erk89 2002 ) . Thus , local translation of specific axonal tran - peptide indicate that vimentin - pErk binding is neces - scripts provides a versatile mechanism activating latent sary for the process . Taken together with the results signaling mechanisms . Indeed , local translation might obtained from vimentin null mice , this series of experi - be a prerequisite for vimentin participation in retrograde ments proves that vimentin - mediated retrograde trans - injury signaling , as anterograde transport of the protein port of pErk facilitates the cell body response in the from the cell body may be diverted to filament assem - sciatic nerve - DRG system . bly en route ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ) . vimentin mRNA is Finally , we examined the effects of vimentin on sen - known to be targeted to specific subcellular locations sory neuron regeneration in vivo . Sciatic nerve crush in nonneuronal cells ( Morris et al . , 2000 ) , and it will be was carried out on 14 wild - type and 14 vimentin − / − interesting to determine how vimentin message is mice , followed by daily monitoring of responses to toe targeted to axons . In this context , it is noteworthy that pinch for up to 30 days postlesion . As shown in Figure vimentin synthesis at an axonal lesion site introduces 7H , there was an immediate and essentially complete the nascent protein chain directly into an elevated cessation of sensory response in both groups immedi - calcium environment likely to be unfavorable for fila - ately after the lesion . Recovery of sensation was de - ment assembly . High calcium may inhibit filament as - layed in the vimentin null animals as compared to wild - sembly due to vimentin phosphorylation by calcium - type , with full recovery observed after 11 days in null activated CAM kinase II ( Inagaki et al . , 1997 ) , or due to animals compared to 1 week in wild - type . Quantifica - calpain - mediated cleavage of vimentin . tion of regenerative sprouting by GAP43 immuno - staining of longitudinal sections revealed significant Potential Regulatory Roles for Calcium differences between wild - type and vimentin null nerves The in vitro effects of calcium on pErk binding , and 3 – 9 days after lesion ( Figure 7H and data not shown ) . phosphatase protection , suggest that calcium eleva - Thus , lack of vimentin causes a marked delay in the in tion in the nerve is likely to influence the retrograde sig - vivo regeneration of sensory axons in sciatic nerve . nal . Calcium is elevated in axons of both invertebrates and vertebrates after nerve injury or trauma ( Mandolesi Discussion et al . , 2004 ; Ziv and Spira , 1995 ) . Although recovery of axonal calcium to basal levels can be fairly rapid in in - We have shown that vimentin is upregulated in sciatic vertebrate neurons in culture ( Ziv and Spira , 1995 ) , nerve axoplasm after lesion and is transported in the levels in injured mammalian nerve may remain elevated retrograde injury - signaling complex via a direct interac - for prolonged periods ( Iwata et al . , 2004 ; Wolf et al . , tion with importin β . The MAP kinases Erk1 and Erk2 2001 ) . This might be due to delayed sealing caused by are phosphorylated in axoplasm after nerve lesion , and reduced extracellular calcium in the mammalian system vimentin binds phosphorylated Erks , thus linking them ( Shi et al . , 2000 ; Yoo et al . , 2003 ) , or due to different to the retrograde transport system ( Figure 8 ) . These rates of sealing in axons of different diameters ( Howard findings reveal how non - NLS - bearing signaling mole - et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , an axonal lesion may lead to signifi - cules can access the importins - mediated retrograde cant and prolonged elevation of calcium levels in the transport complex , describe an additional role for inter - axon , thereby facilitating the interaction of pErk with mediate filaments , and define a mechanism that allows vimentin . If the injury is severe , axonal sealing may be long - distance kinase signaling within cells . delayed , and calcium elevation might be maintained for sufficient time for the pErk signal to arrive at the cell Recruitment of Vimentin to the Retrograde body . If the injury is relatively mild and axon sealing and Transport Machinery calcium recovery is rapid , pErk may dissociate before A critical initiating event for the mechanism outlined above is local axonal synthesis of both importin β and arrival at the cell body . Vimentin - Dependent Translocation of Activated Erk 723 Mobility of Vimentin—Additional Roles by excess NLS peptides ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) , and since NLS peptides did not interfere with the vimentin - pErk for Intermediate Filaments Our data reveal unexpected roles for vimentin that are interaction , additional signaling molecules are likely transported by the importin α classical NLS binding site not necessarily related to its functions in cytoskeleton formation . Initial studies on vimentin null mice showed in the complex . Conversely , a different kinase signal may be transported instead of pErk in vimentin null that they survive and breed normally ( Colucci - Guyon et al . , 1994 ) . Subsequent analyses revealed subtle defects cells ; for example , there is evidence for activation of the jnk pathway in injured rat DRG axons ( Kenney and in cerebellar glia ( Gimenez y Ribotta et al . , 2000 ) , neuro - behavioral effects ( Lalonde and Strazielle , 2003 ) , and Kocsis , 1998 ) and of protein kinase G in lesioned Aplysia neurons ( Sung et al . , 2004 ) . Interestingly , trk re - impaired skin wound healing due to mesenchymal de - fects ( Eckes et al . , 2000 ) ; thus , vimentin is important in ceptor activation by NGF leads to retrograde signaling via Erk5 , and not Erk1 / 2 ( Watson et al . , 2001 ) . Thus it is a range of cell types . A recent study has shown re - duced astroglial reactivity and increased plastic sprout - becoming apparent that retrograde signaling occurs via a diversity of signals , depending on the neuronal sub - ing of supraspinal axons in hemisected spinal cord of vimentin / GFAP double null mice ( Menet et al . , 2003 ) . type and type of stimulus . Although vimentin is known to bind other signaling This phenotype was attributed to a reduction of the in - hospitable environment that would normally be gener - molecules , such as PLA2 ( Paramio and Jorcano , 2002 ) , we have focused on the role of vimentin - transported ated by astrocytes at the lesion site . The outcome of vimentin perturbation in nerve injury is therefore likely pErk in lesioned sciatic nerve . How might pErk contrib - ute to enhanced regeneration of sensory neurons ? Two to depend on the balance between its regeneration - enhancing contribution to intrinsic growth mechanisms independent studies have shown that elevation of cAMP levels in the DRG mimics the regeneration - inducing ef - via retrograde axonal signaling versus an indirect re - generation - inhibiting influence , due to its major struc - fect of a conditioning lesion ( Neumann et al . , 2002 ; Qiu et al . , 2002 ) . Cross - talk between the cAMP and Erk tural role in astroglial cells . Our data also shed light on mechanisms of vimentin pathways can occur via inhibition of cAMP phospho - diesterase - 4 isoforms by Erk , thus increasing cAMP movement within cells . Live imaging of cells expressing GFP - vimentin has shown that vimentin is found in com - levels in the cell ( Houslay and Baillie , 2003 ) . Indeed , it has recently been shown that Erk activated by neuro - plexes of various sizes , which move bidirectionally on microtubules ( Ho et al . , 1998 ; Prahlad et al . , 1998 ; Yoon trophin receptors transiently inhibits cAMP phospho - diesterase - 4 in DRG neurons ( Gao et al . , 2003 ) . The et al . , 1998 ) . Conventional kinesin is thought to move vimentin outward toward plus ends of microtubules transient nature of the inhibition may be due to activa - tion of cAMP - dependent PKA , which in turn can lead ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ) , and dynamitin overexpression was recently used to demonstrate a role for dynein in to inhibition of the Erk pathway ( Houslay and Baillie , 2003 ; Maeda et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , ongoing elevation of inward minus end - directed movement of vimentin on microtubules ( Clarke and Allan , 2002 ; Helfand et al . , cAMP in the cell body may require a supply of newly phosphorylated Erk , provided by vimentin - mediated 2002 ) . The direct interaction between vimentin and im - portin β allows vimentin to connect to dynein via the trafficking from the axon . It will be interesting to deter - mine how direct effects of pErk on transcription factors association of importins with dynein ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , these findings may rationalize some pre - like Elk1 are combined with indirect effects via cAMP or other second messengers to coordinate neuronal re - viously puzzling reports showing vimentin concentra - tion in the cell center upon disruption of microtubules generation . In this context , it is noteworthy that Liu and Snider ( 2001 ) showed that application of a MEK inhibi - ( Clarke and Allan , 2002 ; Gurland and Gundersen , 1995 ; Yoon et al . , 1998 ) . Inward clustering of vimentin at the tor to adult DRG neurons in culture had no effect on their regenerative outgrowth . In that case , the neurons cell center may be due to interactions of importin β with nucleoporins . An importin β - nucleoporin interaction underwent conditional lesioning in vivo and were ex - posed to the MEK inhibitor only afterward in the culture . also provides a mechanism for vimentin entry to the nucleus , strengthening the argument for possible nuclear Taken together with our findings , this indicates that pErk is involved in the retrograde signal initiating regen - roles of vimentin ( Traub and Shoeman , 1994 ) . These findings expand the range of potential roles for vimen - eration but is not required during subsequent out - growth . tin and suggest that intermediate filaments provide dy - namic and mobile scaffolds for localization and long - distance transport of signaling molecules within cells . Long - Distance Transport of Kinase Signals This paper has addressed the issue of how kinase sig - nals might be propagated over long distances within a pErk and Other Signals in the Regenerative Response cell . Most previous work in this field was on signals initiated at the plasma membrane by receptor tyrosine Our data show that vimentin modulates regeneration in a subset of DRG neurons ; however , vimentin is not kinases , thus naturally leading to a focus on mecha - nisms allowing lateral propagation in the membrane or expressed in approximately 40 % of the neuronal pop - ulation . Since retrograde transport of pErk in injured intracellular trafficking of membrane - enclosed vesicles . Although soluble complexes of dynein - trafficked mole - sciatic nerve is completely dependent on vimentin , other signals most likely substitute or compensate for cules have been recognized especially in neurons ( Gu - zik and Goldstein , 2004 ; Hanz and Fainzilber , 2004 ; Hir - pErk in vimentin - negative cells . We have previously shown that retrograde injury signaling can be inhibited okawa and Takemura , 2004 ) , it was not clear how such Neuron724 BioRad , and fluorescent secondary antibodies were from Jackson complexes could maintain integrity of an activated ki - ImmunoResearch . Western blots and immunostainings were car - nase while traversing a phosphatase - rich environment . ried out as described in Hanz et al . ( 2003 ) . For Westerns , axoplasm We suggest a mechanism that enables the cell to trans - samples were resolved on 10 % SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocel - port an activated kinase over distances of many centi - lulose , and after reaction with the desired antibodies were devel - meters in a lesioned axon . A combination of local oped with ECL ( Pierce ) . For immunofluorescence , DRG neurons were fixed with 3 % paraformaldehyde , while control and injured translation and calpain cleavage produces a soluble in - sciatic nerve segments were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , frozen termediate filament fragment that may bind the acti - with Tissue - Tek ( Sakura , Tokyo ) , and sectioned longitudinally at 10 vated kinase under high - calcium conditions and re - (cid:1) m thickness in a Leica cryostat . Neuron cultures and sciatic nerve lease it with signaling moiety intact upon arrival at a sections were mounted in moviol ( Calbiochem ) and observed under low - calcium region . Linkage of the intermediate fila - an Olympus FV500 confocal laser scanning microscope . For Rho - ment - kinase complex to the retrograde transport ma - damine RED - X and Cy5 visualization , we used 543 nm and 633 nm wavelengths in a sequential manner . chinery is via a cotranslated importin , thus providing additional specificity to the system . The versatility of this mechanism suggests that vimentin and pErk may Recombinant Expression of pERK and Importin (cid:1) To obtain doubly phosphorylated ERK , activated human GST - ERK2 turn out to be one of many kinase translocation part - was coexpressed with constitutively active MEK1 in BL21 bacteria , nerships . as previously described ( Wilsbacher and Cobb , 2001 ) . The bacteria were grown in 2YT medium at 30°C to an optical density of 0 . 6 , Experimental Procedures and then 1 mM IPTG was added for an additional 4 hr . GST - importin β and His - tagged importin β constructs were kindly provided by Dr . Animals , In Vivo Procedures , and Cultures Steve Adam ( Northwestern University , Chicago , IL ) and Dr . Ziv Adult ( 8 – 12 weeks old ) male Wistar rats were purchased from Har - Reich ( Weizmann Institute ) , respectively . Importin β constructs lan , Inc . ( Rehovot , Israel ) . Wild - type or vimentin − / − SV129 mice with were grown in BL21 bacteria in Luria - Bertani medium at 37°C until β - gal inserted at the vimentin locus were generously provided by OD 0 . 5 , followed by overnight incubation with 100 (cid:1) M IPTG at Dr . E Colucci - Guyon ( Pasteur Institute ) and bred and maintained at 26°C . Proteins were purified over Glutathione - Sepharose 4B ( Amer - the Veterinary Resources Department of the Weizmann Institute as sham Biosciences ) or nickel - NTA agarose ( Qiagene ) according to previously described ( Colucci - Guyon et al . , 1994 ) . Sciatic nerve the manufacturer’s instructions . crush was performed as previously described ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) . Axoplasm was obtained from freshly dissected nerves after gentle compression in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) or in nuclear Pull - Downs and Coimmunoprecipitations transport buffer ( NTB ; Hanz et al . , 2003 ) without EGTA , containing Sciatic nerve axoplasm ( 500 (cid:1) g ) was precleared for 1 hr with 80 % protease inhibitors ( Roche ) and 1 mM orthovanadate when neces - protein G - Sepharose ( Amersham Bioscience ) . Following overnight sary . Purity of axoplasm was verified by Western blotting for incubation with primary antibody , complexes were incubated on Schwann cell ( S - 100 ) and nuclear ( RCC1 ) markers as described by protein G beads for 2 hr , washed extensively , and eluted by boiling Hanz et al . ( 2003 ) and other glial markers as indicated in Figure S1 . in SDS - PAGE sample buffer before loading on gels for Western blot DRG cultures from adult animals were as previously described analyses . For coimmunoprecipitation in the presence of competi - ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) . Vimentin trituration into DRGs was carried out tors , 2 (cid:1) M NLS or reverse - NLS peptides were added to the axo - by introducing 100 (cid:1) g of vimentin to the trituration medium for 15 plasm for overnight incubation at 4°C . For direct pull - downs , GST - ganglia . Vimentin was prepared for trituration by cleavage with cal - pERK ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) g ) or importin β ( 1 (cid:1) g ) were equilibrated in PBS or NTB pain ( 100 (cid:1) U ; 2 hr ) . In vivo conditioning sciatic nerve lesions were and added to 500 (cid:1) g aliquots of axoplasm from different postlesion carried out as described by Hanz et al . ( 2003 ) . For tests of intro - times . Direct interactions were tested in vitro by mixing 0 . 1 (cid:1) g re - duced substances , sciatic nerves were injected concomitantly with combinant Syrian hamster vimentin or NF ( Cytoskeleton Inc . , Den - the crush with the MEK inhibitor UO126 ( Biomol ; 10 (cid:1) M ) , the Erk89 ver , CO ) to GST - pERK or GST - importin β and incubated for 2 hr at or Erk312 peptides ( 250 (cid:1) g ) , or calpeptin ( Calbiochem ; 100 (cid:1) M ) . 37°C . All pull - downs were washed twice with 0 . 2 M NaCl in PBS or L4 / L5 DRG neurons were cultured 3 – 5 days after the conditioning NTB and twice again with PBS or NTB before elution in SDS - PAGE lesion . Neurons were fixed after 18 hr in culture and stained with sample buffer for loading on gels . NFH , and the length of the longest axon per neuron was measured . In vivo regeneration and recovery of sensory function was tested Phosphatase Protection Assay on wild - type and vimentin null mice following sciatic nerve crush . His - Imp - β ( 2 (cid:1) g ) was incubated with GST - pERK ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) g ) and with Mice were monitored daily for foot withdrawal in response to toe 0 – 2 (cid:1) g vimentin or NF for 2 hr at 37°C . AP ( 2 units ; Roche , Mann - pinch of each individual digit with forceps , scored as the percen - heim , Germany ) or axoplasm from injured nerve ( 100 (cid:1) g ) was then tage of responding digits . Longitudinal sections on injured nerve added for an additional 30 min . Complexes were purified over GST were carried out at designated times and immunostained with anti - beads followed by Western blot analysis for pERK . AP activity was GAP43 rabbit polyclonal AB5220 ( Chemicon ) . All animal experi - verified with the synthetic substrate pNPP ( Sigma S0942 ) dissolved mentation was under the supervision of the Weizmann Institute In - in 0 . 1 M glycine buffer ( 0 . 1 M glycine , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ZnCl 2 ; stitutional Animal Care and Use Committee . pH 10 . 4 ) for a stock solution of 1 mg / ml . One unit AP was added to a reaction mixture consisting of 1 (cid:1) g pNPP with 2 (cid:1) g vimentin Antibodies , Western Blots , and Immunofluorescence or NF in Tris buffer ( pH 7 . 5 ) and incubated for 5 , 15 , and 30 min The following antibodies were from Chemicon International ( Temec - before stopping the reaction with 3 N NaOH . The yellow hydrolysis ula , CA ) : vimentin monoclonal clone V9 MAB3400 ; vimentin poly - product was quantified spectrophotometrically at 405 nm . clonal AB1620 ; peripherin polyclonal AB1530 ; dynein 74 kDa inter - mediate chain monoclonal MAB1618 ; β - gal monoclonal AB1802 ; β - gal polyclonal AB1211 ; NFH polyclonal AB1989 ; CNPase mo - Retrograde Movement Rat sciatic nerves were crushed and dissected out at increasing noclonal MAB326 . The following antibodies were from Sigma ( Re - hovot , Israel ) : NFH clone N52 monoclonal ; Erk polyclonal M5670 ; times after lesion ( 0 – 24 hr ) . Dissected nerves were divided into con - secutive segments of about 10 mm each before extraction of axo - doubly phosphorylated Erk monoclonal M8159 ; GFAP clone G - A - 5 . The importin β monoclonal antibody 3E9 MA3 - 070 was from Affinity plasm . From each segment , 300 (cid:1) g axoplasm was immunoprecipi - tated with the dynein antibody , and precipitates were analyzed by Bioreagents ( Golden , CO ) ; β - tubulin polyclonal SC 9104 and lamin A / C N18 SC 6215 were from Santa Cruz ( Santa Cruz , CA ) ; for Western blot for vimentin and pErk . Followup experiments in mouse were conducted with wild - type or vimentin − / − sciatic nerves , pElk - 1 we used monoclonal 9186 from Cell Signaling ( Beverley , MA ) ; and anti - importin α 4 was a kind gift from Dr . Karsten Weis crushed and ligated as described . At designated times , the nerves were dissected , fixed , and sectioned longitudinally over the ligation ( UC Berkeley ) . HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies were from Vimentin - Dependent Translocation of Activated Erk 725 as previously described ( Hanz et al . , 2003 ) . Sections were then im - microtubules function to localize vimentin intermediate filaments in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1275 – 1290 . munostained for pErk and NFH . Guzik , B . W . , and Goldstein , L . S . ( 2004 ) . Microtubule - dependent pElk1 Response transport in neurons : steps towards an understanding of regulation , Rat L4 / L5 DRGs were dissected 0 – 24 hr after sciatic nerve lesion function and dysfunction . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 443 – 450 . into lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCL [ pH 7 . 4 ] , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM Hanz , S . , and Fainzilber , M . ( 2004 ) . Integration of retrograde axonal PMSF , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and protease inhibitor cocktail and nuclear transport mechanisms in neurons : implications for [ Roche ] ) and processed for Western blot of pErk and pElk - 1 . For therapeutics . Neuroscientist 10 , 404 – 408 . pElk1 analysis in mouse , DRG processes were lesioned at about Hanz , S . , Perlson , E . , Willis , D . , Zheng , J . Q . , Massarwa , R . , Huerta , 1 mm distance from the ganglia before transfer to PBS and incuba - J . J . , Koltzenburg , M . , Kohler , M . , van - Minnen , J . , Twiss , J . L . , and tion in vitro for up to 1 hr at 37°C , followed by lysis and Western Fainzilber , M . ( 2003 ) . Axoplasmic importins enable retrograde injury blot analysis . signaling in lesioned nerve . Neuron 40 , 1095 – 1104 . Harel , A . , and Forbes , D . J . ( 2004 ) . Importin beta : conducting a much larger cellular symphony . Mol . Cell 16 , 319 – 330 . Supplemental Data The Supplemental Data include two figures and can be found with Helfand , B . T . , Mikami , A . , Vallee , R . B . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 2002 ) . A this article online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 45 / 5 / requirement for cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin in intermediate 715 / DC1 / . filament network assembly and organization . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 795 – 806 . Hirokawa , N . , and Takemura , R . ( 2004 ) . Molecular motors in neu - Acknowledgments ronal development , intracellular transport and diseases . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 , 564 – 573 . This work was supported by grants from the Minerva Foundation , Ho , C . L . , Martys , J . L . , Mikhailov , A . , Gundersen , G . G . , and Liem , the Pasteur - Weizmann Foundation , and the Christopher Reeve Pa - R . K . ( 1998 ) . Novel features of intermediate filament dynamics re - ralysis Foundation . M . F . is the incumbent of the Daniel Koshland vealed by green fluorescent protein chimeras . J . Cell Sci . 111 , Sr . Career Development Chair at the Weizmann Institute . We are 1767 – 1778 . very grateful to Emma Colucci - Guyon for the generous gift of vi - Houslay , M . D . , and Baillie , G . S . ( 2003 ) . The role of ERK2 docking mentin − / − mice , and to Daniel Gonzalez - Dunia for invaluable assis - and phosphorylation of PDE4 cAMP phosphodiesterase isoforms tance in transferring the mice . We thank Michael Elbaum and Dafna in mediating cross - talk between the cAMP and ERK signalling Frenkiel for electron microscopy of vimentin filaments ; Vladimir pathways . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 1186 – 1190 . Kiss for assistance with confocal microscopy ; and Steve Adam , Howard , M . J . , David , G . , and Barrett , J . N . ( 1999 ) . Resealing of tran - Elior Peles , Ziv Reich , and Karsten Weis for kind gifts of antibodies sected myelinated mammalian axons in vivo : evidence for involve - and reagents . Finally , we very much appreciate the constructive ment of calpain . Neuroscience 93 , 807 – 815 . criticisms of Ari Elson , Carlos Ibanez , and the reviewers . Howe , C . L . , and Mobley , W . C . ( 2004 ) . Signaling endosome hypothe - sis : A cellular mechanism for long distance communication . J . Neu - Received : June 3 , 2004 robiol . 58 , 207 – 216 . Revised : November 16 , 2004 Accepted : January 14 , 2005 Inagaki , N . , Goto , H . , Ogawara , M . , Nishi , Y . , Ando , S . , and Inagaki , Published : March 2 , 2005 M . ( 1997 ) . Spatial patterns of Ca2 + signals define intracellular dis - tribution of a signaling by Ca2 + / Calmodulin - dependent protein ki - References nase II . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25195 – 25199 . Iwata , A . , Stys , P . K . , Wolf , J . A . , Chen , X . H . , Taylor , A . G . , Meaney , Boyne , L . J . , Fischer , I . , and Shea , T . B . ( 1996 ) . Role of vimentin in D . F . , and Smith , D . H . ( 2004 ) . Traumatic axonal injury induces pro - early stages of neuritogenesis in cultured hippocampal neurons . teolytic cleavage of the voltage - gated sodium channels modulated Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 14 , 739 – 748 . by tetrodotoxin and protease inhibitors . J . Neurosci . 24 , 4605 – 4613 . Clarke , E . J . , and Allan , V . ( 2002 ) . Intermediate filaments : vimentin moves in . Curr . Biol . 12 , R596 – R598 . Kenney , A . M . , and Kocsis , J . D . ( 1998 ) . Peripheral axotomy induces long - term c - Jun amino - terminal kinase - 1 activation and activator Colucci - Guyon , E . , Portier , M . M . , Dunia , I . , Paulin , D . , Pournin , S . , and Babinet , C . ( 1994 ) . Mice lacking vimentin develop and repro - protein - 1 binding activity by c - Jun and junD in adult rat dorsal root ganglia in vivo . J . Neurosci . 18 , 1318 – 1328 . duce without an obvious phenotype . Cell 79 , 679 – 694 . Dubey , M . , Hoda , S . , Chan , W . K . , Pimenta , A . , Ortiz , D . D . , and Shea , Kholodenko , B . N . ( 2003 ) . Four - dimensional organization of protein kinase signaling cascades : the roles of diffusion , endocytosis and T . B . ( 2004 ) . Reexpression of vimentin in differentiated neuro - blastoma cells enhances elongation of axonal neurites . J . Neurosci . molecular motors . J . Exp . Biol . 206 , 2073 – 2082 . Res . 78 , 245 – 249 . Lalonde , R . , and Strazielle , C . ( 2003 ) . Neurobehavioral characteris - tics of mice with modified intermediate filament genes . Rev . Neu - Eckes , B . , Colucci - Guyon , E . , Smola , H . , Nodder , S . , Babinet , C . , Krieg , T . , and Martin , P . ( 2000 ) . Impaired wound healing in embry - rosci . 14 , 369 – 385 . onic and adult mice lacking vimentin . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2455 – 2462 . Lariviere , R . C . , and Julien , J . P . ( 2004 ) . Functions of intermediate filaments in neuronal development and disease . J . Neurobiol . 58 , Gao , Y . , Nikulina , E . , Mellado , W . , and Filbin , M . T . ( 2003 ) . Neuro - trophins elevate cAMP to reach a threshold required to overcome 131 – 148 . inhibition by MAG through extracellular signal - regulated kinase - Liu , R . Y . , and Snider , W . D . ( 2001 ) . Different signaling pathways me - dependent inhibition of phosphodiesterase . J . Neurosci . 23 , diate regenerative versus developmental sensory axon growth . J . 11770 – 11777 . Neurosci . 21 , RC164 . Gimenez y Ribotta , M . , Langa , F . , Menet , V . , and Privat , A . ( 2000 ) . Maeda , M . , Lu , S . , Shaulsky , G . , Miyazaki , Y . , Kuwayama , H . , Ta - Comparative anatomy of the cerebellar cortex in mice lacking vi - naka , Y . , Kuspa , A . , and Loomis , W . F . ( 2004 ) . Periodic signaling mentin , GFAP , and both vimentin and GFAP . Glia 31 , 69 – 83 . controlled by an oscillatory circuit that includes protein kinases ERK2 and PKA . Science 304 , 875 – 878 . Giuditta , A . , Kaplan , B . B . , van Minnen , J . , Alvarez , J . , and Koenig , E . ( 2002 ) . Axonal and presynaptic protein synthesis : new insights Mandolesi , G . , Madeddu , F . , Bozzi , Y . , Maffei , L . , and Ratto , G . M . into the biology of the neuron . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 400 – 404 . ( 2004 ) . Acute physiological response of mammalian central neu - rons to axotomy : ionic regulation and electrical activity . FASEB J . Goldberg , J . L . ( 2003 ) . How does an axon grow ? Genes Dev . 17 , 941 – 958 . 18 , 1934 – 1936 . Menet , V . , Prieto , M . , Privat , A . , and Gimenez y Ribotta , M . ( 2003 ) . Gurland , G . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1995 ) . Stable , detyrosinated Neuron726 Axonal plasticity and functional recovery after spinal cord injury in by tetrodotoxin - sensitive sodium channels . J . Neurosci . 21 , 1923 – 1930 . mice deficient in both glial fibrillary acidic protein and vimentin genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 8999 – 9004 . Yoo , S . , Nguyen , M . P . , Fukuda , M . , Bittner , G . D . , and Fishman , H . M . ( 2003 ) . Plasmalemmal sealing of transected mammalian neurites is Morris , E . J . , Evason , K . , Wiand , C . , L’Ecuyer , T . J . , and Fulton , A . B . a gradual process mediated by Ca ( 2 + ) - regulated proteins . J . Neu - ( 2000 ) . Misdirected vimentin messenger RNA alters cell morphol - rosci . Res . 74 , 541 – 551 . ogy and motility . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2433 – 2443 . Yoon , M . , Moir , R . D . , Prahlad , V . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Motile Neumann , S . , Bradke , F . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , and Basbaum , A . I . properties of vimentin intermediate filament networks in living cells . ( 2002 ) . Regeneration of sensory axons within the injured spinal J . Cell Biol . 143 , 147 – 157 . cord induced by intraganglionic cAMP elevation . Neuron 34 , 885 – 893 . Ziv , N . E . , and Spira , M . E . ( 1995 ) . Axotomy induces a transient and localized elevation of the free intracellular calcium concentration to Paramio , J . M . , and Jorcano , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Beyond structure : do inter - the millimolar range . J . Neurophysiol . 74 , 2625 – 2637 . mediate filaments modulate cell signalling ? Bioessays 24 , 836 – 844 . Perlson , E . , Hanz , S . , Medzihradszky , K . F . , Burlingame , A . L . , and Fainzilber , M . ( 2004a ) . From snails to sciatic nerve : Retrograde in - jury signaling from axon to soma in lesioned neurons . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 287 – 294 . Perlson , E . , Medzihradszky , K . F . , Darula , Z . , Munno , D . W . , Syed , N . I . , Burlingame , A . L . , and Fainzilber , M . ( 2004b ) . Differential pro - teomics reveals multiple components in retrogradely transported axoplasm after nerve injury . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 3 , 510 – 520 . Prahlad , V . , Yoon , M . , Moir , R . D . , Vale , R . D . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Rapid movements of vimentin on microtubule tracks : kinesin - dependent assembly of intermediate filament networks . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 159 – 170 . Qiu , J . , Cai , D . , Dai , H . , McAtee , M . , Hoffman , P . N . , Bregman , B . S . , and Filbin , M . T . ( 2002 ) . Spinal axon regeneration induced by eleva - tion of cyclic AMP . Neuron 34 , 895 – 903 . Reynolds , A . R . , Tischer , C . , Verveer , P . J . , Rocks , O . , and Bastiaens , P . I . ( 2003 ) . EGFR activation coupled to inhibition of tyrosine phos - phatases causes lateral signal propagation . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 447 – 453 . Rogers , K . R . , Eckelt , A . , Nimmrich , V . , Janssen , K . P . , Schliwa , M . , Herrmann , H . , and Franke , W . W . ( 1995 ) . Truncation mutagenesis of the non - alpha - helical carboxyterminal tail domain of vimentin re - veals contributions to cellular localization but not to filament as - sembly . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 66 , 136 – 150 . Shi , R . , Asano , T . , Vining , N . C . , and Blight , A . R . ( 2000 ) . Control of membrane sealing in injured mammalian spinal cord axons . J . Neu - rophysiol . 84 , 1763 – 1769 . Smith , D . S . , and Skene , J . H . ( 1997 ) . A transcription - dependent switch controls competence of adult neurons for distinct modes of axon growth . J . Neurosci . 17 , 646 – 658 . Sung , Y . J . , Povelones , M . , and Ambron , R . T . ( 2001 ) . RISK - 1 : a novel MAPK homologue in axoplasm that is activated and retrogradely transported after nerve injury . J . Neurobiol . 47 , 67 – 79 . Sung , Y . J . , Walters , E . T . , and Ambron , R . T . ( 2004 ) . A neuronal iso - form of protein kinase G couples mitogen - activated protein kinase nuclear import to axotomy - induced long - term hyperexcitability in Aplysia sensory neurons . J . Neurosci . 24 , 7583 – 7595 . Traub , P . , and Shoeman , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Intermediate filament proteins : cytoskeletal elements with gene - regulatory function ? Int . Rev . Cy - tol . 154 , 1 – 103 . Watson , F . L . , Heerssen , H . M . , Bhattacharyya , A . , Klesse , L . , Lin , M . Z . , and Segal , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Neurotrophins use the Erk5 pathway to mediate a retrograde survival response . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 981 – 988 . Weible , M . W . , and Hendry , I . A . ( 2004 ) . What is the importance of multivesicular bodies in retrograde axonal transport in vivo ? J . Neurobiol . 58 , 230 – 243 . Whitehurst , A . W . , Wilsbacher , J . L . , You , Y . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Moore , M . S . , and Cobb , M . H . ( 2002 ) . ERK2 enters the nucleus by a carrier - independent mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7496 – 7501 . Wilsbacher , J . L . , and Cobb , M . H . ( 2001 ) . Bacterial expression of activated mitogen - activated protein kinases . Methods Enzymol . 332 , 387 – 400 . Wolf , J . A . , Stys , P . K . , Lusardi , T . , Meaney , D . , and Smith , D . H . ( 2001 ) . Traumatic axonal injury induces calcium influx modulated