Book Reviews The following reviews were selected from those recently pub - lished in various / €€E TRANSACTIONS , Magazines , and Newsletters . They are reprinted here to make them conveniently available to the many readers who otherwise might not have ready access to them . Each review is followed by an identification of its original source . Communications Training and Consulting in Business , Industry , and Government - William J . Buchholz , Ed . ( Urbana , IL : American Busi - ness Communication Association , 1983 , 290 pp . , $ 9 . 95 ; ABCA mem - bers $ 8 . 95 , softbound . ) Reviewed by f . W . Denton , IBM Corpora - tion , Austin , TX 78758 . In the foreword to this book , Francis Weeks , Executive Director of the American Business Communication Association , says , “This book has been needed for a long time - since 1935 , at least , when ABCA was founded . ” The publication of this volume does indeed fill a void and will be welcomed by ABCA members and by any professional communicator with an interest in consulting . Despite various ludicrous definitions of consultants ( “Someone with a briefcase who lives 50 miles away” ) , consultants in technical and business writing and speaking are in greater demand than ever before . Many university professors are pressed into service by virtue of their position and influence . And many in government and industry consult on the side or eventually move into the consulting business full - time . Before the publication of this book on consult - ing , consultants and would - be consultants relied on word of mouth and on occasional articles as they tried to learn more about the mechanics of beginning a consulting practice and nurturing it to maturity . This book contains 35 articles on various aspects of communica - tion consulting , all written by full - or part - time consultants . Most authors are teachers of business and technical writing or managerial communication at colleges and universities . Some articles are re - printed from other publications , but many have been written espe - cially for this volume . William Buchholz says that “Anyone who can afford a business card can become a communication consultant - and that is pre - cisely the problem facing the profession at this moment . What this book does , then , is to confront that problem , to offer a safeguard against professional dilution by clarifying the purpose , scope , and functions of communication consulting . ” To accomplish that purpose , Buchholz has divided the 35 articles into six categories . “Communication Consulting : The Present and Beyond” examines the state of the art in consulting and analyzes predicted developments in consulting over the next decade . ”Toward Increased Productivity” addresses ways that improved communication and communication training can result in greater productivity for American business and industry . “The Consulting Business” contains five articles on the problems and opportunities of getting into the consulting business . Especially helpful are suggestions for obtaining , negotiating , and pricing con - sulting jobs . “Needs Assessment and Communicating Auditing” suggests ways to determine what the client’s needs really are so that the con - sultant can plan to meet those needs . Questionnaires , surveys , checklists , and audit forms are presented as ways of gathering useful information . “Common Problems : From Strategies to Ethics” explores ways to handle writing anxiety , bureaucratic “miscommunication” in the public sector , engineers’ assumptions about their audiences , and some of the ethical and political issues inherent in the communica - tion consulting process . “Program Deliveries” presents several articles discussing types of writing workshops , model syllabi , sample course outlines , and an annotated bibliography of articles on consulting and related items . Communication Training and Consulting contains a wealth of material that should be useful to the new and experienced con - sultant alike . So far as I know , it is the only source for so much good information . It should , as Francis Weeks points out , become the official handbook on communication consulting . The only negative factors evident in the book are the duplication of informa - tion in places and the need for a closer editing of mechanics and style . If you are interested in becoming a communication consultant or in learing more about consulting , this will be a useful addition to your professional library . pp . 47 - 48 , Mar . 1934 . Reprinted from / €E€ Trans . Professional Communication , vol . PC - 27 , The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action - Donald A . Schon . ( Basic Books , 1983 , $ 19 . 95 . ) Reviewedby R . 1 . Bogumil , Consultant , New York , NY . What is “professional practice” and how are the requisite skills enhanced and inculcated ? The cover jacket proclaims “In this brilliant new book , a leading social scientist [ Ford Professor of Urban Studies and Education at MIT ] addresses himself for the first time to precisely these questions . He looks at five professions - en - gineering , architecture , management , psychotherapy , and town planning - in order to observe professionals in action as they go about their daily business of solving particular problems . And he shows with a wealth of detail that , faced with the typically unpre - dictable situation of professional practice , a professional does much more than just apply knowledge learned in school . There is , Schon shows , a kind of ‘reflection in action’ - an informal improvisation - that is the essence of professional knowledge . ” Except for luminosity and wealth of detail this is a fair description of the book . How revealing any of this may be to an individual reader will , of course , depend on personal views . Facts of life well known to most successful professionals are illustrated through several anecdotes , one or two per profession . From these rudiments a reasonable , conventional interpretation is offered as to the sociotechnical psy - cho - dynamics of professional problem solving . The emphasis is upon common practical considerations beyond the scholarly or scientific / theoretical underpinnings peculiar to each technical sub - ject area . Thus the general importance of informal , ad hoc experi - mentation , discovery , improvisation , client interaction , and “com - mon sense” skills is extolled . This , not a concern with professional ethics or more encompassing social values , is the nature of the reflective practice expounded here . Certainly this is how many professionals tend to think in action , although Chapter One “The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge” raises hope that the author might address deeper , more difficult and socially important issues . As it develops , some such matters do surface but are then ignored and forgotten . For example , in the chapter - long anecdote used to illustrate masterful architectural design , a primary - school floor plan is devised to fit the natural slope of the available site with “significant scale” and “imposed discipline” to great aesthetic self - satisfaction . In conse - quence , the planned building occupants will be forced into “L - PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE , VOL . 73 , NO 4 , APRIL 1985 845 shaped” classrooms - to be shared by grades 1 - 2 , 3 - 4 , and 5 - 6 - without the slightest thought given to end - use functional value , simply to suit drawing - board visual appeal . When this is seen accidentally to create areas with a five - foot ceiling height , these “nooks” are quickly proclaimed by the master to be just right for “kids” and a valuable design innovation . Possible head injury to tall or jumping children is no cause for reflection in promoting this exciting new feature . For his part , Schon fails to recognize this ignorant arrogance as illustrative of the reasons for a crisis of confidence in the professions . Rather , he approvingly recounts the episode as skilled professional reflection - in - action ( at the drawing - board ) . Engineering design is explained as a “reflective conversation with the materials of the situation . ” Inspiration is drawn from a Harvard dean who is cited for his opposition to ”scientizing” engineering schools . Engineering design practice is portrayed as a process in which unsystematic , or shall we say “intuitively guided , ” simple a d hoc experiments are performed to solve specific , circumscribed , practical problems using real materials and commercial technology . Known to us as cut and try . The development of the transistor is reduced to these terms in a few pages . Of course there is much truth to this at a profound level better described , for the sciences , by Poincare and Kuhn and in mathematics by Hadamard and Polya , to name a few . Sept . 1983 . Reprinted from / €€E Technology and Society Magazine , vol . 2 , no . 3 , Bioelectric Measurements - Dean A . DeMarre and D . Michaels . ( Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1983 , ISBN 0 - 13 - 076398 - 5 , 2 % pp . , $ 24 . 95 ) . Reviewed by William A . Hyman , Bioengineering Pro - gram , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX . This short book is said by the authors to be aimed at the undergraduate engineering technology student for a one - or two - term course . When taken out of the context of such a curriculum , and without knowledge of what supplemental materials may be used , it is difficult to assess its specific utility for such students . However , the material is presented at a very introductory level and would appear to be generally inadequate by itself . It therefore would seem to have limited utility in the formal engineering technology educational process and would certainly be unsuitable as an engineering text . As an independent study source , it is too limited to be of much value even to the beginner . There are other recent books that provide a more thorough coverage for both the beginner and the experienced technician , parademic personnel , and / or physician . The book begins with four very general and brief chapters on instrumentation , sensors and transducers , amplifiers , and recorders and display devices . The shortness of the chapters , coupled with the apparent desire to at least mention a little bit of everything , results in broad generalizations , inadequate descriptions , and , yet , the inclusion of irrelevant material . In an unusual definition , noninvasive measurement techniques are said to include only transducers that do not touch the body surface . Thus , surface electrodes and ultrasound are classified here as invasive . Noninvasive techniques are said to be “always safer to use . ” However , by the definition given , perhaps the only noninva - sive technology is X - ray , the dangers of which should not be overlooked . In another generalization , digital meters are said always to be arbitrary to within two units in the last digit . As an example of inadequate description , the section on phase splitters consists of five sentences and one figure ; operational and carrier amplifiers are dispatched in a single page each . in the chapter on transducers , there is a two paragraph discussion of lasers . The examples given are several surgical applications hav - ing nothing to do with transducers . These introductory chapters illustrate not only the limited depth of the book , but also the style . The term signal processor is said to ”chill the hearts of the innocent” and computer processing is said to occur “faster than the blink of an eye . ” As with all of the chapters , each of these four end with a Review Questions section and a Reference section . The majority of the review questions begin with “Discuss . . . I’ and the answer would merely require reguritation of the relevant section in the chapter . The references are not specifically cited in the text of the chapter and tend to reflect the mid - 1970s . While timely publishing in a rapidly evolving field is a problem , in this case there is so much new that is missing that it further decreases the potential of such a book . The next six chapters deal with specific measurement systems ( ECC and heart sound , blood pressure and flow , EEC , EMG , and respiratory ) . These chapters follow the general format of a brief physiological introduction , a description of some of the desired measurements , and a quick overview of some measurement hard - ware , the latter varying from the generic to specific brands . These hardware overviews are generally coupled with a block diagram or schematic representation . However , the description of these figures is generally very short and , therefore , of limited real value . Some techniques , such as echocardiography , are addressed in a single sentence . Other devices , such as heart , lung , and kidney dialysis machines are included for brief mention , but no figures are pro - vided . Furthermore , the relevance of bioelectronic measurements to the use of these devices is not discussed . There are also notable omissions of important topics such as transcutaneous oxygen mea - surement , laboratory blood - gas machines , and ultrasonic blood flow measurement . The next three chapters address the clinical laboratory , ultra - sound , and radiological / nuclear measurements . They follow the same format discussed above and are likewise very brief . Notably the radiological and nuclear measurements chapter runs only 10 pages and makes no mention of the newest technologies ( e g , digital , digital subtraction , NMR ) or of radiation safety . In fact , only occasionally throughout the book is the important subject of mea - surement risk and principles of safe use discussed . The last of these systems chapters focuses on the intensive care unit as a hospital entity . The final chapter ( of 16 pages ) addresses performance testing and safety . This topic would seem to be one of the most important for biomedical equipment technicians and yet its coverage here is totally inadequate . Simulators are briefly discussed for testing ECC and pressure morintors , and a section deals with ultrasonic trans - ducer testing . Electrical safety testing , which , justifiably or not , has become the baseline program of most clinical engineering depart - ments , is not discussed at all . The reference section cites NFPA 768 and the JCAH standards , but these are not discussed in the text , nor are UL544 and the relevant AAMI / ANSI standards mentioned . Fur - thermore , there is no reference to adequate discussions of the subject so the naive reader may think that this is all there is . Recently , there have been a number of books that take this medical hardware “walk - through” approach . Some of the others do a much better job in terms of scope and depth of coverage . Lately , there has seemed to be a rush into print in the biomedical en - gineering / technology area . Perhaps this rush has allowed for the publication of this type of short book that sometimes represents relatively little apparent effort on the part of the authors . It is hoped that these books will not saturate the market , or discourage the publishers , so that a new generation of books can be expected that will be more comprehensive . Reprinted from / €E€ Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine , voi . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 40 - 41 , June 1984 . Real - Time Medical Image Processing - M . Onoe , K . Preston , Jr . , and A . Rosenfeld , Eds . ( New York : Plenum , 1980 , ISBN 0 - 306 - 40551 - 2 , 244 pp . , $ 35 . ) Reviewed by Ernest 1 . Feleppa , Riverside Research Institute , New York , NY . This book consists of a collection of papers presented at the Japan - United States Seminar of Research Toward Real - Time Parallel image Analysis and Recognition , held in Tokyo , Japan , October , 1978 . The seminar was organized by the editors in the interest of providing a timely forum for experts in biomedical image genera - tion and processing to describe their endeavors and present the state of the art . The book contains 17 papers : 2 cover medical image processing in general ; 7 describe image - processing applications in radiology ; 8 address image processing applied to cytology and histology . Radio - logical applications include computed tomography ( three papers ) , ultrasonic echocardiography , chest radiographs , three - dimensional 846 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE . VOL . 73 . NO . 4 . APRIL 1985