Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Covid - 19 Pandemic Low prevalence ( 0 . 13 % ) of COVID - 19 infection in asymptomatic pre - operative / pre - procedure patients at a large , academic medical center informs approaches to perioperative care Jennifer S . Singer , MD a , * , Eric M . Cheng , MD , MS b , Douglas A . Murad , MBBS c , Annabelle de St . Maurice , MD , MPH d , O . Joe Hines , MD , FACS e , Daniel Z . Uslan , MD , MBA f , Omai Garner , PhD , D g , Johnathan Pregler , MD h , Susan V . Bukata , MD i , Michael A . Pfeffer , MD c , Robert A . Cherry , MD , MS , FACS e a Department of Urology / Department of Information Services and Solutions , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA b Department of Neurology / Department of Information Services and Solutions , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA c Department of Medicine / Department of Information Services and Solutions , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA d Department of Pediatrics , Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA e Department of Surgery , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA f Department of Medicine , Division of Infectious Diseases , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA g Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA h Department of Anesthesiology , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA i Department of Orthopedic Surgery / Department of Information Services and Solutions , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , Medical Center , CA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Accepted 23 July 2020 Available online 14 August 2020 a b s t r a c t Background : The coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic has resulted in reduced performance of elective surgeries and procedures at medical centers across the United States . Awareness of the preva - lence of asymptomatic disease is critical for guiding safe approaches to operative / procedural services . As COVID - 19 polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) testing has been limited largely to symptomatic patients , health care workers , or to those in communal care centers , data regarding asymptomatic viral disease carriage are limited . Methods : In this retrospective observational case series evaluating UCLA Health patients enrolled in pre - operative / pre - procedure protocol COVID - 19 reverse transcriptase ( RT ) e PCR testing between April 7 , 2020 and May 21 , 2020 , we determine the prevalence of COVID - 19 infection in asymptomatic patients scheduled for surgeries and procedures . Results : Primary outcomes include the prevalence of COVID - 19 infection in this asymptomatic popula - tion . Secondary data analysis includes overall population testing results and population demographics . Eighteen of 4 , 751 ( 0 . 38 % ) patients scheduled for upcoming surgeries and high - risk procedures had abnormal ( positive / inconclusive ) COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing results . Six of 18 patients were con ﬁ rmed asymptomatic and had positive test results . Four of 18 were con ﬁ rmed asymptomtic and had incon - clusive results . Eight of 18 had positive results in the setting of recent symptoms or known COVID - 19 infection . The prevalence of asymptomatic COVID - 19 infection was 0 . 13 % . More than 90 % of patients had residential addresses within a 67 - mile geographic radius of our medical center , the median age was 58 , and there was equal male / female distribution . * Reprint requests : Jennifer S . Singer , MD , Department of Urology / Department of Information Services and Solutions , David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , University of California at Los Angeles , 200 Medical Center , Suite 170 , Los Angeles , CA . 90095 . E - mail address : jsinger @ mednet . ucla . edu ( J . S . Singer ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Surgery journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / surg https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . surg . 2020 . 07 . 048 0039 - 6060 / © 2020 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 Conclusion : These data demonstrating low levels ( 0 . 13 % prevalence ) of COVID - 19 infection in an asymptomatic population of patients undergoing scheduled surgeries / procedures in a large urban area have helped to inform perioperative protocols during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Testing protocols like ours may prove valuable for other health systems in their approaches to safe procedural practices during COVID - 19 . © 2020 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) , the coronavirus responsible for the coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) global pandemic , was ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed in Wuhan , China , in a cluster of cases of severe pneumonia . 1 , 2 Transmission most often occurs through droplet and direct contact , though aerosol spread also occurs . Three animal coronaviruses have recently evolved to become the newest human coronaviruses . These include severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ( SARS - CoV ) , Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus ( MERS - CoV ) , and SARS - CoV - 2 , all with the potential to cause severe disease , contagion , and resultant pandemic . 3 COVID - 19 is genetically closely related to SARS - CoV and has emerged as a highly contagious coronavirus with wide variability in severity of disease , 2 often manifesting as a simple common cold , however , potentially progressing to more serious infections like pneumonia and respiratory failure , usually in an otherwise pre - disposed patient with underlying health conditions . Data exist suggesting that anywhere from 5 % to 75 % of those with COVID - 19 could be asymptomatic . 4 While the pandemic continues to evolve , at the time of this publication , more than 18 million people have been infected globally , with over 4 . 8 million in the United States ; over 150 , 000 have died in the United States , and global deaths approach 605 , 000 . 5 , 6 Lethality is approximaty 3 . 8 % globally . 5 , 6 An identi ﬁ ed casualty of the COVID - 19 global pandemic has been the cancelation or delay of what have been considered elec - tive or nonessential procedures or surgeries . 7 , 8 This disruption is a consequence of 3 operational aims : ( 1 ) to maintain low hospital census levels in anticipation of any potential COVID - 19 surge , ( 2 ) to limit unnecessary patient and health care worker ( HCW ) SARS - CoV - 2 exposures , and ( 3 ) to reduce consumption of limited sup - plies including stocks of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) . Recent data suggest an increase in perioperative respiratory complications as well as a 19 % perioperative mortality rate in those with concurrent COVID - 19 infection undergoing elective operative procedures . 9 Identifying patients with active , yet asymptomatic or presymptomatic , COVID - 19 infection is critical to controlling the spread of disease , to protecting HCWs , and to maximally caring for patients with COVID - 19 requiring necessary surgeries / procedures . Fundamental to acquiring this information is access to widespread COVID - 19 testing . To date , limitations in test availabililty have restricted testing largely to those with symptoms , HCWs , or those living in communal care centers . COVID - 19 reverse transcriptase e polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) nasopharyngeal samples serve as the current gold standard to evaluate patients for COVID - 19 viral infection . Operative and interventional procedures that may result in exposure risks to HCWs must be approached cautiously , and HCWs continuing to care for patients during the COVID - 19 pandemic require necessary PPE for protection against infection . There is no currently available information about degree of exposure and cor - responding level of risk to surgeons , proceduralists , and anesthe - siologists during operative and interventional procedures . Limitations in the nation ’ s supply of critical PPE ( including masks able to ﬁ lter bacterial and viral particles ) have left health care systems considering whether to limit elective medical procedures in order to avoid exhausting this critical supply . These consider - ations further leave HCWs without a clear roadmap for managing care for patients requiring interventions . Approaches could range from continuing to provide care unabated for considerations of associated potential risk and availability of protective equipment , an approach that would be summarily rejected by HCWs and health system leaders , to performing no surgeries or procedures until SARS - CoV - 2 has been extinguished , an equally unrealistic approach . In an effort to inform these discussions , federal , state , and pro - fessional society guidance have been published relative to per - forming surgery during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Early in the pandemic , the American College of Surgeons ( ACS ) and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services proposed recommendations for limiting elective and nonessential procedures . 7 , 8 Individual states weighed in with 33 issuing guidance on limiting elective surgeries . 10 There has been greater focus on cancer surgeries with efforts made to balance the elective scheduling of most cancer operations with the risk of disease progression . 11 In a recent pub - lication in the obstetrics and gynecology literature , Cohen et al 12 suggested that in the absence of life - threatening emergencies requiring surgery , nonoperative treatment with a delay of surgeries should be adopted . 12 Given the aerosol generating nature of airway surgery and airway management , otolaryngologists and anesthe - siologists have been particularly eager to identify best practices to reduce risks of exposure . 13 More recently , the ACS published an updated guideline addressing resumption of elective surgeries . 14 Their recommendations follow several overarching considerations which include balancing regional COVID - 19 epidemiologic aware - ness , sustaining a capable workforce and PPE supply capacity , creating clear patient communication plans addressing COVID - 19 testing policies , while designing prioritization processes that adjust to institutional resources and patient needs . 14 This updated ACS guidance re ﬂ ects the evolving nature of the COVID - 19 pandemic and supports individualized health system approaches based on local and regional COVID - 19 epidemiology and health system resources and priorities . Interpreting the meaning of elective surgery and balancing this de ﬁ nition with the health of the patient and protecting HCWs and PPE supply chains has proved challenging . Approaches have varied , decisions driven by procedure categories of elective , semielective , urgent , or emergency and essential versus nonessential or discre - tionary . 10 , 15 Some health care systems have deferred to department chairpersons to identify case categories ; others have deferred to heath system perioperative services committee decisions . Still others have published strati ﬁ cation point systems or scoring algo - rithms that consider surgical indication , predicted resource utili - zation , estimated postoperative hospital length of stay , and expected requirements for prolonged ventilator use and intensive care unit level care . 15 , 16 When emergency or urgent surgery has been required , algorithms for operating room precautionary mea - sures have also been proposed . 17 J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 981 Scheduling and performing surgeries and procedures has been disrupted by the COVID - 19 pandemic , and hospital leaders have been left with the incalculably monumental task of trying to interpret and balance state and national regulatory guidance , spe - cialty society guidance , level of urgency in performing surgeries / procedures , and institutional resources and priorities , somehow landing on an approach to deliver necessary care to patients while protecting HCWs providing care in these settings . In an effort to continue providing important clinical care and performing necessary surgeries and procedures early during the COVID - 19 pandemic , UCLA Health adopted a protocol of screening all patients for COVID - 19 symptoms with pre - operative / pre - pro - cedure surveillance COVID - 19 RT - PCR nasopharyngeal testing within 2 days of their scheduled procedure . The results of this routine screening pre - procedure / pre - operative COVID - 19 testing protocol have informed our algorithms for delivering surgical / procedural care during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Materials and methods At our health system , where we perform approximately 60 , 000 surgical and interventional procedures annually , a comprehensive strategy was developed and implemented to address COVID - 19 pandemic - related disruptions , relying on input from surgeons , proceduralists , department chairpersons , perioperative / anesthesi - ology services , hospital leadership , and the infection prevention team . The UCLA Health Chief Medical and Quality Of ﬁ cer convened a weekly meeting with representation from these groups as well as from the UCLA Health Chief Medical Informatics Of ﬁ cer and surgeon - informaticists . Early during the COVID - 19 pandemic , our medical center adopted Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and ACS recommendations to suspend elective surgical and interventional procedures . Starting on April 16 , 2020 , UCLA Health implemented universal masking of all HCWs and patients / visitors older than 2 years of age . Beginning April 7 , 2020 , we implemented the following protocol and algorithms for resuming elective sur - gical and interventional procedures . We introduced universal pre - operative / pre - procedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing for all patients scheduled for operative procedures requiring the presence of an anesthesiologist or interventional procedures considered high risk for potential exposure to aerosolized virus or for any patient moving through perioperative areas ( pre - op / post - anesthesia care unit ) where exposures to other large groups may occur . The 2 - day interval was selected to allow for test results to return , to reduce potential interval exposure risk , and to reduce the interval between testing and surgery during which a prior exposure may have con - verted to active infection . Testing occurs 7 days a week . Figure 1 demonstrates our protocol for universal pre - operative / pre - procedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing and operative / procedural algorithms . Patients with symptoms of COVID - 19 generally do not proceed to surgical / procedural scheduling until after consultation with , and testing directed by , primary care or infectious disease services . For asymptomatic patients with negative testing , pro - cedures proceed as scheduled . For patients with pre - procedure testing postive for SARS - CoV - 2 , each surgeon or proceduralist is asked to assess potential level of harm to the patient if the pro - cedure would be deferred . If the risk is considered low , the pro - cedure is deferred pending viral clearance . If deferring the procedure would incur perceived harm to the patient , the pro - cedure may proceed using additional perioperative precautionary measures and with airborne precautions using N95 respirator masks . In general , efforts are made to defer elective surgical or interventional procedures for all COVID - 19 positive patients pending clearance of infection , which to date has been con ﬁ rmed by repeat negative testing , unless a potential for harm would be incurred in procedural delay . For patients for whom urgent or emergency surgical or interventional procedures are required , COVID - 19 testing is performed , when possible , before proceeding . If test results are available , level of PPE used and operating room protocols proceed according to testing results . For patients with available negative COVID - 19 testing , standard PPE is used . For patients with positive COVID - 19 testing and for whom procedural deferral pending COVID - 19 testing would incur perceived harm , procedures occur with full PPE and with additional Fig 1 . UCLA Health universal COVID - 19 testing protocol and operative / procedural algorithms . J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 982 airborne precautionary measures using N95 respirator masking . If test results are unavailable for these patients , procedures proceed as if test results were positive , using full PPE . At our health system , there have been no PPE supply constraints interfering with following these algorithms . Using data collected from a population of patients scheduled during the study period for upcoming surgeries / procedures at our medical center , we determined the proportion of asymptomatic patients with COVID - 19 infection . Data for the analysis were derived from UCLA ’ s Institutional Review Board - approved COVID - 19 Task Force Research Registry of Suspected and Con ﬁ rmed Cases of COVID within the UCLA Health System ( IRB # 20 - 000534 ) . We designed and built COVID - 19 RT - PCR test orders in our electronic health record with associated indication boxes . For purposes of testing asymptomatic patients awaiting surgeries and procedures , the COVID - 19 RT - PCR order has an indication box of “ pre - proced - ure . ” All COVID - 19 RT - PCR test results accompanied by an indica - tion of “ pre - procedure ” ordered between the dates of April 7 , 2020 and May 21 , 2020 were extracted from an existing data warehouse derived from the electronic health record . COVID 19 RT - PCR is performed at the UCLA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory on the Food and Drug Adminstration Emergency Use Authorization - approved Thermo TaqPath COVID 19 Combo Kit ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c , Waltham , MA ) . 18 This test has 3 viral gene targets ( Orf1ab , S , N ) . Two of 3 targets must be present for a report of a positive ( detected ) result . If only 1 of 3 gene targets is present , the result is reported as inconclusive . A result of indeterminate in - dicates that the internal control against which the test is compared failed . Previous analysis for this testing at our health system dem - onstrates a clinical sensitivity of 98 . 3 % , a speci ﬁ city of 99 % , and a negative predictive value of 99 . 99 % ( personal communication : Omai Garner , PhD , D ) . The test value results are characterized as “ detected , ” “ not detected , ” “ inconclusive , ” and “ indeterminate . ” Detected is equivalent to positive and not detected , negative , for SARS - CoV - 2 . Lab results are more broadly reported as abnormal ( detected / positive or inconclusive ) or normal ( not detected / nega - tive ) . For inclusion in our data set , orders were succesfully completed and resulted at our medical center except on a rare occasion when a test was performed at an outside preapproved lab . A chart review was performed for any patient with abnormal test results to con ﬁ rm their symptom status at the time of COVID - 19 pre - operative or pre - procedure testing . The data set was sum - marized at the patient level . Some patients had more than one “ pre - procedure ” COVID - 19 test performed for a variety of reasons ( rescheduled case dates , etc ) . If any of these results was abnormal , only one entry was used in the numerator to calculate prevalence of patients having had abnormal tests . The denominator was discrete patient numbers having had pre - procedure testing performed . Patient - level characteristics including age , race , and residential zip code were similarly extracted and joined to the aforementioned data set . The distance in miles between the center of each subject ’ s residential zip code and our medical center zip code was used as an approximation of the patient ’ s residential distance from the hos - pital and was calculated using the ZipRadius R package ( R Foun - dation for Statistical Computing , Vienna , Austria ) . We compared our pre - operative and pre - procedure patient population de - mographics with those of Los Angeles ( LA ) County . 19 Results Of UCLA Health patients scheduled for upcoming surgeries or interventional procedures , 4 , 751 underwent protocol surveillance pre - operative / pre - procedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing during the study period . Ninety percent of patients ’ residential addresses were within a 67 - mile radius of our medical center . The remaining 10 % traveled to UCLA from outlying areas such as Bakers ﬁ eld , Las Vegas , San Diego County , and beyond ; the furthest distance recorded was 2 , 594 miles . Age demographics for patients tested under this pro - tocol are shown in Fig 2 with comparative LA County population demographics . 19 Test group race and ethnicity demographics with comparative LA County population demographics are presented in Table I . 19 There was equal male / female patient distribution . A re - view of 6 months of data for surgeries performed before initiating our surveillance preprocedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing con ﬁ rms an overall similar demographic . Testing results are displayed in Fig 3 . During the study period , 18 patients ’ ( 18 / 4 , 751 , 0 . 38 % ) tests results were abnormal ( positive or inconclusive ) . Ten of the 18 patients were con ﬁ rmed to be asymptomatic within the 6 weeks before and at the time of pre - procedure surveillance COVID - 19 testing , while 8 patients were noted to have symptoms consistent with or to have been recently diagnosed with COVID - 19 infection . For purposes of our analysis , we excluded these 8 patients from the group characterized as asymptomatic , leaving 4 , 743 asymptomatic patients . Four asymp - tomatic patients had inconclusive ( abnormal ) test results . For purposes of our analysis , inconclusive results were excluded . The remaining 6 asymptomatic patients had results of detected / positive ( 6 / 4 , 739 , 0 . 13 % ) . Surgeries and procedures scheduled for these 18 patients ranged in nature from orthopedic surgeries / procedures , gastroen - terological endoscopies , intervential cardiac or vascular procedures or biopsies , trabeculectomy , dilatation and curettage ( D & C ) , ad - renal surgery , mastectomy , and others . Of the 10 asymptomatic and 8 symptomatic patients , 2 procedures ( 1 in each group , including one trabeculectomy and one D & C ) were deemed urgent and proceeded despite positive surveillance preprocedure testing . These procedures were performed with the use of additional perioperative precautionary measures and use of the highest level PPE . The procedures proceeded without any known patient - related perioperative complications . To our knowledge , no HCW exposure to any of the COVID - 19 - positive patients tested by our protocol resulted in COVID - 19 infection . Surgeries / procedures for the remaining patients with abnormal test results either proceeded after repeat negative COVID - 19 testing or remained deferred owing to patient preference . All con ﬁ rmed cancer - related procedures or surgeries proceeded , though 2 patients awaiting biopsies / mass excisions were rescheduled by 1 month pending repeat testing for viral clearance . Two patients with positive / detected COVID - 19 testing results had residential addresses in Las Vegas , NV . The remaining patients with positive results had residential addresses within a 10 - mile radius of our medical center . Table II demonstrates demographic analysis of the 18 patients with abnormal test results . For the asymptomatic patients , we found similar race / ethnicity character - stics , male / female distribution , and age characteristics as compared with the overall tested population . For symptomatic patients , the numbers of patients were too small to comment about trends in race / ethnicity or male / female distribution , though there was a trend toward younger age , with 7 / 8 patients being under age 60 . Discussion At the time of this publication , 201 , 106 Los Angelenos have tested positive for COVID - 19 , and 4 , 869 have died ( 2 . 4 % ) . 20 Our medical center data demonstrate very low levels ( 0 . 13 % prevalence ) of COVID - 19 positivity in asymptomatic patients scheduled for elective surgeries / procedures . While patients tested by this proto - col are asymptomatic at the time of surgical scheduling , it is not possible to predict whether any patient may develop symptoms during the interval between procedural scheduling and pre - J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 983 procedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR surveillance testing . Some patients may have developed symptoms consistent with COVID - 19 , and others may have been diagnosed with COVID - 19 infection while awaiting testing . We believe this accounts for the 8 symptomatic patients in our study population . As a large urban referral center , we adopted the CDC and ACS recommendations early in the pandemic , suspending elective sur - gical and interventional procedures and later relaxing those sus - pensions while balancing local / regional COVID - 19 epidemiology , data regarding our pre - operative / pre - procedure testing results , and health system resources and priorities . Our protocols designed to address COVID - 19 - related disruptions to surgery and procedure performance have guided an approach to prioritizing and safely performing surgical and interventional procedures , balancing the needs of the patient , HCW safety , and PPE supplies . Before all sur - gical / procedural patients were tested , our protocols for reducing exposures in the operating room included a 20 - minute time out after any intubation to allow clearance of potentially aerosolized viral particles before the entire team entered the operating theater for procedure start and the use of additional perioperative and airborne precautionary measures . Information about the very low level of COVID - 19 infection in asymptomatic pre - operative / pre - procedure patients , using our COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing with high clinical sensitivity , speci ﬁ city , and negative predictive value , has provided reassurance to our surgeons , proceduralists , and anes - thesiologists and has led to protocol modi ﬁ cations . Given the ac - curacy of our testing , our HCWs are reassured that using standard PPE should provide adequate protection during interactions with patients who have tested negative . Further , for patients with negative surveillance testing , the 20 - minute , postintubation time out has been lifted , and universal donning of N95 respirator masks has been relaxed . At our health system , we continue to require Fig 2 . Age distributions of test population and LA County population ( data for LA County demographics obtained from 2018 United States Census Bureau at data . census . gov 19 ) . Table I Demographics among UCLA pre - operative / pre - procedure tested ( n ¼ 4 , 751 ) and LA County ( n ¼ 10 , 105 , 518 ) populations . ( data for LA County Demographics obtained from 2018 United States Census Bureau at data . census . gov 19 ) UCLA Pre - operative / pre - procedure tested population , n ( % ) LA County population , 19 ( % ) Race Person count n ( % ) LA county population ( % ) White 3 , 059 ( 64 . 4 % ) ( 51 . 3 % ) Other 993 ( 20 . 9 % ) ( 21 . 3 % ) Asian 385 ( 8 . 1 % ) ( 14 . 8 % ) Black or African American 280 ( 5 . 9 % ) ( 8 . 0 % ) More than one race 21 ( 0 . 4 % ) ( 4 . 3 % ) Native Hawaiian or other Paci ﬁ c Islander 13 ( 0 . 3 % ) ( 0 . 3 % ) Ethnicity Person count n ( % ) LA county population ( % ) Not Hispanic or Latino 3 , 698 ( 77 . 8 % ) ( 51 . 4 % ) Hispanic or Latino 730 ( 15 . 4 % ) ( 48 . 6 % ) Other 323 ( 6 . 8 % ) - J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 984 universal masking of all HCWs , patients , and visitors older than 2 years of age . One possible interpretation of our data is that there may be very low levels of COVID - 19 infection in those who do not express COVID - like symptoms . Evidence suggests that between 5 % and 75 % of patients diagnosed with COVID - 19 may be asymptomatic 4 ; however , the prevalence of COVID - 19 infection in asymptomatic patients is unknown . In interpreting our data , one must consider our catchment population . Patients awaiting surgeries and pro - cedures at our health system may inherently represent a popula - tion at lower risk of COVID - 19 infection . This patient population likely includes fewer in nursing homes and communal living fa - cilities , where the known prevalence of COVID - 19 is higher . Patients awaiting procedures may also practice stricter social distancing to avoid COVID - 19 exposures that could interfere with their planned procedures . There may be additional inherent differences as regards health insurance coverage and proportion of tertiary / qua - ternary patients at our medical center compared with higher risk populations . Taken together , these factors could lower the preva - lence of disease in our studied population , which represents a sample of the overall LA area demographic When comparing our surgical / procedural population to LA County data , there are clear differences with more Whites , older patients , and fewer Hispanics / Latinos in our data set as compared with the greater LA area population . As highlighted in Fig 2 , our sample population of patients scheduled for upcoming surgeries and procedures represents an overall older population as compared with the greater LA area population demographics . We did see a trend toward younger age for our symptomatic , or recently diag - nosed COVID - 19 positive , patients , more commensurate with overall LA population demographic data . While the number of patients in this category was too low to determine statistical sig - ni ﬁ cance of this trend , we hypothesize that the younger cohort may exercise less strict social distancing , may be more active critical workforce members , and may more likely act as care givers , ac - tivities potentially contributing to an increased exposure / infection risk when compared with the overall cohort . As emerging evidence suggests that the prevalence and severity of COVID - 19 disease presentations are greater in Blacks and His - panics , one might conclude that our data do not equally represent populations with baseline higher prevalence of disease . 21 - 23 Though the numbers of patients with abnormal testing in our dataset are too small to calculate statistical signi ﬁ cance , we did not see trends toward higher prevalence of asymptomatic or symp - tomatic disease in under - represented populations as compared with our overall population . The overall very low numbers of COVID - 19 positive patients in our data set preclude the ability to extrapolate signi ﬁ cance of this ﬁ nding . Our data do not address the proportion of the regional popu - lation that has been exposed and is now immune . Recent data suggest a possible seroprevalence of antibodies to SARS - CoV - 2 of 4 . 65 % in LA County . 24 In that data set , 13 % of those tested for anti - body to SARS - CoV - 2 reported fever with cough , 9 % fever with shortness of breath , and 6 % loss of smell or taste , suggesting that a Fig 3 . Surveillance pre - operative / pre - procedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR testing . Table II Demographics among 18 patients with abnormal ( positive or inconclu - sive ) testing Asymptomatic patients ( n ¼ 10 ) Symptomatic or recent COVID - 19 positive patients ( n ¼ 8 ) Age ( y ) Mean Median Mean Median 54 . 7 62 . 5 42 . 3 44 . 0 Sex Person count n , ( % ) Person count n , ( % ) Male 6 ( 60 . 0 % ) 3 ( 37 . 5 % ) Female 4 ( 40 . 0 % ) 5 ( 62 . 5 % ) Race Person count n , ( % ) Person count n , ( % ) White 8 ( 80 . 0 % ) 3 ( 37 . 5 % ) Black 1 ( 10 . 0 % ) 1 ( 12 . 5 % ) Asian 0 ( 0 . 0 % ) 1 ( 12 . 5 % ) Other 1 ( 10 . 0 % ) 2 ( 25 . 0 % ) Unavailable 0 ( 0 . 0 % ) 1 ( 12 . 5 % ) Ethnicity Person count n , ( % ) Person count n , ( % ) Not Hispanic or Latino 8 ( 80 . 0 % ) 5 ( 62 . 5 % ) Hispanic or Latino 2 ( 20 . 0 % ) 2 ( 25 . 0 % ) Unavailable 0 ( 0 . 0 % ) 1 ( 12 . 5 % ) J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 985 proportion of those tested may have been symptomatic for COVID - 19 at the time of testing . According to Spellberg et al the prevalence of COVID - 19 infection in patients with mild ﬂ u - like illness treated at another large academic medical center in LA ( LA County - USC ) was 5 % . 25 They excluded patients with known COVID - 19 expo - sures , recent travel , or severe symptoms but included only patients endorsing mild ﬂ u - like symptoms . Our data , demonstrating a 0 . 13 % prevalence of asymptomatic COVID - 19 infection , may be explained by the nature of our testing a population of patients presumed to be asymptomatic and awaiting scheduled surgeries / procedures . Conclusions In conclusion , using a surveillance preprocedure COVID - 19 RT - PCR test with high clinical sensitivity , speci ﬁ city , and negative predictive value , we found very low levels ( 0 . 13 % prevalence ) of COVID - 19 infection in asymptomatic patients undergoing sched - uled surgeries / procedures at UCLA Health . Comparing data ob - tained by similar analyses from other asymptomatic populations would be required before determining scalability of our ﬁ ndings or applying this asymptomatic prevalence data to wider populations . As the scienti ﬁ c community gains further understanding of the pathophysiology of SARS - CoV - 2 , we continue to evaluate our testing protocols in line with CDC and ACS guidance , with plans to adjust as appropriate based on evolving epidemiologic awareness of the COVID - 19 infection . Given that there is no currently available con ﬁ r - matory data about how much exposure to known COVID - 19 infection , or about level of risk that asymptomatic / presymptomatic infection may confer toward disease transmission , we believe that our algo - rithms supporting use of full PPE for patients positive for COVID - 19 or for those with unknown COVID - 19 status , with relaxed PPE use when patients have tested negative , maximize safe practices for patients and HCWs while optimizing an appropriate use of scarce PPE re - sources . Our data have helped to inform perioperative protocols for surgical and procedural cases and have provided reassurance to sur - geons , anesthesiologists , and HCWs as they begin to increase delivery of important health care services during the global COVID - 19 pandemic . Testing protocols like ours may prove valuable as a guide for other health systems in individualizing their plans for safe pro - cedural practices during COVID - 19 . Con ﬂ ict of interest / Disclosure No author on this manuscript has any con ﬂ ict of interest or competing interest to disclose . Funding / Support There was no funding support for this work . References 1 . Chen Z , Zhang Q , Lu Y , et al . Distribution of the COVID - 19 epidemic and cor - relation with population emigration from Wuhan , China . Chin Med J ( Engl ) . 2020 ; 133 : 1044 e 1050 . 2 . Rothan HA , Byrareddy SN . The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) outbreak . J Autoimmun . 2020 ; 109 : 102433 . 3 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Human coronavirus types . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / types . html ; ; 2020 . Accessed May 23 , 2020 . 4 . Heneghan C , Brassey J , Jefferson T . COVID - 19 : What proportion are asymp - tomatic ? ; 2020 . https : / / www . cebm . net / covid - 19 / covid - 19 - what - proportion - are - asymptomatic / . Accessed June 1 , 2020 . 5 . Johns Hopkins University and Medicine . Coronavirus resource center ; 2020 . https : / / coronavirus . jhu . edu / . Accessed July 19 , 2020 . 6 . World Health Organization ( WHO ) . WHO coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) dashboard ; 2020 . https : / / covid19 . who . int / . Accessed July 19 , 2020 . 7 . Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) . CMS releases recommen - dations on adult elective surgeries , non - essential medical , surgical , and dental procedures during COVID - 19 response ; 2020 . https : / / www . cms . gov / newsroom / press - releases / cms - releases - recommendations - adult - elective - surgeries - non - essential - medical - surgical - and - dental . Accessed May 23 , 2020 . 8 . American College of Surgeons ( ACS ) . COVID - 19 : Recommendations for man - agement of elective surgical procedures ; 2020 . https : / / www . facs . org / covid - 19 / clinical - guidance / elective - surgery . Accessed June 1 , 2020 . 9 . COVIDSurg Collaborative . Mortality and pulmonary complications in patients undergoing surgery with perioperative SARS - CoV2 infection : an international cohort study . Lancet . 2020 ; 396 : 27 e 38 . 10 . Diaz A , Sarac B , Schoenbrunner AR , Janis JS , Pawlik TM . Elective surgery in the time of COVID - 19 . Am J Surg . 2020 ; 219 : 900 e 902 . 11 . American College of Surgeons ( ACS ) . COVID - 19 : Elective case triage guidelines for surgical care . https : / / www . facs . org / covid - 19 / clinical - guidance / elective - case . Accessed May 23 , 2020 . 12 . Cohen SL , Liu G , Abrau M , Smart N , Heniford T . Perspectives on surgery in the time of COVID - 19 : safety ﬁ rst . J Minim Invasive Gynecol . 2020 ; 27 : 792 e 793 . 13 . Balakrishnan K , Schechtman S , Hogikyan ND , et al . COVID - 19 pandemic : what every otolaryngologist - head and neck surgeon needs to know for safe airway management . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2020 ; 162 : 804 e 808 . 14 . American College of Surgeons ( ACS ) . ACS guidelines for triage and man - agement of elective cancer surgery cases during the acute and recovery phases of coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic ; 2020 . https : / / www . facs . org / - / media / ﬁ les / covid19 / acs _ triage _ and _ management _ elective _ cancer _ surgery _ during _ acute _ and _ recovery _ phases . ashx . Accessed May 23 , 2020 . 15 . Prachand VN , Milner R , Angelos P , et al . Medically necessary time sensitive procedures : scoring system to ethically and ef ﬁ ciently manage resource scar - city and provider risk during the COVID - 19 pandemic . J Am Coll Surg . 2020 ; 231 : 281 e 288 . 16 . Stahel PF . How to risk stratify elective surgery during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Patient Saf Surg . 2020 ; 14 : 8 . 17 . Forrester JD , Nassar AK , Maggio PM , Hawn MT . Precautions for operating team members during the COVID - 19 pandemic . J Am Coll Surg . 2020 ; 230 : 1098 e 1101 . 18 . ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c . TaqPath COVID - 19 multiplex diagnostic solution ; 2020 . https : / / www . thermo ﬁ sher . com / us / en / home / clinical / clinical - genomics / pathogen - detection - solutions / coronavirus - 2019 - ncov / genetic - analysis / taq - path - rt - pcr - covid - 19 - kit . html . Accessed May 23 , 2020 . 19 . United States Census Bureau . ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates data . https : / / data . census . gov / cedsci / table ? q ¼ United % 20States & g ¼ 0500000US06037 & tid ¼ ACSDP1Y2018 . DP05 & hidePreview ¼ true , 2018 . AccessedSeptember2 , 2020 . 20 . County of Los Angeles Public Health . COVID - 19 in Los Angeles County . http : / / publichealth . lacounty . gov / media / coronavirus / data / index . htm . Accessed September 2 , 2020 . 21 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . People at increased risk of severe illness ; 2020 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / need - extra - precautions / people - at - higher - risk . html . Accessed June 1 , 2020 . 22 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . COVID - 19 in racial and ethnic minority groups ; 2020 . https : / / www . hsdl . org / ? view & did ¼ 837299 . Accessed June 1 , 2020 . 23 . Yancy CY . COVID - 19 and African Americans . JAMA . 2020 ; 323 : 1891 e 1892 . 24 . Sood N , Simon P , Ebner P , et al . Seroprevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 e speci ﬁ c anti - bodies among adults in Los Angeles County , California , on April 10 - 11 , 2020 . JAMA . 2020 ; 323 : 2425 e 2427 . 25 . Spellberg B , Haddix M , Lee R , et al . Community prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 among patients with in ﬂ uenzalike illnesses presenting to a Los Angeles med - ical center in March 2020 . JAMA . 2020 ; 323 : 1966 e 1967 . J . S . Singer et al . / Surgery 168 ( 2020 ) 980 e 986 986