Connecting the Social and Technical Aspects of Computing with Visualization Erik H . Trainer Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences University of California , Irvine Irvine , CA , USA – 92667 etrainer @ ics . uci . edu 1 . Introduction In software development projects , dependencies between developers arise from dependencies in the source - code they write . This observation emerged in our own field studies [ 3 ] and the related literature . In response , we created Ariadne , a visualization tool that allows end - users to explore socio - technical relationships in software development projects . The primary inspiration for this work is the field of software and information visualization [ 1 , 6 ] . In the domain of software development , one seminal example of visualization is SeeSoft [ 4 ] . SeeSoft demonstrated that the source - code for a whole software system could be shown on a single display , as well as statistics for each line of code , to support the analysis of and improvements to the development process . In general , visualization remains a powerful way to integrate information from different sources into a set of visual representations , reducing the visual complexity and mental effort required of the user to interpret them . Another field that has had a large influence on the direction of Ariadne is Social Network Analysis . Certain metrics such as centrality [ 8 ] can indicate who is important or influential in the network based on a variety of factors . Other metrics can identify clusters of people who share similar roles or interact with the same people . The results from metrics can be used to establish structure in and meaning to the data . Combined , visualization and social network metrics have potential to reveal socio - technical relationships in the software development process . However , it is not so clear what metrics are meaningful and useful , and perhaps more importantly , how managers and developers should react once they are presented with socio - technical patterns in their organizations . Ariadne represents a starting point toward answering these types of questions . This research abstract describes the current status of Ariadne , some initial evaluation results , and the current research plan . Finally , Ariadne is discussed in the context of the large computational divide . 2 . Implementation Status Elsewhere in this volume we have illustrated Ariadne’s visual interface and its use [ 7 ] . Essentially , the user – starting from a high - level overview – can perform a set of filtering operations to reveal socio - technical patterns of interest identified in our previous work [ 3 ] . At present , we are interested in the organizational issues related to the design and deployment of visualizations that aim to reveal socio - technical relationships . We think visualizations like Ariadne can help managers and developers see socio - technical patterns and be useful in organizations , but this is an untested empirical question . Some researchers have tried to characterize what constitutes “good” patterns of communication [ 2 ] , but it is not clear what actions viewers of the interface should take , and whether organizations will be better off once these patterns are known . Ideally , understanding and acting on these patterns should improve one aspect of an organization’s development process . 3 . Evaluation Results Before revising the first prototype of Ariadne , we performed an informal evaluation using an open - source project on Sourceforge . net . One developer commented that the visualization could help certain developers “shy away” from changing certain core classes used throughout the system . On the other hand , it could tempt developers to “commit on stuff they shouldn’t commit on” in order to appear more influential to the project’s success than they really were . These comments are indicative of the challenges of revealing socio - technical relationships via visualization in an organizational setting . We evaluated the second revision of Ariadne with commonly used usability inspection methods . The findings from these analyses are reported on in this same volume [ 7 ] . 4 . Research Plan First , this research will focus on improving Ariadne ' s visual interface as per the results of the recent evaluation we conducted [ 7 ] . Second , we aim to identify relevant social network analysis metrics and adapt them to the context of software development . In parallel , we will perform a literature review of the role of dependencies in organizations to identify practical tasks that could benefit from an understanding of socio - technical relationships . Moreover , we will perform a review of the capabilities and features of state - of - the - art information visualizations as well as visualization - specific evaluation techniques . Once we have collected a significant corpus of development data to visualize , we intend to run Ariadne on the data and apply the metrics we found to be relevant . With the results we have analyzed , we will our industry partners and show them the results of our analysis , hopefully with meaningful insights that have actionable implications . Next , we will plan to run human trials experiments with developers . 5 . Discussion and Conclusions Our work has studied software developers with traditional backgrounds in distributed settings . In the future , projects will involve even more diverse sets of individuals , especially if the goal is to eventually include end - users in the development process . However , there exists a computational , and necessarily economic , divide . End - users come from different disciplines and socio - economic backgrounds . As such , they have unequal access to social and technical resources . In a sense , Ariadne represents an early starting point for addressing one part of this large problem . One of the common ways people learn about tools is by traversing their own communication networks to find individuals who have the knowledge . This was one conclusion of Gantt and Nardi’s earlier work on technology workers [ 5 ] . Visualizations like Ariadne show end - users people who actively work with technology artifacts , effectively removing the initial communication overhead . Social network analysis metrics can be used to automatically identify key individuals or groups of individuals with similar knowledge of and experience with technology . Ariadne represents another data point for researchers interested in the visualization of socio - technical relationships and their utility in organizations as well as a medium through which end - users can identify other individuals using artifacts of interest . 6 . Acknowledgments This research is supported by the U . S . National Science Foundation under grants 0534775 and 0205724 , by a U . S . Department of Education GAANN grant , and by an IBM Eclipse Technology Exchange grant . The author gratefully acknowledges comments and support from his advisor David Redmiles and colleagues Steve Abrams , Matt Bietz , Steve Quirk , and Cleidson de Souza . 7 . References [ 1 ] Card , S . K . , J . D . Mackinlay , and B . Shneiderman , Readings in Information Visualization : Using Vision to Think , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco , CA , 1999 . [ 2 ] M . Cataldo , P . A . Wagstrom , J . D . Herbsleb , and K . Carley , “Identification of Coordination Requirements : Implications for the Design of Collaboration and Awareness Tools” , In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM , New York , NY , 2006 , pp . 353 - 362 . [ 3 ] C . R . B . de Souza , S . Quirk , E . Trainer , and D . F . Redmiles , “Supporting Collaborative Software Development through the Visualization of Socio - Technical Dependencies” , In Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work , ACM , New York , NY , 2007 , pp . 147 - 156 . [ 4 ] S . G . Eick , J . L . Steffen , and E . E . Summer , Jr . , “Seesoft - A Tool for Visualizing Line Oriented Software Statistics” , IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , IEEE Press , Piscataway , NJ , 1992 , 18 ( 11 ) , pp . 957 - 968 . [ 5 ] M . Gantt and B . Nardi , “Gardeners and Gurus : Patterns of Cooperation Among CAD Users” , In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , NY , 1992 , pp . 107 - 117 . [ 6 ] Stasko , J . T . , J . B . Domingue , M . H . Brown , and B . A . Price , Software Visualization , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1998 . [ 7 ] E . Trainer , S . Quirk , C . R . B . de Souza , and D . F . Redmiles , “Analyzing a Socio - Technical Visualization Tool Using Usability Inspection Methods” , In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human Centric Computing , IEEE Computer Society , Washington , DC , 2008 , in press . [ 8 ] Wasserman , S . and K . Faust , Social Network Analysis : Methods and Applications , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1994 .