(cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 1 — # 1 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) Target shape dependence in a simple model of receptor - mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis David M . Richards ∗† § , and Robert G . Endres † ∗ Wellcome Trust Centre for Biomedical Modelling and Analysis , University of Exeter , RILD Level 3 , Exeter , EX2 5DW , UK , and † Department of Life Sciences , Imperial College , London , SW7 2AZ , UK ; § david . richards @ exeter . ac . uk Edited by William Bialek , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ Phagocytosis and receptor - mediated endocytosis are vitally impor - tant particle uptake mechanisms in many cell types , ranging from single - cell organisms to immune cells . In both processes , engulf - ment by the cell depends critically on both particle shape and ori - entation . However , most previous theoretical work has focused only on spherical particles and hence disregards the wide - ranging parti - cle shapes occurring in nature , such as those of bacteria . Here , by implementing a simple model in one and two dimensions , we com - pare and contrast receptor - mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis for a range of biologically relevant shapes , including spheres , ellip - soids , capped cylinders , and hourglasses . We ﬁnd a whole range of diﬀerent engulfment behaviors with some ellipsoids engulﬁng faster than spheres , and that phagocytosis is able to engulf a greater range of target shapes than other types of endocytosis . Further , the 2D model can explain why some nonspherical particles engulf fastest ( not at all ) when presented to the membrane tip - ﬁrst ( lying ﬂat ) . Our work reveals how some bacteria may avoid being internalized simply because of their shape , and suggests shapes for optimal drug delivery . endocytosis | phagocytosis | shape dependence | Stefan problem Signiﬁcance Most previous work on endocytosis ( the way cells ingest particles ) has focused on engulfment of spherical targets . However , this is rarely relevant outside the laboratory , where cells must engulf a huge vari - ety of target shapes , from capped cylinders ( like many bacteria ) to hourglasses ( such as dividing cells ) . Here , we map this problem to the well - studied physics problem of the freezing of water . This allows us to study a wide range of diﬀerent , biologically relevant shapes . In particular , for the ﬁrst time , to our knowledge , it allows us to examine the orientation dependence of phagocytosis , to explain the shape dependence of phagocytosis and receptor - meditated endocy - tosis , and to explain why nonspherical targets often engulf faster when the most highly - curved tip is engulfed ﬁrst . C ells are capable of ingesting a huge range of particle shapes , from rod - shaped E . coli to doubly - lobed budding yeast , from helical Borrelia to ﬁlamentous Legionella [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . Further , the shape is critical in determining whether engulf - ment is possible and , if so , how long it takes . In fact , it has been argued that the target shape plays an even more critical role than size [ 4 , 5 ] . In addition , target orientation strongly aﬀects internalisation , with ellipsoidal particles engulfed far easier when the highly - curved tip is presented ﬁrst [ 4 , 6 ] . Yet despite this , there is relatively little work studying shape and orientation dependence , with the vast majority of previous pa - pers , both experimental and theoretical , involving only spher - ical targets . Endocytosis encompasses a number of diﬀerent mechanisms of cellular internalisation , including clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis , caveolar - type endocytosis , macropinocytosis and phago - cytosis [ 7 ] . Whilst sharing some similarities , these processes often proceed in strikingly diﬀerent manners . For example , phagocytosis is typically highly active and involves the mem - brane extending outwards , with ﬁnger - like protrusions sur - rounding the target in an actin - dependent process [ 8 , 9 ] . Con - versely , clathrin - mediated endocytosis is a more passive pro - cess , with targets appearing to sink into the cell [ 10 ] . Here we focus on types of endocytosis that involve target recognition via receptors . We assume that receptors bind irreversibly to ligands on the target so that engulfment proceeds monotoni - cally [ 11 , 12 ] . In particular , we distinguish phagocytosis from other less active forms of receptor - driven internalisation . We refer to all these latter processes as receptor - mediated endo - cytosis , including clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Various mathematical models have attempted to understand the mechanism and dynamics of engulfment . All forms of en - docytosis ( in particular phagocytosis ) are extremely complex , involving hundreds of diﬀerent protein species in signalling cascades and cytoskeleton remodelling [ 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . As a result , overly - complicated models , that try to include every component , are unlikely to be useful . Instead more progress can be made by considering simpler , intuitive models that cap - ture the essential mechanisms . For example , viral engulfment has been modelled by examining the free energy of membrane bending and adhesion [ 17 , 18 ] . Similarly van Eﬀenterre et al . used a thermodynamic approach that involved considering an ensemble of target particles [ 19 ] . Recently , the role of actin during endocytosis in yeast was addressed by using a varia - tional approach and arguing that the ﬁnal pinch - oﬀ stage is due to a pearling - like instability [ 20 ] . There are also models that focus on phagocytosis . For ex - ample , van Zon et al . included simple dynamics for both actin and receptors , which they used to understand why engulfment normally either stalls before halfway or reaches completion [ 6 ] . Herant et al . focussed on the forces required to explain the cup shape and showed , using a continuum mechanics approach , the need for both repulsion at the cup edge and ﬂattening within the cup [ 21 , 22 ] . Various other approaches focus only on en - ergetic requirements , such as those due to membrane bending and receptor - ligand binding , equating the phagocytic cup with some minimum energy state . For example , Dasgupta et al . used this approach to argue that ellipsoids are harder to en - gulf than spheres [ 23 , 24 ] , whereas Tollis et al . found that an actin - driven ratchet mechanism can lead to robust engulfment [ 25 ] . One particularly elegant approach by Gao et al . models en - docytosis by considering only the motion of receptors within the membrane [ 26 ] . They argued that the essence of receptor - mediated endocytosis is related to the dynamics of the re - ceptors themselves , which can be mapped to the supercooled Stefan problem , a simple physical model of how the boundary between ice and water moves during freezing . Although they were able to understand how particle radius aﬀects the rate of engulfment ( predicting an optimum radius corresponding Reserved for Publication Footnotes www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0709640104 PNAS Issue Date Volume Issue Number 1 – 8 (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 2 — # 2 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) A B C D Fig . 1 . Biologically relevant particle shapes . ( A ) Spheres . ( B ) Spheroids , both prolate ( left ) and oblate ( right ) . ( C ) Capped cylinders , consisting of a cylindrical region capped by hemispheres , which describe certain bacteria . ( D ) Hourglasses made from spherical caps and a narrow neck region , which model cells during the division process . to the quickest possible engulfment time ) , they only consid - ered spherical particles . Cylindrical ellipsoids were considered in [ 27 ] , but not in a consistent manner . In [ 28 ] we extended the Gao et al . model to phagocytosis , arguing that a simi - lar mathematical model can explain receptor motion in both cases . This involved including receptor drift and signalling , and showed that the two distinct stages of engulfment ( an ini - tial slow stage followed by a much quicker second stage ) can be explained by diﬀerent receptor dynamics during diﬀerent stages . However , again , we almost exclusively focused on only spherical particles . Here , to address the role of particle shape during engulf - ment , we extend these models in three ways . First , by allow - ing nonconstant curvature , we are able to study nonspherical particle shapes , such as ellipsoids , capped cylinders and hour - glasses ( Fig . 1 ) . All the shapes we consider are relevant for real biological systems , such as rod - shaped bacteria and divid - ing budding yeast . Second , we include signalling and a role for actin in order to examine the diﬀerent target shape de - pendence between phagocytosis and other types of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Third , we extend the formalism from a 1D to a 2D model , which allows , for the ﬁrst time to our knowledge , lower - symmetry shapes , such as lying ellipsoids , to be studied . With this model we are able to address how orientation aﬀects engulfment , ﬁnding an explanation for why prolate spheroids engulf quickest when presented to the cell tip - ﬁrst . Finally , we compare our model with known experi - mental results . Results We ﬁrst study endocytosis in general and consider particles both with and without circular symmetry . Then we extend the model to apply to phagocytosis by including signalling and actin . By particle symmetry we mean the symmetry of the particle looking from directly above the membrane . For example , a prolate spheroid will have circular symmetry only when presented tip ﬁrst ( as in the shape on the left in Fig . 1B ) . As we now show , our model for circularly - symmetric particles becomes eﬀectively 1D , allowing easier analytic and numerical treatment . Conversely , non - symmetric particles require a full 2D model , introducing extra physical and numerical issues . We ﬁrst consider circularly - symmetric particles—spheres , tip - ﬁrst spheroids , capped cylinders , hourglasses—and next ex - amine non - symmetric particles , for example ellipsoids that lie ﬂat ( as in the ﬁrst shape in Fig . 1B lying on its side ) . 1D model for endocytosis of circularly - symmetric particles . We ﬁrst extend the model in Gao et al . [ 26 ] to include non - spherical particles . This is a model of receptor motion with the inclusion of membrane bending and ligand - receptor binding , which focuses on the cup size as a function of time . Con - sider a particle whose cross section parallel to the membrane is circularly symmetric ( such as all the shapes in Fig . 1 ) . Then receptor motion within the membrane and the fraction of engulfment can be parameterised by just one spatial pa - rameter , r , the distance from the centre of the cup . Thus , at time t , the receptors are described by a density ρ ( r , t ) and the engulfment by a ( t ) , which represents the engulfed arc length measured from the centre of the cup ( Fig . 2A ) . Initially , ρ is assumed uniform and given by ρ 0 , which is also the value that is imposed at r = ∞ at all times . As the particle is engulfed , receptors bind to ligands on the bead and the density increases to ρ L in the engulfed region ( Fig . 2B ) . We assume for simplicity that receptors are never destroyed or created , so that the evolution of the receptor density , ρ , in the non - engulfed region ( r ≥ a ) is governed simply by diﬀu - sion with diﬀusion constant D . At the cup boundary receptors ﬂow into the bound region , increasing the engulfment a . By considering the conservation of receptors , the rate of increase of a can be related to the ﬂux of receptors . Full details are given in the SI Appendix where we show that our 1D model is given in the non - engulfed region r ≥ a by ∂ρ ∂t = D r ∂ ∂r (cid:18) r∂ρ∂r (cid:19) , da dt = Dρ (cid:48) + ρ L − ρ + , [ 1 ] where ρ + is the receptor density at the cup edge . Initial con - ditions are ρ ( r , 0 ) = ρ 0 and a ( 0 ) = 0 . This is identical to the supercooled 1D Stefan problem , studied in physics as a model of the freezing of water . To ﬁnd a unique solution we impose one extra condition , the value of ρ at the edge of the cup , ρ + . Since the bound - ary continually moves , the position where this extra condition is applied also continually moves , such that ρ + ( t ) = ρ ( a ( t ) , t ) . As in [ 26 ] , we ﬁx ρ + ( t ) by requiring that there is no free - energy jump across the cup , i . e . that all energy from receptor - ligand binding is used for engulfment . As explained in the SI Ap - pendix , we consider three contributions to the free energy ( receptor - ligand binding , membrane curvature and receptor entropy ) , which leads to the condition ρ + ρ L − ln (cid:18) ρ + ρ L (cid:19) = E − 2 B H 2 ρ L + 1 , [ 2 ] where E is the binding energy per receptor - ligand bond , B is the bending modulus , and H is the mean curvature of the particle at the cup edge . We ignore any contribution from the Gaussian curvature since , as we explain in the SI Appendix , its eﬀect is normally similar to that from the mean curvature for biologically relevant target shapes . The original model in [ 26 ] only considered spherical parti - cles , so that the curvature H is constant . In order to consider other particle shapes , we allow H to depend on the engulf - ment a . This in turn means that ρ + is now not constant in time and that analytic solutions can no longer be found . This same approach was attempted in [ 27 ] for cylindrical particles , but with a misunderstanding that we believe invalidates their results ( see SI Appendix ) . To make progress , we numerically solve the system ( see Materials and Methods ) and consider , in turn , spheroids , capped cylinders and hourglasses . Receptors ( density ρ ) A B Ligands ( density ρ L ) r ρ a ρ L ρ + ρ 0 C u p s i z e , a Fig . 2 . Sketch of the model . ( A ) Sketch of the receptors ( blue ) moving within the membrane and a partially engulfed particle ( red ) . The model variables are the cup size ( a ) and the receptor density ( ρ ) . ( B ) The typical proﬁle of ρ , with ρ L the ligand density , ρ 0 the receptor density at inﬁnity , and ρ + the receptor density at the cup edge . 2 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0709640104 Footline Author (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 3 — # 3 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) Spheroids . A spheroid is an ellipsoid where two of the principal axes have the same length . Later , in our 2D model , we will be able to consider spheroids presented to the cell both end - on and lying down . However , in the 1D model , which requires circularly - symmetric particles , only standing spheroids can be examined . A spheroid is characterised by two radii : R 1 , the radius of the semi - principal axis parallel to the membrane , and R 2 , the radius perpendicular to the membrane ( Fig . 3A ) . We use a standard parameterisation of the surface of a spheroid given by ( x , y , z ) = ( R 1 sin v cos u , R 1 sin v sin u , − R 2 cos v ) , where u ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) and v ∈ [ 0 , π ] . Here the z - axis represents the perpendicular distance from the membrane , so that v = 0 is the “lowest” point , the point of the spheroid that ﬁrst touches the membrane and is the ﬁrst to be engulfed . We must relate the mean curvature H to the arc length s ( measured from v = 0 ) . The curvature can be written in terms of v as 2 H = R 2 (cid:0) R 21 ( 1 + cos 2 v ) + R 22 sin 2 v (cid:1) R 1 (cid:0) R 21 cos 2 v + R 22 sin 2 v (cid:1) 3 / 2 , [ 3 ] whereas the arc length is given by an incomplete elliptic inte - gral of the second kind ( see SI Appendix ) , s = (cid:90) v 0 (cid:113) R 21 cos 2 w + R 22 sin 2 w dw . [ 4 ] Since v cannot be directly eliminated between Eqs . [ 3 ] and [ 4 ] , we proceed as follows : for a given engulfment ( arc length ) a we numerically solve Eq . [ 4 ] to ﬁnd v and then use Eq . [ 3 ] to ﬁnd the curvature . We ﬁnd that , for R 1 (cid:54) = R 2 , engulfment no longer proceeds with the square root of time ( Fig . 3B ) . The speed of engulf - ment now depends on the local curvature at the cup edge . Higher curvatures decrease the right hand side of Eq . [ 2 ] and increase ρ + . In turn a higher ρ + decreases ρ (cid:48) at the cup edge and tends to reduce the engulfment rate . Thus highly curved regions lead to slow engulfment , whereas ﬂatter regions engulf faster . Regions which are too highly curved lead to stalling , where engulfment cannot proceed further ( Fig . 3B ) . In our mathematical model this occurs when ρ + ≥ ρ 0 so that the right - hand side of the second part of Eq . [ 1 ] becomes nega - tive , which we interpret as ˙ a = 0 . To compare diﬀerent spheroids , we vary R 1 whilst always choosing R 2 to ensure the same total surface area . We ﬁnd similar results by instead ﬁxing the volume or R 2 ( see SI Ap - pendix ) . As shown in Figs . 3B and 3C , we ﬁnd ﬁve classes of behaviour , depending on the value of R 1 . First , for suﬃ - ciently small R 1 , the initial curvature is so high that engulf - ment can never begin and the particle simply sits on the cell membrane . Second , for larger R 1 we reach a slow - fast - slow mode of engulfment : the initial high curvature at the par - ticle base leads to slow engulfment , with quicker engulfment in the smaller - curvature middle region , before again a highly - curved , slow stage near the top of the particle . Third , as R 1 is further increased , the spherical case is reached ( R 1 = R 2 ) , characterised by √ t engulfment . Fourth , at still higher R 1 , a fast - slow - fast stage is encountered , with engulfment quick - est at the beginning and end where the curvature is lowest . Finally , suﬃciently high R 1 again leads to incomplete engulf - ment , although now ( unlike for small R 1 ) engulfment stalls around halfway . To better understand the eﬀect of changing R 1 , we study the half and full engulfment times ( Fig . 3D ) . Spheroids with R 1 < R 2 ( like those on the left in Fig . 1B ) always take longer than the equivalent sphere to reach both half and full engulf - ment . Conversely , spheroids with R 1 slightly bigger than R 2 engulf faster than spheres . This is interesting and suggests that rod - shaped bacteria can sometimes be engulfed faster A D C E B R 1 R 2 C up s i z e ( µ m ) 0 1 2 3 0 50 100 150 200 250 R 1 ( µm ) E ngu l f m en t t i m e ( s ) 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 0 50 100 150 200 250 Full engulf . time Half engulf . time Time ( s ) slow | fast | slow fast | slow | fast stalls at half - way stalls before starting 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 1 . 1 1 . 2 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 R ( μm ) D i ff . i n engu l f . t i m e ( s ) 0 sphere max R 1 min R 1 R 1 R 1 = 0 . 65µm R 1 = 0 . 6544µm R 1 = 0 . 8µm R 1 = 0 . 963µm R 1 = 0 . 97µm Fig . 3 . Engulfment time for spheroids in 1D model . ( A ) Cross section of a spheroid , deﬁned by R 1 ( the axis length parallel to the membrane ) and R 2 ( the perpendicular axis length ) . The full shape is obtained by rotating around the z - axis , thus giving an ellipsoid with axis lengths { R 1 , R 1 , R 2 } . ( B ) Progression of engulfment for spheroids with various R 1 . In each case R 2 is chosen so that the surface area is the same as for a sphere of radius 0 . 8 µ m . The spherical case ( red curve ) shows classic √ t engulfment . Nonspherical spheroids show slower rates of engulfment in regions with high curvatures . This occurs at the beginning and end of engulfment for prolate spheroids ( green curve ) and towards the middle for oblate spheroids ( cyan curve ) . Suﬃciently eccentric spheroids ( blue and purple curves ) stall at the point where the curvature gets so high that ρ + > ρ 0 . Solid dots represent complete engulfment . ( C ) The ﬁve types of behaviour for increasing R 1 ( for ﬁxed surface area ) : ( i ) stalling before engulfment starts , ( ii ) slow - fast - slow engulfment , ( iii ) classic √ t spherical behaviour , ( iv ) fast - slow - fast engulfment , and ( v ) stalling at halfway . ( D ) The half - and full - engulfment times as a function of R 1 . Again R 2 is chosen to keep the surface area constant . The dashed line represents the spherical case . Interestingly , the quickest engulfment occurs , not for spheres , but for oblate spheroids ( where R 1 > R 2 ) . Grey shapes : sketches of the target particle . ( E ) The diﬀerence in total engulfment time between ellipsoids with radii { R , R , 1 µ m } and those with { 1 µ m , 1 µ m , ˜R } , where ˜ R is chosen to give the same surface area . The vertical dashed line represents the case of a sphere . Parameters : ρ 0 = 50 µ m − 2 , ρ L = 500 µ m − 2 , D = 0 . 4 µ m 2 s − 1 , E = 15 , B = 10 . than coccus - shaped bacteria of the same surface area . As R 1 is further increased a minimum is reached . Beyond this the high curvature becomes a dominant factor and causes both the half and full engulfment times to rise sharply for larger values of R 1 . To study the orientation dependence of engulfment , we compare ellipsoids with { R 1 , R 2 } = { R , 1 µ m } to those with { R 1 , R 2 } = { 1 µ m , ˜R } , where ˜ R is chosen so that the sur - face area is the same for both cases . Of course , these two shapes do not correspond to the same spheroid ; only later , in our extended 2D model , we will be able to directly com - pare the same ellipsoid in diﬀerent orientations . In partic - ular we compare the diﬀerence in total engulfment time for these two shapes ( Fig . 3E ) . For R > 1 µ m we ﬁnd that the oblate spheroid ( with { R 1 , R 2 } = { R , 1 µ m } ) engulfs quickest . This is simply because the total engulfment length is smaller . For the same reason , for R slightly smaller than 1 µ m , en - gulfment is also quickest for oblate spheroids ( which are now those with { R 1 , R 2 } = { 1 µ m , ˜R } ) . However , for suﬃciently small R , the required value of ˜ R is such that the curvature at the mid - point becomes limiting , slowing engulfment for the { R 1 , R 2 } = { 1 µ m , ˜R } spheroid , so that prolate spheroids are engulfed faster . Capped cylinders and hourglasses . We now brieﬂy consider two other circularly - symmetric shapes ; full details can be found in the SI Appendix . Capped cylinders , consisting of Footline Author PNAS Issue Date Volume Issue Number 3 (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 4 — # 4 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) a cylinder with a hemisphere attached at either end , are good models for various rod - shaped bacteria , such as E . coli and Bacillus subtilis . These display a slow - fast - stall - slow engulf - ment behaviour , related to the lower curvature found in the neck region . The stalling is caused by a jump in ρ + at the top of the neck . By ﬁxing the surface area and varying the neck height , we ﬁnd that the quickest engulfment corresponds to a sphere . Even though rods are not capped cylinders , this could explain the observation that , for endocytosis , spheres engulf in less time than rod - shaped particles [ 29 ] . Hourglasses are more complicated shapes , but are useful for modelling cases of dividing cells , such as budding yeast dur - ing division [ 1 , 30 ] . The engulfment behaviour and the total engulfment time depend on exactly how narrow the neck is compared to the spherical caps , with the neck region engulfed sometimes faster and sometimes slower than the caps . Inter - estingly , the quickest engulfed hourglass does not correspond to the shape with the smallest neck curvature . See the SI Appendix for full details . Extension to phagocytosis . Although actin plays a role in many types of endocytosis , it seems to be far more impor - tant for successful engulfment in phagocytosis [ 31 , 32 , 25 ] . To this end , we extend our model to apply to phagocytosis by adding a simple role for actin . Motivated by our previous work [ 28 ] , we achieve this by including a signalling molecule S which recruits actin to push at the cup edge . We assume that S is produced only within the cup ( with rate βρ L ) , is degraded everywhere ( with lifetime τ ) , and diﬀuses ( with constant D S ) . Then S is described by [ 28 ] ∂S ∂t = D S r ∂ ∂r (cid:18) r∂S∂r (cid:19) + βρ L Θ ( a − r ) − τ − 1 S , [ 5 ] where Θ ( x ) is the Heaviside function . Even though the actin network provides a pushing force at the cup edge , this will not necessarily increase the engulfed target length , a , unless suﬃcient receptors are also present : simply pushing the membrane further around the target with - out a suitable zipper mechanism risks subsequent unwrapping [ 25 ] . Thus the real eﬀect of actin ( at least as far as our model is concerned ) is in facilitating receptor motion to the cup edge . One way this could be achieved is by actin helping to bend the membrane around the target , thus eﬀectively reducing the free energy needed for membrane bending . For example , an actin network structure that matches the target curvature would naturally encourage the membrane to bend in the same man - ner via scaﬀolding [ 33 ] . We implement this mechanism by allowing the bending modulus , B , to depend on the value of S at the cup edge , S + , via B = B 0 / ( 1 + B 1 S + ) , where B i are constants . We identify B 0 with the ( constant ) value of B in the non - phagocytic model and call B 1 the bending - actin constant . Then B 1 = 0 corresponds to non - phagocytic endocytosis and B 1 > 0 to phagocytosis . Note that this mechanism does not require that the membrane becomes softer , only that bending becomes easier . This could be related , for example , to changes in lipid composition within the phagocytic cup as a result of localised small GTPase recruitment [ 34 ] or to changes in the spontaneous curvature . We ﬁrst examine the diﬀerence between receptor - mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis for oblate spheroids ( R 1 > R 2 ) . Suﬃciently eccentric spheroids cannot be engulfed by receptor - mediated endocytosis since the curvature around half way is too high ( Fig . 3D ) . However , with the introduction of sig - nalling and a role for actin , such ellipsoids can often be in - gested by phagocytosis ( Fig . 4A ) . In these cases , the initial rate of engulfment , when S is small , is similar in both models . A B 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 M i n / m a x R 1 ( µ m ) B 1 ( µm 2 ) B 1 ( µm 2 ) E ngu l f . t i m e ( s ) 0 . 3 0 . 35 0 . 4 0 . 45 0 . 5 0 200 400 600 800 Full engulf . time Half engulf . time Fig . 4 . Results for spheroids in phagocytosis model . ( A ) Engulfment times ( for both half and full engulfment ) as a function of the bending - actin constant ( B 1 ) for a spheroid with R 1 = 0 . 98 µ m and R 2 = 0 . 45 µ m . B 1 = 0 corresponds to non - phagocytic endocytosis and B 1 > 0 to phagocytosis . ( B ) The range of spheroids ( grey region ) that can be engulfed as a function of the bending - actin constant . R 2 is always chosen so that the surface area is the same as that of a 0 . 8 µ m - radius sphere . The dashed line represents the largest possible value of R 1 : above this the surface area constraint can no longer be imposed . Parameters : ρ 0 = 50 µ m − 2 , ρ L = 500 µ m − 2 , D = 0 . 4 µ m 2 s − 1 , E = 15 , B 0 = 10 , D S = 1 µ m 2 s − 1 , β = 0 . 4s − 1 , τ = 0 . 5s . However , when engulfment slows down around half way , the recruitment of actin to the cup edge provides an extra push . If the bending - actin constant is large enough this then leads to complete engulfment ( Fig . 4A ) . The situation is markedly diﬀerent for prolate spheroids ( R 1 < R 2 ) for which the high curvature stalling occurs at the beginning of engulfment when there are relatively few receptor - ligand bonds . The lack of bound receptors means that there is little signalling and so little recruitment of actin . In such cases , often both models fail to engulf . For oblate spheroids we can examine the eﬀect of the bending - actin constant on engulfment time in cases where non - phagocytic endocytosis stalls around half way ( Fig . 4A ) . Ini - tially , as B 1 is increased , there is still no engulfment . However , at a critical onset ( about B 1 = 0 . 315 µ m 2 with the parameters in Fig . 4A ) complete engulfment occurs . As B 1 is increased still further , the engulfment time rapidly drops . For values near the critical B 1 value , engulfment takes a long time , with the majority of time spent around half engulfment waiting for enough actin to be recruited to the cup edge . This suggests that certain shapes that appear to stall around half way will actually fully ingest given a suﬃcient amount of time . Finally , we examine how the range of ingestible spheroids changes as the bending - actin constant increases ( Fig . 4B ) . For any ﬁxed value of B 1 there is always a limit on which el - lipsoids can be engulfed : particles that are too oblate or too prolate will never be ingested . However , these limits corre - spond to progressively more and more eccentric spheroids as B 1 increases . From experimental measurements of which el - lipsoids can and cannot be engulfed , it should be possible to infer the value of the bending - actin constant . Thus , phagocy - tosis ( B 1 > 0 ) allows not only larger particles , but also more eccentric particles to be ingested compared to other types of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( B 1 = 0 ) . However , our model suggests that there are always suﬃciently eccentrically shaped targets that can evade engulfment . 2D model for noncircularly - symmetric particles . A limitation of the 1D model is that only circularly - symmetric particles can be studied . In particular , this excludes general ellipsoids ( with all the axes diﬀerent lengths ) and even spheroids that are not presented tip - ﬁrst . To study such shapes we extend the above model to two dimensions , which involves studying a 2D Stefan problem . We parameterise the surface by polar coordinates r and θ , with r ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ θ < 2 π . The receptor density is now described by ρ ( r , θ , t ) , whereas the engulfed arc length , a ( θ , t ) , becomes a function of the angular direction . With the same boundary conditions as in the 1D model ( ρ = ρ 0 both at t = 0 and at r = ∞ ) , we now have to solve the 2D diﬀusion 4 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0709640104 Footline Author (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 5 — # 5 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) equation , ∂ρ ∂t = D r ∂ ∂r (cid:18) r∂ρ∂r (cid:19) + D r 2 ∂ 2 ρ ∂θ 2 , [ 6 ] for r > a . As before , ρ = ρ L within the cup . The evolution of a can be derived from the conservation of receptors . As we show in the SI Appendix , the second part of Eq . [ 1 ] is replaced by ∂a ∂t = D ( ∇ ρ + · ˆ n ) ρ L − ρ + , [ 7 ] where ˆ n is a unit outward - pointing normal to the cup surface . The ﬁnal boundary condition , ﬁxing ρ + , again follows from re - quiring no free - energy jump across the cup edge . Although the derivation is more involved , the ﬁnal condition is the same as in the 1D model , Eq . [ 2 ] ( see SI Appendix ) . To ﬁnd solutions we developed a numerical approach that involves a 2D lattice that must be continually updated as the cup enlarges ( see Ma - terials and Methods ) . To test our numerics we checked that spherical particles ( with constant curvature H = R − 1 ) agree with the analytic results from the 1D model . We focus on studying ellipsoids , which are parameterised by their three semi - principal axes , R 1 , R 2 and R 3 ( Fig . 5A ) . Since the cup does not proceed in unison around the parti - cle ( diﬀerent angles engulf at diﬀerent rates ) , there is now no unique deﬁnition of half engulfment . We consider two deﬁ - nitions : half - area engulfment when the engulfed area is half the ellipsoid surface area , and half - circumference engulfment when all points of the cup are over half way to the top of the particle . Half - area engulfment always occurs before ( or at the same time as ) half - circumference engulfment . As an example of engulfment , consider an ellipsoid with R 1 = R 3 < R 2 , which is a lying - down prolate spheroid as in the ﬁrst ﬁgure in Fig . 1B if it was lying on its side ( see Video S1 ) . The lack of circular symmetry ( when viewed from above ) means that engulfment now proceeds at diﬀerent rates at diﬀerent angles . In particular , consider θ = 0 compared to θ = π 2 , corresponding to the two principal axes parallel to the membrane . Cup progression at θ = 0 proceeds along a circle of radius R 1 with constant curvature , H θ = 0 . Conversely , the cup edge at θ = π 2 follows an ellipse , with the curvature starting at H θ = 0 , rising to a maximum at half - way and then decreasing back to H θ = 0 . In addition , the total arc length along θ = π 2 is longer than that along θ = 0 , so that the θ = π 2 direction must engulf more membrane to reach full engulfment . As seen in Fig . 5B and Video S1 , the θ = π 2 direction takes considerably longer to engulf . This is partly due to both the greater curvature along θ = π 2 and the greater arc length . However , there is another , more important reason that slows engulfment at θ = π 2 compared to θ = 0 , which is only revealed in the full 2D simulation . Once θ = π 2 starts to lag behind θ = 0 ( due to higher curvature ) , angular diﬀusion ( diﬀusion in the θ direction ) causes even more receptors to move away from θ = π 2 and towards θ = 0 . This increases the ﬂux at θ = 0 , so that the θ = π 2 direction slips even further behind θ = 0 , amplifying the eﬀect ( see SI Appendix , Fig . S6 ) . This ampliﬁcation explains why engulfment takes so much longer at θ = π 2 . This eﬀect may also explain the asymmetric spreading over ellipsoidal particles in [ 4 ] . For the ﬁrst time , to our knowledge , we are now able to com - pare spheroids presented to the cell with diﬀerent orientations . To do this we compare spheroids with radii { R 1 , R 2 , R 3 } = { ˜ R , ˜ R , R } to those with { R 1 , R 2 , R 3 } = { ˜ R , R , ˜ R } . We re - fer to the ﬁrst case as a symmetrically - presented spheroid ( since from above this spheroid has circular symmetry ) and the second case as an asymmetrically - presented spheroid . For a given R we always choose ˜ R to keep constant surface area ( the surface area of a sphere with radius 0 . 4 µ m ) . This al - A B C R 1 R 1 R 2 R 3 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 20 40 60 80 E ngu l f . t i m e ( s ) R ( µm ) { R 1 , R 2 , R 3 } = { R ~ , R , R ~ } { R 1 , R 2 , R 3 } = { R ~ , R ~ , R } 0 40 80 120 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 C up s i z e ( µ m ) Time ( s ) θ = π / 2 θ = 0 r θ Fig . 5 . Engulfment time for ellipsoids in 2D model . ( A ) Sketch of an ellipsoid , which is deﬁned by its three semi - principal axis lengths , R 1 , R 2 and R 3 . ( B ) Comparison of engulfment at diﬀerent angles for an ellipsoid with R 1 = R 3 = 0 . 3 µ m and R 2 = 0 . 6 µ m . Diﬀerent directions around the ellipsoid engulf at diﬀerent rates , with complete engulfment occurring just after 118s . Here we show the two most extreme angles : θ = 0 and θ = π 2 . Insert : cup shape when the θ = 0 direction is about half engulfed with the target in grey and the cell mem - brane in red . For the full movie , see Video S1 . ( C ) Comparison of total engulfment time for spheroids presented to the cell in two perpendicular orientations . ˜ R is always chosen so that the surface area is the same as that of a sphere of radius 0 . 4 µ m . The dashed line represents the spherical case . Grey shapes : sketches of the target particle . Parameters : ρ 0 = 50 µ m − 2 , ρ L = 500 µ m − 2 , D = 0 . 4 µ m 2 s − 1 , E = 6 , B = 0 . 4 . lows us to directly compare spheroids with diﬀerent eccen - tricities . Fig . 5C shows the results for the total engulfment time . Both symmetrically - and asymmetrically - presented spheroids demonstrate the expected characteristic behaviour , with quickest engulfment corresponding to some intermediate spheroid : more squashed or more pointed ellipsoids take longer to engulf , with suﬃciently eccentric shapes never reaching complete engulfment . Further , the symmetrically - presented spheroid always engulfs ﬁrst , both for prolate and oblate spheroids . This is due to the ampliﬁcation of angular diﬀusion described above , where the θ = π 2 angle for asymmetrically - presented spheroids takes much longer to engulf than θ = 0 . For symmetrically - presented spheroids we ﬁnd , as we should , similar results to those for spheroids in the 1D model . For ﬁxed surface area , the sphere is not the optimal shape . Rather slightly oblate spheroids ( R < ˜ R ) engulf faster . This is true not only for the total engulfment time , but also for the half - area and half - circumference engulfment times ( which are always equal for such a shape ) . Conversely , for asymmetrically - presented spheroids , the sphere always corre - sponds to quickest total engulfment . This again is caused by the ampliﬁcation eﬀect , which penalises non - symmetric shapes . The half - circumference engulfment time ( which re - quires all angles to have reached half - engulfment ) is also a min - imum for spheres ( Fig . S5B ) . However , the situation is diﬀer - ent for the half - area engulfment time , where prolate spheroids ( R > ˜ R ) reach half - area engulfment sooner than spheres ( Fig . S5A ) . Thus our 2D model leads to three important conclusions for spheroids . First , prolate spheroids engulf quickest when presented to the membrane tip - ﬁrst , which agrees with previ - ous phagocytic measurements [ 4 ] and is a prediction for other types of endocytosis . Suﬃciently spherical targets will com - pletely engulf in either orientation , whereas targets that are too eccentric are not engulfed in any orientation . This could well explain the observation in [ 4 ] , where the membrane some - times only spreads along the target with no internalisation . However , there also exists an intermediate regime where pro - late spheroids are engulfed only when one of the highly - curved tips is engulfed ﬁrst . Although in phagocytosis this orienta - tion dependence can be explained by adding active processes and a second engulfment stage to the 1D model [ 28 ] , our 2D model shows that this ( for all types of endocytosis ) can also be understood simply by receptor diﬀusion . Second , we predict that oblate spheroids engulf quickest when presented ﬂat to the membrane . This ﬁnding is perhaps surprising since it is Footline Author PNAS Issue Date Volume Issue Number 5 (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 6 — # 6 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) then the low curvature region that is engulfed ﬁrst ( and last ) rather than the highly - curved tips as for prolate spheroids . Hence oblate and prolate spheroids have completely diﬀerent engulfment behaviours even for superﬁcially similar shapes ( such as the two standing spheroids in Fig . 5C ) . Further experiments with spheroidal targets should help clarify this prediction . Third , the 2D model predicts that the absolute quickest engulfment for a spheroid ( with ﬁxed surface area ) occurs for a slightly oblate spheroid that lies ﬂat with respect to the membrane . The last ﬁnding is conﬁrmed by Sharma et al . for macrophages [ 35 ] . Discussion In analogy with the freezing of water , as described by the heat equation with a moving boundary , we used a minimal model of receptor diﬀusion and capture to study shape and orientation dependence during endocytosis . The process of engulfment is then equivalent to a ﬁrst - order phase transition characterised by a transition from mobile , unbound receptors to immobile , ligand - bound receptors . By including signalling and a role of actin , we were then able to adapt our model to phagocytosis and examine the diﬀerent role shape plays for receptor - mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis . We both extended a previous 1D model to include nonspher - ical targets and developed a more realistic 2D version , allowing lower - symmetry particles to be studied . The 1D model shows that a whole host of engulfment behaviours emerge from dif - ferent particle types . This supports the idea that the local curvature at the cup edge is a crucial factor in determining whether ( and how quickly ) targets are engulfed [ 4 ] . Highly - curved regions may prevent complete engulfment and so are likely to be factors that , at least partially , drive the evolution of pathogen shapes . We found that for some shapes ( such as capped cylinders ) the more spherical the target the quicker the engulfment , whereas for other shapes ( such as spheroids ) non - spherical particles can be engulfed faster . Thus long , narrow ﬁlamentous shapes could in some situations be more beneﬁ - cial for pathogens that try to avoid ingestion . Further , our hourglass - shaped particles also explain the observation that phagocytosis of budded yeast can stall at half engulfment [ 1 , 30 ] . The 2D model allowed , for the ﬁrst time to our knowledge , the orientation dependence of engulfment to be probed . We found that , for nonspherical targets , engulfment can some - times proceed at completely diﬀerent rates in diﬀerent direc - tions , with higher - curved directions engulﬁng much slower . This should be directly observable with , for example , scan - ning electron microscopy . Further , we discovered that this eﬀect can explain the experimental observation that prolate spheroids phagocytose quickest when presented to the cell tip - ﬁrst [ 4 ] . In addition , the 2D model predicts both that oblate spheroids engulf fastest when presented ﬂat to the cell and that slightly oblate spheroids can engulf even faster than the equivalent sphere . These perhaps counterintuitive results could readily be tested in the near future . Although phagocytosis is distinct to other forms of receptor - mediated endocytosis , the role of receptors and their motion towards the cup is equally important [ 28 ] . By adding sig - nalling and a simple role for actin , our models predict that all types of endocytosis , including phagocytosis , have similar shape dependence . In addition we found that phagocytosis not only fulﬁls its traditional role of allowing larger particles to be ingested , but also allows more highly - curved targets to be engulfed . It is important to point out the limitations of our mod - els . We have focussed only on passive diﬀusion of receptors , neglecting more active receptor motion [ 15 , 16 ] . Further , in our phagocytosis model , we have only included one signalling molecule and have added actin in a highly - simpliﬁed manner without any attempt to model the underlying structure of the cytoskeleton . Although these simpliﬁcations will not capture many aspects of endocytosis , it is likely that the interplay between target ( and hence membrane ) curvature and the mo - tion of receptors is correctly represented even in our minimal models . Our phagocytosis model also assumes that signalling reduces the membrane bending modulus , eﬀectively making bending around highly curved objects easier . An alternative model representation could have focussed on forces instead of receptor dynamics so that , for example , signalling and actin polymerisation would lead to a membrane pushing force . Tak - ing spatial derivatives of the cup energy would translate our energy - based model to a force - based model [ 6 ] . Finally , we have assumed that targets do not rotate during engulfment . It would be interesting to also include this in our models , which would then allow further questions , such as the stability of diﬀerent orientations , to be addressed . Shape dependence is a fascinating aspect of endocytosis , which is probably even more important for successful engulf - ment than target size [ 4 ] . Understanding the role of shape may also have direct applications to , for example , how some pathogens invade cells [ 36 ] , how other pathogens avoid uptake , the optimal design for drug delivery carriers [ 37 , 38 ] , and even cell behaviour [ 39 ] . We have shown that there is great variety in the uptake of diﬀerent target shapes , which is also heavily orientation dependent . Future work , using diﬀerently coated particles , will need to address how geometric , mechanical and chemical signals are integrated to explain the wide range of observed engulfment outcomes . Materials and Methods 1D numerical simulations . For nonspherical particles , even the 1D model must be solved numerically . We used a grid with spacing ∆ r = 0 . 1 µ m and total length L = 50 µ m . Eq . [ 1 ] was solved using the Euler method with time step ∆ t = 1 × 10 − 3 s . At each time step we also imposed the boundary condition ρ ( a ( t ) , t ) = ρ + , which involves ﬁrst calculating the mean curvature at the cup edge and solving Eq . [ 2 ] . We checked convergence by showing that smaller values of ∆ r and ∆ t did not noticeably change the results . See the SI Appendix for full details . 2D numerical simulations . Our 2D numerical solutions were calculated on a 2D grid with ∆ r = 2 . 5nm and ∆ θ = π / 8 . The maximum radius was set at 20 µ m . The area of each lattice point was no longer constant , but depended on r , a fact that had to be taken into account . We solved Eqs . [ 6 ] and [ 7 ] with the usual Euler method using ∆ t = 2 . 5 × 10 − 6 s . At a given time t and angle θ , the normal to the cup surface was estimated from a ( θ , t ) and a ( θ ± ∆ θ , t ) . Similarly , ∇ ρ + was estimated as a ﬁnite diﬀerence . Updating the cup edge normally moved a away from the discrete θ - lattice points ( n ∆ θ ) . Linear interpolation was then performed to move them back . Finally , for each point on the cup edge , the mean curvature was calculated , giving a value for ρ + , which was then imposed as a boundary condition . Full details are given in the SI Appendix . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . DMR and RGE were supported by BBSRC grant BB / I019987 / 1 . DMR was also supported by the Wellcome Trust Institutional Strate - gic Support Award ( WT105618MA ) . RGE also acknowledges funding from ERC Start - ing Grant 280492 - PPHPI . 6 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0709640104 Footline Author (cid:105) (cid:105) “ShapeDependence” — 2016 / 5 / 9 — 17 : 27 — page 7 — # 7 (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) (cid:105) 1 . Clarke M , Engel U , Giorgione J , M¨uller - Taubenberger A , Prassler J , Veltman D , Gerisch G ( 2010 ) Curvature recognition and force generation in phagocytosis . BMC Biol 8 : 154 . 2 . Rittig MG , Krause A , H¨aupl T , Schaible UE , Modolell M , Kramer MD , L¨utjen - Drecoll E , Simon MM , Burmester GR ( 1992 ) Coiling phagocytosis is the preferential phago - cytic mechanism for Borrelia burgdorferi . Infect Immun 60 : 4205 – 4212 . 3 . Horwitz MA ( 1984 ) Phagocytosis of the legionnaires’ disease bacterium ( legionella pneumophila ) occurs by a novel mechanism : engulfment within a pseudopod coil . Cell 36 : 27 – 33 . 4 . Champion JA , Mitragotri S ( 2006 ) Role of target geometry in phagocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 ( 13 ) : 4930 – 4 . 5 . Champion JA , Mitragotri S ( 2009 ) Shape induced inhibition of phagocytosis of polymer particles . Pharm Res 26 ( 1 ) : 244 – 9 . 6 . van Zon JS , Tzircotis G , Caron E , Howard M ( 2009 ) A mechanical bottleneck explains the variation in cup growth during Fc γ R phagocytosis . Mol Syst Biol 5 : 298 . 7 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 . 8 . Diakonova M , Bokoch G , Swanson JA ( 2002 ) Dynamics of cytoskeletal proteins during Fc γ receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 402 – 411 . 9 . Dart AE , Tollis S , Bright MD , Frankel G , Endres RG ( 2012 ) The motor protein myosin 1G functions in Fc γ R - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 125 : 6020 – 6029 . 10 . Smythe E , Warren G ( 1991 ) The mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Eur J Biochem 202 : 689 – 699 . 11 . Griﬃn FM , Griﬃn JA , Leider JE , Silverstein SC ( 1975 ) Studies on the mechanism of phagocytosis : I . Requirements for circumferential attachment of particle - bound ligands to speciﬁc receptors on the macrophage plasma membrane . J Exp Med 142 : 1263 – 1282 . 12 . Griﬃn FM , Griﬃn JA , Leider JE , Silverstein SC ( 1976 ) Studies on the mechanism of phagocytosis : II . The interaction of macrophages with antiimmunoglobulin IgG - coated bone marrow - derived lymphocytes . J Exp Med 144 : 788 – 809 . 13 . ˇSamaj J , Baluˇska F , Voigt B , Schlicht M , Volkmann D , Menzel D ( 2004 ) Endocytosis , Actin Cytoskeleton , and Signaling . Plant Physiol 135 : 1150 – 1161 . 14 . Qualmann B , Kessels MM ( 2002 ) Endocytosis and the cytoskeleton . Int Rev Cytol 220 : 93 – 144 . 15 . Swanson JA ( 2008 ) Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 9 : 639 – 649 . 16 . Underhill DM , Ozinsky A ( 2002 ) Phagocytosis of microbes : complexity in action . Annu Rev Immunol 20 : 825 – 852 . 17 . Sun SX , Wirtz D ( 2005 ) Mechanics of Enveloped Virus Entry into Host Cells . Biophys J 90 : L10 – L12 . 18 . Tzlil S , Deserno M , Gelbart WM , Ben - Shaul A ( 2004 ) A statistical - thermodynamic model of viral budding . Biophys J 86 : 2037 – 2048 . 19 . van Eﬀenterre D , Roux D ( 2003 ) Adhesion of colloids on a cell surface in competition for mobile receptors . Europhys Lett 64 : 543 – 549 . 20 . Zhang T , Sknepnek R , Bowick MJ , Schwarz JM ( 2015 ) On the modeling of endocytosis in yeast . Biophys J 108 : 508 – 519 . 21 . Herant M , Heinrich V , Dembo M ( 2006 ) Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : ex - periments and quantitative models . J Cell Sci 119 : 1903 – 1913 . 22 . Herant M , Lee C - Y , Dembo M , Heinrich V ( 2011 ) Protrusive push versus envelop - ing embrace : computational model of phagocytosis predicts key regulatory role of cytoskeletal membrane anchors . PLoS Comput Biol 7 : e1001068 . 23 . Dasgupta S , Auth T , Gompper G ( 2013 ) Wrapping of ellipsoidal nano - particles by ﬂuid membranes . Soft Matter 9 : 5473 . 24 . Dasgupta S , Auth T , Gompper G ( 2014 ) Shape and orientation matter for the cellular uptake of nonspherical particles . Nano Lett 14 ( 2 ) : 687 – 693 . 25 . Tollis S , Dart AE , Tzircotis G , Endres RG ( 2010 ) The zipper mechanism in phagocy - tosis : energetic requirements and variability in phagocytic cup shape . BMC Syst Biol 4 : 149 . 26 . Gao H , Shi W , Freund L ( 2005 ) Mechanics of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 ( 27 ) : 9469 – 9474 . 27 . Decuzzi P , Ferrari M ( 2008 ) The receptor - mediated endocytosis of nonspherical parti - cles . Biophys J 94 ( 10 ) : 3790 – 3797 . 28 . Richards DM , Endres RG ( 2014 ) The mechanism of phagocytosis : two stages of en - gulfment . Biophys J 107 : 1542 – 1553 . 29 . Chithrani BD , Ghazani AA , Chan WC ( 2006 ) Determining the size and shape depen - dence of gold nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells . Nano Lett 6 : 662 – 668 . 30 . Dieckmann R , von Heyden Y , Kistler C , Gopaldass N , Hausherr S , Crawley SW , Schwarz EC , Diensthuber RP , Cˆot´e GP , Tsiavaliaris G , Soldati T ( 2010 ) A myosin IK - Abp1 - PakB circuit acts as a switch to regulate phagocytosis eﬃciency . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 1505 – 18 . 31 . Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Drubin DG ( 2003 ) Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 : 287 – 332 . 32 . Robertson AS , Smythe E , Ayscough KR ( 2009 ) Functions of actin in endocytosis . Cell Mol Life Sci 66 : 2049 – 206 . 33 . McMahonHT , Boucrot E ( 2015 ) Membrane curvature ata glance . J Cell Sci128 : 1065 – 1070 . 34 . Hoppe AD , Swanson JA ( 2004 ) Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 display distinct patterns of activation during phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 3509 – 3519 . 35 . Sharma G , Valenta DT , Altman Y , Harvey S , Xie H , Mitragotri S , Smith JW ( 2010 ) Polymer particle shape independently inﬂuences binding and internalization by macrophages . J Control Release 147 ( 3 ) : 408 – 12 . 36 . Hagedorn M , Rohde KH , Russell DG , Soldati T ( 2009 ) Infection by tubercular my - cobacteria is spread by nonlytic ejection from their amoeba hosts . Science 323 : 1729 – 1733 . 37 . Champion JA , Katare YK , Mitragotri S ( 2007 ) Particle shape : A new design parameter for micro - and nanoscale drug delivery carriers . J Control Release 121 : 3 – 9 . 38 . Nowacek AS , Balkundi S , McMillan J , Roy U , Martinez - Skinner A , Mosley RL , Kan - mogne G , Kabanov AV , Bronich T , Gendelman HE ( 2011 ) Analyses of nanoformulated antiretroviral drug charge , size , shape and content for uptake , drug release and antiviral activities in human monocyte - derived macrophages . J Control Release 150 ( 2 ) : 204 – 211 . 39 . Huang X , Teng X , Chen D , Tang F , He J ( 2010 ) The eﬀect of the shape of mesoporous silica nanoparticles on cellular uptake and cell function . Biomaterials 31 ( 3 ) : 438 – 448 . Footline Author PNAS Issue Date Volume Issue Number 7