UC San Diego UC San Diego Previously Published Works Title Explaining the moral of the story Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 7df9v6th Authors Walker , CM Lombrozo , T Publication Date 2017 - 10 - 01 DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California Explaining the moral of the story Caren M . Walker a , ⇑ , Tania Lombrozo b a University of California , San Diego , Department of Psychology , 9500 Gillman , # 0109 , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0109 , United States b University of California , Berkeley , Department of Psychology , 3210 Tolman Hall , Room 1221 , Berkeley , CA 94720 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 26 February 2016 Revised 15 September 2016 Accepted 16 November 2016 Available online xxxx Keywords : Cognitive development Moral reasoning Explanation Abstraction Narrative comprehension a b s t r a c t Although storybooks are often used as pedagogical tools for conveying moral lessons to children , the abil - ity to spontaneously extract ‘‘the moral” of a story develops relatively late . Instead , children tend to rep - resent stories at a concrete level – one that highlights surface features and understates more abstract themes . Here we examine the role of explanation in 5 - and 6 - year - old children’s developing ability to learn the moral of a story . Two experiments demonstrate that , relative to a control condition , prompts to explain aspects of a story facilitate children’s ability to override salient surface features , abstract the underlying moral , and generalize that moral to novel contexts . In some cases , generating an explanation is more effective than being explicitly told the moral of the story , as in a more traditional pedagogical exchange . These ﬁndings have implications for moral comprehension , the role of explanation in learning , and the development of abstract reasoning in early childhood . (cid:1) 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction ‘‘There once was a boy named Pierre who only would say , ‘I don’t care ! ’ Read his story , my friend , for you’ll ﬁnd at the end that a suit - able moral lies there . ” [ ‘‘Pierre : A Cautionary Tale” ( Prologue ) , Maurice Sendak ( 1962 ) ] Moral stories have long been thought to improve ‘‘moral liter - acy” and ‘‘moral character” in children ( Bennett , 1993 ; Honig , 1987 ; Kilpatrick , 1992 ; Lickona , 1991 ; Nash , 1997 ; Wynne & Ryan , 1993 ) , and storybooks are often used with the intention to convey moral lessons during childhood . However , the ability to spontaneously extract underlying themes from a story appears to develop quite late ; some have proposed that this ability does not truly mature until adolescence ( McKenna & Ossoff , 1998 ; van den Broek , 1997 ; Williams , 1993 ) . Instead , beginning with Piaget ( 1952 ) , many researchers have suggested that young children are ‘‘context bound , ” and therefore unable to grasp the abstract goal or lesson of a story ( Fisch , 2000 ; van den Broek , 1997 ; van den Broek , Lynch , Naslund , Ievers - Landis , & Verduin , 2003 ) . In the pre - sent paper , we investigate whether prompting young children to explain – a process that has been shown to facilitate learning ( Fonseca & Chi , 2011 ; Lombrozo , 2006 , 2012 ) – can help young children go beyond superﬁcial content and successfully abstract the moral of a story . 1 . 1 . Development of theme comprehension Despite the popularity of stories with moral lessons in literature for young children , a sizable body of research suggests that chil - dren under 10 years of age typically interpret story meaning in ways that deviate from the writer’s intent ( e . g . , Goldman , Reyes , & Varnhagen , 1984 ; Lehr , 1988 ; Mares , 2006 ; Mares & Acosta , 2008 ; Narvaez , 1998 ; Narvaez , Bentley , Gleason , & Samuels , 1998 ; Narvaez , Gleason , Mitchell , & Bentley , 1999 ; Whitney , Vozzola , & Hofmann , 2005 ) . In particular , when children are asked to generate the moral of a story , they tend to produce a salient story event or repeat a familiar but irrelevant moral . According to the dominant line of thought from this body of work , children fail to represent narratives at a level that highlights abstract gener - alizations and understates surface content ( Goldman et al . , 1984 ; Williams et al . , 2002 ) . Although it has been proposed that drawing attention to the underlying structure of a narrative could facilitate children’s grasp of the moral and its generalization to novel con - texts , interventions taking this approach have been largely unsuc - cessful , particularly with young children . To illustrate , consider a study by Narvaez et al . ( 1999 ) , in which 3rd and 5th graders were asked to identify the moral of a story and to select a new story with the same moral theme . The target story was a brief vignette , in which a character stops for gas , pays , receives too much change , and then returns the extra money . The test vignettes were designed to provide several attractive options : ( 1 ) same setting ( character stops for gas ) ; ( 2 ) same main character ; ( 3 ) same actions ( character pays the bill at a restaurant http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 0010 - 0277 / (cid:1) 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : Department of Psychology , University of California , San Diego , 9500 Gillman Dr . , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0109 , United States . E - mail address : carenwalker @ ucsd . edu ( C . M . Walker ) . Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 and gets change ) ; or ( 4 ) same theme ( character returns something that doesn’t belong to him [ candy ] ) . The most common response was to select the ‘‘same action” vignette , suggesting that children were attracted to stories with shared surface content . The authors conclude that at least part of children’s difﬁculty in grasping moral themes is explained by their tendency to be distracted by superﬁ - cial details . In fact , children in this study did not extract the theme at all until at least 4th grade ( 10 years of age ) , with 3rd graders performing at chance . In addition , the 3rd graders seemed surpris - ingly resistant to training . After 14 weeks of an educational inter - vention , these children were able to generate morals that had been explicitly discussed during the training , but failed to do so when presented with new material ( Williams et al . , 2002 ) . This pattern of results extends beyond storybooks to televised narrative as well . For example , in a study by Mares and Acosta ( 2008 ) , 5 - year - old children watched a television program with a moral theme intended to portray tolerance of social differences . In this program , a disabled character ( a dog with three legs ) was initially feared , and then eventually accepted . Children who watched this program were asked to select the moral from several provided options and to select another episode that shared the same lesson . Performance was poor on both tasks . Notably , when asked to generate the lesson in an open response , children pro - vided a lesson that was tied to literal story content : ‘‘You should be kind to three - legged dogs . ” The authors conclude that 5 - year - olds take televised content at face value , or assume a literal inter - pretation of narrative . The abstraction of a theme from a story has also been examined in a related but separate literature examining children’s analogical transfer . For example , Brown , Kane , and Echols ( 1986 ) assessed transfer in preschool - aged children using a task in which learners were required to notice the common underlying structure of a set of problems in order to succeed . Three - to 5 - year - olds were presented with sets of stories that differed in their surface content ( e . g . , a genie transferring jewels into his lamp and a farmer trans - ferring cherries into his truck ) , but shared a common problem solution ( i . e . , transfer objects by rolling them through a hollow tube ) . The authors examined whether children could transfer the solution from one story to another , and if so , which factors mat - tered most for success . Children were split into several conditions . In one case , children were prompted to provide the explicit goal structure , recalling the protagonist , the goal , the problem , and the solution . In a second condition , children were prompted to simply recall the events of the story , with no additional guidance . In a third condition , children were given no prompt . Results demonstrated that children prompted to provide the explicit goal structure were best able to draw an analogy between stories . How - ever , when participants’ responses were coded , children in the recall condition who spontaneously provided the explicit goal structure in their response were just as likely to transfer the solu - tion . It seems that the key factor was whether children achieved a level of representation that highlighted the common goal structure and understated the surface content of the stories , irrespective of the experimental prompt . Brown et al . ( 1986 ) offer an interpretation of these results in terms of children’s ‘‘depth of representation , ” which predicted the probability a child would transfer the solution from one story to another , even controlling for memory , age , and the ability to ver - balize the solution . The idea that ‘‘deeper” processing facilitates memory and problem solving has appeared in a variety of forms ( e . g . , Craik & Lockhart , 1972 ) , and deeper processing is credited with facilitating retention and transfer in children ( Brown , 1975 ; Murphy & Brown , 1975 ) . However , it is often unclear how to distin - guish deep processing from alternatives , except by circular reason - ing : the child who performs well is processing at a deeper level , and we know this is the case because she performs well ( see also Bransford , 1979 ) . With respect to the goal of extracting a story’s lesson , however , we can safely say that more abstract reasoning is better : children must appreciate that much of the surface con - tent is incidental to the main lesson that the story’s author intends to convey . If this is the case , then children’s moral comprehension should beneﬁt from interventions that promote abstract reasoning over attention to idiosyncratic details . The literature on analogical reasoning provides a further hint about what such an intervention might be : prompting children to explain key aspects of the story as it unfolds . Crisaﬁ and Brown ( 1986 ) found that asking 2 - to 4 - year - olds to teach a puppet how to solve a problem improved analogical transfer of the solu - tion to a novel situation . In addition , Brown and Kane ( 1988 , Experiment 7 ) provided 4 - year - old children with three examples of mimicry in the natural world ( i . e . , caterpillars , rats , and beetles ) . When children were asked to explain – for example – why a cater - pillar would want to look like a snake , and then to explain a second example ( e . g . , about mimicry in rats ) , they were more likely to transfer the concept of mimicry to a third example ( e . g . , about mimicry in beetles ) . These effects of explanation on analogical problem solving suggest that when it comes to extracting the moral of a narrative story , explanation could have a beneﬁcial effect by facilitating abstraction . 1 . 2 . Explanation and abstraction Previous research has found that the act of generating explana - tions can be a powerful mechanism for learning , scaffolding knowl - edge acquisition and contributing to theory change ( Chi , Bassok , Lewis , Reimann , & Glaser , 1989 ; Chi , de Leeuw , Chiu , & LaVancher , 1994 ; Fonseca & Chi , 2011 ; Crowley and Siegler , 1999 ; Lombrozo , 2006 , 2012 ; Walker , Lombrozo , Legare , & Gopnik , 2014 ; Wellman & Liu , 2007 ) . Among previous accounts of these effects , several suggest a direct or indirect relationship between explanation and abstraction . At a theoretical level , for example , explanation has been linked to supporting generalization ( e . g . , Lombrozo & Carey , 2006 ) , which beneﬁts from abstract repre - sentations . At a mechanistic level , abstraction could be a conse - quence of the process by which learners generate explanations . In particular , explanations tend to involve an implicit or explicit appeal to an explanatory generalization that subsumes the instance being explained by relating it to a more general frame - work ( Lombrozo , 2006 , 2012 ; Wellman & Liu , 2007 ; Williams & Lombrozo , 2010 , 2013 ) . In so doing , they may highlight the abstract features of a situation in virtue of which the generalization applies , and downplay idiosyncratic particulars . Recent evidence additionally suggests that when learners gen - erate explanations , they tend to favor hypotheses that support good explanations ( Lombrozo , 2016 ) . This introduces a systematic bias in information processing , with consequences for what learn - ers discover , remember , and infer . For example , adults favor expla - nations that are simple ( Lombrozo , 2007 ) and broad ( Read & Marcus - Newhall , 1993 ) , and engaging in explanation can amplify the inﬂuence of these preferences : adults who are prompted to explain the category membership of individual items are more likely to discover simple and broad classiﬁcation rules ( Williams & Lombrozo , 2010 , 2013 ; Williams , Lombrozo , & Rehder , 2013 ) . Even preschool - aged children favor some explanations over others : like adults , they prefer explanations that are simple ( Bonawitz & Lombrozo , 2012 ) and broad ( Walker , Lombrozo , Williams , Rafferty , & Gopnik , 2016 ) , and they prefer explanations that omit extraneous details ( Frazier , Gelman , & Wellman , 2009 ) . As with adults , the inﬂuence of simplicity and breadth is exaggerated when children are explicitly prompted to explain ( Walker , Bonawitz , & Lombrozo , in press ; Walker et al . , 2016 ) . Given that simpler and broader explanations also tend to be more abstract , the process 2 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 of identifying a ‘‘good” explanatory generalization is likely to result in more abstract representations . Consistent with these ideas , there’s evidence suggesting that when prompted to explain , children tend to favor more abstract properties , such as causal relationships , over salient perceptual properties , such as color ( Legare & Lombrozo , 2014 ; Walker , Lombrozo et al . , 2014 ; see also Williams and Lombrozo ( 2010 ) for evidence from adults ) . To illustrate , consider the ﬁrst study reported by Walker , Lombrozo et al . ( 2014 ) , in which preschool - aged children were prompted to explain why ( or report whether ) each object in a set of three did or did not make a machine play music when the object was placed on top of it . Each set contained a target object with the relevant causal property ( making the machine play music ) as well as salient perceptual properties ( e . g . , yellow color and cylindrical shape ) . The other two objects included a causal match ( which similarly activated the machine , but looked different ) and a perceptual match ( which looked just like the target object , but did not activate the machine ) . After each object was placed on the machine and children either explained or reported , the experimenter revealed that the target object had a previously - occluded internal part : a red pin . Children were asked which of the other two objects , the causal match or the perceptual match , was more likely to contain this hidden feature . The 3 - , 4 - , and 5 - year olds in the report condition tended to select the percep - tual match or chose at chance . However , children in the explain condition chose the causal match signiﬁcantly more often than chil - dren in the report condition , and above chance levels . This suggests that generating explanations helped children overcome the allure of the salient perceptual similarities , and instead focus on the potential relationship between internal parts and causal affor - dances . Additional support comes from Legare and Lombrozo ( 2014 ) , who found that children who were prompted to explain how a gear toy worked were more likely than controls to learn how the gears’ size and shape made the machine go , but less likely to recall causally - irrelevant details , such as the colors of the gears . While the work reviewed above offers reasons to expect an association between explanation and abstraction , the evidence itself is indirect . In previous work , a more abstract feature ( e . g . , a causal property ) was pitted against a perceptual feature ( e . g . , color ) . However , it was not necessary for children to abstract these properties from their observations , since they were explicitly pro - vided . Moreover , the competing abstract and concrete representa - tions were representations of different features , not representations of the same content at different levels of abstraction . In the case of moral stories , the child must abstract away from the particulars to extract the lesson , and more abstract and concrete representations for the same story can compete and co - exist . Moral story compre - hension is therefore an ideal task for testing the prediction that explanation facilitates abstraction . Indeed , theme comprehension is widely used in educational contexts as a means for assessing abstraction abilities in children . Further , Williams ( 1993 ) deﬁned the moral [ theme ] of a story as ‘‘expressing a pattern among story components in a form that is abstracted from the speciﬁc story context . . . ” Similarly , Mar and Oatley ( 2008 , p . 176 ) propose that the type of abstraction involved in ﬁctional narrative constitutes ‘‘ . . . an explanation of what goes on beneath the surface to generate observable behavior . ” 1 . 3 . Current research In the studies that follow , we directly investigate the hypothesis that explanation can facilitate 5 - and 6 - year - old children’s abstrac - tion of a moral from a story . We focus on this age group for several reasons . First , the large literature on narrative comprehension ( reviewed above ) suggests that although 5 - to 6 - year - old children likely have the relevant inferential skills to understand simple and familiar narratives , the ability to extract the lesson from a story develops well into the elementary school years and beyond . We therefore selected an age group that would be unlikely to sponta - neously abstract the theme of a story , and could potentially beneﬁt from a prompt to explain ( e . g . , Walker , Gopnik , & Ganea , 2014 ; Walker et al . , in press ) . Second , previous research indicates that by this age , children have many of the basic cognitive prerequisites needed to complete our tasks . By 5 years old , children have intu - itions about what counts as a satisfying explanation ( e . g . , Bonawitz & Lombrozo , 2012 ; Frazier et al . , 2009 ) , produce domain - appropriate explanations ( Hickling & Wellman , 2001 ; Schulz , Bonawitz , & Grifﬁths , 2007 ) , and are able to represent and reason about complex causal relationships ( Carey , 1985 ; Gelman & Wellman , 1991 ; Gopnik & Meltzoff , 1997 ; Inagaki & Hatano , 1993 ; Perner , 1991 ) . In both studies presented below , we test the speciﬁc prediction that prompting children to explain key story events ( without train - ing or feedback ) will make them more likely than children in a con - trol condition to successfully identify , generate , and generalize the moral of the story . Such a ﬁnding would be quite surprising in light of the previous work on narrative comprehension , and additionally provide some evidence for the mechanisms underlying the devel - opment of these abilities . Further , although the predictions are in line with claims from prior work that explanation leads children to shift away from surface similarity , the current research departs from these previous studies in several important and novel ways . First , to our knowledge , these are the ﬁrst studies to directly assess the role of explanation in promoting abstraction in young children . Second , the current studies are the ﬁrst to consider the effects of explanation on learning prescriptive ( moral ) content , which , by deﬁnition , cannot be derived from the descriptive information that is provided . Third , in Study 2 , we compare the effects of explana - tion on abstraction to the effects of directly teaching children the moral of the story . Although a handful of previous studies have examined the relative beneﬁts of explanation versus more tradi - tional pedagogical techniques like direct instruction , this has been in the context of procedural knowledge acquisition ( Rittle - Johnson , 2006 ; Siegler , 1995 ) , not abstraction from a single example . 2 . Study 1 In Study 1 , 5 - and 6 - year - olds were assigned to either explain or report conditions . In both conditions , the experimenter began by reading an illustrated storybook that involved a moral lesson . Chil - dren were then provided with two opportunities to either explain or report the events in the story – once mid - way through and once at the end . Afterwards , children completed four dependent mea - sures , adapted from Narvaez et al . ( 1999 ) , to assess their under - standing of the story’s moral : ( 1 ) memory assessment ( true / false questions about the story ) , ( 2 ) vignette selection ( select a novel vignette that best matches the theme of the original story ) , ( 3 ) theme selection ( forced choice between the theme and a salient sur - face property ) , and ( 4 ) open response ( describe ‘‘the most important thing” learned from the story ) . 2 . 1 . Method 2 . 1 . 1 . Participants A total of 48 5 - and 6 - year - olds ( M = 69 . 7 months ; SD = 8 . 1 , range : 60 . 0 – 85 . 1 ) were included in Study 1 , with 24 children ran - domly assigned to each of two conditions ( explain and report ) . There was no signiﬁcant difference in age between conditions , and there were approximately equal numbers of males and females assigned to each . Two additional children were tested , but excluded for failing to complete the study . Children were C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 3 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 recruited from local preschools and museums , and a range of eth - nicities resembling the diversity of the population was represented . 2 . 1 . 2 . Materials and procedure 2 . 1 . 2 . 1 . Storybook reading . Four 10 - page illustrated storybooks were constructed for this study . All stories depicted human protag - onists engaged in realistic , familiar activities ( helping around the house , playing with children , painting a picture , planting a tree ) , which has been shown to support theme comprehension ( Afﬂerbach , 1990 ; Lehr , 1988 ; Narvaez et al . , 1999 ; Richert & Smith , 2011 ; Walker , Ganea , & Gopnik , 2013 ) . In all stories , a prob - lem was presented and then resolved by afﬁrming the values of the moral . Stories presented a range of morals . ‘‘Tall People” described a boy who looks different from the other people in his town . The townspeople learn that it’s important to be nice to those who are dif - ferent from you . ‘‘Henry the Hero” described a boy who learns that you don’t have to be a superhero to help others . Instead , anyone can be a hero and help people . ‘‘Mr . Muffet’s Apple Tree” described a man who plants some apple seeds in his garden and must wait for them to grow . He learns that good things come to those who wait . ‘‘The Queen’s Painting” concerned several families who each have a favorite color . When they are asked to create a painting for the queen , they learn to combine their colors and work together to achieve something greater . Appendices A – D provide the full script of each story . Storybooks were randomized among participants within each condition . Children were tested individually , seated at a table in a quiet room or corner with the experimenter . After a brief warm - up , the experimenter read the story to the child , interacting naturally and pointing to illustrations . The experimenter introduced the story saying , ‘‘I am going to read you a story , and I want you to pay very close attention because afterwards , I am going to ask you some questions about it . ” The experimenter did not engage with the child in conversation about the content . If a child com - mented on story events during the interaction ( e . g . , ‘‘I have an apple tree in my backyard ! ” ) , the experimenter would acknowl - edge the comment and continue reading . Midway through the storybook , the experimenter would inter - rupt to provide the ﬁrst condition prompt ( see Table 1 ) . In the explain condition , the experimenter would say , ‘‘Can you tell me , why did [ event ] happen ? ” and in the report condition , the experi - menter would say , ‘‘Can you remind me , did [ event ] happen ? ” In each case , the event referred to the problem that was introduced . For example , in Mr . Muffet’s Apple Tree the protagonist plants some apple seeds and is sad that the seeds did not sprout after many days ( problem ) . For this storybook , the mid - story prompt asked ‘‘Can you tell me , why was Mr . Muffet sad ? ” in the explain condi - tion , and ‘‘Remind me , was Mr . Muffet sad ? ” in the report condi - tion . Later in the story , Mr . Muffet’s wife suggests that he be patient , since good things come to those who wait ( lesson ) . At the end of the story , Mr . Muffet has his apple tree and is very happy that he was patient . At the conclusion of the story , the experi - menter would prompt the child again , this time probing for the les - son , saying , ‘‘Can you remind me , [ Can you tell me , why ] was Mr . Muffet happy at the end of the story ? ” All story prompts appear in Appendices A – D . These prompts were the only differences between conditions , and children never received feedback on their responses . Instead , the experimenter provided a neutral response ( ‘‘Okay ! ” ) and continued . 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . Tasks . After reading the story , all children completed sev - eral tasks to measure comprehension and lesson extraction . All tasks appear in order of presentation below . 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Memory assessment . Children were asked a set of four memory questions to ensure their attention and recall . Questions were presented in ‘‘true / false” format . True statements were fac - tual claims endorsed in the storybook . False statements were fac - tual claims that were not endorsed in the story . The experimenter explained , ‘‘Some of the things I say will be right , and some of the things will not be right . I want you to say ‘yes’ to the things that are right and ‘no’ to the things that are not right . ” Each story was accompanied by two true memory questions ( e . g . , ‘‘Mr . Muffet watered his seeds every day” ) and two false memory questions ( e . g . , ‘‘Mr . Muffet wanted to grow oranges” ) , presented in random order . Correct responses were coded as ‘‘1” and incor - rect responses were coded as ‘‘0 . ” Children could receive a total of 4 points . Memory questions for all stories appear in Appendices A – D . 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Open response . Next , children were asked to generate the lesson in an open response . The experimenter said , ‘‘Let’s think about the storybook . There is going to be another kid coming in today , and we have to tell them what we learned about the story . What should we tell them ? What is the most important thing we learned in the story ? ” Children’s answers were recorded and coded as belonging to one of three categories : ( 1 ) lesson - based , ( 2 ) content - based , and ( 3 ) irrelevant . Lesson - based responses were assigned a score of ‘‘1” and all other responses were assigned a score of ‘‘0 . ” 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Vignette selection . Children were then asked to select between pairs of vignettes to assess their recognition of the story lesson in a novel context . Two pairs of vignettes were constructed for each storybook . One set was the lesson probe , designed to pit the lesson of the target story ( e . g . , ‘‘good things come to those who wait” ) against a novel lesson ( e . g . , ‘‘listen to your parents” ) . In this set , both vignettes contained the same novel content ( char - acters , scene , activity ) , which was always different from the con - tent of the target story . The second pair of vignettes was the conﬂict probe ( see Table 2 ) , designed to pit the surface content of the target story against its lesson . In this set , one vignette con - tained content that matched the target story ( same characters , scene , activity ) , but presented a novel lesson . The other vignette presented a lesson that matched the target story , but dif - fered in content ( novel characters , scene , activity ) . All lesson probe and conﬂict probe vignettes for each target story appear in Appendices A – D . 1 Each vignette was presented with four illustrated cards ( see Table 2 ) . The experimenter introduced the task saying , ‘‘I am going to show you two different sets of cards , and each set of cards tells a short story . And then I am going to ask you which set of cards best matches what we learned in the longer storybook that we just read . ” The experimenter would read each card aloud , laying it face up on the table . After all cards had been presented , the child was asked to retell the events in the vignette . If the child had any difﬁ - culty doing this , the experimenter would read the vignette again . After both vignettes were displayed , the experimenter asked , ‘‘Which of these short stories best matches what we learned in the storybook ? ” The presentation of vignettes was counterbal - anced . Children’s selections that were in line with the lesson were coded as ‘‘1 , ” and all other selections were coded as ‘‘0 . ” 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Theme selection . Finally , children were provided with a forced - choice between the lesson and salient surface content of 1 We included one additional pair of vignettes that always appeared last . This ﬁnal vignette pair was intended as a content probe in which the target story’s lesson appeared in both vignettes , but one had content that matched the target story and one did not . The task was confusing for children because the story with matching content was effectively a repetition of the target story . Children performed at chance in both conditions . We therefore exclude this vignette pair from further analyses and discussion . 4 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 Table 1 Sample storybook pages with corresponding mid - story and end - story prompts in each condition , corresponding to the story ‘‘Tall People . ” ( See Appendix D for complete story . ) Prompt Mid - story End - story Storybook page But the villagers kept laughing , and said they didn’t want to play with him . Jocko was so sad that he started to walk back home . . . . . . So Jocko played with the people in Talleg , and it turned out that they all had the most wonderful time even though they weredifferent ! Andfrom thenon , no oneever laughed at Jocko again , and they playedtogether every day ! Report prompt ‘‘Remind me , was Jocko sad ? ” ‘‘Remind me , did the tall people decide to play with Jocko ? Explain prompt ‘‘Tell me , why was Jocko sad ? ” ‘‘Tell me , why did the tall people decide to play with Jocko ? ” Pedagogy prompt ( Study 2 ) ‘‘Jocko was sad because the people in Talleg laughed at him for being different from them . ” ‘‘The tall peopledecided toplay withJocko because itsokay to befriends withpeople who aredifferent from you . ” C . M . W a l k e r , T . L o m b r o z o / C o g n i t i o n xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 5 P l ea s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e i n p r e ss a s : W a l k e r , C . M . , & L o m b r o z o , T . E x p l a i n i n g t h e m o r a l o f t h e s t o r y . C o g n i t i o n ( 2 0 16 ) , h tt p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 16 / j . c o g n i t i o n . 2 0 16 . 11 . 00 7 Table 2 Sample conﬂict probe item , corresponding to the story ‘‘Tall People . ” Participants were asked : ‘‘Which of these short stories best matches what we learned in the storybook ? ” Match type Sample image Probe story text Lesson match Jenny is different from other people , because instead of walking on her feet , she walks on her hands ! The other kids didn’t let Jenny walk to school with them , because they thought it was weird that she walked on her hands . Jenny became very sad , but ﬁnally one of the kids said she could walk with them to school , because it didn’t matter that she walks differently . She walked to school with them , and they had a wonderful time , and they all became very good friends ! Content match The tall people were playing a game and a short person named Jocko asked if he could play with them . First they laughed at him and he became very sad . Then one of the tall people hurt his leg . . . . . . and Jocko was able to help him , and it was so nice that Jocko helped the tall person . 6 C . M . W a l k e r , T . L o m b r o z o / C o g n i t i o n xxx ( 2 016 ) xxx – xxx P l ea s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e i n p r e ss a s : W a l k e r , C . M . , & L o m b r o z o , T . E x p l a i n i n g t h e m o r a l o f t h e s t o r y . C o g n i t i o n ( 2 0 16 ) , h t t p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 16 / j . c o g n i t i o n . 2 0 16 . 11 . 00 7 the target story , and asked to select ‘‘the most important thing” they learned from the storybook . The experimenter said , ‘‘Another kid was here today , and he said that the most important thing that we learned was [ the lesson ] . And another kid said that the most important thing that we learned was [ surface content ] . ” For exam - ple , in ‘‘Mr . Muffet’s Apple Tree , ” the prompt pit the lesson that ‘‘good things come to those who wait , ” against the content that ‘‘plants take a long time to grow . ” In order to reduce memory demands , each of these options was accompanied by an illustrated card that was laid on the table and represented each choice . The order of presentation of these cards was counterbalanced between subjects . Children’s selections in line with the story lesson were coded as ‘‘1” and selections in line with the surface content were coded as ‘‘0 . ” All theme selection choices appear in Appendices A – D . 2 . 1 . 2 . 3 . Coding . All of children’s responses were coded by a second researcher during test sessions and also video recorded for reliabil - ity purposes . Sixty - three percent of videos were available for reli - ability coding . A second researcher who was naïve to the purpose of the experiment recoded all responses from available videos . Inter - rater reliability on all true / false and binary selection tasks was very high ; the two coders agreed on more than 99 % of chil - dren’s responses . Inter - rater reliability for coding the open response task was somewhat lower , with the twocoders agreeing on 88 % of children’s responses . All disagreements were settled by discussion among the two researchers and a third party . 2 . 2 . Results and discussion To test the hypothesis that prompts to explain can facilitate children’s ability to extract the moral from each story , we com - pared performance across the explain and report conditions for each of our dependent variables . First , a univariate ANOVA was conducted to assess differences in children’s recall ( out of 4 memory questions ) between condi - tions ( explain , report ) . Explaining did not lead to better recall of story content , with children in the explain ( M = 3 . 8 , SD = 0 . 51 ) and report ( M = 3 . 7 , SD = 0 . 44 ) conditions recalling story content equally well , F ( 1 , 46 ) = 0 . 092 , p = 0 . 76 . These results provide some evidence that any effects of explanation cannot be reduced to an indiscriminate increase in attention to story content . As a more sensitive measure , we also analyzed only those memory questions that referred to content presented after the ﬁrst experimental prompt . All but one of the stories ( Tall People ) included two questions from before the mid - story prompt and two questions from after the mid - story prompt ( see Appendices A – D ) . There were no differences in recall for events occurring either before ( M = 1 . 78 ) or after ( M = 1 . 94 ) the mid - point explanation prompt , t ( 34 ) = (cid:1) 1 . 45 , p = 0 . 16 . There were also no differences in recall between report ( M = 1 . 94 ) and explain ( M = 1 . 94 ) conditions on those mem - ory questions that occurred after the mid - story prompt , t ( 34 ) = 0 , p = 1 . 0 . However , memory scores were uniformly high , which may indicate that questions were not sensitive enough to pick up on possible differences . We next focused on the dependent measures designed to assess whether children had successfully extracted the story’s lesson : the lesson probe , conﬂict probe , theme selection , and open response ( see Fig . 1 ) . While each measure is importantly distinct , we began with an omnibus test to capture global trends and reduce the probabil - ity of Type I errors from performing multiple independent tests . To do so , we generated a total score ( out of 4 ) for each participant by summing scores across all four tasks . A univariate ANOVA with condition ( explain and report ) as the independent variable and total score ( out of 4 ) as the dependent variable revealed a main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 46 ) = 6 . 68 , p < 0 . 02 , g p 2 = 0 . 127 , with children in the explain condition signﬁcantly more likely to privilege the lesson across tasks ( M = 2 . 7 , SD = 1 . 0 ) than children in the report condition ( M = 1 . 8 , SD = 1 . 3 ) . This pattern held for each of the four stories . We also performed independent analyses of each task with Chi - Square tests . Children who were prompted to explain per - formed signiﬁcantly better than those prompted to report on the lesson probe , v 2 ( 1 ) = 5 . 5 , p < 0 . 02 , and theme selection , v 2 ( 1 ) = 4 . 5 , p < 0 . 04 , tasks . Moreover , while children prompted to explain performed above chance on both tasks ( lesson probe : p < 0 . 03 ; theme selection : p < 0 . 001 ) , children who were prompted to report did not ( lesson probe : p = 0 . 54 , theme selection : p = 0 . 31 ) . For the more challenging conﬂict probe vignette , there was no signiﬁcant difference between explain and report conditions , v 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 765 , p = 0 . 38 , with both groups performing at chance levels ( explain : p = 1 . 0 , report : p = 0 . 15 ) . Finally , children who explained also pro - vided signﬁcantly more lesson - based responses ( 50 % ) in their open response , compared with children who reported ( 33 % ) , v 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 4 , p < 0 . 05 . Thirty - seven percent of explainers and 47 % of reporters offered a content - based response , with all remaining children ( explain = 13 % and report = 20 % ) offering irrelevant responses . Although we coded the content of children’s explanations in the explain condition , very few children provided a lesson - relevant explanation in response to the prompt ( 29 % ) , with all remaining children noting surface content of the story . It was therefore not 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Lesson Probe Conflict Probe Theme Selection Open Response P r o p o r t i o n o f L e ss o n R e s p o n s e s Explain Report Fig . 1 . Proportion of children who privileged the lesson in the lesson probe vignette , conﬂict probe vignette , theme selection , and open response in the explain and report conditions of Study 1 . The dashed line indicates chance performance ( except for the open response task , for which chance performance is not well deﬁned ) . Error bars indicate standard error of the proportion . C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 7 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 possible to perform additional analyses on these data , though it is noteworthy that the explain prompt facilitated lesson extraction despite the fact that the lesson appeared in a minority of children’s explanations . 3 . Study 2 In Study 1 , we found that explanation facilitated children’s abil - ity to extract the moral of the story and recognize this moral in novel contexts . In Study 2 , we further explored these results by including several additional probes . First , we included more difﬁ - cult memory questions in order to ensure that the effects of expla - nation are not just a downstream consequence of increased attention or engagement . Second , we included a brief training in what constitutes a story’s ‘‘lesson” to disambiguate requests for what children learned from each story . Third , we assessed whether explaining during learning would help children generalize the les - son of the story to a novel , open - ended moral reasoning problem . To do so , children were asked to reason about a real - world event involving the experimenter . Study 2 also included a ‘‘ pedagogy ” prompt condition in addi - tion to the explain and report conditions from Study 1 . Recent research suggests that children’s interpretation of evidence may vary depending on whether learning occurs in pedagogical or non - pedagogical contexts ( Bonawitz et al . , 2011 ; Buchsbaum , Gopnik , Grifﬁths , & Shafto , 2011 ; Rhodes , Gelman , & Brickman , 2010 ; Shafto , Goodman , & Frank , 2012 ) , and there’s also evidence that the effects of self - generated explanations can sometimes dif - fer from those of experimenter - provided explanations or direct instruction ( e . g . , Rittle - Johnson , 2006 ; Wittwer & Renkl , 2008 ; but see Crowley & Siegler , 1999 ) . Like explanations , pedagogical cues can promote attention to inductively rich features ( Csibra & Gergely , 2006 , 2009 ) . On the other hand , explaining is a construc - tive activity , whereas passively receiving instruction is not ( Chi , 2009 ) . Evidence exists for the beneﬁts of both types of learning ( Rittle - Johnson , 2006 ) . Direct instruction has been demonstrated to be particularly effective in providing well - structured schemas in contexts in which working memory limitations prevent children from coordinating information ( e . g . , Sweller , van Merrienboer , & Paas , 1998 ) . We might therefore predict that direct instruction would be particularly beneﬁcial in this context . On the other hand , the beneﬁts of explanation observed in Study 1 occurred even though children rarely offered the lesson in their explanations , suggesting that the process of generating explanations could have promoted more abstract representations . We were thus interested in how the effects of explanation compare to a more traditional pedagogical technique , namely direct instruction . 3 . 1 . Method 3 . 1 . 1 . Participants A total of 96 5 - and 6 - year - olds ( M = 69 . 5 months ; SD = 6 . 2 ; range : 59 . 3 – 83 . 3 ) were included in Study 2 , with 32 children ran - domly assigned to each of three conditions ( explain , report , and pedagogy ) . There were no signiﬁcant differences in age across con - ditions , and there were approximately equal numbers of males and females assigned to each group . Seven additional children were tested , but excluded . Four of these exclusions were due to failure to complete the study and three were due to interference by the caregiver . Recruitment procedures were identical to those used in Study 1 . 3 . 1 . 2 . Materials and procedure 3 . 1 . 2 . 1 . Storybook reading . In Study 2 , we selected two of the four stories ( ‘‘Tall People” and ‘‘The Queen’s Painting” ) from Study 1 and randomly assigned half of the children in each condition to receive each one . The same prompts that appeared in Study 1 were used in the report and explain conditions in Study 2 . In the new ped - agogy condition , children were simply provided with a statement of the problem and the lesson of the target story in lieu of the mid - story and end prompts ( see Table 1 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 . 2 . Tasks . After reading the story , children completed several tasks to measure comprehension , lesson extraction , and general - ization . Tasks appear in order of presentation below . 3 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Memory assessment . In Study 2 , four additional memory questions were added to the original four , for a total of eight ques - tions . These questions were designed to be more challenging than those in Study 1 to provide a more sensitive measure . These mem - ory questions appear in Appendices C and D . Correct responses were coded as ‘‘1” and incorrect responses were coded as ‘‘0 . ” Chil - dren could receive a total of 8 points . 3 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Lesson training . To aid children in reasoning about the lesson of the storybooks , we added a lesson training in which the experimenter deﬁned the term ‘‘lesson , ” saying , ‘‘I want to teach you what a lesson is . Some stories have a moral or a lesson – which is what the person who made up the story wanted us to learn from it . Do you think that this story has a lesson ? I want you to think about what the person who made up the story wanted us to learn from it . ” By adding this instruction , we hoped to decrease any ambiguity in the prompt . 3 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Vignette selection . Materials and procedures for the vign - ette selection task were identical to those used in Study 1 ( see Table 2 ) . However , the instructions were revised to improve clarity and incorporate the new lesson training . The experimenter said , ‘‘I’m going to show you two different sets of cards . Each set of cards tells a short story . Then , I will ask you which set of cards best matches the lesson of the story about [ story title ] . I want you to pick the one that best matches what the person who made up the story wanted us to learn . Remember , you only get to choose one set of cards , so we have to choose the one that best matches what the author wanted us to learn from the story . ” 3 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Generalization task . Finally , we added a generalization task , in which children were given an opportunity to apply the les - son from the target story in reasoning about a novel , real world sit - uation . The generalization task was presented in ﬁrst person , as a real event that had occurred to the experimenter that day . Unlike the vignette selection task , the generalization task required that children reason outside of a ﬁctional context . For example , in ‘‘The Queen’s Painting , ” the experimenter said , ‘‘ I went to the store today with my brother to buy ﬂowers for our mom’s birthday ! I only had one dollar , and my brother also only had one dollar . When we got to the store , there were small ﬂowers for one dollar , or big bunches of ﬂowers for two dollars . What should my brother and I do ? ” By applying the lesson from ‘‘The Queen’s Painting” to this novel , real world situation , children might suggest working together and com - bining their resources to purchase the big bunch of ﬂowers . The generalization prompts for both stories appear in Appendices C and D . Children were provided with an illustrated card that repre - sented the novel situation as it was described . Children’s responses that were in line with the lesson were coded as ‘‘1” and all other responses were coded as ‘‘0 . ” Children’s responses were coded by a second researcher during test sessions and also video recorded for reliability purposes . Ninety - four percent of videos were available for reliability coding . A second researcher who was naïve to the purpose of the experi - ment recoded all responses from available videos . Inter - rater reli - ability on all true / false and binary selection tasks was very high ; the two coders agreed on more than 99 % of children’s responses . Inter - rater reliability for coding the open response and generaliza - tion task also relatively high , with the two - coders agreeing on 92 % 8 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 of children’s responses . All disagreements were settled by discus - sion among the two researchers and a third party . 3 . 2 . Results and discussion First , a univariate ANOVA was conducted to assess differences in children’s recall ( out of eight memory questions ) across condi - tions ( explain , report , and pedagogy ) . Even with the inclusion of more difﬁcult memory questions , explaining did not lead to better recall , F ( 2 , 93 ) = 0 . 802 , p = 0 . 45 , with children in the explain ( M = 5 . 7 , SD = 1 . 1 ) , report ( M = 6 . 0 , SD = 0 . 91 ) , and pedagogy ( M = 5 . 7 , SD = 1 . 3 ) conditions recalling story content equally well . Unlike Study 1 , performance was not at ceiling . These data provide stronger evidence that effects of explanation cannot be reduced to an increase in overall attention to or engagement with story content . Following Study 1 , we generated a total score ( out of 5 ) for each participant by summing scores on all tasks designed to reﬂect chil - dren’s recognition of the story’s moral : lesson probe , conﬂict probe , theme selection , open response , and generalization . A univariate ANOVA with condition ( explain , pedagogy , and report ) as the inde - pendent variable and total score ( out of 5 ) as the dependent vari - able revealed a main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 93 ) = 4 . 20 , p < 0 . 02 , g p2 = 0 . 083 , with children in the explain condition privileging the lesson most often across tasks ( M = 3 . 6 , SD = 1 . 0 ) , and children in the pedagogy and report conditions privileging the lesson less often across tasks ( M = 3 . 0 , SD = 1 . 0 and M = 2 . 9 , SD = 1 . 1 , respectively ) . There was a signiﬁcant difference in this total score between the explain condition and both the report ( p < 0 . 01 ) and pedagogy ( p < 0 . 03 ) conditions , with no signiﬁcant difference in this total score between the report and pedagogy conditions ( p = 0 . 72 ) . This pattern of performance – with the children in the explain condition most likely to privilege the lesson , followed by those in pedagogy and then in report – was found for each of the two stories tested . We also assessed the presence of condition differences on each individual task using Chi - Squared tests ( see Fig . 2 ) . First , the addi - tion of the lesson training to the procedure in Study 2 led to sub - stantial differences in performance ( relative to Study 1 ) on several tasks . In particular , children in all conditions privileged the lesson more often than chance on the lesson probe vignette ( report : p < 0 . 001 , explain : p < 0 . 001 , and pedagogy : p < 0 . 05 ) , with no signiﬁcant differences across the three conditions , v 2 ( 2 ) = 4 . 1 , p = 0 . 13 . For the most challenging task , the conﬂict probe , we did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect of condition , v 2 ( 2 ) = 7 . 6 , p < 0 . 03 . Children prompted to explain privileged the lesson more often than children in the report , v 2 ( 1 ) = 13 . 07 , p < 0 . 001 or pedagogy , v 2 ( 1 ) = 14 . 77 , p < 0 . 001 ) conditions , with no signiﬁcant difference between report and pedagogy , v 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 07 , p = 0 . 80 . Moreover , children prompted to explain privileged the lesson more often than chance , p < 0 . 05 , while those in the report and pedagogy conditions responded at chance levels , with p = 0 . 37 and p = 0 . 22 , respectively . For the theme selection task , children in all conditions selected the correct theme more often than chance ( p s < 0 . 001 ) , with no signiﬁcant dif - ferences across explain , report , and pedagogy conditions , v 2 ( 2 ) = 0 . 18 , p = 0 . 92 . In the open - ended measures , there was a signiﬁcant effect of condition on performance in the open response task , v 2 ( 2 ) = 6 . 8 , p < 0 . 04 . Children in the explain condition provided signiﬁcantly more lesson - based responses ( 41 % ) than children in the report con - dition ( 13 % ) , v 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 5 , p < 0 . 02 . Children in the pedagogy condi - tion also provided signiﬁcantly more lesson - based responses ( 34 % ) than children in the report condition ( 13 % ) , v 2 ( 1 ) = 4 . 27 , p < 0 . 04 . There was no difference between the explain and pedagogy conditions , v 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 27 , p = 0 . 60 . Children’s responses in the generalization task were coded according to whether they applied the lesson to a novel , real - world context . Eighty - four percent of children in the explain condi - tion , 72 % of children in the pedagogy condition , and 63 % of children in the report condition successfully applied the lesson . Children in the explain condition generalized the lesson signiﬁcantly more often than children in the report condition , v 2 ( 1 ) = 3 . 9 , p < 0 . 05 . Performance of the children in the pedagogy condition fell between that of children in the explain and report conditions , and there was no signiﬁcant difference between the explain and pedagogy condi - tions , v 2 ( 1 ) = 1 . 5 , p = 0 . 23 , nor between the pedagogy and report conditions , v 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 64 , p = 0 . 42 . Finally , we again coded the content of children’s explanations in response to the prompt at the conclusion of the storybook in the explain condition . However , very few children provided a lesson - relevant explanation in response to the prompt ( 9 % ) , with all remaining children noting surface content of the story . As in Study 1 , it was not possible to perform additional analyses on these data , but it’s interesting to note that explanation was so beneﬁcial in promoting children’s learning of a story’s moral even when the content of the explanations focused elsewhere . In sum , the results of Study 2 provide additional support for the claim that explanation facilitates children’s ability to abstract the moral of a story , recognize the moral when it is presented in novel contexts , privilege the moral over story content , and use the moral in reasoning about a novel situation . In addition , results of the gen - eralization task demonstrate that children who explain not only learn the moral of the story and recognize it in other story con - texts , but also extend that moral to inform their reasoning about the real world . Finally , in some cases , the effect of explanation went above and beyond the effect of a pedagogical intervention , in which children were explicitly provided with the lesson . 4 . General discussion Across two experiments , we ﬁnd that prompting young children to explain makes them more likely to recognize and identify the moral of a story , even when doing so requires them to favor abstract themes over surface content . In Study 1 , children who explained were more likely to identify the lesson in a novel con - text , select the lesson in a forced choice , and generate the lesson in an open response . In line with previous research , children in the control condition based their judgments on surface similarity . In Study 2 , the effect of explanation emerged for a more challeng - ing probe , which pit the lesson of the story against salient surface details , and in a novel generalization task , which required children to apply the lesson to an open - ended reasoning problem . In addi - tion , explaining produced beneﬁts above and beyond direct instruction , for which children were explicitly told the moral of the story . The comparison between generating explanations and direct instruction provides strong evidence that the cognitive beneﬁts of explanation are not simply a byproduct of drawing the learner’s attention to the moral . Moreover , the fact that we saw no differ - ences in memory between conditions in either study challenges the idea that explanation produces a general beneﬁt for learning by globally and indiscriminately increasing engagement or motiva - tion . Instead , it appears that the process of explaining generates selective effects on children’s learning , facilitating the abstraction and application of a story’s moral . These results provide empirical support for an emerging theoretical perspective on the unique and selective effects of explanation on early learning and inference ( Legare & Lombrozo , 2014 ; Lombrozo & Vasilyeva , in press ; Walker , Gopnik et al . , 2014 ; Walker , Lombrozo et al . , 2014 ; Walker et al . , in press ; Wilkenfeld & Lombrozo , 2015 ) , but are C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 9 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 the ﬁrst to provide direct evidence of a role for explanation in chil - dren’s formation of more abstract representations . Our results go beyond prior work in a number of other ways , as well . Perhaps most strikingly , this is the ﬁrst study to demonstrate success on moral theme comprehension in children of this age . Prior work overwhelmingly ﬁnds that children in our age range ( and even older ) focus on surface details ( e . g . , van den Broek , 1997 ; Van den Broek , Lorch , Linderholm , & Gustafson , 2001 ; see also Gelman , 2003 ; Keil , 1989 ; Sobel , Yoachim , Gopnik , Meltzoff , & Blumenthal , 2007 ; Wellman & Gelman , 1992 ) . For example , Taylor ( 1986 ) found that although 9 - to 11 - year - olds had no difﬁ - culty summarizing the plot of a narrative , they were unable to summarize the theme ( deﬁned as the ‘‘point” of the story ) . The ability to extract the theme of a story requires generalizing from the literal level of the text to pull out the main point ( Kintsch & van Dijk , 1978 ) . This is a difﬁcult task ; the theme is rarely con - structed from a story automatically , even in adults ( e . g . , Afﬂerbach , 1990 ; Williams , 1993 ) . Some have argued that younger children lack the cognitive or conceptual prerequisites to achieve this construction ( e . g . , Narvaez , 2002 ; Perfetti , 1985 ; van den Broek , Lorch , & Thurlow , 1997 ) , regardless of the type of interven - tion applied . Others argue that narrative comprehension is an inferential skill that develops more continuously , with theme extraction occurring later in development ( e . g . , Goldman , 1985 ; van den Broek , 1997 ; van den Broek et al . , 2005 ) , or that differences in prior knowledge account for age - related changes ( e . g . , Afﬂerbach , 1990 ) . Our ﬁndings instead reveal that even 5 – 6 - year - old children can extract the theme of the story following a minimal prompt . This suggests that young children do have the cognitive and conceptual resources , as well as the prior knowledge , to abstract the theme of a story – under appropriate conditions . It is therefore not the case that children in this age range can’t abstract the moral , but that they don’t . By cueing them to the correct level of analysis , they are able to extract the theme of the story and rec - ognize abstract similarity . Our ﬁndings also identify a process that helps children succeed in theme abstraction : engaging in explanation . How does expla - nation generate this effect ? In prior work , we have proposed that explaining recruits speciﬁc constraints on learning , changing how information is evaluated by encouraging learners to privilege those hypotheses that offer ‘‘good” explanations ( Lombrozo , 2016 ; Lombrozo & Vasilyeva , in press ; Walker , Gopnik et al . , 2014 ; Walker , Lombrozo et al . , 2014 ; Walker et al . , in press ; Williams & Lombrozo , 2010 , 2013 ; Williams et al . , 2013 ) , in par - ticular those that are simple ( Bonawitz & Lombrozo , 2012 ) , broad ( Walker et al . , 2016 ) , and consistent with prior knowledge ( Walker et al . , 2016 ) . One possibility , then , is that when children were prompted to explain key events in the story , they relied more heavily on prior knowledge to identify a broad and simple principle that could account for the events . In so doing , idiosyn - cratic surface content was demoted in favor of the more abstract features of the narrative that conformed to the explanatory gener - alization . For example , in explaining why Jocko was sad in the story ‘‘Tall People , ” children would naturally recruit prior knowl - edge about what might cause sadness , and search for explanatory generalizations to differentiate the actual state of affairs ( Jocko is sad ) from an implied alternative ( Jocko is not sad ) , with a prefer - ence for those generalizations that explained the most story con - tent ( breadth ) without making many additional assumptions ( simplicity ) . The result of this process would be the identiﬁcation of an explanatory generalization formulated in terms of social exclusion broadly ( or being ‘‘left out” for being different ) , not in terms of the details of the story ( e . g . , exclusion due to height , exclusion in the context of play ) . One alternative possibility is that being prompted to explain promoted ‘‘deeper processing . ” In particular , being asked ‘‘deeper” questions as probes could have signaled children to produce ‘‘deeper” responses at test . One reason to doubt this alternative comes from the selectivity of the observed effects – it is not obvi - ous that ‘‘deeper processing” should lead children to uncover the moral of the story , in particular , rather than leading them to elab - orate on the content or engage in some other form of processing . It is also notable that explanation led children to generate the intended theme , rather than inventing their own theme – as has been demonstrated in previous work ( e . g . , Lehr , 1988 , 1991 ) . Per - haps most tellingly , previous research in theme comprehension has not shown marked improvement following similar ‘‘deep” probes . For example , Williams et al . ( 2002 , 2005 ) developed an instructional program to help students learn about the concept of a ‘‘theme , ” identify the theme in stories , and apply them to real world situations . This program included teacher explanation and modeling , guided practice , and independent practice . In one study , elementary - aged children participated in a total of 14 lessons , each organized around a single story . Children read the story aloud , engaged in discussion of the theme using organizing questions and probes , identiﬁed the theme , transferred the theme to other stories , and engaged in a variety of other enrichment activities . Afterwards , 2nd and 3rd grade students were still unable to apply the theme to a real world context or transfer skills to uninstructed themes . If any form of ‘‘deep” processing is sufﬁcient to promote 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Lesson Probe Conflict Probe Theme Selection Open Response Generalization P r o p o r t i o n o f L e ss o n R e s p o n s e s Explain Pedagogy Report Fig . 2 . Proportion of children who privileged the lesson for each relevant task in the explain , pedagogy , and report conditions of Study 2 . The dashed line indicates chance performance for the Lesson Probe , Conﬂict Probe , and Theme Selection tasks ( chance performance is not well deﬁned for Open Response or Generalization ) . Error bars indicate standard error for each proportion . 10 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 theme learning , it is quite surprising that these interventions were not more effective . Our ﬁndings also shed light on the differential effects of gener - ated versus instructional explanations . Previous research compar - ing the effects of explanation to those of direct instruction has focused on the acquisition of particular procedures , such as solving mathematical equivalence problems or executing tic - tac - toe strategies . In one such study , prompts to explain led to improve - ments in procedural learning and transfer over and above direct instruction in 3rd through 5th graders ( Rittle - Johnson , 2006 ) . However , other experimental evidence indicates that providing children with high quality explanations of the same mathematical equivalence problems is sufﬁcient to support learning and transfer ( e . g . , Perry , 1991 ; Rittle - Johnson & Alibali , 1999 ) . Relatedly , Crowley and Siegler ( 1999 ) found that the facilitative effect of explanation on procedural knowledge did not vary based on whether children generated correct explanations on their own , or adopted correct explanations that were provided by an experi - menter . Our ﬁndings instead suggest that when it comes to extracting and applying an abstract representation from a single example , explanation can be more beneﬁcial than instruction , and that the beneﬁts are not restricted to children who produce correct explanations . This naturally raises the question of how explaining affected children’s performance , if not through the theme - related content of the explanations themselves . Our ﬁnding is consistent with prior research , which has found that preschoolers who are prompted to explain often show a more sophisticated pattern of responses on later inferences , even when the content of their explanations falls short of the more mature pattern ( Walker , Gopnik et al . , 2014 ; Walker , Lombrozo et al . , 2014 ; Walker et al . , 2016 ; Walker et al . , in press ) . Elsewhere , we have proposed several mechanisms by which explanation could have indirect but beneﬁcial effects ( see also , Wilkenfeld & Lombrozo , 2015 ) . For example , generating an incorrect explanation could help learners identify gaps or inconsis - tencies in their current understanding ( e . g . , Chi , 2000 ) . Explaining could also encourage other cognitive processes , such as compar - ison ( e . g . , Edwards , Williams , Gentner , & Lombrozo , 2014 ) , that could change a learner’s representation of the hypothesis space , carrying downstream implications . On these views , engaging in explanation helped children to appreciate the abstract structure of the story , even if it fell short of delivering the moral lesson in the explanation itself . Finally , our ﬁndings are the ﬁrst ( to our knowledge ) to demon - strate effects of explanation prompts on learning normative con - tent . The studies reported here required children to learn a prescriptive ( moral ) lesson from a single narrative , not a descrip - tive generalization from multiple observations . It is thus all the more remarkable that explanation had reliable effects , and that the effects so closely paralleled those found in prior work . This sug - gests that the mechanisms involved in explanation - based learning may be domain - general , though to the extent that prior knowledge is invoked through explanation , the speciﬁc effects of that prior knowledge will also be a function of its ( domain - speciﬁc ) content . Even if the mechanisms that underlie explanation - based learn - ing are quite general , there are reasons to suspect that explanation could play a particularly central role in moral learning . Unlike more typical examples of observational learning , prescriptive con - tent necessarily goes beyond the data observed : you might observe a child cry when she is excluded from play for being different , but you don’t ‘‘observe” that it is wrong to exclude others on this basis . It’s likely , then , that moral learning is especially dependent on inferential mechanisms that aren’t strictly data - driven and bottom - up . Explaining to oneself ( without new data , as in our experiments ) is one candidate mechanism , as are inductive and deductive reasoning , analogy , and mental simulation , to name a few . These are all mechanisms that support what we call ‘‘learning by thinking” ( Lombrozo , in press ; Lombrozo & Walker , in prepara - tion ) : cases of genuine learning or insight that occur in the absence of novel data from ‘‘outside the head . ” Like thought experiments , explaining can help us leverage what we already know in order to extract novel conclusions – in this case prescriptive lessons about moral virtues or how to treat others . Future work could extend these results beyond moral learning to explore whether explanation and other forms of learning by thinking can also inﬂu - ence moral behavior . To conclude , we ﬁnd that 5 - and 6 - year - old children can suc - cessfully extract the moral lesson from a story , and that prompts to explain key events in the story signiﬁcantly support their ability to do so . This ﬁnding is surprising in light of prior work suggesting that children lack the cognitive or conceptual prerequisites to suc - ceed , and in light of the fact that our intervention – prompts to explain – did not provide children with novel evidence or feedback . The beneﬁts that we report are therefore instances of ‘‘learning by thinking , ” and provide evidence for the existence of cognitive pro - cesses that impose top - down constraints on how evidence and prior knowledge are recruited , interpreted , or deployed . Such pro - cesses are likely central to all learning , and play a special role when it comes to content that is not strictly descriptive , as in the moral domain . Acknowledgments Research was funded by grants from the National Science Foun - dation ( Grant DRL - 1056712 ) , the John Templeton Foundation’s Project on Varieties of Understanding , the James S . McDonnell Foun - dation Scholar Award in Understanding Human Cognition to T . Lom - brozo , and the American Psychological Foundation ( Elizabeth Munsterberg Koppitz ) to C . M . Walker . The authors thank the par - ents and children who participated in this research . We are also grateful to the University of California , Berkeley Early Childhood Centers , the Lawrence Hall of Science , the Childhood Creativity Center at the Bay Area Discovery Museum , and Habitot for facilitat - ing recruitment . We thank Alison Gopnik for her contribution in developing this project . Thanks also to Rebecca Herd , Bridget McDonnell , Sari Christine Rickansrud , and Sophie Bridgers for their assistance with data collection . A special thanks to Jacob Schatz for his contribution to writing the stories and vignettes used in this study . Finally , we thank Katie Chen , Phoenix Delman , Ashley Pear - sol , and Melody Wang for providing storybook and vignette illustrations . Appendix A . Henry the hero story , prompts , and tasks A . 1 . Henry the hero ( Lesson : ‘‘Anybody can help ” ) Henry sat on the ﬂoor at school listening to his teacher , Mrs . Peach . Mrs . Peach was talking about helping . ‘‘Henry , ” she said , ‘‘can you think of someone who helps other people ? ” ‘‘Yeah , heroes help people and they have big muscles and he ﬁghts bad guys and they can ﬂy ! ” Henry said . ‘‘That’s right , heroes do help people ! ” Mrs . Peach replied . ‘‘But not only heroes help people , regular people can help too ! ” Later that day , Henry went home , still thinking about heroes and helpers . He put on his blue pajamas and draped his red towel like a cape over his back . Then he ran into the kitchen and saw his dad reaching for a plate in a cabinet way up high ! ‘‘I’ll help you daddy ! ” he said like a superhero . ‘‘I am a super - hero , so I can get that plate down for you ! ” He reached and reached , and jumped as high as he could , but Henry couldn’t reach C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 11 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 the plate ! Finally he was so tired . ‘‘Oh no ! Why can’t I help ? ? I’m a superhero ! ! ” ‘‘That’s okay , ” Henry’s dad said . ‘‘I’m sure you can help with other things . ” ‘‘I know what I’ll do ! ” Henry thought to himself , ‘‘I’ll put on a mask . Maybe that will make me a hero so I can help people ! ” So he ran to his room and found a silly mask . He put it on , and went outside . He found his mom carrying something really heavy into the house . ‘‘I’ll help you mommy ! ” he said , like a superhero . ‘‘I am a super - hero , so I can carry that box in for you ! ” He tried to pick up the box , but it wouldn’t budge – it was too heavy ! ! He tried and tried , until he was so tired . ‘‘I still can’t help ! But why not ? ? I am a superhero ! ” ‘‘Henry , ” his mom said , ‘‘is that why you are all dressed up ? ” ‘‘I want to be a hero so I can help people ! ” he replied , ‘‘so I put on my hero outﬁt and I’m trying to ﬁnd ways to help ! ” [ Mid - story prompt ] ‘‘But , ” his mom said , ‘‘you don’t have to be a superhero to help people , and you don’t have to wear a cape or a mask either . ” ‘‘But my teacher said I could be a hero ! ” ‘‘She was right ! You can be a hero , but not all heroes have super strength and wear masks ! Most heroes wear normal clothes , just like you and me ! ” So Henry took off his red cape and his silly mask and his blue pajamas , and put on his regular clothes , and ate a regular dinner , and went to bed . He didn’t know how he was going to be a hero without wearing hero clothes and having super strength . The next morning , as Henry walked into the kitchen , he saw his dad reaching for something underneath the counter . But his hands were too big too ﬁt in the small crack , so he couldn’t reach it ! ‘‘Henry , ” he said , ‘‘could you help me and reach for the fork I dropped ? ” So Henry reached with his smaller hands and got the fork out very easily . ‘‘Thank you so much , Henry ! ” he said , ‘‘you helped me so much ! ” Henry was so happy , because he ﬁnally knew that he could do what heroes do - even without a cape or a mask . A . 2 . Prompts for Henry the hero Mid - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , did Henry dress up like a super hero ? ” Mid - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why did Henry dress up like a super hero ? ” End - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was Henry happy at the end of the story , even though he wasn’t dressed like a super hero ? ” End - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was Henry happy at the end of the story , even though he wasn’t dressed like a super hero ? ” A . 3 . Memory questions for Henry the hero Is Henry able to get the plate down by himself ? ( no ) Is the box too heavy for Henry to carry ? ( yes ) Is Henry able to pick up the fork for his dad ? ( yes ) Does Henry’s cape turn him into a super hero ? ( no ) A . 4 . Vignettes for Henry the hero A . 4 . 1 . Lesson probe Diff . content / Diff . lesson : Mandy’s mom was cooking lunch . Mandy was feeling silly so she started calling her mom ‘‘lunch lady” , which made her mom upset . Mandy’s mom told her that calling people names makes them upset and it isn’t very nice , so Mandy decided not to call her mom ‘‘lunch lady” because she didn’t want to hurt her feelings . Diff . content / Same lesson : Mandy’s mom was cooking lunch . Mandy decided to set the table so that her mom could ﬁnish cook - ing sooner . When they sat down for lunch , the food was delicious and Mandy felt so good that she could help her mom prepare for lunch . A . 4 . 2 . Conﬂict probe Same content / Diff . lesson : Henry was learning in class about peo - ple who help other people . He went home and dressed up like a superhero and bragged to his friends that he was cooler than them . Their feelings were hurt , and Henry noticed that it wasn’t nice or fun to brag to anyone . He said sorry to his friends for bragging . Diff . content / Same lesson : School was over , and all of the parents came to pick up their kids . But some of the kids were playing with the blocks and didn’t clean up when their parents came to take them home ! Brandon saw the messy area with all the blocks , and decided to clean the blocks up so that his teacher wouldn’t have to do the work all on her own . When his teacher saw him cleaning up the blocks , she said thank you and Brandon felt so good that he helped clean up after his friends ! A . 4 . 3 . Theme selection for Henry the hero Lesson : Anyone can be a hero and help other people . Surface content : Superheroes wear capes and masks and help other people . Appendix B . Mr . Muffett’s apple tree story , prompts , and tasks B . 1 . Muffett’s apple tree ( It is good to be patient / Good things come to those who wait ) Mr . Muffett lived with his wife and children in a beautiful house . The only thing he wanted to change about his house was his garden ! There wasn’t anything there except dirt , a few patches of grass , and weeds everywhere ! ‘‘I know what I want , ” he said to himself one day . ‘‘I want my own fresh apples , and I want a beautiful garden ! I’ll grow an apple tree ! ” So Mr . Muffett went to the nearest plant shop and asked the owner for some apple seeds to plant in his backyard . ‘‘Are you sure you want to grow an apple tree ? ” ‘‘I am sure ! ” replied Mr . Muffett . So he paid for his apple seeds and rushed home to plant them . Mr . Muffett planted the seeds right in the center of his garden , where the sun would shine the most . He dug a hole and placed the seeds inside . He patted the dirt down on top of the seeds , and then watered the patch of dirt . ‘‘I am so excited for my apple tree ! ” Mr . Muffett thought to him - self as he went inside his house for dinner . The next morning , Mr . Muffett jumped out of bed and rushed out the door to his garden to see how his apple tree was doing . But all he found was a patch of dirt ! ‘‘Humf ! ” he said , ‘‘I thought I would see something by now . . . ” so he watered the patch of dirt again and went on with his regular day . Every day for two whole months Mr . Muffett would jump out of bed and rush to see his apple tree . But every day he would see just a patch of dirt . One day he woke up , ran down to his garden , but again he only found that patch of dirt . He went back into his house , feeling very sad , and his wife asked what the matter was . 12 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 ‘‘My apple tree isn’t growing ! It never will ! I’m not going to keep watering that silly patch of dirt ! ” [ Mid - story prompt ] ‘‘Don’t worry , ” his wife replied , ‘‘keep watering the dirt , and wait just a little bit longer . Soon it will start to grow , I’m sure ! ” So Mr . Muffett watered the dirt for another month , and the patch of dirt was still just a patch of dirt , and Mr . Muffett’s wife kept telling him to wait a bit longer . One morning , Mr . Muffett woke up and walked outside to water the patch of dirt . He was so surprised to ﬁnd that in the patch of dirt , a little green stem had popped its head out ! ‘‘Finally ! ” he said , ‘‘all that waiting ﬁnally paid off ! ” He was so happy . And for ﬁve years , Mr . Muffett took care of his plant , and waited , until ﬁnally the plant grew into . . . the most beautiful apple tree Mr . Muffett had ever seen . It made him happy for many , many years . B . 2 . For Mr . Muffett’s apple tree Mid - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was Mr . Muffett sad ? ” Mid - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was Mr . Muffett sad ? ” End - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was Mr . Muffett happy at the end of the story ? ” End - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was Mr . Muffett happy at the end of the story ? ” B . 3 . Questions for Mr . Muffett’s apple tree Did the little green stem ever pop out of the ground ? ( yes ) Does Mr . Muffett want to grow oranges ? ( no ) Does Mr . Muffett’s tree grow the very ﬁrst day he plants it ? ( no ) Did Mr . Muffet water his apple tree seeds ? ( yes ) B . 4 . For Mr . Muffett’s apple tree B . 4 . 1 . Lesson probe Diff . content / Same lesson : Sara had a yellow blanket that she car - ried with her everywhere . It was her favorite blanket ! One day , Sara’s yellow blanket was so dirty that her mother decided it should be put in the laundry . Right after her mother put the blan - ket in the wash , Sara missed her favorite blanket . ‘‘When will the blanket be done ? ” she asked , ‘‘I want it now ! ” Just wait a little longer her mom said . So Sara decided to wait without becoming upset . Soon enough , the blanket was done washing ! Sara was so happy she waited because now the blanket was clean and ﬂuffy . Diff . content / Diff . lesson : Sara had a yellow blanket that she car - ried with her everywhere . It was her favorite blanket ! One day , Sara’s yellow blanket was so dirty that her mother decided it should be put in the laundry . Her mom said , ‘‘While your blanket is washing , why don’t you clean your room ? ” So Sara cleaned her room , and when her blanket was done washing , she had a clean room and a clean blanket ! She felt so good she listened to her mother . B . 4 . 2 . Conﬂict probe Diff . content / Same lesson : Dina sat at home with her father , wait - ing for her mother to come home from work . Her mother was late and Dina was upset . Her dad told her to wait a little longer , and not to be upset because her mom would be home soon . Dina waited without getting upset , and her mother came home and Dina was so happy that she waited the extra time because her mom had brought home Dina’s favorite ice cream ! Same content / Diff . lesson : Mr . Muffett bought apple seeds to plant an apple tree in his garden . Every day he watered the seeds and the dirt but they weren’t growing ! His wife asked him if he needed help . He said no . Every day Mr . Muffett found that the seeds weren’t growing . Finally , he asked his wife for help , and she helped him because she knew how to grow apple trees . The apple tree grew and Mr . Muffett was so happy he had asked his wife for help . B . 5 . Selection for Mr . Muffet’s apple tree Lesson : It is good to be patient . Surface content : Plants take a long time to grow . Appendix C . The Queen’s painting story , prompts , and tasks C . 1 . The Queen’s painting ( Theme : ‘‘Work together to make something better . ” ) In a faraway land there lived a wise old queen . Her whole king - dom was very happy , except for three families ! The Yellows were a family of painters who thought that everything should be painted – only in YELLOW ! They only used yellow paint , and they thought that the other colors were silly looking and not as good ! The Reds were also painters and they ONLY used red paint , because they thought that red was the most beautiful ! The third family , the Blues , only painted with BLUE paint because they thought blue was the best ! So all three families thought that their colors were the best ! One day the queen asked all three families to come to her castle and said , ‘‘I would like for you three families to make the most beautiful painting for me ! ‘‘So , ” she asked Yellow family , ‘‘what color do you think should be used in the painting ? ” ‘‘Yellow , over course ! ” they answered . ‘‘Alright , ” the queen said , and she handed them a bowl , ‘‘put some yellow paint in this bowl , please . ” So they did . Next the queen turned to the Red family and asked ‘‘now , what color do you think we should paint with ? ” ‘‘RED ! ” they responded . The queen was sad that the Yellow family only wanted to use yellow and the Red family only wanted to use red . [ Mid - story prompt ] ‘‘Alright , then please put some red paint in this bowl with the yellow paint . ” So they did . Then , the queen took a spoon and mixed the red and the yellow paint together . ‘‘Look ! ” the queen said , ‘‘your yellow and your red can mix together to make another won - derful color – orange ! ” Then the queen took some blue paint and some yellow paint and mixed them together , and the mixture created another beauti - ful color - green ! Then she mixed the blue and the red and made even another beautiful color - purple ! ‘‘See ? ” the queen said , ‘‘you can make so many beautiful things with two colors . Now if you use all your colors for the same paint - ing , you’ll have SIX wonderful colors instead of just ONE ! ” So the Yellow family and the Red family and the Blue family took the red , and the orange and the yellow and the green and the blue and the purple and painted the most BEAUTIFUL painting in the entire world ! It was a rainbow made of all the colors . From then on , all the families painted together , because even though the Yellow family loved yellow and the Red family loved red and the blue family loved blue , what they all loved EVEN MORE was all the colors together ! C . 2 . Prompts for the Queen’s painting Mid - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was the queen sad ? ” Mid - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was the queen sad ? ” C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 13 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 Mid - story prompt ( pedagogy ; Study 2 only ) : ‘‘The queen was sad because each family only wanted to paint with their own color and not work together . ” End - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was the painting beautiful ? ” End - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was the painting so beautiful ? ” End - story prompt ( pedagogy ; Study 2 only ) : ‘‘The painting was so beautiful because the families worked together to combine their colors . ” C . 3 . Memory questions for the Queen’s painting C . 3 . 1 . Study 1 Do the paints mix together to make new colors ? ( yes ) Does the yellow family think the painting should only have blue paint ? ( no ) Was the queen happy that the yellow family only wanted to use yellow and the red family only wanted to use red ? ( no ) Was the painting beautiful ? ( yes ) C . 3 . 2 . Study 2 additional questions At the end of the story , did the red family , the blue family , and the yellow families share ? ( no ) Was the queen’s hair purple ? ( yes ) Did the queen paint the picture together with the red family , the blue family and the yellow family ? ( no ) After they mixed the colors , did they have six colors to paint with ? ( yes ) C . 4 . Vignettes for the Queen’s painting C . 4 . 1 . Lesson probe Diff . content / Same lesson : Recess time ! Sam wanted to swing on the swings , but his best friend Julie wanted to play catch . Sam went on the swings , but there was no one to push him . Julie grabbed the ball , but there was no one to catch it . So they decided that they would play together . Julie would push Sam on the swings , and then Sam would catch Julie’s ball . Diff . content / Diff . lesson : Recess time ! Sam was swinging on the swings , and his best friend Julie was pushing him . After a while , she got very tired , and Sam got very dizzy . Neither of them felt very well at all ! So they decided that even though they love swinging on the swings , they shouldn’t do it so much . C . 4 . 2 . Conﬂict probe Same content / Diff . lesson : The yellow family only painted with yellow , the red family only painted with red , and the blue family only painted with blue . One day , the queen asked all of the families to come to her house to paint the most beautiful painting for her . Each family started painting , but the queen wanted them to go fas - ter because she didn’t want to wait . But , when the paintings were done , they were so beautiful that the queen was happy that she had waited . Diff . content / Same lesson : Ben and Cara were each making their own sand castles . But Ben didn’t like his sand castle because it was too small , and Cara didn’t like her sand castle because it kept falling apart . So they decided to build one sand castle and they made a huge castle that didn’t fall apart . They were so happy that they worked together . C . 5 . Theme selection for the Queen’s painting Lesson : When people work together instead of alone , they can do greater things . Surface content : Mixing colors can make new colors for a painting . C . 6 . Generalization task ( Study 2 only ) Now , I have a story to tell you ! I went to the store today with my brothertobuyﬂowersforourmom’sbirthday ! I onlyhadonedollar , and my brother also only had one dollar . When we got to the store , there were small ﬂowers for one dollar , or big bunches of ﬂowers for two dollars . What should my brother and I do ? Appendix D . The tall people , prompts , and tasks D . 1 . The tall people ( Be nice to people who are different ) In a town called Talleg there lived really , really tall people ! They were as tall as trees , with big arms as long as huge branches . They had huge houses and huge schools and huge cars , and they liked being tall ! They always like to play a game together , and they would have so much fun ! One day , someone new walked into town - he was short , with short legs and short arms . All the people in Talleg stared at the new guest , who made his way to the closest house . People snick - ered and snackered and giggled and laughed , but the new man didn’t notice . Right outside the house , he knocked on the door . When a tall mother appeared with her tall baby , the short man cleared his throat and said very loudly ‘‘My name is Jocko , and I want to play with you ! Everyone who heard him laughed and laughed , and ﬁnally Jocko was a little bit upset . ‘‘Why is everyone laughing at me ? ” he said ‘‘Because you look so . . . silly ” someone replied ‘‘Do I really ? Why do I look silly ? ” The villagers started to yell ‘‘you’re short , with small legs and small arms” ‘‘Is that so ? ” Jocko replied , ‘‘because I come from a land called Smalleg , and everyone who lives there is just my height , with small legs and arms ! In all my life , no one ever told me I look silly . ” But the villagers kept laughing , and said they didn’t want to play with him . Jocko was so sad that he started to walk back home . [ Mid - story prompt ] ‘‘Wait ! ” one tall person said , ‘‘I will play with you , because even though you’re smaller than me , you still seem like a nice person . ” ‘‘Oh , alright , ” another tall person said , ‘‘I’ll play with you too . I don’t really care that you’re smaller than me . ” ‘‘Really ? ? ” Jocko said , ‘‘that’s so nice of you ! Thank you , thank you so much ! ” So Jocko played with the people in Talleg , and it turned out that they all had the most wonderful time ! And from then on , no one ever laughed at Jocko again , and they played together every day ! D . 2 . Prompts for tall people Mid - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , was Jocko sad ? ” Mid - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why was Jocko sad ? ” Mid - story prompt ( pedagogy ; Study 2 only ) : ‘‘Jocko was sad because the people in Talleg laughed at him for being different from them . ” End - story prompt ( report ) : ‘‘Remind me , did the tall people decide to play with Jocko ? 14 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 End - story prompt ( explain ) : ‘‘Tell me , why did the tall people decide to play with Jocko ? ” End - story prompt ( pedagogy ; Study 2 only ) : ‘‘The tall people decided to play with Jocko because its okay to be friends with people who are different from you . ” D . 3 . Memory questions for tall people D . 3 . 1 . Study 1 Does Talleg have really small people in the town ? ( no ) Do the villagers from Talleg laugh at Jocko when he comes to their town ? ( yes ) Do the villagers tell Jocko that he looks silly ? ( yes ) Does Jocko have very long arms and legs ? ( no ) D . 3 . 2 . Study 2 additional questions Did Jocko say that all the people in the town where he came from play together ? ( no ) Was Jocko from a town called Smalleg ? ( yes ) Did Jocko say to the people of Talleg , ‘‘Will you play with me , even though I am different ? ” ( no ) Did the people in Talleg have no hair ? ( yes ) D . 4 . Vignettes for tall people D . 4 . 1 . Lesson probe Diff . content / Diff . lesson : Mrs . Trimble was directing a school play , and Sasha and Max were in the play together . One day , Max brought some cookies to play practice , and gave one to Mrs . Trim - ble . Sasha wanted to eat a cookie too , so Max shared his cookies with Sasha . The cookies were so yummy and Max felt so good that he gave Sasha a cookie . Diff . content / Same lesson : Mrs . Trimble was directing a school play , but she only allowed kids with green eyes to be in the play ! Sasha really wanted to be in the play , but Mrs . Trimble said no because Sasha had brown eyes . Sasha became really sad , but her friend Max gave Sasha his part in the play because it didn’t matter that she had brown eyes , she was still his friend . D . 4 . 2 . Conﬂict probe Same content / Diff . lesson : The tall people were playing a game and a short person named Jocko asked if he could play with them . First they laughed at him and he became very sad . Then one of the tall people hurt his leg and Jocko was able to help him , and it was so nice that Jocko helped the tall person . Diff . content / same lesson : Jenny is different from other people , because instead of walking on her feet , she walks on her hands ! The other kids didn’t let Jenny walk to school with them , because they thought it was weird that she walked on her hands . Jenny became very sad , but ﬁnally one of the kids said she could walk with them to school , because it didn’t matter that she walks differ - ently . She walked to school with them , and they had a wonderful time , and they all became very good friends ! D . 5 . Theme selection for tall people Lesson : It doesn’t matter if people are different , we can still be nice to each other and have fun together . Surface content : The people from Talleg laughed at Jocko and didn’t want to play with him at ﬁrst . D . 6 . Generalization task ( Study 2 only ) Now , I have a story for you ! I have a dog , named Rex , and Rex is a poodle ! My town just made a brand new dog park . Rex loves to run and play , but all the other dogs in the dog park are Dalmatians . When I brought Rex to the dog park today , the people in charge said they weren’t sure they could allow Rex to go into the dog park because he’s a poodle . What should the people in charge of the dog park do ? References Afﬂerbach , P . P . ( 1990 ) . The inﬂuence of prior knowledge on expert readers’ main idea construction strategies . Reading Research Quarterly , 25 , 31 – 46 . Bennett , W . ( 1993 ) . The book of virtues . New York : Simon & Schuster . Bonawitz , E . B . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2012 ) . Occam’s rattle : Children’s use of simplicity and probability to constrain inference . Developmental Psychology , 48 , 1156 – 1164 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0026471 . Bonawitz , E . B . , Shafto , P . , Gweon , H . , Goodman , N . D . , Spelke , E . , & Schulz , L . ( 2011 ) . The double - edged sword of pedagogy : Instruction affects spontaneous exploration and discovery . Cognition , 120 , 322 – 330 . Bransford , J . D . ( 1979 ) . Human cognition : Learning , remembering , and understanding . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth . Brown , A . L . ( 1975 ) . The development of memory : Knowing knowing about knowing , and knowing how to know . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) . Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 10 ) . New York : Academic Press . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 88 ) 90014 - X . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 ( 2 ) , 103 – 121 . Buchsbaum , D . , Gopnik , A . , Grifﬁths , T . L . , & Shafto , P . ( 2011 ) . Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is inﬂuenced by statistical and pedagogical evidence . Cognition , 120 ( 3 ) , 331 – 340 . Carey , S . ( 1985 ) . Conceptual change in childhood . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2000 ) . Self - explaining : The dual processes of generating inference and repairing mental models . In R . Glaser ( Ed . ) . Advances in instructional psychology : Educational design and cognitive science ( Vol . 5 , pp . 161 – 238 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Chi , M . T . ( 2009 ) . Active - constructive - interactive : A conceptual framework for differentiating learning activities . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1 ( 1 ) , 73 – 105 . Chi , M . T . H . , Bassok , M . , Lewis , M . , Reimann , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1989 ) . Self - explanations : How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems . Cognitive Science , 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1302 _ 1 . 145 – 18 . Chi , M . T . H . , de Leeuw , N . , Chiu , M . H . , & LaVancher , C . ( 1994 ) . Eliciting self - explanations improves understanding . Cognitive Science , 18 , 439 – 477 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1803 _ 3 . Craik , F . I . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 11 ( 6 ) , 671 – 684 . Crisaﬁ , M . A . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1986 ) . Analogical transfer in very young children : Combining two separately learned solutions to reach a goal . Child Development , 57 ( 4 ) , 953 – 968 . Crowley , K . , & Siegler , R . S . ( 1999 ) . Explanation and generalization in young children’s strategy learning . Child Development , 70 ( 2 ) , 304 – 316 . Csibra , G . , & Gergely , G . ( 2009 ) . Natural pedagogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13 ( 4 ) , 148 – 153 . Csibra , G . , & Gergely , G . ( 2006 ) . Social learning and social cognition : The case for pedagogy . InY . Munakata & M . H . Johnson ( Eds . ) , Processes of change in brain and cognitive development . Attention and performance XXI ( pp . 249 – 274 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Edwards , B . J . , Williams , J . J . , Gentner , D . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2014 ) . Effects of comparison and explanation on analogical transfer . In P . Bello , M . Guarini , M . McShane , & B . Scassellati ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive science society ( pp . 445 – 450 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Fisch , S . M . ( 2000 ) . A capacity model of children’s comprehension of educational content on television . Media Psychology , 2 , 63 – 91 . Fonseca , B . , & Chi , M . T . H . ( 2011 ) . The self - explanation effect : A constructive learningactivity . InR . E . Mayer & P . A . Alexander ( Eds . ) , The handbook ofresearch on learning and instruction ( pp . 296 – 321 ) . New York , NY : Routledge Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203839089 . Frazier , B . N . , Gelman , S . A . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 2009 ) . Preschoolers’ search for explanatory informationwithin adult - child conversation . Child Development , 80 , 1592 – 1611 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2009 . 01356 . x . Gelman , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The essential child : The origins of essentialism in everyday thought . Oxford : Oxford Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 1991 ) . Insides and essences : Early understandings of the non - obvious . Cognition , 38 ( 3 ) , 213 – 244 . Goldman , S . R . , Reyes , M . , & Varnhagen , D . ( 1984 ) . Understanding fables in ﬁrst and second languages . NABE Journal , 8 , 35 – 66 . Gopnik , A . , & Meltzoff , A . N . ( 1997 ) . Words , thoughts , and theories . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hickling , A . K . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 2001 ) . The emergence of children’s causal explanations and theories : Evidence from everyday conversation . Developmental Psychology , 37 ( 5 ) , 668 – 683 . Honig , B . ( 1987 ) . Last chance for our children : How you can help save our schools . Boston , MA : Addison Wesley Publishing Company . C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 15 Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007 Inagaki , K . , & Hatano , G . ( 1993 ) . Young children’s understanding of the mind - body distinction . Child Development , 1534 – 1549 . Keil , F . C . ( 1989 ) . Concepts , kinds , and cognitive development . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kilpatrick , W . ( 1992 ) . Why Johnny can’t tell right from wrong . New York : Simon & Schuster . Kintsch , W . , & van Dijk , T . ( 1978 ) . Cognitive psychology and discourse : Recalling and summarizing stories . Current Trends in Text Linguistics , de Gruyter , Berlin , 61 – 80 . Legare , C . H . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2014 ) . The selective beneﬁts of explanation on learning in early childhood . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 126 , 198 – 212 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2014 . 03 . 001 . Lehr , S . ( 1988 ) . The child’s developing sense of theme as a response to literature . Reading Research Quarterly , 23 , 337 – 357 . Lehr , S . ( 1991 ) . The child’s developing sense of theme : Responses to literature . New York : Teachers College Press . Lickona , T . ( 1991 ) . Educating for character . New York : Bantam Books . Lombrozo , T . , & Carey , S . ( 2006 ) . Functional explanation and the function of explanation . Cognition , 99 ( 2 ) , 167 – 204 . Lombrozo , T . L . ( 2006 ) . The structure and function of explanations . Trends in Cognitive Science , 10 , 464 – 470 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2006 . 08 . 004 . Lombrozo , T . ( 2016 ) . Explanatory preferences shape learning and inference . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 20 , 748 – 759 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tics / 2016 . 08 . 001 . Lombrozo , T . ( 2007 ) . Simplicity and probability in causal explanation . Cognitive Psychology , 55 , 232 – 257 . Lombrozo , T . ( in press ) . ‘Learning by thinking’ in science and in everyday life . In Godfrey - Smith , P . , and Levy , A . ( Eds . ) , The scientiﬁc imagination . Oxford University Press : Oxford , UK . Lombrozo , T . L . ( 2012 ) . Explanation and abductive inference . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 260 – 276 ) . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oxfordhb / 9780199734689 . 013 . 0014 . Lombrozo , T . , & Vasilyeva , N . ( in press ) . Causal explanation . In Waldmann , M . ( Ed . ) , Oxford handbook of causal reasoning . Oxford University Press : Oxford , UK . Mar , R . , & Oatley , T . ( 2008 ) . The function of ﬁction is the abstraction and simulation of social experience . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 3 ( 3 ) , 173 – 192 . Mares , M . L . ( 2006 ) . Repetition increases children’s comprehension of television content – Up to a point . Communication Monographs , 73 ( 2 ) , 216 – 241 . Mares , M . , & Acosta , E . E . ( 2008 ) . Be kind to three - legged dogs : Children’s literal interpretations of TV’s moral lessons . Media Psychology , 11 , 377 – 399 . McKenna , M . W . , & Ossoff , E . P . ( 1998 ) . Age differences in children’s comprehension of a popular television program . Child Study Journal , 28 , 53 – 68 . Murphy , M . D . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1975 ) . Incidental learning in preschool children as a function of level of cognitive analysis . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 19 , 509 – 523 . Narvaez , D . ( 1998 ) . The inﬂuence of moral schemas on the reconstruction of moral narratives in eighth grade and college students . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 13 – 24 . Narvaez , D . ( 2002 ) . Does reading moral stories build character ? Educational Psychology Review , 14 ( 2 ) , 155 – 171 . Narvaez , D . , Bentley , J . , Gleason , T . , & Samuels , J . ( 1998 ) . Moral theme comprehension in third graders , ﬁfth graders , and adults . Reading Psychology , 19 , 217 – 241 . Narvaez , D . , Gleason , T . , Mitchell , C . , & Bentley , J . ( 1999 ) . Moral theme comprehension in children . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 477 – 487 . Nash , R . J . ( 1997 ) . Answering the virtuecrats : A moral conversation on character education . New York : Teachers College Press . Perfetti , C . ( 1985 ) . Reading ability . New York : Oxford University Press . Perner , J . ( 1991 ) . Understanding the representational mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Perry , M . ( 1991 ) . Learning and transfer : Instructional conditions and conceptual change . Cognitive Development , 6 , 449 – 468 . Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The origins of intelligence . New York : International University Press . Read , S . J . , & Marcus - Newhall , A . ( 1993 ) . Explanatory coherence in social explanations : A parallel distributed processing account . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 ( 3 ) , 429 – 447 . Rhodes , M . , Gelman , S . A . , & Brickman , D . ( 2010 ) . Children’s attention to sample composition in learning , teaching , and discovery . Developmental Science , 13 ( 3 ) , 421 – 429 . Richert , R . A . , & Smith , E . I . ( 2011 ) . Preschoolers’ quarantining of fantasy stories . Child Development , 82 ( 4 ) , 1106 – 1119 . Rittle - Johnson , B . ( 2006 ) . Promoting transfer : Effects of self - explanation and direct instruction . Child Development , 77 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Alibali , M . W . ( 1999 ) . Conceptual and procedural knowledge of mathematics : Does one lead to the other ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 175 – 189 . Schulz , L . E . , Bonawitz , E . B . , & Grifﬁths , T . L . ( 2007 ) . Can being scared cause tummy aches ? Naive theories , ambiguous evidence , and preschoolers’ causal inferences . Developmental Psychology , 43 ( 5 ) , 1124 – 1139 . Sendak , M . ( 1962 ) . Pierre : A cautionary tale . China : Harper Collin’s Publishers . Shafto , P . , Goodman , N . D . , & Frank , M . C . ( 2012 ) . Learning from others : The consequences of psychological reasoning for human learning . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7 , 341 – 351 . Siegler , R . S . ( 1995 ) . How does change occur : A microgenetic study of number conservation . Cognitive Psychology , 28 , 225 – 273 . Sobel , D . M . , Yoachim , C . M . , Gopnik , A . , Meltzoff , A . N . , & Blumenthal , E . J . ( 2007 ) . The blicket within : Preschoolers’ inferences about insides and causes . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 159 – 182 . Sweller , J . , Van Merrienboer , J . J . , & Paas , F . G . ( 1998 ) . Cognitive architecture and instructional design . Educational Psychology Review , 10 ( 3 ) , 251 – 296 . Taylor , K . K . ( 1986 ) . Summary writing by young children . Reading Research Quarterly , 193 – 208 . van den Broek , P . ( 1997 ) . Discovering the cement of the universe : The development of event comprehension from childhood to adulthood . In P . W . van den Broek , P . J . Bauer , & T . Bourg ( Eds . ) , Developmental spans in event comprehension and representation : Bridging ﬁctional and actual events ( pp . 321 – 342 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . van den Broek , P . , Kendeou , P . , Kremer , K . , Lynch , J . , Butler , J . , White , M . J . , & Lorch , E . P . ( 2005 ) . Assessment of comprehension abilities in young children . In S . Stahl & S . Paris ( Eds . ) , Children’s reading comprehension and assessment ( pp . 107 – 130 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Van den Broek , P . , Lorch , R . F . , Linderholm , T . , & Gustafson , M . ( 2001 ) . The effects of readers’ goals on inference generation and memory for texts . Memory & Cognition , 29 ( 8 ) , 1081 – 1087 . van den Broek , P . , Lorch , R . F . , & Thurlow , R . ( 1997 ) . Children’s and adults’ memory for television stories : The role of causal faculty , story - grammar categories , and hierarchical level . Child Development , 67 , 3010 – 3028 . van den Broek , P . , Lynch , J . , Naslund , J . , Ievers - Landis , C . , & Verduin , K . ( 2003 ) . The development of comprehension of main ideas in narratives : Evidence from the selection of titles . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 ( 4 ) , 707 – 718 . Walker , C . , Bonawitz , E . , & Lombrozo , T . ( inpress ) . Effects of explaining on children’s preference for simpler hypotheses . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review . Walker , C . M . , Gopnik , A . , & Ganea , P . ( 2014 ) . Learning to learn from stories : Children’s developing sensitivity to the causal structure of ﬁctional words Early view at . Child Development . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12287 . Walker , C . M . , Lombrozo , T . , Legare , C . , & Gopnik , A . ( 2014 ) . Explaining prompts children to favor inductively rich properties . Cognition , 133 , 343 – 357 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2014 . 07 . 008 . Walker , C . , Lombrozo , T . , Williams , J . J . , Rafferty , A . , & Gopnik , A . ( 2016 ) . Explaining constrains causal learning in childhood . Child Development . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12590 . Wellman , H . M . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1992 ) . Cognitive development : Foundational theories of core domains . Annual Review of Psychology , 43 , 337 – 375 . Wellman , H . M . , & Liu , D . ( 2007 ) . Causal reasoning as informed by the early development of explanations . In L . Schulz & A . Gopnik ( Eds . ) , Causal learning : Psychology , philosophy , & computation ( pp . 261 – 279 ) . 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780195176803 . 001 . 0001 . Whitney , M . P . , Vozzola , E . C . , & Hofmann , J . ( 2005 ) . Children’s moral reading of Harry Potter : Are children and adults reading the same books ? Journal of Research in Character Education , 3 , 1 – 24 . Wilkenfeld , D . , & Lombrozo , T . L . ( 2015 ) . Inference to the best explanation ( IBE ) versus explanation to the best inference ( EBI ) . Science and Education , 10 , 1 – 19 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11191 - 015 - 9784 - 4 . Williams , J . P . ( 1993 ) . Comprehension of students with and without learning disabilities : Identiﬁcation of narrative themes and idiosyncratic text representations . Journal of Educational Psychology , 85 , 631 – 641 . Williams , J . P . , Hall , K . M . , Lauer , K . D . , Stafford , K . B . , DeSisto , L . A . , & deCani , J . S . ( 2005 ) . Expository text comprehension in the primary grade classroom . Journal of Educational Psychology , 97 ( 4 ) , 538 – 550 . Williams , J . P . , Lauer , K . D . , Hall , K . M . , Lord , K . M . , Gugga , S . S . , Back , S . J . , . . . deCani , J . S . ( 2002 ) . Teaching elementary school students to identify story themes . Journal of Educational Psychology , 94 , 235 – 248 . Williams , J . J . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2010 ) . The role of explanation in discovery and generalization : Evidence from category learning . Cognitive Science , 34 , 776 – 806 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2010 . 01113 . x . Williams , J . J . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2013 ) . Explanation and prior knowledge interact to guide learning . Cognitive Psychology , 66 , 55 – 84 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogpsych . 2012 . 09 . 002 . Williams , J . J . , Lombrozo , T . , & Rehder , B . ( 2013 ) . The hazards of explanation : Overgeneralization in the face of exceptions . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 142 , 1006 – 1014 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0030996 . Wittwer , J . , & Renkl , A . ( 2008 ) . Why instructional explanations often do not work : A framework for understanding the effectiveness of instructional explanations . Educational Psychologist , 43 ( 1 ) , 49 – 64 . Wynne , E . , & Ryan , K . ( 1993 ) . Reclaiming our schools . New York : Merrill . 16 C . M . Walker , T . Lombrozo / Cognition xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Walker , C . M . , & Lombrozo , T . Explaining the moral of the story . Cognition ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 11 . 007