Social Psychology of Creativity : A Consensual Assessment Technique Teresa M . Amabile Brandeis University Although personality research has made much progress in developing an indi - vidual - difference psychology of creativity , the nature of this phenomenon can only be fully illuminated if a social psychology of creativity is developed as well . Yet experimental studies of social and environmental influences on creativity are extremely rare . A major obstacle to such research is the criterion problem : the lack of a clear operational definition and an appropriate assessment methodology . For a variety of reasons , both the popular creativity tests and the subjective assessment techniques used in some previous creativity studies are ill - suited to social psychological studies of creativity . A consensual definition of creativity is presented and , as a refinement of previous subjective methods , a reliable sub - jective assessment technique based on that definition is described . Several studies testing the methodology in both artistic and verbal domains are presented , and the advantages and limitations of this technique are discussed . The present meth - odology can be particularly useful for the development of a social psychology of creativity because of the nature of the tasks employed and the nature of the creativity assessments obtained . In the discussion , creativity assessment is con - sidered as one instance illustrating the more general issue of the divergent aims and methods of personality psychology and social psychology . The . past 30 years have seen an enormous increase in creativity research . Creativity ci - Thls work was supported in part by Predoctoral Fel - lowship 5F31 MH05232 - 02 from the National Institute of Mental Health and by a BRSG SO7044 awarded by the Biomedical Research Support Grant Program , Di - vision of Research Resources , the National Institutes of Health . The author gratefully acknowledges the help of several colleagues , students , and friends who worked on the studies reported here : Carolyn Amabile , Phyllis Ama - bile , and Julia Steinmetz , who provided invaluable as - sistance in the design and execution of Study 1 ; Elliot Eisner , who offered several suggestions for Study 1 ; Steven Berglas and Marie Handel , who collaborated on Study 2 ; Margaret Stubbs , who collaborated on Study 3 ; Shereen Brackfield , who collaborated on Study 6 ; Phyllis Goldfarb , who collaborated on Study 7 ; Lisa Herman and Ronit Goldlust who helped conduct Study 8 ; and the principals , teachers , and students of St . Jude ' s School in Waltham , Massachusetts , and Charles , E . Cashman School in Amesbury , Massachusetts , for their invaluable cooperation in Studies 2 and 3 . In addition , several colleagues offered very helpful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript : Wil - liam DeJong , Maurice Hershenson , Robert Kidd , Ellen Langer , Mark Lepper , Leslie McArthur , Ricardo Mor - ant , Harvey Pines , Lee Ross , Mark Snyder , and Mar - garet Stubbs . Requests for reprints should be sent to Teresa M . Amabile , Department of Psychology , Brandeis Univer - sity , Waltham , Massachusetts , 02254 . tations , which accounted for less than . 2 % of the listings in Psychological Abstracts in 1950 , made up more than 1 % of the citations in 1980 . Despite this proliferation of research publications on creativity , however , there has been virtually no work on the social psy - chology of creativity . Between 1975 and 1980 , there were barely half a dozen articles in the Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology and the Journal of Experimental So - cial Psychology that dealt in some way with the effects of social and environmental fac - tors on creativity . Instead , creativity research has been heavily personality oriented ; studies on the description and identification of cre - ative personality and cognitive style have predominated ( e . g . , Gough , 1979 ; Lott , 1978 ; Sobel & Rothenberg , 1980 ) . Development of a social psychology of cre - ativity could be important for both person - ality and social psychology , as well as for the study of creativity . Although a great deal of research has already focused on the creative personality , an illumination of the types of social variables that can positively or nega - tively influence creative performance would aid in the comprehensive description of cre - Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1982 , Vol . 43 , No . 5 , 997 - 1013 Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 82 / 4305 - 0997S00 . 75 997 998 TERESA M . AMABILE ative personality , its development , and its manifestation . Within social psychology , re - searchers have in recent years turned increas - ing attention to an exploration of the effects of social factors on various aspects of cog - nitive and motor performance ( e . g . , Condry , 1977 ; Deci , 1971 ; Diener & Dweck , 1978 ; Kruglanski , Friedman , & Zeevi , 1971 ; Lep - per , Greene , & Nisbett , 1973 ; McGraw & McCullers , 1979 ; Seta & Hassan , 1980 ; Wim - peris & Fair , 1979 ) . As one important aspect of performance that has been virtually ig - nored in these investigations , creativity should be integrated into social psychological theo - ries of motivation and cognition . Finally , although cognitive and characterological de - terminants of creativity unquestionably de - serve research attention , theories of the cre - ative process will be incomplete without an accounting of social - situational determinants as well . Methodologically , studies of the social psy - chology of creativity can be grouped into two broadly denned categories : archival and ex - perimental . An excellent example of the for - mer type is a program of research carried out over the past few years by Simonton ( 1975 , 1977a , 1977b , 1979 ) . In these studies * data collected from archival sources such as his - tories , anthologies , and biographical diction - aries are subjected to transhistorical time - se - ries analyses to test hypotheses about the ef - fect of social variables such as role model availability and political instability on cre - ative production . Despite the utility of this approach , however , it must be coupled with experimental techniques to more clearly identify the causal influence of social factors on creativity and the mechanism of their operation ( Simonton , 1975 ) . It is such ex - perimental investigations that are so rare in the literature of personality and social psy - chology . Most of the experimental work on cre - ativity has used one of two assessment tech - niques . Some researchers have had judges rate products ( or the persons who produced them ) on scales of creativity . The vast ma - jority , however , have relied upon creativity tests—instruments that are usually similar in form and administration to conventional in - telligence tests . Despite these two rather well - established approaches to the assessment of creativity , it can be argued that the criterion problem still presents a major obstacle to suc - cessful and rigorous empirical work in all areas of creativity research and especially in the social psychology of creativity . The defi - nition and assessment of creativity have long been the subject of disagreement and dissat - isfaction among psychologists . This problem has been dealt with in a variety of ways by the few researchers who have experimentally studied social influences on creativity , but none of them has explicitly addressed the adequacy of conventional assessment meth - ods in any detail . Creativity Tests Although several different batteries of cre - ativity tests have been developed , the most widely used ( and the prototype for many other tests ) are the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ; Torrance , 1962 ) . The TTCT consist of a number of subtests , most of which are verbal , although some involve drawing . The child ( or adult , depending on the form used ) is typically presented with one or several subtests , such as the Unusual Uses test , in which the child is asked to think of as many different uses as he can for a com - mon object ; the Consequences Test , in which the child is required to suggest consequences of several " impossible " events ( e . g . , people becoming invisible at will ) ; and Imaginative Stories , where the child is asked to write an interesting and exciting story on a given topic ( e . g . , the dog that doesn ' t bark ) . Responses to these test items are scored according to the number and variety of ideas expressed , as well as the elaboration of ideas and their sta - tistical infrequency . Most other creativity tests are similar to the TTCT in form , con - tent , administration , and scoring ( e . g . , Guil - ford , 1967 ; Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) . One conceptual problem with the use of creativity tests in empirical studies of creative performance is that their use is not clearly tied to an operational definition of creativity . There are , certainly , many definitions of cre - ativity . Although some theorists have ex - pressed the bold hope that an ultimate defini - tion will one day be articulated ( Ghiselin , 1963 ) , it is generally recogni / ed that a search for specific , objectively identifiable features CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 999 common to all creative products will not be fruitful . Instead , most definitions , while us - ing the creative product as the distinguishing sign of creativity , propose that the general qualities of novelty and appropriateness dif - ferentiate creative from uncreative products ( e . g . , Barren , 1955 ; Bruner , 1962 ; Newell , Shaw , & Simon , 1962 ; Stein , 1974 ) . In other words , the product or response must be un - usual , statistically infrequent , or completely unique , and it must also be correct in the context of the problem or audience to which it was addressed . In addition , some theorists define creativity in terms of the response that the product produces in an observer . For ex - ample , Bruner ( 1962 ) saw the creative prod - uct as anything that produces " effective sur - prise " in the observer , along with a " shock of recognition " that the product or response , although novel , is entirely appropriate . Despite the existence of such intuitively reasonable definitions , however , current as - sessment techniques depending on the cre - ativity tests are not closely linked to them . Indeed , it can be argued that the criterion problem in creativity research has arisen in large part because most definitions do not include conceptualizations that are readily translated into useful assessment criteria , let alone ultimate criteria . It is not clear , for ex - ample , how one might assess novelty and appropriateness in any general way or how one might determine in any satisfactory way whether an observer is experiencing " effec - tive surprise " and a " shock of recognition . " As a result , the creativity tests and the studies built around them are operating in a defini - tional void . There is no clear , explicit state - ment of the criteria that conceptually un - derlie the assessment procedures . A second problem is the basically subjec - tive nature of the purportedly objective scor - ing procedures in the creativity tests . Perfor - mance on these tests is rated according to the test constructor ' s or scorer ' s intuitive assess - ment of what is creative and not according to objective criteria of novelty , appropriate - ness , satisfyingness , and so on . Motivated perhaps by the apparent success of objective tests of intelligence , creativity researchers might have been too quick to attempt to ob - jectify the assessment of creativity . Almost certainly , many creativity tests do measure abilities that are important for creative per - formance , but it is unclear whether they are useful for directly assessing something called creativity . It will be argued here that such judgments can ultimately only be subjective . For the purposes of developing a social psychology of creativity , however , the most crucial feature of the creativity tests is that they were primarily developed as tools for personality research . They were expressly designed to be sensitive to individual differ - ences in performance in a wide variety of domains—verbal , artistic , scientific , and mathematical ( e . g . , Guilford , 1956 , 1957a , 1957b ; Torrance , 1962 ) . To the extent that they are able to detect subtle individual dif - ferences , however , these tests are problematic for experimental studies of social and envi - ronmental influences on creativity . Although it has been suggested that creativity tests can be influenced by social and environmental factors ( e . g . , Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) , there is abundant evidence that many of these tests do assess rather stable individual differences ( e . g . , Gakhar & Luthra , 1973 ; Holland , 1968 ; Torrance , 1972a , 1972b ) . It is precisely this success in identifying stable traits that ren - ders creativity tests less appropriate for stud - ies of environmental influences ( Feldman , 1980 ) . Normally , social psychologists seek to control for and , as much as possible , elimi - nate individual - difference or within - group variability in the crucial dependent measures so that those measures can more easily detect the " signal " of between - group differences produced by experimental manipulations ( Carlsmith , Ellsworth , & Aronson , 1976 ) . Thus , in developing a social psychology of creativity , it would seem unwise to rely upon assessment techniques that were expressly designed to reveal consistent individual dif - ferences . Judgments of Products The second , and much less common , ap - proach to creativity assessment has been the use of judges to provide subjective ratings of the creativity of products or the persons who produced them ( e . g . , Domino , 1974 ; Helson & Crutchfield , 1970 ; Kruglanski et al . , 1971 ; MacKinnon , 1962 ; Sobel & Rothenberg , 1980 ) . In one of the best known of the studies 1000 TERESA M . AMABILE using this approach , for example , Mac - Kinnon and his colleagues ( 1962 ) asked five university professors of architecture to nom - inate the 40 most creative architects in the United States and to rate the creativity of each on a 5 - point scale . The nominated ar - chitects were then invited to participate in extensive personality assessments . In other studies ( e . g . , Sobel & Rothenberg , 1980 ) , sub - jects with special expertise or experience in a particular domain are asked to produce works in that domain during the experimen - tal session ; these products are then rated on creativity by expert judges . Studies that have employed subjective judgment have clearly avoided one of the problems noted earlier with the creativity tests . In their use of judges ' ratings , they pre - sent an assessment of creativity in which the subjective nature of the measure is direct and unveiled , in contrast to the apparent objec - tivity of the creativity tests . In other respects , however , even these methods present diffi - culties . These studies , too , often suffer from a definitional void by failing to explictly ar - ticulate the definition of creativity guiding the research or by presenting conceptual defi - nitions ( usually including novelty and ap - propriateness as criteria ) that are not directly tied to the assessment procedure . In addition , in their assessment procedures , these studies often fail to differentiate between the cre - ativity of the products and other constructs , such as technical correctness or aesthetic ap - peal . Moreover , the interjudge reliability might be questioned in studies where the ex - perimenter presents judges with his or her own definition of creativity for them to apply or trains judges beforehand to agree with one another ( e . g . , Eisner , 1965 ) . Of primary importance for the present discussion , however , are the ways in which previous subjective methodologies might be inappropriate for use in social psychological research . Although these techniques may not have been specifically designed for person - ality research , those that require judges to make assessments of a person on the basis of a large body of work over time are likely to detect relatively stable characteristics and would , therefore , certainly be better suited to personality than to social - psychological research . Even those assessment procedures that have judges rate a single product , however , may be too sensitive to large and stable in - dividual differences in performance . In a re - cent conceptualization of the creative process ( Amabile , in press ) , it was proposed that cre - ativity depends on three classes of factors : domain - relevant skills , such as knowledge about and talent in the domain , which de - pend on innate abilities and training ; cre - ativity - relevant skills , such as cognitive style , work habits , and knowledge of creativity heu - ristics , which depend on personality char - acteristics and training ; and task motivation , which depends on individual task preferences and socially imposed constraints . A social - psychological study might , for example , in - vestigate decrements in creativity resulting from a decrease in task motivation by the offer of a tangible reward . The assessment of creativity will be most sensitive to such task motivational effects if the influence of do - main - relevant and creativity - relevant skills can be controlled or eliminated . Thus , to the extent that the task presented to subjects draws on special talents or experience - related skills—as the tasks in most previous subjec - tive - assessment studies do—the assessment will be insensitive to social - psychological ef - fects . Moreover , the high levels of skill re - quired by some tasks employed will limit possible subject populations to those who have considerable experience in that domain . It appears , then , that the criterion problem presents a major obstacle to the investigation of social - environmental effects on creativity . The development of a social psychology of creativity that could be integrated with per - sonality and cognitive research might be fa - cilitated by a straightforward operational def - inition of creativity and by an assessment technique amenable to social - psychological inquiry . The definition and the methodology described here are presented to that end . A Consensual Definition of Creativity The creativity assessment technique de - scribed here is grounded in a consensual defi - nition of creativity—an explicitly opera - tional definition that implicitly underlies most subjective creativity assessment meth - odologies : CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1001 A product or response is creative to the extent that ap - propriate observers independently agree it is creative . Appropriate observers are those familiar with the do - main in which the product was created or the response articulated . Thus , creativity can be regarded as the qual - ity of products or responses judged to be creative by appropriate observers , and it can also be regarded as the process by which something so judged is produced . It should be noted , first , that this defini - tion , like most current definitions of creativ - ity , is based on the creative product rather than on the process or the person . Not only is a clear articulation of the creative process not yet possible but , more importantly , any identification of a thought process as creative must finally depend on the fruit of that pro - cess—a product or response . Similarly , even a clear specification of the personality traits that mark outstandingly creative individuals would have to be validated against their work . Thus , a product - centered operational definition is clearly most useful for empirical research in creativity . Perhaps the most important feature of this definition is its reliance on subjective criteria . In this way , it overcomes the difficulty of attempting to specify ultimate objective cri - teria for identifying products as creative . In - deed , it can be argued that it is impossible to articulate such ultimate criteria—that , just as the . judgment of attitude statements as more or less favorable ( Thurstone & Chave , 1929 ) or the identification of individuals as physically attractive ( Walster , Aronson , Abrahams , & Rottman , 1966 ) depends on a social context , so too does the judgment of creativity . Certainly , there must be particular characteristics of attitude statements of per - sons or products that observers systemati - cally look to in rating them on scales of fa - vorability or physical attractiveness or cre - ativity , but , ultimately , the choice of those characteristics is a subjective one . This as - sertion of the necessarily subjective nature of creativity assessment must be emphati - cally underscored , given the strong predom - inance of creativity tests in empirical re - search and the tendency for many observers to regard these tests as pure , objective mea - sures of creativity . This consensual definition of creativity also avoids the translation problem noted earlier with traditional definitions . Although the conceptualizations of novelty and appro - priateness in traditional definitions are un - doubtedly important in formulating theoret - ical models of creative performance ( see Am r abile , in press ) , it is not clear how these concepts are to be translated into assessment operations . By contrast , the consensual defi - nition conceptually identifies creativity with the assessment operations . It may indeed be possible to identify particular objective fea - tures of products that correlate with subjec - tive judgments of creativity or to analyze the nature of subjective correlates of those judg - ments , but this definition makes it unnec - essary to attempt to specify those objective features or the characteristics of those sub - jective reactions beforehand . The consensual definition rests on a pair of important assumptions . The first assump - tion is that it is possible to obtain reliable judgments of the creativity of products , given an appropriate group of judges . In other words , although creativity in a product may be difficult to characterize in terms of specific features , it is something that people can rec - ognize when they see it . Furthermore , people familiar with such products can agree with one another on this perception . Second , the assessment methodology that is built upon the consensual definition assumes that there are degrees of creativity—that observers can indeed say , at an acceptable level of agree - ment , that some products are more creative or less creative than others . This assumption of a continuous underlying dimension of cre - ativity is fairly standard in contemporary the - ory and research on creativity ( e . g . , Getzels & Jackson , 1962 ; Guilford , 1959 ; Nicholls , 1972 ) . A Reliable Subjective Assessment Technique Given the methodological requirements of a social psychology of creativity and given the , consensual definition and the assump - tions about creativity asserted here , there are several features required of an appropriate subjective assessment methodology . First , there are some requirements of the task itself . Because it is desirable for social - psychologi - cal research that there not be large individual differences in baseline performances on the 1002 TERESA M . AMABILE task , it should be one that does not depend heavily on certain specialized skills—such as drawing ability or verbal facility—that some individuals have undoubtedly developed more fully than others . At the same time , the task should be open - ended enough to permit considerable flexibility in responses . It is de - sirable that the task allow for novelty in re - sponse , since the independent variables will be designed to influence creativity and since , conceptually , creativity has most often been identified with novelty of response . In addi - tion , of course , the task must lead to some product or clearly observable response that can be made available to appropriate judges for assessment . There are also a number of requirements for the assessment procedure . First , the judges should all have some experience with the domain in question , although the level of experience for all judges need not be iden - tical . Basically , the method requires that all judges be familiar enough with the domain to have developed , over a period of time , some implicit criteria for creativity , technical goodness , and so on . It is important to note that these judges need not themselves have produced work rated as highly creative ; it is their familiarity with the domain that is im - portant . Second , the judges must make their as - sessments independently . Because the tech - nique relies on subjective judgments , partic - ularly the implicity shared subjective stan - dards of creativity that judges are proposed to have , these judges should not be trained by the experimenter to agree with one an - other , and they should not be given specific criteria for judging creativity . Third , in preliminary work on developing the technique for a given task , judges should be asked to make assessments on other di - mensions in addition to creativity . Mini - mally , they should make ratings of the tech - nical aspects of the work and , if appropriate , its aesthetic appeal as well . This would then make it possible to examine the degree of relatedness or independence of those dimen - sions in subjective assessments of the product in question . Assessments of other aspects of the work would also allow for an analysis of effects of social and environmental factors on those aspects , making a comparison with cre - ativity effects possible . This is important be - cause theoretically there might be reasons to predict a differential effect of a given social factor on creativity and on technical perfor - mance . Fourth , judges should be instructed to rate the products relative to one another on the dimensions in question rather than rating them against some absolute standards they might have for sculpture , poetry , and so on . This is important because for most studies the levels of creativity produced by the " or - dinary " subjects who participate will be very low in comparison with the greatest works ever produced in that domain . Finally , each judge should view the prod - ucts in a different random order and each judge should consider the various dimen - sions of judgment in a different random or - der . If all judgments were made in the same order by all judges , high levels of interjudge reliability might reflect method artifacts . Once the judgments are obtained , ratings on each dimension should be analyzed for interjudge reliability . In addition , if several subjective dimensions of judgment have been obtained , these should be subjected to a fac - tor analysis to determine the degree of in - dependence between creativity and the other dimensions . Finally , if the products lend themselves to a straightforward identification of specific objective features , these features may be assessed and correlated with creativ - ity judgments . Given the consensual definition of cre - ativity , the most important criterion for the results of this assessment procedure is that the ratings be reliable . By definition , inter - judge reliability in this method is equivalent to construct validity ; if appropriate judges independently agree that a given product is highly creative , then it can and must be ac - cepted as such . In addition , it should be pos - sible to separate subjective judgments of cre - ativity from judgments of technical goodness and from judgments of aesthetic appeal . Ob - viously , for some domains of endeavor , it may be relatively difficult to obtain ratings of aesthetic appeal and technical quality that are not highly correlated with ratings of cre - ativity . However , it is important to demon - strate that it is at least possible to separate these dimensions . Otherwise , the discrimi - CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1003 nant validity of the measure would be in doubt ; judges might be rating something as creative simply because they like it or be - cause they find it to be technically well done . Judges ' ratings can be used to determine if the original task presented to subjects was appropriate for the purposes of a social - psy - chological methodology . Certainly , if virtu - ally all of the subjects in a random sample of a population are able to do the task and report no technical difficulty in doing so ( i . e . , in manipulating the materials , in finishing within a reasonable period of time , and x so on ) , this suggests that the task was well - cho - sen for these purposes . If later judging of the products reveals a low correlation between judged creativity and experience - related characteristics of the subjects ( e . g . , age , ex - perience with the particular type of materi - als ) , then the task can truly be considered a satisfactory one . 1 Application to Artistic Creativity In a program of research carried out over the last 5 years , several studies have dem - onstrated that it is possible to develop a re - liable subjective assessment technique appro - priate for social - psychological studies of cre - ativity . Most of these examined artistic creativity , an area that has often been ne - glected by traditional assessment methods . Study 1 Method Subjects and judges . Subjects were 22 girls , aged 7 - 11 years , who each participated in one of two group sessions held in their apartment complex in Palo Alto , California . Because this was the preliminary investiga - tion of this assessment technique , three different groups of judges were used , varying in expertise with art : ( a ) psychologist judges—12 members of the Stanford Uni - versity psychology department ( faculty and graduate stu - dents ) , ( b ) art teachers—21 members of an art education course in the Stanford University School of Education ( many of whom were elementary - and secondary - school art teachers ) , ( c ) artist judges—7 undergraduate and graduate artists from the art department at Stanford University , each of whom had spent at least 5 years working in studio art . 2 Materials . All subjects were given identical sets of materials to work with : over 100 pieces of lightweight paper in several different sizes , shapes , and colors ( all arranged identically for each subject ) , a container of glue , and a 15 inch X 20 inch ( . 38 m X . 51 m ) piece of white cardboard . Procedure . The girls were seated at widely spaced places at long tables , given their materials , and asked to spend some time making a design for the experimenter . 3 The experimenter then demonstrated gluing shapes onto paper , and the children practiced with some scrap ma - terials . None appeared to have any difficulty in working with the materials . Following this , the children were told that they could use the materials in any way they wished to make a design that was " silly . " This silliness theme was used as a way to obtain a relatively high baseline level of creativity and to reduce one source of vari - ability—the themes children might employ—that could serve to make the judges ' task more difficult . After 18 minutes ( at which time virtually everyone had finished ) , the children were asked to stop . All judges were told that the designs had been made by children in 18 minutes . Each psychologist judge was individually asked to rank the designs from most to least creative , using his or her own subjective definition of creativity . The art teachers were shown professionally made slides of the 22 designs and were also asked to use their own subjective definitions of creativity in making assessments . They were asked to assign each design to one of five categories immediately after viewing it : ( a ) very uncreative ( b ) rather uncreative ( c ) undecided ( d ) rather creative or ( e ) very creative . The artist judges were recruited to spend 4 hours in an individual session judging the 22 designs on a variety of dimensions . As with the other two groups of judges , the artists were allowed to inspect all 22 designs before making any judgment on any one design and were told that the designs had been made by children in 18 min - utes . They evaluated each of the 22 designs on 23 dif - 1 Of course , in the extremes , experience - related vari - ables will be important regardless of the particular task chosen . For this reason , care should be taken in elimi - nating extremes in ability level on the task in question . For example , if a verbal task was being used , it would be inappropriate to include an age range of 5 - 15 years in the population for a given study , even if the task had been chosen to minimize the importance of special ver - bal skills . Likewise , if an artistic task was being used with a population of college students , it would be inappro - priate to include students who had been doing studio art for several years along with students who have no in - volvement in art , even if the task does not depend in an obvious way upon draftsmanship . 2 It is difficult to provide a clear rule for the number of judges to be used . By the Spearman - Brown reliability calculation ( Nunnally , 1967 ) , the mean judge correla - tion and the number of judges both contribute to the interjudge reliability . Thus , to the extent that the judging is a difficult task and the mean interjudge correlation is low , the number of judges should be increased . However , if the mean correlation is high , good reliabilities can be obtained with fewer judges . 3 Of the artistic creativity studies presented here , this is the only one in which subjects worked in groups . They were , however , encouraged by the experimenters to " do their own thing " and not to copy or interfere with the other girls . The experimenters were present throughout the session and observed that there was very little imi - tation of ideas or techniques . 1004 TERESA M . AMABILE Table 1 Factor Analysis on 23 Dimensions of Artistic Creativity Judgment : Study 1 Factor loading Dimension Factor 1 : Creativity Factor 2 : TechnicalGoodness Creativity cluster CreativityNovel use of materials Novel idea Effort evident Variation in shapes DetailComplexity . 68 . 78 . 55 . 85 . 72 . 95 . 91 - . 23 - . 21 - . 18 . 23 - . 04 . 09 - . 30 Technical cluster Technical goodness OrganizationNeatnessPlanningRepresentationalismSymmetryExpression of meaning . 16 - . 08 - . 34 . 10 . 00 - . 34 - . 01 . 54 . 67 . 51 . 83 . 95 . 48 . 92 Aesthetic judgment Liking . 22 Aesthetic appeal - . 04 Would you display it ? . 22 . 04 . 14 . 28 ferent dimensions including creativity , technical good - ness , and aesthetic appeal . A nonrestrictive definition of each dimension was provided at the top of its rating sheet ( e . g . , " Creativity : Using your own , subjective defi - nition of creativity , the degree to which the design is creative . " ) . The judges were asked to keep the different dimensions of judgment as separate from one another as possible , and they were instructed to rate the collages relative to one another on each dimension rather than rating them against some absolute standard of art . The artist - judges were presented with continuous scales for making each judgment . These scales had five equally spaced , reference points marked , three of which were labeled " high , " " medium , " and " low . " The judges were told to make each judgment by placing an X any - where on the scale . They were asked to view the scale as having equal spacing between the five reference points , and they were encouraged to make use of the entire range of the scale . On four of the dimensions ( creativity , technical goodness , liking , and silliness ) , the artist - judges were also asked to assign each design to one of three categories ( high , medium , low ) and to rank all 22 designs from highest to lowest on the given dimen - sion . The designs were arranged in a different random order for each artist - judge , and the dimensions were judged in different random orders ( e . g . , all designs judged on balance , then all judged on creativity , and so on ) . The various judgment tasks were described to judges before - hand , and the judges were given loose time limits to help them pace themselves through the judgment tasks . Results Interjudge reliabilities ( Winer , 1971 ) were calculated for each of the three groups of judges . 4 The reliability of the rankings on creativity provided by the 12 psychologist judges was . 73 ; that of the creativity ratings made by the 21 art teachers was . 88 . Inter - judge reliabilities for the seven artist - judges , on the 23 dimensions of judgment were , on the whole , quite good . The reliability of the creativity ratings was . 77 and that of the tech - nical goodness ratings was . 72 . In addition , 16 of the 23 dimensions had reliabilities greater than . 80 ; the median reliability was . 77 . There was little systematic difference between the reliabilities of the scale ratings , the rankings , and the category groupings for those four dimensions that were assessed in all three ways . Thus , in subsequent studies , only the scale ratings were used . The agreement between different groups of judges on their creativity assessments was fairly good . The correlation between the psy - chologist - judges ' mean creativity ranking for each design and the artist - judges ' mean cre - ativity ranking was . 44 , p < . 05 . The correla - tion between the art teachers and the artist - judges was even higher : . 65 , p < . 01 . Several of the dimensions assessed by the artist - judges did , indeed , correlate with their judgments of creativity . In addition , how - ever , it appears that the creativity judgments were psychologically separate for the judges from their assessments of technical compe - tence and aesthetic appeal . A factor analysis done on the mean ratings of all 23 dimen - sions of judgment for each design ( varimax rotation ) revealed two major factors that were essentially orthogonal to one another . 4 The technique of calculating interjudge reliabilities presented by Winer ( 1971 ) involves an analysis of be - tween - design and within - design variance in ratings , and the result depends on the number of judges used . The Spearman - Brown calculation of reliabilities ( Nunnally , 1967 ) , which also depends on the number of judges , yields results for these analyses that are virtually identical to those obtained by the analysis of variance technique . Because the Spearman - Brown calculations are considerably simpler , they were used in subsequent studies . CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1005 These appear to be a Creativity factor and a Technical Goodness factor . Many of the 23 dimensions clustered rather neatly about these two factors ; loadings on the factors are presented in Table 1 . It is important to note that liking for and aesthetic appeal of the collages loaded low on both of these main factors , as did the rated " silliness " of the de - sign . A number of objective measures were made on the collages by two independent raters : number of pieces used , number of col - ors used , number of shape categories used ( circles , squares , crescents , and so on ) , num - ber of pieces altered in some way ( ripped , folded , and so on ) , and number of pieces that overlapped other pieces , in addition to sev - eral other objective features of the collages . Interrater agreement on these measures was nearly 100 % . Many of the objective features did indeed correlate significantly with the artist - judges ' ratings of creativity : number of colors , r = . 48 , p < . 05 ; number of pieces , r = . 64 , p < . 01 ; shape categories , r = . 52 , p < . 05 ; pieces altered , r = . 37 , p < . 05 ; and pieces overlapping , r = . 62 , p < . 01 . Importantly , age of the child did not cor - relate significantly with any of the groups of judges ' assessments of creativity , although it did correlate with the rated technical good - ness of the collages , r = . 46 , p < . 05 . Studies 2 and 3 Method These studies also employed children as subjects . Study 2 included 55 boys and 56 girls drawn from Grades 2 - 6 at a parochial school in eastern Massachu - - setts . Study 3 included 24 boys and 23 girls enrolled in Grades 1 and 2 at a nontraditional ' ' open " school in eastern Massachusetts . In Study 2 , the judges were six undergraduate studio art majors from Brandeis Univer - sity , each with at least 4 years of studio art experience . In Study 3 , the judges were seven artists from Brandeis University 5 and seven nonartists ( psychology graduate students , undergraduates , and elementary - school teach - ers from schools other than that in which the study was conducted ) . Using the same materials as in Study 1 , each child in these studies worked individually on making a collage for about 15 minutes . Following the standard procedures , each judge rated each collage on creativity and technical goodness . Results In Study 2 , the interjudge reliabilities were . 77 for creativity and . 72 for technical good - ness . Again , the correlation between subject age and rated creativity of the collage was nonsignificant , r = . 12 , whereas the correla - tion between subject age and rated technical goodness was significant , r = . 28 , p < . 01 . There were no significant differences be - tween boys and girls in rated creativity , r ( 109 ) = . 68 . In Study 3 , the interjudge reliability for creativity judgments was . 81 for the artists , . 83 for the nonartists , and . 89 when all 14 judges were considered together . The reli - ability for technical goodness judgments was . 72 for the artists , . 80 for the nonartists , and . 83 for all 14 judges . For creativity judg - ments , the correlation between artists and nonartists was . 69 , p < . 001 . Over all judges , the correlation between creativity and tech - nical goodness judgments was . 77 . Studies 4 , 5 , and 6 6 Method The subjects in each of these studies were college un - dergraduates : 95 women at Stanford University in Study 4 , 10 men and 10 women at Stanford University in Study 5 , and 40 women at Brandeis University in Study 6 . Using the standard materials , each subject was given 15 minutes to make a collage that " conveyed a feeling of silliness . " In addition , in Study 5 , half of the male and half of the female subjects were asked to " be as creative as possible . " , The judges were 15 artists with at least 5 years of studio art experience in Study 4 , 14 nonartist under - graduate and graduate students in Study 5 , and 10 stu - dents working on honors projects in studio art in Study 6 . All judges rated the collages from their study individ - ually , according to the standard procedure . In Study 4 , the judges rated each collage on each of 16 different artistic dimensions , which had been formed by elimi - nating from the 23 dimensions used in Study 1 those that had low interjudge reliabilities or had not clustered with the creativity or technical goodness judgments . Results The interjudge reliability of the creativity judgments in Study 4 was . 79 . In general , the reliabilities of all the subjective judgments in this study were quite high ; 12 of the 16 di - mension reliabilities were above . 80 , and the median reliability was . 84 . Only one dimen - sion of judgment , balance , failed to reach an 5 Some of these judges had also participated in Study 2 . 6 A more complete report of Study 4 can be found in Amabile ( 1979 ) . 1006 TERESA M . AMABILE acceptable reliability level . As in Study 1 , a factor analysis was performed on the dimen - sions of judgment . With three exceptions , the 16 dimensions clustered almost exactly as they had in the earlier analysis . There were two nearly orthogonal factors : one composed of creativity , novel material use , novel idea , effort evident , variation of shapes , detail , and complexity ; and one composed of neatness , organization , planning evident , balance , and expression of meaning . The asymmetry di - mension ( the negative of the symmetry judg - ments ) loaded sufficiently low on the cre - ativity factor that it did not cluster with the others . In addition , representationalism loaded nearly zero on both factors , and the single dimension of technical goodness loaded high not only on the technical factor but also on the creativity factor . In Study 5 , the judges rated the collages only on creativity ; the reliability of these judgments was . 93 . Instructions to " be cre - ative " had no impact on the rated creativity of the collages ( F < 1 ) , but there was a trend toward a sex difference ; females made col - lages that were rated higher in creativity than those of the males , F ( l , 16 ) = 4 . 39 , p < . 10 . There were no significant differences between the ratings assigned by female judges and those assigned by male judges , t ( l9 ) = 1 . 47 . Both creativity and technical goodness were rated in Study 6 , and the reliabilities were . 93 and . 91 , respectively . The correla - tion between the two dimensions was . 70 . Discussion of Collage Studies This set of studies on the development of a reliable subjective method for assessing ar - tistic creativity has demonstrated several strengths of the methodology . Of primary importance , these studies have shown that it is possible to obtain high levels of agree - ment in subjective judgments of creativity , even when the judges are working indepen - dently and have not been trained to agree in any way . Thus , according to the consensual definition of creativity presented earlier , this can be considered a valid measure of cre - ativity in these products . It appears , however , that the levels of in - terjudge agreement for this task may depend to some degree on the magnitude of effort required of judges . For artists , the correlation between the total number of dimensions judged and the mean interjudge correlation of the creativity judgments is — . 43 . For all judge groups , this correlation is — . 24 . Like - wise , for artists , the correlation between number of collages judged at a given time and mean interjudge correlation of the cre - ativity judgments is - . 33 . For all judge groups , this correlation is - . 14 . This is per - haps not surprising , because in Study 4 , where each artist spent approximately 4 hours rating 95 collages on each of 16 di - mensions , the mean interjudge correlation was only . 21 ; by contrast , in Study 6 , where each artist - judge spent only about ¥2 hour rating 40 collages on 2 dimensions , the mean interjudge correlation was . 57 . Possible fac - tors of judge fatigue and difficulty in main - taining consistent criteria throughout the judging task should be taken into account by increasing the number of judges used under such circumstances . It is interesting that level of expertise of the judges appears not to matter as much as might have been expected for this task . Over all six studies , there is no clear superiority of artists over nonartists in interjudge reliabil - ity . The mean interjudge correlation is . 35 for the former group and . 33 for the latter group . Moreover , nonartists and artists do not appear to be subjectively defining cre - ativity in very different ways . In those studies where both types of judges were used ( Studies 1 and 3 ) , the degree of agreement between the groups is quite high ( . 44 and . 65 in Study 1 , . 69 in Study 3 ) . This , of course , raises the question of who is to be considered an expert for the purposes of the present methodology and , thus , who is to be considered an appro - priate judge . It appears that the only require - ment is a familiarity with the domain of en - deavor in which the product was made . Ap - parently , all the groups of judges used in these collage studies shared some requisite minimal level of familiarity with collages . Indeed , it is probably true that for some do - mains—judging cartoon captions , for ex - ample—any " ordinary " individuals with an average level of exposure to the written me - dia would be appropriate judges . On the other hand , there are other areas—for ex - ample , medical research or atonal music—in CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1007 which , to be an appropriate judge , an indi - vidual must have received special training in the field . Otherwise , the judges ' familiarity with the domain would be in doubt and their level of agreement would almost certainly suffer . These studies have also demonstrated that subjective judgments of the creativity of art - works can be separated from judgments of their aestheic appeal and technical goodness . In Study 1 , aesthetic judgments loaded very low on both the Creativity and the Technical Goodness factors in the factor analysis . In both Study 1 and Study 4 ( the two studies in which enough dimensions were judged to warrant a factor analysis ) , there was a clear separation between the Technical Goodness and Creativity factors . It must be noted , how - ever , that the single dimension labeled Tech - nical Goodness does not seem to consistently capture the technical component of subjec - tive judgments . Although the correlation be - tween the single Creativity and Technical Goodness dimensions was only . 13 and . 26 in Studies 1 and 2 , respectively , it was . 77 , . 68 , and . 70 in Studies 3 , 4 , and 6 , respec - tively . Because the factor analyses did con - sistently yield a good separation between the Creativity and Technical Goodness factory , it may be that a scale labeled something other than Technical Goodness would better cap - ture the distinct set of features that includes neatness , organization , planning , and so on , and that ratings on such a scale would be more consistently distinct from ratings on the Creativity scale . Although they were independent of the technicaland aesthetic judgments , the cre - ativity ratings were correlated with several other subjective judgments and a number of objective features of the collages as well . A clearly delineated set of artistic dimensions clustered closely with creativity in a factor analysis of subjective judgments , and in Study 1 , several physical features of the col - lages correlated with assessments of cre - ativity . It is of particular significance for a social psychology of creativity that it is possible , as demonstrated in these studies , to find a cre - ativity assessment task that does not depend heavily on the special skills that some indi - viduals may have developed more highly than others . The collage task was quite man - ageable for both adults and children and , among the children , there was no apparent relationship between age and creative per - formance . Thus , this type of task could be used in experimental studies of social and environmental influences on creativity . Application to Verbal Creativity Study 7 Method Subjects and judges . The subjects were 48 female students enrolled in an introductory psychology class at Brandeis University . Two groups of judges assessed the finished products , which were five - line stanzas . Group 1 was composed of seven males and three females re - cruited from the English department of Brandeis Uni - versity ; all had had at least three years ' experience study - ing poetry at an advanced level and writing poetry them - selves . Several were published poets . Group 2 was composed of five published poets and five nonpoets who lived in Cambridge , Massachusetts . The five nonpoets were of approximately the same age and background as the poets . Procedure . Each subject was given 20 minutes to work individually on writing a cinquain . 7 A cinquain is a simplified form of unrhymed poetry consisting of 5 lines : Line 1 is a single noun ; Line 2 consists of two adjectives describing the noun ; Line 3 consists of three verb forms relating to the noun ; Line 4 contains any number of words ( a phrase or sentence about the noun ) ; Line 5 repeats the noun of Line 1 . After the initial in - structions , subjects were presented with two examples of cinquains . All subjects were provided with the first line of the poem they were to write—the word joy —in an effort to reduce variability and to make the judging task somewhat easier . The judges in Group 1 participated together in one session . Of course , since the judging task involved read - ing , each judge was able to work completely indepen - dently . Indeed , the judges were not allowed to discuss the poems or the judging task at any time before the session was completed . They were each given copies of the instructions that subjects had received and were told that the female undergraduate subjects had had 20 min - utes in which to write their poems . Each judge had copies of the 38 poems and was allowed to read through all of them prior to making any judgments . These judges all rated each poem on creativity , using their " own subjec - tive definition of creativity . " The judges in Group 2 , also participating in one group session , rated each of 24 poems on 14 different dimensions , including creativity , use of the poetic form , and liking . 8 Scales similar to those 7 Pretesting indicated that 20 minutes was ample time for subjects to finish . 8 Half of the original 48 poems were randomly chosen for assessment by Group 2 . This was done because the task of rereading each poem for rating on each of the 1008 TERESA M . AMABILE Table 2 Factor Analysis on 14 Dimensions of Judgment for Group 2 : Study 7 Factor loading Dimension Factor 1 : Creativity Factor 2 : Style Factor 3 : Technical ClarityAppropriatenessConsistency Creativity cluster CreativityNovelty of word choice Originality of idea SophisticationRhythm . 91 . 91 . 88 . 90 . 78 . 30 . 25 . 36 . 31 . 36 . 21 . 24 . 06 . 13 . 10 Style cluster . 23 . 47 . 44 . 89 . 82 . 81 . 27 . 20 . 16 GrammarUse of form Technical cluster . 19 . 14 . 17 . 22 . 90 . 91 used in the collage judging were employed . Indeed , the judging procedure for both Group 1 and Group 2 was virtually identical to that used in the collage studies . Results The interjudge reliability of almost all sub - jective judgments was quite high . The reli - ability of creativity judgments was . 87 for Group 1 and . 90 for Group 2 . For the 14 dimensions rated by Group 2 , 13 of the re - liabilities were above . 70 ; the median reli - ability was . 82 . In addition , in Group 2 , the correlation between the creativity judgments of poets and nonpoets was quite high : . 80 . A factor analysis ( varimax rotation ) of the 14 dimensions rated by Group 2 did not pro - duce as clear a separation as was obtained with judgments on the collages . All of the dimensions loaded positively on the two main factors , and some loaded rather high on both . However , there did seem to be some meaningful clusters of dimensions ( see Table 2 ) . Liking judgments did not cluster closely 14 dimensions was quite time consuming . This proce - dure was preferable to one in which each poem was rated on all 14 dimensions before the next poem was rated on any dimension , however , because the former procedure made it more likely that each judge would apply his or her subjective criteria for each particular dimension more consistently . with the five creativity dimensions because the former loaded fairly high on both the Creativity and the Style factors . However , the correlation between judges ' creativity ratings and their liking ratings was . 94 . Study 8 Method Subjects in this study were 40 undergraduate females recruited from an introductory psychology class at Bran - deis University . They wrote cinquains under the same procedure as had been used for Study 7 . The judges were six poets living in the Cambridge , Massachusetts area . 9 These judges worked individually on the assessment tasks in their homes ; they were mailed copies of the 40 poems and were asked to follow the same judging pro - cedures as had been followed in the group session for Study 7 . In addition , they were given written instructions identical to those used in the previous study . Each judge rated each of the 40 poems on creativity , clarity of expression , and use of poetic form . Results Although somewhat lower than the inter - judge reliabilities obtained in Study 7 , two of the three reliabilities here did meet ac - ceptable levels . The reliability of creativity judgments was . 77 ; poetic form judgments , ' Five of these six judges had served in Study 7 . CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1009 . 91 ; and clarity judgments , . 62 . Creativity judgments correlated — . 16 with poetic form judgments and . 38 with clarity judgments ; both correlations are nonsignificant . Discussion of Poetry Studies This preliminary attempt to extend the proposed assessment technique to the verbal domain was successful on many counts . First , and most important , subjective judg - ments of creativity of the poems were shown to have high interjudge reliability . In addi - tion , although the separation was not quite as clear as it had been with the artistic judg - ments in Studies 1 and 4 , there was a sepa - ration between the Creativity factor and other factors rated in a factor analysis of the subjective judgments in Study 7 . As noted earlier , although ratings of liking for the poem did not cluster closely with the cre - ativity dimensions on that factor analysis , the single liking dimension was highly correlated with the single creativity dimension . Thus , it appears that although it may be possible for some types of products to obtain creativ - ity judgments that are clearly uncontami - nated by assessments of liking , creativity judgments for other types of products may be more tightly bound up with assessments of aesthetic appeal . As with the collages , it appears that a very high level of judge expertise is not required to ensure a high level of reliability in ratings of the cinquains . The level of agreement in creativity ratings between nonpoets and pub - lished poets in Group 2 of Study 7 was . 80 . This high level of agreement might have arisen because the cinquain is so simple and because most educated individuals in our culture are familiar with simple poetic forms . As N noted earlier , higher levels of expertise would probably be required to ensure reli - ability of judgments of very complex prod - ucts or products that would not be generally familiar . It is also important to note that , like the collage - making task , the cinquain task ap - pears not to depend heavily on special skills . None of the subjects in either study expressed any difficulty in writing the poem or in com - pleting it easily in the time allotted . In ad - dition , these studies demonstrated that this assessment technique can be adapted for very different kinds of tasks . The collage making is completely nonverbal , involving the ma - nipulation of paper and glue . In contrast , the task of writing a cinquain requires the com - position of three original lines . It seems prob - able , therefore , that this methodology could be successfully employed for a variety of tasks in a wide range of domains and that it could be generally useful in experimental studies on the social psychology of creativity . General Discussion Contrast to Previous Methods In its basic approach , the methodology described here is the conceptual reverse of that adopted by traditional objective creativ - ity tests . In those tests , component tasks and subtasks are scored to yield a global assess - ment of an individual ' s creativity , an assess - ment that is ultimately based on the subjec - tive judgment of the psychometricians who devised the subtasks or the raters who score them . Instead , the present technique begins with a global , explicitly subjective assessment of creativity . This global judgment is then clearly demonstrated to be a reliable one . Once this is done , the judgment of creativity can tentatively be broken down into com - ponent parts ; it can then be examined to de - termine which other subjective judgments and , perhaps , which objective features of the product predict this judgment of creativity . As the studies presented here demonstrate , some progress toward this goal has already been made . Moreover , the subjective assessment tech - niqu6 proposed here appears to have ecolog - ical validity as a measure of creativity . Using materials that allow for considerable flexi - bility in response , subjects actually create something—a collage or a poem , for exam - ple—that " real world " creators might make . Then , using an approach that has clear prec - edents in social - psychological research ( e . g . , Thurstone & Chave , 1929 ; Walster et al . 1966 ) , reliable subjective judgments of the products are obtained from appropriate ob - servers . Thus , not only does the task itself mimic real - world performance but the as - sessment technique mimics real - world eval - uations of creative work . 1010 TERESA M . AMABILE The present methodology can be consid - ered a refinement of the subjective assess - ment techniques used in previous social - psy - chological and personality studies ( e . g . , Domino , 1974 ; Helson & Crutchfield , 1970 ; Kruglanski et al , 1971 ; MacKinnon , 1962 ; Sobel & Rothenberg , 1980 ) . In comparison with those techniques , the present method - ology can be more generally useful for social - psychological studies for two reasons . First , it calls for tasks that are structured to be rel - atively independent of skills such as writing or drawing ability . Second , in contrast to many subjective assessment studies in which judges make global ratings of a person ' s cre - ativity , in this technique judges make ratings of specific products . In addition , the reliabil - ity of creativity judgments across several groups of appropriate observers has been firmly established in the present method , in the absence of any attempts to train judges to agree . Finally , and perhaps most impor - tantly , the existence of a unique subjective construct called creativity has been demon - strated . Although judges were not provided with a definition of creativity , but were in - stead asked to use their own subjective defini - tions , they consistently and reliably identified a quality in both types of products that was distinct from technical execution . Moreover , for artworks , it was distinct from aesthetic appeal as well . It is important that this assessment meth - odology has been used in several studies in - vestigating substantive questions about cre - ativity . In particular , the methodology has been successfully applied in studies of task - motivational influences on creativity . In one such investigation ( Amabile , 1979 ) , subjects making collages either did or did not expect that their work would be evaluated by ex - perts . Those expecting external evaluation not only expressed a lower level of intrinsic interest in the activity but also produced col - lages that were significantly lower on judged creativity than those produced by noneval - uation subjects . Another study ( Goldfarb , Note 1 ) replicated this effect on the creativity of cinquains . 10 Thus , the construct validity of this subjective method of creativity as - sessment has been reinforced ; the method provides measures of a construct that be - haves as creativity was predicted to behave on the basis of theoretical derivations . Limitations of the Methodology Despite its advantages , the present tech - nique of creativity assessment is not pro - posed as an ultimate and universally useful methodology . Indeed , it has some specific limitations . First , if practical considerations are primary , this method is decidedly im - practical in the short run . Choosing an ap - propriate task and an appropriate judge pop - ulation , having several individuals judge the products ( sometimes on several dimensions ) , and doing statistical analyses are all time con - suming . In addition , to the extent that the task cho - sen is one that does not depend heavily on particular abilities and experience - related skills , the approach is probably not a useful one for identifying a wide range of enduring individual differences in creativity . However , because tasks can be chosen with this end in mind ( i . e . , with the inclusion of an appro - priate range of skills to be tapped ) , with mod - ification this method might prove to be a rea - sonable one even for such individual - differ - ence studies . Also , it may be difficult to apply this as - sessment technique to products that are at the frontiers of a particular domain of en - deavor . Consider , for example , revolutionary theories in science or revolutionary works of art . It would be difficult to apply this method to assess the creativity of these products be - cause it is precisely their revolutionary nature that makes it difficult for people , even sup - posed experts in their fields , to agree on the level of creativity evident . In fact , this prob - lem could be considered within the context of the familiarity criterion proposed earlier . These products are so different that no one is sufficiently familiar with the domain ( per - haps because the products create their own new domain ) to serve as an appropriate judge . Finally , a related caveat is that the reli - ability—and hence the validity—of the judg - ments obtained by this method are neces - sarily limited by historical time and place . It is doubtful that a group of Italian Renais - 10 In addition , although their subjective assessment methodology was considerably less complex than that outlined here , Kruglanski et al . ( 1971 ) found negative effects of expected reward on the rated creativity of sto - ries and titles . CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1011 sance painters would agree to a great degree with a group of contemporary American ar - tists in their creativity judgments of any given group of artworks from any era . Clearly , the shared subjective criteria of creativity in any domain of endeavor do change over time and do differ across cultures . This need not nec - essarily be considered a limitation , however . Many previous theorists have realized that the judgment of creativity is historically and culturally bound , " and it seems unreasona - ble to expect that universal and enduring cri - teria—even subjective criteria—could ever be agreed upon . Future Directions Although the preliminary studies reported earlier lay the groundwork for the assessment methodology proposed here , further refine - ment and extension of the technique are re - quired in a number of areas . First , attempts should be made to extend the subjective as - sessment methodology to other domains of endeavor and to other types of tasks within the artistic and verbal domains already ex - plored . Second , a finer identification of ob - jective and subjective correlates of creativity judgments may be possible . Third , the limits of interjudge reliability should be explored , especially where the products being judged are in relatively new domains or represent truly pioneering work . Fourth , since the re - sults presented earlier suggested that certain characteristics of the judging task—such as the number of products or dimensions to be judged—can influence interjudge agreement , it is important to determine what other fea - tures of the judging task might also influence reliability . Fifth , more work is needed on the identification of appropriate judges for par - ticular types of products and on the influence of judge characteristics on interjudge reli - ability . Sixth , because the studies presented here showed reasonable but not perfect sep - aration between creativity and other dimen - sions of subjective judgment , it is important to determine under what circumstances and for what types of products and domains of endeavor creativity judgments will and will not be clearly separated from assessments of the technical and aesthetic aspects of prod - ucts . Finally , attempts should be made to determine whether this subjective assessment technique could be usefully adapted not only for the social psychology of creativity but also for the identification of individual differences in creativity . The arguments presented here on the mer - its of various creativity - assessment tech - niques for different types of psychological in - quiries raises a more general point about the aims and methods of personality and social psychology . Most simply stated , it is the pur - pose of personality psychology to identify stable characteristics and abilities and to study the ways in which they are related to other characteristics and abilities . Thus , per - sonality researchers generally look for con - sistency of behavior over time and across sit - uations and for evidence of a given trait in a variety of behavioral domains . For these purposes , measures that are particularly sen - sitive to stable baseline individual differences are most useful . On the other hand , most simply stated , it is the purpose of social psy - chology to investigate the impact of social and environmental factors on most people or on the " average " person . Thus , social psy - chologists are less concerned with within - group variability ( and in fact seek to reduce it where possible ) and more interested in sit - uationally induced between - group differ - ences in behavior . Such differences , although they may be large and important ones , are usually of relatively brief duration when compared to the enduring individual differ - ences that personality researchers seek to identify . For their purposes , then , social psy - chologists require measures that are not par - ticularly sensitive to baseline individual dif - ferences but do allow room for variability in response . This difference between appropri - ate methods applies not only to creativity assessment but also to measurement in a wide range of other behavioral domains that are of interest to both social and personality psychology . Rather than proposing a new and easily applicable creativity test , the consensual as - sessment technique instead presents a some - what time - consuming general methodology that can produce clear and reliable subjective " For example , Stein ( i975 , p . 253 ) defines creativity as " a process that results in a novel product or idea which is accepted as useful , tenable , or satisfying by a significant group of others at some point in time . " 1012 TERESA M . AMABILE judgments of creativity . In the long run , though , more than any single creativity test , this methodological approach may facilitate the inclusion of creativity in a comprehensive theory of social - psychological influences on performance and the inclusion of social psy - chological influences in a comprehensive the - ory of creativity . Reference Note 1 . Goldfarb , P . The effects of evaluation expectation and coaction on verbal creativity . Unpublished manu - script , Brandeis University , 1978 . ( Available from T . Amabile , Department of Psychology , Brandeis Uni - versity , Waltham , Massachusetts 02254 ) : References Amabile , T . M . Effects of external evaluation on artistic creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 1979 , 37 , 221 - 233 . Amabile , T . M . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , in press . Barren , F . The disposition toward originality . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1955 , 51 , 478 - 485 . Bruner , J . The conditions of creativity . In H . Gruber , G . Terrell , & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking . New York : Atherton Press , 1962 . Carlsmith , J . , Ellsworth , P . , & Aronson , E . Methods of research in social psychology . Reading , Mass . : Addi - son - Wesley , 1976 . Condry , J . Enemies of exploration : Self - initiated versus other - initiated learning . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1977 , 35 , 459 - 477 . Deci , E . Effects of externally mediated rewards on in - trinsic motivation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1971 , 18 , 105 - 115 . Diener , C , & Dweck , C . An analysis of learned help - lessness : Continuous changes in performance , strat - egy , and achievement cognitions following failure . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1978 , 36 , 451 - 462 . Domino , G . Assessment of cinematographic creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1974 , 30 , 150 - 154 . Eisner , E . A typology of creative behavior in the visual arts . American Educational Research Journal , 1965 , 2 , 125 - 136 . Feldman , D . Beyond universals in cognitive develop - ment . Norwood , N . J . : Ablex , 1980 . Gakhar , S . , & Luthra , S . The test - retest reliability of Torrance Tests of Verbal Creative Thinking in a sam - ple of ninth and tenth grade Indian children . Journal of the Indian Academy of Applied Psychology , 1973 , 10 , 48 - 52 . Getzels , J . , & Jackson , P . Creativity and intelligence : Exploration with gifted students . New York : Wiley , 1962 . Ghiselin , B . Ultimate criteria for two levels of creativity . In C . Taylor & F . Barren ( Eds . ) , Scientific creativity : Its recognition and development . New York : Wiley 1963 . Gough , H . A creative personality scale for the adjective check list . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 1979 , 37 , 1398 - 1407 . Guilford , J . P . The structure of intellect . Psychological Bulletin , 1956 , 53 , 267 - 293 . Guilford , J . P . A revised structure of intellect . Report of the Psychological Laboratory , University of Southern California , No . 19 , 1957 . ( a ) Guilford , J . P . Creative abilities in the arts . Psychological Review , 1957 , 64 , 110 - 118 . ( b ) Guilford , J . P . Traits of creativity . In H . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Creativity and its cultivation . New York : Harper , 1959 . Guilford , J . The nature of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1967 . Helson , R . , & Crutchfield , R . Mathematicians : The cre - ative researcher and the average PhD . Journal of Con - sulting and Clinical Psychology , 1970 , 34 , 250 - 257 . Holland , J . Test reviews . Journal of Counseling Psy - chology , 1968 , 15 , 297 - 298 . Kruglanski , A . , Friedman , E . , & Zeevi , G . The effects of extrinsic incentives on some qualitative aspects of task performance . Journal of Personality , 1971 , 39 , 606 - 617 . Lepper , M . , Greene , D . , & Nisbett , R . Undermining children ' s intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward : A test of the " overjustiflcation " hypothesis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1973 , 28 , 129 - 137 . Lott , B . Behavioral concordance with sex role ideology related to play areas , creativity , and parental sex typ - ing of children . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1978 , 36 , 1087 - 1100 . MacKinnon , D . The nature and nurture of creative tal - ent . American Psychologist , 1962 , 17 , 484 - 495 . McGraw , K . . , & McCullers , J . Evidence of a detrimental effect of extrinsic incentives on breaking a mental set . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 1979 , 15 , 285 - 294 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . , & Simon , H . The processes of cre - ative thinking . In H . Gruber , G . Terrell , & M . Werth - eimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking . New York : Atherton Press , 1962 . Nicholls , J . Creativity in the person who will never pro - duce anything original and useful : The concept of creativity as a normally distributed trait . American Psychologist , 1972 , 27 , 717 - 727 . Nunnally , J . Psychometric theory . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1967 . Seta , J . , & Hassan , R . Awareness of prior success or failure : A critical factor in task performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1980 , 39 , 70 - 76 . Simonton , D . K . Sociocultural context of individual cre - ativity : A transhistorical time - series analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975 , 32 , 1119 - 1133 . Simonton , D . K . Creative productivity , age , and stress : A biographical time - series analysis of 10 classical com - posers . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1977 , 55 , 791 - 804 . ( a ) CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT 1013 Simonton , D . K . Eminence , creativity , and geographic marginality : A recursive structural equation model . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1977 , 35 , 805 - 816 . ( b ) Simonton , D . K . Multiple discovery and invention : Zeitgeist , genius , or chance ? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1979 , ^ 7 , 1603 - 1616 , Sobel , R . , & Rothenberg , A . Artistic creation as stim - ulated by superimposed versus separated visual im - ages . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 198 , 0 , 39 , 953 - 960 . Stein , M . Stimulating creativity ( Vol . 1 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1974 . Stein , M . Stimulating creativity ( Vol . 2 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1975 . Thurstone , L . , & Chave , E . The measurement of attitude . Chicago : University of Illinois Press , 1929 . Torrance , E . P . Guiding creative talent . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1962 . Torrance , E . P . Career patterns and peak creative achievements of creative high school students twelve years later . Gifted Child Quarterly , 1972 , 16 , 75 - 88 . ( a ) Torrance , E . P . Predictive validity of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . Journal of Creative Behavior , 1972 , 6 , 236 - 252 . ( b ) Wallach , M . , & Kogan , N . Modes of thinking in young children . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston , 1965 . Walster , E . , Aronson , V . , Abrahams , D . , & Rottman , L . Importance of physical attractiveness in dating be - havior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1966 , 4 , 508 - 516 . Wimperis , B , , & Farr , J . The effects of task content and reward contingency upon task performance and sat - isfaction . Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 1979 , 9 , 229 - 249 . Winer , B . Statistical principles in experimental design . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1971 . Received August 28 , 1981 • Instructions to Authors APA policy prohibits an author from simultaneously submitting the same manuscript to two or more journals . Authors should prepare manuscripts according to the Publication Manual of the American Psychological ^ Association ( 2nd edition ) and the " Guidelines for Nonsexist Language in APA Journals " ( Publication Manual Change Sheet 2 , American Psy - chologist , June 1977 , pp . 487 - 494 ) . Manuscripts must include an abstract of 100 - 175 words . Instructions on tables , figures , references , metrics , and typing ( all copy must be double - spaced ) appear in the Manual . Articles not prepared according to the Manual will not be reviewed . For further information on content , authors should refer to the editorial in the March 1979 issue of this journal ( Vol . 37 , No . 3 , pp . 468 - 469 ) . The reference citation for any article in any JPSP section follows APA ' s standard reference style for journal articles ; that is , authors , article title , journal title , year of publication , volume number , and page numbers . ( See Example 1 , p . 122 of the Publication Manual , 2nd ed . ) The citation does not include the section title . Manuscripts should be submitted in quadruplicate ( an original and 3 copies ) to the ap - propriate section editor . All copies should be clear , readable , and on paper of good quality . Editors ' addresses appear on the inside front cover of the journal . Authors should keep a copy of the manuscript to guard against loss . Blind review is optional and must be specifically requested when a manuscript is first submitted . In those cases , authors ' names and affiliations must appear only on a separate title page , included with each copy of the manuscript . Footnotes containing the identity of authors or their affiliations must be on a separate sheet . Section editors reserve the right to redirect papers among themselves as appropriate unless an author specifically requests otherwise . Rejection by one section editor is considered re - jection by all , therefore a manuscript rejected by one section editor should not be submitted to another .