Organizational Memory Joline Morrison University of Wisconsin , Eau Claire morrisjp @ uwec . edu Lorne Olfman Claremont Graduate University Lorne . Olfman @ cgu . edu Organizational Memory ( OM ) can be defined as the way an organization applies past knowledge to present activities . This mini - track focuses on how information technology can assist organizations in capturing , structuring , retaining , and retrieving OM . It represents a primary forum for researchers in this domain to exchange ideas and present research results . We are also striving to make it a springboard for other activities that will expand our understanding of Organizational Memory . In addition to chairing the mini - track this year , we have organized a Task Force that has developed a series of position papers to provide a compendium of the state of the OM research area . Papers have been developed on the following topics : ( 1 ) Perspectives : theoretical perspectives of OM , and its relationshipsto organizational science and organizational learning ; ( 2 ) Systems Development : OM system development issues ( including but not restricted to requirements , integration with existing information systems ) ; a summary of existing systems and system types ; lessons learned from development ; ( 3 ) Researching Organizational Memory : what kinds of methods are valid and doable ; and ( 4 ) Empirical Research : a summary and classification of the empirical research studies that have been published . Our goal is to publish these task force papers as a book . For the minitrack this year we received 11 paper submissions , and accepted seven papers for presentation in two sessions . Papers in the first session address more conceptual OM issues , while the second session papers present systems and system evaluations . The first paper , " An Organizational Memory Information Systems Success Model : An Extension of DeLone and McLean’s I / S Success Model " by Murray Jennex , Lorne Olfman , Pituma Panthawi , and Yong - Tae Park , presents a model for assessing OM information system success that was derived from both the DeLone and McLean I / S success model and a case study of the utilization of OMIS at a nuclear power plant . The second paper , " Can Mission Statements Plant the Seeds of Dysfunctional Behaviors in an OM ? " by John Landry , analyzes organizational mission statements to determine if they plant the seeds for dysfunctional organizational memory . The final paper of the first session , " An Organizational Memory - based Approach for an Evolutionary Workflow Management System : Concepts and Implementation , " by Christoph Wargitsch , Thorsten Wewers , and Felix Theisinger , presents a design and implementation of an evolutionary workflow management system that is itself an OMIS . This paper received the minitrack " Best Paper " nomination . The second session opens with " Structuring Feedback for Groupware Use : Memory Based Awareness " by Gloria Mark and Alex Bordetsky . It examines the role of awareness and feedback in implementing an organizational memory information system within a groupware system . The second paper is " Collaborative Digital Data Analysis in Organizational Memory Systems " by Ricki Goldmann - Segal , John Willinsky , and V . Srinivasan Rao . It describes a prototype video system that can be used to capture , sort , represent , and interpret memory in organizations . The third paper , " Learning in Organisational Memory Information Systems : An IntelligentDecision Support Perspective , " by Henry Linger and Frada Burstein , addresses the issue of building OMISs in organizations that employ post - Fordist work practices , that is , work organized around teams . The final paper , " Experimental Evaluation of the Efficiency of a Case - based Organisational Memory Information System Used as a Decision Aid , " by Frada Burstein , Helen Smith , and S . M . Fung , describes a laboratory experiment that evaluates the efficiency and effectiveness of a case - based organizational memory system for evaluating student course transfer information at a large university in Australia . We appreciate the efforts of all our colleagues who submitted papers for publication , served as referees for the submitted papers , and attended ( or will attend ) the conference sessions and workshops . Through their efforts , we continue to have interesting discussions and fruitful exchanges of ideas on organizational memory .