94 July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Knowledge management—its models , products , tools and techniques—is beyond the point at which consumers can perceive substance over market - induced expectation . The fact that an organization’s ability to marshal and exploit its knowledge as a potent tool in sustaining its competitiveness was never in doubt . From business - driven extreme programming teams to knowledge - worker cells , the potential of proactively managing the implicit and explicit knowl - edge that emerges from work and interac - tion has been widely recognized . But as knowledge management has progressively distinguished itself from the traditional fields of data and information management , its proponents have learned that knowledge is a difficult and challenging thing to man - age . The discipline of knowledge manage - ment reflects this difficulty in its broad philosophical base and the range of approaches , from technological ones based on information management infrastructure through to sociotechnical ones that measure and develop knowledge capital [ 7 , 12 ] . Knowledge is a personal thing . We take the view that knowledge comes from a situ - ated , personal and internalized experience of the world . Far from being reducible to information schemas or templates , knowl - edge emerges from the combination of per - sonal skill , expertise , perception , history , and constructive memory . In its most basic form , knowledge is internalized know - how , Developing techniques to improve the process of converting information to knowledge . K NOWLEDGE M ANAGEMENT W ITH P ATTERNS If knowledge is power , then an awful lot of power is going to waste in the world . But not for want of products , tools , or techniques : for some time , many useful and practical knowledge management techniques have been obscured in the froth of successive marketing waves . As the meaning and applicability of knowledge management becomes clearer , we are finding that the tools and expertise needed to usefully manage critical business and project knowledge are within our grasp . By Daniel May and Paul Taylor COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 95 the ability to tacitly know—in any particu - lar context—what needs doing and how it should be done . It is developed whenever the individual applies his or her concepts , interpretations , and assumed conceptual relationships to the set of commonly observed phenomena in the world . So while we can commu - nicate data in the form of events and messages ( infor - mation ) formed using syntactic and seman - tic conventions , knowledge is a far more elusive property that does not quantify eas - ily , especially in our increasingly complex , heterogeneous work and personal environ - ments . What one person perceives as knowledge may be bland information in another’s eyes . So if we cannot reify knowl - edge objectively in databases or build tools that handle knowledge directly , a promising alternative is to capture and manage infor - mation in such a way that it supports how knowledge is made explicit and transferred . In doing so , we focus on devising tech - niques to improve the process where infor - mation is converted to knowledge . Here , we explore the use of patterns [ 1 , 3 ] as a powerful mechanism for this information - to - knowledge conversion . Patterns as Knowledge Media To illustrate the potential of using patterns for knowledge management , consider the pattern Sell Now , Resource Later ( see the table here ) , an example of a pattern from a pattern lan - guage that might describe the cor - porate culture of a consulting or professional ser - vices firm . It illustrates some of the key fea - tures that differentiate the patterns approach from other knowledge manage - ment or design transfer techniques . We will contrast some of these later , but for now , look through the syntax and structure of Sell Now , Resource Later as described in the table to consider the intent of the pattern . It describes in no uncertain terms the compa - ny’s resource scheduling strategy and opera - tional policy , and does this in an open way , allowing the reader to deconstruct this knowledge to its component parts and then reconstruct the solution’s rationale . The ele - ments of the pattern ( context , problem , forces , solution , rationale , resulting context , related patterns ) allow its readers to draw together a judgment as to its usefulness , appropriateness , and applicability in differ - from Tacit to Explicit : • pattern mining • shepherding • writers ' workshops from Explicit to Tacit : • selecting patterns • using patterns • reflecting on pattern use from Explicit to Explicit : • combining patterns • mixing patterns with other knowledge representations from Tacit to Tacit : • mentoring Tacit knowledge Explicitknowledge How patterns fit with the spiral of knowledge . T E RR Y M I U R A 96 July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM ent contexts . Sell Now , Resource Later makes a tacit optimistic resource allocation strategy for the con - sulting organization explicit and accessible . Organizational benefits . For the organization , this pattern’s strategic and operational value is clear . Supervisors find great value in being able to convey useful resource allocation strategies to first - time managers or new employees in a form that is infor - mal and easy to comprehend . As a technique for expressing knowledge , the process of identifying patterns serves to make explicit and vali - date tacit knowledge , so that it can be subsequently reapplied and combined with other pieces of knowl - edge . Over time , this extends the boundaries of the organization’s knowledge , while encouraging inef - fective ‘knowledge’ to be identified . As a tool for cul - tural reinforcement , the pattern attaches a label ( Sell Now , Resource Later ) to an organization’s strategy that has been proven and should be followed . The creation of a company - specific vocabulary of pattern names and the association of each with a desired behavior provides a systematic counterpoint to the management of company culture than ad hoc or opportunistic ones . The applicability of patterns as a technique for knowledge management rests on two key characteristics—knowledge capture and knowl - edge communication , and it is these benefits that we believe patterns can bring to the discipline of knowl - edge management . Patterns in the World Because of the personal and perceptual dimensions of knowledge , the highest return - on - investment in knowledge management effort is frequently realized by concentrating on : • Presenting and structuring information in such a way that it supports reification of knowledge and knowledge - enacting behaviors in people rather than artifacts ; • Building conceptual frame - works that allow the sharing of ideas and abstractions between people working in the same conceptual spaces ; and • Identifying individuals or groups who possess critical knowledge , and then support - ing these people appropriately with the right techniques and resources . Patterns are an excellent candi - date technique to meet these requirements—they provide a flexible but structured informa - tional template , they use simple but expressive everyday state - ments , they are deliberate and instructive while providing trans - parent reasoning , and they can convey business structure , cul - tural values , and strategies at many levels of an organization simultaneously . The impact of patterns . The pattern languages and catalogs of Gamma [ 4 ] , Buschmann [ 2 ] , Rising [ 9 ] and other authors have altered the way software developers speak and think about design . Patterns like Observer , Visitor , and Iterator [ 4 ] have lifted the level of abstraction in the design discourse , ensuring rapid exchange and transfer of proven solutions between designers . The application of patterns to the problems of structuring software teams is less well - known but equally well - regarded—Coplien and Harrison’s organizational pattern language encapsulates extensively researched knowledge of how the world’s most productive and healthy soft - ware teams operate . The object - oriented world and other domains where patterns have been successfully applied [ 10 ] demonstrate the capture , transfer , and management of design knowledge . The next context for pattern adoption—organizations and global business com - munities—presents a vast opportunity . But to A pattern that captures a consulting company’s resourcing policy . Name Sell Now , Resource Later Context Problem Forces Solution Rationale ResultingContext Related Patterns A consultancy engaged in selling professional services to a competitive , contested marketplace . You have a window of opportunity to submit a proposal for consulting work to a client , but you cannot guarantee allocation of the resources ( consultants ) needed to do the job . Resources ( consultants ) are not shareable . . . • If you submit your proposal you must offer the client resources without a firm commitment , which may weaken your proposal ' s competitiveness ; • If you submit and your proposal is successful , you may be required to secure your resources ; • The resources you offer in your proposal may also be offered on other bids ; • If your proposal is accepted , your resources may be allocated to another client . On the other hand . . . • If you reserve your resources ( that is , hold them back from other work because they have been offered on a proposal ) , the proposal may not be accepted . You also need to consider that . . . • Consultants are valuable resources whose individual and collective utilization rates must be kept as high as possible ; • Consultants who are underutilized may drift out of the company culture , and leave ; • Even if the proposal is successful , the client may not be able to start the assignment when they originally indicated . Therefore , bid for the assignment first , and worry about resourcing the assignment later—only after the proposal has been won and a firm starting date is known , In the bid , propose consultants who are indicative , but do not commit them . The weight of responsibility of making resource allocation decisions should be borne by the company , not by the individual proposer . You leave yourself open to exploring multiple opportunities at the same time . However , if several proposals are accepted for work during a similar time frame and there is contention for one or more consultants , you must be prepared to negotiate a substitution . Other resourcing approaches include Get Players Off the Bench and Use Locals First . Resourcing conflicts may be handled by Reviewing the Game Plan and Proposing Alternative People . COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 97 achieve the transition from a system design practice to an organizational and business practice , patterns need to fit the ways that organizational knowledge is understood , valued , and managed . To be acceptable , useful , and usable , patterns and the knowledge - sharing they enable must fit comfortably with organizational and business models of knowledge . Fitting a Model of Knowledge The concepts of tacit and explicit knowledge [ 8 ] are central to knowledge management theory and prac - tice . Nonaka and Takeuchi [ 7 ] present a model for the interplay between these two phases of knowl - edge , as depicted in the figure on the left . Tacit to Tacit Knowledge Tacit knowledge underpins classic expert behavior— the uncharted , unpredictable combination of skill , information , expertise , experience , and judgment that work together in a seemingly ad hoc way in the minds and actions of an expert surgeon , lawyer , executive , architect , designer , navigator , writer , con - sultant , or programmer . It is common for such experts to be unable to explain their methods or rationalize their actions . Tacit knowledge of this kind is both critical to expert performance and impossible to predictably manage , and is typically only passed on by craft - like mentoring of appren - tices over many years . Some professions—for exam - ple , law , medicine , and architecture—prefer to keep it this way , and have a long history of knowledge preservation and even protectionism . Others , like the engineering disciplines , are more altruistic about knowledge exchange . Tacit to Explicit Knowledge Mining patterns . A valuable insight derived from knowledge management is to make tacit knowledge explicit , allowing it to be analyzed and critiqued , learned , shared , and combined . Several aspects of the patterns approach support this phase transition . To begin , the pattern is expressed in written language , where it may be described at various levels of granu - larity and generality , depending on how well the pat - tern author can express the pattern’s context , problem , forces , and solution . The writing , review , and refinement of patterns follows a model of incre - mental or piecemeal growth—patterns under con - struction typically evolve as fragments of tacit knowledge expressed in pattern form . Pattern authors consistently report this is not an easy thing to do , because it involves explicating what is unsaid and assumed to be explicit . Recognizing this , the software design pattern community uses a process that supports the tacit - explicit transition and pro - vides an exemplar for knowledge mining in other contexts . The process is as follows : • A practitioner identifies a potential pattern—it should not have been described before , it should be a result of the author’s direct experience , and it should solve a specific and recurring problem with a proven solution . Because the problem is recurring , it should also have been experienced by others , and in a similar way the solution should have experienced previous use ( though it may not have been recognized as a pattern at that time ) ; • The author drafts the pattern ( s ) —this usually involves concerted introspection as the author grapples with the problem being solved , the forces in the problem context that demarcate the prob - lem and make it unique , and the clear expression of the known solution ; • Each drafted pattern is related to other patterns , both in the author’s pattern language and in other languages . This phase of pattern mining is possi - bly the most difficult , and is rarely done well dur - ing the first attempt . Once a knowledge fragment has been expressed as a pattern , it has a name that allows it to be refer - enced , a description of the context that clarifies when the pattern may be applied , a statement of the problem and forces that exist in the problem con - text , the solution itself , and the consequences of applying the pattern’s solution—all of which add precision to the pattern’s encapsulated knowledge . While the solution is an important part of a pattern , it is these other components that situate and orient the solution , distinguishing the pattern from a sim - ple expression of a recommendation , a heuristic , or a business rule . Distilling tacit knowledge . Software pattern authors are encouraged to draw on the help of the pat - terns community as they write . Since 1994 , pattern - writing conferences have been held annually in the U . S . , Germany , Australia , Japan , South America , and Scandanavia for the sole purpose of reviewing pat - terns . When a pattern author submits a draft , the con - ference committee allocates a “shepherd”—a more experienced pattern author—to work closely with the author in refining the draft patterns . What follows is an exercise in literary criticism , where the shepherd guides but does not control or dictate the emerging work . Once the draft has been shepherded , typically over a six - to eight - week period , the shepherd makes a decision in conjunction with a program committee member to accept the work into a writer’s workshop , a group review protocol similar to that used for many years by poets . At the conference , the writer’s workshop inverts the conventions of conference paper presentations . The author initially becomes a “fly on the wall” : not speaking a word , but listening as the workshop attendees , many of whom are authors themselves , discuss their understanding of the pattern . This allows the author a rare opportunity to hear how others have understood and interpreted the pattern . Misunderstandings become immediately clear dur - ing this time . The workshop concludes when the author reenters the circle and has the opportunity to request clarifications of the reviewers . Many authors find a writer’s workshop to be a rich and rewarding experience that provides very high - quality review and feedback . This intensive process can result in a distilled and highly evolved expression of an important piece of domain knowledge . Explicit to Explicit Knowledge Synthesizing knowledge . New explicit knowledge may be created by combining existing pieces of explicit knowledge . While combination is impor - tant , it does not typically yield the powerful steps of insight that accompany articulation ( tacit - explicit conversion ) . The cost of externalizing fragments of tacit knowledge in pattern form begins to be repaid when the pattern is published and used widely , either in conventional book form or in a Web - based repository . Patterns can be combined with other pat - terns or with other knowledge representations and models , such as business processes , narratives , and personal development activities . The Related Pat - terns section of Sell Now , Resource Later demon - strates its links to other relevant patterns , situating itself in the context of previous work and collective knowledge . Because pattern theory has developed to accommodate linking and combining solutions through the pattern language , it is tailored toward supporting combination in a way that conventional documentation does not . Explicit to Tacit Knowledge New tacit knowledge . The knowledge spiral com - pletes when the refined or synthesized explicit knowledge becomes internalized back into tacit form . This occurs as individual patterns become familiar in an organizational context , as experienced and novice business people alike discuss their strate - gies , designs , concepts , and actions with a liberal sprinkling of pattern names . The best example of this can be found in the design dialogues of OO software designers , in which the names of architectural and design patterns become tacitly and fluently inter - spersed . In this phase , pattern languages become signifi - cant as people apply patterns tacitly . In fact , the full benefits of patterns are not realized until a set of related patterns are applied together , in concert . A pattern language allows an individual , team , or orga - nization to navigate through complex , multidimen - sional problems by using patterns that link to each other via their initial and final contexts . This allows both the isolated local problem ( resolved by an indi - vidual pattern ) and the interrelated strategic prob - lem ( resolved by the pattern language ) to be addressed at the same time . A well - constructed pat - tern language that represents a knowledge whole is far greater than the sum of its constituent parts , the individual patterns . Stories , Metaphors , and Analogies The use of stories for sharing experiences and dissem - inating lessons learned is another well - known knowl - edge management practice . These can vary from unstructured stories to structured narrative tech - niques specifically intended to build organizational learning such as learning histories [ 5 ] . Metaphors and analogies [ 7 ] are also used to share concepts . Metaphors combine ideas into expressive imagery , while analogies are useful in helping us form new ideas by comparing them with familiar ones . Patterns complement these approaches . The key differentiator of patterns is their self - descriptive and reflective nature , and the ability to generalize instances of experience into distilled core knowledge that cuts across specific uses and individual instances . While stories , metaphors , and analogies are concrete examples of knowledge in action , pat - terns can capture and generalize the essence of this knowledge . These complementary roles are recog - nized in some pattern templates that include a sec - tion for known uses , the examples of how the pattern was used in a specific instance , perhaps phrased as story , metaphor , or analogy at the author’s discretion . Experiences : Patterns and Knowledge Observers consistently report advantages of using and mining patterns in organizations—patterns effec - tively share information , highlight design rationale , capture competencies and sound practice , and pro - vide a standardized design vocabulary . The limitations of patterns in knowledge explica - tion reported to date relate to the difficulty of intro - ducing change , generating support for patterns , writing good patterns , indexing patterns to increase 98 July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM knowledge about the applicability of patterns , and quantifying the impact of patterns . Patterns also face the difficulties associated with introducing change into organizations [ 6 ] . These problems are consistent with other knowledge management initiatives , and to a large extent are a consequence of the inherently ‘wicked problem’ of knowledge [ 11 ] . Patterns are cer - tainly no panacea . While patterns make good projects better , they cannot resurrect bad projects or substitute for effective and timely project management . The sheer number of patterns produced , both within a given organization and across domains and organizations , may create problems of assimilation . Some efforts [ 9 ] address this , but the challenge is sig - nificant , given that patterns can cross multiple domains , and people bring unique perspectives to the knowledge ( patterns ) they seek . While the concept of a pattern is reasonably straightforward and expressed in a readable fashion , writing good patterns is surprisingly difficult . Signif - icant effort and time need to be invested in prospec - tive pattern authors to bring them to a level of authoring maturity that ensures useful and effective patterns . Again , there seems to be a confluence here with the general problem of understanding and expressing knowledge . Time to Start Reflecting Patterns have great potential to be a rich knowledge extraction technique that is intuitive , straightfor - ward , and offers a good return on investment over medium - and long - term periods . The success of pat - terns to date has largely occurred within design - intensive software and technology domains . We have some evidence that patterns are useful in more gen - eral business contexts , and this article has explored the basis of our beliefs that patterns can be a valuable general - purpose knowledge management tool . Patterns are in their infancy , but the future looks bright . It is likely that patterns will gain a foothold in other design - intensive industries in the same way as has happened in OO software engineering . Such expansion would represent a form of linear growth , from one industrial domain to another . But the really big opportunity for patterns and pattern lan - guages , an opportunity for exponential growth , comes to light when we perceive patterns as an important part of a larger challenge—that of valu - ing , exploiting , and managing the knowledge avail - able all around us , in both tacit and explicit forms , ripe for the picking . References 1 . Alexander , C . A Pattern Language . Oxford University Press , New York , 1977 . 2 . Buschmann , F . and Meunier , R . Patterns of Software Architecture : A Sys - tem of Patterns . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . , 1995 . 3 . Coplien , J . O . Software Patterns . Lucent Technologies , Bell Labs Inno - vations , New York , 1996 . 4 . Gamma , E . , Helm , R . , Johnson , R . and Vlissides , J . Design Patterns : Elements of Reusable Object - Oriented Software Architecture . Addison Wesley , Reading , MA , 1995 . 5 . Kleiner , A . and Roth , G . How to make experience your company’s best teacher . Harvard Business Review 75 , 5 ( Sept . – Oct . 1997 ) . 6 . Manns , M . L . and Rising , L . Fear Less and Other Patterns for Intro - ducing New Ideas into Organizations . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 2003 . 7 . Nonaka , I . and Takeuchi , H . The Knowledge - Creating Company . Oxford University Press , 1995 . 8 . Polanyi , M . Tacit Dimension . Peter Smith , 1983 . 9 . Rising , L . The Pattern Almanac 2000 . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 2000 . 10 . Rising , L . , Ed . The Patterns Handbook : Techniques , Strategies , and Applications . SIGS Books and Multimedia , 1998 . 11 . Rittel , H . J . and Weber , M . M . Planning problems are wicked problems . In N . Cross , Ed . Developments in Design Methodology , Wiley , 1984 , 135 – 144 . 12 . Sveiby , K . E . The New Organizational Wealth : Managing and Measuring Knowledge - based Assets . Berrett - Koehler Publishers , San Francisco , 1997 . researcher with The Maersk Institute at the University of Southern Denmark . Paul Taylor ( ptaylor @ csse . monash . edu . au ) is a consultant and researcher at Monash University , Australia . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or class - room use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . © 2003 ACM 0002 - 0782 / 03 / 0700 $ 5 . 00 c COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM July 2003 / Vol . 46 , No . 7 99 O BSERVERS CONSISTENTLY REPORT ADVANTAGES OF USING AND MINING PATTERNS IN ORGANIZATIONS — PATTERNS EFFECTIVELY SHARE INFORMATION , HIGHLIGHT DESIGN RATIONALE , CAPTURE COMPETENCIES AND SOUND PRACTICE , AND PROVIDE A STANDARDIZED DESIGN VOCABULARY . Daniel May ( daniel @ thedanielmay . com ) is a consultant and