Biomech Model Mechanobiol DOI 10 . 1007 / s10237 - 012 - 0447 - y ORIGINAL PAPER Interaction between surface shape and intra - surface viscous ﬂow on lipid membranes Padmini Rangamani · Ashutosh Agrawal · Kranthi K . Mandadapu · George Oster · David J . Steigmann Received : 16 August 2012 / Accepted : 1 October 2012 © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 Abstract The theory of intra - surface viscous ﬂow on lipid bilayers is developed by combining the equations for ﬂow on a curved surface with those that describe the elastic resistance of the bilayer to ﬂexure . The model is derived directly from balance laws and augments an alternative formulation based on a variational principle . Conditions holding along an edge of the membrane are emphasized , and the coupling between ﬂow and membrane shape is simulated numerically . Keywords Lipid bilayers · Viscous membranes · Surface ﬂow · Bending elasticity 1 Introduction A formulation of the nonlinear mechanics of lipid mem - branes , incorporating intra - membrane viscous ﬂow and accounting for viscous interaction with bulk liquids , has recently been developed in Arroyo and DeSimone ( 2009 ) . There , it is demonstrated that intra - membrane viscosity has a significant effect on the dynamics of the system vis a vis bulk viscosity at biologically relevant length scales , contrary P . Rangamani · G . Oster Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA A . Agrawal Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Houston , Houston , TX 77204 , USA K . K . Mandadapu Sandia National Laboratories , Livermore , CA 94551 , USA D . J . Steigmann ( B ) Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA e - mail : steigman @ me . berkeley . edu to earlier claims made in the literature ( Seifert 1997 ) . This ﬁnding furnishes impetus for the general theory of surface ﬂow on lipid membranes . The work reported in Arroyo and DeSimone ( 2009 ) relies on a variational principle combined with exterior differential calculus . While such a framework is entirely satisfactory from a theoretical point of view , we believe that understand - ing of the subject would be promoted by the availability of an alternative treatment - based a priori on balance laws and asso - ciated constitutive equations . Indeed , the authors of Arroyo and DeSimone ( 2009 ) allude to the possibility of developing the theory from the balance laws and boundary conditions of the elastic model ( Steigmann 1999a ) , suitably extended to account for the effects of intra - membrane viscosity . They refer to such a development as a ‘conceptually interesting exercise’ which , however , lay beyond the scope of their investigation . Our purpose in the present work is precisely to provide such a development . Thus , while the variational approach has intrinsic value , here we adopt Scriven’s ( 1960 ) approach to the theory of surface ﬂow , which was devel - oped entirely on the basis of balance laws and constitutive equations . In this way , the methods of the older theory are retained , allowing us to distinguish more sharply the non - standard effects associated with the bending stiffness of lipid membranes . Moreover , because differential forms are not widely used in continuum mechanics , we work in the setting of tensor analysis on surfaces . Our view is that this framework , which is more in keeping with the methods underlying conventional bulk - ﬂuid mechanics , is adequate for formulating the general theory and addressing boundary - value problems . Section 2 contains a complete summary of the con - ventional elastic theory and boundary conditions arising from a treatment based directly on balance laws rather than variational principles ( Steigmann 1999a ) . These of 123 P . Rangamani et al . course are equivalent to the model derived from varia - tional considerations ( Steigmann et al . 2003 ; Agrawal and Steigmann 2009a , b ) . In the present work , the notions of area incompressibility and uniformity of the material properties are developed in detail , and the adjustments to the theory required to accommodate non - uniform material response are indicated . In Sect . 3 , we focus on uniform membranes and introduce intra - membrane viscosity via a well - established interfacial ﬂow model ( Scriven 1960 ; Aris 1989 ) . There we also develop the adjustments to the equilibrium and bound - ary conditions required by the inclusion of intra - membrane viscosity . Section 4 is concerned with the development of the equations of the model in the Monge parametrization , as a prerequisite to the numerical analysis of some exam - ple problems . For simplicity , we do not include viscous bulk interactions and thus impose a uniformly distributed pressure on the lipid membrane ; that is , we effectively assume the bulk liquid to be inviscid and thus that it transmits a uniform pres - sure to the membrane in the absence of inertial effects . In light of the work reported in Arroyo and DeSimone ( 2009 ) , this simpliﬁcation may be regarded as realistic at sufﬁciently small length scales . In any case , viscous interaction with the bulk may be taken into account in a straightforward manner and so is not considered here ( see for example Secomb and Skalak 1982 ; Arroyo and DeSimone 2009 ) . 2 Inviscid membranes In this section , we present a thorough overview of the con - ventional purely elastic theory of lipid membranes based on a free energy per unit mass . Our purpose is to establish a framework that is sufﬁciently general to subsume the cur - rent literature and to allow for straightforward extension to accommodate surface ﬂow and additional effects such as dif - fusion ( Agrawal and Steigmann 2011 ) . The present work is limited to the consideration of elastic response combined with surface ﬂow . Later , in Sect . 2 . 7 , we connect this for - mulation to the more commonly used framework based on a free energy per unit area of the surface occupied by the membrane in its current conﬁguration . 2 . 1 Elastic surfaces Lipid membranes are special elastic surfaces with energy densities that respond to changes in surface metric and cur - vature . The equations of motion in the absence of inertia are simply the equations of mechanical equilibrium . For an elastic surface , subjected to a net lateral pressure p in the direction of the local surface unit normal n , these may be summarized in the compact form ( Steigmann 1999a ) : T α ; α + p n = 0 , ( 1 ) where T α are the so - called stress vectors and Greek indices range over { 1 , 2 } . These are proportional to the forces , per unit length , transmitted across the curves on which the sur - face coordinates θ α are constant . Here the semi - colon refers to covariant differentiation with respect to the metric a αβ = a α · a β , where a α = r , α and commas identify partial deriva - tives with respect to θ α . The a α comprise the natural tangent basis on the surface induced by the parametrization r ( θ μ , t ) of the position ﬁeld . The connection to the unit normal ﬁeld is n = a 1 × a 2 / | a 1 × a 2 | . Here and henceforth , Greek indices rangeover { 1 , 2 } and , ifrepeated , aresummedoverthatrange . We assume familiarity with tensor analysis and curvilinear coordinate systems . Useful introductions for mechanicians are given in Sokolnikoff ( 1964 ) , Kreyzsig ( 1959 ) . We denote the membrane surface by ω . The coordinate system θ μ on ω plays a role analogous to that of a ﬁxed - coordinatesystemusedtoparametrizeacontrolvolumeinthe Eulerian or spatial description of classical ﬂuid mechanics . The differential operation in ( 1 ) is the surface divergence , given explicitly by T α ; α = ( √ a ) − 1 ( √ a T α ) , α , ( 2 ) where a = det ( a αβ ) . The metric is a positive - definite matrix , with a > 0 , and so the divergence is well deﬁned . The metric ( the coefﬁcients of the ﬁrst fundamental form ) is one of the two basic variables in surface theory ; the other is the cur - vature b αβ ( the coefﬁcients of the 2nd fundamental form ) , deﬁned by b αβ = n · r , αβ . This framework encompasses all elastic surfaces for which the energy density responds to metric and curvature . For example , if the energy density per unit mass of the surface is F ( a αβ , b αβ ) , then ( Steigmann 1999a ) T α = N α + S α n , ( 3 ) where N α = N βα a β with N βα = σ βα + b βμ M μα , S α = − M αβ ; β . ( 4 ) These are given in terms of the energy density by Steigmann ( 1999a ) σ βα = ρ (cid:2) ∂ F ∂ a αβ + ∂ F ∂ a βα (cid:3) M βα = 1 2 ρ (cid:2) ∂ F ∂ b αβ + ∂ F ∂ b βα (cid:3) , ( 5 ) where ρ is the surface mass density . Substituting ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) into ( 1 ) , invoking the Gauss and Weingarten equations ( Sokolnikoff 1964 ) a β ; α = b βα n and n , α = − b βα a β , where b αβ = a αλ b λβ , and projecting the result onto the tangent and normal spaces to ω furnishes the three equations N βα ; α − S α b βα = 0 , S α ; α + N βα b βα + p = 0 . ( 6 ) 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation This setting subsumes classical capillarity theory in which the energy depends in a special manner on metric alone ( M βα = 0 ) . It also incorporates the well - known Helfrich theory ( Helfrich 1973 ; Ou - Yang et al . 1999 ) of lipid bilayers and monolayers in which the lipids are of ﬁxed length and everywhere aligned with the surface normal . 2 . 2 Edge conditions Edge conditions may be deduced from a mechanical power balance ( Steigmann 1999b ) which is simply the global form of the equation of motion in which inertia is suppressed . In the purely elastic theory , this is d d t E = P , ( 7 ) where P = (cid:4) ω p n · u d a + P b ( 8 ) is the power supplied to the membrane , u ( θ α , t ) is the mem - brane velocity ﬁeld , E = (cid:4) ω ρ F d a ( 9 ) is the net ﬁlm energy and P b is the power supplied by the forces and moments acting at the boundary ∂ω . This is Steigmann ( 1999a , b ) P b = (cid:4) ∂ω ( f · u + M n · u , ν ) ds + (cid:5) f i · u i , ( 10 ) where u , ν is the normal derivative of u on ∂ω with exterior unit normal ν = ν α a α and unit tangent τ = n × ν , f = T α ν α − ( M αβ τ α ν β n ) (cid:3) , M = M αβ ν α ν β ( 11 ) are the distributed force and bending couple on the edge , ( · ) (cid:3) = d ( · ) / ds is the arclength derivative on ∂ω in the direc - tion of τ , and f i = − M αβ [ τ α ν β ] i n ( 12 ) is the force exerted at the i th corner of ∂ω if the boundary is piecewise smooth with a ﬁnite number of points where τ ( and hence ν ) is discontinuous ; here the square bracket refers to the forward jump as the i th corner is traversed , and the sum in ( 10 ) accounts for all corners . The corner forces vanish if the boundary is smooth in the sense that its tangent τ is continuous . The expression ( 10 ) for the power is convenient because u and u , ν may be speciﬁed independently on ∂ω . In particular ( Agrawal and Steigmann 2009a ) n · u , ν = − τ · ω where ω is therateofchangeofthesurfaceorientation ; i . e . , therotational velocity of the unit normal n . This yields M n · u , ν = − M τ · ω and hence the interpretation of M as a bending couple . 2 . 3 Lipid membranes The elastic theory of lipid membranes is based on free - energy densities of the form F ( ρ , H , K ) , where H = 1 2 a αβ b αβ , K = 1 2 ε αβ ε λμ b αλ b βμ , ( 13 ) respectively , are the mean and Gaussian curvatures of the surface . Here ( a αβ ) = ( a αβ ) − 1 is the dual metric and ε αβ is the permutation tensor deﬁned by ε 12 = − ε 21 = 1 / √ a , ε 11 = ε 22 = 0 . The set { ρ , H , K } of independent variables in the free - energy function is dictated by material symmetry requirements pertaining to the ﬂuid - like response character - istics of lipid membranes . The underlying concept is devel - oped fully in Steigmann ( 1999a , 2003 ) . In this case , the functions listed in ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) reduce to ( Steigmann 1999a ) σ αβ = − [ ρ 2 F ρ + 2 H ( ρ F H ) + 2 K ( ρ F K ) ] a αβ + ( ρ F H ) ˜ b αβ , M αβ = 1 2 ( ρ F H ) a αβ + ( ρ F K ) ˜ b αβ , N αβ = − [ ρ 2 F ρ + H ( ρ F H ) + K ( ρ F K ) ] a αβ + 1 2 ( ρ F H ) ˜ b αβ , − S α = 1 2 ( ρ F H ) , β a αβ + ( ρ F K ) , β ˜ b αβ , ( 14 ) where ˜ b αβ = 2 Ha αβ − b αβ ( 15 ) is the cofactor of the curvature , in which b αβ = a αλ a βμ b λμ , and use has been made of the Mainardi – Codazzi equations of surface theory ( Sokolnikoff 1964 ) in the form ( Steigmann 1999a ) ˜ b αβ ; β = 0 . ( 16 ) Later , we use the connection b β μ ˜ b μα = Ka αβ . ( 17 ) From ( 14 ) we have , N βα ; α − S α b βα = − [ ( ρ 2 F ρ ) , α + ρ ( F K K , α + F H H , α ) ] a βα , ( 18 ) and the positive definiteness of the metric then furnishes the tangential equilibrium equations ( cf . ( 6 ) 1 ) ( ρ 2 F ρ ) , α + ρ ( F K K , α + F H H , α ) = 0 , ( 19 ) whereas the normal part of the equilibrium equation reduces to p = (cid:13) (cid:2) 1 2 ρ F H (cid:3) + ( ρ F K ) ; αβ ˜ b αβ + 2 H ρ ( ρ F ρ + K F K ) + ρ ( 2 H 2 − K ) F H , ( 20 ) 123 P . Rangamani et al . in which (cid:13) ( · ) = ( · ) ; αβ a αβ is the surface Laplacian , also known as the Beltrami operator . The subscripts ρ , H , K refer to partial derivatives of the energy with respect to the indicated variables . Equations ( 19 ) and ( 20 ) together consti - tute the generalization of the well - known shape equation ( Ou - Yang et al . 1999 ) to ﬁlms with possibly non - uniform properties ( Jenkins 1977 ; Steigmann 1999a ) . In the absence of bending elasticity , this system reduces to the equations of classical capillarity theory : p = 2 H ( ρ 2 F ρ ) in which ( ρ 2 F ρ ) , α = 0 . ( 21 ) 2 . 4 Convected coordinates To ease the formulation of balance laws and to facilitate their correct interpretation , we parametrize the material manifold by a convected - coordinate system ξ α . This may be identiﬁed with the system θ α at a ﬁxed instant t 0 , say . The associated surface (cid:15) , with parametric representation x ( ξ α ) = r ( ξ α , t 0 ) , is ﬁxed and may serve as a reference surface in a Lagrangian or referential description of the motion . That is , we regard these coordinates as being convected in the sense that they identify , via a map r = ˆ r ( ξ α , t ) , the current position at time t of a material point that was located at x ( ξ α ) ∈ (cid:15) at time t 0 . The notion may be generalized by regarding (cid:15) as a surface that is in one - to - one correspondence with that occupied at time t 0 , so that (cid:15) need not actually be occupied in the course of the motion . The connection with the θ α - parametrization of ω is provided by Scriven ( 1960 ) , Aris ( 1989 ) ˆ r ( ξ α , t ) = r ( θ β ( ξ α , t ) , t ) . ( 22 ) Thus , we specify the ﬁxed surface coordinates θ α as func - tions of ξ α and t subject to θ α ( ξ β , t 0 ) = ξ α . We assume the relations giving θ α in terms of ξ α to be invertible , to reﬂect the notion that at ﬁxed t , the coordinates θ α can be associ - ated with a unique material point ( identiﬁed by ﬁxed values of ξ α ) . Any function , f ( θ α , t ) , say , may then be expressed in terms of convected coordinates as ˆ f ( ξ α , t ) , where ˆ f ( ξ α , t ) = f ( θ β ( ξ α , t ) , t ) . ( 23 ) The material derivative of f is its partial time deriva - tive in the convected - coordinate representation , i . e . , ˙ f = ∂ ˆ f ( ξ α , t ) / ∂ t , whereas its local time derivative in the ﬁxed - coordinate parametrization is f t = ∂ f ( θ α , t ) / ∂ t . By the chain rule , the two are related by ˙ f = f t + ( θ α ) · f , α . The velocity of a material point on (cid:15) that has been con - vected by the motion to ω is u = ˙ r = ∂ ˆ r / ∂ t . We may write this in terms of components on the natural basis induced by the ﬁxed - coordinate ( θ α ) parametrization . Thus , u = v α a α + w n . ( 24 ) This is not the same as the time derivative r t . However , the two are related by u = ( θ α ) · a α + r t . ( 25 ) Following ( Aris 1989 ) , we adopt the ﬁxed - coordinate param - etrization deﬁned by d d t θ α = v α ( θ β , t ) , θ α | t 0 = ξ α , ( 26 ) where the derivative is evaluated at a ﬁxed value of the dou - blet { ξ α } and is therefore equal to ( θ α ) · . Accordingly , the normal velocity in ( 24 ) is given by w n = r t , ( 27 ) and the convected and ﬁxed - coordinate time derivatives sat - isfy ˙ f = f t + v α f , α . ( 28 ) Later , werequireanexpressionforthematerialderivative ˙ a αβ in terms of the θ α - parametrization . To this end , we adopt con - vected coordinates ξ α whose values coincide with the instan - taneous values of θ α . The two coordinate systems will of course differ at different instants due to the fact that material is convecting with respect to the θ α - system . Said differently , the material point instantaneously located at the place with surface coordinates θ α will have different locations at differ - ent instants and hence be associated with different values of θ α , whereas the values of ξ α remain invariant . Accordingly , while it is always permissible to identify ξ α with θ α at any particular instant t 0 , say , it is not possible to do so over an interval of time . However , for our purposes , this limitation is not restrictive . Using ˙ a λμ = ˙ a λ · a μ + a λ · ˙ a μ and ˙ a λ = ( ∂ r / ∂θ λ ) · = [ ∂ r / ∂ξ μ ( ∂ξ μ / ∂θ λ ) ] · = ∂ u / ∂ξ μ ( ∂ξ μ / ∂θ λ ) + ∂ r / ∂ξ μ ( ∂ 2 ξ μ / ∂θ λ ∂θ α ) v α , ( 29 ) togetherwith ∂ξ μ / ∂θ λ = δ μλ ( theKroneckerdelta ) andhence ∂ 2 ξ μ / ∂θ λ ∂θ α = 0 at time t 0 , we derive ˙ a α = ∂ u / ∂ξ α and ˙ a λμ = u , λ · a μ + a λ · u , μ , ( 30 ) where u , λ = ∂ u / ∂θ λ at the considered instant . Combining ( 24 ) with the Gauss and Weingarten equations yields u , λ = ( v α ; λ − w b αλ ) a α + ( v α b αλ + w , λ ) n , ( 31 ) where a α = a αβ a β and v α ; λ is the covariant derivative deﬁned by v α ; λ = v α , λ − v β (cid:17) β αλ , ( 32 ) in which (cid:17) βαλ are the Christoffel symbols on ω computed using the θ α - system ( Sokolnikoff 1964 ) . This delivers the desired expression ( Steigmann et al . 2003 ) : 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation ˙ a λμ = v μ ; λ + v λ ; μ − 2 w b λμ . ( 33 ) The corresponding result in Aris’ book ( Aris 1989 ; eqs . ( 10 . 21 . 3 ) , ( 10 . 21 . 4 ) ) is given , in our notation , by ˙ a λμ = v μ ; λ + v λ ; μ + ( a λμ ) t , ( 34 ) where ( · ) t is computed at ﬁxed θ α . The latter is ( a λμ ) t = ( a λ ) t · a μ + a λ · ( a μ ) t , where ( a λ ) t = ( r , λ ) t = ( r t ) , λ , and ( cf . ( 27 ) ) ( r t ) , λ = ( w n ) , λ = w , λ n − w b λα a α , ( 35 ) yielding ( a λμ ) t = − 2 w b λμ , in agreement with ( 33 ) . How - ever , ( 33 ) is not given explicitly in Aris ( 1989 ) . 2 . 5 Mass balance The foregoing relationships facilitate the derivation of bal - ance laws . For example , if f is the areal density of a particular quantity on ω , then the rate of change of the total quantity in a part π of ω is d d t (cid:4) π f d a = d d t (cid:4) (cid:19) f J d A = (cid:4) π ( ˙ f + f ˙ J / J ) d a , ( 36 ) where (cid:19) is the part of the ﬁxed surface (cid:15) that is convected to π and J is the local areal dilation of the surface ; i . e . , (cid:4) π d a = (cid:4) (cid:19) J d A for all (cid:19) ⊂ (cid:15) . ( 37 ) To express the right - hand side of ( 36 ) in terms of the ﬁxed - coordinate parametrization , we combine ˙ J / J = 12 a αβ ˙ a αβ ( Steigmann et al . 2003 ) with ( 33 ) , obtaining ˙ J / J = v α ; α − 2 H w . ( 38 ) For example , mass conservation is expressed by d d t (cid:4) π ρ d a = 0 . ( 39 ) Using ( 36 ) with f = ρ and invoking the arbitrariness of π then yields the local conservation law 0 = ˙ ρ + ρ ˙ J / J = ρ t + v α ρ , α + ρ ( v α ; α − 2 H w ) . ( 40 ) 2 . 6 Area incompressibility It is well known that lipid membranes are relatively stiff against areal dilation in comparison with bending or shearing in the tangent plane ( Evans and Skalak 1980 ; Secomb and Skalak 1982 ) . To model this , we impose J = 1 as a local constraint at material points . Accordingly , ˙ J vanishes and ( 40 ) simpliﬁes to 0 = ˙ ρ = ρ t + v α ρ , α , ( 41 ) the ﬁrst of which implies that ρ is independent of t in the convected - coordinate description ; that is , ρ is independent of t when expressed as a function of ξ μ and t . Its value at a particular material point is thus invariant in time and hence given by the density in the ﬁxed conﬁguration associated with (cid:15) . The constraint on J is seen to be equivalent to the invari - ance of ρ at any material point . To accommodate it , we replace F in Sect . 2 . 3 by F ( ρ , H , K ; ξ μ , t ) = ¯ F ( H , K ; ξ μ ) − γ ( ξ μ , t ) / ρ , ( 42 ) where γ is a constitutively indeterminate Lagrange - multi - plier ﬁeld . The latter takes whatever values that may be required by the equations of equilibrium and any subsidiary conditions in the particular problem at hand and may thus depend on the coordinates and time . This yields the formula γ = ρ 2 F ρ and hence the mechanical interpretation of the Lagrange - multiplier ﬁeld γ as a surface pressure . However , it is not a material property and so its a priori speciﬁcation in terms of the known surface tension of a particular liquid— commonplace in works concerned with incompressible lipid membranes—is logically inconsistent . This point appears to be a source of considerable misunderstanding in the litera - ture . 2 . 7 Areal free - energy density It is customary in the literature to formulate the mechanics of lipid membranes in terms of the free energy per unit area of the surface ω currently occupied by the material ; namely W = ρ ¯ F . ( 43 ) In terms of this , we have σ αβ = ( λ + W ) a αβ − ( 2 HW H + 2 K W K ) a αβ + W H ˜ b αβ , M αβ = 1 2 W H a αβ + W K ˜ b αβ , N αβ = ( λ + W ) a αβ − ( HW H + K W K ) a αβ + 1 2 W H ˜ b αβ , − S α = 1 2 ( W H ) , β a αβ + ( W K ) , β ˜ b αβ , ( 44 ) where λ = − ( γ + W ) . ( 45 ) The shape equation ( 20 ) is then seen to be equivalent to p = (cid:13) (cid:2) 1 2 W H (cid:3) + ( W K ) ; αβ ˜ b αβ + W H ( 2 H 2 − K ) + 2 H ( K W K − W ) − 2 λ H , ( 46 ) whereas N βα ; α − S α b βα = − ( γ , α + W K K , α + W H H , α ) a βα = ( ∂ W / ∂θ α | exp + λ , α ) a βα , ( 47 ) 123 P . Rangamani et al . wherein the derivative ∂ W / ∂θ α | exp accounts for any explicit coordinate dependence of the material properties arising in non - uniform membranes . Further , the Lagrange multiplier is presumed , by virtue of the one - to - one relation between the convected and ﬁxed coordinates at any t , to be expressible in terms of θ α ; that is , γ , α = ∂γ / ∂θ α . The tangential equations of equilibrium are then equivalent to Agrawal and Steigmann ( 2009a , b ) λ , α = − ∂ W / ∂θ α | exp . ( 48 ) The specializations of the edge conditions follow by substituting ( 44 ) into ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) and ( 11 ) . The involved calcula - tions are found to yield results which coincide exactly with those derived in detail elsewhere ( Agrawal and Steigmann 2009a , b ) by a variational method . These are M = 1 2 W H + κ τ W K and f = f ν ν + f τ τ + f n n , ( 49 ) where f ν = W + λ − κ ν M f τ = − τ M , f n = ( τ W K ) (cid:3) − (cid:2) 1 2 W H (cid:3) , ν − ( W K ) , β ˜ b αβ ν α , ( 50 ) and f i = W K [ τ ] i n . ( 51 ) Here , κ ν = b αβ ν α ν β , κ τ = b αβ τ α τ β , τ = b αβ ν α τ β , ( 52 ) respectively , are the normal curvatures of ω in the directions ν and τ and the twist of ω on the ( ν , τ ) - axes . Use has also been made of the identities H = 1 2 ( κ ν + κ τ ) and K = κ ν κ τ − τ 2 . Evidently the actual surface tension is given by f ν . This is the projection onto ν of the force per unit length trans - mitted across a curve with unit normal ν . The net force reduces to f = λ ν ( = − γ ν ) only in the absence of bending effects . Suppose the membrane is such that the mass density is uniformly distributed on the ﬁxed surface (cid:15) used in the def - inition of convected coordinates . The presumed existence of such a conﬁguration , even if it is never actually occu - pied in the course of the motion , constitutes part of the def - inition of a uniform ﬁlm . By the chain rule we then have 0 = ∂ρ / ∂ξ α = ρ , β ∂θ β / ∂ξ α . The presumed invertibility of the relation between the ﬁxed and convected coordinates implies that the matrix ( ∂θ β / ∂ξ α ) is non - singular and hence that ρ , β = 0 . The mass - conservation law ( 41 ) then yields ρ t = 0 , implying that ρ is a ﬁxed constant on the surface ω , independent of θ α and t . If the ﬁlm is uniform in the sense described , then its response to H and K should be the same at all material points . There is then no explicit coordinate dependence in the spe - ciﬁc energy density ¯ F , and hence neither in the areal energy density W . Thus ∂ W / ∂θ α | exp vanishes in uniform membranes , implying ( cf . ( 48 ) ) that λ is uniformly distributed on ω . The latter result is modiﬁed in the case of ﬁlms with non - uniform bending properties in which the non - uniformity is induced by a diffusing species , for example ( Agrawal and Steigmann 2011 ) . We show below that it is also modiﬁed by viscous ﬂow in the surface . This framework incorporates the well - known shape equa - tion k [ (cid:13) H + 2 H ( H 2 − K ) ] − 2 λ H = p ( 53 ) for uniform Helfrich membranes , deﬁned by W = kH 2 + ¯ kK , ( 54 ) in which λ is uniform and k and ¯ k are the ( constant ) bending moduli . 3 Effect of intra - membrane viscosity 3 . 1 Conventional theory of intra - membrane viscosity Extensions of classical capillarity theory to accommodate intra - surface viscous ﬂow are well known ( Scriven 1960 ; Aris 1989 ) . They entail the addition of a conventional vis - cous term to the stress σ αβ = − ( ρ 2 F ρ ) a αβ , while bending effects are of course suppressed in the classical theory . Typ - ically the viscous stress is assumed to be the 2 - D analog of that appearing in the 3 - D Navier – Stokes theory . This stress arises in response to straining of the ﬂuid , which is simply the time derivative of the evolving metric in the convected - coordinate description ( Aris 1989 ) . Accordingly , in the case of area incompressibility , we have σ αβ = − γ a αβ + π αβ , where π αβ = ν a αλ a βμ ˙ a λμ ( 55 ) and ν is the intra - membrane shear viscosity . This form of the viscous stress is not appropriate for use with the θ α - parametrization . To rectify this , we substitute ( 33 ) , obtaining π αβ = ν (cid:6) a αλ a βμ ( v μ ; λ + v λ ; μ ) − 2 w b αβ (cid:7) , ( 56 ) which is equivalent to eqs . ( 10 . 23 . 3 , 4 ) of Aris ( 1989 ) in the case of area incompressibility ( a αβ ˙ a αβ = 0 ) . 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation 3 . 2 Viscous lipid membranes We suppose that viscous interaction among lipids arises mainly from their relative motion in the surface ω , while the effect of relative misalignment of neighboring lipids due to bending remains essentially elastic in nature . Accordingly , the required adjustment to the elastic theory of Sect . 2 , to account for viscosity , is limited simply to the addition of a viscous stress π αβ of the form ( 56 ) to the expression ( 44 ) 1 for σ αβ and hence also to the expression ( 44 ) 3 for N αβ ( see ( 4 ) ) . This has the effect of adding the terms π βα ; α and π βα b βα ( 57 ) to the left - hand sides of ( 46 ) and ( 47 ) , respectively . To aid in the reduction of the ﬁrst term , we recast ( 56 ) , using ( 15 ) , as π βα = ν (cid:8) a βλ a αμ ( v μ ; λ + v λ ; μ ) − 4 w Ha βα + 2 w ˜ b βα (cid:9) . ( 58 ) From the Mainardi – Codazzi equations ( 16 ) and because the metric is covariant - constant ( Sokolnikoff 1964 ) , we then obtain π βα ; α = 2 ν ( a βλ a αμ d λμ ; α − w , α b βα − 2 w H , α a βα ) , ( 59 ) where d λμ = 1 2 ( v μ ; λ + v λ ; μ ) ( 60 ) and d αβ ; μ = d αβ , μ − d βλ (cid:17) λαμ − d αλ (cid:17) λβμ . ( 61 ) Using ( 13 ) 1 and ( 17 ) we also derive π βα b βα = 2 ν (cid:8) b αβ d αβ − w ( 4 H 2 − 2 K ) (cid:9) . ( 62 ) The equations of motion for viscous membranes , replac - ing ( 46 ) and ( 48 ) respectively , are thus given in the case of uniform membranes of Helfrich type ( cf . 54 ) ) by λ , γ − 4 νw H , γ + 2 ν ( a αμ d γμ ; α − w , α b αγ ) = 0 , v α ; α − 2 w H = 0 , ( 63 ) and k [ (cid:13) H + 2 H ( H 2 − K ) ] − 2 λ H + 2 ν [ b αβ d αβ − w ( 4 H 2 − 2 K ) ] = p . ( 64 ) The constraint ( 63 ) 2 may be treated by introducing a function ϕ such that (cid:13)ϕ = 2 H w , where (cid:13)ϕ = ( √ a ) − 1 ( √ aa αβ ϕ , β ) , α , ( 65 ) and then deﬁning a vector ﬁeld (cid:23) α such that v α = a αβ ϕ , β + (cid:23) α . ( 66 ) From ( 63 ) 2 and ( 65 ) 1 we have (cid:23) α ; α = 0 and it follows , for any simply connected patch of the surface , that (cid:23) α = ε αβ ψ , β ( 67 ) for some scalar ﬁeld ψ . However , we make no use of this decomposition in the present work . 3 . 3 Explicit edge conditions The edge conditions for lipid membranes with viscosity are given by ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) and ( 11 ) in which the viscous stress π αβ is added to the expression ( 44 ) 1 for σ αβ . This results in the addition of the term π βα ν α a β to the right - hand side of the formula ( 49 ) for the edge force f . The decomposition a β = ν β ν + τ β τ facilitates the separation of terms into normal and tangential parts , yielding ( 44 ) with f ν = W + λ − κ ν M + π βα ν β ν α f τ = π βα τ β ν α − τ M , ( 68 ) while f n remains unaltered . The expressions ( 49 ) 1 and ( 51 ) for the bending moment and corner forces are also unchanged . The full set of edge conditions for uniform viscous Helf - rich membranes is M = 1 2 k ( κ ν + κ τ ) + ¯ k τ f ν = 1 4 k ( κ 2 τ − κ 2 ν ) − ¯ k τ 2 + λ + π βα ν β ν α , f τ = π βα τ β ν α − 1 2 k τκ ν − (cid:2) 1 2 k + ¯ k (cid:3) τκ τ , f n = ¯ k τ (cid:3) − kH , ν ( 69 ) with corner forces f i = ¯ k [ τ ] i n . ( 70 ) 3 . 4 Dissipation The discrepancy between the power supplied to the mem - brane and rate at which energy is stored in it is the dissipation D , deﬁned by D = P − d d t E , ( 71 ) and satisfying D ≥ 0 ( 72 ) in any dissipative process , this effectively serving as a sur - rogate for the second law of thermodynamics in the present , purely mechanical , setting . In Steigmann ( 1999b ) , it is shown that the equations of mechanical equilibrium for surfaces yield the global balance equation 123 P . Rangamani et al . S = P , ( 73 ) where S is the stress power . In the purely elastic theory , this is given simply by S = d E / d t , yielding ( 7 ) and D = 0 . In the presence of both elasticity and viscosity , the appro - priate expression for S follows from eq . ( 2 . 18 ) of Steigmann ( 1999b ) and is given by S = d d t E + (cid:4) ω π βα a β · ˙ a α d a , ( 74 ) where E is again given by ( 9 ) . Accordingly , D = ( P − S ) + (cid:4) ω π βα a β · ˙ a α d a , ( 75 ) yielding D = (cid:4) ω π βα a β · ˙ a α d a ( 76 ) in all inertia - less motions of the surface . The argument is eas - ily modiﬁed to accommodate inertia . In this case , the equa - tions of motion of the ﬁlm yield d K / d t + S = P in place of ( 73 ) , where K is the kinetic energy of the surface . The dissipation is now deﬁned by D = P − d ( E + K ) / d t , while ( 74 ) and ( 76 ) are unaltered . The integrand in ( 73 ) is π βα a β · ˙ a α = 12 π βα ˙ a βα , where π βα ˙ a βα = ν a βλ a αμ ˙ a λμ ˙ a βα . ( 77 ) The factor multiplying ν is the squared norm of the surface tensor with covariant components equal to ˙ a αβ . A positive value of the viscosity thus ensures that any motion involving straining of the surface is strictly dissipative in the sense of the strict inequality in ( 72 ) . Further , the dissipation vanishes only if the straining vanishes pointwise . If the loading on the membrane is conservative , then there exists L such that P = d d t L . In this case , we have D = − d d t ( E − L ) ( 78 ) and hence d d t ( E − L ) ≤ 0 . ( 79 ) The potential energy E − L then furnishes a Lyapunov func - tion for the motion . In particular , it is minimized by asymp - totically stable equilibria at which dissipation ceases and the response is purely elastic . 4 Monge parametrization To illustrate the use of the theory we adopt the Monge rep - resentation r ( θ α , t ) = θ + z ( θ , t ) k ( 80 ) of ω , where θ ( θ α ) is position on a plane with unit normal k . The shape of the membrane is then determined by the single function z ( θ , t ) . For example , the plane may be parametrized globally by a single system of Cartesian coordinates θ α , in which case θ = θ α e α , ( 81 ) where { e α } is an orthonormal basis for the plane . These then furnish a parametrization of ω via ( 80 ) . We compute r t = z t k , a α = e α + z , α k , a αβ = δ αβ + z , α z , β and n = ( k − ∇ z ) / √ a , ( 82 ) where δ αβ is the Kronecker delta , ∇ z = z , α e α is the gradient on the plane , and a = det ( a αβ ) = 1 + | ∇ z | 2 . ( 83 ) Further , the integrand in ( 8 ) is n · r = ( z − θ α z , α ) / √ a , ( 84 ) the covariant curvature components are b αβ = n · a α , β = z , αβ / √ a , ( 85 ) and the curvature tensor is b = b αβ a α ⊗ a β , where a 1 = 1 a { [ 1 + ( z , 2 ) 2 ] ( e 1 + z , 1 k ) − z , 1 z , 2 ( e 2 + z , 2 k ) } , ( 86 ) together with a similar formula for a 2 , obtained by inter - changing the subscripts . These are derived by using a α = a αβ a β with ( a αβ ) = (cid:10) a αβ (cid:11) − 1 . The Christoffel symbols (cid:17) λαβ = a λ · a α , β ( Sokolnikoff 1964 ) , required in ( 60 ) and ( 61 ) , are (cid:17) λαβ = z , λ z , αβ / a , ( 87 ) and the normal velocity is w = n · r t = z t / √ a . ( 88 ) It is straightforward to use these formulas to cast the equa - tions of motion ( 63 ) , ( 64 ) in terms of z ( θ α , t ) . However , the resulting system is quite complicated , and so we refrain from exhibiting it explicitly . 4 . 1 Example Consider an example in which the membrane ﬂows over a rectangular portion of the plane with sides of length a and b . The kinematic boundary conditions are z = 0 , n = k . ( 89 ) The latter implies that z , α vanish on the boundary and hence so too the normal derivative z , ν = ν α z , α . From ( 88 ) we have w = 0 ( 90 ) 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation Table 1 Boundary conditions used in Figs . 1 and 2 Variable Boundary 1 Boundary 2 Boundary 3 Boundary 4 z 0 0 0 0 z x 0 – – 0 z y – 0 0 – v α 0 0 0 – f ν – – – λ f τ – – – 0 λ – – – 10 − 4 pN / nm on the boundary , while the condition z , ν = 0 implies that w , ν also vanishes there . We conclude that n · u , ν vanishes on the boundary . Because boundary conditions entail the speciﬁca - tion of one or the other member of a pair of power - conjugate variables , it follows from ( 10 ) that the transverse shear force f n and the bending moment M are not speciﬁed . No - slip boundary conditions are used on three of the four boundaries for the tangential velocity components , i . e . , v α = 0 . On the fourth boundary , the traction boundary con - dition given in ( 68 ) is used to relate the velocity gradient to the surface pressure and the membrane shape . On the fourth boundary , we specify the left - hand sides of f ν = λ − 1 4 k ( ν α ν β z , αβ ) 2 + π βα ν β ν α , ( 91 ) f τ = π βα τ β ν α , where use has been made of the fact that κ τ and τ vanish on the boundary ; the former following from the fact that the boundary is piecewise straight and the latter from the fact that ∇ z vanishes identically on the boundary . In particular , there are no jumps in the twist τ at the corners and thus no corner forces . The boundary conditions are listed in Table 1 . To solve this highly nonlinear coupled system , we use the multiphysics code Comsol . We study the evolution of membrane shape and ﬂow in response to an applied uniform pressure , p , normal to the surface . It should be noted that when p = 0 , z = 0 is a solution to the shape equation even when the tangential ﬂow is not zero . The model was imple - mented in the equations - based PDE interface of Comsol Multiphysics , using the backward difference formula solver for time dependent problems . The equations were solved on a domain of 1 , 000nm square with an intramembrane surface viscosity of 10 − 4 pN · s / nm ( Hochmuth 1987 ) . The value of bendingmodulusofthemembraneassumedhereis82pN · nm ( Derenyi et al . 2002 ) . We choose f ν = λ on one boundary as shown in Table 1 . In Fig . 1 , we show the height of the membrane z at the center in response to the applied lateral pressure at different times . The lateral pressure is increased as a ramp function , as shown in Fig . 1a . In response to this increasing pressure , ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 1 a Lateral pressure as a function of time and b the height z at the center of the square patch the height , z , at the center also increases with time and even - tually attains a constant value when p is held constant ( Fig . 1b ) , indicating that the system has attained a steady - state conﬁguration . The tangential velocity ﬁeld ( Fig . 2 ) also undergoes tran - sient changes to accommodate the ﬂow of lipids required to produce the change in shape . The ﬂuid membrane ﬂows in from the open boundary . At early times , the ﬂuid ﬂow rate is low because the lateral pressure is small and at later times the tangential velocity settles into a steady ﬂow pattern in response to the steady surface pressure . This steady ﬂow ( Fig . 2b , c ) is maintained even after the lateral pressure attains a constant value because the velocity gradient at that boundary is coupled to the function z ( θ α , t ) . Thesurfacepressure λ variesspatiallytoaccommodatethe tangential ﬂow of the lipids into the computational domain . Even though the lipid membrane is homogeneous , the change in the ﬂuid ﬂow pattern results in a change in the surface pressure in a region adjoining the open boundary . At early times , the change is the surface pressure is very small and not discernible . As the shape evolves in response to the lateral pressure p , the surface pressure λ develops a spatial inho - mogeneity , which begins to appear around t = 0 . 1s and intensiﬁes as lateral pressure increases ( Table 2 ) . The coupling between surface shape and surface ﬂow is primarily through the behavior of λ . The choice of f ν at the boundary is also important in determining the ﬂow of lip - ids and how membrane shape evolves . In this example , the 123 P . Rangamani et al . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Fig . 2 The tangential velocity vector illustrates the ﬂow of lipids on the surface of the membrane at times a t = 0 . 05s , b t = 0 . 1s , and c t = 0 . 22s . The ﬂow of lipids settles into a steady pattern in accordance with the prescribed boundary conditions and vortices can be seen near the open boundary where traction is assigned choice f ν = λ resulted in a boundary condition wherein the velocitygradientarisesinresponsetosurfaceshapealoneand not surface pressure . To further understand how the system responds to different values of f ν , we conducted simulations with the same lateral pressure function but changed the value f ν / λ on boundary 4 ( Table 3 ) . Figure 3 depicts the shape of the membrane along the cen - ter of the domain . When f ν / λ is less than unity , the height of the membrane increases . As the value of f ν / λ is increased , not only does the membrane ﬂatten ; it also adopts an asym - metric shape . That is , the maximum height is not at the cen - ter of the domain but rather closer to the open boundary . This is due to the role played by λ as an effective surface pressure ; larger values at a given pressure correlate roughly with smaller curvature and hence , in this example , smaller height ( Table 3 ) . Another parameter that affects the relationship between surface deformation and ﬂow is the number of boundaries 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation Table 2 Boundary conditions used in Fig . 4 Variable Boundary 1 Boundary 2 Boundary 3 Boundary 4 z 0 0 0 0 z x 0 – – 0 z y – 0 0 – v α 0 0 – – f ν – – λ λ f τ – – 0 0 λ – – 10 − 4 pN / nm 10 − 4 pN / nm that allow ﬂow of lipids . In Fig . 4 , we show cases where two adjacent boundaries , boundaries 3 and 4 , allow ﬂow with the boundary conditions f ν = λ and f τ = 0 . The shape is symmetric ( Fig . 4 ) but the tangential ﬂow ﬁeld of lipids is very different from that of the previous example . In Fig . 4 , Table 3 Boundary conditions used in Fig . 5 Variable Boundary 1 Boundary 2 Boundary 3 Boundary 4 z 0 0 0 0 z x 0 – – 0 z y – 0 0 – v α 0 – – – f ν – λ λ λ f τ – 0 0 0 λ – 10 − 4 pN / nm 10 − 4 pN / nm 10 − 4 pN / nm we observe the lipids entering and leaving the domain from the two adjacent walls . Similarly , when only one boundary is treated as a wall ( Fig . 5 ) , the lipids ﬂow in and out of three boundaries ( Fig . 5 ) . Even though the shape is similar for these boundary conditions , the ﬂow pattern of lipids on the surface Fig . 3 A cross section of the domain at the center line shows the membrane shape in response to different values of f ν / λ at the boundary . As f ν / λ increases , the height decreases and the surface shape becomes increasingly asymmetric for the same value of pressure ( p = 2 × 10 − 6 pN / nm 2 ) Fig . 4 In this example , two walls , boundaries 3 and 4 have the bound - ary condition f ν = λ . The characteristics of the membrane are shown at time t = 0 . 1s , after shape evolution has ceased . The tangential velocity ﬁeld shows the lipid ﬂow in and out of two boundaries and the presence of vortices near these boundaries 123 P . Rangamani et al . Fig . 5 In this example , three walls , boundaries 1 , 3 and 4 have the boundary condition f ν = λ . The characteristics of the membrane are shownattime t = 0 . 1s , aftershapeevolutionhasceased . Thetangential velocity ﬁeld shows the lipid ﬂow in and out of three boundaries and the presence of vortices near these boundaries and the surface pressure pattern are quite different in each of these conditions . We note that the shape equation ( cf . ( 64 ) ) involves λ algebraically , whereas the remaining equations of the model involve λ only through ∇ λ . Thus , if the membrane remains ﬂat under the stated boundary conditions , λ affects the ﬂow only through ∇ λ and the speciﬁcation of λ on the boundary is neither necessary nor consistent . In the general case in which membrane shape evolves , we specify a uniform value of λ on the traction part of the boundary and use the fully coupled system for ﬂow and shape to obtain its distribution in the interior . In effect we are solving a one - parameter family of problems , parametrized by the speciﬁed boundary value of λ . To ﬁnd the physiologically relevant value , it would be nec - essary in principle to assess the predictions obtained using different parameter values against some empirically deter - mined aspect of membrane shape ; the appropriate value of theparameteristhengivenbythatwhichfurnishesthebest - ﬁt simulation . This exercise is beyond our present scope , how - ever , due to the paucity of available data consistent with our boundary conditions . 5 Conclusions In this work , we have developed a model for the intra - surface ﬂow of lipids on a bilayer membrane by coupling the elastic model for membrane bending with a model for ﬂow on an evolving curved surface . This model is based entirely on bal - ance laws and constitutive equations . Solutions to represen - tative problems exhibit the coupled interplay between lipid ﬂow and membrane shape . Potential applications to biophys - ics include the simulation of membrane nanotube formation and the cubic - to - lamellar transition . Our work on these prob - lems is in progress and will be reported elsewhere . References Agrawal A , Steigmann DJ ( 2009a ) Modeling protein - mediated mor - phology in biomembranes . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 8 : 371 – 379 Agrawal A , Steigmann DJ ( 2009b ) Boundary - value problems in the theory of lipid membranes . Continuum Mech Thermodyn 21 : 57 – 82 Agrawal A , Steigmann DJ ( 2011 ) A model for surface diffusion of trans - membrane proteins on lipid bilayers . ZAMP 62 : 549 – 563 Arroyo M , DeSimone A ( 2009 ) Relaxation dynamics of ﬂuid mem - branes . Phys Rev E 79 ( 031915 ) : 1 – 17 Aris R ( 1989 ) Vectors , tensors and the basic equations of ﬂuid mechan - ics . Dover , NY Derenyi I , Julicher F , Prost J ( 2002 ) Formation and interaction of mem - brane tubes . Phys Rev Lett88 : 238101 - 1 – 238101 - 4 Evans EA , Skalak R ( 1980 ) Mechanics and thermodynamics of bio - membranes . CRC Press , Boca Raton Helfrich W ( 1973 ) Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and pos - sible experiments . Z Naturforsch 28 : 693 – 703 Hochmuth RM , Waugh RE ( 1987 ) Erythrocyte membrane elasticity and viscosity . Annu Rev Physiol 49 : 209 – 219 Jenkins JT ( 1977 ) The equations of mechanical equilibrium of a model membrane . SIAM J Appl Math 32 : 755 – 764 Kreyzsig E ( 1959 ) Differential geometry . University of Toronto Press , Toronto Ou - Yang Z - C , Liu J - X , Xie Y - Z ( 1999 ) Geometric methods in the elas - tic theory of membranes in liquid crystal phases . World Scientiﬁc , Singapore 123 Membrane ﬂow and deformation Scriven LE ( 1960 ) Dynamics of a ﬂuid interface . Chem Eng Sci 12 : 98 – 108 Secomb TW , Skalak R ( 1982 ) Surface ﬂow of viscoelastic membranes in viscous ﬂuids . Q J Mech Appl Math 35 : 233 – 247 Seifert U ( 1997 ) Conﬁgurations of ﬂuid membranes . Adv Phys 46 : 13 – 137 Sokolnikoff IS ( 1964 ) Tensor analysis : theory and applications to geo - metry and mechanics of continua . Wiley , NY SteigmannDJ ( 1999a ) Fluidﬁlmswithcurvatureelasticity . ArchRation Mech Anal 150 : 127 – 152 Steigmann DJ ( 1999b ) On the relationship between the Cosserat and Kirchhoff – Love theories of elastic shells . Math Mech Solids 4 : 275 – 288 Steigmann DJ ( 2003 ) Irreducible function bases for simple ﬂuids and liquid crystal ﬁlms . ZAMP 54 : 462 – 477 Steigmann DJ , Baesu E , Rudd RE , Belak J , McElfresh M ( 2003 ) On the variational theory of cell - membrane equilibria . Interfaces Free Boundaries 5 : 357 – 366 123