This article was downloaded by : [ Indiana University Libraries ] On : 11 August 2012 , At : 02 : 53 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Educational Psychologist Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / hedp20 The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning Samuel B . Day a & Robert L . Goldstone b a Department of Psychology , Susquehanna University b Department of Psychology , Indiana University Version of record first published : 25 Jul 2012 To cite this article : Samuel B . Day & Robert L . Goldstone ( 2012 ) : The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning , Educational Psychologist , 47 : 3 , 153 - 176 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 696438 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae , and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand , or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 153 – 176 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 696438 The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning Samuel B . Day Department of Psychology Susquehanna University Robert L . Goldstone Department of Psychology Indiana University After more than 100 years of interest and study , knowledge transfer remains among the most challenging , contentious , and important issues for both psychology and education . In this article , we review and discuss many of the more important ideas and ﬁndings from the existing research and attempt to bridge this body of work with the exciting new research directions suggested by the following articles . Like many of the people reading this article , we ﬁnd math - ematics intrinsically interesting . However , even if most stu - dents shared in our appreciation of the inherent elegance of mathematical explanation , it is unlikely that this would justify the immense amount of educational time spent on the topic . The goal of learning mathematics is to prepare students to use it in the real world , or even more broadly , to employ rigorous , formal thought processes to their everyday life . In various ways , the same can be said for any educational topic—from physics to history to biology to literature , education is fun - damentally about acquiring knowledge to be used outside of the classroom . It is therefore especially troubling that a considerable corpus of research ﬁnds systematic failures in people’s ability to apply their relevant knowledge in new sit - uations . Because of both the difﬁculty and the importance of transfer , aspects that bear on the very foundation of educa - tion , an enormous amount of research has been conducted on knowledge transfer . The topic remains both frustrating and contentious ; however , with some researchers going so far as to argue that meaningful transfer seldom if ever actually occurs ( e . g . , Detterman , 1993 ) . We had two primary goals in writing this article . First , as a lead - in to this special issue , we have attempted to provide a review of the ( sometimes daunting ) existing literature on knowledge transfer . Of course , such a review will never Correspondence should be addressed to Samuel B . Day , Department of Psychology , Susquehanna University , 514 University Avenue , Selinsgrove , PA 17870 . E - mail : days @ susqu . edu be close to complete . However , we have tried as much as possible to include a broad sampling of some of the more important and inﬂuential ﬁndings and ideas and to organize these along themes that are renewed by the current set of articles . When combined with the other articles in this issue , our hope is to provide the reader with a solid understanding of the “state of the art” in transfer research . Our second goal for this article was to join with the other authors in presenting our own proposal for a productive way of advancing research in this area—namely , a discussion of the role of perceptual processes and perceptual representations in knowledge transfer . FINDINGS FROM THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH TO TRANSFER The traditional approach to knowledge transfer has its roots in ideas from the early 20th century . In particular , Thorndike’s ( 1924 ; Thorndike & Woodworth , 1901 ) seminal ideas regarding the importance of overlapping features , or “identical elements , ” between the learning and transfer sit - uations remain an important aspect of current psychological theories . However , contemporary views of transfer have been very much shaped by the computational metaphor of cognition that emerged during the “cognitive revolution” of the 1960s ( see Gardner , 1987 ) , and much of the psycho - logical research on transfer has become tightly linked with symbolic cognitive approaches , particularly with theories D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 154 DAY AND GOLDSTONE of analogical reasoning ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 ) . It is therefore worth spending some time reviewing some of the assumptions of these approaches . According to traditional cognitive approaches , knowledge is representedinterms of systems of discretesymbols , eachof which corresponds to a meaningful concept ( see Markman , 1999 ) . To meaningfully represent a situation , these mental symbols are combined according to a structured syntax that deﬁnes the relationships between the constituent concepts . As an example of the critical role that relations play in knowl - edge representation , the situation described by the sentence “John loves Mary” reﬂects a different set of relationships than the situation described by “Mary loves John , ” although both are made up of the same three constituent symbols ( John , Mary , and loves ) . This capacity to productively reconﬁg - ure the same set of symbols into many distinct structures is one of the primary beneﬁts of the symbolic approach , and it provides a very straightforward way of capturing the power of the human cognitive system ( Fodor & Pylyshyn , 1988 ) . These assumptions , that concepts are represented in a way that is psychologically discrete and allows for ﬂexible recom - bination , have important consequences for cognition . Most important for our purposes , they imply that the structure of a situation may be understood and processed independently of the particular objects and features that are involved . For ex - ample , consider the following situation : John loves Mary , but Mary loves David , causing John to be jealous of David . The symbolic approach allows us to easily generate new situations involving a completely new cast of characters while main - taining the same underlying system of relationships—for ex - ample , Susan loves Mark , but Mark loves Gretchen , causing Susan to be jealous of Gretchen . Furthermore , this approach allows for the possibility of understanding the system of rela - tions independent of any speciﬁc characters , that is , holding an abstract representation of a “love triangle . ” According to traditional cognitive approaches , it is this capacity to represent systems of relations independently of the objects and features that they bind together , which under - lies our ability to reason analogically ( see Gentner , 1983 ) . An analogy is simply a match between the systems of relations in two represented situations ( their “deep structure” ) , regard - less of any differences in the objects and features they involve ( their “surface features” ) . An individual’s recognition of this similarity relies on a mapping process , in which structurally based correspondences between the situations are identiﬁed ( e . g . , in the aforementioned examples , John and Susan would correspond to each other as a result of their shared role of “jealous unrequited lover” ) . This mapping process may then support analogical inference , the generation of some new potential knowledge on the basis of these structural com - monalities . For example , when confronted with a situation in which Nick loves Melanie but Melanie loves Greg , one might use prior knowledge to reasonably conclude that Nick will be jealous of Greg . Traditional approaches to knowledge transfer fundamen - tally rely on this symbolic conception of analogical process - ing . For example , a student may learn a formula for mathe - matical permutations in the context of a problem involving pizzatoppings ( e . g . , Ross , 1984 ) , andsubsequentlyencounter a new permutations problem that describes the assignment of people to teams . To effectively make use of the infor - mation from the ﬁrst problem , the student must recognize the structural commonalities between the two cases , despite their overt surface differences , and use his or her understand - ing of the correspondences to correctly assign values to the variables in the formula . Although there is some variation in the theoretical approaches taken by different researchers ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 2003 ; Keane , Ledgeway , & Duff , 1994 ) , psychologists have widely adopted the view that transfer is the recruitment of previously known , structured symbolic representations in the service of under - standing and making inferences about new , structurally sim - ilar cases . Surface Similarity Over the last several decades , the traditional view of transfer has been a fertile source of research and has greatly expanded our understanding of the conditions under which transfer is likely ( and unlikely ) to occur . By far the most robust ﬁnd - ing involves the inﬂuence of the concrete surface similarities between cases . Although psychologists view structural sim - ilarity as the critical component in meaningful , productive knowledge transfer , research has repeatedly shown that it is the surface commonalities between cases that are more of - ten the driving force in determining whether transfer actually occurs ( e . g . , Anderson , Farrell , & Sauers , 1984 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Reed , 1987 ; Ross , 1987 ; Salomon & Perkins , 1989 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . When a new case dif - fers in its surface characteristics from a previously learned analogous case , spontaneous transfer is typically quite poor ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Simon & Hayes , 1976 ; Weisberg , DiCamillo , & Phillips , 1978 ) . In general , the greatest cognitive difﬁculty seems to be in simply noticing that a new case is structurally similar to a previously known one . For instance , Gentner , Ratterman , and Forbus ( 1993 ) found that although structural commonalities predicted the degree to which participants found an analogy to be “apt” or inferentially sound , these abstract similari - ties were very unlikely to produce reminding on their own . In contrast , surface commonalities between two cases led to frequent remindings , even though participants explicitly recognized their limited beneﬁt . Probably the best known ( and most cited and replicated ) example of this type of recognition failure is the work of Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) , based on Duncker’s ( 1945 ) classic “radiation problem . ” In that problem , individuals are told about a patient with an inoperable tumor in his stom - ach . There is a kind of ray that could be used to treat the D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 155 patient , but at intensities sufﬁcient to destroy the tumor , a great deal of healthy tissue would also be destroyed . At lower intensities , the ray would be harmless to healthy tissue but would not affect the tumor . Individuals are asked to propose a solution that could destroy the tumor while also leaving healthy tissue intact . The intended solution involves a con - vergence approach , in which several low intensity rays are administered from different locations but converge at the site of the tumor , creating a greater aggregate intensity there . Participants have a very difﬁcult time solving this problem independently . Furthermore , preceding the problem with a relevant analogous example—for instance , a story about sol - diers simultaneously converging on a fortress—did little to improve performance ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . How - ever , when the demands for spontaneous reminding were re - moved from the task by giving participants an explicit cue to consider the relevance of a previously learned situation ( e . g . , “the story you read earlier might be relevant in solving this problem” ) , transfer rates were dramatically higher ( also see Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Reed , Dempster & Ettinger , 1985 ) . In the absence of such hints , however , recognition fail - ures can be surprisingly robust . In one striking example , Anolli , Antonietti , Crisafulli , and Cantoia ( 2001 ) interrupted participants during their attempts to solve Duncker’s radi - ation problem , asked them to answer a relevant question about the previously seen , analogous problem , and then al - lowed them to continue working on the test problem . Despite this seemingly extreme manipulation , successful transfer oc - curred only rarely ( 5 – 10 % of the time ) and was no better than a control condition in which no analogous prior problem had been given . As previously discussed , in the symbolic view of analog - ical processing , reminding is only the ﬁrst step in achieving transfer . To make accurate inferences between the cases , af - ter reminding occurs individuals must perform a mapping between the two representations to determine structural cor - respondences . There is evidence that surface similarity can have an important inﬂuence during this phase as well . High surface similarity between entities in the same role ( e . g . , en - tities that would be represented by the same variable in a mathematical formula ) tends to facilitate transfer , even when reminding is not a factor ( Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) . This can be contrasted with cases of “cross - mapping , ” in which two sit - uations share similar entities , but these entities play differ - ent roles within their respective systems . For example , after studying a problem in which various cars are assigned to mechanics , an individual may be asked to solve a new prob - lem in which mechanics are assigned to cars . Under these conditions , the concrete commonalities between the situa - tions may improve reminding ( Ross , 1989 ) , but the added difﬁculty required in ignoring the surface similarities be - tween entities during the mapping process ( because cars in the study problem does not correspond to cars in the trans - fer problem ) generally leads to poorer overall performance than when cross - mapping does not occur ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) . In general , however , more attention has been given to the role of surface content on reminding than on mapping , and , in fact , these kinds of effects may be seen as an example of the broader inﬂuence of encoding speciﬁcity ( Tulving & Thomson , 1973 ) on memory and knowledge application . In - deed , Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) have developed a fairly com - prehensive taxonomy of the many ways in which learning and transfer situations may differ from one another . These included factors such as physical context , temporal context , functional context , social context and modality , in addition to the content of the materials themselves . The authors sug - gested several areas for future research to ﬁll gaps in our knowledge about the effects and interactions between these factors , but also noted many existing studies in which differ - ences along these dimensions negatively inﬂuenced transfer . For instance , Spencer and Weisberg ( 1986 , again using a ver - sion of Duncker’s radiation problem ) found that even small changes in the context of the learning and testing episodes ( one was described as an experiment , the other as a classroom exercise ) eliminated all evidence of transfer , even though the physical context ( the classroom ) remained constant and the delay between tasks was only a few minutes . Likewise , there is evidence that the similarity between the kinds of cognitive processing used during learning and testing may inﬂuence the likelihood of transfer . For instance , researchers have examined people’s ability to solve brief in - sight puzzles , such as , “A man in the U . S . married 20 dif - ferent women in the same town . All of them are still living and he has never divorced one of them , yet he has broken no law . Can you explain ? ” Surprisingly , providing partici - pants with highly relevant information immediately prior to the test phase ( e . g . , reading the sentence “A minister marries several people each week . ” ) has no impact on their ability to correctly solve the problems ( Perfetto , Bransford , & Franks , 1983 ) . However , when this prior information is presented in a way that mirrors the likely “confusion - resolution” process - ing involved in the test puzzles—such as , “You can marry several people each week . . . if you are minister”—transfer rates increase considerably ( Adams et al . , 1988 ; Lockhart , Lamon , & Gick , 1988 ) . The literature thus provides a strong and consistent picture of the role of similarity in transfer . Structural similarity repre - sents the actual basis for meaningful knowledge transfer , and people are aware of , and sensitive to , this fact ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ) . In practice , however , contextual similarity be - tween the situations themselves seems to play a much larger role in determining whether transfer will actually occur . Discerning Deep Structure The role of surface similarity in transfer represents a very serious issue for educators . Educational curricula contain an enormous number of concepts that students are expected to D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 156 DAY AND GOLDSTONE master , each of which reﬂects ( directly or indirectly ) some knowledge or skill that is presumed to be of value outside of the classroom . The literature on similarity and transfer sug - gests that students may often fail to recognize the relevance of these ideas when they are confronted with analogous situa - tions in the real world , particularly when the speciﬁc concrete details of those situations do not closely match those pre - sented by teachers . However , the sheer breadth and volume of the material to be learned , combined with limited class time , means that this will typically not be the case . Teach - ers will never be able to anticipate and address most of the contexts in which important concepts could be applicable . Furthermore , even if this were possible , research suggests that students would encounter difﬁculties simply because of changes to the learning context itself : Information learned in the classroom is often unlikely to be accessed and applied outside of the classroom ( e . g . , Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ) . Findings such as these seem to call into question the entire enterprise of formal education . However , the research discussed earlier also points to some reasons for hope . Researchers found that when infor - mation was encoded in a way that made it more accessible during the test phase—for instance , by matching the kinds of cognitive processes that were likely to be engaged ( Adams et al . , 1988 ; Lockhart et al . , 1988 ) —transfer was much more likely to occur . More broadly , there has been a considerable amount of research looking at the ways in which speciﬁc aspects of the mental representations that learners initially form may help ( or hinder ) their ability to generalize their knowledge in new contexts . Most frequently , these efforts have involved seeking ways to emphasize the structural aspects of the learned representa - tions while deemphasizing contextual features that are irrele - vant to that structure . Sometimes this has been accomplished very directly . For instance , after giving children a story to read , Ann Brown and her colleagues ( A . L . Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ) asked them a few questions emphasizing relevant aspects of its underlying goal structure , such as the protagonist , the goal , and the obstacle to be overcome . Under these conditions , children were more than 3 times as likely to spontaneously suggest the relevant strategy when solving a new problem . The researchers also found that the children who had emphasized these structural aspects of the story on their own , without the leading questions , were similarly quite likely to transfer the solution ( also see Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Another straightforward way to emphasize structural fea - tures during learning is through explicit labeling . For exam - ple , Catrambone ( 1996 , 1998 ) found that labeling the sub - goals involved in a complex mathematical procedure helped students accurately understand the important structural as - pects of a new problem , and thereby transfer the solution more effectively . This result held even when the label was not inherently meaningful . Labeling has proven particularly effective in research with younger children ( e . g . , Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . For in - stance , preschool - aged children were better able to recog - nize and take advantage of structural commonalities between two physical models when the spatial locations of one of the models were meaningfully labeled ( e . g . , in , on , under ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . For adults as well , labels that emphasize structural relations can promote transfer to new situations that are structurally similar ( Son , Doumas , & Goldstone , 2010 ) . Perhaps the most obvious way of deemphasizing the su - perﬁcial , context - speciﬁc aspects of a situation is by simply reducing their presence in the training materials . Evidence suggests that this can also be an effective strategy . For in - stance , the “seductive details” effect ( e . g . , Garner , Gilling - ham , & White , 1989 ) occurs in situations where interest - ing but structurally irrelevant information distracts learners from the important concepts to be acquired . Harp and Mayer ( 1997 ) found that recall and transfer from a scientiﬁc pas - sage dropped precipitously when interesting but tangential text or illustrations were included ( also see Garner , Brown , Sanders , & Menke , 1992 ; Garner et al . , 1989 ; Harp & Mayer , 1998 ; Hidi & Baird , 1988 ; Wade , 1992 ) . Similarly , Mayer , Grifﬁth , Jurkowitz , and Rothman ( 2008 ) reported studies in which interesting extraneous information signiﬁcantly im - paired transfer while leaving retention largely intact . Based on these results , the authors argued that even if the added extraneous material is engaging , the net beneﬁt for learning may be negative due to interference with the deep cognitive processing necessary for the construction of generalizable knowledge structures . The presence of completely extraneous information seems to represent a clear impediment to learning and transfer . A po - tentially more insidious issue , however , involves contextual content that is inherently relevant to the training materials . For instance , an instructor may present the concept of positive feedback systems through a speciﬁc contextualized example , such as the effects of polar melting on global warming . In this case , the concrete details of the situation—the sun , the ice , the reﬂected light—may still interfere with a learner’s abil - ity to transfer their knowledge to new contexts , even though they promote comprehension of the example . Researchers have had some success in facilitating mapping and transfer between situations by simply reducing the “richness” of the content in the training materials ( e . g . , Clement , Mawby , & Giles , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1995 ; Goldstone , Medin , & Gentner , 1991 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998 ) . For example , Goldstone and Sakamoto ( 2003 ) taught participants about the principle of competitive specialization in the context of ants foraging for food . When a computer simulation of the system por - trayed these ants as dots rather than realistic drawings , partic - ipants were better able to transfer their knowledge to a new , superﬁcially dissimilar instantiation of the same principle . Clement and colleagues ( 1994 ) found a similar pattern with text materials that used domain - general or domain - speciﬁc D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 157 words . For instance , a domain - general version of one of the scenarios described a political candidate who stole ideas and incorporated them into his speeches ; in the domain - speciﬁc version , the candidate was described as plagiarizing ideas and typing them into his speeches , terms which are much more speciﬁc in their applicability . Participants in these stud - ies were far more likely to recognize and retrieve structurally similar cases when their relationships were described in more domain - general rather than domain - speciﬁc terms . In work with young children , DeLoache ( e . g . , 1991 , 1995 ; DeLoache & Burns , 1994 ) has consistently found evidence that salient concrete details in a learning experience can im - pair knowledge transfer , even between situations that are seemingly very similar . In one of her standard experimental paradigms , children watch a miniature item being hidden in a small model of a room ( e . g . , a miniature toy might be hidden under a miniature bed ) and are then asked to ﬁnd the matching item in the corresponding location of a matching full - sized room ( a real toy under a real bed ) . Younger children have a surprisingly difﬁcult time with this task . However , their success or failure can be inﬂuenced by the subjective con - creteness of the learning case . For instance , they are more successful when the initial model is a two - dimensional im - age rather than a three - dimensional scaled model . Similarly , it was found that children were better able to transfer their knowledge from a scaled model when it was seen behind a plexiglass window , but transfer was impaired when they were allowed to interact and play with the scaled items prior to using the model to ﬁnd the corresponding items in the full - sized room . DeLoache argued that these effects reﬂect the difﬁculty of representing something both as a physical object and as a symbol for something else and that this issue is exacerbated when the concrete physicality of the object is emphasized . As some of these examples demonstrate , the notion of concreteness is not necessarily equivalent to the objective “quantity” of perceptual features . Perhaps the broadest and most applicable way of construing concreteness is in terms of the amount of information that a representation conveys to a particular individual ( e . g . , Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2011 ) . For instance , a simple line drawing of a cat would contain less in - formation than a photograph of a cat , and would therefore be a less concrete representation . Important to note , this concep - tion of concreteness can reﬂect more than just the information inherent to the materials themselves . For instance , a picture of one’s own cat could be considered even more concrete , in that it evokes a great deal of previously existing knowl - edge . Along these lines , Kaminski , Sloutsky , and Heckler ( 2008 ) taught students about the modulo 3 operation , using either symbols representing a familiar , well - structured con - text ( e . g . , line drawings of measuring cups ) or more generic symbols without any relevant preexisting associations . The generic symbols led to much greater transfer to a new con - text , whereas performance by the concrete training group did not differ from chance . Similarly , Son and Goldstone ( 2009 ) reported that participants’ ability to transfer the principles of signal detection theory was impaired when the protagonist of the scenario was a well - known ﬁctional television character rather than an anonymous doctor . Activation of speciﬁc , pre - existing knowledge appears to have negative consequences for transfer similar to the hindrance for transfer caused by overt contextual detail . There is therefore a broad range of evidence that reducing the concrete content of a learning experience can aid in an individual’s ability to apply their knowledge to new , dissim - ilar situations . Taken to its natural conclusion , this pattern suggests that the ideal learning materials would be those that eliminate such information altogether . For instance , math - ematical ideas could be taught entirely in terms of num - bers , variables , and formulae , or a principle such as “positive feedback loop” could be conveyed in terms of abstract rela - tionships and processes ( e . g . , “A system in which changes to a variable result in additional changes to that variable in the same direction” ) . However , evidence suggests that this is generally an ineffective approach . Although completely abstract materials can present information in a way that is both efﬁcient and maximally general , it seems to do so at the expense of comprehensibility ( e . g . , Bruner , 1966 ; Carra - her , Carraher , & Schliemann , 1987 ; see Nathan , 2012 , for a related argument ) . In one clear example of the issues associated with com - plete abstraction , researchers ( LeFevre & Dixon , 1986 ) pro - vided participants with both explicit written instructions for a task and a worked example . For some participants , how - ever , these two sources of instruction were in conﬂict and reﬂected entirely different tasks that would lead to different correct responses . Under these conditions , more than 90 % of the participants ignored the verbal instructions and in - stead followed the example of the worked concrete problem . Work by Ross ( 1987 ) suggests a similar phenomenon . In his study , participants learned about a particular mathemati - cal procedure in the context of a speciﬁc , concrete example . During a later test , individuals were provided with the correct formula needed to solve a new analogous problem . Never - theless , performance was signiﬁcantly affected by the details of the example that had been seen earlier ( also see Anderson et al . , 1984 ) . A similar pattern has been observed in percep - tual classiﬁcation tasks . Even when people know a simple , clear - cut rule for a classiﬁcation , performance is better on frequently presented , compared to rare , examples ( Allen & Brooks , 1991 ) . A recent study by McNeil and her colleagues ( McNeil , Uttal , Jarvin , & Sternberg , 2009 ) captures the complexity of the issue of concreteness in learning . Students in that study were less successful in solving word problems about money when the task involved interaction with actual phys - ical bills and coins than when it did not . However , the con - creteness of the physical money seemed to convey some important advantages as well . Analysis of students’ work showed that those who used the perceptually rich money D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 158 DAY AND GOLDSTONE were less likely to make conceptual errors ( i . e . , they were more likely to attempt the correct mathematical operations ) , suggesting that the concreteness helped them to compre - hend the overall structure of scenarios . Similarly , in a recent study exploring the tradeoffs between contextually grounded versus abstract ( equation - based ) representations , Koedinger , Alibali , and Nathan ( 2008 ) found that for simple problems , grounded word problems were solved better , but for complex problems , equations were solved more accurately . In both of these studies , the real - world contextualization provides useful checks and constraints that prevent certain kinds of mistakes , but this same contextualization can interfere with transfer to new , complex situations . Combining Concreteness and Abstraction The research on concreteness in learning and transfer presents researchers with some confounding issues . On one hand , presenting information via concrete examples may lead to mental representations that are overly “bound” to a par - ticular context and may interfere with a person’s ability both to recognize new situations where their knowledge could be relevant and to apply their knowledge in an appropriate way . On the other hand , efforts to circumvent these problems by presenting information abstractly , with minimal speciﬁc con - text , may seriously impair the learner’s ability to accurately represent the information at all . Educators may , reasonably , feel faced with the unappealing task of choosing between comprehensibility and applicability . Of course , these extremes do not represent the only possi - bilities , and researchers have given serious attention to ﬁnd - ing ways to leverage the beneﬁts of both concreteness and ab - straction . For instance , Goldstone and Son ( 2005 ) conducted a study in which a previously unfamiliar scientiﬁc principle ( competitive specialization ) was taught through two inter - active computer simulations , each of which could be either relatively concrete or relatively idealized . They found that participants showed superior performance on learning and transfer after interacting with one concrete and one ideal - ized version of the simulation , relative to participants who had interacted with two simulations of the same type . This advantage was especially pronounced under conditions of “concreteness fading , ” in which a concrete simulation was followed by one that was less perceptually rich . Scheiter , Ger - jets , and Shuh ( 2010 ) replicated and extended this ﬁnding . In their study , a computer simulation demonstrated a continu - ous morphing between very concrete and more abstract visual representations . For example , an initial display of realistically rendered trees became progressively less detailed , until they were ultimately transformed into small green squares , which were then combined into larger contiguous groupings that made the relative proportions of different types of trees very salient . This approach ( which simultaneously used both rich and idealized representations and facilitated cognitive map - ping between the two types ) led to reliable gains in transfer . One of the most investigated—and apparently most effective—ways of overcoming the limitations of speciﬁc concrete examples is by comparing multiple dissimilar cases . This approach can allow a learner to encode the content in terms of meaningful , comprehensible situations , but then to distill the structurally relevant information on the basis of commonalities across the examples . In particular , there is evidence that the act of mapping the correspondences be - tween two situations ( i . e . , identifying which entities play the same respective roles ) can serve to highlight the struc - tural content . For example , Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner ( 2003 ) conducted research with management ( MBA ) students enrolled in a course on negotiation . Some of the students compared two speciﬁc cases involving a “con - tingency contract , ” a useful but sometimes counterintuitive negotiation technique . Other students received the same two cases but read and analyzed them sequentially , without any explicit comparison . Later , all students took part in a face - to - face bargaining exercise in which the use of a contingency contract represented the optimal approach . Students who had compared cases were nearly 3 times as likely to apply this principle to the new case as those who had analyzed the cases separately . In fact , the latter group performed no better on the transfer task than those who had received no training on the contingency principle at all . Results from many other stud - ies across a variety of contexts are consistent with the idea that comparison and mapping between dissimilar cases fa - cilitates structural processing ( e . g . , Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Cummins , 1992 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , Thompson , & Forbus , 2009 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Richland & McDonough , 2010 ) . In one example from a real - world educational setting , Richland and McDonough ( 2010 ) found that explicitly cuing the meaningful common - alities between two math problems—for example , by visually presenting both examples at once and gesturing between cor - responding aspects of them—improved students’ ability to transfer to new cross - mapped cases . Research on this approach has typically involved explicit , directed comparison between cases , but there is also evidence that multiple examples may provide a beneﬁt under less di - rected conditions as well . Quilici and Mayer ( 2002 ) taught students about statistical tests ( t test , chi - square , correlation ) by sequentially presenting a set of examples that systemat - ically varied surface and structural properties . Speciﬁcally , students read examples describing t tests in three different concrete contexts , followed by examples of chi - square tests in the same three contexts , followed by the same for correla - tion problems . Although participants in this study were not explicitly asked to map between the cases , the structure of the problem presentation invited at least informal compari - son . Consistent with this , transfer rates were reliably higher relative to other study structures . Ross and Kennedy ( 1990 ) also examined the effects of nondirected comparison . Speciﬁcally , when participants in their study used a previous example to solve a new problem D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 159 ( as a result of spontaneous reminding ) , they then showed superior performance on subsequent problems of that type . This is consistent with the idea that the initial reminding and application involved a comparison and mapping process that helped to create a stronger structural representation . The authors suggest that this kind of “unsupervised” compari - son reﬂects a natural and realistic way in which generaliz - able knowledge could develop in the real world , particularly given that in many domains , surface , and structural charac - teristics tend to be correlated ( e . g . , Gentner , 1989 ; Lewis & Anderson , 1985 ; Mayer , 1981 ) . Finally , as discussed earlier , research has found that explicit labeling can be beneﬁcial in highlighting structural commonalities between situations ( e . g . , Catrambone , 1998 ) . Some researchers have argued that these labels are effective because they invite spontaneous comparison ( e . g . , Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Namy & Gen - tner , 2002 ) , and there is some recent evidence to support this interpretation ( Son et al . , 2010 ) . Despite a growing body of evidence for the beneﬁts of comparison , however , the results are not uniformly positive . For example , Reed ( 1989 ) found that comparing two algebra problems did not improve performance on new problems . Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) found that although com - parison helped transfer in the short term , these beneﬁts dis - appeared after short delays or changes in context ( although longer term transfer could be facilitated through more in - tensive , experimenter - directed comparisons ) . In one recent study ( Mayer , DeLeeuw , & Ayres , 2007 ) , exposure to multi - ple cases was actually found to impair transfer . Participants in that study learned about the design and function of hy - draulic brake systems , and some of those participants also saw descriptions of other types of brake systems ( air and caliper brakes ) . The researchers found that those who had learned about multiple systems performed worse on tests of both retention and transfer than those who had only learned about one . One possible explanation for this disadvantage is that the transfer questions in this study all involved inferences about hydraulic brakes themselves , not inferences based on any structural commonalities across the different systems . If true , this suggests that the beneﬁts of generalizability asso - ciated with comparison may sometimes come at the expense of more speciﬁc kinds of knowledge . Overall , however , research suggests that the comparison of multiple cases represents a particularly promising avenue for developing generalizable representations from concrete ex - amples . There are still important questions about the optimal ways of organizing these comparisons , however , and much less evidence exists regarding the kinds of cases that should be compared . On one hand , a case could be made that com - paring situations with very dissimilar surface features should lead to the best generalization . If comparison serves to high - light commonalities between cases while deemphasizing dif - ferences , comparing situations that share irrelevant features could result in those features being retained in a learner’s mental representation ( the idea of “conservative generaliza - tion” ; Medin & Ross , 1989 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1990 ) . This , in turn , could limit generalizability to new , dissimilar cases . Some research is consistent with this conclusion ( e . g . , Day , Goldstone , & Hills , 2010 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Halpern , Hansen , & Riefer , 1990 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2009 ) . For example , Halpern and colleagues ( Halpern et al . , 1990 ) asked students to read scientiﬁc passages that included either “near” ( superﬁcially similar ) or “far” ( superﬁcially dis - similar ) analogies . The passages including far analogies led to superior retention , inference , and transfer than those fea - turing superﬁcially similar comparisons , which showed no beneﬁt at all . On the other hand , there are also good reasons to suggest that the comparison of more similar cases might be beneﬁcial , particularly early in the learning process . As discussed ear - lier , the process of mapping two representations to ﬁnd struc - tural correspondences is facilitated when entities in similar roles are concretely similar . The less similar two situations are overall , the less likely it becomes that corresponding enti - ties will share overt surface similarities , and thus the process of mapping itself becomes both more cognitively demanding and more prone to error ( see Gentner , Loewenstein , & Hung , 2007 ) . Together with the considerable evidence that cogni - tive demands represent a general impediment to learning ( see Sweller , 1999 ) , this suggests that there may be circumstances in which the comparison of concretely similar cases would lead to better transfer , and there is some evidence to support this idea . For instance , Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found that although young children initially had a very difﬁcult time recognizing and responding on the basis of structural similarities between perceptually dissimilar stimuli , they be - came reliably better at this task when they had ﬁrst observed the structural commonality between overtly similar stimuli , a phenomenon termed “progressive alignment” ( also see Gen - ter et al . , 2007 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ) . Thus , there is some evidence for each of these two compet - ing ideas—that transfer will beneﬁt most from the compar - ison of similar and of dissimilar cases . One possible way to reconcile these ﬁndings is by suggesting that different kinds of learners may beneﬁt from different kinds of comparisons . In the absence of other constraints , comparisons of dissimilar situations should be best , because they can serve to highlight only those features that are relevant to the broadest possible set of applicable cases . Of course , learning and cognition are inevitably subject to ( often serious ) constraints . When an individual’s working memory capacity is more restricted , because of limited background knowledge , individual dif - ferences in ability , or both , the comparison of concretely similar cases may be preferable . In fact , some recent ﬁndings are consistent with this idea ( Day et al . , 2010 ; Rittle - Johnson , Star , & Durkin , 2009 ) . If this reconciliation is correct , then a general recommendation for promoting transfer would be to present a principle using the most dissimilar cases that still allow a learner to compare the cases and recognize the basis for their similarity . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 160 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Prior Knowledge Several lines of research have established that an individual’s existing knowledge can provide a signiﬁcant advantage in his or her ability to recognize and take advantage of deep structural content . One of the classic ﬁndings in this area comes from the work of Chi , Feltovich , and Glaser ( 1981 ) examining the differences between experts and nonexperts in the domain of physics . The researchers found that experts ( advanced physics PhD students ) overwhelmingly tended to group physics problems on the basis of the general princi - ples underlying their solution ( e . g . , conservation of energy , Newton’s second law ) . In contrast , relative novices ( under - graduates who had just completed an introductory mechan - ics course ) were much more likely to group problems by their concrete features ( e . g . , the presence of springs , inclined planes , pulleys , etc . ) . This general pattern , with experts using meaningful structural commonalities to assess similarity and novices using surface features , has been replicated in a wide range of domains . For instance , expert programmers tend to sort computer programs on the basis of their underlying algo - rithms , whereas novices are more likely to sort on the basis of application type ( Weiser & Shertz , 1983 ) . Similarly , trained musicians were found to group musical pieces exclusively by similarities in their melodic and harmonic structure , whereas nonmusicians had a strong bias to group them by similarities in instrumentation ( Wolpert , 1990 ) . Likewise , when expert and novice subjects were asked to solve the Tower of Hanoi puzzle and judge the similarity between the goal and vari - ous states , experts’ judgments were more likely to be based on the number of moves required to transform one posi - tion to the other , rather than number of shared superﬁcial features ( Suzuki , Ohnishi , & Shigemasu , 1992 ) . Although most of this research has examined individuals that are al - ready experts in their ﬁeld , similar effects can be induced experimentally through training . For example , Schoenfeld and Hermann ( 1982 ) found that students were more likely to sort mathematical problems on the basis of their underlying structure after an intensive training course on mathematical problem solving . Important for our purposes , these expertise differences appear to have a strong inﬂuence on the likelihood of spon - taneous analogical reminding and use . For example , Novick ( 1988 ) found that students with greater expertise in mathe - matics ( as assessed by scores on the mathematical section of the SAT ) were much more likely to make use of previously seen problems that were analogous but overtly dissimilar to a new test problem . In contrast , the nonexpert students were more likely to be inﬂuenced ( negatively ) by remindings of prior problems with surface commonalities ( also see Ball , Ormerod , & Morley , 2004 ; Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . Of course , experts are not completely immune to the in - ﬂuence of surface features ( e . g . , Blessing & Ross , 1996 ; Hardiman , Dufresne , & Mestre , 1989 ) . In fact , in some cir - cumstances , experts’ greater knowledge and experience can leave them susceptible to new kinds of surface inﬂuences . For instance , Blessing and Ross ( 1996 ) asked experienced math students to solve story problems that varied in both their surface features ( the cover story of the problem ) and their underlying structure ( the formula necessary to solve them correctly ) . According to prior research , one might pre - dict that these experts would have learned simply to ignore the irrelevant contextual information and focus solely on the abstract relationships within each problem . However , these students’ prior experience had provided them with ad - ditional relevant information : that certain kinds of mathe - matical problems tend to be presented in certain kinds of contexts . The researchers found that students’ performance was impaired when the problems involved content that was typically associated with a different type of solution formula ( also see Bassok , Wu , & Olseth , 1995 ; Hinsley , Hayes , & Simon , 1978 ) . Overall , however , expertise provides signiﬁcant advan - tages for transfer . There are many factors that might con - tribute to this fact . Experts may have simply had more prac - tice construing situations in terms of the abstractions that are relevant to their ﬁeld . For instance , physicists are likely to be quite good at thinking about speciﬁc problems in terms of abstract objects and forces . Because of this , their mental representations of two problems that involve the same under - lying principles are likely to be fairly similar , which would facilitate both reminding and mapping . One of the most im - portant factors in experts’ transfer , as we discuss in the next section , is that their rich background knowledge allows them to overcome limitations in working memory . Cognitive Load and Task Difﬁculty Potentially the greatest constraint on learning in general , and therefore on transfer , is the severe cognitive restriction on the amount of information that can be processed at any one time . Research on working memory ( see Baddeley , 2000 ; Baddeley & Hitch , 1974 ) has provided a wealth of evidence that individuals are only capable of keeping a handful of units of information active simultaneously and are able to actively manipulate even fewer . Furthermore , this kind of knowledge is typically very short - lived . In the absence of active rehearsal , information tends to remain active for only a few seconds . These facts are especially relevant for transfer because there are reasons to suspect that structural knowledge in particular could be disproportionately inﬂuenced by such restrictions . In general , learners need to represent the indi - vidual entities in a situation before they are able to repre - sent the relationships between those constituent parts ( e . g . , Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ) . This suggests that when an individual has limited resources to devote to a set of facts—perhaps because new content in a lecture is displac - ing it quickly—it is the representation of the relational struc - ture that is most likely to suffer ( see Halford , Wilson , & D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 161 Phillips , 1998 ) . Similarly , this limited capacity means that learners have fewer opportunities to elaborate on the new information by generating new inferences , making connec - tions to existing knowledge , and developing more general schemas from the information ( e . g . , Sweller , 1994 ) . Given this , limitations in cognitive capacity could lead to serious difﬁculties in both recognizing and making use of analogous structures . There is empirical evidence to support this idea . Waltz and colleagues ( Waltz , Lau , Grewal , & Holyoak , 2000 ) ex - amined people’s ability to recognize structural commonalities between pairs of visual scenes , each of which portrayed vari - ous people and objects interacting in some way . For example , one picture showed a woman receiving groceries from a man from a food bank , while the paired picture showed the same woman giving food to a squirrel ( see Figure 1 ) . In this and all of the pairs , one of the entities was “cross - mapped” between the images—for example , the woman in the ﬁrst picture cor - responded to the woman in second picture on the basis of their similar physical appearance , but she corresponded to the squirrel in terms of their shared role as “recipient of food” ( see Markman & Gentner , 1993 ) . The question of inter - est was which of these alternatives participants would select FIGURE 1 Sample stimuli used by Waltz et al . ( 2000 ) . From “Structural alignment during similarity comparisons , ” by A . B . Markman and D . Gentner , 1993 , Cognitive Psychology , 25 , p . 436 . Copyright 1993 by Elsevier . Reprinted with permission . when asked which entity corresponded to the ﬁrst woman . Under normal conditions , the relational match ( the squirrel ) and the perceptual match ( the woman ) were chosen about equally often . However , when participants were put under a cognitive load during the task—for example , by asking them to maintain a string of digits in memory—they were far more likely to ignore the structural features and prefer the perceptually similar match . Similar results have been found from manipulations that deplete working memory capacity indirectly , such as inducing anxiety in participants ( Tohill & Holyoak , 2000 ) . Because of the critical role that working memory con - straints play in learning and transfer , researchers have been very interested in determining effective ways of managing processing demands during learning . Cognitive load theory ( CLT ; Sweller , van Merrienboer , & Paas , 1998 ) , which distin - guishes between different kinds of cognitive demands based on their relevance to learning , has provided a productive framework for examining these issues . For example , several studies have reported superior learning and transfer after stu - dents had been shown several worked examples ( see Renkl , 2005 ; Renkl & Atkinson , 2010 ) . This worked - example ef - fect is typically explained in terms of learners having the opportunity to develop meaningful schemas without having unnecessary demands placed on their cognitive processing . Other research has shown that learning can beneﬁt from ma - nipulations such as removing irrelevant , distracting content ( e . g . , Garner et al . , 1989 ) , using cues to direct attention to rel - evant content ( e . g . , Lorch , 1989 ; Mautone & Mayer , 2001 ) , allowing learners to pace their own training in order allow sufﬁcient processing time ( e . g . , Lusk et al . , 2009 ; Mayer & Chandler , 2001 ) , and “pretraining” students on relevant sub - components of a system prior to the complete training phase ( e . g . , Mayer , Mathias , & Wetzell , 2002 ; Pollock , Chandler , & Sweller , 2002 ) . CLT also takes into consideration the fact that auditory and visual working memory systems appear to be relatively independent ( e . g . , Baddeley , 1986 ; Paivio , 1990 ) . That is , a heavy processing demand from one kind of information ( e . g . , auditory or verbal content ) typically does not signiﬁcantly interfere with processing for a different kind of information ( e . g . , visual content ) . Because of this , it is often possible to more effectively balance the information load between these two subsystems . For instance , Mayer and colleagues report several studies in which the presentation of visual material that was accompanied by oral narration led to better learn - ing and transfer than the simultaneous presentation of visual material and text ( e . g . , Mayer & Moreno , 1998 ; Moreno & Mayer , 1999 ; Moreno , Mayer , Spires , & Lester , 2001 ) . In this case , presenting the visual and verbal content in different modalities avoids overloading a single system . Other stud - ies have found beneﬁts associated with aligning images and text spatially ( e . g . , Hegarty & Just , 1989 ; Moreno & Mayer , 1999 ) and synchronizing their presentation temporally ( e . g . , Mayer & Anderson , 1991 , 1992 ; Mayer & Sims , 1994 ) , both D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 162 DAY AND GOLDSTONE of which should reduce the length of time that information must be maintained in working memory . In all of these examples , the degree to which learners’ working memory is taxed has an important inﬂuence on their ability to acquire new knowledge , and particularly their abil - ity to develop knowledge structures that can generalize to new situations . In fact , constraints on cognitive processing almost certainly play a role in many of the transfer effects that have already been discussed . For example , both the fa - cilitation observed in analogical mapping between similar objects and the impairment associated with “cross - mapping” entities to dissimilar roles ( e . g . , Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) are likely to reﬂect the relative difﬁculty of maintaining similar versus dissimilar correspondences in working memory . Likewise , the labeling of relational struc - tures ( e . g . , Catrambone , 1996 , 1998 ) may be beneﬁcial in part because it serves to reduce cognitive demands by group - ing and thereby simplifying the information to be stored and processed . One of the clearest examples of the role of processing constraints on transfer is in the differences between experts and novices . Speciﬁcally , expertise seems to involve spe - cialized kinds of processes and representations that allow an individual to efﬁciently work around these severe cogni - tive constraints . A considerable amount of evidence supports the idea that proﬁciency in a content domain is not asso - ciated with improved storage or processing capacity per se . Rather , individuals are able to become much more efﬁcient at processing information through the acquisition of long - term knowledge structures . Through the process of chunking , ex - perts may reduce very large quantities of information into a much smaller number of representational units . For instance , although a novice looking at a chessboard in mid - game is confronted with an overwhelming amount of information , chess experts are able to quickly recognize and classify large groups of pieces into a small number of meaningful structures ( e . g . , Chase & Simon , 1973 ; de Groot , 1966 ) . Important for our purposes , chunked knowledge structures such as these do not only allow individuals to encode content far more quickly and remember conﬁgurations much more effectively . They also serve as a kind of classiﬁcation which enables experts to associate appropriate procedures and strategies with dif - ferent kinds of complex situations . For example , a physics expert may classify diverse problems into structurally mean - ingful categories ( e . g . , Chi et al . , 1981 ) that highlight relevant relationships and suggest speciﬁc kinds of solutions . Although there are many clear examples of beneﬁts from reducing the cognitive demand associated with learning , the story is made somewhat more complex by the seemingly contradictory evidence for the beneﬁts of cognitive difﬁ - culty . “Desirable difﬁculties” ( Bjork , 1994 ) are aspects of a learning situation that make immediate learning and encod - ing more difﬁcult but that also enhance long - term retention and retrieval . Although such effects have typically been ex - amined in terms of basic information recall , several studies suggest that certain kinds of difﬁculties during training may enhance transfer as well . For instance , Kornell and Bjork ( 2008 ) showed participants several examples of paintings from each of 12 different artists and then looked at the par - ticipants’ ability to generalize their knowledge by recogniz - ing new paintings by those artists . Participants overwhelming preferred conditions in which the paintings by any particular artist were grouped together consecutively , and believed that this presentation improved their test performance . In real - ity , however , the more challenging “spaced” presentation , in which paintings by each artist were presented “interleaved” with those of other painters , led to reliably better generaliza - tion . In a more typical problem - solving transfer test , Chen and Mo ( 2004 ) found that although greater variability in training examples led to slower , more difﬁcult learning , it also left participants better equipped to generalize their knowledge to new transfer problems . Similarly , researchers have found that participants’ ability to transfer a solution to an insight problem was improved when the source problem was pre - sented in a way that made structural relationships within the problem less salient , and therefore more difﬁcult to encode ( Didierjean & Nogry , 2004 ; Gick & McGarry , 1992 ) . In all of these cases , the introduction of difﬁculty during training improved later transfer performance . The recommendations from CLT and Desirable Difﬁcul - ties are , on the face of it , conﬂicting , and each has its share of empirical support . One possible reconciliation of these con - ﬂicting results is that introducing difﬁculties into learning can confer beneﬁts for transfer so long as solid learning is nonetheless achieved . Reminiscent of Nietzsche’s aphorism “What does not destroy me , makes me strong , ” the recom - mendation would be to introduce learning challenges that do not completely derail learning . Adaptive learning technolo - gies that adjust the difﬁculties of materials while learning is ongoing represent a promising way of implementing this recommendation . Types of Processing and Strategic Approaches All of the effects discussed thus far have related to inﬂu - ences outside of the learner’s immediate control—features inherent in the learning materials and situations themselves , or knowledge that individuals bring from their prior experi - ence . However , transfer can also be affected by a variety of online factors , reﬂecting different kinds of processing used during encoding or transfer . Surprisingly little evidence exists regarding one of the most direct potential processing inﬂuences—namely , whether individuals can be in a cognitive state that causes them to interpret things more or less relationally in general . In one of the few studies on this question ( Bliznashki & Kokinov , 2010 ) , researchers recently reported evidence that engaging in one task that requires relational construal of information can prime participants to interpret subsequent D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 163 situations more relationally . Speciﬁcally , after attempting several items from the Raven Progressive Matrices test , which involves solving visual analogies based on structural relationships between a series of diagrams , participants were more likely to judge the similarities between new scenes based on structural rather than featural information . Relat - edly , in research with young children , A . L . Brown and Kane ( 1988 ) found that 3 - and 4 - year - old participants seemed to “learn to learn , ” quickly developing a mind - set to look for relational similarities between cases after previous exposure to other analogous situations . However , much work remains to be done on this fundamental issue . Another way in which learners may inﬂuence their own encoding is in terms of the speciﬁc goals with which they approach a given task . A great deal of research over the past two decades has examined the inﬂuence of achievement goals on learning , primarily in terms of mastery versus per - formance goals ( see Ames , 1992 ) . Although mastery goals relate to basic competence , with the aim of personal learning and improvement , performance goals relate to success on the immediate task , particularly in terms of demonstrating one’s ability relative to others . These competing goal types have been shown to have a signiﬁcant impact on learning in general ( see Elliot , 1999 ; Pintrich , 2000 ) , with mastery goals being associated with greater engagement and long - term success , as well as correlating well with a variety of factors ben - eﬁcial to learning , such as persistence and the adoption of appropriate cognitive strategies . Recent research has revealed similar effects on knowledge transfer more speciﬁcally . For instance , Bereby - Meyer , Moran , and Unger - Aviram ( 2004 ) put groups of participants into a negotiation task and exam - ined their ability to maximize their gains through the use of mutually beneﬁcial strategies . Some participants were given instructions that emphasized immediate performance and the minimization of errors , whereas others received instructions that emphasized content mastery . All participants’ perfor - mance improved on subsequent versions of similar tasks . However , when participants transferred their knowledge to a new scenario in which important conditions and details were changed , those in the performance - oriented condition performed no better than a control group , whereas those who had been given mastery - oriented instructions improved reli - ably . Other research has extended this ﬁnding to situations in which such achievement orientations were primed at the time of transfer rather than during initial learning ( Bereby - Meyer & Kaplan , 2005 ) . Similar results have been found by sim - ply varying the speciﬁcity of learners’ goals during training ( Vollmeyer , Burns , & Holyoak , 1996 ) . When participants in that study were provided with a speciﬁc goal to achieve in the training phase , immediate performance was good . However , transfer to a task with a new goal was reliably poorer than for participants who had freely explored during training without any speciﬁc goal . Finally , there is evidence that individuals may vary greatly in the quantity and quality of explanations that they spon - taneously generate when studying examples and that these differences can have an important inﬂuence on their abil - ity to learn and transfer from studied materials . Inﬂuen - tial research by Chi and colleagues ( Chi , Bassok , Lewis , Reimann , & Glaser , 1989 ) found that students who self - explained well—explaining and justifying steps in an exam - ple problem , and considering goals , consequences , and the relationships between subsequent actions—were far more successful at solving later transfer problems . Renkl ( 1997 ) replicated and expanded on these ﬁndings , reporting large effects of self - explanation even when controlling for time on task , and distinguishing between several qualitatively differ - ent types of explanation styles , which he found to be quite sta - ble within individuals across situations . This self - explanation effect seems to beneﬁt learning via multiple routes , both by supplementing the presented information through the gener - ation of relevant inferences and by helping learners to recog - nize and correct disparities between their own mental models and the ones suggested by the examples ( see Chi , 2000 ) . Following on these correlational results , researchers have had some success in improving transfer by eliciting self - explanations from learners , particularly in combination with other favorable learning conditions . For instance , Renkl , Stark , Gruber , and Mandl ( 1998 ) used multiple worked ex - amples to teach participants about compound interest calcu - lation and found that participants who had been trained to generate appropriate self - explanations ( through the observa - tion of good self - explanation , followed by practice with feed - back and coaching ) exhibited reliably better transfer perfor - mance . In another study ( Atkinson , Renkl , & Merrill , 2003 ) , researchers found that transfer following training through a “fading” procedure , in which worked - out steps were succes - sively removed from training examples , was improved when participants were prompted for self - explanations at each step of the training problems . Challenges to the Traditional View Although the traditional approach to transfer has generated an enormous body of research , it has also come under an increasing amount of criticism . Many of the basic themes of this criticism are captured by the inﬂuential work of Lave ( 1988 ) , who lays out several interrelated points of concern . Most fundamentally , she questions the model of knowledge representation that underlies ( explicitly or implicitly ) the ba - sic cognitivist approach . Traditional psychological research tends to view knowledge as a stable mental entity , which under the right conditions may be brought forth and applied to new situations . For example , a student may learn a gen - eral rule for applying the distributive property to a mathe - matical formula . When confronted with a problem in which this method would be appropriate , the student may retrieve this existing knowledge structure and apply it to the new problem . Although there are many ways in which this pro - cess could break down—a failure to successfully retrieve the D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 164 DAY AND GOLDSTONE existing knowledge , an inaccurate mapping between the known method and the new situation—the relevant knowl - edge itself is typically treated as a discrete , reiﬁed en - tity . In fact , the very word “transfer” seems to reﬂect this assumption—that a discrete piece of knowledge is being “carried over” intact from one context to another . Lave ( 1988 ) presented a very different view of knowledge , both in terms of acquisition and use . In this view , all knowl - edge is a by - product of participation in particular situations and is very much tied to those speciﬁc contexts . Because of this , the most traditional kind of knowledge transfer be - tween dissimilar cases is simply not possible , because there is no knowledge that is in a sufﬁciently abstracted form to be applicable across highly variable contexts . Rather , new knowledge is constructed in the course of understanding and participating in new situations , a process generally referred to as “situated learning . ” ( As Greeno , 1997 , p . 12 , noted , however , Lave does not explicitly say that far transfer cannot occur , but that there are serious concerns about the underly - ing theory on which this assumption is based . ) In particular , Lave and colleagues emphasized the social and interactive nature of learning , observing that learning typically takes place in “communities of practice , ” or groups of people who interact in the service of shared interests and goals . For example , when Lave and Wenger ( 1991 ) analyzed the process of learning within several different communities of shared interest ( e . g . , Yucatan midwives , apprentice tailors , members of Alcoholics Anonymous ) , they found a general pattern in which newcomers to a group gradually acquired knowledge from more experienced members as an inciden - tal by - product of group participation . Apprentice tailors , for instance , typically begin their careers by performing a num - ber of seemingly trivial tasks—running errands , preparing the tailor’s materials and workspace at the beginning of each day , adding ﬁnishing details to garments that the tailor has completed—that serve to familiarize the novice with the framework of fundamental knowledge of that community . The apprentice’s responsibilities gradually progress “back - ward” to cutting and sewing jobs , and this progress “can be arranged and interrelated in ways that gradually transform that skeletal understanding” ( p . 96 ) . In addition to questioning the established views of what constitutes learning , Lave also took issue with many prac - tical aspects of the experimental research on transfer . For instance , transfer research is typically designed to measure participants’ application of one particular principle or strat - egy , which is chosen or designed by experts whose knowledge may be quite different from that of the learners . In so doing , most transfer studies prioritize expert knowledge while over - looking or disregarding the relationships that novice par - ticipants ﬁnd relevant . As an example , Lave cited a study ( Williamson , Hollan , & Stevens , 1983 ) that describes an indi - vidual attempting to understand and make predictions about a heat exchange mechanism ( a system in which cool ﬂuids are used to reduce the temperature of hotter ﬂuids ) . Over the course of answering questions about this system , the individ - ual generated multiple , distinct models of its operation . New questions allowed the learner to recognize ﬂaws in his previ - ous models , and in trying to integrate and coordinate these different models , he both improved his models and furthered his overall understanding of the system . Lave argued that tra - ditional studies of learning and transfer that are based solely on matches to experimenter - generated “normative” models and solutions would have failed to capture this individual’s learning and knowledge . Lave also noted that the most common experimental de - sign for assessing transfer involves training with a single ar - tiﬁcially constructed example , followed by measurement of that example’s inﬂuence on a single subsequent case ( which has been judged analogous by an expert ) . This “two - problem” design seems to severely restrict the scope of what prior knowledge a participant can meaningfully bring to bear on a new situation . These critiques have resonated with many researchers in - terested in learning and education and have been adapted and expanded upon in various ways , both in terms of the - ory and application . For example , Carreher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) argued that the idea of transfer itself represents a theory rather than an actual phenomenon to be investigated or explained . Furthermore , they believe it is a theory that is largely incompatible with existing empirical ﬁndings , and one which should therefore be abandoned . In reviewing the literature , and in their own studies examining ﬁfth - grade stu - dents’ acquisition of the concept of negative numbers , they found little evidence for any of the passive “carrying over” of knowledge between cases that the transfer metaphor implies . Instead , in - depth interviews with their student participants suggested that they were “drawing upon a broad history of experience regarding numbers , general arithmetical opera - tions , money , notation and diagrams , and so forth” ( p . 19 ) , and integrating and adapting that diverse knowledge dur - ing the online processes of comprehension and learning . Thus , they argued that existing knowledge is often altered to accommodate new information . Schwartz , Chase , and Bransford ( 2012 / this issue ) describe this process as seeing the new in the old—interpreting previous situations in new ways . In contrast , traditional views of knowledge transfer seem to allow only the assimilation of new information into static existing knowledge structures—seeing the old in the new . Other researchers are more open to the value of tradi - tional transfer research , while still agreeing with many of Lave’s speciﬁc concerns . Lobato and her colleagues ( e . g . , Lobato , 2012 / this issue ; Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) have done work addressing two of the major issues raised by Lave—the emphasis in transfer research on conforming to expert knowl - edge , and the reliance on simple “two problem” transfer de - signs . In her work , Lobato has performed in - depth analyses of verbal protocols collected from students over the course of several days of training . Through these analyses , she has D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 165 been able to identify ways in which students’ understand - ings during training are reﬂected and adapted during later transfer episodes . In this way , her research allows a much richer picture of what information is being drawn upon dur - ing application , and also highlights how that knowledge may develop gradually throughout learning experiences . In one example ( Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) , a student was observed and interviewed while learning about slope , ra - tios , and proportionality . In analyzing those protocols , the researchers found evidence that an approach discovered by the student in an earlier session ( partitioning a particular rise / run “unit , ” which could then be iterated any number of times ) was brought to bear on a later problem in a very dif - ferent context . However , this use did not appear to reﬂect a straightforward importing of a previous piece of knowledge . Rather , the interview suggested an extended process that re - quired both a reinterpretation of the new problem and an adaptation of the original knowledge . James Greeno and his colleagues ( e . g . , Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ) offered a reconceptualization of transfer that is related to , but somewhat distinct from , Lave’s . Greeno inter - preted transfer on the basis of the affordances ( Gibson , 1977 ) that a situation offers—in other words , the ways in which an agent may meaningfully interact with a situation . When sim - ilar affordances are shared across different situations , there is a possibility for transfer to occur . As an example , Greeno examined Judd’s ( 1908 ; replicated by Hendrickson & Schroeder , 1941 ) classic study in which participants practiced hitting an underwater target with a dart or an air riﬂe . Some of those participants received an expla - nation of light refraction and how it could lead to deceptive perceptions of the target’s location . Although all participants performed equally well on the initial task , those who had received the additional instruction performed much better on a transfer task in which the depth of the target was changed . Greeno suggested that success on this task depends on at - tending to the affordances of the situation that are invariant across the contexts—namely , the relative angle of the ap - parent path of the projectile after hitting the water—rather than attending to any of the other means of adjusting one’s aim that would not be invariant across contexts . According to this interpretation , those participants who had received in - formation about refraction were more attuned to the relevant , task - invariant affordances , and thus more likely to interact with the modiﬁed version appropriately . As this example highlights , for Greeno these affordances do not reﬂect a quality of the external situation itself , but rather a relationship between the situation and the agent who is acting upon it . Greeno argued that just as the idea of motion reﬂects a relationship between an object and a point of refer - ence , so too does cognition necessarily depend on a relation - ship between an agent and a context . It is therefore incorrect to treat context as simply an inﬂuence on cognition—by his interpretation , the very idea of cognition without context is meaningless . One of the most inﬂuential reconsiderations of learning and transfer is through the idea of preparation for future learning ( e . g . , Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . Several decades ago , educational philosopher Harry Broudy ( 1977 ) suggested three different ways in which knowledge could be manifested in an individual : replicative knowledge ( “knowing that” something is true ) , applicative knowledge ( “knowing how” to accomplish some task ) , and interpretive knowledge ( “knowing with” some existing knowledge ) . Although traditional tests of transfer have looked extensively at the ﬁrst two ways of understand - ing , they have largely ignored the third—the ways in which our prior experience shapes our interpretations of new infor - mation ( see Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Through this kind of application , speciﬁc prior knowledge serves as a lens for the construal of new content rather than being the direct focus of cognition itself . Consistent with the themes of recent transfer critiques , research has demonstrated powerful interpretive effects of knowledge that would have been overlooked by more conventional measures . For instance , most transfer studies involve a simple manipulation during the study phase ( e . g . , viewing a relevant analog vs . viewing an unrelated control example ) , followed by an assessment of this manipulation’s effect on a transfer task ( e . g . , solving a problem ) . In contrast , Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) designed a “double - transfer paradigm , ” in which some participants re - ceived additional training between the study and test phases . In one of their studies , ninth - grade algebra students learned about standardized scores , which allow comparison of individual values across groups with different averages and variabilities ( e . g . , how does one performance on the high jump compare to another performance on the long jump ? ) . One group of students began by attempting to invent a way of standardizing scores on their own , whereas another group was shown an intuitive way of visually understanding stan - dardization , which they then practiced themselves . The re - searchers found no difference between the groups in terms of direct transfer to transfer problems given immediately after the manipulation . Typically , this would be interpreted to mean that the manipulation had no effect . However , the study in - volved an additional manipulation : Prior to testing , half of the students in each group were given additional training on the conventional method of calculating standardized scores . It is important to note that this training was identical for the two conditions . The researchers found that for these students , the initial condition did inﬂuence transfer performance . Specif - ically , those students who began by trying to invent their own procedure and then received more formal training per - formed markedly better than the other three groups , whose performance was essentially identical . Apparently , the initial manipulation inﬂuenced the way in which individuals were able to learn from the supplemental training . In general , mainstream psychologists have not responded to ( or even acknowledged ) the critiques from education re - searchers . In the most prominent direct response , Anderson , D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 166 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Reder , and Simon ( 1996 , 1997 ) disputed the general claims of situated learning on empirical grounds , pointing to evi - dence that transfer is possible even across situations that are concretely very dissimilar . Others have complained that the arguments presented by Lave and others are largely untestable and unfalsiﬁable . However , some of the research and ideas from mainstream psychologists are at least consistent with the points raised by situated thinkers . For instance , many transfer researchers have discussed an adaptation or “re - representation” phase in transfer , during which one or both of the representations involved is altered to make analogical mapping more consistent ( e . g . , Clement , 1988 ; Gentner & Colhoun , 2010 ; Holyoak , Novick , & Melz , 1994 ; Keane , 1996 ) . For example , when Clement ( 1988 ) an - alyzed protocols collected during physics problem solving , he found that individuals often transformed or modiﬁed prior cases in order make them applicable to new problems . Fur - thermore , he reported that problem solving often involved the generation of Gedanken experiments , or novel , artiﬁcially constructed thought experiments . Such mental constructions would clearly not involve transferring knowledge from a spe - ciﬁc prior case but would instead require learners to draw on and adapt multiple sources of experience . Consistent with this last point , several studies have ex - amined transfer from “real - world” episodes outside of any experimental context , helping to address issues with the stan - dard “two problem” design . For example , Dunbar ( 2001 ) used an “in vivo” approach , in which he recorded weekly meet - ings from biology laboratories . In analyzing these discus - sions , he discovered numerous examples of scientists draw - ing on outside analogies to help them formulate new theories , design experiments , and explain new ideas to one another ( also see Ball et al . , 2004 ; Bearman , Ball , & Ormerod , 2007 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . Other research has looked at individuals’ ability to retrieve autobiographical examples that are structurally similar to new experimentally presented cases . For instance , Chen , Mo , and Honomichl ( 2004 ) found evidence that people were likely to spontaneously retrieve and use relevant folk tales in order to solve new analo - gous problems . Similarly , Gentner et al . ( 2009 ) found that just as comparison of multiple cases can improve transfer to new situations , it can also facilitate retrieval of previ - ously known , structurally similar episodes , including autobi - ographical memories from an individual’s own past . Traditional cognitive approaches have generally consid - ered analogical reasoning to be a very active , deliberative process in which two situations are explicitly mapped to one another . This characterization is difﬁcult to reconcile with ar - guments for the importance of “knowing with , ” or using prior knowledge as an interpretive lens for understanding new sit - uations . However , there is some evidence for less delibera - tive , more implicit forms of analogical transfer . For instance , Schunn and Dunbar ( 1996 ) presented participants with a sim - ulated biochemistry problem that required a strategy of inhi - bition in order to be solved ( other participants were given a problem with a different solution strategy ) . On a molecular genetics problem the following day , these participants were better able to generate the correct inhibition - based solution . Despite this transfer , however , the participants appeared to be unaware of the relationship between the two problems and did not mention the earlier simulation in their verbal proto - cols or in a questionnaire given after the transfer task . Other recent studies have reported similar effects , even when par - ticipants were explicitly asked about the relationship between the training and transfer tasks ( e . g . , Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; also see Gross & Greene , 2007 ) . Kostic and colleagues ( Kostic , Cleary , Severin , & Miller , 2010 ) found further evidence for this phenomenon , showing a dissociation between familiarity and recall for previously seen analogical relationships . Participants in that study of - ten knew that they had seen a structurally similar example earlier in the session , even when they could not explicitly remember the content of that example . This further suggests the likelihood of situations in which the structure of prior ex - periences may inﬂuence later processing without requiring explicit analogical mapping between speciﬁc cases . The critiques of the traditional view of transfer present serious challenges to mainstream transfer research . By point - ing out potential problems with the models on which such research is based , such critiques seem to call into question the very foundations and justiﬁcation for this extensive body of literature , not to mention its ﬁndings . On the other hand , it is often not clear to psychologists how these criticisms can be addressed within a straightforward experimental framework . Contemporary researchers are making progress in bridging this apparent divide , however . The work on preparation for fu - ture learning and Lobato’s approach of iterating explicit ma - nipulations with in - depth qualitative analysis provide prime examples of taking these issues seriously while simultane - ously maintaining scientiﬁc rigor . And as discussed earlier , research by mainstream psychologists is increasingly pro - ducing ﬁndings that bear on these issues , whether or not that is their explicit goal . The extent to which the critiques of Lave and others will ever be satisfactorily addressed is of course an open question , but examples such as these provide reason for optimism . PERCEPTION , COGNITION , AND TRANSFER Taken as a whole , a review of the literature on transfer pro - vides a story of challenges and frustrations , but also rea - sons for hope . In one way or another , each of the articles in this special issue draws creatively on broad swaths of this literature—including recent critiques—in order to advance our understanding of how we can best foster generalizable knowledge . In this section , we would like to propose our own suggestion for reconceptualizing transfer , which is , ironically enough , to shift transfer from an abstract , high - level concep - tualization to perception – action processes . Speciﬁcally , we D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 167 believe the evidence suggests that perceptual learning and perceptual processes provide a critical foundation for both knowledge representation and knowledge use , and that we can leverage this fact in order to facilitate learning and trans - fer . This proposed connection is by no means new . For in - stance , in their seminal work on expertise and problem solv - ing , Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) asserted that “it is no mistake of language for the chess master to say that he ‘sees’ the right move ; and it is for good reason that students of com - plex problem solving are interested in perceptual processes” ( p . 56 ) . Later in his career , Herb Simon ( 2000 ) maintained that “an audience of scientists will very likely agree that thinking doesn’t always ( or maybe not even usually ) use the medium of words , ” and that often , “seeing is the most efﬁcient way of reasoning” ( pp . 119 – 120 ) . This idea has also intrigued education researchers . For instance , the views of J . S . Brown , Collins , and Duguid ( 1989 ) on situated cognition assume a primary role for perception in knowledge acquisition and use . However , both the interest and the empirical evidence for a relationship between perception and cognition have been expanding rapidly in recent years , and a more thorough con - sideration seems warranted . There are at least two productive ways in which one can draw connections between perception and cognition . The ﬁrst , weaker connection is in the terms of the general kinds of characteristics that are typically associ - ated with each type of processing ; the second , stronger poten - tial connection is the suggestion that cognition may rely on perceptual processes and representations in a very literal way . Relative to most views of how cognition operates , per - ceptual processes tend to be very fast , to occur automatically without conscious deliberation , and to rely largely on pattern - matching with respect to existing representations . This , of course , is not to say that perception is either simple or content - free . In fact , the efﬁciency and subjective ease of perceptual experience belies both the complexity and the ﬂexibility of the processes involved . Some of this efﬁciency may derive from the availability of general , possibly innate organizing principles , such as those suggested by the Gestaltists ( e . g . , Metzger , 1936 ; Wertheimer , 1938 ) or more recently by de - velopmental psychologists such as Spelke ( 1990 ) and Bail - largeon ( 1987 ) . However , perception is also strongly inﬂu - enced by prior experience . For instance , expertise in a given domain is often accompanied by a kind of perceptual “tun - ing” that leaves the individual more sensitive to perceptual features and patterns that are relevant to their ﬁeld ( see Gau - thier , Tarr , & Bub , 2010 ) . Such gradual adaptation is consis - tent with other kinds of “nondeliberate” learning , such as the acquisition of procedural knowledge and automaticity ( e . g . , Shiffrin & Schneider , 1977 ) . However , lasting changes in perceptual interpretations can also result from much briefer experiences . A classic example of this is the well - known “young woman / old woman” illusion ( Boring , 1930 ) , an am - biguous drawing which can be interpreted as either a rela - tively young or very old woman . Leeper ( 1935 ) found that preceding the viewing of this image with an unambiguous version of the drawing , which was not open to alternative construals , overwhelmingly biased participants’ subsequent interpretation of the ambiguous ﬁgure . Similarly , DeSchep - per and Treisman ( 1996 ) found that a single exposure to an abstract ﬁgure inﬂuenced individuals’ perception for several weeks , even when they demonstrated no conscious recogni - tion for that ﬁgure . In one dramatic demonstration of this type of effect , individuals exhibited facilitated recognition for picture fragments after a single , brief exposure during an initial study conducted 17 years earlier ( Mitchell , 2006 ) . Participants in the follow - up experiment frequently reported having no memory for the previous study itself , much less for the speciﬁc items . There are clear parallels between these kinds of percep - tual effects and the idea of “knowing with , ” in which prior conceptual knowledge is used to interpret new situations . In fact , one recent study ( Day & Gentner , 2007 ) represents a fairly straightforward replication of the young woman / old woman demonstration with conceptual materials ( narrative passages ) . In this study , participants’ interpretations of an ambiguous passage were strongly inﬂuenced by an unam - biguous analogous passage they had recently read , with two different versions of the ﬁrst passage leading to two different interpretations of the subsequent passage . As in the percep - tual task , the structure of a recent stimulus served to guide the interpretation of a new case , although in this instance it was conceptual , relational structure that was being affected . Also paralleling the young woman / old woman demonstration , this inﬂuence did not appear to be deliberate or effortful . When participants were asked afterward , they reported that the ambiguous target passage had been completely understandable on its own and that they had not referred to any prior passages in trying to understand the new one . As in the perceptual task , participants in this study not only were unaware of the inﬂuence of the ﬁrst stimulus on the second but also appeared to be unaware of the ambiguity in the second case altogether . Consistent with the concept of knowing with , the earlier scenario was not an explicit focus of attention but rather provided a framework through which new incoming information could be structured ( also see Day & Goldstone , 2011 , discussed next ) . However , there are reasons to suggest an even stronger , more direct connection between perceptual and conceptual processes . Speciﬁcally , we would suggest that a consider - able amount of cognitive activity—even those aspects which seems relatively “abstract”— relies on mental representa - tions that are perceptually and spatially concrete . As such , the relationship between our conceptual and perceptual pro - cesses and representations could be considered a very literal one . For example , individuals are reliably faster when re - sponding to smaller numbers with their left hands and to larger numbers with their right hands , a phenomenon known as the “SNARC” effect ( Dehaene , Bossini , & Giraux , 1993 ) . Follow - ups and extensions to this study strongly suggest that D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 168 DAY AND GOLDSTONE these individuals are relying on a spatial mental representa - tion such as a number line when performing the seemingly abstract task of assessing magnitude . Some of the most extensive evidence for the role of per - ceptual representations in cognition comes from research on mental models . Such models provide a simpliﬁed spatial and mechanical representation of a situation , allowing individu - als to reason about relationships within a system and about consequences of different possible actions . In a recent review , Hegarty ( 2004 ) discussed a considerable body of evidence supporting the use of such analog spatial models in a variety of mechanical reasoning tasks . For instance , the ability to solve simple mechanical problems is highly correlated with independent measures of spatial ability but not measures of verbal ability ( e . g . , Hegarty & Sims , 1994 ) . Similarly , such problems experience more disruptive interference from a si - multaneous secondary task that involves visuospatial work - ing memory than from one involving verbal working memory ( e . g . , Sims & Hegarty , 1997 ) . Studies have also found pat - terns of reaction times for such problems that are consistent with reliance on an analog mental simulation ( e . g . , Schwartz & Black , 1996 ) . Such phenomena are not limited to me - chanical problem solving situations , of course . For instance , research on text processing has repeatedly found evidence for the construction of mental “situation models” in the course of comprehending text passages ( see Zwaan & Radvansky , 1998 ) . Through the use of such models , readers are able to quickly and automatically infer the physical affordances of the entities described in text ( e . g . , Glenberg & Robertson , 2000 ) . In fact , there is evidence that reading comprehension may actually be fostered by asking individuals to “act out” written passages with physical objects ( Glenberg , Gutierrez , Levin , Japuntich , & Kaschak , 2004 ) . Mental models can also play an important role beyond such literal approximations of real - world situations . Indi - viduals may also use models that are only analogically or metaphorically similar to novel cases . For example , Gentner and Gentner ( 1983 ) reported that learners were very likely to understand concepts related to electrical currents in terms of mental models of ﬂowing water or moving crowds of peo - ple . Similarly , Johnson - Laird and colleagues have reported extensive evidence that seemingly very abstract types of log - ical reasoning are often performed through the use of analog , perceptually - concrete mental representations ( see Johnson - Laird , 2006 ) . The role of perceptual representations in comprehension and reasoning suggests that such content may be important in transfer as well , and there is a growing body of evidence that this is the case . Some of the earliest evidence involved problems that were inherently and literally spatial in nature . For instance , Dreistadt ( 1969 ) reported that individuals were better able to solve a spatial insight problem ( e . g . , “organize 10 items into ﬁve rows of exactly 4 items each” ) when a perceptual image that was relevant to the solution ( e . g . , a star ) was present as an incidental feature of the environment . The author reported anecdotally that participants were largely unaware of this inﬂuence on their reasoning . In an even earlier example , Maier ( 1931 ) reported that participants were much more likely to solve the “two - string” insight problem after witnessing the researcher “accidentally” brush against one of the strings and cause it to swing ( a crucial component of the solution ) . Again , this inﬂuence was reported to occur largely outside of conscious awareness . Recently , we ( Day & Goldstone , 2011 ) examined the pos - sibility of achieving “far” transfer through similar means . Speciﬁcally , we hypothesized that because knowledge trans - fer appears to be contingent on the psychological ( rather than objective ) similarity between two situations , and because in - dividuals often seem to represent complex situations through simpliﬁed , concrete mental models , it is possible that transfer could occur between cases that appear quite dissimilar on the surface but are in fact represented similarly . In our study , participants began by interacting with a com - puter simulation of a ball that was suspended between two elastic bands , and oscillated horizontally between them ( see Figure 2 ) . In addition , there was a fan located to the left of this system that could blow rightward across it , adding an additional force in that direction . Participants were given the goal of using the fan to cause the ball to either ( a ) stop in the middle between the two poles connected to the ball by the bands or ( b ) reach the far right - hand side of the system . In either case , the goal could be accomplished by coordinating one’s actions with the inherent frequency of the ball’s oscil - lations . For instance , by applying the rightward force from the fan only when the ball was traveling leftward , and not when it was traveling rightward , the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations could quickly be reduced and the ball would eventually stop in the middle of the system . ( The alternate goal required the opposite strategy , applying force from the fan only when the ball was moving rightward . ) Next , par - ticipants moved on to a second , seemingly unrelated task that was quite dissimilar to the ball simulation in a number of important ways . First , rather than being a perceptually rich simulation of moving , interacting parts , the second task was entirely text based . Furthermore , although the ball task displayed actions and interactions unfolding in real time , this task progressed in discrete time steps , controlled by the users’ button presses . Finally , the domain itself was quite dissimilar : The second simulation involved managing the population of a city . Speciﬁcally , some participants were assigned the goal of stabilizing the city’s population at 500 , 000 , whereas other participants attempted to reach a population of 1 , 000 , 000 . To achieve these goals , participants decided whether or not to invest in media advertisement for the city at each time step , which would inject a temporary positive “force” on the population level . Despite the numerous overt differences between the ﬁrst and second simulation , they were in fact governed by the same underlying dynamics . Both involved oscillatory mo - tion ( of the ball or the population ) that could be manipulated D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 169 FIGURE 2 Schematic of the ball simulation used by Day and Goldstone . From “Analogical Transfer From a Simulated Physical System , ” by S . B . Day and R . L . Goldstone , 2011 , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , p . 553 . Copyright 2011 by the American Psychological Association . Reprinted with permission . by a force in one direction , to either stabilize or maximize the relevant value ( ball location or population size ) . Like - wise , the appropriate methods for achieving these goals were completely analogous between the two tasks . We predicted , and found , that participants would achieve the goal in the second task more quickly when it was structurally similar to the goal they were assigned in the previous simulation ( e . g . , both goals involved either stabilization or maximiza - tion ) . Of interest , participants in our study were unlikely to report noticing the relationship between the tasks , and such noticing was not related to more successful transfer . We argue that , although the two situations are quite dis - similar from one another on the surface , the physical dynam - ics of the ball and fan simulation provided a useful mental model for representing the ( less overtly spatial ) population task . Consistent with this interpretation , when the order of the tasks was reversed ( with the more decontextualized pop - ulation task presented ﬁrst ) , no evidence for transfer was observed . In other words , the overtly perceptual and spatial nature of the training task appeared to be critical for this kind of transfer to occur . Other research is consistent with our general conclusions . For example , Beveridge and Parkins ( 1987 ) used a concrete perceptual model to improve performance on a Duncker’s ( 1945 ) radiation problem . As noted earlier , previous research has shown that participants have a very difﬁcult time solving this problem independently and are unlikely to make sponta - neous use of relevant analogous examples ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . However , Beveridge and Parkins found that par - ticipants were much more likely to transfer their knowledge successfully when they had previously been shown a physical model that captured the relevant “convergence” structure of the problem . Speciﬁcally , they were shown a set of colored transparent strips of plastic that fanned out from a central location , where they overlapped . These strips demonstrated a darker , “stronger” color in that central location , analogous to the greater summed intensity of the converging rays in the radiation problem . Similar results have been obtained af - ter showing an animated diagram depicting moving lines of arrows converging at a central point ( Pedone , Hummel , & Holyoak , 2001 ) . Grant and Spivey ( 2003 ) , also using Duncker’s radiation problem , demonstrated the important role of online percep - tual processing in understanding and transferring knowledge . Those researchers tracked participants’ eye movements while viewing a simple diagram of the described of the situation , with parts labeled tumor , healthy tissue , skin , and outside . They found that individuals who successfully solved the problem had spent considerably more time looking at the skin area of the diagram , and suggested that this pattern reﬂected more eye movements crossing the skin boundary while look - ing between the inside and outside of the body . In other words , successful problem solvers’ eye movements were ef - fectively “acting out” the convergence pattern . Thomas and Lleras ( 2007 , 2009a ) subsequently reported achieving simi - lar effects through experimental manipulation . Participants in their studies were more likely to solve the radiation problem after performing a visual task that guided their eye move - ments ( 2007 ) and / or visual attention ( 2009a ) in a conver - gence pattern on the diagram , alternating between various locations inside and outside the body . Such perceptual effects on thinking are not limited to vi - sual representations . In fact , a large body of research on “embodied” cognition ( see Barsalou , 1999 ; Glenberg , 1997 ; Wilson , 2002 ) has focused on the important relationship be - tween physical action and thought . For example , the “action compatibility effect” ( Glenberg & Kaschak , 2002 ) refers to the fact that individuals’ speed at judging the sensibility of a sentence is inﬂuenced by the physical action involved in their response . For instance , participants take longer to con - ﬁrm that “close the drawer” is a sensible phrase when their response involves a motion toward their own bodies ( which is incompatible with the motion required to actually close a drawer ) . Similarly , Goldin - Meadow and colleagues ( see Goldin - Meadow , 2005 ) have repeatedly demonstrated the importance of gesture in learning and comprehension and have even shown that experimental manipulations of indi - viduals’ gesturing can help or hinder their learning ( e . g . , Cook , Mitchell , & Goldin - Meadow , 2008 ) . Effects such as these suggest the possibility of similar embodied effects on problem solving and transfer , and there is some prelimi - nary evidence for this . For instance , just as acting out a passage with physical objects can lead to greater comprehen - sion ( Glenberg et al . , 2004 ) , Catrambone , Craig , and Ners - essian ( 2006 ) found that acting out an analog to Duncker’s radiation problem with wooden blocks increased the likeli - hood of transferring the convergence solution . In a different kind of paradigm , Thomas and Lleras ( 2009b ) found that D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 170 DAY AND GOLDSTONE participants were better able to solve Maier’s two - string prob - lem after performing an exercise which involved swinging their arms , although most participants remained unaware of this effect . It is important to note , however , that most of the effects described in this section would not necessarily arise from “raw” perceptual representations , containing only informa - tion about form , location , color , and so forth . Rather , our explanation assumes that these mental models are integrated representations of both perceptual and meaningful concep - tual content . Thinking back to the ball and fan simulation , for example , it is clear that a model based on this simulation would need to include information about properties such as “force” to be effective , properties that are not directly per - ceivable themselves but must be inferred from the visible components . Furthermore , that particular example requires additional conceptual content in order to assign meaningful directionality to the systems . That is , although the population task that follows it has an inherent positive direction , the ball task is horizontal , with neither direction explicitly “higher” or “lower” than the other . However , as discussed previously , there is evidence that individuals rely on a mental number line that automatically associates the rightward direction with increase . If this conceptual content were included in partici - pants’ mental models of the ball task , it would help to explain the mapping between our two simulations—in both cases , the participants’ interventions would be perceived to provide a net positive force . Consistent with this interpretation , when we ran a follow - up study in which the direction of the fan was reversed , such that it was on the right - hand side blowing left - ward across the ball system , no transfer to the population task was observed . A mapping that included this additional con - ceptual content appeared to be fundamental to the usefulness of the model . This inherent integration of perceptual and conceptual content also highlights the fact that these mental models are not equivalent to actual perception . A recent study involv - ing physics students ( Thaden - Koch , Dufresne , & Mestre , 2006 ) demonstrated this distinction clearly . In that study , participants observed a simulation of two balls rolling along adjacent tracks . When one of the balls moved in an un - realistic manner—accelerating on an uphill portion of the track—honors physics students were less likely to notice this error than were physics novices . In this case , the physics students’ ( still - developing ) knowledge about the principles operating in the simulation led them to ignore overt percep - tual information in favor of their own expectations about the behavior that “should” occur . We would suggest that these students’ observations may , in fact , be guided by models that are perceptual in that they involve dynamic and spatial rep - resentations . However , perceptually grounded models need not be veridical models , and they can possess systematic dis - tortions . With systematic training , the students’ perceptual expectations might be brought into better alignment with the real behavior of the rolling balls , with revisions to their underlying interpretations possibly resulting . Knowledge is both inﬂuencing , and is inﬂuenced by , perceptual interpreta - tions . Mathematics provides an interesting domain for exam - ining the interplay between perception and cognition . On one hand , mathematics is , by deﬁnition , abstracted from any speciﬁc content domain . Ideas such as “three” or “multiplica - tion” are by design theoretically unattached to any particular concrete instantiation . On the other hand , individuals ( par - ticularly experts ) routinely report a subjectively strong per - ceptual component to their mathematical reasoning . Because of reports such as these , researchers have recently been giv - ing more attention to the potential importance of perceptual representations and perceptual processing in mathematics . Most of the research conducted thus far has speciﬁcally ex - amined the role of perception in the processing of external representations of mathematical concepts , such as equations or graphs . For instance , Kellman and his colleagues ( e . g . , Kellman , Massey , & Son , 2009 ) created an interactive classiﬁcation task that trained participants to recognize the relevant percep - tual features underlying accurate transformations between representations ( e . g . , matching a graph to an equation ) . In - dividuals who completed that task were subsequently much more accurate in generating their own transformations be - tween representations , a crucial step in successful problem solving . Similarly , David Landy and colleagues have focused ontheroleof perceptual processes inunderstandingandinter - acting with mathematical formulas . For instance , in practice , the perceptual grouping of terms ( i . e . , which terms are closer together in space on the page ) can interfere with and even trump groupings based on operator precedence ( e . g . , group - ing by multiplication before grouping by addition ; Landy & Goldstone , 2007a , 2007b ) . On the other hand , experience with mathematical formulas can lead to the automatic deploy - ment of attention to operators with higher priority ( Landy , Jones , & Goldstone , 2008 ) . People also appear to interact with equations in ways that seem concretely grounded . For instance , students may learn to use a strategy of transposi - tion , or “moving” a term from one side of an equation to the other ( and then applying the inverse operation ) . So , for example , the equation 5x + 7 = 12 may be rewritten as 5x = 12 – 7 by moving the 7 to the right . There is evidence that for experienced students , this operation is conceived in terms of actual spatial movement . Goldstone , Landy , and Son ( 2010 ) reported a study in which an equation was pre - sented on a computer screen with a subtle moving grating in the background , and participants were asked to solve the equation for a particular variable . Performance was reliably worse when this grating was moving in the opposite direction of the implicated spatial transposition of the term—for in - stance , when a solution required “moving” a term rightward but the grating was moving to the left . This suggests that the grating’s motion was interfering with participants’ imagined spatial movements of terms within the equation . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 171 Taken together , ﬁndings such as these provide a way of ex - tending and enriching our understanding of traditional trans - fer phenomena while also addressing many of the concerns and critiques that have been raised against the standard cog - nitivist approach . For example , the suggestion that transfer is often a largely perceptual process is inherently consistent with the idea of “knowing with . ” Perception is by nature a process of interpretation , in which existing knowledge struc - tures guide and constrain the organization of new incoming information . Many of the phenomena described in this sec - tion could best be explained in terms of providing a model by which new information may be structured and understood ( e . g . , Beveridge & Parkins , 1987 ; Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; Pedone et al . , 2001 ) . This differs in im - portant ways from the more traditional account of transfer , which begins with the recognition of structural common - alities . Instead , perception and action routines can provide the basis for linking two situations , and once linked , more formal , more generalizable structures that are compatible with the linking can be constructed . This kind of mechanism may also underlie the advantage that Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found for progressively removing perceptual support for connecting two structurally similar situations . Consistent with construing existing knowledge as a “lens” rather than a focus of cognitive processing , the effects de - scribed here frequently appear to be implicit , often occurring without deliberation or even conscious awareness ( e . g . , Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; Dreistadt , 1969 ; Maier , 1931 ; Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 ; Thomas & Lleras , 2009b ) . The notion of perceptually grounded models under - lying interpretation also provides a productive way of consid - ering new means for promoting transfer . If transfer between overtly dissimilar situations is possible when those cases in - volve similar mental models ( e . g . , Day & Goldstone , 2011 ) , transfer research may be most successful when it focuses on understanding underlying models used by novices and experts in a domain ( see Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) . These ideas are consistent with the themes of several of the critiques , and they link particularly well with the ideas and research of Lobato , described earlier ( e . g . , Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) . The student described in that example ap - peared to be forming a model of slope and proportionality as a discrete , integrated unit that could be combined iteratively to ﬁt different situations . Such a model would seem to lend itself to a fairly perceptual , spatial representation . Such a model would also be consistent with her general ﬁnding that prior knowledge was not imported wholesale in order to solve an analogous case , but rather that knowledge provided a means of working through and organizing new information—which allowed the original model to be simultaneously modiﬁed and adapted . A perceptual interpretation of transfer is also consistent with the idea that knowledge is not typically transferred from a single source . The knowledge that underlies one’s under - standing of a concrete , analog system seems to exist in a variety of independent , sometimes conﬂicting pieces ( e . g . , Collins & Gentner , 1987 ; diSessa , 1982 ) . To the extent that comprehension often involves interplay between new facts and existing knowledge working together to construct appro - priate models ( e . g . , Clement , 1988 ) , transfer may often draw on a lifetime of knowledge and experience . This ﬁts well with the analysis by Carreher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) described previously . Students in their research were informed and in - ﬂuenced by knowledge from multiple domains at once , and their learning involved an active process of novel integration across those domains . Of course , this is not to say that such “interpretation” - based transfer invariably relies on multiple sources . As with literal perception , interpretation may also sometimes rely heavily on a single recent episode ( e . g . , Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 , Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 ) . Our goal in this section has not been to suggest that per - ceptual representations are “the” basis for knowledge trans - fer , or that they supply an explanation for the many varied ﬁndings and phenomena reported in the transfer literature . Although such a conclusion would necessarily follow from the strongest claims that all of cognition is inherently per - ceptual ( e . g . , Barsalou , 1999 ) , there is at present simply not enough empirical data to support this argument convincingly . Nor are we suggesting that the path to improved transfer is to make learning materials more “perceptual . ” In fact , there is considerable evidence discussed earlier in this paper that explicitly contradicts this conclusion . Rather , we would ar - gue that acknowledging and leveraging learners’ perceptual representations , particularly as they relate to mental models of learned material , is one important , effective , and largely unexplored means of supporting transfer . CONCLUSIONS In this article , we have tried to organize the diverse litera - ture on knowledge transfer into a coherent whole . Obviously , however , these broad - ranging ideas and ﬁndings sometimes defy straightforward integration . For example , as researchers and educators continue to struggle with the challenges of helping students to achieve generalizable knowledge , it is clear that the critiques of the more traditional models of trans - fer will need to be taken seriously . It is also possible that by recognizing different approaches as being reﬂective of differ - ing goals or levels of analysis , and by honestly considering both the advantages and weaknesses of different perspec - tives , it will prove to be the case that no single approach is sufﬁcient to account for all aspects of transfer . However , as transfer researchers of all stripes continue to become more open and creative in their search for explanations and so - lutions , the development of theories and principles that are both very general and highly effective remains an enticing possibility . As the other articles in this special issue make D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 172 DAY AND GOLDSTONE clear , the coming decade promises to be a productive and exciting period for transfer research . REFERENCES Adams , L . T . , Kasserman , J . E . , Yearwood , A . A . , Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1988 ) . Memory access : The effects of fact - oriented versus problem - oriented acquisition . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 167 – 175 . Allen , S . W . , & Brooks , L . R . ( 1991 ) . Specializingtheoperationofanexplicit rule . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 120 , 3 – 19 . Ames , C . ( 1992 ) . Classrooms : Goals , structures , and student motivation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 261 – 271 . Anderson , J . R . , Farrell , R . , & Sauers , R . ( 1984 ) . Learning to program in LISP . Cognitive Science , 8 , 87 – 129 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and education . Educational Researcher , 25 , 5 – 11 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1997 ) . Rejoinder : Situa - tive versus cognitive perspectives : Form versus substance . Educational Researcher , 26 , 18 – 21 . Anolli , L . , Antonietti , A . , Crisafulli , L . , & Cantoia , M . ( 2001 ) . Accessing source information in analogical problem - solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 54 , 237 – 261 . Atkinson , R . K . , Renkl , A . , & Merrill , M . M . ( 2003 ) . Transitioning from studying examples to solving problems : Effects of self - explanation promptsandfadingworked - outsteps . JournalofEducationalPsychology , 95 , 774 – 783 . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1986 ) . Workingmemory . NewYork , NY : OxfordUniversity Press . Baddeley , A . ( 2000 ) . The episodic buffer : a new component of working memory ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 , 417 – 423 . Baddeley , A . D . , & Hitch , G . J . ( 1974 ) . Working memory . In G . A . Bower ( Ed . ) , Recent advances in learning and motivation ( Vol . 8 , pp . 47 – 90 ) . New York , NY : Academic . Baillargeon , R . ( 1987 ) . Objectpermanencein3 12 - and4 12 - month - oldinfants . Developmental Psychology , 23 , 655 – 664 . Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Morley , N . J . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneous analogising in engineering design : a comparative analysis of experts and novices . Design Studies , 25 , 495 – 508 . Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 – 609 . Bassok , M . , Wu , L . - l . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretative effects of content on problem - solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 354 – 367 . Bearman , C . R . , Ball , L . J . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2007 ) . The structure and function of spontaneous analogising in domain - based problem solving . Thinking & Reasoning , 13 , 273 – 294 . Bereby - Meyer , Y . , & Kaplan , A . ( 2005 ) . Motivational inﬂuences on transfer of problem - solving strategies . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 30 , 1 – 22 . Bereby - Meyer , Y . , Moran , S . , & Unger - Aviram , E . ( 2004 ) . When perfor - mance goals deter performance : Transfer of skills in integrative nego - tiations . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 93 , 142 – 154 . Beveridge , M . , & Parkins , E . ( 1987 ) . Visual representation in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 230 – 237 . Bjork , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Memoryandmetamemoryconsiderationsinthetraining of human beings . In J . Metcalfe & A . Shimamura ( Eds . ) , Metacognition : Knowing about knowing ( pp . 185 – 205 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Blessing , S . B . , & Ross , B . H . ( 1996 ) . Content effects in problem categoriza - tionandproblemsolving . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 792 – 810 . Bliznashki , S . , & Kokinov , B . ( 2010 ) . Relational versus attributional mode ofproblemsolving ? ProceedingsoftheThirty - SecondAnnualConference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 465 – 470 ) . Portland , OR : Cognitive Science Society . Boring , E . G . ( 1930 ) . A new ambiguous ﬁgure . The American Journal of Psychology , 42 , 444 – 445 . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 – 100 . Broudy , H . S . ( 1977 ) . Types of knowledge and purposes of education . In R . C . Anderson , R . J . Spiro , & W . E . Montague ( Eds . ) , Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge ( pp . 1 – 17 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 , 103 – 121 . Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , & Duguid , P . ( 1989 ) . Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning . Educational Researcher , 18 , 32 – 42 . Bruner , J . S . ( 1966 ) . Toward a theory of instruction : Cambridge , MA : Har - vard University Press . Carraher , T . N . , Carraher , D . W . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 1987 ) . Written and oral mathematics . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 18 , 83 – 97 . Carraher , D . , & Schliemann , A . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Catrambone , R . ( 1996 ) . Generalizing solution procedures learned from ex - amples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 1020 – 1031 . Catrambone , R . ( 1998 ) . The subgoal learning model : Creating better exam - ples so that students can solve novel problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 127 , 355 – 376 . Catrambone , R . , Craig , D . L . , & Nersessian , N . J . ( 2006 ) . The role of per - ceptually represented structure in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 34 , 1126 – 1132 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psy - chology , 4 , 55 – 81 . Chen , Z . , & Mo , L . ( 2004 ) . Schema induction in problem solving : A mul - tidimensional analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 30 , 583 – 600 . Chen , Z . , Mo , L . , & Honomichl , R . ( 2004 ) . Having the memory of an elephant : Long - term retrieval and the use of analogues in prob - lem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 415 – 433 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2000 ) . Self - explaining expository texts : The dual processes of generating inferences andrepairing mental models . In R . Glaser ( Ed . ) , Advances in instructional psychology ( pp . 161 – 238 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erl - baum . Chi , M . T . H . , Bassok , M . , Lewis , M . W . , Reimann , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1989 ) . Self - explanations : How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems . Cognitive Science , 13 , 145 – 182 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of engineering design . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 29 – 38 . Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural alignment . Journal of Cognition and Devel - opment , 11 , 356 – 373 . Clement , J . ( 1988 ) . Observed methods for generating analogies in scientiﬁc problem solving . Cognitive Science , 12 , 563 – 586 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 173 Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , & Giles , D . E . ( 1994 ) . Theeffectsofmanifestre - lational similarity on analog retrieval . Journal of Memory and Language , 33 , 396 – 420 . Collins , A . , & Gentner , D . ( 1987 ) . How people construct mental models . In D . H . N . Quinn ( Ed . ) , Cultural models in language and thought ( pp . 243 – 265 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Cook , S . W . , Mitchell , Z . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2008 ) . Gesturing makes learning last . Cognition , 106 , 1047 – 1058 . Cummins , D . ( 1992 ) . Role of analogical reasoning in the induction of prob - lem categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 1103 – 1124 . Day , S . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 2007 ) . Nonintentional analogical inference in text comprehension . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 39 – 49 . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simulated physicalsystem . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . Day , S . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Hills , T . T . ( 2010 ) . The effects of similarity and individual differences on comparison and transfer . Proceedings of the Thirty - Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . ( pp . 465 – 470 ) . Portland , OR : Cognitive Science Society . de Groot , A . D . ( 1966 ) . Perception and memory versus thought : Some old ideas and recent ﬁndings . In B . Kleimnuntz ( Ed . ) , Problem solving ( pp . 19 – 50 ) . New York , NY : Wiley . Dehaene , S . , Bossini , S . , & Giraux , P . ( 1993 ) . The mental representation of parity and numerical magnitude . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 122 , 371 – 396 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1991 ) . Symbolic functioning in very young children : Un - derstanding of pictures and models . Child Development , 62 , 736 – 752 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early understanding and use of symbols : The model model . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 4 , 109 – 113 . DeLoache , J . S . , & Burns , N . M . ( 1994 ) . Early understanding of the repre - sentational function of pictures . Cognition , 52 , 83 – 110 . DeSchepper , B . , & Treisman , A . ( 1996 ) . Visual memory for novel shapes : Implicit coding without attention . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 27 – 47 . Detterman , D . ( 1993 ) . The case of prosecution : Transfer as an epiphe - nomenon . In R . J . S . D . K . Detterman ( Ed . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Didierjean , A . , & Nogry , S . ( 2004 ) . Reducing structural - element salience on a source problem produces later success in analogical transfer : What role does source difﬁculty play ? Memory & Cognition , 32 , 1053 – 1064 . diSessa , A . ( 1982 ) . Unlearning Aristotelian physics : A study of knowledge - based learning . Cognitive Science , 6 , 37 – 75 . Dreistadt , R . ( 1969 ) . The use of analogies and incubation in obtaining in - sights in creative problem solving . Journal of Psychology : Interdisci - plinary and Applied , 71 , 159 – 175 . Dunbar , K . B . , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cognition : the case of analogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 5 , 334 – 339 . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 , i - 113 - i - 113 . Elliot , A . J . ( 1999 ) . Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals . Educational Psychologist , 34 , 169 – 189 . Fodor , J . A . , & Pylyshyn , Z . W . ( 1988 ) . Connectionism and cognitive archi - tecture : A critical analysis . Cognition , 28 , 3 – 71 . Gardner , H . ( 1987 ) . The mind’s new science : a history of the cognitive revolution . New York , NY : Basic Books . Garner , R . , Brown , R . , Sanders , S . , & Menke , D . ( 1992 ) . “Seductive details” and learning from text . In K . A . Renninger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , The role of interest in learning and development ( pp . 239 – 254 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Garner , R . , Gillingham , M . G . , & White , C . S . ( 1989 ) . Effects of “seductive details” on macroprocessing and microprocessing in adults and children . Cognition and Instruction , 6 , 41 – 57 . Gauthier , I . , Tarr , M . J . , & Bub , D . ( 2010 ) . Perceptual expertise : Bridging brain and behavior : New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . Mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 – 241 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Colhoun , J . ( 2010 ) . Analogical processes in human thinking and learning . In B . Glatzeder , V . Goel , & A . M¨uller ( Eds . ) , Towards a theory of thinking ( pp . 35 – 48 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer Berlin Heidel - berg . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . G . A . L . Stevens ( Ed . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 – 129 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Hung , B . ( 2007 ) . Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for parts . Journal of Cognition and Devel - opment , 8 , 285 – 307 . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2009 ) . Reviv - ing inert knowledge : Analogical abstraction supports relational retrieval of past events . Cognitive Science , 33 , 1343 – 1382 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of sim - ilarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 – 575 . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1977 ) . The theory of affordances . In R . E . Shaw & J . Brans - ford ( Eds . ) , Perceiving , acting , and knowing ( pp . 67 – 82 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Gick , M . L . , & McGarry , S . J . ( 1992 ) . Learning from mistakes : Inducing analogous solution failures to a source problem produces later successes in analogical transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 623 – 639 . Glenberg , A . M . ( 1997 ) . What memory is for . Behavioral and Brain Sci - ences , 20 , 1 – 55 . Glenberg A . M . , Gutierrez , T . , Levin , J . R . , Japuntich , S . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Activity and imagined activity can enhance young children’s reading comprehension . Journal of Educational Psychology , 96 , 424 – 36 . Glenberg , A . M . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Grounding language in action . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 , 558 – 565 . Glenberg , A . M . , & Robertson , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Symbol grounding and mean - ing : A comparison of high - dimensional and embodied theories of mean - ing . Journal of Memory and Language , 43 , 379 – 401 . Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2005 ) . Hearing gesture : how our hands help us think . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Goldstone , R . L . , Landy , D . H . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2010 ) . The education of perception . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 265 – 284 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1994 ) . Time course of comparison . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 , 29 – 50 . Goldstone , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features in similarity judgments . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 – 264 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governingcomplexadaptivesystems . CognitivePsychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . The transfer of scientiﬁc principles using concrete and idealized simulations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 , 69 – 110 . Grant , E . R . , & Spivey , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Eye movements and problem solving : Guiding attention guides thought . Psychological Science , 14 , 462 – 466 . Greeno , J . G . ( 1997 ) . On claims that answer the wrong questions . Educa - tional Researcher , 26 , 5 – 17 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transfer of situated learning . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 174 DAY AND GOLDSTONE trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Gross , W . L . , & Greene , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Analogical inference : The role of awareness in abstract learning . Memory , 15 , 838 – 844 . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , & Phillips , S . ( 1998 ) . Processing capacity deﬁned by relational complexity : Implications for comparative , develop - mental , and cognitive psychology . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 803 – 831 . Halpern , D . F . , Hansen , C . , & Riefer , D . ( 1990 ) . Analogies as an aid to understandingandmemory . JournalofEducationalPsychology , 82 , 298 – 305 . Hardiman , P . T . , Dufresne , R . , & Mestre , J . P . ( 1989 ) . The relation between problem categorization and problem solving among experts and novices . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 627 – 638 . Harp , S . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1997 ) . The role of interest in learning from scientiﬁc text and illustrations : On the distinction between emotional interest and cognitive interest . Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 , 92 – 102 . Harp , S . F . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1998 ) . How seductive details do their damage : A theory of cognitive interest in science learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 414 – 434 . Hegarty , M . ( 2004 ) . Mechanical reasoning as mental simulation . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 8 , 280 – 285 . Hegarty , M . , & Just , M . A . ( 1989 ) . Understanding machines from text and diagrams . In H . Mandl & J . Levin ( Eds . ) , Knowledge acquisition from text and picture ( pp . 171 – 194 ) . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : North Holland . Hegarty , M . , & Sims , V . K . ( 1994 ) . Individual differences in mental anima - tion during mechanical reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 22 , 411 – 430 . Hendrickson , G . , & Schroeder , W . H . ( 1941 ) . Transfer training in learning to hit a submerged target . Journal of Educational Psychology , 32 , 205 – 213 . Hidi , S . , & Baird , W . ( 1988 ) . Strategies for increasing text - based interest and students’ recall of expository texts . Reading Research Quarterly , 23 , 465 – 483 . Hinsley , D . A . , Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1978 ) . Fromwordstoequations : Meaning and representation in algebra word problems . In M . A . Just & P . A . Carpenter ( Eds . ) , Cognitive processes in comprehension ( pp . 89 – 106 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in ana - logical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 323 – 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , Novick , L . R . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Component processes in analogical transfer : Mapping , pattern completion , and adaptation . In Analogical connections ( pp . 113 – 180 ) . Westport , CT : Ablex . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributedrepresentationsofstruc - ture : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) . A symbolic - connectionist theory of relational inference and generalization . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 – 264 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2006 ) . How we reason . New York , NY : Oxford Uni - versity Press . Judd , C . H . ( 1908 ) . The relation of special training to general intelligence . Educational Review , 6 , 28 – 42 . Kaminski , J . A . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2011 ) . Representationandtransferofab - stract mathematical concepts . In V . F . Reyna ( Ed . ) , The adolescent brain : Learning , reasoning , and decision making ( pp . 67 – 93 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Kaminski , J . A . , Sloutsky , V . M . , & Heckler , A . F . ( 2008 ) . The advantage of abstract examples in learning math . Science , 320 , 454 – 455 . Keane , M . T . ( 1996 ) . On adaptation in analogy : Tests of pragmatic im - portance and adaptability in analogical problem solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 49 , 1062 – 1085 . Keane , M . T . , Ledgeway , T . , & Duff , S . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on analogical mapping : Acomparison of three models . Cognitive Science , 18 , 387 – 438 . Kellman , P . J . , Massey , C . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2009 ) . Perceptual learning mod - ules in mathematics : Enhancing students’ pattern recognition , structure extraction and ﬂuency . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 285 – 305 . Koedinger , K . , Alibali , M . , & Nathan , M . ( 2008 ) . Trade - offs between grounded and abstract representations : Evidence from algebra problem solving . Cognitive Science , 32 , 366 – 397 . Kornell , N . , & Bjork , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Learning concepts and categories . Psy - chological Science , 19 , 585 – 592 . Kostic , B . , Cleary , A . M . , Severin , K . , & Miller , S . W . ( 2010 ) . Detectingana - logical resemblance without retrieving the source analogy . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 17 , 405 – 411 . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . Landy , D . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2007a ) . Formal notations are dia - grams : Evidence from a production task . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 2033 – 2040 . Landy , D . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2007b ) . How abstract is symbolic thought ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 33 , 720 – 733 . Landy , D . H . , Jones , M . N . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . How the appearance of an operator affects its formal precedence . In Proceedings of the Thirti - eth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 2109 – 2114 ) . Washington , DC : Cognitive Science Society . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life : New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Lave , J . , & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . S ` ıtuated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Leeper , R . ( 1935 ) . Astudyofaneglectedportionoftheﬁeldoflearning—the development of sensory organization . The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology , 46 , 41 – 75 . LeFevre , J . - A . , & Dixon , P . ( 1986 ) . Do written instructions need examples ? Cognition and Instruction , 3 , 1 – 30 . Lewis , M . W . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1985 ) . Discriminationofoperatorschemata in problem solving : Learning from examples . Cognitive Psychology , 17 , 26 – 65 . Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - ogist , 47 , 232 – 247 . Lobato , J . , & Siebert , D . ( 2002 ) . Quantitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 21 , 87 – 116 . Lockhart , R . S . , Lamon , M . , & Gick , M . L . ( 1988 ) . Conceptual transfer insimple insight problems . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 36 – 44 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 , 189 – 219 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Relational language and the devel - opment of relational mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 50 , 315 – 353 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Analogical learning in negotiation teams : Comparing cases promotes learning and transfer . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 2 , 119 – 127 . Lorch , R . F . ( 1989 ) . Text - signaling devices and their effects on reading and memory processes . Educational Psychology Review , 1 , 209 – 234 . Lusk , D . L . , Evans , A . D . , Jeffrey , T . R . , Palmer , K . R . , Wikstrom , C . S . , & Doolittle , P . E . ( 2009 ) . Multimedia learning and individual differences : Mediating the effects of working memory capacity with segmentation . British Journal of Educational Technology , 40 , 636 – 651 . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans . II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 194 . Markman , A . B . ( 1999 ) . Knowledge representation . New York , NY : Psy - chology Press . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during simi - larity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Mautone , P . D . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Signaling as a cognitive guide in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 377 – 389 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1981 ) . Frequency norms and structural analysis of algebra word problems into families , categories , and templates . Instructional Sci - ence , 10 , 135 – 175 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 175 Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Animations need narrations : An experimental test of a dual - coding hypothesis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 484 – 490 . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1992 ) . The instructive animation : Helping students build connections between words and pictures in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 444 – 452 . Mayer , R . E . , & Chandler , P . ( 2001 ) . When learning is just a click away : Does simple user interaction foster deeper understanding of multimedia messages ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 390 – 397 . Mayer , R . E . , DeLeeuw , K . E . , & Ayres , P . ( 2007 ) . Creating retroactive and proactiveinterferenceinmultimedialearning . AppliedCognitivePsychol - ogy , 21 , 795 – 809 . Mayer , R . E . , Grifﬁth , E . , Jurkowitz , I . T . N . , & Rothman , D . ( 2008 ) . In - creased interestingness of extraneous details in a multimedia science presentation leads to decreased learning . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Applied , 14 , 329 – 339 . Mayer , R . E . , Mathias , A . , & Wetzell , K . ( 2002 ) . Fostering understanding of multimedia messages through pre - training : Evidence for a two - stage the - ory of mental model construction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 8 , 147 – 154 . Mayer , R . E . , & Moreno , R . ( 1998 ) . A split - attention effect in multime - dia learning : Evidence for dual processing systems in working memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 312 – 320 . Mayer , R . E . , & Sims , V . K . ( 1994 ) . For whom is a picture worth a thou - sand words ? Extensions of a dual - coding theory of multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 , 389 – 401 . McNeil , N . M . , Uttal , D . H . , Jarvin , L . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 2009 ) . Shouldyou show me the money ? Concrete objects both hurt and help performance on mathematics problems . Learning and Instruction , 19 , 171 – 184 . Medin , D . L . , & Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . The speciﬁc character of abstract thought : Categorization , problem solving , and induction . In Advances in the psychology of human intelligence , Vol . 5 . ( pp . 189 – 223 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Metzger , W . ( 1936 ) . Gesetze des Sehens [ Laws of seeing ] . Frankfurt , Ger - many : Waldemar Kramer . Mitchell , D . B . ( 2006 ) . Nonconscious priming after 17 years . Psychological Science , 17 , 925 – 929 . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive principles of multimedia learning : The role of modality and contiguity . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 358 – 368 . Moreno , R . , Mayer , R . E . , Spires , H . A . , & Lester , J . C . ( 2001 ) . The case for social agency in computer - based teaching : Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents ? Cognition and Instruction , 19 , 177 – 213 . Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow’s ears : Young children’s use of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology . General , 131 , 5 – 15 . Nathan , M . J . ( 2012 ) . Rethinking formalisms in formal education . Educa - tional Psychologist , 47 , 125 – 148 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 – 520 . Paivio , A . ( 1990 ) . Mental representations : A dual coding approach . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Pedone , R . , Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2001 ) . The use of diagrams in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 214 – 221 . Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1983 ) . Constraints on access in a problem solving context . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 24 – 31 . Pintrich , P . ( 2000 ) . The role of goal orientation in self - regulated learning . In M . Boekaerts , P . Pintrich & M . Zeidner ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - regulation ( pp . 452 – 502 ) . London , UK : Academic . Pollock , E . , Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 2002 ) . Assimilating complex infor - mation . Learning and Instruction , 12 , 61 – 86 . Quilici , J . L . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Teaching students to recognize struc - tural similarities between statistics word problems . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 325 – 342 . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . More evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : Children’s performance on a causal - mapping task . Cognitive Development , 13 , 453 – 478 . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 124 – 139 . Reed , S . K . ( 1989 ) . Constraints on the abstraction of solutions . Journal of Educational Psychology , 81 , 532 – 540 . Reed , S . K . , Dempster , A . , & Ettinger , M . ( 1985 ) . Usefulness of anal - ogous solutions for solving algebra word problems . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 106 – 125 . Renkl , A . ( 1997 ) . Learning from worked - out examples : A study on individ - ual differences . Cognitive Science , 12 , 1 – 29 . Renkl , A . ( 2005 ) . Theworked - out - exampleprincipleinmultimedialearning . In R . Mayer ( Ed . ) , Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning ( pp . 229 – 246 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Renkl , A . , & Atkinson , R . K . ( 2010 ) . Learning from worked - out examples and problem solving . In J . Plass , R . Moreno , & R . Br¨unken ( Eds . ) , Cog - nitive load theory and research in educational psychology ( pp . 91 – 108 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Renkl , A . , Stark , R . , Gruber , H . , & Mandl , H . ( 1998 ) . Learning from worked - out examples : The effects of example variability and elicited self - explanations . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 23 , 90 – 108 . Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Dis - criminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psy - chology , 35 , 28 – 43 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Compared with what ? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual knowledge and procedural ﬂexibil - ity for equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 529 – 544 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , Star , J . R . , & Durkin , K . ( 2009 ) . The importance of prior knowledge when comparing examples : Inﬂuences on conceptual and procedural knowledge of equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 836 – 852 . Ross , B . ( 1984 ) . Remindings and their effect in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371 – 416 . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the sep - aration of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - ing , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . ( 1989 ) . Remindings in learning and instruction . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Ed . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 438 – 469 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of ear - lier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanism of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 113 – 142 . Scheiter , K . , Gerjets , P . , & Schuh , J . ( 2010 ) . The acquisition of problem - solving skills in mathematics : How animations can aid understanding of structural problem features and solution procedures . Instructional Sci - ence , 38 , 487 – 502 . Schoenfeld , A . H . , & Herrmann , D . J . ( 1982 ) . Problem perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice mathematical problem solvers . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 8 , 484 – 494 . Schunn , C . D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1996 ) . Priming , analogy , and awareness in complex reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 271 – 284 . Schwartz , D . L . , & Black , J . B . ( 1996 ) . Shuttling between depictive mod - els and abstract rules : Induction and fallback . Cognitive Science , 20 , 457 – 497 . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , 204 – 214 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012 176 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for future learn - ing : The hidden efﬁciency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 129 – 184 . Schwartz , D . L . , Sears , D . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁciency and inno - vation in transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 – 51 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Shiffrin , R . M . , & Schneider , W . ( 1977 ) . Controlled and automatic human information processing : II . Perceptual learning , automatic attending and a general theory . Psychological Review , 84 , 127 – 190 . Simon , H . A . ( 2000 ) . Observations on the sciences of science learning . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 21 , 115 – 121 . Simon , H . A . , & Hayes , J . R . ( 1976 ) . The understanding process : Problem isomorphs . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 165 – 190 . Sims , V . K . , & Hegarty , M . ( 1997 ) . Mental animation in the visuospatial sketchpad : evidence from dual - task studies . Memory & Cognition , 25 , 321 – 332 . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The transfer of cognitive skill . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Son , J . Y . , Doumas , L . A . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . When do words promote analogical transfer ? The Journal of Problem Solving , 3 , 52 – 92 . Son , J . Y . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2009 ) . Contextualization in perspective . Cognition and Instruction , 27 , 51 – 89 . Spelke , E . S . ( 1990 ) . Principles of object perception . Cognitive Science , 14 , 29 – 56 . Spencer , R . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Context - dependent effects on analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 14 , 442 – 449 . Suzuki , H . , Ohnishi , H . , & Shigemasu , K . ( 1992 ) . Goal - directedprocessesin similarity judgment . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 343 – 348 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Sweller , J . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive load theory , learning difﬁculty , and instruc - tional design . Learning and Instruction , 4 , 295 – 312 . Sweller , J . ( 1999 ) Instructional design in technical areas . Melbourne , Aus - tralia : ACER . Sweller , J . , van Merrienboer , J . J . G . , & Paas , F . G . W . C . ( 1998 ) . Cognitive architecture and instructional design . Educational Psychology Review , 10 , 251 – 296 . Thaden - Koch , T . , Dufresne , R . , & Mestre , J . ( 2006 ) . Coordination of knowledge in judging animated motion . Physics Education Research , 2 , 1 – 11 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2007 ) . Movingeyesandmovingthought : Onthe spatialcompatibilitybetweeneyemovementsandcognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 663 – 668 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2009a ) . Covert shifts of attention function as an implicit aid to insight . Cognition , 111 , 168 – 174 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2009b ) . Swinging into thought : Directed movement guides insight in problem solving . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 16 , 719 – 723 . Thorndike , E . L . ( 1924 ) . Mental discipline in high school studies . Journal of Educational Psychology , 15 , 83 – 98 . Thorndike , E . L . , & Woodworth , R . S . ( 1901 ) . Theinﬂuenceofimprovement in one mental function upon the efﬁciency of other functions . Psycholog - ical Review , 8 , 247 – 261 . Tohill , J . M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 6 , 27 – 40 . Tulving , E . , & Thomson , D . M . ( 1973 ) . Encoding speciﬁcity and retrieval processes in episodic memory . Psychological Review , 80 , 352 – 373 . Vollmeyer , R . , Burns , B . D . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . The impact of goal speciﬁcity on strategy use and the acquisition of problem structure . Cog - nitive Science , 20 , 75 – 100 . Wade , S . ( 1992 ) . How interest affects learning from text . In K . A . Ren - minger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , The role of interest in learning and development ( pp . 255 – 277 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Waltz , J . A . , Lau , A . , Grewal , S . K . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The role of working memory in analogical mapping . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 1205 – 1212 . Weisberg , R . W . , DiCamillo , M . , & Phillips , D . ( 1978 ) . Transferring old associationstonewproblems : Anon - automaticprocess . JournalofVerbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 17 , 219 – 228 . Weiser , M . , & Shertz , J . ( 1983 ) . Programming problem representation in novice and expert programmers . International Journal of Man – Machine Studies , 19 , 391 – 398 . Wertheimer , M . ( 1938 ) . Laws of organization in perceptual forms . In A source book of Gestalt psychology ( pp . 71 – 88 ) . London , UK : Kegan Paul , Trench , Trubner . Williams , M . D . , Hollan , J . D . , & Stevens , A . L . ( 1983 ) . Human reasoning about a simple physical system . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 131 – 154 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Wilson , M . ( 2002 ) . Six views of embodied cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 , 625 – 636 . Wolpert , R . S . ( 1990 ) . Recognition of melody , harmonic accompaniment , and instrumentation : Musicians vs . nonmusicians . Music Perception , 8 , 95 – 105 . Zwaan , R . A . , & Radvansky , G . A . ( 1998 ) . Situation models in lan - guage comprehension and memory . Psychological Bulletin , 123 , 162 – 185 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ I nd i a n a U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r i e s ] a t 02 : 53 11 A ugu s t 2012