© 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 3463 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com P R O G R E SS R E P O R T By Ryo Yoshida * Self - Oscillating Gels Driven by the Belousov – Zhabotinsky Reaction as Novel Smart Materials [ ∗ ] Prof . R . Yoshida Department of Materials Engineering Graduate School of Engineering The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8656 ( Japan ) E - mail : ryo @ cross . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 200904075 1 . Introduction Polymer gel is a research ﬁ eld of polymer science that has made rapid progress during the past 20 – 30 years . Theoretical studies of the characteristics of gels had already occurred in the 1940’s , and the principle of swelling by water absorption based on ther - modynamics had been clariﬁ ed by Flory . [ 1 ] As an application of gel research , soft contact lenses were developed in the 1960’s , and subsequently gels have been widely used in the medical and pharmaceutical ﬁ elds . Since a polymer which can absorb about 1000 times as much water as its own weight was devel - oped in the 1970’s , gels have been applied as superabsorbent polymers in several industrial ﬁ elds , mainly in applications for sanitary items and disposable diapers . Until now , fundamental and applied research which include many different ﬁ elds , such as the synthesis of novel polymers , elucidation of gelation mechanisms , analysis of physical properties and structure , and functional control by molecular design , have been done . Further , in 1978 , it was discovered by Tanaka [ 2 ] that gels change volume revers - ibly and discontinuously in response to environmental changes such as solvent composition , temperature , and pH change ; these are called “volume phase transi - tion” phenomena . With this discovery as a turning point , research to use gels as functional materials became active . So far , many researchers have developed sev - eral kinds of stimuli - responsive polymer gels . [ 3 – 6 ] Their ability to swell and deswell according to conditions makes them an interesting proposition for use in new functional materials . Especially , from the late 1980’s or early 1990’s , new functional gels that exhibited the following three functions have been developed by many researchers as “intelligent gels” or “smart gels” : sensing an external signal ( sensor function ) , judging it ( processor function ) , and taking action ( actuator function ) . As typical examples of applications , many biomedical applications to actuators ( artiﬁ cial muscle ) , drug delivery systems ( DDS ) , tissue engineering , puriﬁ cation or separation systems , bio - sensors , shape - memory materials , and molecular recognition systems have been extensively studied . [ 7 , 8 ] In recent years , the usefulness of gels has also been shown in the ﬁ eld of microma - chines and nanotechnology . [ 9 , 10 ] In addition to new synthetic methods to give unique functions by molecular design in the nanoscale , including supramolecular design , the design and construction of micro - or nanomaterial systems with the biomi - metic functions have been attempted . 1 . 1 . Stimuli - Responsive Gels and their Applications to Functional Materials 1 . 1 . 1 . Stimuli - Responsive Gels with Mechanical Motion The functions of stimuli - responsive gels can be roughly classi - ﬁ ed into mechanical motion , mass transport , and conversion and transmission of information . Several mechanical devices using gels were devised and demonstrated later in the 1980’s or early in the 1990’s when gels came to attract attention as a functional material . For example , the devices driven by changing tempera - ture or giving an electric ﬁ eld ( e . g . , artiﬁ cial muscles or robot hands which lift or grasp something , artiﬁ cial ﬁ sh which swim with a repeating bending motion , and artiﬁ cial loopers which So far stimuli - responsive polymer gels and their application to smart mate - rials have been widely studied ; this research has contributed to progress in gel science and engineering . For their development as a novel biomimetic polymer , studies of polymers with an autonomous self - oscillating function have been carried out since the ﬁ rst reports in 1996 . The development of novel self - oscillating polymers and gels have been successful utilizing the oscillating reaction , called the Belousov – Zhabotinsky ( BZ ) reaction , which is recognized as a chemical model for understanding several autonomous phenomena in biological systems . The self - oscillating polymer is com - posed of a poly ( N - isopropylacrylamide ) network in which the catalyst for the BZ reaction is covalently immobilized . In the presence of the reactants , the polymer undergoes spontaneous cyclic soluble – insoluble changes or swelling – deswelling changes ( in the case of gel ) without any on – off switching of external stimuli . Potential applications of the self - socillating polymers and gels include several kinds of functional material systems , such as biomimetic actuators and mass transport surface . 3464 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T Okano and co - workers [ 23 ] introduced temperature - responsive poly ( NIPAAm ) ( PNIPAAm ) to the surface of cell culture dishes , and achieved the control of attachment and detachment of the cultured cells by temperature . At 37 ° C over the lower critical solution temperature ( LCST ) , the surface becomes hydro - phobic , and since the cell can attach to the dish through adhe - sive proteins like the usual polystyrene dish , the incubated cell can be cultured . When the temperature is lowered below the LCST , since the surface changes to hydrophilic , the cells detach from the dish and they can be recovered . Usually , in order to remove a cell from a culture dish , treatment using protein decomposition enzyme such as trypsin is necessary . But in that case , not only the adhesive protein but also the membrane protein which is essential to maintain cell function is destroyed . However , by using temperature - responsive cul - ture dishes , cells can be recovered without spoiling the struc - ture and function . Also , if a lowering temperature treatment is carried out after the cells become conﬂ uent ( single layer ) , the cells can be harvested as a single sheet , in which all cells are connected by intercellular adhesion . It was impossible to obtain such a cell sheet by the conventional trypsin treatment because intercellular adhesion was also destroyed . By using the cultivation technology , several kinds of cell sheets ( e . g . , for skin , cornea , cardiac muscle ) are actually made , and some of them are already applied clinically . Additionally , they have studied tissue engineering to recon - struct the 3D structure of tissues by laminating the different cell sheets ( 3D manipulation ) . [ 23 ] For example , reconstruction of the liver tissue by lamination of a hepatic cell sheet and an endothelial cell sheet was attempted . Further , temperature - responsive culture dishes with microdomain structure on the surface which consist of different thermosensitive polymers with different LCSTs were prepared . Patterned coculture of dif - ferent cells and the recovery of the patterned cell sheet were realized . These are expected as important technology in the ﬁ eld of tissue engineering which attracts much attention as new medical treatment . And also , they introduced NIPAAm copolymers into the surface of silica gels , which act as the carrier of chromatography , Ryo Yoshida received his Ph . D . in Chemical Engineering at Waseda University , Japan , in 1993 . He was a Research Associate at the Tokyo Women’s Medical University in 1993 , a Researcher at the National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research in 1994 – 1997 , and Assistant Professor at the University of Tsukuba in 1997 – 2000 . In 2001 , he moved to The University of Tokyo as Associate Professor . He received the SPSJ ( the Society of Polymer Science , Japan ) Wiley Award in 2009 . walk on rails ) attracted much attention . [ 11 ] In addition , several chemomechanical gels were demonstrated , e . g . , “biochemo - mechanical” gels that contract when glucose was added to an outside solution . [ 12 ] Studies on applications to artiﬁ cial muscles and an actuator are currently still progressing further . [ 13 ] Electrically stimulated systems using polyelectrolyte gels , organogels , [ 14 ] gels con - sisting of carbon nanotubes and ionic liquids [ 15 ] are popular , and some materials have already come near to practical use . For example , the ion conductive polymer actuator obtained by plating a golden electrode to both sides of a perﬂ uorocarbox - ylic acid ﬁ lm causes bending motion and biomimetic motion by electric ﬁ eld addition . [ 16 ] By using the gels , hobby products such as artiﬁ cial ﬁ sh ( it has already been commercialized ) and medical operation devices ( e . g . , catheters ) are devised . Also , actuating systems driven by a magnetic ﬁ eld have been studied by Zrinyi et al . [ 17 ] They prepared the poly ( vinyl - alcohol ) ( PVA ) gel containing magnetite ( Fe 3 O 4 ) particles ( ferrogel ) and dem - onstrated that the gel showed dynamic motion in response to a magnetic ﬁ eld . 1 . 1 . 2 . Stimuli - Responsive Gels for Control of Mass Transport Several gels with the function to catch or release a chemical or biological substance and the function to separate or purify the substance have been studied for biomedical applications . One of the typical examples is the application to DDS . [ 18 – 22 ] By loading drugs into stimuli - responsive gels , intelligent DDS with auto - feedback mechanisms release the drug only when it is required and stop its release when the system has returned to the normal state . For example , the system to release antipy - retics only when body temperature rises , the system to sense an increase in glucose concentration in blood and release insulin automatically would be potential applications . Actually , on – off control of drug release by the minute temperature changes near body temperature was realized using temperature - responsive N - isopropylacrylamide ( NIPAAm ) copolymer gels . [ 19 ] As for the regulating systems of insulin release , there have been already various examples since the 1980’s . [ 20 ] Kataoka et al . [ 21 ] prepared the glucose - responsive gel which has the phenylboronic acid group . They realized on – off regulation of insulin release in response to external glucose concentration by utilizing reversible complex formation between glucose and the phenylboronic acid group . The gels which operate at physiological pH conditions are also prepared by bearing phe - nylborate derivatives as a glucose - sensing moiety . Other than these systems , many kinds of self - regulated DDS in response to changes in pH , an electric ﬁ eld , and a magnetic ﬁ eld have been designed . [ 22 ] These self - regulated DDS utilize the change in permeability or diffusivity of gel by the structural changes accompanying swelling and deswelling changes . On the other hand , new mod - ulation systems to control the surface properties or solubility of materials in response to an external signal are designed by introducing stimuli - responsive polymers into a material sur - face , or modifying the surface of bioactive substances such as enzymes . These technologies are applied to separation and puriﬁ cation , diagnosis , and analysis , especially in biomedical ﬁ eld . 3465 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T complex is formed by the interaction between the target mol - ecule and monomer . After polymerization , the target molecules are removed . By this method , the information on the target molecules is memorized in the polymer network . As a typical study , Mosbach and co - workers [ 32 ] used theophylline as a target molecule and methacrylic acid as the crosslinked polymer net - work . In this case , the concentration of crosslinker ( ethylene - glycol dimethacrylate ) is higher than 70 % , which results in a rigid polymer network . On the other hand , there have been sev - eral attempts to change the molecular recognition ability of gels by environmental stimuli . Tanaka and co - workers [ 33 ] created the gel whose capturing mechanism for metal ions differed with temperature . In addition , several kinds of biomolecule - responsive gels such as a glucose - responsive and antigen - responsive gels have been developed by utilizing biomolecular interactions as reversible crosslinking . [ 34 ] Recently , chemical - to - electrical - signal transduction synchro - nized with swelling – deswelling changes of gels was realized using a ﬁ eld - effect transistor ( FET ) modiﬁ ed with glucose - responsive or Ca 2 + - responsive gels . [ 35 ] Also , photo - induced hydrogen or oxygen - generating gel systems toward artiﬁ cial pho - tosynthesis were achieved by involving electronic transmission circuits in the crosslinked polymer network of PNIPAAm . [ 36 ] 1 . 2 . Design of Network Structure and Microfabrication for Functional Control For the design of gels with unique properties and functions , several attempts to create a unique network structure at the nanoscale by molecular and supramolecular design have been made . In the preceding few years especially , many kinds of gels with supramolecular structure have been designed and developed to give unique properties , which plays an impor - tant role in the progress of gel science . For example , in order to toughen mechanical strength , slide - ring gels ( topological gels ) prepared using polyrotaxane , [ 37 ] double - network gels con - sisting of a densely crosslinked polyelectrolyte gel and a loosely crosslinked neutral network , [ 38 ] nanocomposite gels with an organic / inorganic network , [ 39 ] and tetra - ( polyethylene glycol ) gels having extremely homogeneous structure with biocom - patibility [ 40 ] have been reported . Further , comb - type graft gels with rapid shrinking response , [ 41 , 42 ] supramolecular hydrogels composed of glycosylated amino acetate for semi - wet peptide / protein microarrays , [ 43 ] self - repairing or self - healing gels with supramolecular structure , [ 44 ] and lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels as superabsorbent polymers for nonpolar organic solvents [ 45 ] have been developed . Microfabrication technologies such as photolithography [ 46 ] and two - photon initiated polymerization [ 47 ] are also employed for preparation of microgels . Since any shape of gel can be created by these methods , applications to micromachines and micro - ( total analysis systems ) ( μ - TAS ) such as soft microactua - tors , microgel valves , and gel display are expected . [ 48 ] Sumaru and co - workers [ 49 ] developed the hydrogels composed of the spiropyran - functionalized PNIPAAm gel , and observed the photomechanical function in response to blue light irradiation . On - demand control of microﬂ uidic system using the photore - sponsive gel sheet was demonstrated . and developed a new type of temperature - responsive chroma - tography to enable high - speed separation of the mixture by controlling the interaction between the carrier surface and sub - stance with temperature . [ 24 ] By applying the stepwise tempera - ture change from higher temperature to lower temperature , the retention time for hydrophobic components is controllable . Since the mobile phase is only water and an organic solvent is not used , separation and analysis of physiologically active sub - stances or cells which have never been used for conventional chromatography are applicable . At the same time , it has the great advantage that environmental pollution is avoidable . 1 . 1 . 3 . Stimuli - Responsive Gels for Information Transmission and Transformation The third category is the function to memorize or convert information . The molecular design to memorize structure on the molecular level in the polymer network is an important subject . As a pioneering study which realized a gel to memo - rize structure , Osada et al . [ 25 ] prepared “shape - memory gel , ” which consists of acrylic acid and stearyl acrylate with a long hydrophobic side chain . The gel returns to original shape by heating . Several applications towards an artiﬁ cial valve , an arti - ﬁ cial anus and medical implements , and sporting goods are expected . Dimmer materials which change color reversibly are impor - tant as a component for displays , recorders , and sensors . Recently , various gels with such an optical conversion function have been developed . Asher and co - workers [ 26 ] prepared the polymerized crystalline colloidal arrays , and reported the new sensor materials which determine the concentration of analyte by the wavelength change of diffracted light . Hu et al . [ 27 ] pre - pared “gel opals” that change color with temperature by cova - lently bonding self - assembled PNIPAAm gel particles using divinylsulfone . On the other hand , Takeoka et al . [ 28 ] prepared the porous PNIPAAm gel with “structural color” which had reverse opal structure . The periodically ordered interconnecting porous structure was created in the gels using a closest - packing silica colloidal crystal as a template . The porous gel changes the structural color based on the temperature , which can be tuned by simply changing the amount of the cross - linker . The applica - tion to the sensor for blood sugar level is expected by coupling glucose - responsive gels . Akashi et al . [ 29 ] prepared new light - modulation materials using PNIPAAm gels in which highly concentrated pigment were included . By arranging the gel particulates containing carbon black on a glass substrate , the glass to change the transmitted light reversibly with temperature were created . Such a dimmer function to diffuse and condense pigment by volume change is similar with the function of the pigment cells of living organisms . Recently , novel polymeric materials to cause color changes induced by mechanical deformation have been developed by introducing spiropyran into the polymer as mechanophores . [ 30 ] Gels which recognize only speciﬁ c chemical substances such as a catalyst or enzyme have been prepared by the molecular imprinting method . [ 31 ] Target molecules are mixed into the solution containing the monomer with a recognition site , and polymerization is carried out under the condition that the 3466 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T external stimuli , which is different from conventional stimuli - responsive gels ( Figure 1a ) . Since ﬁ rstly reported in 1996 as a “self - oscillating gel , ” [ 56 ] we have been systematically studying self - oscillating polymers and gels as well as their applications to biomimetic or smart materials . [ 57 , 58 ] Indeed the studies can be considered as pioneering work that has achieved autonomous oscillating gel systems in a whole new gel research ﬁ eld . In the following section , the recent progress on the self - oscillating polymers and gels and the design of functional material systems are summarized . 2 . Design of Self - Oscillating Gel In order to design the autonomous polymer system , we focused on the Belousov – Zhabotinsky ( BZ ) reaction , [ 59 ] which is well - known as an oscillating reaction to exhibit temporal and spa - tiotemporal oscillating phenomena . The BZ reaction is often analogically compared with the TCA cycle ( tricarboxylic acid cycle , Krebs cycle ) , which is a key metabolic process taking place in the living body . The overall process of the BZ reaction is the oxidation of an organic substrate , such as malonic acid ( MA ) or citric acid , by an oxidizing agent ( bromate ion ) in the presence of a strong acid and a metal catalyst such as cerium ion , ferroin , or ruthenium tris ( 2 , 2’ - bipyridine ) ( Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) . In the course of the reaction , the catalyst undergoes spontaneous redox oscillation . When the solution is homogeneously stirred , the color of the solution periodically changes , like a neon sign , based on the redox changes of the metal catalyst . When the solu - tion is placed as a thin ﬁ lm in stationary conditions , concentric or spiral wave patterns develop in the solution . The wave of oxi - dized state propagating in the medium at a constant speed is called a “chemical wave . ” The signiﬁ cance of the BZ reaction has been recognized as a chemical model for understanding some aspects of biological phenomena , such as glycolytic oscil - lations or biorhythms , cardiac ﬁ brillation , self - organization of amoeba cells , pattern formation on animal skin , and visual pat - tern processing on retina . [ 60 ] We attempted to convert the chemical oscillation of the BZ reaction to the mechanical changes of gels and generate an autonomic swelling – deswelling oscillation under non - oscil - latory outer conditions . A copolymer gel which consists of NIPAAm and Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + was prepared . Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + , acting as a catalyst for the BZ reaction , is pendent to the polymer chains of NIPAAm . It is well known that homopolymer gels of NIPAAm have thermosensitivity and undergo an abrupt volume - collapse ( phase transition ) when heated at around 32 ° C . The poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel has a phase transition temperature because of themosensitive constituent NIPAAm . The oxidation of the Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + moiety caused not only an increase in the swelling degree of the gel , but also a rise in the transition temperature ( Figure 1b ) . [ 56 , 61 ] These charac - teristics may be interpreted by considering an increase in hydrophilicity of the polymer chains due to the oxidation of Ru ( II ) to Ru ( III ) in the Ru ( bpy ) 3 moiety . As a result , it is expected that the gel undergoes a cyclic swelling – deswelling alteration when the Ru ( bpy ) 3 moiety is periodically oxidized and reduced under constant temperature . When the gel is immersed in an aqueous solution containing the substrate of 1 . 3 . Construction of Cyclic Gel Systems As mentioned above , stimuli - responsive polymer gels and their application have been widely studied . One of the strate - gies of these applications is to develop biomimetic material systems with stimuli - responding functions , i . e . , systems in which the materials sense environmental changes by them - selves and go into action . This stimuli - responding behavior is a temporary action toward an equilibrium state . For these systems , the on – off switching of external stimuli is essen - tial to instigate the action of the gel . Upon switching , the gels provide only one unique action , either swelling or deswelling . On the other hand , as one of characteristic behaviors in living systems , autonomous oscillation , i . e . , spontaneous changes with temporal periodicity ( called “temporal structure” ) such as heartbeat , brain waves , pulsatile secretion of hormone , cell cycle , biorhythm , and so forth , can be exempliﬁ ed . From the standpoint of biomimetics , several stimuli - responsive polymer systems have been studied extensively as mentioned above , but the polymer systems undergoing self - oscillation under constant condition without any on – off switching of external stimuli are still undeveloped . If such autonomous polymer systems such as a living organism can be realized using completely synthetic polymers , then unprecedented biomimetic materials exhibiting temporal or spatiotemporal structure will be created . In the research ﬁ eld of functional gels , there has been a lot of study on stimuli - responsive systems , but there has been a few studies on cyclic gel systems , in which gels exhibit sponta - neous and autonomous periodic swelling – deswelling changes under constant conditions without on – off switching of external stimuli . The studies which have been attempted so far can be classiﬁ ed into two categories : i ) construction of oscillating sys - tems using conventional stimuli - responsive gels , and ii ) design of new types of gels to generate spontaneous mechanical oscillation . Studies in category ( i ) include 1 ) periodic swelling – deswelling changes of pH - sensitive gels soaked in an autonomous pH - oscillating solution in a continuous stirred tank reactor ( CSTR ) , [ 50 – 53 ] and 2 ) an oscillatory drug release system utilizing a pH - sensitive gel membrane coupled with pH - oscillating or enzymatic reactions . [ 54 ] In these systems , an oscillating outer solution is created by the ﬂ ow reactor ( i . e . , CSTR ) , and the swelling – deswelling changes of the gel occur in response to the oscillating outer condition . Recently , a new experimental approach is also proposed by coupling an acid autocatalytic reac - tion in CSTR to a pH - responsive gel , where a steady homoge - neous environment is kept . [ 55 ] On the other hand , as an unprecedented study belonging to category ( ii ) , we attempted to develop a novel gel that pro - vides mechanical oscillation by itself without external control in a complete closed solution . And we succeeded in devel - oping such self - oscillating polymers and gels by incorporating an oscillating chemical reaction in a polymer network , i . e . , by constructing a built - in circuit of an energy conversion cycle producing mechanical oscillation within the polymer network itself . Under the coexistence of the reactants in a closed and constant - conditioned solution , the polymer undergoes sponta - neous cyclic soluble – insoluble changes or swelling – deswelling changes ( in the case of gels ) without any on – off switching of 3467 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T 3 . Self - Oscillating Behavior of the Gel 3 . 1 . Self - Oscillation of Miniature Bulk Gel In miniature gels sufﬁ ciently smaller than the wavelength of the chemical wave ( typically several millimeters ) , the redox change of the ruthenium catalyst can be regarded to occur homogeneously without pattern formation . [ 62 ] Figure 2a shows the BZ reaction ( MA , acid , and oxidant ) except for the cata - lyst , the substrates penetrates into the polymer network and the BZ reaction occurs in the gel . Consequently , periodical redox changes induced by the BZ reaction produce period - ical swelling – deswelling changes of the gel ( Figure 1c ) . The gel has the cyclic reaction network in itself to generate peri - odic mechanical energy from the chemical energy of the BZ reaction . Figure 1 . a ) Stimuli - responsive gel and self - oscillating gel . b ) Temperature dependence of diameter for ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel particles under different conditions of reduced Ru ( II ) state ( in Ce ( III ) solution ) and oxidized Ru ( III ) state ( in Ce ( IV ) solution ) . c ) Mechanism of self - oscillation for poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel coupled with the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction . 3468 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T in chemical oscillation leads to a change in the swelling – deswelling oscillation : i . e . , the swelling – deswelling amplitude ( the change in gel length , Δ d ) increases with an increase in the period and amplitude of the redox changes . Empirically , the relation between Δ d ( μ m ) and the substrate concentrations is expressed as Δ d = 2 . 38 [ MA ] 0 . 392 [ NaBrO 3 ] 0 . 059 [ HNO 3 ] 0 . 764 ( Figure 2b ) . As a result , it is apparent that the swelling – deswelling ampli - tude of the gel is controllable by changing the initial concentration of substrates . So far , a swelling – deswelling amplitude with ca . 20 % of the initial gel size has been obtained as a maximum value . When the amplitude of swelling – deswelling oscillation increased , the waveform of redox changes deformed to a rectangular shape with a plateau period . [ 62 ] From this result , it is supposed that not only energy transformation from chemical to mechanical change , but also a feedback mechanism from mechanical to chemical change acts in the synchronization process . Further , in general , the oscillation frequency ( the reciprocal of the period ) of the BZ reaction tends to increase as the tem - perature increases , in accordance with the Arrhenius equation . the observed oscillating behavior under a microscope for the miniature cubic poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel ( each length of about 0 . 5 mm ) . Color changes of the gel accompanied by redox oscillations ( orange : reduced state , light green : the oxi - dized state ) were converted to 8 - bit grayscale changes ( dark : reduced , light : oxidized ) by image processing . Due to the redox oscillation of the immobilized Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + , mechanical swelling – deswelling oscillation of the gel autonomously occurs with the same period as for the redox oscillation . The volume change is isotropic and the gel beats as a whole , like a heart muscle cell . The chemical and mechanical oscillations are synchronized without a phase difference ( i . e . , the gel exhibits swelling during the oxidized state and deswelling during the reduced state ) . 3 . 2 . Control of Oscillating Behaviors It is a general tendency that the oscillation period increases with a decrease in concentration of substrates . The variation Figure 2 . a ) Periodic redox changes of the miniature cubic poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel ( lower ) and the swelling – deswelling oscillation ( upper ) at 20 ° C . Color changes of the gel accompanied by redox oscillations ( orange : reduced state , light green : the oxidized state ) were converted to 8 - bit grayscale changes ( dark : reduced , light : oxidized ) by image processing . Transmitted light intensity is expressed as an 8 - bit grayscale value . Outer solution : [ MA ] = 62 . 5 m M ; [ NaBrO 3 ] = 84 m M ; [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 6 M . Adapted with permission . [ 62 ] Copyright 2000 , American Chemical Society ( ACS ) . b ) Dependence of the swelling – deswelling amplitude ( Δ d ) on the initial concentration of substrates . Adapted with permission . [ 62 ] Copyright 2000 , ACS . c ) Oscillating proﬁ les of optical transmittance for poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AAc ) solution ( [ MA ] = 0 . 1 M , [ NABrO 3 ] = 0 . 2 M , [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 3 M ) under the condition that temperature was changed stepwise . Adapted with permission . [ 64 ] Copyright 2000 , ACS . d ) Change in oscillating behavior of the gel in response to the stepwise concentration changes of MA between 10 and 25 m M ( others : [ NaBrO 3 ] = 84 m M , [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 3 M , 20 ° C ) . Adapted with permission . [ 63 ] Copyright 2000 , ACS . 3469 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T again as soon as the concentration was decreased back to the initial value . In these ways , reversible on – off regulation of self - beating triggered by MA was successfully achieved . Since there are some organic acids which can be the substrate for the BZ reaction ( e . g . , citric acid ) , the same regulation of beating is pos - sible by using those organic acids instead of MA . Also , as the gel has thermosensitivity due to the NIPAAm component , the beating rhythm can be controlled by temperature ( Figure 2c ) . [ 64 ] 3 . 3 . Peristaltic Motion of Gels with Propagation of Chemical Wave When the gel size is larger than chemical wavelength , the chemical wave propagates in the gel by coupling with the dif - fusion of intermediates . Then peristaltic motion of the gel is created . Figure 3a shows the cylindrical gel which is immersed in an aqueous solution containing the three reactants of the BZ reaction . The chemical waves propagate in the gel at a constant The swelling – deswelling amplitude of the gel increases with an increase in the oscillation period and amplitude of the redox changes . Therefore the swelling – deswelling amplitude of the gel is controllable by changing not only the initial concentration of substrates but also temperature . As an inherent behavior of the BZ reaction , the abrupt tran - sition from steady state ( non - oscillating state ) to oscillating state occurs with a change in controlling parameters , such as chemical composition . This change is termed “bifurcation . ” By utilizing these characteristics , reversible on – off regulation of self - beating triggered by addition and removal of MA was suc - cessfully achieved . [ 63 ] Figure 2d shows the oscillating behavior of the gel when a stepwise change in [ MA ] was repeated between lower concentrations ( 10 m M ) in steady state and higher con - centration ( 25 m M ) in oscillating state . At [ MA ] = 10 m M , the redox oscillation does not occur and consequently the gel exhib - ited no swelling – deswellng changes . Then the concentration was quickly increased to 25 m M . Immediately after increasing concentration , the gel started self - beating . The beating stopped Figure 3 . a ) Time course of peristaltic motion of poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) ( where AMPS represents 2 - acrylamido - 2 - methylpropanesul - fonic acid ) gel in a solution of the BZ substrates at 18 ° C . The green and orange colors correspond to the oxidized and reduced states of the Ru moiety in the gel , respectively . Adapted with permission . [ 72 ] Copyright 2008 , Wiley - VCH . b ) Upper : A model for simulation to learn how mechanical oscillation takes place when the chemical wave propagates in a rectangular gel . Lower : Simulation for the effects of initial gel length on the amplitude of swelling – deswelling oscillation and the phase difference between chemical and mechanical oscillations . [ 69 ] 3470 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T length is just half of the wavelength . These mean that the change in the overall gel length is equivalent to that in the last stationary wave at the free end . According to the simula - tion , the phase difference has any value between 0 and π by changing the initial gel length . These results were conﬁ rmed experimentally using the gel samples with different initial length . [ 68 , 69 ] The tensile force of the cylindrical gel with oscillation was also measured . [ 70 , 71 ] We succeeded in measuring the oscillating force of cylindrical poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel accom - panied by the BZ reaction . The measurements were made for three gels with different diameters , 0 . 65 , 1 . 17 , and 1 . 88 mm , at 15 ° C . It was found that the amplitude of oscillatory tensile stress of the reacting cylindrical gel with a diameter of 0 . 65 mm is much higher than the stress theoretically expected from the Donnan osmotic pressure . The amplitude is explained by an oscillatory change of the interaction parameter , χ , which might be induced by the hydration and dehydration of the chain due to the oscillatory charge density on the polymer chain . The oscillation behavior of the BZ reaction is found to be strongly dependent on the diameter of the gel . The staying period in the oxidative state and the period of the oscillation increase with a decrease in the diameter of the cylindrical gel . 3 . 4 . Self - Oscillation with Structural Color Changes and Photoregulation of Peristaltic Motion It is well known that the period of oscillation is affected by light illumination for the Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - catalyzed BZ reaction . [ 73 ] There - fore we can intentionally make a pacemaker with a desired period ( or wavelength ) by local illumination of laser beam to the gel , or we can change the period ( or wavelength ) by local illumi - nation to a pacemaker which already exists in the gel . [ 74 ] Chem - ical and optical control of the self - sustaining peristaltic motion of a structural colored porous gel were demonstrated . [ 75 – 77 ] We prepared a periodically ordered mesoporous self - oscillating gel which reveals “structural color” depending on its swelling ratio . To obtain the gel , we used as a template the closest - packing colloidal crystal composed of silica sphere par - ticles . The porous gel obtained exhibits a bright color under white light and undergoes fast and drastic changes in color in response to temperature . The color is caused by the Bragg dif - fraction of visible light from the ordered voids regarded as crys - tallites . Because this coloring is due primarily to the structures formed in the crystal - like structure , we call it “structural color . ” The peak values of the reﬂ ection spectra , λ max , for the porous gel are obtained by [ 75 – 77 ] 8 max = 1 . 633 ( d / m ) ( D / D 0 ) n a ( 2 ) where d is the diameter of the colloidal particles used , m is the order of the Bragg reﬂ ection , D and D 0 are the character - istic sizes of the gel in the equilibrium state at a certain con - dition and in the preparative state , respectively , and n a is the average refractive index of the porous gel . D / D 0 is deﬁ ned as the degree of equilibrium swelling of the gel . The value of n a can be treated as a constant under varying degrees of D / D 0 . It follows that the variable thickness L of the gel membrane can speed in the direction of the gel length . [ 65 – 72 ] Considering the orange ( Ru ( II ) ) and green ( Ru ( III ) ) zones represent simply the shrunken and swollen parts respectively , the locally swollen and shrunken parts move with the chemical wave , like the peri - staltic motion of living worms . When the one end is ﬁ xed and the other end is free , the propagation of the chemical wave makes the free end of the gel move back and forth at a rate corresponding to the wave propagation speed . As a result , the total length of the gel peri - odically changes . In order to deal with this behavior mathemati - cally , we consider a model system in which the chemical wave with a wavelength of λ and with a waveform given by cos 2 π ( x – t ) is propagating through a rectangular gel with the following “original” dimensions ( in other words , sizes of the rectangular gel under the condition that the BZ reaction does not occur . ) : thickness = d 0 , width = w 0 , and length = l 0 ( Figure 3b ) . When a steady state is reached and if d 0 and w 0 are smaller than λ , the chemical wave should be propagating along the x axis . Taking this into account , a change in the gel length as a function of time , L ( t ) , might be given by Equation 1 : L ( t ) / 8 = l 0 / 8 + (cid:2) L ( t ) / 8 ≈ k (cid:2) l 0 / 8 0 Z o x ( x , t ) dx ( 1 ) Here , k denotes a proportional constant , Z o x ( x , t ) is the nor - malized concentration of the Ru ( III ) ions as a function of the position and time ( i . e . , Z o x ( x , t ) = cos 2 π ( x – t ) ) . The restriction of steady oscillation requests that the gel length corresponding to the wavelength of the traveling chemical wave should be time - independent . Combining this with the other restrictions coming from the boundary conditions ( i . e . , one of the ends of the gel is ﬁ xed in the laboratory coordinate ) , we ﬁ nd there must appear a node at x = 0 , λ , 2 λ , … i λ , … n λ ( x = 0 means the ﬁ xed point ) . The node shows no displacement even when Z o x ( i λ , t ) becomes the maximum or the minimum because the swelling at the i th node is always canceled by the deswelling of the reduced part of the i th stationary wave , and vice versa . Therefore , Equation 1 may be replaced as follows . L ( t ) / 8 ≈ n + k (cid:2) l 0 / 8 n Z o x ( x , t ) dx ( 1 ′ ) From Equation 1 , we can mathematically simulate L ( t ) / λ as a function of t . Figure 3b demonstrates the inﬂ uence of the residual gel length ( that is , l 0 / λ – n or mod ( l 0 / λ ) ) on the ampli - tude of mechanical oscillations of gel ( Δ L ( t ) / λ ) and the phase dif - ference ( φ ) between chemical and mechanical oscillations ( i . e . , φ between Z o x ( l 0 , t ) and L ( t ) ) . The important results obtained are as follows : i ) the gel does not undergo any extension – contrac - tion change when l 0 / λ equals an integral , i . e . , Δ L ( t ) = 0 at l 0 / λ = i where i = 1 , 2 , … ( i . e . , existence of node ) , but ii ) L ( t ) ( there - fore Δ L ( t ) ) exhibits a time - dependent change when l 0 / λ is a non - integral value . Moreover , iii ) as mod ( l 0 / λ ) deviates from an integer , the apparent phase difference changes from 0 to π in proportion to the increase in residual length . When the residual length is slightly shorter than the wavelength , the phase differs almost by a half - period ( i . e . , antiphase mode ) between chem - ical and mechanical oscillations . The amplitude in mechanical oscillation , Δ L ( t ) , has a maximum value when the residual 3471 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T to several effects : e . g . , application to chronopharmacotherapy to release hormones synchronized with biorhythms , decreasing drug tolerance . 4 . 2 . Ciliary Motion Actuator Using Self - Oscillating Gel One of the promising ﬁ elds of the micro - electromechanical sys - tems ( MEMS ) is that of microactuator arrays or distributed actu - ator systems . The actuators , which have a very simple actuation motion , such as up and down motion , are arranged in an array form . If their motions are random , no work is extracted from this array . However , by controlling them to operate in a certain order , they can generate work as a system . A typical example of this kind of actuation array is a ciliary - motion microactuator array . There have been many reports on this system . Although various actuation principles have been proposed , all the pre - vious work is based on the concept that the motion of actuators is controlled by external signals . If a self - oscillating gel plate with a microprojection structure array on top were realized , it would be expected that the chemical wave propagation would create dynamic rhythmic motion of the structure array . This proposed structure could exhibit spontaneous dynamic propa - gating oscillation producing a ciliary - motion array . A gel plate with a microprojection array was fabricated by molding ( Figure 4a ) . [ 80 , 81 ] First , moving - mask deep - X - ray lithog - raphy was utilized to fabricate a poly ( methyl methacrylate ) ( PMMA ) plate with a truncated conical microstructure array . This step was followed by evaporation of a Au seed layer and subsequent electroplating of nickel to form the metallic mold structure . Then , a polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) mold struc - ture was duplicated from the Ni structure and utilized for gel molding . The formation of gel was carried out by vacuum injection molding . A structure with a height of 300 μ m and bottom diameter of 100 μ m was successfully fabricated by the described process . The propagation of chemical reaction wave and dynamic rhythmic motion of the microprojection array were conﬁ rmed by chemical wave observation and displace - ment measurements . Figure 5a shows the measured lateral and vertical movements and the motion trajectory of the projection top . Motion of the top with a 5 μ m range in both lateral and vertical directions and elliptical motion of the projection top were observed . The feasibility of the new concept of the ciliary - motion actu - ator made of self - oscillating polymer gel was successfully con - ﬁ rmed . The actuator may serve as a microconveyer to transport micro - or nanoparticles on the surface . And we are trying to develop a chemical robot , which is unlike a conventional electri - cally powered robot , by coupling it with a PDMS membrane . [ 82 ] 4 . 3 . Self - Walking Gel Further , we successfully developed a novel biomimetic walking - gel actuator made of self - oscillating gel . [ 83 ] To produce direc - tional movement of gel , asymmetrical swelling – deswelling is desired . For these purposes , as a third component , hydrophilic 2 - acrylamido - 2 - methylpropanesulfonic acid ( AMPS ) was copoly - merized into the polymer to lubricate the gel and to cause be calculated using the spatiotemporally determined value of λ max , according to the equation . [ 75 – 77 ] L = L 0 ( D / D 0 ) = L 0 m 8 max / 1 . 633 dn a ( 3 ) Here L 0 is the preparative thickness of the gel membrane . The templated periodical porous structure in the gel can revers - ibly change its spacing in response to temperature changes in impacting the volume of the gels and will signal these changes through iridescence . The structural color is visible even when the structural color overlaps with the pigmented color of the Ru - complex . Considering these results , we are able to expect that the self - sustained peristaltic motion on the surface of a gel can be observed through the change in the structural color during the BZ reaction . To demonstrate this oscillating change in the structural color , the porous disk - shaped gel was immersed in a reaction solution containing nitric acid , malonic acid , and sodium bromate at certain temperatures ( Figure 4 - I ) . At 19 ° C , the structural color of the gel shifted into the ultraviolet region . Concentric brilliant blue rings caused by the swelling of the gel due to the oxidation of the Ru - complex spread out from the center with the BZ reaction can be observed on the surface of the gel . The faint red structural colored concentric rings are developed and spread out on the porous gel at 4 ° C , whereas the green concentric waves which are also indistinct from the surrounding color were observed at 12 ° C . The change in the reﬂ ection spectra was monitored by ﬁ xing a reﬂ ection probe in the prescribed position above the porous gel . A periodically swinging of the reﬂ ection spectra was observed during the BZ reaction . From the equation mentioned above , the temporal change in the thickness of the gel can be estimated . By this evaluation technique , chemical and optical control of the self - sustaining peristaltic motion of a structural colored porous gel were demonstrated ( Figure 4 - II ) . 4 . Design of Biomimetic Micro - / Nanoactuators Using Self - Oscillating Polymers and Gels 4 . 1 . Microfabrication of Self - Oscillating Gels for Microdevices Recently , microfabrication technologies such as photolithog - raphy have also been attempted for preparation of microgels . Since any shape of gel can be created by these methods , their application as a new manufacturing method for soft microac - tuators , microgel valves , and gel displays are expected . Micro - fabrication of self - oscillating gels have also been attempted by photolithography for application to such microdevices . [ 78 , 79 ] In these devices , the possible application to DDS is as a self - oscillatory drug release microchip . If the microfabricated self - oscillating gel can be used as a beating micropump to push and pull a diaphragm that separates the drug reservoir , a microchip that would release the drug periodically would be realized . Since self - beating of the gel occurs in the closed solution containing the BZ reactants as the energy source , a complete stand - alone microchip without electric wiring and external apparatus is pos - sible . Periodic release of the drug at preprogrammed periods under constant conditions would be achieved , and it might lead 3472 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T Figure 4 . I ) Models and pictures of peristaltic motion of the surface of poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel membranes . a , b ) Spatiotemporal color pat - terns of oscillating behavior for a rectangular ( a : model ) and a disk ( b : pictures ) bulk poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel can be observed because of the difference in color between the reduced and oxidized states of the Ru complex . c , d ) Spatiotemporal structural color changes of a rectangular - shaped ( c : model ) and a disk ( d : pictures ) porous poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel during the BZ reaction shows that the gel moves like an earthworm . The pictures show the time change in the pigment color of the bulk gel and the structural color of the porous gel during the BZ reaction at several tem - peratures . Both disk - shaped gels ( 4 mm diameter and 0 . 5 mm thickness ) were immersed in an aqueous solution ( 20 mL ) containing MA ( 62 . 5 m M ) , NABrO 3 ( 84 m M ) , and HNO 3 ( 0 . 890 M ) in a temperature - controlled glass cell . Adapted with permission . [ 77 ] Copyright 2008 , Wiley - VCH . II ) Irradi - ated light intensity and sodium bromate concentration tuning of self - sustaining peristaltic motion of the porous gel at 13 ° C . Outer solution : [ MA ] = 62 . 5 m M ; [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 890 M ; [ NaBrO 3 ] = 42 ( A ) , 60 ( B ) , and 84 ( C ) m M . The periods of the self - sustaining peristaltic motions for each condition are shown . Adapted with permission . [ 76 ] Copyright 2008 , Royal Society of Chemistry ( RSC ) . 3473 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T Figure 5 . a ) Fabrication of ciliary - motion actuator ( artiﬁ cial cilia ) using self - oscillating gel . b ) Time course of self - walking motion of the gel actuator . During stretching , the front edge can slide forward on the base , but the rear edge is prevented from sliding backwards . Oppositely , during bending , the front edge is prevented from sliding backwards while the rear edge can slide forward . This action is repeated , and as a result , the gel walks forward . Outer solution : [ MA ] = 62 . 5 m M , [ NaBrO 3 ] = 84 m M , [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 894 M , 18 ° C . Adapted with permission . [ 83 ] Copyright 2007 , Wiley - VCH . c ) Images of the repeated bending and stretching pendulum motion of the gel strip one end of which is ﬁ xed in the mixture solution of the BZ substrates . Adapted with permission . [ 84 ] Copyright 2008 , Wiley - VCH . 3474 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T gel . For the design of mass transport surfaces , the inﬂ uence of the AMPS’s feed ratio on the swelling – deswelling properties of poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gels and mass transport - ability of the gels were investigated . The gel had a microphase - separated structure when the AMPS’s feed ratio was less than 5 mol % due to the effect of the poor solvent in the polymerization process . On the other hand , when the AMPS’s feed ratio is more than 10 mol % , the gel had a homogeneous structure . The microphase - separated structure highly improved the swelling – deswelling kinetics and gener - ated a swelling – deswelling amplitude more than 10 % of the gel thickness ( Figure 6A ) ; this was approximately 10 times larger than that of the gel with a homogeneous network structure . As a model object , a cylindrical poly ( acrylamide ) ( PAAm ) gel was put on the gel surface . It was observed that the PAAm gel was transported on the gel surface with the propagation of the chemical wave as it rolled [ 85 ] ( Figure 6B ) when the AMPS’s feed ratio was low ( less than 2 . 5 mol % ) . Figure 6C shows a phase diagram of transportable conditions given by the velocity and the inclination angle θ of the wave front . It was found that the cylindrical PAAm gel was not transported if the inclination angle was less than approximately 0 . 05 rad . It seems that the mass transportability does not depend on the velocity of the chemical wave , but on the diameter of the cylindrical PAAm gel and the inclination angle of the wave front . We have proposed a model to describe the mass transport phenomena based on the Hertz contact theory , and the relation between the transport - ability and peristaltic motion was investigated . Figure 6D shows the contact model of the cylindrical PAAm gel and the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel sheet . If the inclination angle of the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel surface was smaller than the slope of the tangent at point A , sufﬁ cient contact force from the strain does not act to rotate the cylindrical PAAm gel . Therefore , the condition for the transport of the cylindrical PAAm gel is written as R 1 sin 2 ≥ b ( 4 ) The minimum inclination angle calculated from the above equation was the same as that resulting from the experiment . It was found experimentally and supported by the model that the sheer wave front of the peristaltic motion was necessary to transport cylindrical gels . As the size of the gels was approxi - mately in the submillimeter to millimeter order , gravity , fric - tional force , and contact force acting on the PAAm gel were the important factors for mass transport . So , if the cargo mate - rials are not adsorbed to the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel surface by an attracting force such as hydrophobic interaction , mass transportation depends on the performance of the peristaltic motion of the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel surface . It was found that the microphase - separated structure was key to transporting cylindrical gels because the enlarged peristaltic motion could be useful for generating rota - tional movement of the cylindrical gel . The functional gel sur - face generating autonomous and periodic peristaltic motion has the potential for several new applications , such as a conveyer to transport soft materials , a formation process for ordered struc - tures of micro - and / or nanomaterials , a self - cleaning surface , and so on . anisotropic contraction . During polymerization , the monomer solution faces two different surfaces of plates ; a hydrophilic glass surface and a hydrophobic Teﬂ on surface . Since Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + monomer is hydrophobic , it easily migrates to the Teﬂ on sur - face side . As a result , a non - uniform distribution along the height is formed by the components , and the resulting gel has gradient distribution for the content of each component in the polymer network . At the surface side where the content of hydrophilic AMPS is higher , the swelling ratio of the gel mem - brane in water becomes larger than that at the opposite side in the same gel where the content of hydrophobic Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + is higher . Consequently , in water , the gel strip always bends in the direction of the surface that was facing the Teﬂ on plate during polymerization In order to convert the bending and stretching changes to 1D motion , we employed a ratchet mechanism . A ratchet base with an asymmetrical surface structure was fabricated . On the ratchet base , the gel repeatedly bends and stretches autono - mously resulting in the forward motion of the gel , while sliding backwards is prevented by the teeth of the ratchet . Figure 5b shows successive proﬁ les of the “self - walking” motion of the gel like a looper in the BZ substrate solution under constant temperature . The walking velocity of the gel actuator was approximately 170 μ m min − 1 . Since the oscillating period and the propagating velocity of chemical wave change with the concentration of substrates in the outer solution , the walking velocity of the gel can be controlled . By using the gel with a gra - dient structure and ﬁ xing one end on a substrate , another type of actuator that generates a pendulum motion has also been realized . [ 84 ] 4 . 4 . Mass Transport Surface Utilizing Peristaltic Motion of Gel One of the fundamental issues in nanotechnology and bio - technology is how to transport micro - and / or nanosized mate - rials . In addition , micropatterning and construction of 2D - and 3D - ordered structures of micro - and / or nano - sized materials are important technologies for electronic , chemical , and bio - medical applications . Recently , for these purposes , several new methods utilizing soft functional materials have been proposed , for example , photoinduced mass transport systems utilizing a photoisomerizable polymer ﬁ lm and cargo transport systems through sequential regulation of volume phase transitions of temperature - responsive PNIPAAm gel . These functional sur - faces and mass transport systems need an external drive mech - anism . On the other hand , using biomolecular motor proteins such as kinesin and myosin , molecular shuttle systems and gel machines have been reported as transport systems that do not need an external drive mechanism . However , there has not been any reports of mass transport systems using com - plete synthetic materials which involves a driven mechanism in themselves . In order to realize such a novel mass transport system , we have attempted to utilize the peristaltic motion of the self - oscillating gels . [ 85 ] In order to control the transportability , it is necessary to enhance the driving force as a conveyer . It is effective to copoly - merize AMPS with a poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel network to generate large amplitudes of volume change in the self - oscillating 3475 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T the plane side of the other gel ( C - to - P ) across the gap junction , whereas it propagated from the plane side to the corner side ( P - to - C ) in the case of the pentagonal gel array . Numerical anal - ysis based on a theoretical model was done for understanding the mechanism of unidirectional propagation in triangular and pentagonal gel arrays . By fabricating different shapes of gel arrays , control of the direction is possible . The swelling and deswelling changes of the gels followed the unidirectional propagation of chemical wave . Application to novel microcon - veyers is expected . 4 . 5 . Control of Chemical Wave Propagation in Self - Oscillating Gel Array A chemomechanical actuator utilizing a reaction – diffusion wave across the gap junction was constructed toward a novel microconveyer by a micropatterned self - oscillating gel array . [ 86 ] Unidirectional propagation of the chemical wave of the BZ reaction was induced on gel arrays . In the case of using a triangle - shaped gel as an element of the array , the chemical wave propagated from the corner side of the triangular gel to Figure 6 . A ) a ) Schematic illustration of the peristaltic surface of the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel sheet . b ) Spatiotemporal pattern of the oscillation of the gel sheet . Outer solution : [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 894 M , [ NaBrO 3 ] = 84 m M , [ MA ] = 62 . 5 m M . B ) Schematic illustration of mass transport on the peristaltic surface ( left ) and observed transport of cylindrical PAAm gel on the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) gel sheet ( right ) . C ) Phase diagram of the transportable region given by the velocity and the inclination angle of the wave front : transported ( (cid:2) ) and not transported ( × ) . D ) Model of the rolling cylindrical gel on the peristaltic gel surface ( R 1 = radius of curvature , W = load of the PAAm gel , b = contact half - width ) . Adapted with permission . [ 85 ] Copyright 2009 , ACS . 3476 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T the effect was not quantitatively evaluated . The amplitude and frequency were controlled by the concentration of reactant , as observed in the solution . Here nanoscale molecular self - oscillation was observed for the ﬁ rst time . The oscillation polymer chain may be used as a component of a nanoclock or nanomachine . 5 . 3 . Self - Flocculating / Dispersing Oscillation of Microgels We then prepared submicrometer - sized poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) gel beads by emulsion polymerization [ 90 , 91 ] or surfactant - free aqueous precipitation polymerization , [ 92 – 95 ] and analyzed the oscillating behaviors . In both cases of the reduced Ru ( II ) and the oxidized Ru ( III ) states , the microgels were also ﬂ occulated when they were heated above the volume phase tran - sition temperature ( VPTT ) because the interparticle electrostatic repulsion is extremely low at a high salt concentration ( ∼ 0 . 3 M ) ( Figure 8C ) . The microgels in the oxidized Ru ( III ) state became ﬂ occulated at slightly higher temperature ( 34 ° C ) than those in the reduced Ru ( II ) state ( 32 ° C ) . This temperature shift is due to an increase in hydrophilicity of the polymer by the increased charge density on the copolymer chains . As a result , microgels in the oxidized Ru ( III ) state show larger hydrodynamic diam - eters at each temperature because PNIPAAm - based microgels show continuous change of diameter below the VPTT . These deviations of the hydrodynamic diameters and differences of the colloidal stabilities at the same temperature should lead to self - oscillation of the microgels . Figure 8A shows the oscillation proﬁ les of transmittance for the microgel dispersions . First , temperature dependence of the oscillation was checked ( Figure 8A - a ) . At low temperatures ( 20 – 26 . 5 ° C ) , on raising the temperature , the amplitude of the oscil - lation became larger . The increase in the amplitude is due to the increased deviation of the hydrodynamic diameters between the Ru ( II ) and Ru ( III ) states as shown in Figure 8C . Further - more , a remarkable change in the waveforms was observed between 26 . 5 and 27 ° C . Then the amplitude of the oscilla - tion dramatically decreased at higher temperature ( 27 . 5 ° C ) , and ﬁ nally periodical transmittance change could not be observed at 28 ° C . Taking the results obtained in Figure 8C into consideration , the sudden change in the oscillation’s waveforms should be related to the colloidal stability change between the Ru ( II ) and Ru ( III ) states . Here , the microgels should be ﬂ occu - lated due to lack of electrostatic repulsion at a high salt concen - tration when the microgels were deswollen . The temperature at which the colloidal stability change in Figure 8C is different from that of the remarkable change in the waveforms was observed because colloidal stability is sensitive to ionic strength and dispersion concentration ( being easier at higher concen - trations and ionic strengths ) . In this system , because precise adjustment of ionic strength is very difﬁ cult , we checked a dependence of dispersion concentrations on oscillation at 27 ° C where the remarkable change in the waveform was observed in Figure 8A - a . As can be seen clearly from Figure 8A - b , the wave - forms of the oscillation are related to the dispersion concentra - tions : remarkable change in the waveforms was only observed at higher dispersion concentrations ( > 0 . 225 wt % ) . The self - oscillating property makes microgels attractive for future development as microgel assemblies , drug / gene controlled 5 . Self - Oscillating Polymer Chains and Gel Particles as “Nano - oscillators” 5 . 1 . Self - Oscillation of Polymer Chains with Rhythmical Soluble – Insoluble Changes In self - oscillating gel , redox changes of the Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + catalyst are converted to conformational changes of the polymer chain by polymerization . The conformational changes are ampliﬁ ed to macroscopic swelling – deswelling changes of the polymer network by crosslinking . Further , when the gel size is larger than chemical wavelength , the chemical wave propagates in the gel by coupling with diffusion . Then peristaltic motion of the gel is created . In this manner , a synchronization process exists from the micro - scopic to macroscopic level in the self - oscillating gel ( Figure 7a ) . These periodic changes of linear and uncrosslinked polymer chains can be easily observed as cyclic transparent and opaque changes for the polymer solution with color changes due to the redox oscillation of the catalyst . [ 87 ] Figure 7b shows the oscil - lation proﬁ les of transmittance for a polymer solution which consists of linear poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) , MA , NaBrO 3 , and HNO 3 at constant temperatures . The wavelength ( 570 nm ) at the isosbestic point of reduced and oxidized states was used to detect the optical transmittance changes based on soluble – insoluble changes of the polymer , not on the redox changes of the Ru ( bpy ) 3 moiety . Synchronized with the periodical changes between Ru ( II ) and Ru ( III ) states of the Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + site , the polymer becomes hydrophobic and hydrophilic , and exhibits cyclic soluble – insoluble changes . Viscosity oscillation of the polymer solution was also observed under a certain conditions . [ 88 ] 5 . 2 . AFM Observation of Immobilized Self - Oscillating Polymers By grafting the polymers or arraying the gel beads on the sur - face of substrates , we have attempted to design self - oscillating surfaces as nanoconveyers ( Figure 7c ) . The self - oscillating poly - mer was covalently immobilized on a glass surface and self - oscillation was directly observed at a molecular level by AFM . [ 89 ] A self - oscillating polymer was synthesized using Ru ( bpy ) 3 mon - omer , NIPAAm , and an N - succinimidyl group ( NAS , a compo - nent for linking to the substrate ) . The synthesized copolymer was immobilized on an aminosilane - coupled glass plate . While no oscillation was observed in pure water , nanoscale oscilla - tion was observed in an aqueous solution of the BZ reaction which consisted of MA , NaBrO 3 , and HNO 3 ( Figure 7d ) . The amplitude was about 10 – 15 nm and the period was about 70 s , although some irregular behavior was observed . Although no stirring could lead to the observed irregularity , the oscillation was reproducibly observed . The amplitude of oscillation of the immobilized polymer ( about 10 – 15 nm ) was less than that in solution , as observed by dynamic light scattering ( DLS ; 23 . 9 and 59 . 6 nm ) . This smaller amplitude may be because the structure of the immobilized polymer was a loop – train – tail : the moving regions were shorter than that of the soluble polymer , as illustrated in Figure 7d . In addition , the oscillation amplitude may have been suppressed due to the force applied by the weight of the cantilever , although 3477 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T Figure 7 . a ) Synchronization in self - oscillating gel in the range from the microscopic to macroscopic level . b ) Oscillating proﬁ les of optical transmit - tance for poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) solution at several temperatures . Adapted with permission . [ 87 ] Copyright 2002 , ACS . c ) Concept of functional surface ( nanoconveyer ) using a self - oscillating polymer and gel beads . d ) Self - oscillating behavior of immobilized polymer in the BZ substrate solution ( [ MA ] = 0 . 1 M , [ NaBrO 3 ] = 0 . 3 M , [ HNO 3 ] = 0 . 3 M ) measured by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . Adapted with permission . [ 89 ] Copyright 2006 , ACS . 3478 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T technology could be applied in many applications as electro - or magnetic rheological ( ER or MR ) ﬂ uids have been done . In par - ticular , the dispersion with autonomously oscillating viscosity may be used as a micropump , which could lead to the realiza - tion of the next generation of microﬂ uidics devices . 5 . 4 . Fabrication of Microgel Bead Monolayers As discussed in the previous section , we have been interested in the construction of micro / nanoconveyers by grafting or arraying self - oscillating polymer or gel beads . For this purpose , a fabri - cation method for organized monolayers of microgel beads was investigated ( Figure 9 ) . [ 96 ] A 2D close - packed array of ther - mosensitive microgel beads was prepared by double template release , and optical and rheological applications . In general , vis - cosity is related to effective volume fraction of microgels and the status of dispersion ( ﬂ occulated or not ) . So , these two types of autonomous oscillation of the microgels should affect vis - cosity in the dispersion . Actually , autonomously oscillating vis - cosity of the microgel dispersion was achieved . [ 95 ] The viscosity was oscillated autonomously following swelling / deswelling oscillation of the microgels as well as self - ﬂ occulating / self - dispersing oscillation of the microgels . We can control rhythm and amplitude of the oscillation using these two phenomena of the microgels . Figure 8D shows colloidal crystals of the microgels in pure water . This result means that the microgels synthesized here are very monodisperse , which should lead to future applica - tion such as sophisticated photonic crystals . And also , this Figure 8 . A ) Self - oscillating proﬁ les of optical transmittance for microgel dispersions . The microgels were dispersed in aqueous solutions containing MA ( 62 . 5 m M ) , NaBrO 3 ( 84 m M ) , and HNO 3 ( 0 . 3 M ) . Microgel concentration was 0 . 25 wt % . a ) Proﬁ les measured at different temperatures . b ) Pro - ﬁ les measured at different microgel dispersion concentrations at 27 ° C . B ) Self - oscillation of microgels around the phase - transition temperature . C ) Deswelling curves for microgels under different conditions as measured by dynamic light scattering : the reduced Ru ( II ) state in 1 m M Ce ( III ) and 0 . 3 M HNO 3 solution ( solid diamond ) , and the oxidized Ru ( III ) state in 1 m M Ce ( IV ) and 0 . 3 M HNO 3 solution ( open square ) . Note that each dispersion concentration was 0 . 005 wt % . Adapted with permission . [ 92 ] Copyright 2000 , Wiley - VCH . D ) Colloidal crystal formation of the microgels in pure water . [ 94 ] 3479 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T strong acid and the oxidant coexist . For extending the application ﬁ eld to biomaterials , more sophisticated molecular design to cause self - oscillation under physiological conditions is needed . For this purpose , we constructed the integrated polymer system where all of the BZ substrates other than biorelated organic substrate were incorporated into the polymer chain . [ 97 – 99 ] As the ﬁ rst step , we attempted to prepare self - oscillating polymer chains with incorporated pH - control sites , that is , polymer chains which exhibit rhythmic oscillations in aqueous solutions containing only the two BZ substrates , without using acid as an added agent . For this purpose , AMPS was incorporated into the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) chain as the pH - control site . [ 97 ] Actually we observed a self - oscillating transmittance change for the solutions of poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS ) ( 20 : 10 : 70 wt % in feed ) at three constant temperatures ( 18 , 21 , and 24 ° C ) . Under acid - free conditions and in the presence of only two BZ substrates ( malonic acid and sodium bromate ) , we suc - ceeded in causing soluble – insoluble self - oscillation of a polymer solution . Oscillating behaviors were remarkably inﬂ uenced by the temperature , polymer concentration , and composition . 6 . 2 . Self - Oscillation Under Oxidant - Free Conditions As the next step , we attempted to introduce the oxidizing agent into the polymer . Methacrylamidopropyltrimethylam - monium chloride ( MAPTAC ) , with a positively charged group , was incorporated into the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + ) as a capture site for an anionic oxidizing agent ( bromate ion ) . [ 98 ] The bromate ion was introduced into the MAPTAC - containing polymer through ion - exchange . Under the conditions in which only two BZ substrates ( malonic acid and sulfuric acid ) were polymerization . First , a 2D colloidal crystal of silica beads with 10 μ m diameter was obtained by solvent evaporation . This monolayer of colloidal crystal can serve as the ﬁ rst template for preparation of macroporous polystyrene . The macroporous poly - styrene trapping the crystalline order can be used as a negative template for fabricating a gel bead array . By this double tem - plate polymerization method , functional surfaces using thermo - sensitive PNIPAAm gel beads were fabricated . It was observed that topography of the surface changed with temperature . The fabrication method demonstrated here was so versatile that any kind of gel beads could be obtained . This method may be a key technology for creating new functional surfaces . Actually , mon - olayers of self - oscillating microgel beads were fabricated by this method , and the chemical wave propagation on the monolayers was observed . Figure 9 Preparation of self - oscilating gel beads monolayer by two - step template polymerization and schematic illustration of functional surface ( nano - conveyer ) using self - oscillating gel bead array . 6 . Attempts Toward Self - Oscillation Under Biological Conditions 6 . 1 . Self - Oscillation of Polymer Chains Under Acid - Free Conditions As mentioned , we had succeeded in developing a novel self - oscillating polymer ( or gel ) utilizing the BZ reaction . However , in this self - oscillating polymer system , the operating conditions are limited to the nonphysiological environment where the Figure 9 . Preparation of self - oscilating gel bead monolayer by two - step template polymerization and schematic illustration of functional surface ( nanoconveyer ) using self - oscillating gel beads array . 3480 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T be improved . The design of gels for biomedical applications is under investigation . 7 . Future Prospects Differently from conventional stimuli - responsive gels , the new concept of self - oscillating gel was established and developed in the past few years . This is a burgeoning area and will con - tinue to grow in several research ﬁ elds . As mentioned above , we proposed novel chemomechanical systems to convert chemical oscillation of the BZ reaction to mechanical changes in polymers and gels , and succeeded in realizing such an energy conver - sion system producing autonomous self - oscillation in polymer gels . We established fundamental mechanisms : e . g . , that redox changes of the BZ catalyst are converted to conformational changes of polymer chains through the changes in intra - or intermolecular interactions of the polymer based on electrostatic interaction . No matter what the detailed molecular mechanism is—changes in hydrophilicity of the polymer , shift of phase tran - sition temperature , changes in osmotic pressure , formation of complex , etc—the basic design concept would be the same in the sense that periodic redox changes of the BZ catalyst are con - verted to structural oscillating changes of the polymer . If we stick to practical applications , there will be many methods for improvement of the self - oscillating performance . For example , the combination of several kinds of polymer and catalyst would be interesting subjects for us to think of easily . Also , in the research ﬁ eld of gel science and engineering , there are many reported methods to control the physical net - work structure of gels to improve their physical properties , which are also useful for the improvement of system perform - ance . However , in those cases of applied research for practical use , obtained results may be imaginable and predictable from knowledge of past studies in polymer chemistry and physical chemistry because a huge amount of research on functional polymers and oscillating reactions already exists . The self - oscillating gel we created here provides material sys - tems coupled with reaction – diffusion and mechanical motion . In the event that they are affected each other by feedback , it would be difﬁ cult to predict and explain the oscillating behav - iors ; theoretical simulation then becomes effective tool . For example , Balazs et al . [ 100 ] developed an efﬁ cient theoretical model for the self - oscillating gels . Since reported in 2006 , they have demonstrated several aspects of the self - oscillating behavior for the gel by theoretical simulation . Many interesting phenomena that we cannot predict simply are demonstrated theoretically . On the basis of such a situation , further innova - tive research , not simply applied research for the improvement or utilization of the gel , is expected . Acknowledgements The author gratefully thanks all the collaborators on this research project . Received : November 28 , 2009 Revised : February 9 , 2010 Published online : May 25 , 2010 present , soluble – insoluble self - oscillation of the polymer was observed . In the self - oscillating polymer solution system induced by the BZ reaction , self - oscillation was achieved without addi - tion of oxidizing agent by utilizing the MAPTAC - containing polymer which included sodium bromate as a counter ion . The self - oscillating behavior was controllable by temperature . The polymer has two advantages because of the higher LCST ; one is self - oscillation around body temperature , and the other is oscillation for a longer time without intermolecular aggregation among the polymer chains in the reduced state . A step toward the practical use of self - oscillating polymers under biological conditions has been established . 6 . 3 . Self - Oscillation Under Acid - and Oxidant - Free Conditions Further , we have synthesized a quaternary copolymer which includes both pH - control and oxidant - supplying sites in the poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 ) chain at the same time . [ 99 ] In the polymer , AMPS was incorporated as a pH - control site , and MAPTAC with a positively charged group was incorporated as a capture site for an anionic oxidizing agent ( bromate ion ) . By using the polymer , self - oscillation under biological conditions where only the organic acid ( malonic acid ) exists was actually achieved ( Figure 10 ) . Other than malonic acid , citric acid or malic acid , which is a biorelated organic acid , can be a substrate of the BZ reaction . For practical medical use , however , it would be necessary to avoid exchange of toxic ions such as bromate to outside of the gel . In addition , working temperatures must Figure 10 . Chemical structure of poly ( NIPAAm - co - Ru ( bpy ) 3 2 + - co - AMPS - co - MAPTAC ) ( upper ) and the oscillating proﬁ les of the optical transmittance for the polymer solution at 12 ° C when only MA ( 0 . 7 M : ﬁ ne dotted line , 0 . 5 M : rough dotted line , 0 . 3 M : solid line ) is added to the solution ( lower ) . 3481 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T [ 27 ] Z . B . Hu , X . H . Lu , J . Gao , Adv . Mater . 2001 , 13 , 1708 . [ 28 ] a ) Y . Takeoka , M . Watanabe , Adv . Mater . 2003 , 15 , 199 ; b ) Y . Takeoka , M . Watanabe , Langmuir 2002 , 18 , 5977 ; c ) D . Nakayama , Y . Takeoka , M . Watanabe , K . Kataoka , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2003 , 42 , 4197 . [ 29 ] a ) R . Akashi , H . Tsutsui , A . Komura , Adv . Mater . 2002 , 14 , 1808 ; b ) H . Tsutsui , R . Akashi , J . Poly . Sci . Part A 2006 , 44 , 4644 ; c ) H . Tsutsui , R . Akashi , J . Appl . Poly . Sci . 2006 , 102 , 362 ; d ) H . Tsutsui , R . Akashi , J . Appl . Poly . Sci . 2006 , 102 , 2295 ; e ) H . Tsutsui , R . Akashi , J . Appl . Poly . Sci . 2006 , 102 , 5351 . [ 30 ] D . A . Davis , A . Hamilton , J . Yang , L . D . Cremar , D . V . Gough , S . L . Potisek , M . T . Ong , P . V . Braun , T . J . Martinez , S . R . White , J . S . Moore , N . R . Sottos , Nature 2009 , 459 , 68 . [ 31 ] M . Komiyama , T . Takeuchi , T . Mukawa , H . Asanuma , Molecular Impring – From Fundamentals to Applications , Wiley - VCH , Weinheim , Germany 2003 . [ 32 ] G . Vlatakis , L . I . Andersson , R . Muller , K . Mosbach , Nature 1993 , 361 , 645 . [ 33 ] T . Oya , T . Enoki , A . Y . Grosberg , S . Masamune , T . Sakiyama , Y . Takeoka , K . Tanaka , G . Wang , Y . Yilmaz , M . S . Feld , R . Dasari , T . Tanaka , Science 1999 , 286 , 1543 . [ 34 ] a ) T . Miyata , N . Asami , T . Uragami , Nature 1999 , 399 , 766 ; b ) T . Miyata , M . Jige , T . Nakaminami , T . Uragami , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2006 , 103 , 1190 ; c ) M . Ehrbar , R . Schoenmakers , E . H . Christen , M . Fussenegger , W . Weber , Nat . Mater . 2008 , 7 , 800 . [ 35 ] a ) A . Matsumoto , N . Sato , T . Sakata , R . Yoshida , K . Kataoka , Y . Miyahara , Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 1 ; b ) A . Matsumoto , T . Endo , R . Yoshida , Y . Miyahara , Chem . Commun . 2009 , 5609 . [ 36 ] a ) K . Okeyoshi , R . Yoshida , Soft Matter 2009 , 5 , 4118 ; b ) K . Okeyoshi , R . Yoshida , Chem . Commun . 2009 , 6400 ; c ) K . Okeyoshi , R . Yoshida , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2009 , 20 . 708 . [ 37 ] a ) Y . Okumura , K . Ito , Adv . Mater . 2001 , 13 , 485 ; b ) J . Araki , K . Ito , Soft Matter 2007 , 3 , 1456 ; c ) K . Mayumi , N . Osaka , H . Endo , H . Yokoyama , Y . Sakai , M . Shibayama , K . Ito , Macromolecules 2008 , 41 , 6480 . [ 38 ] a ) J . P . Gong , Y . Katsuyama , T . Kurokawa , Y . Osada , Adv . Mater . 2003 , 15 , 1155 ; b ) Y . H . Na , Y . Tanaka , Y . Kawauchi , H . Furukawa , T . Sumiyoshi , J . P . Gong , Y . Osada , Macromolecules 2006 , 39 , 4641 ; c ) Q . M . Yu , Y . Tanaka , H . Furukawa , T . Kurkawa , J . P . Gong , Macromolecules 2009 , 42 , 3852 . [ 39 ] a ) K . Haraguchi , T . Takehisa , Adv . Mater . 2002 , 14 , 1120 ; b ) K . Haraguchi , H . J . Li , Macromolecules 2006 , 39 , 1898 ; c ) S . Miyazaki , H . Endo , T . Karino , K . Haraguchi , M . Shibayama , Macromolecules 2007 , 40 , 4287 . [ 40 ] a ) T . Sakai , T . Matsunaga , Y . Yamamoto , C . Ito , R . Yoshida , S . Suzuki , N . Sasaki , M . Shibayama , U . Chung , Macromolecules 2008 , 41 , 5379 ; b ) T . Matsunaga , T . Sakai , Y . Akagi , U . Chung , M . Shibayama , Macromoelcules 2009 , 42 , 1344 ; c ) T . Matsunaga , T . Sakai , Y . Akagi , U . Chung , M . Shibayama , Macromoelcules 2009 , 42 , 6245 . [ 41 ] a ) R . Yoshida , K . Uchida , Y . Kaneko , K . Sakai , A . Kikuchi , Y . Sakurai , T . Okano , Nature 1995 , 374 , 240 ; b ) Y . Kaneko , K . Sakai , A . Kikuchi , R . Yoshida , Y . Sakurai , T . Okano , Macromolecules 1995 , 28 , 7717 ; c ) Y . Kaneko , S . Nakamura , K . Sakai , T . Aoyagi , A . Kikuchi , Y . Sakurai , T . Okano , Macromolecules 1998 , 31 , 6099 . [ 42 ] a ) Y . Noguchi , K . Okeyoshi , R . Yoshida , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2005 , 26 , 1913 ; b ) K . Okeyoshi , T . Abe , Y . Noguchi , H . Furukawa , R . Yoshida , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2008 , 29 , 897 . [ 43 ] S . Kiyonaka , K . Sada , I . Yoshimura , S . Shinkai , N . Kato , I . Hamachi , Nat . Mater . 2004 , 3 , 58 . [ 44 ] a ) B . Ghosh , M . W . Urban , Science 2009 , 323 , 1458 ; b ) C . C . Corten , M . W . Urban , Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 5011 ; c ) P . Cordier , F . Tournihac , C . Soulie - Ziakovic , L . Leibler , Nature 2008 , 451 , 977 ; d ) Q . Wang , J . L . Mynar , M . Yoshida , E . Lee , M . Lee , K . Okuro , K . Kinbara , T . Aida , Nature 2010 , 463 , 339 . [ 1 ] P . J . Flory , Principles of Polymer Chemistry , Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY 1953 . [ 2 ] a ) T . Tanaka , Phys . Rev . Lett . 1978 , 40 , 820 ; b ) T . Tanaka , Sci . Am . , 1981 , 244 , 124 . [ 3 ] Polymer Gels and Networks ( Eds : Y . Osada , A . R . Khokhlov ) , Marcel Dekker , New York , 2002 . [ 4 ] N . Yui , Reﬂ exive Polymers and Hydrogels – Understanding and Designing Fast Responsive Polymeric Systems ( Eds : R . J . Mrsny , K . Park ) , CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , 2004 . [ 5 ] T . Miyata , in Supramolecular Design for Biological Applications ( Ed : N . Yui ) , CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , 2002 , pp . 191 – 225 . [ 6 ] R . Yoshida , Curr . Org . Chem . , 2005 , 9 , 1617 . [ 7 ] A . S . Hoffman , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2002 , 43 , 3 . [ 8 ] Biorelated Polymers and Gels – Controlled Release and Applications in Biomedical Engineering ( Ed : T . Okano ) , Academic Press , San Diego , CA , 1998 . [ 9 ] N . A . Peppas , J . Z . Hilt , A . Khademhosseini , R . Langer , Adv . Mater . 2006 , 18 , 1345 . [ 10 ] L . Dong , H . Jiang , Soft Matter 2007 , 3 , 1223 . [ 11 ] Y . Osada , H . Okuzaki , H . Hori , Nature 1992 , 355 , 242 . [ 12 ] E . Kokufuta , Y . Q . Zhang , T . Tanaka , J . Biomater . Sci . Polym . Edn 1994 , 6 , 35 . [ 13 ] S . Ashley , Sci . Am . 2003 , 289 , 35 . [ 14 ] T . Hirai , H . Nemoto , M . Hirai , S . Hayashi , J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 1994 , 53 , 79 . [ 15 ] T . Fukushima , K . Asaka , A . Kosaka , T . Aida , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2005 , 44 , 2410 . [ 16 ] K . Asaka , K . Oguro , J . Electroanal . Chem . 2000 , 480 , 186 . [ 17 ] M . Zrinyi , D . Szabo , G . Filipcsei , J . Feher , in Polymer Gels and Networks ( Eds : Y . Osada , A . R . Khokhlov ) Marcel Dekker , 2002 , pp . 309 – 355 . [ 18 ] A . Kikuchi , T . Okano , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2002 , 54 , 53 . [ 19 ] a ) R . Yoshida , K . Sakai , T . Okano , Y . Sakurai , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 1993 , 11 , 85 ; b ) R . Yoshida , T . Okano , Y . Sakurai , K . Sakai , J . Biomater . Sci . Polymer Edn . 1994 , 6 , 585 . [ 20 ] a ) K . Makino , E . J . Mack , T . Okano , S . W . Kim , J . Controlled Release 1990 , 12 , 235 ; b ) J . Kost , T . A . Horbett , B . D . Ratner , M . J . Singh , Biomed . Mater . Res . 1985 , 19 , 1117 ; c ) K . Ishihara , M . Kobayashi , J . Shinohara , Makromol . Chem . , Rapid Commun . 1983 , 4 , 327 ; d ) Y . Ito , M . Casolaro , K . Kono , Y . Imanishi , J . Controlled Release 1989 , 10 , 195 . [ 21 ] a ) K . Kataoka , H . Miyazaki , M . Bunya , T . Okano , Y . Sakurai , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1998 , 120 , 12694 ; b ) A . Matsumoto , R . Yoshida , K . Kataoka , Biomacromolecules 2004 , 5 , 1038 ; c ) A . Matsumoto , K . Yamamoto , R . Yoshida , K . Kataoka , T . Aoyagi , Y . Miyahara , Chem . Commun . 2010 , 46 , 2203 . [ 22 ] R . F . Kiser , G . Wilson , D . Needham , Nature 1998 , 394 , 459 . [ 23 ] a ) J . Yang , M . Yamato , T . Okano , MRS Bull . 2005 , 30 , 189 ; b ) K . Nishida , M . Yamato , Y . Hayashida , K . Watanabe , K . Yamamoto , E . Adachi , S . Nagai , A . Kikuchi , N . Maeda , H . Watanabe , T . Okano , Y . Tano , N . Engl . J . Med . 2004 , 351 , 1187 ; c ) M . Yamato , T . Okano , Mater . Today 2004 , 7 , 42 ; d ) N . Matsuda , T . Shimizu , M . Yamato , T . Okano , Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 3099 . [ 24 ] a ) H . Kanazawa , K . Yamamoto , Y . Matsushima , N . Takai , A . Kikuchi , Y . Sakurai , T . Okano , Anal . Chem . 1996 , 68 , 100 ; b ) H . Kanazawa , K . Yamamoto , Y . Matsushima , N . Takai , A . Kikuchi , Y . Sakurai , T . Okano , Anal . Chem . 1996 , 69 , 823 ; c ) H . Kanazawa , Y . Matsushima , T . Okano , Trends Anal . Chem . 1998 , 17 , 435 ; d ) J . Kobayashi , A . Kikuchi , K . Sakai , T . Okano , Anal . Chem . 2003 , 73 , 2027 ; e ) C . Sakamaoto , Y . Okada , H . Kanazawa , E . Ayano , T . Nishimura , M . Ando , A . Kikuchi , T . Okano , J . Chromatogr . 2004 , A103 , 247 . [ 25 ] Y . Osada , A . Matsuda , Nature 1995 , 376 , 219 . [ 26 ] a ) J . M . Weissman , H . B . Sunkara , A . S . Tse , S . A . Asher , Science 1996 , 274 , 959 ; b ) J . H . Holtz , S . A . Asher , Nature 1997 , 389 , 829 ; c ) J . H . Holtz , J . S . W . Holtz , C . H . Munro , S . A . Asher , Anal . Chem . 1998 , 70 , 780 . 3482 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T [ 63 ] R . Yoshida , K . Takei , T . Yamaguchi , Macromolecules 2003 , 36 , 1759 . [ 64 ] Y . Ito , M . Nogawa , R . Yoshida , Langmuir 2003 , 19 , 9577 . [ 65 ] R . Yoshida , S . Onodera , T . Yamaguchi , E . Kokufuda , J . Phys . Chem . A 1999 , 103 , 8573 . [ 66 ] R . Yoshida , G . Otoshi , T . Yamaguchi , E . Kokufuta , J . Phys . Chem . A 2001 , 105 , 3667 . [ 67 ] K . Miyakawa , F . Sakamoto , R . Yoshida , T . Yamaguchi , E . Kokufuta , Phys . Rev . E 2000 , 62 , 793 . [ 68 ] R . Yoshida , E . Kokufuta , T . Yamaguchi , CHAOS 1999 , 9 , 260 . [ 69 ] R . Yoshida , T . Yamaguchi , E . Kokufuta , J . Intelligent Mater . Syst . Struct . 1999 , 10 , 451 . [ 70 ] S . Sasaki , S . Koga , R . Yoshida , T . Yamaguchi , Langmuir 2003 , 19 , 5595 . [ 71 ] R . Aoki , M . Enoki , R . Yoshida , Key Eng . Mater . 2006 , 321 – 323 , 1036 . [ 72 ] S . Maeda , Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , S . Hashimoto , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2008 , 47 , 6690 . [ 73 ] T . Amemiya , T . Ohmori , T . Yamaguchi , J . Phys . Chem . 2000 , 104 , 336 . [ 74 ] R . Yoshida , T . Sakai , O . Tabata , T . Yamaguchi , Sci . Tech . Adv . Mater . 2002 , 3 , 95 . [ 75 ] Y . Takeoka , M . Watanabe , R . Yoshida , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2003 , 125 , 13320 . [ 76 ] S . Shinohara , T . Seki , T . Sakai , R . Yoshida , Y . Takeoka , Chem . Commun . 2008 , 4735 . [ 77 ] S . Shinohara , T . Seki , T . Sakai , R . Yoshida , Y . Takeoka , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2008 , 47 , 9039 . [ 78 ] R . Yoshida , K . Omata , K . Yamaura , M . Ebata , M . Tanaka , M . Takai , Lab Chip 2006 , 6 , 1384 . [ 79 ] R . Yoshida , K . Omata , K . Yamaura , T . Sakai , Y . Hara , S . Maeda , S . Hashimoto , J . Photopolym . Sci . Tech . 2006 , 19 , 441 . [ 80 ] O . Tabata , H . Hirasawa , S . Aoki , R . Yoshida , E . Kokufuta , Sens . Actuators A 2002 , 95 , 234 . [ 81 ] O . Tabata , H . Kojima , T . Kasatani , Y . Isono , R . Yoshida , IEEE 16th Annual Intl . Conf . Micro Electro Mechanical Syst . ( MEMS2003 ) Proc . , IEEE , Piscataway , NJ 2003 , pp . 12 – 15 . [ 82 ] S . Maeda , S . Hashimoto , R . Yoshida , Proc . IEEE Intl . Conf . Robotics Biomimetics ( ROBIO 2004 ) , IEEE , Piscataway , NJ 2004 , 313 . [ 83 ] S . Maeda , Y . Hara , T . Sakai , R . Yoshida , S . Hashimoto , Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 3480 . [ 84 ] S . Maeda , Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , S . Hashimoto , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2008 , 29 , 401 . [ 85 ] Y . Murase , S . Maeda , S . Hashimoto , R . Yoshida , Langmuir 2009 , 25 , 483 . [ 86 ] S . Tateyama , Y . Shibuta , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2008 , 112 , 1777 . [ 87 ] R . Yoshida , T . Sakai , S . Ito , T . Yamaguchi , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2002 , 124 , 8095 . [ 88 ] Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , J . Chem . Phys . 2008 , 128 , 224904 . [ 89 ] Y . Ito , Y . Hara , H . Uetsuka , H . Hasuda , H . Onishi , H . Arakawa , A . Ikai , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2006 , 110 , 5170 . [ 90 ] T . Sakai , R . Yoshida , Langmuir 2004 , 20 , 1036 . [ 91 ] T . Sakai , Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2005 , 26 , 1140 . [ 92 ] D . Suzuki , T . Sakai , R . Yoshida , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2008 , 47 , 917 . [ 93 ] a ) D . Suzuki , R . Yoshida , Macromolecules 2008 , 41 , 5830 ; b ) D . Suzuki , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2008 , 112 , 12618 . [ 94 ] D . Suzuki , R . Yoshida , Trans . Mater . Res . Soc . Jpn . 2009 , 34 , 465 . [ 95 ] a ) D . Suzuki , H . Taniguchi , R . Yoshida , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2009 , 131 , 12058 ; b ) H . Taniguchi , D . Suzuki , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2010 , 114 , 2405 . [ 96 ] T . Sakai , Y . Takeoka , T . Seki , R . Yoshida , Langmuir 2007 , 23 , 8651 . [ 97 ] a ) Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2005 , 109 , 9451 ; b ) Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , Langmuir 2005 , 21 , 9773 . [ 45 ] T . Ono , T . Sugimoto , S . Shinkai , K . Sada , Nat . Mater . 2007 , 6 , 429 . [ 46 ] a ) G . Chen , Y . Imanishi , Y . Ito , Macromolecules 1998 , 31 , 4379 ; b ) Z . Hu , Y . Chen , C . Wang , Y . Zheng , Y . Li , Nature 1998 , 393 , 149 . [ 47 ] T . Watanabe , M . Akiyama , K . Totani , S . M . Kuebler , F . Stellacci , W . Wenseleers , K . Braun , S . R . Marder , J . W . Perry , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2002 , 12 , 611 . [ 48 ] a ) D . J . Beebe , J . S . Moore , J . M . Bauer , Q . Yu , R . H . Liu , C . Devadoss , B . H . Jo , Nature 2000 , 404 , 588 ; b ) D . T . Eddington , D . J . Beebe , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2004 , 56 , 199 ; c ) L . Dong , A . K . Agarwal , D . J . Beebe , H . R . Jiang , Nature 2006 , 442 , 551 ; d ) G . H . Kwon , J . Y . Park , J . Y . Kim , M . L . Frisk , D . J . Beebe , S . H . Lee , Small 2008 , 4 , 2148 . [ 49 ] a ) A . Szilagyi , K . Sumaru , S . Sugiura , T . Takagi , T . Shinbo , M . Zrinyi , T . Kanamori , Chem . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 2730 ; b ) S . Sugiura , A . Szilagyi , K . Sumaru , K . Hattori , T . Takagi , G . Filipcsei , M . Zrinyi , T . Kanamori , Lab Chip 2008 , 9 , 196 . [ 50 ] a ) R . Yoshida , H . Ichijo , T . Hakuta , T . Yamaguchi , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 1995 , 16 , 305 ; b ) R . Yoshida , T . Yamaguchi , H . Ichijo , Mater . Sci . Eng . C 1996 , 4 , 107 . [ 51 ] a ) C . J . Crook , A . Smith , R . A . L . Jones , A . J . Ryan , Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 2002 , 4 , 1367 ; b ) A . J . Ryan . C . J . Crook , J . R . Howse , P . Topham , R . A . L . Jones , M . Geoghegan , A . J . Parnell , L . Ruiz - Perez , S . J . Martin , A . Cadby , A . Menelle , J . R . P . Webster , A . J . Gleeson , W . Bras , Faraday Discuss . 2005 , 128 , 55 . [ 52 ] a ) G . P . Misra , R . A . Siegel , J . Controlled Release 2002 , 79 , 293 ; b ) G . P . Misra , R . A . Siegel , J . Pharm . Sci . 2002 , 91 , 2003 . [ 53 ] I . Varga , I . Szalai , R . Meszaros , T . Gilanyi , J . Phys . Chem . B 2006 , 110 , 20297 . [ 54 ] a ) R . A . Siegel , C . G . Pitt , J . Controlled Release 1995 , 33 , 173 ; b ) J . P . Baker , R . A . Siegel , Macromol . Rapid Commun . 1996 , 17 , 409 ; c ) X . Zou , R . A . Siegel , J . Chem . Phys . 1999 , 110 , 2267 ; d ) J . H . Leroux , R . A . Siegel , CHAOS 1999 , 9 , 267 ; e ) B . Li , R . A . Siegel , CHAOS 2000 , 10 , 682 ; f ) G . P . Misra , R . A . Siegel , J . Controlled Release 2002 , 81 , 1 ; g ) A . P . Dhanarajan , G . P . Misra , R . A . Siegel , J . Phys . Chem . A 2002 , 106 , 8835 . [ 55 ] a ) F . Gauffre , V . Labrot , J . Boissonade , P . De Kepper , in ACS Symposium Series 869 Nonlinear Dynamics in Polymeric Systems ( Eds : J . A . Pojman , Q . T . C . Miyata ) , American Chemical Society , Washington , DC 2004 , Ch . 7 , p . 80 – 93 ; b ) J . Boissonade , P . De Kepper , in Chemomechanical Instabilities in Responsive Materials ( Eds : P . Borckmans , P . De Kepper , A . R . Khokhlov , S . Metens ) , Springer , 2009 , pp . 95 – 116 . [ 56 ] R . Yoshida , T . Takahashi , T . Yamaguchi , H . Ichijo , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1996 , 118 , 5134 . [ 57 ] R . Yoshida , Bull . Chem . Soc . Jpn . 2008 , 81 , 676 . [ 58 ] R . Yoshida , T . Sakai , Y . Hara , S . Maeda , S . Hashimoto , D . Suzuki , Y . Murase , J . Controlled Release 2009 , 140 , 186 . [ 59 ] a ) A . N . Zaikin , A . M . Zhabotinsky , Nature 1970 , 225 , 535 ; b ) Oscil - lations and Traveling Waves in Chemical Systems ( Eds : R . J . Field , M . Burger ) , John Wiley & Sons , New York 1985 ; c ) I . R . Epstein , J . A . Pojman , An Introduction to Nonlinear Chemical Dynamics : Oscillations , Waves , Patterns , and Chaos , Oxford University Press , New York 1998 . [ 60 ] a ) Biological and Biochemical Oscillators ( Eds : B . Chance , E . K . Pye , A . K . Ghosh , B . Hess ) , Academic Press , New York 1973 ; b ) R . A . Gray , J . Jalife , A . V . Panﬁ lov , W . T . Baxter , C . Cabo , J . M . Davidenko , A . M . Pertsov , Science 1995 , 270 , 1222 ; c ) A . T . Winfree , S . H . Strogatz , Nature 1984 , 311 , 611 ; d ) S . Kondo , R . Asai , Nature 1995 , 376 , 765 ; e ) N . Suzuki , M . Hirata , S . Kondo , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 9680 ; f ) V . Castets , E . Dulos , J . Boissonade , P . DeKepper , Phys . Rev . Lett . 1990 , 64 , 2953 ; g ) L . Kuhnert , K . I . Agladze , V . I . Krinsky , Nature 1989 , 337 , 244 . [ 61 ] R . Yoshida , T . Takahashi , T . Yamaguchi , H . Ichijo , Adv . Mater . 1997 , 9 , 175 . [ 62 ] R . Yoshida , M . Tanaka , S . Onodera , T . Yamaguchi , E . Kokufuda , J . Phys . Chem . A 2000 , 104 , 7549 . 3483 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com © 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2010 , 22 , 3463 – 3483 P R O G R E SS R E P O R T A . C . Balazs , Phys . Rev . E 2008 , 77 , 046210 ; f ) O . Kuksenok , V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , Phys . Rev . E 2008 , 78 , 041406 ; g ) O . Kuk - senok , V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , Soft Matter 2009 , 5 , 1835 ; h ) V . V . Yashin , K . J . Van Vliet , A . C . Balazs , Phys . Rev . E 2009 , 79 , 046214 ; i ) P . Dayal , O . Kuksenok , A . C . Balazs , Langmuir 2009 , 25 , 4298 ; j ) V . V . Yashin , O . Kuksenok , A . C . Balazs , Prog . Polym . Sci . 2010 , 35 , 155 . [ 98 ] Y . Hara , T . Sakai , S . Maeda , S . Hashimoto , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2005 , 109 , 23316 . [ 99 ] Y . Hara , R . Yoshida , J . Phys . Chem . B 2008 , 112 , 8427 . [ 100 ] a ) V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , Science 2006 , 314 , 798 ; b ) V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , Macromolecules 2006 , 39 , 2024 ; c ) V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , J . Chem . Phys . 2007 , 126 , 124707 ; d ) O . Kuksenok , V . V . Yashin , A . C . Balazs , Soft Matter 2007 , 3 , 1138 ; e ) V . V . Yashin ,