Why do ideas get more creative across time ? An executive interpretation of the serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks . By : Roger E . Beaty & Paul J . Silvia Roger E . Beaty & Paul J . Silvia ( 2012 ) . Why do ideas get more creative across time ? An executive interpretation of the serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 6 ( 4 ) , 309 - 319 . Made available courtesy of the American Psychological Association : http : / / psycnet . apa . org / journals / aca / 6 / 4 / 309 / This article may not exactly replicate the final version published in the APA journal . It is not the copy of record . Figures and / or pictures may be missing from this format of the document . Abstract : The serial order effect—the tendency for later responses to a divergent thinking task to be better than earlier ones—is one of the oldest and most robust findings in modern creativity work . But why do ideas get better ? Using new methods that afford a fine - grained look at temporal trajectories , we contrasted two explanations : the classic spreading activation account and a new account based on executive and strategic aspects of creative thought . After completing measures of fluid intelligence and personality , a sample of young adults ( n = 133 ) completed a 10 - min unusual uses task . Each response was time - stamped and then rated for creativity by three raters . Multilevel structural equation models estimated the trajectories of creativity and fluency across time and tested if intelligence moderated the effects of time . As in past work , creativity increased sharply with time and flattened slightly by the task ' s end , and fluency was highest in the task ' s first minute and then dropped sharply . Intelligence , however , moderated the serial order effect— as intelligence increased , the serial order effect diminished . Taken together , the findings are more consistent with a view that emphasizes executive processes , particularly processes involved in the strategic retrieval and manipulation of knowledge , than the simple spreading of activation to increasingly remote concepts . creativity | divergent thinking | executive processes | intelligence | multilevel Keywords : modeling | serial order effect | psychology Article : Creativity research has many ideas , both old and new , about how people come up with new ideas . In the present research , we propose some new ideas about one of creativity research ' s oldest ideas : the serial order effect in idea generation ( Christensen , Guilford , & Wilson , 1957 ) . One of the many landmark discoveries by Guilford and his group was that ideas tend to get increasingly original , novel , and remote as time passes . In a divergent thinking task , for example , it ' s more likely for the good ideas to appear later and the more mundane ideas to appear earlier . Guilford ' s idea had a huge influence on associative theories of creative thought , particularly theories founded on spreading activation in semantic memory ( Mednick , 1962 ; Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) . During the half - century since Guilford ' s work , many experiments have replicated the serial order effect : as time passes , creativity goes up and fluency—the number of responses—goes down ( Parnes , 1961 ; Ward , 1969 ) . And there ' s apparently no debate about why this happens : all research explains the serial order effect with reference to low - level associative processes typical of semantic networks . In contrast , we propose a new explanation for the serial order effect . We contend that the growth of creativity across time represents the influence of top - down executive influences on creative thought , such as strategy use , interference management , and directed search and retrieval processes . The serial order effect—long viewed as a foundation for associative models of creativity—might instead be yet more evidence for an executive interpretation of divergent thinking and creative thought ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a ; Silvia & Beaty , 2012 ) . The present research thus provides a new look at the serial order effect . After reviewing past work , we discuss some methodological limitations and show how modern methods and statistical models can overcome them . We then present an experiment that examined the influence of fluid intelligence—an ability central to executive cognitive processes ( Carroll , 1993 ; Conway , Kane , & Engle , 2003 ) —on the creativity and fluency of divergent thinking across time . Taken together , the results both illustrate new methods for studying the serial order effect and suggest reconsidering why it happens . The Serial Order Effect Many studies , using a variety of methods and samples , have found that later ideas tend to be better than early ideas . Christensen et al . ( 1957 ) , in the first demonstration , gave adult participants a series of divergent thinking tasks ( e . g . , unusual uses , plot titles , impossible situations ) and instructed them to come up with ideas that were either appropriate or clever ( i . e . , “interesting - arousing , catchy , inviting , or novel , ” p . 84 ) . Their research was inspired by the emerging literature on verbal fluency tasks , which had found that low - frequency words tend to appear later ( Bousfield & Barclay , 1950 ; Bousfield & Sedgewick , 1944 ) . Each divergent thinking task was timed between 12 and 16 minutes , and participants were asked to draw lines under their last response at 2 - min intervals to mark the time period . Across several studies , Christensen et al . found that creativity increased as time passed . This was apparent in descriptive curves of temporal trends and in statistical tests that compared responses during the first half of the task versus the second half . Later work replicated and extended the serial order effect . Several studies showed the effect with children ( Milgram & Rabkin , 1980 ; Phillips & Torrance , 1977 ; Runco , 1986 ; Ward , 1969 ) ; evaluated the effect for different kinds of tasks ( Johns , Morse , & Morse , 2001 ; Phillips & Torrance , 1977 ) ; and explored a range of scoring methods , such as subjective ratings ( Parnes , 1961 ) , flexibility ( Runco , 1986 ) , and originality and uniqueness ( Runco , 1986 ; Ward , 1969 ) . The typical methodological approach has been to offer more time than the usual divergent thinking task ( or to have no time limit ) and then to test for the serial order effect by splitting the scores into two groups and comparing them . With the benefit of hindsight and statistical advances , we can identify some methodological challenges that were difficult for past research to handle . The first limitation is the kind of within - person statistical tests that were available to past researchers . Nearly all studies did a within - person median split and then compared the halves . In some cases , the scores were split based on the task ' s median ( e . g . , after 5 minutes during a 10 minute task ) ; in other cases , the scores were split at each person ' s own median ( e . g . , after the fourth response for a person who gave eight responses ) . Readers familiar with multilevel modeling will recognize this difference as analogous to centering within - person data at the overall sample ' s mean versus each person ' s own mean ( Enders & Tofighi , 2007 ) . The perils of median splits have become more understood since most of the serial order research was conducted ( e . g . , Cohen , 1983 ; Maxwell & Delaney , 1993 ) . Among other problems , a median split puts distant responses into the same category and close responses into different categories . For a participant with 20 responses , for example , the two halves would consist of responses 1 – 10 and responses 11 – 20 . Response 11 is much closer to 10 than 10 is to 1 , but 10 and 11 end up in different categories . A second and more subtle limitation is the data sparseness that results from variation in fluency . Because few people generate a lot of responses , and because responses taper off as time passes , few people have responses late in a task . In the serial - order curves depicted by Christensen et al . ( 1957 , p . 84 ) , for example , participants with fewer than 6 , 8 , or 10 responses ( depending on the task ) were excluded . The resulting curves thus fail to represent the true temporal trends in the sample , and the findings are probably biased by the extensive listwise deletion ( Enders , 2010 ) . In Ward ' s ( 1969 ) research , most participants had no responses at the later time points , so some people were dropped from many analyses . That decision probably biased the findings in complex ways , given that Ward found that the more creative people in his sample were less likely to be dropped . In short , past work lacked the statistical tools needed to harness the extensive within - person data that divergent thinking tasks provide . This is an instance of the broader struggle that psychological research had within repeated - measures data prior to the development of advanced statistical models for nested data structures ( Singer & Willett , 2003 ) . Modern methods for repeated - measures data , particularly multilevel models ( Luke , 2004 ; Raudenbush & Bryk , 2002 ) , can overcome both limitations . First , unlike repeated - measures ANOVA , multilevel models allow each person to have a different number of within - person scores . It is thus easy to handle the fact that people generate different numbers of responses . Second , multilevel models allow time - varying predictor scores , which means simply that people can vary in their time - of - occurrence scores . In an ANOVA framework , the time - of - occurrence scores would have to be equated across people by classifying the responses into time bins , such as into above - median and below - median bins ( e . g . , Milgram & Rabkin , 1980 ; Parnes , 1961 ) or into successive 2 - min or 10 - s bins ( e . g . , Christensen et al . , 1957 ; Ward , 1969 ) . In a multilevel model , in contrast , researchers can simply measure when responses were given and then use those time values to predict the responses ' creativity . Researchers thus needn ' t drop participants with too few or too many responses . Explaining the Serial Order Effect The serial order effect is unusually robust , so the important question is why ideas get more creative across time . The most common explanation comes from the classic associative model of creativity pioneered by Mednick ( 1962 ) . According to this view , divergent thinking is a process of spreading activation in semantic memory , and creative ideas come from activating and connecting distant concepts . This model implies a spatial metaphor of creative ideation : people must first pass highly related , accessible responses ( e . g . , table - chair ) before they arrive at remote and unusual ones ( Moran , 2009 ) . The Remote Associates Test ( RAT ; Mednick , 1962 ) , a task designed to assess this conception of creative ability , remains a popular measure 50 years later ( Sawyer , 2011 ) . Mednick ' s associative mechanism provides a simple and appealing explanation for temporal trends in divergent thinking . It takes time for increasingly remote associations to become active and available , so the serial order effect reflects the gradual spreading of activation from close and obvious associations to remote and unusual ones . With enough time , activation will spread to distal associates on the fringe of the network , and those are likely to be original and novel ( Milgram & Rabkin , 1980 ; Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ; Ward , 1969 ) . More generally , the spreading of activation through semantic networks remains an influential explanation for how divergent thinking happens and why some people are better at it than others ( Kaufman , 2009 ; Runco , 2007 ) . Furthermore , an associative explanation reinforces the long - standing distinction between divergent thinking , which is broad , diffuse , and bottom - up , and convergent thinking , which is narrow , focused , and top - down . Modern creativity research , however , has suggested that the classic divergent - versus - convergent distinction obscures many top - down , executive , and controlled aspects of creative thought . Recent research , for example , has highlighted the contributions of exercising top - down control over attention and cognition ( Benedek , Bergner , Könen , Fink , & Neubauer , 2011 ; De Dreu , Nijstad , Bass , Wolsink , & Roskes , 2012 ; Fink et al . , 2009 ; Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a ; Vartanian , 2009 ; Zabelina & Robinson , 2010 ; Zabelina , Robinson , Council , & Bresin , 2012 ) , judging and refining initial ideas ( Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Gabora , 2005 ; Vartanian , 2011 ) , and choosing and applying idea - generation strategies that vary in effectiveness ( Gilhooly , Fioratou , Anthony , & Wynn , 2007 ) . The trend toward viewing divergent thinking in terms of executive processes suggests that researchers should take a new look at the serial order effect . Executive processes unfold over time , too , and we think that the temporal operation of executive processes provides a plausible interpretation of why responses get more creative across time . Three executive processes in particular seem to change in ways that would correspond with increases in creativity . First , people identify , use , and discard strategies during a divergent thinking task , and patterns of strategy use map on to patterns of creativity . Gilhooly et al . ( 2007 ) , in a revealing set of studies , analyzed how people selected and changed cognitive strategies over the course of an unusual uses task . In the first of two experiments , participants were asked to “think aloud” as they worked through the task . Protocol analysis of the verbal reports ( Ericsson & Simon , 1980 ) revealed several classes of strategies that people used to come up with unusual uses . The least creative responses resulted from a retrieval - based strategy—simply recalling preexisting uses from memory—whereas creative ideas were associated with other abstract strategies ( e . g . , disassembling the object and using the parts ) . Regarding serial order , Gilhooly et al . found a temporal structure to strategy use . Around 97 % of the participants started with the memory - retrieval strategy , which generates mundane and obvious uses . Many participants never switched away from this strategy , but most eventually discarded it and switched to a more fertile strategy . As a result , strategy use over time would also create a serial order effect : responses become more creative as people discard poor ideation strategies in favor of better ones . Second , executive switching—when people stop generating ideas from one conceptual category and switch to another—unfolds over time . Research on verbal fluency tasks , which are close cousins of divergent thinking tasks ( Carroll , 1993 ) , shows that people higher in intelligence and working memory span switch categories more often ( Troyer , Moscovitch , & Winocur , 1997 ; Unsworth , Spillers , & Brewer , 2011 ) . In both verbal fluency tasks and unusual uses tasks , people typically start with a salient and obvious category . For a brick task , people might start with “construction uses” by listing uses such as build a wall , fireplace , or garden path . Once a category is exhausted and people hit an impasse , they need to stop the search processes within a category , generate a cue for a new category , and then construct responses within it . Some people—people lower in intelligence and working memory span—have a harder time with such deliberate control of attention and cognition , so they switch less often and hence have fewer ideas in verbal fluency tasks ( Unsworth et al . , 2011 ) and less creative ideas in unusual uses tasks ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a , Study 1 ) . As with strategy use , switching has a temporal structure that would create a serial order effect : if people first exhaust an obvious category and then stop and switch to new idea categories , their later responses will be better than their earlier responses . Third , interference management during a divergent thinking would lead to later responses being better than earlier ones . Creating good responses involves managing interference from obvious uses , previously generated responses , and responses closely connected to the object ' s salient features ( e . g . , a brick ' s color , shape , and density ) . Managing interference is a central executive process ( Unsworth , 2010 ) , and several cognitive abilities , particularly fluid intelligence and working memory span ( Burgess , Gray , Conway , & Braver , 2011 ) , predict how well people can do it . The fan effect , for example , refers to a type of interference that stems from an overactivation of shared conceptual information in long - term semantic memory ( Anderson , 1983b ) . People with low working memory spans experience more interference than high - spans during tasks where the number of shared concepts ( or fans ) increases ( Bunting , Conway , & Heitz , 2004 ; Cantor & Engle , 1993 ) . Taken in the context of divergent thinking tasks , it ' s likely that the initial search for alternative uses activates highly related associates in semantic memory . Overcoming this source of interference and navigating beyond tightly knit conceptual knowledge requires executive processes and abilities associated with the control of attention . Like strategy use and switching , interference management has a temporal structure that would create a serial order effect : obvious , common ideas and object features come to mind first , so better responses come later when people overcome interference from obvious ideas and early responses . The Present Study The serial order effect is easy to replicate but hard to explain . The dominant explanation for the serial order effect is associative : responses get better as increasingly remote semantic concepts are activated . But executive processes unfold across time , too , and we have discussed how several of them unfold in ways that would generate a serial order effect . We think an executive explanation is at least as likely as an associative one , and the present experiment sought to gain evidence in support of our reinterpretation . A straightforward way to examine the role of executive processes is to examine the role of fluid intelligence , a domain - general executive ability ( Carroll , 1993 ) . People higher in fluid intelligence can use complex strategies more effectively ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a , Study 2 ) , switch idea categories more often ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a , Study 1 ) , manage interference ( Unsworth , 2010 ) , and discern patterns , rules , and structure in complex problems ( McGrew , 2005 ) . Fluid intelligence is closely tied to working memory span ( Süß , Oberauer , Wittman , Wilhelm , & Schulze , 2002 ) , another ability fundamental to the deliberate control of cognition and attention . Fluid intelligence can thus represent variability in how well people can exert control over the mental resources needed to generate good ideas . In our study , we measured the creativity of responses across an extended divergent thinking task . People had 10 minutes to generate unusual and creative uses for a brick . The software that controlled the task precisely recorded when each response was given , and multilevel models were used to estimate the trajectory of creativity across time . To examine the role of intelligence , we administered six standard tests of fluid intelligence , with an emphasis on nonverbal and visuospatial tasks . If the serial order effect reflects the unfolding of low - level spreading activation in semantic memory , then we wouldn ' t expect fluid intelligence to moderate it . But if the serial order effect reflects the unfolding of executive processes , then we would expect to find two things . First , people high in fluid intelligence should generate better , more creative responses overall , consistent with our claim that intelligence promotes creative thought ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a ; Silvia & Beaty , 2012 ) . Second , fluid intelligence should moderate the serial order effect . Specifically , time should matter more for people low in intelligence but matter less for people high in intelligence . It ' s harder for people low in intelligence to manage interference , to hold a good strategy in mind while applying it , and to switch the train of thought from one track to another , so they are more likely to perseverate in unproductive categories and to apply easy - but - ineffective strategies ( e . g . , searching memory for previously seen uses for a brick ) . People high in intelligence , in contrast , can more quickly discard unproductive strategies , switch from unproductive categories to fertile ones , and inhibit obvious and mundane uses that compete for attention . They can thus start strong and do well throughout the task instead of spending the first few minutes wading through and breaking free from mundane ideas . Method Participants The sample was comprised of 133 undergraduate students—92 women , 41 men—from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro . Students volunteered to participate and received credit toward a research option in a psychology class . Based on self - reports , the sample ' s racial and ethnic composition was diverse—European American ( 61 % ) , African American ( 26 % ) , Asian American ( 10 % ) , and Hispanic / Latino ( 5 % ) —and several people ( 6 % ) selected more than one category . Age ranged from 18 to 48 , with a mean of 19 . 6 ( SD = 3 . 2 ) . The most common majors were psychology , nursing , undecided , and kinesiology . Procedure Participants completed the study in groups of 1 to 8 . Upon entering the lab room , participants were given a consent form and a brief explanation of the study . Following informed consent , students completed a divergent thinking task , a series of fluid intelligence tests , and some self - report questionnaires . The tasks and questionnaires were administered with MediaLab v2010 ( Empirisoft , 2010 ) . The data were collected as part of a larger study on cognitive abilities and creativity . Another paper presents data on a metaphor task that was included ( Silvia & Beaty , 2012 ) ; the creativity data have not been presented elsewhere . Divergent thinking task Participants had 10 minutes to generate unusual uses for a brick . Similar to past serial order research ( Christensen et al . , 1957 ; Parnes , 1961 ; Runco , 1986 ) , we gave people more time than usual to have a larger window to track temporal trends in creative quality . Participants typed each response into text fields presented on a computer screen , and the software time - stamped each response . Before starting the task , students were briefed on the characteristics of an appropriate response . We instructed them to “be creative” and “to come up with something clever , humorous , original , compelling , or interesting . ” Past research demonstrates that “be creative” instructions increase the quality of responses ( Christensen et al . , 1957 ; Harrington , 1975 ; Niu & Liu , 2009 ) . Responses were scored using the subjective scoring method ( Silvia et al . , 2008 ) . Three raters scored each response independently on a 1 ( not at all creative ) to 5 ( very creative ) scale , using criteria of novelty , remoteness , and cleverness . Time - stamped identifiers were removed and the responses were sorted alphabetically prior to scoring , so raters were unaware of an item ' s serial order , the number of responses a participant provided , which response came from which participant , and all other information about the participants . Fluid intelligence tasks After completing the divergent thinking task , students were given a series of six fluid intelligence tests . We chose measures that were spatial and nonverbal to avoid superficial overlap with the verbal divergent thinking task . All tasks were administered electronically using MediaLab . Students completed the following assessments : ( 1 ) an abbreviated version of the Ravens Advanced Progressive Matrices ( 18 items , 12 minutes ; see Carroll , 1993 ) ; ( 2 ) a paper folding task , which asks people to determine the final state of a piece of paper that has been folded , punched with holes , and unfolded ( 10 items , 3 minutes ; Ekstrom , French , Harman , & Dermen , 1976 ) ; ( 3 ) a letter sets task , which presents a series of four - letter combinations and requires people to determine which set does not follow a rule governing the other four ( 16 items , 4 minutes ; Ekstrom et al . , 1976 ) ; ( 4 ) the matrices task from the Cattell Culture Fair Intelligence Test ( CFIT ; Cattell & Cattell , 1961 / 2008 ) , in which a pattern must be completed by choosing the missing segment of a matrix ( 13 items , 3 minutes ) ; ( 5 ) the series task from the CFIT , in which a sequence of images must be completed by selecting the next corresponding image ( 13 items , 3 minutes ) ; and ( 6 ) a number series task , in which participants complete a sequence of numbers by discovering a guiding rule ( 15 items , 4 . 5 minutes ; Thurstone , 1938 ) . Results Data Reduction and Descriptive Statistics Each response was time stamped based on elapsed milliseconds , so we converted each value into decimal time . A value of 1 . 75 thus means that 1 . 75 minutes had elapsed ( i . e . , the 1 : 45 mark ) when the response occurred . To score fluency , we segmented the task into 10 1 - min blocks and counted the number of responses that occurred in each of the 10 blocks . Our analyses used multilevel structural equation modeling , an extension of conventional multilevel modeling that includes latent variables ( Heck & Thomas , 2009 ) . In particular , we modeled creativity as a latent variable with three indicators , one for each rater ( see Silvia , 2008c ) . The divergent thinking ratings were highly skewed—each rater gave at least 75 % of the responses a score of 1 or 2 on the 5 - point scale . We always find skewed ratings in our research— most responses are mundane , some are pretty good , and a few are great—but this level of skew required treating the ratings as ordinal variables . An ordinal model uses the distribution of scores in each category to estimate each person ' s underlying trait score , which is assumed to be continuous ( Skrondal & Rabe - Hesketh , 2004 ) . The factor loadings for the three raters were nearly identical , so we constrained them to be equal to simplify the model . The reliability of the ratings was high : Cronbach ' s alpha , estimated from the factor loadings ( Hancock & Mueller , 2001 ; Silvia , 2011 ) , was . 89 . For our analyses , we built up from main effects to full multilevel models . At the between - person level , we estimated the main effect of fluid intelligence ; at the within - person level , we estimated the main effect of time . The full models included both main effects as well as their interaction , known as a cross - level interaction . A significant cross - level interaction between fluid intelligence and time would mean that the effect of time on divergent thinking—the serial order effect—varies across levels of intelligence . Between - person predictors were centered at the sample ' s overall mean ; within - person predictors were centered at each person ' s own mean ( Enders & Tofighi , 2007 ) . We estimated all models using Mplus 6 . 1 ( Muthén & Muthén , 1998 – 2010 ) , using maximum likelihood with robust standard errors . Unless noted otherwise , all effects are unstandardized . Creativity We first examined the within - person main effect of time on creativity . For this model , we estimated the linear and quadratic effects of time on creativity , which was specified , as described earlier , as a latent variable indicated by the three raters ' scores . Both the linear ( b = . 138 , SE = . 016 , p < . 001 ) and quadratic effects ( b = − . 018 , SE = . 004 , p < . 001 ) were significant . Figure 1 depicts the estimated pattern . Our data showed the same trend as past work—responses became increasingly creative across time , but the linear trend flattened toward the end of the time period . Figure 1 . The creativity of divergent thinking responses across time . Next , we examined the between - person main effect of fluid intelligence on the creativity of people ' s divergent thinking responses . Fluid intelligence was specified as a latent variable with six continuous indicators , one for each task . This main effect was significant , b = . 174 , SE = . 077 , p = . 024 . An estimate of the standardized effect size was β = . 260 . Finally , we examined whether time and fluid intelligence interacted . To simplify this complex model , we specified fluid intelligence as an observed variable by standardizing and then averaging the six intelligence tasks . The between - person level had fluid intelligence ( centered at the sample ' s grand mean ) as a predictor ; the within - person level had the linear effect of time ( centered at each person ' s mean ) as a predictor . The full model , not surprisingly , found significant main effects of fluid intelligence ( b = . 448 , SE = . 194 , p = . 021 ) and of time ( b = . 112 , SE = . 012 , p < . 001 ) . More notable was a significant interaction between time and fluid intelligence , b = − . 042 , SE = . 015 , p = . 004 . Figure 2 depicts this interaction as a scatterplot . The X - axis is fluid intelligence ; the Y - axis is the size of the time – creativity slope . As intelligence increases , the within - person relationship between time and creativity becomes smaller . In short , the serial order effect diminished as intelligence increased . People high in fluid intelligence had flatter slopes , so the creativity of their responses depended less on time . Stated the other way , people low in fluid intelligence had steeper slopes , so their responses became increasingly creative with time . Figure 2 . The interaction between fluid intelligence and time . Fluency What about fluency across the 10 minutes ? On average , people came up with 13 . 6 responses ( SD = 6 . 6 ) , but these responses tended to appear in the task ' s first few minutes . Figure 3 shows the average number of responses generated during each minute of the task . The pattern shows a burst of responses during the first two minutes and a swift decline thereafter . Figure 3 . Fluency across the 10 minutes of the task . As with the creativity scores , we used multilevel models to examine the effects of time and intelligence on fluency . At the within - person level , there were significant linear ( b = − . 474 , SE = . 044 , p < . 001 ) and quadratic ( b = . 031 , SE = . 004 , p < . 001 ) effects of time , as one would expect based on the trend shown in Figure 3 . At the between - person level , there was no main effect of fluid intelligence , b = − . 509 , SE = . 773 , p = . 511 . The estimated standardized effect size was a meager β = − . 074 . Furthermore , there was no interaction between time and fluid intelligence ( b = . 016 , SE = . 017 , p = . 359 ) . Fluency thus behaved differently than creativity : it started high and swiftly dropped , and fluid intelligence didn ' t predict overall fluency or fluency ' s relationship with time . 1 Discussion Why are later ideas more creative than earlier ideas ? The serial order effect is easy to replicate : many researchers have found it using diverse tasks , samples , and scoring methods . The prevailing explanation , interestingly enough , is the oldest explanation : it takes time for people to reach remote associates on the fringe of a sematic network , so responses become more unique and creative as people move away from close , obvious concepts to remote and uncommon ones . The associative explanation proposed by the early researchers ( Christensen et al . , 1957 ; Mednick , 1962 ; Parnes , 1961 ) was compatible with parallel work in verbal fluency ( Bousfield & Barclay , 1950 ; Bousfield & Sedgewick , 1944 ) and with the period ' s deep interest in associationism as a component of complex behavior and cognition ( e . g . , Berlyne , 1965 ; Hull , 1952 ) . It ' s an irony of history that verbal fluency tasks , an inspiration for the original work on the serial order effect , are now known to involve many executive processes , particularly cue generation , category switching , and interference management ( Troyer et al . , 1997 ; Unsworth et al . , 2011 ) . Divergent thinking tasks appear to be receiving a new look , too , given the modern turn toward proposing executive and strategic mechanisms of creative thought ( e . g . , Benedek et al . , 2011 ; Fink et al . , 2009 ; Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ; Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a ; Silvia & Beaty , in press ; Zabelina & Robinson , 2010 ) . Like associative processes , executive processes unfold over time in ways that would create a serial order effect—it takes time for most people to develop a good strategy , overcome interference from obvious ideas , and identify fertile idea categories . As a result , the serial order effect in divergent thinking—like the parallel effect in verbal fluency tasks—might result from the operation of top - down processes , not from simple spreading activation . To test this idea , we examined the role of fluid intelligence in serial order . Fluid intelligence is central to executive control , so it is a way of capturing individual differences in mental management : the ability to manage interference , to deploy abstract strategies , and to successfully direct attention and thought . Our experiment found a pronounced serial order effect , which replicated prior work . More interesting , however , was the significant moderating effect of fluid intelligence . The serial order effect diminished as intelligence increased , and it was effectively absent at the highest levels of intelligence in our sample ( see Figure 2 ) . Taken together , the findings revealed that people higher in fluid intelligence started with better ideas and did better throughout the task—their initial ideas were as good as their later ones . Because highly intelligent participants didn ' t show a serial order effect , it seems unlikely that the effect is overall solely due to spreading activation in semantic networks . We should emphasize that our evidence for this claim is indirect and oblique—the experiment didn ' t directly measure semantic spread , the operation of executive processes within the task , or online verbal reports of people ' s thoughts and strategies—but we nevertheless think our reasoning is sound in light of the findings . Specifically , the people who performed the best on the divergent thinking task showed no change over time , so it is clear that temporal change isn ' t essential to doing well . If anything , the long - standing spatial metaphor of moving away from close , obvious ideas toward remote , original ones may be misleading ( cf . Moran , 2009 ) . Good ideas needn ' t be “farther away” in semantic space than bad ideas—indeed , good ideas are often generated by people on the spot , not waiting to be found in the frontiers of memory ( Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ) . Instead , people who are more effective at managing their minds can recruit the strategies and processes needed to generate ideas despite interference generated from obvious ideas and entrenched ways of thinking . Past meta - analyses ( Kim , 2005 , 2008 ) and literature reviews ( Kaufman & Plucker , 2011 ; Kim , Cramond , & VanTassel - Baska , 2010 ) suggest that creativity and intelligence are modestly related . Our main effect of fluid intelligence on divergent thinking was notably higher ( β = . 26 ) than the benchmark effect size from Kim ' s ( 2005 ) meta - analysis ( around r = . 17 ) . It ' s worth pointing out , however , that our past research has shown that the relationship between intelligence and creativity increases when researchers analyze latent variables ( Silvia , 2008b ) , assess higher - order factors of intelligence rather than lower - order abilities ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a , Study 1 ; Silvia , 2008a ) , and include several creativity tasks ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a , Study 2 ) . The present study thus had some strikes against it : it included only one unusually long divergent thinking task , and it analyzed fluid intelligence rather than the higher - order g factor . As a result , we suspect that this higher - than - average effect size is nevertheless an underestimate of the true effect size , but this is naturally a claim that awaits future work . As an aside , our findings for fluency nicely round out the experiment . First , fluency started high and then swiftly declined . This replicates prior work , albeit with a more robust method for estimating temporal trajectories . Second , creativity and fluency varied in their predictors . Fluid intelligence had both a main effect and an interactive effect for ratings of creativity , but it had no effects on fluency . Such dissociations have appeared in our past work , and they are one reason why we have advocated for subjective scoring ( Silvia et al . , 2008 ) . Traditional methods for scoring divergent thinking , particularly uniqueness scoring and its variants , lead to unusually high correlations between creativity and fluency ( e . g . , Hocevar , 1979 ; Silvia , 2008b ) . Subjective ratings , in contrast , appear to effectively divorce creative quality from mere quantity ( Silvia , Martin , & Nusbaum , 2009 ; Silvia et al . , 2008 ) . Executive Mechanisms in Creativity Given that our evidence for an executive interpretation of the serial order effect is indirect , it ' s worth developing some of the likely mechanisms . Our approach to executive aspects of creativity more generally presupposes that there are many entry points for cognitive control in the creative process ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011a ) , so one would expect a range of processes to be important . One critical mechanism is the ability to inhibit irrelevant information , particularly salient - but - obvious responses and prepotent associations . Considering the associative architecture of long - term memory , one can imagine the interference that would arise during a divergent thinking task from the overactivation of high - frequency associates in stored semantic knowledge ( i . e . , the fan effect ; see Anderson , 1983b ) . To generate unusual uses , it seems likely that some level of associative blocking must occur to inhibit the most closely related elements of a given cue ( e . g . , a brick ) . Several models of selective retrieval provide insight into the inhibitory mechanisms involved in overriding prepotent associates that compete for activation in semantic memory ( e . g . , Anderson , 1983a ; Cantor & Engle , 1993 ; McGeoch , 1932 ) . Selective retrieval requires the deliberate suppression of salient knowledge ( Bunting , Conway , & Heitz , 2004 ; Friedman & Miyake , 2004 ; May , Hasher , & Kane , 1999 ) , an ability that should be useful for generating novel associations during creative cognition . This contention received support from a study of individual differences in performance on the Remote Associates Task ( RAT ; Gupta , Jang , Mednick , & Huber , 2012 ) , perhaps the classic example of a test anchored in the associative tradition . Participants were encouraged to respond rapidly to each problem and to guess if necessary . Using computational models , Gupta and colleagues demonstrated that poor performance on the RAT was characterized by a bias toward responding with high - frequency semantic associates of the three RAT cues . Conversely , strong performance was characterized by ( 1 ) overcoming high - frequency associates and instead considering low - frequency ones , and ( 2 ) correctly evaluating an option as correct or incorrect . These findings are consistent with our view that creative thinking involves managing interference from neighboring associates in semantic memory . We should note that our findings aren ' t consistent with an expanded spreading activation model . In such an account , everyone starts with obvious , prepotent ideas that spread toward remote ideas , but only people low in intelligence give the obvious responses . People high in intelligence , in contrast , inhibit the obvious responses and only begin typing their ideas once they have arrived at remote concepts that they feel are creative enough . Such a view thus sees spreading activation as the core process : everyone wades through obvious ideas , and intelligence merely moderates people ' s ability to inhibit and reject them . Although interesting , this account seems unlikely based on additional analyses . If smart people are simply inhibiting the same prepotent associates that everyone else is typing , then we would expect them to take longer to type their first response , assuming that the rate of semantic spread is similar across intelligence levels and that the process of inhibiting and rejecting ideas requires time . To test this prediction , we correlated Gf ( the average of the six z - scored tasks ) with how long it took people ( in decimal time ) to give their first idea in the brick task . The correlation between intelligence and latency was essentially zero ( r = − . 037 , p = . 673 ) , which suggests that people high in fluid intelligence were not simply waiting out the obvious ideas . But managing knowledge via the control of attention isn ' t the only executive contribution to the generation of creative ideas . Two other mechanisms—strategy use and goal maintenance— deserve mention . Strategy use received an extensive treatment in Gilhooly et al . ' s ( 2007 ) protocol analysis of people ' s verbal reports during unusual uses tasks . As we mentioned earlier , that research found a wide range of strategies that varied in effectiveness . People who came up with better ideas were able to stop the most intuitive strategy ( search memory for known uses ) , identify a better one , and keep it in mind while enacting it . Goal maintenance—the ability to keep a task ' s goal in mind while performing the task—has not yet been studied in creativity tasks , but it is probably important . People with better cognitive control , such as people with high working memory spans , are less likely to have a task ' s goal ( such as “to be creative” and “generate only creative uses” ) slip from mind during the task ( Kane & Engle , 2003 ; Marcovitch , Boseovski , Knapp , & Kane , 2010 ) . Maintaining a goal online during task performance requires stronger executive control of thought , and it seems sensible that smart people generate better ideas in part because they can keep the task ' s “be creative” goal in mind while simultaneously executing ideational processes . Integrating Top - Down and Bottom - Up Models of Creative Thought Throughout , we have been critical of associative models of creative thought . Our criticism of this tradition has been a bit exaggerated so that we could emphasize the contrast between executive and associative mechanisms . Nevertheless , we do agree that associative processes—even humble spreading activation—are important to creativity , and we suspect that the big problem for future work is to understand the interaction of controlled and automatic aspects of creative thought . Many aspects of thought are hard to control , so intentionally trying to generate creative ideas involves managing a set of processes that , as a group , aren ' t entirely manageable . Recent work provides several innovative examples of how executive and associative processes interact . First , some people probably use passive associative cueing as a strategy for idea generation . A humorous example comes from the verbal reports obtained by Gilhooly et al . ( 2007 ) . Several of their participants simply repeated the name of the object to themselves ( e . g . , “brick… brick… brick” ) in an attempt to spark ideas . This strategy won ' t often yield original ideas—it will yield ideas already stored in memory , not novel ones—but it does show how people can deliberately try to spark ideas using associative spread . Second , people vary in associative abilities . In one of the few studies of associative abilities and creativity , Benedek , Könen , and Neubauer ( in press ) developed a series of tasks that required generating words according to associative constraints . As a set , the associative abilities explained over half the variance in divergent thinking fluency , but two kinds of abilities emerged as particularly important . The first , associative combination , is the ability to generate a word that was associated with each word in a pair of words . The second , dissociative ability , is the ability to generate semantically unrelated words . These two abilities involve many features of higher - order thought , such as discerning abstract relationships and inhibiting semantic knowledge , and the findings illustrate how seemingly low - level processes can recruit general mechanisms of cognitive control . Third , low - level associative processes can be viewed in terms of dynamic systems that exhibit features of executive processes—selection , inhibition , and goal - direction—but do so based on self - organizing dynamic qualities , not intentional top - down input . The best - known example is Gabora ' s ( 2005 , 2010 ) honing theory , which examines self - organizing properties of low - level conceptual and memory systems . The conventional way of viewing semantic knowledge in creativity has been to focus on spreading activation ( e . g . , the traditional explanation for the serial - order effect ) or on the structure of semantic knowledge ( e . g . , research on how prior knowledge states affect creativity and problem - solving ; Weisberg , 2006 ) . In honing theory , in contrast , knowledge systems themselves can self - organize and interact according to dynamic rules . The end result can appear directed , but the processes unfold based on the low - level system ' s initial state , rules , contents , and organizational tendencies . Unlike the other approaches , then , honing theory views associative processes as goal - directed , but the person needn ' t exercise agency or intention for them to unfold . If developed to examine how intelligence and creativity relate , honing theory might offer the most problematic critique of an executive approach : creativity ' s top - down appearance would be only specious . Some Limitations and Directions for Future Work The present research offered a new interpretation of the serial order effect and illustrated how new methods and statistical models can be used to test it , but there are several limitations that would serve as fruitful directions for future work . First , the experiment used fluid intelligence as a proxy for a family of executive abilities , but it would be worthwhile to untangle them . For example , measuring strategy use via think - alouds or prompts embedded in the task , assessing interference management directly ( Unsworth , 2010 ) , or manipulating variables that would affect interference , switching , and executive capacity would shed light on the mechanisms behind our global effect . Second , fluid intelligence is one of several cognitive abilities within modern models of the structure of intelligence ( e . g . , Carroll , 1993 ) . Several other abilities—such as crystallized intelligence ( Gc ) and retrieval ability ( Gr ) —are relevant to creativity broadly and to the intersection of executive and associative processes specifically . A more expansive assessment of cognitive abilities that incorporated innovations in assessing Gc and Gr ( e . g . , Benedek , Könen , & Neubauer , in press ; Rolfhus & Ackerman , 1999 ) would be an important next step . Finally , the present work showed how new methods can be applied to studying the serial order effect that avoid the vexing statistical problems found in past work . The serial order effect is a good paradigm for studying how creative thought unfolds over time , so studying moderators beyond the few considered here would be productive . Conclusion The serial order effect is one of the oldest empirical findings in creativity research , and it is central to models of divergent thinking that presume a spread of activation toward increasingly remote associations ( e . g . , Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) . Nevertheless , modern research on executive aspects of creative thought suggests that some executive control over creativity is possible , so perhaps some people can arrive at good ideas without first wading through bad ones . In our research , the serial order effect diminished as fluid intelligence increased . Because smart people did better overall and generated consistently good responses throughout the task , two things are clear : ( 1 ) people needn ' t first work through poor ideas to arrive at good ones , and ( 2 ) creative ideas can be recruited and developed in the absence of associative spread . This work further supports the emerging interest in executive aspects of creative thought and suggests that the underpinnings of the classic serial order effect deserve a new look . Footnotes 1 Although fluid intelligence is the central focus of this research , it ' s worth noting some effects of personality , given the large literature on personality and creativity . A first set of analyses explored between - person main effects of the Big Five Factors , measured with the 60 - item NEO Five Factor Inventory ( NEO - FFI ; Costa & McCrae , 1992 ) . Only one of them—openness to experience , naturally—predicted creativity . Consistent with a vast amount of work ( see Feist , 1998 ; Silvia , Nusbaum , Berg , Martin , & O ' Connor , 2009 ; Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011b ) , people high in openness generated ideas that were more creative , b = 1 . 561 , SE = . 256 , p < . 001 . None of the other four factors had a significant effect . Furthermore , there were no significant cross - level interactions involving the five factors , so the effects of time on creativity were independent of personality . Similar effects appeared for fluency : openness to experience ( b = . 261 , SE = . 110 , p = . 017 ) and neuroticism ( b = . 157 , SE = . 079 , p = . 048 ) had main effects on fluency , but none of the cross - level interactions was significant . References Anderson , J . R . ( 1983a ) . A spreading activation theory of memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22 , 261 – 295 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 5371 ( 83 ) 90201 - 3 Anderson , J . R . ( 1983b ) . Retrieval of information from long - term memory . Science , 220 , 25 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 6828877 Benedek , M . , Bergner , S . , Könen , T . , Fink , A . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2011 ) . EEG alpha synchronization is related to top - down processing in convergent and divergent thinking . Neuropsychologia . , 49 , 3505 – 3511 . Benedek , M . , Könen , T . , & Neubauer , A . ( in press ) . Associative abilities underlying creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts . Berlyne , D . E . ( 1965 ) . Structure and direction in thinking . New York : Wiley . Bousfield , W . A . , & Barclay , W . D . ( 1950 ) . The relationship between order and frequency of occurrence of restricted associated responses . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 40 , 643 – 647 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0059019 Bousfield , W . A . , & Sedgewick , C . H . ( 1944 ) . An analysis of sequences of restricted associative responses . Journal of General Psychology , 30 , 149 – 165 . Bunting , M . F . , Conway , A . A . , & Heitz , R . P . ( 2004 ) . Individual differences in the fan effect and working memory capacity . Journal of Memory and Language , 51 , 604 – 622 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2004 . 07 . 007 Burgess , G . C . , Gray , J . R . , Conway , A . A . , & Braver , T . S . ( 2011 ) . Neural mechanisms of interference control underlie the relationship between fluid intelligence and working memory span . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 140 , 674 – 692 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0024695 Cantor , J . , & Engle , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Working - memory capacity as long - term memory activation : An individual - differences approach . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 19 , 1101 – 1114 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 19 . 5 . 1101 Carroll , J . B . ( 1993 ) . Human cognitive abilities : A survey of factor - analytic studies . New York : Cambridge University Press . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511571312 Cattell , R . B . , & Cattell , A . K . S . ( 1961 / 2008 ) . Measuring intelligence with the Culture Fair Tests . Oxford , UK : Hogrefe . Christensen , P . R . , Guilford , J . P . , & Wilson , R . C . ( 1957 ) . Relations of creative responses to working time and instructions . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 53 , 82 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0045461 Cohen , J . ( 1983 ) . The cost of dichotomization . Applied Psychological Measurement , 7 , 249 – 253 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 014662168300700301 Conway , A . R . A . , Kane , M . J . , & Engle , R . W . ( 2003 ) . Working memory capacity and its relation to general intelligence . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 547 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2003 . 10 . 005 Costa , P . T . , Jr . , & McCrae , R . R . ( 1992 ) . Revised NEO Personality Inventory ( NEO - PI - R ) and NEO Five - Factor Inventory ( NEO - FFI ) professional manual . Odessa , FL : Psychological Assessment Resources . De Dreu , C . K . W . , Nijstad , B . A . , Bass , M . , Wolsink , I . , & Roskes , M . ( 2012 ) . Working memory benefits creative insight , musical improvisation , and original ideation through maintained task - focused attention . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 38 , 656 – 669 . Ekstrom , R . B . , French , J . W . , Harman , H . H . , & Dermen , D . ( 1976 ) . Manual for Kit of Factor - Referenced Cognitive Tests . Princeton , NJ : Educational Testing Service . Empirisoft . ( 2010 ) . MediaLab ( Version 2010 ) [ Computer software ] . New York : Author . Enders , C . K . , & Tofighi , D . ( 2007 ) . Centering predictor variables in cross - sectional multilevel models : A new look at an old issue . Psychological Methods , 12 , 121 – 138 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1082 - 989X . 12 . 2 . 121 Enders , C . K . ( 2010 ) . Applied missing data analysis . New York : Guilford . Ericsson , K . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Verbal reports as data . Psychological Review , 87 , 215 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 87 . 3 . 215 Feist , G . J . ( 1998 ) . A meta - analysis of personality in scientific and artistic creativity . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 2 , 290 – 309 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15327957pspr0204 _ 5 Fink , A . , Grabner , R . H . , Benedek , M . , Reishofer , G . , Hauswirth , V . , Fally , M . , . . . Neubauer , A . C . ( 2009 ) . The creative brain : Investigation of brain activity during creative problem solving by means of EEG and fMRI . Human Brain Mapping , 30 , 734 – 748 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20538 Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Friedman , N . P . , & Miyake , A . ( 2004 ) . The relations among inhibition and interference control processes : A latent variable analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 101 – 135 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 133 . 1 . 101 Gabora , L . ( 2005 ) . Creative thought as a non - Darwinian evolutionary process . Journal of Creative Behavior , 39 , 262 – 283 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2005 . tb01261 . x Gabora , L . ( 2010 ) . Revenge of the “neurds” : Characterizing creative thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of memory . Creativity Research Journal , 22 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400410903579494 Gilhooly , K . J . , Fioratou , E . , Anthony , S . H . , & Wynn , V . ( 2007 ) . Divergent thinking : Strategies and executive involvement in generating novel uses for familiar objects . British Journal of Psychology , 98 , 611 – 625 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8295 . 2007 . tb00467 . x Gupta , N . , Jang , Y . , Mednick , S . C . , & Huber , D . E . ( 2012 ) . The road not taken : Creative solutions require avoidance of high - frequency responses . Psychological Science , 23 , 288 – 294 . Hancock , G . R . , & Mueller , R . O . ( 2001 ) . Rethinking construct reliability within latent variable systems . In R . Cudeck , S . du Toit , & D . Sörbom ( Eds . ) , Structural equation modeling : Present and future ( pp . 195 – 216 ) . Lincolnwood , IL : Scientific Software International . Harrington , D . M . ( 1975 ) . Effects of explicit instructions to “be creative” on the psychological meaning of divergent thinking test scores . Journal of Personality , 43 , 434 – 454 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6494 . 1975 . tb00715 . x Heck , R . H . , & Thomas , S . L . ( 2009 ) . An introduction to multilevel modeling techniques ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Routledge . Hocevar , D . ( 1979 ) . Ideational fluency as a confounding factor in the measurement of originality . Journal of Educational Psychology , 71 , 191 – 196 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 71 . 2 . 191 Hull , C . L . ( 1952 ) . A behavior system . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Johns , G . A . , Morse , L . W . , & Morse , D . T . ( 2001 ) . An analysis of early vs . later responses on a divergent production task across three time press conditions . Journal of Creative Behavior , 35 , 65 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2001 . tb01222 . x Kane , M . J . , & Engle , R . W . ( 2003 ) . Working - memory capacity and the control of attention : The contributions of goal neglect , response competition , and task set to Stroop interference . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 132 , 47 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 132 . 1 . 47 Kaufman , J . C . , & Plucker , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Intelligence and creativity . In R . J . Sternberg & S . Kaufman ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of intelligence ( pp . 771 – 783 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Kaufman , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Creativity 101 . New York : Springer . Kim , K . H . , Cramond , B . , & VanTassel - Baska , J . ( 2010 ) . The relationship between creativity and intelligence . In J . C . Kaufman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of creativity ( pp . 395 – 412 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511763205 . 025 Kim , K . H . ( 2005 ) . Can only intelligent people be creative ? Journal of Secondary Gifted Education , 16 , 57 – 66 . Kim , K . H . ( 2008 ) . Meta - analyses of the relationship of creative achievement to both IQ and divergent thinking test scores . Journal of Creative Behavior , 42 , 106 – 130 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2008 . tb01290 . x Luke , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Multilevel modeling . ( Sage University Paper Series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences , series no . 07 – 143 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Marcovitch , S . , Boseovski , J . J . , Knapp , R . J . , & Kane , M . J . ( 2010 ) . Goal neglect and working memory capacity in 4 - to 6 - year - old children . Child Development , 81 , 1687 – 1695 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2010 . 01503 . x Maxwell , S . E . , & Delaney , H . D . ( 1993 ) . Bivariate median splits and spurious statistical significance . Psychological Bulletin , 113 , 181 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 113 . 1 . 181 May , C . P . , Hasher , L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1999 ) . The role of interference in memory span . Memory & Cognition , 27 , 759 – 767 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03198529 McGeoch , J . A . ( 1932 ) . Forgetting and the law of disuse . Psychological Review , 39 , 352 – 370 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0069819 McGrew , K . S . ( 2005 ) . The Cattell - Horn - Carroll theory of cognitive abilities . In D . P . Flanagan & P . L . Harrison ( Eds . ) , Contemporary intellectual assessment : Theories , tests , and issues ( 2nd ed . , pp . 136 – 181 ) . New York , NY : Guilford . Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0048850 Milgram , R . M . , & Rabkin , L . ( 1980 ) . Developmental test of Mednick ' s associative hierarchies of original thinking . Developmental Psychology , 16 , 157 – 158 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 16 . 2 . 157 Moran , S . ( 2009 ) . Metaphor foundations in creativity research : Boundary vs . organism . Journal of Creative Behavior , 43 , 1 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2009 . tb01303 . x Muthén , L . K . , & Muthén , B . O . ( 1998 – 2010 ) . Mplus user ' s guide ( 6th ed . ) . Los Angeles , CA : Muthén and Muthén . Niu , W . , & Liu , D . ( 2009 ) . Enhancing creativity : A comparison between effects of an indicative instruction “to be creative” and a more elaborate heuristic instruction on Chinese student creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 93 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0013660 Nusbaum , E . C . , & Silvia , P . J . ( 2011a ) . Are intelligence and creativity really so different ? Fluid intelligence , executive processes , and strategy use in divergent thinking . Intelligence , 39 , 36 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2010 . 11 . 002 Nusbaum , E . C . , & Silvia , P . J . ( 2011b ) . Are openness and intellect distinct aspects of openness to experience ? A test of the O / I model . Personality and Individual Differences , 51 , 571 – 574 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2011 . 05 . 013 Parnes , S . J . ( 1961 ) . Effects of extended effort in creative problem solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 52 , 117 – 122 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0044650 Phillips , V . K . , & Torrance , E . P . ( 1977 ) . Levels of originality at earlier and later stages of creativity test tasks . Journal of Creative Behavior , 11 , 147 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 1977 . tb00602 . x Raudenbush , S . W . , & Bryk , A . S . ( 2002 ) . Hierarchical linear models : Applications and data analysis methods ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Rolfhus , E . L . , & Ackerman , P . L . ( 1999 ) . Assessing individual differences in knowledge : Knowledge structures and traits . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 511 – 526 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 91 . 3 . 511 Runco , M . A . ( 1986 ) . Flexibility and originality in children ' s divergent thinking . Journal of Psychology : Interdisciplinary and Applied , 120 , 345 – 352 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00223980 . 1986 . 9712632 Runco , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Creativity . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Sawyer , R . K . ( 2011 ) . The cognitive neuroscience of creativity : A critical review . Creativity Research Journal , 23 , 137 – 154 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2011 . 571191 Silvia , P . J . , & Beaty , R . E . ( 2012 ) . Making creative metaphors : The importance of fluid intelligence for creative thought . Intelligence , 40 , 343 – 351 . Silvia , P . J . , Martin , C . , & Nusbaum , E . C . ( 2009 ) . A snapshot of creativity : Evaluating a quick and simple method for assessing divergent thinking . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 4 , 79 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2009 . 06 . 005 Silvia , P . J . , Nusbaum , E . C . , Berg , C . , Martin , C . , & O ' Connor , A . ( 2009 ) . Openness to experience , plasticity , and creativity : Exploring lower - order , higher - order , and interactive effects . Journal of Research in Personality , 43 , 1087 – 1090 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jrp . 2009 . 04 . 015 Silvia , P . J . , Winterstein , B . P . , Willse , J . T . , Barona , C . M . , Cram , J . T . , Hess , K . I . , Martinez , J . L . , & Richard , C . A . ( 2008 ) . Assessing creativity with divergent thinking tasks : Exploring the reliability and validity of new subjective scoring methods . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 2 , 68 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1931 - 3896 . 2 . 2 . 68 Silvia , P . J . ( 2008a ) . Another look at creativity and intelligence : Exploring higher - order models and probable confounds . Personality and Individual Differences , 44 , 1012 – 1021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2007 . 10 . 027 Silvia , P . J . ( 2008b ) . Creativity and intelligence revisited : A latent variable analysis of Wallach and Kogan ( 1965 ) . Creativity Research Journal , 20 , 34 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400410701841807 Silvia , P . J . ( 2008c ) . Discernment and creativity : How well can people identify their most creative ideas ? Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 2 , 139 – 146 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1931 - 3896 . 2 . 3 . 139 Silvia , P . J . ( 2011 ) . Subjective scoring of divergent thinking : Examining the reliability of unusual uses , instances , and consequences tasks . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 6 , 24 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2010 . 06 . 001 Singer , J . D . , & Willett , J . B . ( 2003 ) . Applied longitudinal data analysis : Modeling change and event occurrence . New York : Oxford University Press . Skrondal , A . , & Rabe - Hesketh , S . ( 2004 ) . Generalized latent variable modeling : Multilevel , longitudinal , and structural equation models . Boca Raton , FL : Chapman & Hall / CRC . Süβ , H . M . , Oberauer , K . , Wittman , W . W . , Wilhelm , O . , & Schulze , R . ( 2002 ) . Working - memory capacity explains reasoning ability—And a little bit more . Intelligence , 30 , 261 – 288 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0160 - 2896 ( 01 ) 00100 - 3 Thurstone , L . L . ( 1938 ) . Primary mental abilities . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , & Winocur , G . ( 1997 ) . Clustering and switching as two components of verbal fluency : Evidence from younger and older healthy adults . Neuropsychology , 11 , 138 – 146 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0894 - 4105 . 11 . 1 . 138 Unsworth , N . , Spillers , G . J . , & Brewer , G . A . ( 2011 ) . Variation in verbal fluency : A latent variable analysis of clustering , switching , and overall performance . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 64 , 447 – 466 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2010 . 505292 Unsworth , N . ( 2010 ) . Interference control , working memory capacity , and cognitive abilities : A latent variable analysis . Intelligence , 38 , 255 – 267 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2009 . 12 . 003 Vartanian , O . ( 2009 ) . Variable attention facilitates creative problem solving . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 57 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0014781 Vartanian , O . ( 2011 ) . Decision junctures in the creative process . In O . Vartanian & D . R . Mandel ( Eds . ) , Neuroscience of decision making ( pp . 311 – 327 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Wallach , M . A . , & Kogan , N . ( 1965 ) . Modes of thinking in young children : A study of the creativity – intelligence distinction . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Ward , W . C . ( 1969 ) . Rate and uniqueness in children ' s creative responding . Child Development , 40 , 869 – 878 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1127195 Weisberg , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity : Understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Zabelina , D . L . , Robinson , M . D . , Council , J . R . , & Bresin , K . ( 2012 ) . Patterning and non - patterning in creative cognition : Insights from performance in a random number generation task . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 6 , 137 – 145 . Zabelina , D . L . , & Robinson , M . D . ( 2010 ) . Creativity as flexible cognitive control . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 4 , 136 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0017379 Submitted : November 29 , 2011 Revised : April 3 , 2012 Accepted : May 8 , 2012