Review Seasonal change in the avian hippocampus David F . Sherry ⇑ , Scott A . MacDougall - Shackleton Departments of Psychology and Biology , Advanced Facility for Avian Research , University of Western Ontario , Canada a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Available online 10 December 2014 Keywords : Hippocampus Seasonality Photoperiod Food - storing Brood parasitism Neurogenesis Memory Spatial ability a b s t r a c t The hippocampus plays an important role in cognitive processes , including memory and spatial orienta - tion , in birds . The hippocampus undergoes seasonal change in food - storing birds and brood parasites , there are changes in the hippocampus during breeding , and further changes occur in some species in association with migration . In food - storing birds , seasonal change in the hippocampus occurs in fall and winter when the cognitively demanding behaviour of caching and retrieving food occurs . The timing of annual change in the hippocampus of food - storing birds is quite variable , however , and appears not to be under photoperiod control . A variety of factors , including cognitive performance , exercise , and stress may all inﬂuence seasonal change in the avian hippocampus . The causal processes underlying seasonal change in the avian hippocampus have not been extensively examined and the more fully described hor - monal inﬂuences on the mammalian hippocampus may provide hypotheses for investigating the control of hippocampal seasonality in birds . (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . Introduction and scope The lives of birds are driven by seasonal factors and dramatic changes in behaviour and physiology occur on an annual cycle in many species . Seasonal reproduction is associated with changes in song , courtship , parental care , and plumage of most species ( Dawson et al . , 2001 ; Rani and Kumar , 2013 ) . Migration and the physiological changes associated with migration occur just before and again following reproduction in many temperate zone birds ( Cornelius et al . , 2013 ) . For non - migrants , there are physiological and behavioural changes associated with remaining resident at high latitudes during winter ( Witter and Cuthill , 1993 ; Wingﬁeld and Ramenofsky , 2011 ) . It should not be a surprise , then , that changes also occur in birds’ brains on a seasonal time scale . Despite a long history of research on seasonal change in the song - control system and hypothalamic – pituitary – gonadal axis , examination of seasonal change in the avian hippocampus is relatively recent . There are changes in the avian hippocampus associated with sea - sonal food storing ( Sherry and Hoshooley , 2009 , 2010 ) , seasonal reproductive behaviour ( Srivastava and Singh , 2012 ) , and annual migration ( LaDage et al . , 2010 ) . Here , we will review what is known about seasonal change in the hippocampus of birds and highlight some promising avenues for further research on the con - trol and function of seasonal change in the avian hippocampus . 1 . 2 . The avian hippocampus The avian hippocampus is a dorsomedial forebrain structure ( Fig . 1 ) . Although two structures , the hippocampus and the area parahippocampalis ( APH ) , are identiﬁed in some early atlases ( Karten and Hodos , 1967 ) these two regions are now usually trea - ted as a single structure – the hippocampus , hippocampal formation or hippocampal complex – and a different nomenclature is used for proposed subdivisions ( Atoji and Wild , 2006 ) . The hippocampus is bounded by the surface of the brain , the lateral ventricle , and two cytoarchitectural boundaries , one ventrally with the septum and another laterally with the hyperpallium apicale ( HA , Sherry et al . , 1989 ) . The septal boundary is a cell - poor region in which ﬁbre bundles predominate . The lateral boundary is characterised by a change in cell number and cell type from the large dispersed neu - rons of the hippocampus to the more cell - dense HA in which both large and small cells occur ( Krebs et al . , 1989 ) . The caudal limit of the hippocampus is the caudal pole of the avian brain . The rostral boundary is more problematic . It is , by convention , associated with the ﬁrst appearance ( progressing rostro - caudally through the brain ) of a ventral hippocampal structure consisting of densely packed cells in a V - shape that occurs though most of the hippo - campus . These cytoarchitectural features characteristic of the pas - serine hippocampus are shown in Fig . 1 and can be seen in the http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yfrne . 2014 . 11 . 008 0091 - 3022 / (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : Department of Psychology , University of Western Ontario , London , ON N6A 5C2 , Canada . E - mail address : sherry @ uwo . ca ( D . F . Sherry ) . Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / yfrne online zebra ﬁnch atlas http : / / zebraﬁnch . brainarchitecture . org / introduction / . The hippocampus has afferent and efferent connections to many other parts of the brain , including the contralateral hippocampus through the pallial commissure . Major afferent and efferent con - nections with forebrain areas enter and leave the hippocampus at the lateral boundary with HA . These afferents provide the hippo - campus with highly processed visual , auditory , olfactory , somato - sensory and trigeminal inputs ( Atoji and Wild , 2006 ) . Connections with other brain areas also occur through the septum , descending efferent projections predominating . There are a number of proposed anatomical homologies between the avian and mammalian hippocampus ( e . g . Szekely , 1999 ; Kahn et al . , 2003 ; Erichsen et al . , 1991 ) . Atoji and Wild ( 2006 ) propose a homology between the V - shaped region of the avian hippocampus and the mammalian dentate gyrus , between the central region of the avian hippocampus and the mammalian CA cells ﬁelds and subiculum , and between the most lateral part of the avian hippocampus and the mammalian entorhinal cortex . There are homologies between the hippocampus of birds and mammals in function as well as anatomy . Lesions to the hippocam - pus produce deﬁcits in cache recovery and spatial orientation in food - storing birds ( Krushinskaya , 1966 ; Sherry and Vaccarino , 1989 ; Hampton and Shettleworth , 1996 ) . Hippocampal lesions dis - rupt memory and a variety of cognitive processes in pigeons ( Good and Macphail , 1994 ; Scarf et al . , 2014 ; Broadbent and Colombo , 2000 ; Colombo et al . , 1997 ) . Lesions also produce a complex pat - tern of navigational impairments in homing pigeons ( Gagliardo et al . , 2004 ) . Hippocampal lesions disrupt acquisition of the ability to home from novel release sites in naïve homing pigeons but not accurate homeward orientation in experienced birds ( Bingman et al . , 1990 , 1984 ) . Homing pigeons with hippocampal lesions do , however , show impairments in recognition of familiar landmarks near their home loft ( Bingman et al . , 1984 ) . In general , the hippo - campus appears to play a role in memory for spatial locations , spa - tial orientation , and other cognitive processes comparable to that of the mammalian hippocampus . Estrogen receptors , androgen receptors and aromatase are all found in the passerine hippocampus ( Hodgson et al . , 2008 ; Metzdorf et al . , 1999 ; Gahr et al . , 1993 ; Saldanha et al . , 1998 ) . The high level of aromatase activity , found in both sexes , indicates that estrogens produced locally in the hippocampus play an impor - tant role in the function of the avian hippocampus , as they do in the mammalian hippocampus ( Saldanha et al . , 1998 ) . Aromatase is co - localised with NMDA glutamate receptors in the avian hippo - campus ( Saldanha et al . , 2004 ) . NMDA receptor - expressing neu - rons are particularly prominent in both the ventrolateral and the dorsomedial arms of the V - shaped region . Administration of estro - gen increases the size of NMDA receptor - expressing neurons and the number of synaptic contacts with NMDA receptor - positive axons ( Saldanha et al . , 2004 ) . Saldanha et al . ( 1998 ) have proposed that high levels of aroma - tase in the hippocampus of food - storing birds may function to maintain estrogen - dependent hippocampal activity in a manner that is non - sex - speciﬁc in autumn and winter when gonadal ste - roidogenesis is low or non - existent . Consistent with this hypothe - sis is the ﬁnding that local application to the hippocampus of the aromatase inhibitor ATD ( 1 , 4 , 6 - androstatriene - 3 , 17 - dione ) causes an increase in errors on a spatial memory task in male zebra ﬁnches that is very similar to the effects of ibotenic acid lesions of the hippocampus ( Bailey et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , implants of estradiol lead to more rapid learning of a spatial task in gonadecto - mized male zebra ﬁnches ( Oberlander et al . , 2004 ) . The hippocampus of food - storing birds , homing pigeons , and brood parasites differs from the hippocampus of other birds . The hippocampus is larger in food - storing birds , such as chickadees and tits , nuthatches , and jays than in non - food - storing species ( Sherry et al . , 1989 ; Krebs et al . , 1989 ; Lucas et al . , 2004 ) . It is also larger in homing pigeons than in non - homing strains ( Rehkämper et al . , 1988 ) . Brood parasitic birds that search for host nests in which to lay their eggs have a larger hippocampus than closely - related non - parasites ( Reboreda et al . , 1996 ; Sherry et al . , 1993 ) . Brood parasitic brown - headed cowbirds ( Molothrus ater ) , for example , have a larger hippocampus than non - parasitic red - winged blackbirds ( Agelaius phoeniceus ) and common grackles ( Quiscalus quiscula ) despite being smaller in size and having fore - brains that are approximately the same size ( Sherry et al . , 1993 ) . Finally , migratory subspecies of some birds can have a larger S HA V HP S V HA HP Fig . 1 . Upper . The left hippocampus of the black - capped chickadee in Nissl stained coronal section . Arrowheads show the lateral boundary of the hippocampus with the hyperpallium apicale and the ventral boundary with the septum . Dashed lines indicate the location of cells forming the hippocampal ‘‘V’’ , that appears lateral to the left arm of the dashed V and medial to the right arm of the dashed V . Lower . The left hippocampus of the black - capped chickadee showing doublecortin ( DCX ) immunoreactivity . Doublecortin is expressed by new neurons following cell division and during migration and differentiation . Inset shows at greater magni - ﬁcation the proliferative subependymal zone indicated by the dotted rectangle . Abbreviations : HA – Hyperpallium apicale , HP – Hippocampus , S – Septum , V – Ventricle . Scale bars equal 200 l m . Photomicrographs courtesy of Adam Piraino and Caroline Strang . D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 159 hippocampus , relative to the size of the telencephalon ( Pravosudov et al . , 2006 ) , and a greater density of hippocampal neurons ( Cristol et al . , 2003 ) than non - migratory subspecies . Differences in the hip - pocampus between species that are correlated with differences in spatial behaviour also occur in mammals ( Jacobs et al . , 1990 ; Jacobs and Spencer , 1994 ; Sherry et al . , 1992 ) . 1 . 3 . Seasonality , photoperiodism and the annual cycle Almost every habitat on earth undergoes seasonal changes , and most species exhibit physiological , morphological , and behavioural changes in response . Seasonality in birds has been well studied , in part because birds exhibit conspicuous changes across their annual cycle . Seasonal reproduction occurs as a result of organisms match - ing the production of offspring with seasonal abundance of resources offspring require . In birds , the resource most important for seasonal reproduction is food . Although food is the ultimate factor ( sensu Baker , 1938 ) underlying seasonal reproduction , most species use other environmental cues as proximate factors to time seasonal changes in behaviour and physiology . In seasonally breed - ing birds , the environmental cue most commonly used to time both reproduction and migration is the seasonal change in photo - period ( Dawson et al . , 2001 ) . Endogenous circannual timers are synchronised by the change in photoperiod to regulate seasonal changes in reproduction and migration ( MacDougall - Shackleton et al . , 2015 ) . Other cues , such as temperature , weather , and social factors typically have a modulatory effect on the main photope - riod - driven changes ( Wingﬁeld , 1983 ; Ball , 1993 ) . In seasonally - breeding birds long - day photoperiods have a stimulatory effect on reproduction ( reviewed in Dawson et al . , 2001 ) . In many species this termination of reproduction by the onset of photorefractoriness is absolute and may occur even prior to the summer solstice . In other species that breed opportunisti - cally photorefractoriness may be reduced or absent , but even in these species a photoperiod response may occur ( e . g . Hahn , 1998 ; Bentley et al . , 2000 ) . Seasonal changes in the brain of songbirds primarily occur in response to seasonal changes in photoperiod that drive seasonal changes in gonadal steroid hormones ( Tramontin and Brenowitz , 2000 ) . This has been most extensively studied in the song - control system of songbirds . Indeed , the song - control nucleus HVC exhibits extreme seasonal plasticity ( Brenowitz , 2004 , 2008 ) and testoster - one treatment is sufﬁcient to induce an increase in HVC size ( Brenowitz and Lent , 2002 ) . However , photoperiod can also have effects on HVC that are independent of gonadal steroids ( e . g . Bernard et al . , 1997 ; Hall and MacDougall - Shackleton , 2012 ; Robertson et al . , 2014 ) . These gonad independent effects may potentially be driven by other hormones such as melatonin ( Bentley , 2001 ) . The consensus view , however , is that much of the seasonal plasticity observed in the song - control system results from seasonal changes in hormones that are driven by photoperiod and other factors . How photoperiod and hormones may drive seasonal changes in the avian hippocampus and hippocampus - dependent behaviour is less clear ( see below ) . 2 . Food - storing birds 2 . 1 . Hippocampal neurogenesis Like most members of the chickadee and tit family , the Paridae , black - capped chickadees ( Poecile atricapillus ) store food intensely during the fall and winter and much less frequently during spring and summer ( Brodin , 2005 ; Sherry and Hoshooley , 2007 ) , although the details of this annual pattern can be variable ( Pravosudov , 2006 ) . Some properties of the hippocampus of chickadees , likewise , change seasonally in a fashion that is correlated with the seasonal occurrence of food - storing behaviour . Anat Barnea and Fernando Nottebohm colour banded black - capped chickadees , injected them with [ H 3 ] thymidine to label dividing cells , and then released them back into the wild ( Barnea and Nottebohm , 1994 ) . They were able to recapture 27 birds six weeks later . Because the initial injection of [ H 3 ] thymidine had occurred at different times of year , and because six weeks allowed enough time for cells that initially divided in the subependymal zone ( Fig . 1 ) to migrate into the hippocampus and mature into a neuronal phenotype , the results gave a picture of seasonal hippocampal neuronal recruitment in the wild in this food - storer . Chickadees injected in October had signiﬁcantly more labelled neurons in the hippocam - pus at re - capture six weeks later than birds injected in August or February – March . The total number of neurons in the hippocampus did not vary seasonally . The results also showed many fewer labelled neurons in the hyperpallium apicale ( HA ) adjacent to the hippocampus than in the hippocampus and no seasonal pattern in the labelling of HA cells . A comparison with other chickadees recaptured after intervals longer than 6 weeks showed that the number of surviving labelled cells decreased substantially over subsequent weeks and that this effect was greater in the rostral than in the middle or caudal hippocampus . This indicates that hip - pocampal neurogenesis in chickadees is part of a process of neuro - nal turnover rather than a progressive increase in the number of neurons in the hippocampus ( Barnea and Nottebohm , 1994 ) . The peak in 6 - week survival of new neurons produced in October corresponds roughly to the early part of the food storing season for chickadees , suggesting that this peak in neuronal recruit - ment might be related to hippocampal involvement in caching and cache retrieval . Food caching by chickadees begins in early autumn and continues through the winter . Barnea and Nottebohm’s ( 1994 ) results show that new neurons born in October are more likely to survive into November or early December than new neurons born at other times of year . Chickadees and other food - storing birds retrieve cached food by remembering the spatial locations of caches ( Sherry , 1984 ; Vander Wall , 1982 ; Shettleworth and Krebs , 1982 ; Sherry et al . , 1981 ; Kamil and Balda , 1985 ) and memory for cache sites is hippocampus - dependent ( Sherry and Vaccarino , 1989 ; Krushinskaya , 1966 ; Hampton and Shettleworth , 1996 ) . Food - stor - ing birds have a larger hippocampus than birds that do not store food ( Sherry et al . , 1989 ; Krebs et al . , 1989 ; Lucas et al . , 2004 ) . There are , however , a variety of other seasonal changes occurring in autumn that might affect the chickadee brain in addition to food storing ( Barnea and Pravosudov , 2011 ) . Chickadees’ social system , home range , diet , and the appearance of their habitat , for example , all change in autumn at about the same time food storing begins . To determine whether seasonal change in hippocampal neuro - genesis was speciﬁcally associated with food storing , we compared two species of birds , house sparrows ( Passer domesticus ) and black - capped chickadees which both experience seasonal change of var - ious kinds in autumn , but only one of which – chickadees – stores food ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2007 ) . Neither house sparrows nor chickadees are migratory and in fall , both species experience a change in their social system as breeding pairs form dominance - structured winter ﬂocks ( Smith , 1991 ; Lowther and Cink , 2006 ) . The home range of individuals of both species also increases at this time . Their diets change as insect food becomes less abundant , and the appearance of the habitat changes as deciduous trees lose their leaves and snow cover becomes more frequent . We injected birds with the cell division marker bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) at two times of year , October – November and February – April , held them in captivity for 6 weeks in large outdoor aviaries exposed to natu - ral photoperiod and temperatures , and then counted the number of labelled neurons in the hippocampus and hyperpallium apicale . The period of time between injection and sacriﬁce was thus the 160 D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 same as in the Barnea and Nottebohm ( 1994 ) study , but birds were held in captivity outdoors between injection and sacriﬁce , not released back into the wild . We found that chickadees had much higher levels of neuronal recruitment into the hippocampus than house sparrows but there was no seasonal change in neuronal recruitment in either species . There was no species difference or seasonal difference in neuronal recruitment into HA . We also found that chickadees had a signiﬁ - cantly larger hippocampus and signiﬁcantly more hippocampal neurons than house sparrows , even though house sparrows are lar - ger birds ( mean weight 27 . 4 g compared to 10 . 6 g for chickadees ) with a signiﬁcantly larger telencephalon . Unexpectedly , chickadees in this study had a larger hippocampus and a greater number of hippocampal neurons in February – April than in October , evidence against the idea that seasonal change in the hippocampus is specif - ically associated with food storing . These results show that food - storing chickadees have greater recruitment of new neurons into the hippocampus ( and a larger hippocampus ) than a non - storing species that shares some fea - tures of habitat and natural history with chickadees , but the results gave no indication of a seasonal change in the recruitment of new neurons into the hippocampus in chickadees . To better understand the seasonal pattern of hippocampal neu - rogenesis in black - capped chickadees in the wild , we collected chickadees at four times of year ( October , January , April and July ) , injected them with BrdU on the day following capture and held them in captivity for observation of food - storing behaviour for one week before sacriﬁce ( Hoshooley et al . , 2007 ) . One week allows enough time for newly divided BrdU - labelled cells to move out of the subependymal zone into the hippocampus . We found the greatest number of labelled neurons in the hippocampus in January , an intermediate number in April and the fewest in October and July ( Hoshooley et al . , 2007 ) . There were no signiﬁcant differences among the four groups in the number of BrdU - labelled cells found within the subependymal zone , indicating that mitotic activity did not vary seasonally . Instead , survival of new cells in the hippocampus was the neurogenic process that varied seasonally , in this case exhibiting a peak in January . These results are much more like those obtained originally by Barnea and Nottebohm ( 1994 ) than those we obtained in our comparison of house sparrows and chickadees ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2007 ) but with a notably offset maximum in neurogenesis : January instead of October . Recruitment of new neurons into the hippocampus – that is , migration , differentiation , incorporation and survival of new neu - rons – is the critical variable in these studies because new undiffer - entiated cells are generated in the subependymal zone at about the same rate year - round ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2004 ) . Neurogenesis is a multi - step process . New cells are produced by the division of stem cells that have many characteristics of glial cells in the sube - pendymal zone of the avian brain and migrate out of this region into forebrain sites . Some follow radial glial processes away from the ventricle into telencephalic brain areas , others migrate tangen - tially , parallel to the ventricular wall ( Garcia - Verdugo et al . , 2002 ; Doetsch , 2003 ) . Seasonal differences in hippocampal neurogenesis are thus seasonal differences in recruitment , not seasonal differ - ences in the birth of new neurons . Cellular and functional explana - tions for seasonal neurogenesis must therefore account for why new neurons are more likely to survive and incorporate into the hippocampus at certain times of year than others . Although seasonal changes in neuron survival and incorporation are loosely correlated with seasonal changes in food storing , this relationship has been found to be variable across studies : one report of greatest 6 - week survival of neurons produced in October ( Barnea and Nottebohm , 1994 ) , one of greatest 1 - week survival of neurons pro - duced in January ( Hoshooley et al . , 2007 ) and one of no seasonal maximum in neuronal survival at all ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2007 ) . As described earlier , photoperiod drives the changes in gonadal steroid hormones that cause seasonal change in the song - control system of the songbird brain . Photoperiodism in black - capped chickadees is much less studied than in other songbird species , such as European starlings . Black - capped chickadees do develop absolute photorefractoriness ; that is , following extended photosti - mulation with long - day photoperiods birds become insensitive to the stimulatory effects of long days and regress their gonads ( MacDougall - Shackleton et al . , 2003a , b ) . At this time even 24 h light will not further stimulate reproductive function ( Phillmore et al . , 2005 ) and like many other songbirds chickadees appear to require exposure to short - day photoperiods in order to reinstate photosensitivity . Although the timing of the transition from a pho - torefractory to photosensitive state in free - living chickadees is not known , the observed peaks in hippocampal neurogenesis reported above all occur in autumn or mid - winter when the photophase is short . At this time chickadees have completely regressed gonads ( Phillmore et al . , 2006 ) and elevated plasma melatonin levels ( B . Kriengwatana and S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton , unpublished data ) . There is , thus , an association between hippocampal plasticity , low levels of sex steroids , and elevated levels of melatonin . Clarifying what role , if any , these hormones play in the seasonal changes observed in hippocampus , however , requires further study . 2 . 2 . Hippocampal volume At about the same time Barnea and Nottebohm ( 1994 ) were examining seasonal neurogenesis in food - storing chickadees , Tom Smulders et al . ( 1995 ) were investigating seasonal change in the size of the hippocampus in chickadees in the wild . They found that the hippocampus reached a maximum size in October , which , like the maximum 6 - week survival of neurons produced in October described by Barnea and Nottebohm ( 1994 ) , corresponds roughly to the early part of the food - storing season . The septum , a major efferent path from the hippocampus , follows the same pattern of seasonal change in size ( Shifﬂet et al . , 2002 ) . The increase in hippocampal volume in October is accompanied by an increase in the total number of hippocampal neurons ( Smulders et al . , 2000 ) . In both adults and juveniles more large neurons occur in the hippocampus in October than at other times of years , and more small cells – some of which are neurons and others glia – are likewise found in the hippocampus in October . Subsequent studies of wild - caught birds produced varying results . In one study , we found no difference in hippocampal vol - ume of chickadees among the months of October , November , Jan - uary and February / March ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2004 ) . In another , we found no difference in hippocampal size among birds collected in October , January , April and July ( Hoshooley et al . , 2007 ) . In a ﬁnal study , we found that chickadees had a larger hip - pocampus from February to April than from October to November ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2007 ) . Our birds and those collected by Smulders et al . ( 1995 ) came from the same latitude ( Ithaca NY 42 (cid:3) 26 0 N ; London ON 42 (cid:3) 59 0 N ) and the same temperate North American mixed forest region . It is possible that differences among these studies are the result of sampling effects . The samples collected could , for example , contain different proportions of age classes . Alternatively , the seasonal pattern in both hippocampal neurogenesis and hippocampal volume may vary from year to year at the same latitude and in the same habitat . Many factors affect food storing by chickadees and tits . Food availability , food predict - ability , winter temperature , population size and many other factors could potentially affect how much food is stored in a partic - ular season . If food - storing experience affects neurogenesis and size of the hippocampus , then year - to - year variation in these neuroanatomical variables could be the outcome ( discussed fur - ther in Section 2 . 4 ) . D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 161 2 . 3 . Photoperiod and the hippocampus Incorporation of new neurons into the song control nuclei of songbirds shows a clear seasonal pattern and is under photoperiod control ( Tramontin and Brenowitz , 2000 ) . It might therefore seem likely that seasonal recruitment of new neurons into the hippo - campus is also under photoperiod control , but this turns out not to be the case . Experimental manipulations of photoperiod – switching birds from long summer day lengths to fall day lengths or vice versa – affect food storing behaviour but do not result in change in the hippocampus . 2 . 3 . 1 . Photoperiod effects on food storing Shettleworth et al . ( 1995 ) compared food hoarding in groups of captive chickadees removed from the wild at two times of year . They found that for birds captured in early spring , holding birds for six weeks at a long day summer photoperiod ( 18 : 6 h L : D at 22 (cid:3) C ) resulted in more food storing when these birds were then placed on a short day winter photoperiod ( 8 : 16 h L : D at 17 (cid:3) C ) than did holding birds throughout the experiment on a short day winter photoperiod ( 8 : 16 h L : D at 17 (cid:3) C ) . That is , experiencing a summer photoperiod as birds would normally do before the onset of the fall food - storing season resulted in greater storing when birds were then exposed to a winter photoperiod , compared to experiencing a continuous winter photoperiod . Birds brought into captivity in November initially stored more food than birds in the previously described groups . For these birds , holding them for 11 weeks on a short day winter photoperiod ( 6 : 18 h L : D at 18 (cid:3) C ) resulted in no difference in food storing when the birds were then placed on a long day summer photoperiod ( 16 : 8 h L : D at 22 (cid:3) C ) , compared to birds held on long days ( 16 : 8 h L : D at 22 (cid:3) C ) throughout the experiment ( Shettleworth et al . , 1995 ) . This sequence of short followed by long day lengths would normally precede spring and might be expected to cause a decrease in food storing , but this did not occur . Some manipula - tions of photoperiod , speciﬁcally moving birds from long days to short days , can thus affect food storing while others do not . It is also possible , however , that the temperature at which the birds were held could have affected these results ( Shettleworth et al . , 1995 ) . We manipulated photoperiod to simulate the increase in day length that might be expected to terminate food storing in black - capped chickadees in spring ( MacDougall - Shackleton et al . , 2003a , b ) . To ensure that birds were in the appropriate photosensi - tive state to respond to changes in day length , we held some birds on long summer days ( 19 : 5 h L : D ) to establish photorefractoriness and other birds on short winter days ( 8 . 75 : 15 . 25 h L : D ) to establish photosensitivity . Half of these photosensitive birds were then photostimulated by a transfer to a long day ( 19 : 5 h L : D ) photope - riod . We conﬁrmed that the photostimulation manipulation was successful by determining that it produced an increase in gonad size in both males and females . We found , however , that short days resulted in more food storing than long days , regardless of photo - periodic state or gonadal development . That is , photorefractory birds on long days throughout the experiment and photosensitive birds switched to long days stored relatively little food compared to birds held on short day lengths ( Fig . 2 ) . It is possible that day length has the effect it has not because it induces photoperiodically - controlled physiological changes but simply because short days provide less opportunity for feeding and this causes birds to increase their food storing . Birds may interpret a shorter period of food availability in the day as a less reliable food resource and hedge their bets by food storing ( Hurly , 1992 ; Lucas and Walter , 1991 ; McNamara et al . , 1990 ; Sherry , 2014 ; Pravosudov and Grubb , 1997 ; Lucas et al . , 1993 ) . This seems not to be the case however . Karpouzos et al . ( 2005 ) manipulated food availability and day length independently and found that while these factors inﬂuenced body weight and fat scores in black - capped chickadees , making food available for only 9 h on 15 : 9 h L : D or 9 : 15 h L : D photoperiods did not increase food storing . Similarly , making food unpredictable by randomly varying when during the day it will be available , does not affect the amount of food stored ( Pravosudov and Clayon , 2001 ) . Making food unpredictable in this way does increase the accuracy of cache retrieval , although it is not clear whether this is the result of increased attention , motivation or memory . There was no effect observed on the size of the hippocampus or the total number of hippocampal neurons in these birds ( Pravosudov et al . , 2002 ) . 2 . 3 . 2 . Photoperiod effects on the hippocampus Taken together , the results described above suggest that photo - period can affect some aspects of food storing behaviour , particu - larly its onset in the fall ( Shettleworth et al . , 1995 ) . What about the hippocampus ? Krebs et al . ( 1995 ) followed a procedure very similar to that of Shettleworth et al . ( 1995 ) and found similar effects of photoperiod on food storing ( birds on short day photope - riods stored more if they had previously experienced a long day photoperiod ) but there was no effect of this photoperiod manipu - lation on the volume of the hippocampus . MacDougall - Shackleton et al . ( 2003a , b ) found , likewise , that the photoperiod manipula - tions they performed had no effect on hippocampus volume . Hoshooley et al . ( 2005 ) maintained birds on a short day photope - riod ( 8 : 16 h L : D ) for several months , then switched all birds to long days ( 15 : 9 h L : D ) . This manipulation was conﬁrmed to induce gonadal growth . When these birds became photorefractory after several months , half were switched to short days ( 8 : 16 h L : D ) while the others remained on long days . These manipulations had no effect on the size of the hippocampus or recruitment of new neurons into the hippocampus ( Hoshooley et al . , 2005 ) . Thus photoperiod manipulations that successfully induce changes in food - storing behaviour have been found not to cause changes in the hippocampus . 2 . 4 . Experience and the Hippocampus What should be made of the marked variability in the observed pattern of seasonal change in hippocampal neurogenesis and the absence of photoperiod effects on the hippocampus ? One N u m S eed S t o r ed 2 1 2 3 4 Fig . 2 . Photosensitive birds ( h ) maintained on a short day photoperiod store more food than photorefractory ( d ) birds maintained on long days . Photostimulated birds ( N ) decrease their storing when switched from short days to long days . Phases 1 and 2 refer to initial and ﬁnal photoperiod conditions for birds held continuously on short days , continuously on long days , or switched from short to long days . Reprinted with permission from MacDougall - Shackleton et al . ( 2003b ) . 162 D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 possibility is that food - storing behaviour itself inﬂuences hippo - campal neuronal recruitment and that year - to - year variation in food - storing behaviour is the cause of the observed differences between studies . In the song control system , singing behaviour and the neural activation of singing increases neuronal recruitment and the size of song nuclei ( Alvarez - Borda and Nottebohm , 2002 ; Larson et al . , 2013 ; Sartor and Ball , 2005 ; Ball et al . , 2004 ) . If storing or retrieving caches has similar effects , one would predict that manipulating food - caching behaviour should drive changes in the hippocampus . Food - caching behaviour has been shown to affect development of the hippocampus in young marsh tits ( Clayton , 1995 ) , but it does not appear to affect the size of the hippocampus in adult food storers ( Cristol , 1996 ) . Captivity reduces the size of the hippocampus in food - storing and non - storing birds ( Smulders et al . , 2000 ; LaDage et al . , 2009 ; Tarr et al . , 2009 ; Freas et al . , 2013 ) . Holding birds in captivity could be the reason that a mixed pattern of results was found in the stud - ies of seasonal change in hippocampal volume described earlier . If captivity reduces hippocampal size , it could attenuate naturally occurring variation in hippocampal size and mask seasonal change . Interestingly , captivity reduces the size of the hippocampus with - out affecting the number of hippocampal neurons ( Freas et al . , 2013 ; Roth et al . , 2012 ; LaDage et al . , 2009 ) . Captivity can probably be considered an enforced reduction in food storing behaviour and so may provide evidence that food - storing experience has effects on the hippocampus ( as well as introducing a confounding variable to studies of the avian hippocampus LaDage et al . , 2009 ; Smulders et al . , 2000 ; Day et al . , 2008 ; Roth et al . , 2012 ) . In the ﬁrst descrip - tion of seasonal hippocampal neurogenesis in food - storing birds Barnea and Nottebohm ( 1994 ) found that captive birds showed much reduced levels of neurogenesis ( but still exhibited seasonal variation in rates of neurogenesis ) . We found that the number of BrdU labelled cells in the chickadee hippocampus decreased over a period of weeks in captivity as the time between injection of BrdU and sacriﬁce increased ( Hoshooley and Sherry , 2004 ) . It is also possible that the effect of captivity on neurogenesis and hippocampal volume is caused by stress . Both acute and chronic stress reduce cell proliferation in the hippocampus of mammals ( Schoenfeld and Gould , 2012 ) . In food - storing mountain chickadees ( Poecile gambeli ) , however , elevation of corticosterone of approximately 140 % above baseline for 49 days using corticoste - rone implants resulted in no difference in hippocampal volume , neuron number or ventricular cell proliferation rates between implanted birds and controls ( Pravosudov and Omanska , 2005 ) . Roth et al . ( 2012 ) found that chickadees that were hand - raised in captivity had the same numbers of hippocampal neurons and the same rates of hippocampal neurogenesis as wild birds , which may indicate that stress is the cause of observed reductions in neu - rogenesis in adults birds captured in the wild and brought into captivity . Exercise might also be involved in the captivity effects described above . Recent evidence from European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) indicates that exercise increases neurogenesis in birds ( Hall et al . , 2014 ) as it does in mammals ( van Praag , 2008 ) . Starlings that ﬂew in a wind tunnel for several hours per day for 15 days showed elevated hippocampal neurogenesis compared to control birds that did not ﬂy . Vitamin E has a neuroprotective effect in the rat hippocampus ( Ferri et al . , 2003 ) . In starlings , enriching the starlings’ diet with vitamin E increased hippocampal neurogen - esis in birds that did not exercise but decreased hippocampal neu - rogenesis in birds that did . On the whole , it appears quite possible that the variation among studies of seasonal change in the hippo - campus of food - storing parids is the result of experience - dependent effects of several different kinds , including the intensity of food - storing behaviour , and stress or the amount of exercise in captivity . 3 . Brood parasites There are ﬁve brood - parasitic species of cowbirds in the genus Molothrus in the New World blackbird family Icteridae . Females of the most common North American cowbird , the brown - headed cowbird ( M . ater ) , search for host nests unassisted by males . Because they lay their eggs very early in the day ( Rothstein et al . , 1984 ; Scott , 1991 ) , they are thought to lay in nests they have dis - covered one to several days previously . Female brown - headed cowbirds perform better than males on tests of spatial ability ( Guigueno et al . , 2014 ) . Females also track the number of eggs in potential host nests in order to lay before the host has completed its clutch and begun incubation ( White et al . , 2009 ) . The shiny cowbird ( Molothrus bonariensis ) is a generalist parasite like the brown - headed cowbird and is found in much of South America , the Caribbean and parts of Florida . Female shiny cowbirds perform better than males in a food search task in which the correct loca - tion is indicated with a contrasting colour cue but do not differ from males when the same task must be solved by remembering a spatial location ( Astié et al . , 1998 ) . Femalebrown - headedcowbirdshavealargerhippocampusthan males , a sex difference not found in another closely - related Icterid , the red - winged blackbird ( Sherry et al . , 1993 ) . Similar sex differ - ences in the hippocampus have been found in South American cow - birds , associated with the sex difference in search for host nests ( Reboreda et al . , 1996 ) . In the generalist parasite , the shiny cowbird , only females search for host nests and females were found to have a larger hippocampus than males . In a specialist parasite , the scream - ing cowbird ( Molothrus rufoaxillaris ) , in which both males and females search for host nests , there was no sex difference in relative hippocampal size . In the non - parasitic bay - winged cowbird ( Agelaioides badius ) , no sex difference in hippocampal size occurred . This result – a sex difference in hippocampal size associated with search for host nests by females that is absent in two other cowbird species – was not observed , however , in a subsequent study of the same three species ( Nair - Roberts et al . , 2006 ) . There may be seasonal change in the size of the cowbird hippo - campus ( Clayton et al . , 1997 ) . Clayton et al . ( 1997 ) found that both males and females of the generalist shiny cowbird had a larger hip - pocampus in the breeding season than in the non - breeding season and females had a relatively larger hippocampus than males . No statistical interaction between sex and season is reported but the authors state that a sex difference in relative hippocampal size present during breeding is absent in non - breeding . Both males and females of the specialist parasite , the screaming cowbird , had a larger hippocampus in the breeding season than in the non - breeding season but there was no difference in hippocampus size between the sexes . A seasonal change in relative size of the hippocampus such as this could account for the difference in results , described above , obtained by Reboreda et al . ( 1996 ) and Nair - Roberts et al . ( 2006 ) . Clayton et al . ( 1997 ) are cautious in their conclusions regarding seasonal differences , however , noting that seasonal comparisons of this kind can be confounded by seasonal differences in the populations from which samples are drawn . The non - breeding population , for example , may contain more young birds with a developmentally different hippocampus . Nevertheless , these results do provide some indication that there may be seasonal change in the hippocampus that is associated , like food storing , with seasonal change in the cognitively demanding and possibly hippocampus - dependent behaviour of searching for and remembering host nests . 4 . Reproduction Srivastava and Singh ( 2012 ) have reported substantial increases in the thickness of dendrites and the number of dendritic spines of D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 163 hippocampal neurons in breeding compared to non - breeding con - dition in the ringneck parrot ( Psittacula krameri ) . They examined Golgi - stained pyramidal , multipolar , bipolar and unipolar cells in the APH region of the hippocampus and found the dendrites of all four cells types to be thicker in birds collected during the breed - ing season . Dendritic spine density was , similarly , elevated in most cells types in breeding birds ( Srivastava and Singh , 2012 ) . A com - parable change in the density of apical dendritic spines of CA1 pyramidal cells over the estrous cycle – speciﬁcally , lowest spine density during estrus – has been observed in rats ( Woolley et al . , 1990 ) . The spacing between hippocampal cells also increases dur - ing breeding in the ringneck parrot , perhaps as a consequence of the change in density of dendritic spines ( Singh and Srivastava , 2013 ) . Srivastava and Singh ( 2012 ) note that there are a variety of changes in behaviour , cognition , and affect associated with breeding in birds that may recruit the functions of the hippocam - pus or alter hippocampal structure . 5 . Migration Changes in the hippocampus are associated with migration in a number of species . Some of these effects appear to be a conse - quence of migratory experience rather than recurring seasonal phenomena of the kind seen in food - storing birds or in association with reproduction . The available evidence , nevertheless , shows that migration is associated with hippocampal plasticity in birds and may provide avenues for further research on the causes of sea - sonal change in the hippocampus . Healy et al . ( 1996 ) found that age and migratory experience both produced an increase in relative hippocampal size in garden warblers ( Sylvia borin ) and that older experienced birds had more hippocampal neurons than younger inexperienced birds . In non - migratory Sardinian warblers ( Sylvia melanocephala ) age did not affect hippocampal size . Migratory and non - migratory subspecies of the dark - eyed junco ( Junco hyemalis hyemalis and J . h . carolinen - sis , respectively ) do not differ in the size of the hippocampus but migrants have a greater density of hippocampal neurons ( Cristol et al . , 2003 ) . Hippocampal volume was found to be greater in migratory Gambel’s white - crowned sparrow ( Zonotrichia leuchophrys gambelii ) than in non - migratory Nuttall’s white - crowned sparrow ( Z . l . nuttalli Pravosudov et al . , 2006 ) . As with garden warblers , age also affected hippocampal size . Adults had a larger hippocampus than juveniles in both subspecies , adult migra - tory Gambel’s had a larger hippocampus than adult non - migratory Nuttall’s , and within juveniles there was a larger left but not right hippocampus in migratory Gambel’s compared to non - migratory Nuttall’s . Adult Gambel’s also had more neurons in the right ( but not the left ) hippocampus compared to Nuttall’s ( Pravosudov et al . , 2006 ) . Finally , adult migratory Gambel’s white - crowned sparrows were found to have a greater level of neurogenesis than non - migratory Nuttall’s white - crowned sparrows while no differ - ence was observed in juveniles ( LaDage et al . , 2011 ) . This effect , interestingly , appears to be due to a developmental decrease in neurogenesis in non - migrants from the juvenile to the adult stage that does not occur in migrants . There has been no research testing speciﬁcally for annual var - iation in the hippocampus of migratory birds . Effects observed in the studies described above are consistent with the hypothesis that , in addition to changes in the hippocampus due to age , migratory experience causes a one - time change in the hippo - campus that persists throughout adulthood ( and such a change is , naturally , absent in non - migrants ) . It would be valuable to determine whether there are annual cyclic changes in the hippo - campus of migrants in advance of , during , or following migration . 6 . Seasonal change in the mammalian hippocampus A variety of rodents exhibit naturally occurring seasonal change in the hippocampus ( Yaskin , 2011 ) . For voles and shrews , this can involve a reduction of 30 % or more in the total size of the hippo - campus in winter , a change that occurs in other forebrain regions , too , but primarily affects the hippocampus ( Yaskin , 2011 ) . The summer increase in size of the hippocampus is correlated with an increase in spatial range , especially in males ( e . g . Yaskin , 2013 ) . Rates of neurogenesis also vary seasonally in wild popula - tions of voles , with females showing higher levels of cell prolifera - tion than males and higher levels during non - breeding than during breeding ( Galea and McEwen , 1999 ; Omerod and Galea , 2003 ) . In Richardson’s ground squirrel ( Urocitellus richardsonii ) the size of the dentate gyrus and the rate of hippocampal neurogenesis both vary seasonally ( Burger et al . , 2014 ) but such seasonal effects do not occur in grey squirrels ( Lavenex et al . , 2000a , b ) . Hormonal control of neurogenesis in the rodent hippocampus has been extensively investigated ( reviewed in Galea et al . , 2013 ) . Estrogens and androgens affect the hippocampus in a sex - speciﬁc fashion . Estradiol increases cell proliferation and cell survival in female rats . It has little effect on male rats or mice but can increase cell survival in male voles during a speciﬁc limited phase of cell maturation . Androgens increase cell survival in male rodents but have no effect on cell proliferation ( Galea et al . , 2013 ) . The hormonal control of adult neurogenesis in mammals , par - ticularly rodents , presents a complex picture and relatively few studies speciﬁcally examine seasonal change in the hippocampus in wild populations . What is clear , however , is that hormones interact in a complex fashion with experience , sex and season in the regulation of naturally - occurring change in the mammalian hippocampus and that the potential for investigating hormonal control of seasonal change in the avian hippocampus has been , by comparison , largely untapped . 7 . Conclusions The avian hippocampus undergoes seasonal change most clearly in food - storing birds , although it has also been described in brood parasites and occurs in association with breeding in some species . Changes in the hippocampus are associated with migration , too , but it is not clear whether or not these changes are a recurring sea - sonal phenomena . Photoperiod , which has a strong and pervasive effect on the hormonal control of seasonal change in the song con - trol system of songbirds , has been shown to have no effect on sea - sonal change in the hippocampus of food - storing birds although it can induce change in food - storing behaviour . This photoperiod independence suggests that seasonal change in the hippocampus of food - storing birds may be a consequence of food - storing behav - iour itself . Year - to - year variation in the timing of seasonal change in hippocampus size and hippocampal neurogenesis also supports this suggestion . The hypothesis that seasonal variation in the hip - pocampus of food - storing birds is a consequence of seasonal varia - tion in food storing is , however , by no means proven . Patterns of seasonal variation in the hippocampus are highly variable and are found in some properties of the hippocampus and not others . A number of factors associated with captivity , including the amount of food storing behaviour that can occur in captivity , stress , and exercise also complicate interpretation of results on seasonal change in the hippocampus of food storing birds . In addition , although both food storing and seasonal change in the hippocam - pus tend to occur in fall and winter rather than spring and summer , the temporal relation between them is not strong . Hormonal control of change in the hippocampus has been extensively examined in mammals , particularly changes associated 164 D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 with the reproductive cycle of male and female rodents . Although food - storing occurs in the non - breeding season in most food - storing birds and there are no sex differences in food - storing or the hippocampus in black - capped chickadees ( Petersen and Sherry , 1996 ) , the avian hippocampus is rich in aromatase and both estrogen and estradiol cause structural change in the avian hippocampus and hippocampus - dependent behaviour of birds . Hormonal control of hippocampal plasticity in mammals may provide a useful model and source of hypotheses for examining seasonal hippocampal plasticity in birds . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Tom Smulders , Vladimir Pravosudov , and Liisa Galea for their many helpful comments on the manu - script . Preparation of this paper was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Discovery Grants 105542 to DFS and 217381 to SMS . References Alvarez - Borda , B . , Nottebohm , F . , 2002 . Gonads and singing play separate , additive roles in new neuron recruitment in adult canary brain . J . Neurosci . 22 , 8684 – 8690 . Astié , A . A . , Kacelnik , A . , Reboreda , J . C . , 1998 . Sexual differences in memory in shiny cowbirds . Anim . Cognition 1 , 77 – 82 . Atoji , Y . , Wild , M . , 2006 . Anatomy of the avian hippocampal formation . Rev . Neurosci . 17 , 3 – 15 . Bailey , D . J . , Ma , C . , Soma , K . K . , Saldanha , C . J . , 2013 . Inhibition of hippocampal aromatization impairs spatial memory performance in a male songbird . Neuroendocrinology 154 , 4707 – 4714 . Baker , J . R . , 1938 . The evolution of breeding seasons . In : de Beer , G . R . ( Ed . ) , Evolution : Essays on Aspects of Evolutionary Biology . Clarendon Press , Oxford . Ball , G . F . , 1993 . The neural integration of environmental information by seasonally breeding birds . Am . Zool . 33 , 185 – 199 . Ball , G . F . , Auger , C . J . , Bernard , D . J . , Charlier , T . D . , Sartor , J . J . , Riters , L . V . , Balthazart , J . , 2004 . Seasonal plasticity in the song control system : Multiple brain sites of steroid hormone action and the importance of variation in song behaviour . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1016 , 586 – 610 . Barnea , A . , Nottebohm , F . , 1994 . Seasonal recruitment of hippocampal neurons in adult free - ranging black - capped chickadees . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 11217 – 11221 . Barnea , A . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2011 . Birds as a model to study adult neurogenesis : bridging evolutionary , comparative , and neuroethological approaches . Eur . J . Neurosci . 34 , 884 – 907 . Bentley , G . E . , 2001 . Unraveling the enigma : the rolemelatonininseasonalprocesses in birds . Mircrosc . Res . Tech . 53 , 63 – 71 . Bentley , G . E . , Spar , B . D . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Hahn , T . P . , Ball , G . F . , 2000 . Photoperiodic regulation of the reproductive axis in male zebra ﬁnches , Taeniopygia guttata . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 117 , 449 – 455 . Bernard , D . J . , Wilson , F . E . , Ball , G . F . , 1997 . Testis - dependent and - independent effects of photoperiod on volumes of song control nuclei in American tree sparrows ( Spizella arborea ) . Brain Res . 760 , 163 – 169 . Bingman , V . P . , Bagnoli , P . , Ioalè , P . , Casini , G . , 1984 . Homing behavior of pigeons after telencephalic ablations . Brain Behav . Evol . 24 , 94 – 108 . Bingman , V . P . , Ioalè , P . , Casini , G . , Bagnoli , P . , 1990 . The avian hippocampus : evidence for a role in the development of the homing pigeon navigational map . Behav . Neurosci . 104 , 906 – 911 . Brenowitz , E . A . , 2004 . Plasticity of the adult avian song control system . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1016 , 560 – 585 . Brenowitz , E . A . , 2008 . Plasticity of the song control system in adult birds . In : Ziegler , H . P . , Marler , P . ( Eds . ) , Neuroscience of Birdsong . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Brenowitz , E . A . , Lent , K . , 2002 . Act locally and think globally : intracerebral testosterone implants induce seasonal - like growth of adult avian song control circuits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 12421 – 12426 . Broadbent , N . J . , Colombo , M . , 2000 . Visual and spatial discrimination behavior following hippocampal lesions in pigeons . Psychobiology 28 , 463 – 475 . Brodin , A . , 2005 . Hippocampal volume does not correlate with food - hoarding rates in the black - capped chickadee ( Poecile atricapillus ) and the willow tit ( Parus montanus ) . Auk 122 , 819 – 828 . Burger , D . K . , Gulbrandsen , T . , Saucier , D . M . , Iwaniuk , A . N . , 2014 . The effects of season and sex on dentate gyrus size and neurogenesis in a wild rodent , Richardson’s ground squirrel ( Urocitellus richardsonii ) . Neuroscience 272 , 240 – 251 . Clayton , N . S . , 1995 . The neuroethological development of food - storing memory : a case of use it , or lose it ! Behav . Brain Res . 70 , 95 – 102 . Clayton , N . S . , Reboreda , J . C . , Kacelnik , A . , 1997 . Seasonal changes of hippocampus volume in parasitic cowbirds . Behav . Process . 41 , 237 – 243 . Colombo , M . , Swain , N . , Harper , D . , Alsop , B . , 1997 . The effects of hippocampal and area parahippocampalis lesions in pigeons : I . Delayed matching to sample . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 50B , 149 – 171 . Cornelius , J . M . , Boswell , T . , Jenni - Eiermann , S . , Breuner , C . W . , Ramenofsky , M . , 2013 . Contributions of endocrinology to the migration life history of birds . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 190 , 47 – 60 . Cristol , D . A . , 1996 . Food storing does not affect hippocampal volume in experienced adult willow tits . Behav . Brain Res . 81 , 233 – 236 . Cristol , D . A . , Reynolds , E . B . , Leclerc , J . E . , Donner , A . H . , Farabough , C . S . , Ziegenfus , C . W . S . , 2003 . Migratory dark - eyed juncos , Junco hyemalis , have better spatial memory and denser hippocampal neurons than nonmigratory conspeciﬁcs . Anim . Behav . 66 , 317 – 328 . Dawson , A . , King , V . M . , Bentley , G . E . , Ball , G . F . , 2001 . Photoperiodic control of seasonality in birds . J . Biol . Rhythms 16 , 365 – 380 . Day , L . B . , Guerra , M . , Schlinger , B . A . , Rothstein , S . I . , 2008 . Sex differences in the effects of captivity on hippocampus size in brown - headed cowbirds ( Molothrus ater obscurus ) . Behav . Neurosci . 122 , 527 – 534 . Doetsch , F . , 2003 . The glial identity of neural stem cells . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 1127 – 1134 . Erichsen , J . T . , Bingman , V . P . , Krebs , J . R . , 1991 . The distribution of neuropeptides in thedorsomedial telencephalon of thepigeon ( Columba livia ) : abasis for regional subdivisions . J . Comp . Neurol . 314 , 478 – 492 . Ferri , P . , Cecchini , T . , Ciaroni , S . , Ambrogini , P . , Cuppini , R . , Santi , S . , Benedetti , S . , Pagliarani , S . , Del Grande , P . , Papa , S . , 2003 . Vitamin E affects cell death in adult rat dentate gyrus . J . Neurocytol . 32 . Freas , C . A . , Bingman , K . , LaDage , L . D . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2013 . Untangling elevation - related differences in the hippocampus in food - caching Mountain chickadees : the effect of a uniform captive environment . Brain Behav . Evol . 82 , 199 – 209 . Gagliardo , A . , Ioalè , P . , Odetti , F . , Kahn , M . C . , Bingman , V . P . , 2004 . Hippocampal lesions do not disrupt navigational map retention in homing pigeons under conditions when map acquisition is hippocampal dependent . Behav . Brain Res . 153 , 35 – 42 . Gahr , M . , Güttinger , H . - R . , Kroodsma , D . E . , 1993 . Estrogen receptors in the avian brain : survey reveals general distribution and forebrain areas unique to songbirds . J . Comp . Neurol . 327 , 112 – 122 . Galea , L . A . M . , McEwen , B . S . , 1999 . Sex and seasonal differences in the rate of cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult wild meadow voles . Neuroscience 89 , 955 – 964 . Galea , L . A . M . , Wainwright , S . R . , Roes , M . M . , Duarte - Guterman , P . , Chow , C . , Hamson , D . K . , 2013 . Sex , hormones and neurogenesis in the hippocampus : hormonal modulation of neurogenesis and potential functional implications . J . Neuroendocrinol . 25 , 1039 – 1061 . Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . , Ferrón , S . , Flames , N . , Collado , L . , Desﬁlis , E . , Font , E . , 2002 . The proliferative ventricular zone in adult vertebrates : a comparative study using reptiles , birds , and mammals . Brain Res . Bull . 57 , 765 – 775 . Good , M . , Macphail , E . M . , 1994 . The avian hippocampus and short - term memory for spatial and non - spatial information . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 47B , 293 – 317 . Guigueno , M . F . , Snow , D . A . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Sherry , D . F . , 2014 . Female cowbirds have more accurate spatial memory than males . Biol . Lett . 10 , 20140026 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsbl . 2014 . 0026 . Hahn , T . P . , 1998 . Reproductive seasonality in an opportunistic breeder , the Red crossbill , Loxia curvirostra . Ecology 79 , 2365 – 2375 . Hall , Z . J . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2012 . Inﬂuence of testosterone metabolites on song - control system neuroplasticity during photostimulation in adult European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . PLoS One 7 , e40060 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0040060 . Hall , Z . J . , Bauchinger , U . , Gerson , A . R . , Price , E . R . , Langlois , L . A . , Boyles , M . , Pierce , B . , McWilliams , S . R . , Sherry , D . F . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2014 . Site - speciﬁc regulation of adult neurogenesis by dietary fatty acid content , vitamin E and ﬂight exercise in European starlings . Eur . J . Neurosci . 39 , 875 – 882 . Hampton , R . R . , Shettleworth , S . J . , 1996 . Hippocampal lesions impair memory for location but not color in passerine birds . Behav . Neurosci . 110 , 831 – 835 . Healy , S . D . , Gwinner , E . , Krebs , J . R . , 1996 . Hippocampal volume in migratory and non - migratory warblers : effects of age and experience . Behav . Brain Res . 81 , 61 – 68 . Hodgson , Z . , Meddle , S . L . , Christians , J . K . , Sperry , T . K . , Healy , S . D . , 2008 . Inﬂuence of sex steroid hormones on spatial memory in a songbird . J . Comp . Physiol . A 194 , 963 – 969 . Hoshooley , J . S . , Sherry , D . F . , 2004 . Neuron production , neuron number , and structure size are seasonally stable in the hippocampus of the food - storing black - capped chickadee ( Poecile atricapillus ) . Behav . Neurosci . 118 , 345 – 355 . Hoshooley , J . S . , Sherry , D . F . , 2007 . Greater hippocampal neuronal recruitment in food - storing than in non - food - storing birds . Dev . Neurobiol . 67 , 406 – 414 . Hoshooley , J . S . , Phillmore , L . S . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2005 . An examination of avian hippocampal neurogenesis in relationship to photoperiod . Neuroreport 16 , 987 – 991 . Hoshooley , J . S . , Phillmore , L . S . , Sherry , D . F . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2007 . Annual cycle of the black - capped chickadee : seasonality of food - storing and the hippocampus . Brain Behav . Evol . 69 , 161 – 168 . Hurly , T . A . , 1992 . Energetic reserves of marsh tits ( Parus palustris ) : food and fat storage in response to variable food - supply . Behav . Ecol . 3 , 181 – 188 . Jacobs , L . F . , Spencer , W . D . , 1994 . Natural space - use patterns and hippocampal size in kangaroo rats . Brain Behav . Evol . 44 , 125 – 132 . Jacobs , L . F . , Gaulin , S . J . C . , Sherry , D . F . , Hoffman , G . E . , 1990 . Evolution of spatial cognition : sex - speciﬁc patterns of spatial behavior predict hippocampal size . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 6349 – 6352 . D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 165 Kahn , M . C . , Hough , G . E . , ten Eyck , G . R . , Bingman , V . P . , 2003 . Internal connectivity of the homing pigeon ( Columba livia ) hippocampal formation : an anterograde and retrograde tracer study . J . Comp . Neurol . 459 , 127 – 141 . Kamil , A . C . , Balda , R . P . , 1985 . CacherecoveryandspatialmemoryinClark’snutcracker ( Nucifraga columbiana ) . J . Exp . Psychol . Anim . Behav . Process . 11 , 95 – 111 . Karpouzos , H . , Hernandez , A . M . , MacDougall - Shackleton , E . A . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2005 . Effects of day - length and food availability on food caching , mass and fat reserves in black - capped chickadees ( Poecile atricapillus ) . Physiol . Behav . 84 , 465 – 469 . Karten , H . J . , Hodos , W . , 1967 . A Stereotaxic Atlas of the Brain of the Pigeon . Johns Hopkins Press , Baltimore , MD . Krebs , J . R . , Sherry , D . F . , Healy , S . D . , Perry , V . H . , Vaccarino , A . L . , 1989 . Hippocampal specialization of food - storing birds . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 1388 – 1392 . Krebs , J . R . , Clayton , N . S . , Hampton , R . R . , Shettleworth , S . J . , 1995 . Effects of photoperiod on food - storing and the hippocampus in birds . Neuroreport 6 , 1701 – 1704 . Krushinskaya , N . L . , 1966 . Some complex forms of feeding behaviour of nut - cracker Nucifragacaryocatactes , after removal of old cortex . Zh . Evol . Biochimii Fisiloggia II , 563 – 568 . LaDage , L . D . , Roth , T . C . , Fox , R . A . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2009 . Effects of captivity and memory - based experiences on the hippocampus in mountain chickadees . Behav . Neurosci . 123 , 284 – 291 . LaDage , L . D . , Roth , T . C . I . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2010 . Hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with migratory behaviour in adult but not juvenile sparrows ( Zonotrichia leucophrys ssp . ) . Proc , R , Soc , B – Biol . Sci . 278 , 138 – 143 . LaDage , L . D . , Roth , T . C . I . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2011 . Hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with migratory behaviour in adult but not juvenile sparrows ( Zonotrichia leuchophrys spp . ) . Proc . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 278 , 138 – 143 . Larson , T . A . , Wang , T . - W . , Gale , S . D . , Miller , K . E . , Thatra , N . M . , Caras , M . L . , Perkel , D . J . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2013 . Postsynaptic neural activity regulates neuronal addition in the adult avian song control system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 16640 – 16644 . Lavenex , P . , Steele , M . A . , Jacobs , L . F . , 2000a . The seasonal pattern of cell proliferation and neuron number in the dentate gyrus of wild adult eastern grey squirrels . Eur . J . Neurosci . 12 , 643 – 648 . Lavenex , P . , Steele , M . A . , Jacobs , L . F . , 2000b . Sex differences , but no seasonal variation in the hippocampus of food - caching squirrels : a stereological study . J . Comp . Neurol . 425 , 152 – 166 . Lowther , P . E . , Cink , C . L . , 2006 . House Sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) . In : Poole , A . ( Ed . ) , Birds of North America Online . Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology , Ithaca NY . Lucas , J . R . , Walter , L . R . , 1991 . When should chickadees hoard ? Theory and experimental results . Anim . Behav . 41 , 579 – 601 . Lucas , J . R . , Peterson , L . J . , Boudinier , R . L . , 1993 . The effects of time constraints and changes in body mass and satiation on the simultaneous expression of caching and diet - choice decisions . Anim . Behav . 45 , 639 – 658 . Lucas , J . R . , Brodin , A . , de Kort , S . R . , Clayton , N . S . , 2004 . Does hippocampal size correlate with the degree of caching specialization ? Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 271 , 2423 – 2429 . MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Hernandez , A . , Valyear , K . F . , Clark , A . P . , 2003a . Photostimulation induces rapid growth of song - control brain regions in male and female chickadees ( Poecile atricapilla ) . Neurosci . Lett . 340 , 165 – 168 . MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Sherry , D . F . , Clark , A . P . , Pinkus , R . , Hernandez , A . M . , 2003b . Photoperiodic regulation of food - storing and hippocampus volume in black - capped chickadees Poecile atricapilla . Anim . Behav . 65 , 805 – 812 . MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Watts , H . E . , Hahn , T . P . , 2015 . Biological timekeeping : individual variation , performance , and ﬁtness . In : Martin , L . B . , Ghalambor , C . K . , Woods , A . ( Eds . ) , Integrative Organismal Biology . Wiley - Blackwell , Hoboken NJ . . McNamara , J . M . , Houston , A . I . , Krebs , J . R . , 1990 . Why hoard ? The economics of food storing in tits , Parus spp . Behav . Ecol . 1 , 12 – 23 . Metzdorf , R . , Gahr , M . , Fusani , L . , 1999 . Distribution of aromatase , estrogen receptor , and androgen receptor mRNA in the forebrain of songbirds and nonsongbirds . J . Comp . Neurol . 407 , 115 – 129 . Nair - Roberts , R . G . , Erichsen , J . T . , Reboreda , J . C . , Kacelnick , A . , 2006 . Distribution of substance P reveals a novel subdivision in the hippocampus of parasitic South American cowbirds . J . Comp . Neurol . 496 , 610 – 626 . Oberlander , J . G . , Schlinger , B . A . , Clayton , N . S . , Saldanha , C . J . , 2004 . Neural aromatization accelerates the acquisition of spatial memory via an inﬂuence on the songbird hippocampus . Horm . Behav . 45 , 250 – 258 . Omerod , B . K . , Galea , L . A . M . , 2003 . Reproductive status inﬂuences the survival of new cells in the dentate gyrus of adult male meadow voles . Neurosci . Lett . 346 , 25 – 28 . Petersen , K . , Sherry , D . F . , 1996 . No sex difference occurs in hippocampus , food - storing , or memory for food caches in black - capped chickadees . Behav . Brain Res . 79 , 15 – 22 . Phillmore , L . S . , Hoshooley , J . S . , Hahn , T . P . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2005 . A test of the absolute photorefractoriness and photo - induced neural plasticity of song - control regions in black - capped chickadees ( Poecile atricapilla ) . Can . J . Zool . 83 , 747 – 753 . Phillmore , L . S . , Hoshooley , J . S . , Sherry , D . F . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2006 . Annual cycle of the black - capped chickadee : seasonality of singing rates and vocal - control brain regions . J . Neurobiol . 66 , 1002 – 1010 . Pravosudov , V . V . , 2006 . On seasonality in food - storing behaviour in parids : do we know the whole story ? Anim . Behav . 71 , 1455 – 1460 . Pravosudov , V . V . , Clayon , N . S . , 2001 . Effects of demanding foraging conditions on cache retrieval accuracy in food - caching Mountain chickadees ( Poecile gambeli ) . Proc . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 268 , 363 – 368 . Pravosudov , V . V . , Grubb , T . C . , 1997 . Management of fat reserves and food caches in tufted titmice ( Parus bicolor ) in relation to unpredictable food supply . Behav . Ecol . 8 , 332 – 339 . Pravosudov , V . V . , Omanska , A . , 2005 . Prolonged moderate elevation of corticosterone does not affect hippocampal anatomy or cell proliferation rates in mountain chickadees ( Poecile gambeli ) . J . Neurobiol . 62 , 82 – 91 . Pravosudov , V . V . , Lavenex , P . , Clayon , N . S . , 2002 . Changes in spatial memory mediated by experimental variation in food supply do not affect hippocampal anatomy in Mountain chickadees ( Poecile gambeli ) . J . Neurobiol . , 142 – 148 . Pravosudov , V . V . , Kitaysky , A . S . , Omanska , A . , 2006 . The relationship between migratory behaviour , memory and the hippocampus : an intraspeciﬁc comparison . Proc . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 273 , 2641 – 2642 . Rani , S . , Kumar , V . , 2013 . Avian circannual systems : persistence and sex differences . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 190 , 61 – 67 . Reboreda , J . C . , Clayton , N . S . , Kacelnik , A . , 1996 . Species and sex differences in hippocampus size in parasitic and non - parasitic cowbirds . Neuroreport 7 , 505 – 508 . Rehkämper , G . , Haase , E . , Frahm , H . D . , 1988 . Allometric comparison of brain weight and brain structure volumes in different breeds of the domestic pigeon , Columba livia f . d . ( fantails , homing pigeons , strassers ) . Brain Behav . Evol . 31 , 141 – 149 . Robertson , B . D . , Hasstedt , M . R . , Vandermeer , C . L . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , 2014 . Sex steriod - independent effects of photostimulation on the song - control system of white - throated sparrows ( Zonotrichia albicollis ) . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 204 , 166 – 172 . Roth , T . C . I . , LaDage , L . D . , Freas , C . A . , Pravosudov , V . V . , 2012 . Variation in memory and the hippocampus across populations from different climates : a common garden approach . Proc . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 279 , 402 – 410 . Rothstein , S . I . , Verner , J . , Stevens , E . , 1984 . Radio - tracking conﬁrms a unique diurnal pattern of spatial occurrence in the parasitic brown - headed cowbird . Ecology 65 , 77 – 88 . Saldanha , C . J . , Popper , P . , Micevych , P . E . , Schlinger , B . A . , 1998 . The passerine hippocampus is a site of high aromatase : inter - and intraspecies comparisons . Horm . Behav . 34 , 85 – 97 . Saldanha , C . J . , Schlinger , B . A . , Micevych , P . E . , Horvath , T . L . , 2004 . Presynaptic N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor expression is increased by estrogen in an aromatase - rich area of the songbird hippocampus . J . Comp . Neurol . 469 , 522 – 534 . Sartor , J . J . , Ball , G . F . , 2005 . Social suppression of song is associated with a reduction in volume of a song - control nucleus in European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Behav . Neurosci . 119 , 233 – 244 . Scarf , D . , Millar , J . , Pow , N . , Colombo , M . , 2014 . Inhibition , the ﬁnal frontier : the impact of hippocampal lesions on behavioral inhibition and spatial processing in pigeons . Behav . Neurosci . 128 , 42 – 47 . Schoenfeld , T . J . , Gould , E . , 2012 . Stress , stress hormones , and adult neurogenesis . Exp . Neurol . 233 , 12 – 21 . Scott , D . M . , 1991 . The time of day of egg laying by the brown - headed cowbird and other icterines . Can . J . Zool . 69 , 2093 – 2099 . Sherry , D . F . , 1984 . Food storage by black - capped chickadees : memory for the location and contents of caches . Anim . Behav . 32 , 451 – 464 . Sherry , D . F . , 2014 . Decisions , memory , and the neuroecology of food - storing birds . In : Preston , S . D . , Kringelbach , M . L . , Knutson , B . ( Eds . ) , The Interdisciplinary Science of Consumption . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Sherry , D . F . , Hoshooley , J . S . , 2007 . Neurobiology of spatial behavior . In : Otter , K . A . ( Ed . ) , The Ecology and Behavior of Chickadees and Titmice : An Integrated Approach . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Sherry , D . F . , Hoshooley , J . S . , 2009 . The seasonal hippocampus of food - storing birds . Behav . Process . 80 , 334 – 338 . Sherry , D . F . , Hoshooley , J . S . , 2010 . Seasonal hippocampal plasticity in food - storing birds . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 365 , 933 – 943 . Sherry , D . F . , Vaccarino , A . L . , 1989 . Hippocampus and memory for food caches in black - capped chickadees . Behav . Neurosci . 103 , 308 – 318 . Sherry , D . F . , Krebs , J . R . , Cowie , R . J . , 1981 . Memory for the location of stored food in marsh tits . Anim . Behav . 29 , 1260 – 1266 . Sherry , D . F . , Vaccarino , A . L . , Buckenham , K . , Herz , R . S . , 1989 . The hippocampal complex of food - storing birds . Brain Behav . Evol . 34 , 308 – 317 . Sherry , D . F . , Jacobs , L . F . , Gaulin , S . J . C . , 1992 . Spatial memory and adaptive specialization of the hippocampus . Trends Neurosci . 15 , 298 – 303 . Sherry , D . F . , Forbes , M . R . L . , Khurgel , M . , Ivy , G . O . , 1993 . Females have a larger hippocampus than males in the brood - parasitic brown - headed cowbird . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 7839 – 7843 . Shettleworth , S . J . , Krebs , J . R . , 1982 . How marsh tits ﬁnd their hoards : the roles of site preference and spatial memory . J . Exp . Psychol . Anim . Behav . Process . 8 , 354 – 375 . Shettleworth , S . J . , Hampton , R . R . , Westwood , R . P . , 1995 . Effects of season and photoperiod on food storing by black - capped chickadees , Parus atricapillus . Anim . Behav . 49 , 989 – 998 . Shifﬂet , M . W . , Gould , K . L . , Smulders , T . V . , DeVoogd , T . J . , 2002 . Septum volume and food - storing behavior are related in Parids . J . Neurobiol . 51 , 215 – 222 . Singh , S . , Srivastava , U . C . , 2013 . Seasonal changes in neuronal spacing of hippocampus of Psittacula krameri ( Scopoli , 1769 ) . Natl . Acad . Sci . Lett . 36 , 157 – 159 . Smith , S . M . , 1991 . The Black - capped Chickadee . Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY . Smulders , T . V . , Sasson , A . D . , DeVoogd , T . J . , 1995 . Seasonal variation in hippocampal volume in a food - storing bird , the black - capped chickadee . J . Neurobiol . 27 , 15 – 25 . 166 D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 Smulders , T . V . , Casto , J . M . , Nolan , V . , Ketterson , E . D . , DeVoogd , T . J . , 2000 . Effects of captivity and testosterone on the volumes of four brain regions in the dark - eyed junco ( Junco hyemalis ) . J . Neurobiol . 43 , 244 – 253 . Smulders , T . V . , Shiﬂett , M . W . , Sperling , A . J . , DeVoogd , T . J . , 2000 . Seasonal change in neuron number in the hippocampal formation of a food - hoarding bird : the black - capped chickadee . J . Neurobiol . 44 , 414 – 422 . Srivastava , U . C . , Singh , S . , 2012 . Seasonal plasticity in neurons of APH in female Indian ringneck parrot ( Psittacula krameri ) . Natl . Acad . Sci . Lett . 35 , 259 – 262 . Szekely , A . D . , 1999 . The avian hippocampal formation : subdivisions and connectivity . Behav . Brain Res . 98 , 219 – 225 . Tarr , B . A . , Rabinowitz , J . S . , Imtiaz , M . A . , DeVoogd , T . J . , 2009 . Captivity reduces hippocampal volume but not survival of new cells in a food - storing bird . Dev . Neurobiol . 69 , 972 – 981 . Tramontin , A . D . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2000 . Seasonal plasticity in the adult brain . Trends Neurosci . 23 , 251 – 258 . van Praag , H . , 2008 . Neurogenesis and exercise : past and future directions . Neuromol . Med . 10 , 128 – 140 . Vander Wall , S . B . , 1982 . An experimental analysis of cache recovery in Clark’s nutcracker . Anim . Behav . 30 , 84 – 94 . White , D . J . , Ho , L . , Freed - Brown , G . , 2009 . Counting chicks before they hatch : female cowbirds can time readiness of a host nest for parasitism . Psychol . Sci . 20 , 1140 – 1145 . Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1983 . Environmental and endocrine control of reproduction : an ecological approach . In : Mikami , S . - I . , Homma , K . , Wada , M . ( Eds . ) , Avian Endocrinology : Environmental and Ecological Perspectives . Japan Scientiﬁc Societies Press & Springer - Verlag , Tokyo & Berlin . Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Ramenofsky , M . , 2011 . Hormone - behavior interrelationships of birds in response to weather . Adv . Study Behav . 43 , 93 – 188 . Witter , M . S . , Cuthill , I . C . , 1993 . The ecological costs of avian fat storage . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B – Biol . Sci . 340 , 73 – 92 . Woolley , C . S . , Gould , E . , Frankfurt , M . , McEwen , B . S . , 1990 . Naturally occurring ﬂuctuation in dendritic spine density on adult hippocampal pyramidal neurons . J . Neurosci . 10 , 4035 – 4039 . Yaskin , V . A . , 2011 . Seasonal changes in hippocampus size and spatial behavior in mammals and birds . Biol . Bull . Rev . 1 , 279 – 288 . Yaskin , V . A . , 2013 . Seasonal modulation of sex - related differences in hippocampus size and spatial behavior in bank voles , Clethrionomys glareolus ( Rodentia , Cricetidae ) . Russ . J . Ecol . 44 , 221 – 226 . D . F . Sherry , S . A . MacDougall - Shackleton / Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 37 ( 2015 ) 158 – 167 167