1 Centering and symmetry breaking in confined contracting actomyosin networks Niv Ierushalmi 1 , Maya Malik - Garbi 1 , Angelika Manhart 2 , 3 , Enas Abu - Shah 1 , 4 , Bruce L . Goode 5 , Alex Mogilner 2 and Kinneret Keren 1 , 6 1 Department of Physics , Technion - Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 32000 , Israel 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Department of Biology , New York University , New York , NY 10012 , USA 3 Department of Mathematics , Imperial College London , London SW7 2AZ , UK 4 Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology , University of Oxford , Oxford OX3 7FY , UK 5 Department of Biology , Brandeis University , Waltham , MA , USA 6 Network Biology Research Laboratories and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute , Technion – Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 32000 , Israel Abstract Centering and decentering of cellular components is essential for internal organization of cells and their ability to perform basic cellular functions such as division and motility . How cells achieve proper localization of their components is still not well - understood , especially in large cells such as oocytes . Here , we study actin - based positioning mechanisms in artificial cells with persistently contracting actomyosin networks , generated by encapsulating cytoplasmic Xenopus egg extracts into cell - sized ‘water - in - oil’ droplets . We observe size - dependent localization of the contraction center , with a symmetric configuration in larger cells and a polar one in smaller cells . In the symmetric state , the contraction center is actively centered , via a hydrodynamic mechanism based on Darcy friction between the contracting network and the surrounding cytoplasm . During symmetry breaking , transient attachments to the cell boundary drive the contraction center to a polar location near the droplet boundary . Our findings demonstrate a robust , yet tunable , mechanism for subcellular localization . 2 Introduction The proper localization of cellular components is essential for a variety of cell functions 1 . Depending on the cellular context , some components need to be positioned at the center of the cell , whereas other components must assume a polar , decentered localization 2 . For example , depending on the cell type and its stage in the cell cycle , the cell nucleus has to be positioned at the cell center or asymmetrically localized , whereas abnormal nuclear positioning can lead to various pathologies and disease 3 . Similarly , the centrosome is located at the geometrical center of cells under many conditions , yet in other cases it is required at the cell periphery where it serves as the base of the primary cilium 4 . Cells use diverse mechanisms to control their internal organization and dynamically regulate the positioning of their components in response to various internal and external cues . While much research has been devoted to the study of the various cellular positioning mechanisms , many basic questions remain open . This is particularly true in large cells such as oocytes 5 , where movements must be coordinated over large scales and it is often still unclear what drives movement in the first place and how the proper localization is stabilized . Transport of cellular components depends on biophysical processes that rely on the cell’s cytoskeleton . The mechanisms involved are diverse , typically employing either microtubules , the actin cytoskeleton , or both , together with their respective molecular motors 3 , 5 , 6 . The mechanisms also vary in terms of the relevant length scales at which they operate , as the physical requirements for positioning objects in a small cell are different from those in an extremely large oocyte 5 , 7 , 8 . Many positioning mechanisms rely on microtubule asters radiating from the organelle being positioned , impinging on the cortex at the cell boundary and generating pushing and / or pulling forces against it 8 . For example , the spindle in dividing cells is often centered by astral microtubules that emanate radially from the centrosomes and interact with dynein motors at the cortex 9 . However , this mechanism depends on the availability of long enough microtubules that can directly interact with the cell boundary . In large cells such as oocytes , this is often not the case and various actin - based localization schemes are found . These include , for example , nuclear centering in mouse oocytes which depends on gradients in actin - dependent active diffusion 10 , chromosome congression in starfish oocytes where a contracting actin network carries the chromosomes like a fishnet 11 , or ooplasm segregation in zebrafish oocytes where differential friction with a contracting actin network drags the ooplasm toward the animal pole 12 , 13 . The study of cellular localization mechanisms has greatly benefitted from in vitro work on cell - free systems , that make it possible to study the localization schemes in a simplified , well - controlled environment , and isolate the basic biophysical and biochemical processes involved 6 , 14 - 16 . A notable example is the work on localization of microtubule asters in micro - fabricated , cell - sized compartments . 3 Early work showed that microtubule assembly and disassembly dynamics are sufficient for centering of microtubules asters 14 , while more recently the influence of cortex - bound microtubule motors was studied by attaching motors to the compartment’s interface 15 . These experiments , together with theoretical modeling 17 , 18 , showed how the interaction between the tips of microtubules and the cell boundary generates pushing and pulling forces that lead to robust centering under a variety of conditions . Localization in large cells where the cytoskeletal elements do not span the entire system , cannot rely on direct interaction between the cytoskeleton and the cell boundary . Rather , the centering mechanisms must involve indirect sensing of the cell boundary , to be able to define the cell center without directly interacting with it 8 . Here we use a recently developed in vitro system that self organizes to form persistently contracting bulk actin networks within cell - sized compartments 19 , to demonstrate a hydrodynamic centering mechanism that can function in very large cells in the absence of any direct interaction between the cytoskeleton and the cell boundary . Our system is based on encapsulation of Xenopus egg extracts in cell - sized water - in - oil emulsions 16 , 19 - 21 . The system self - organizes to form persistently contracting actomyosin networks surrounding an aggregate that forms around the contraction center 19 . We observe size - dependent localization of the aggregate : large droplets are symmetric with the aggregate positioned at the center , whereas smaller droplets are polar with the aggregate near the boundary . The centering and decentering of the contraction center resemble cellular centering and decentering as seen for example during nuclear centering and spindle migration in mammalian oocytes 22 , 23 and plant eggs 24 , and can serve as a simplified model to study actin - based localization in large cells . We show that the centered state is stable against large perturbations and suggest a hydrodynamic active centering mechanism that is based on an imbalance of the Darcy friction forces between the contracting actomyosin network and the cell’s cytoplasm . We use mathematical modeling to show how the displacement of the contraction center from the center of the droplet is translated into an asymmetry in the actin network density , and how this in turn leads to an effective centering force with spring - like properties . The size - dependent localization of the contraction center is a result of a competition between this hydrodynamic centering force , and a decentering force due to engagement between the contracting network and the boundary , which is more prominent in smaller droplets . 4 Results Size - dependent localization of the contraction center in artificial cells Persistently contracting actin networks are generated in cell - like compartments by encapsulating cytoplasmic Xenopus egg extract in water - in - oil emulsion droplets 16 , 19 - 21 . Endogenous actin nucleation activities induce the formation of bulk actin networks , which undergo continuous myosin - driven contraction 19 . A dense ‘exclusion zone’ forms around the contraction center within minutes , as the network contracts and accumulates particulates from the ( crude ) extract into a dense aggregate . We find that the droplets are typically in one of two configurations : a symmetric state or a polar state ( Fig . 1 ) . In the symmetric state , the aggregate is localized near the middle of the droplet and the network exhibits spherically symmetric density and flow patterns ( Fig . 1a - c , Movie 1 ) . In the polar state , the aggregate is positioned near the droplet’s boundary and the network displays a flow pattern that is skewed toward the side ( Fig . 1a - c , Movie 2 ) . The observed configurations , both the symmetric one and the polar one , reflect a dynamic steady - state in which the system self - organizes into persistent contractile flow patterns , which remain nearly stationary over time scales that are considerably longer than the characteristic time scale for network contraction and turnover ( ~ 1min ) 19 . The network dynamics arise from distributed actin network assembly and disassembly processes , coupled to myosin - generated forces that drive global network contraction . The network contracts toward a single point , which is located at the center in the symmetric configuration or near the boundary in the polar configuration , generating characteristic centripetal flow patterns around the contraction center ( Fig . 1c ) . The system is able to reach a dynamic steady - state thanks to the presence of rapid actin network disassembly , which limits the accumulation of network around the contraction center and enables the system to reach a stationary network density distribution 19 . We have previously shown that the network contracts at a homogenous , density independent rate 19 , with an inward flow velocity that increases linearly in magnitude as a function of distance from the contraction center , and approaches zero on the surface of the aggregate surrounding the contraction center ( Fig . 1c ) . The symmetry state of individual droplets was found to be strongly correlated with their size ( Fig . 1d - f ) . The aggregate is typically centered in larger droplets , whereas in smaller droplets the aggregate is in a polar position near the boundary . The localization of the contraction center in spherical droplets of varying sizes was determined by measuring the displacement of the centroid of the aggregate from the droplet center ( Materials and Methods ) . Characterization of the symmetry states 40 minutes after sample preparation is shown in Fig . 1e , with small droplets ( R < 31 µm ) exhibiting a polar state and large droplets ( R > 40µm ) predominantly in a symmetric state . Intermediate - sized droplets ( 31µm < R < 40 µm ) exhibit a 5 bimodal distribution whereby both polar and symmetric droplets are observed . The characteristics of this localization pattern persists for more than an hour ( i . e . smaller droplets are polar whereas larger droplets are primarily in a symmetric state ) , but over time the fraction of droplets in the polar state increases ( Fig . S1 ) , suggesting that the centered state is metastable . Dynamics of centering and symmetry breaking To gain more insight into the mechanisms for centering and symmetry breaking of the contraction center , we followed the dynamics of aggregate position over time in different - sized spherical droplets . We measured the 3D positions of the aggregate centroids in time lapse movies ( Materials and Methods ) and analyzed the dynamics of their displacement over time ( Fig . 2 ) . Small droplets were already in a polar state ~ 5 minutes after sample preparation . However , we could find droplets with R > 25µm that were initially symmetric and underwent a symmetry breaking process , whereby the system transitioned from a symmetric state into a polar state ( Fig . 2a , b ; Movie 3 ) . In these cases , the aggregate was initially positioned near the middle of the droplet , exhibiting limited fluctuations , and subsequently , at some moment , started moving in a directional manner toward the droplet boundary ( Fig . 2b , f ) . The timing of the transition varied between different droplets , whereas the duration of the transition from the center to the boundary was similar , τ = 12± 4 min ( N = 18 ) . In droplets with R > 35µm , the symmetric state could remain stable for more than 1 hour ( Fig . 2c ) . We characterized the centered state by analyzing the movements of aggregates in droplets that remained symmetric throughout the experiment ( 1 hour ) . The aggregates exhibit random movement around the droplet centers . Analysis of this movement shows that the mean squared displacement ( MSD ) of the aggregate positions in individual droplets scales nearly linearly with time ( Fig . 2d ) , so that   2 6 MSD r t Dt     with 0 . 93 0 . 07   ( Mean ± STD ; N = 12 droplets ) and 2 0 . 32 0 . 1 min D m    ( Mean ± STD ) for t < 5 minutes . Over longer time scales ( t > 10minutes ) , the movement appears confined , as the MSD is bounded and does not continue to increase with time . Thus , the aggregate motion in the centered state can be effectively described as a confined random walk . We can estimate the extent of confinement of the aggregate positions by measuring the mean squared distance from the droplets centers 2 3 . 4 1 . 6 c R d m     ( Mean ± STD ) which is ~ 10 % of the system size . The velocity autocorrelation function decays immediately at the temporal resolution of our measurements ( 0 . 5 min ; Fig . 2e ) , indicating that the aggregates motion is uncorrelated temporally on these time scales . 6 The characteristics of the symmetry breaking process were analyzed in N = 18 droplets that displayed a transition from the symmetric state to a polar state within one hour . Initially , the aggregates exhibited random fluctuations that were similar to the behavior of centered aggregates in the symmetric state ( Fig . S2 ) . The onset of symmetry breaking was abrupt , with the aggregate starting to move in a directional manner toward the boundary ( Fig . 2b ) . This movement was characterized by a mean squared displacement that increased with time as ,   2 ~ MSD r t t    with 1 . 5 0 . 1   ( Mean ± STD ) , indicating that the movement of the aggregate at this stage is directed rather than random . The average outward radial velocity during the symmetry breaking process was 1 1 min V m    ( Mean ± STD ) . During the symmetry breaking process , the aggregates’ velocity becomes temporally correlated as it moved in a directional manner . This is reflected in the velocity autocorrelation function , which in contrast to the symmetric state , exhibits clear temporal correlations over several minutes ( Fig . 2h ) , comparable to the duration of the symmetry breaking process . Once the aggregate reached the boundary it remained there , in a stable polar state . The centered state is stable against large perturbations To probe the stability of the centered state and gain insight on the centering mechanism , we developed a methodology to apply external forces on the aggregate that allow us to transiently displace the aggregate from the middle of the droplet and then follow its recovery dynamics ( Fig . 3 , S4 ; Movies 4 , 5 ) . This is done by introducing micron - sized superparamagnetic beads into the extract mix ( Fig . S3 ; see Materials and Methods ) . During the first few minutes after sample preparation , the magnetic beads are swept together with other particulates in the crude extract into the aggregate that forms around the contraction center . The magnetic beads then allow us to move the contraction center with an external magnet 25 . To that end , we introduce the droplets into rectangular capillaries and use a micromanipulator to position a magnetic needle from the side ( Figs . 3a , S3 ) . In this configuration , the magnetic force and hence the displacement of the aggregate are nearly horizontal ( i . e . parallel to the imaging plane ) , allowing us to follow the dynamics within a single imaging plane . To displace an aggregate from the center of a droplet in the symmetric state , we placed a magnetic needle ~ 200µm from the droplet ( Fig . 3b ) . The magnetic force on the beads pulls the aggregate toward the needle . As the aggregate is connected to the cytoskeletal network surrounding it , this causes the complex of the aggregate and the surrounding network to move from the middle of the droplet toward the side . The 7 magnetic needle was kept in place for ~ 1min while monitoring the aggregate’s position . We estimate that the net pulling force acting on the aggregate is of the order of ~ 50pN ( Materials and Methods ) . The needle is then removed , and the recovery dynamics of the aggregate are followed . Typically , we observed that shortly after removing the magnetic needle , the aggregate recentered , moving in a directional manner back toward the center of the droplet ( 26 out of 31 droplets examined ; Fig . 3 , Movie 4 ) . Occasionally , we observed droplets that transitioned into a polar state after the perturbation ( 5 out of 31 droplets examined ; Fig . S4 , Movie 5 ) . We followed the recentering dynamics of the aggregates following large displacements in N = 8 droplets ( Fig . 3 ) , measuring the recentering velocity as a function of time ( Fig . 3c , f ) and as a function of distance from the center of the droplet ( Fig . 3g ) . We find that the aggregates move toward the center of the droplet and resettle there in a symmetric configuration . The centering velocity reaches a peak value of 5 - 10 µm / min after an initial reorganization phase . Subsequently , the recentering process proceeds at a velocity that decreases as a function of the displacement of the aggregate from the droplet center in a characteristic concave - down fashion , which is similar among different droplets ( Fig . 3g ) . These results show that the centered position of the aggregate is actively maintained by a centering force and is stable against large perturbations . The recentering process is accompanied by a dynamic reorganization of the actin network ( Figs . 3d , S5 ) . While the contractile network flows persist throughout the recentering process , the network density distribution and flow pattern undergo substantial rearrangements during the process . During the reorganization phase , following the large displacement of the aggregate from the droplet center , the network distribution around the aggregate becomes skewed with a higher density toward the middle of the droplet . As the aggregate moves toward the center of the droplet , the asymmetry in the network distribution becomes less prominent until eventually , when the aggregate reaches the center of the droplet , the network distribution becomes symmetric again ( Fig . S5 ) Hydrodynamic mechanism for centering To understand the centering mechanism , we model our system as a two - phase system made up of an active actomyosin network immersed in the surrounding fluid ( cytosol ) , both enclosed within a spherical droplet with the aggregate as an excluded region ( Fig . 4a ) . Mathematically , we describe the system using dynamical equations for the actin network density ( ρ ) and the coupled flows of the network ( V ) and the fluid cytosol ( U ; see Supplementary Information ) . Many studies ( reviewed in 26 , see also 12 ) demonstrated that the cytosol can be considered as a viscous fluid that flows in the cell with a low 8 Reynolds number , and squeezes through effective pores formed by the cytoskeletal mesh . Physically , the relative movements of the fluid cytosol and the cytoskeletal mesh lead to the so - called Darcy friction , which is proportional to the relative local movement between the mesh and the cytosol . Given the network density and movement rates , a well - defined system of equations 26 allows to calculate the Darcy friction and the resulting pressure distribution and flow in the cytosol . The Darcy friction between the contracting network and the fluid cytosol depends on the relative velocity between them , the fluid viscosity , and the network permeability coefficient which is a function of the network density 27 , 28 . Based on our previous work 19 , we assume that the actin network exhibits centripetal flow with a speed that increases linearly with the distance from the aggregate ( Fig . 1c ) , and that the network turns over with constant assembly and disassembly rates . Two fundamental laws – conservation of mass and momentum – govern the dynamics and mechanics of the network and fluid flow . We numerically solve the respective coupled equations and obtain the actin network density distribution , the fluid velocity and pressure distributions , and the position of the aggregate ( see Supplementary information ) . The net centering force on the aggregate is obtained by integrating the friction forces due to the relative movement between the contracting network and the fluid phase ( Supplementary information ) . To estimate the effective force on the aggregate , we performed simulations in which the aggregate is held fixed in place at a given position , and the network is allowed to reach a dynamic steady - state for this configuration ( Fig . 4b , c ) . A ‘fountain’ - like cytosolic flow emerges when the aggregate is decentered : if the aggregate is shifted to the left ( Fig . 4b , c ) , more network accumulates to its right and this body of network flows to the left . The cytosol is pulled to the left with the contracting network , and then , due to the incompressibility , escapes around the aggregate to the left curving away from the aggregate . The cytosol returns to the right near the boundaries of the droplets , where the network density is low and the resistance to fluid flow is smaller ( Fig . 4c ) . We calculate the net hydrodynamic force on the aggregate by integrating the Darcy friction force over the whole droplet , as a function of aggregate position and droplet radius ( Fig . 4d ) . We find that the hydrodynamic centering force behaves like a Hookean spring with a force that increases linearly as a function of the displacement from the droplet center , and an effective spring constant that scales with the volume of the droplet ( Fig . 4d , e ) . This scaling arises because the network density depends weakly on the radius , so each volume element contributes a certain force and the net force scales with the droplet’s volume . Intuitively , the appearance of a centering force can be understood as follows . The contracting network flows through the cytosol . When the aggregate is displaced from the center , for example to the left , then the network distribution becomes skewed with more network on the right ( it has more space to assemble on the right ) ( Fig . 4b ) . As the network permeability decreases with network density , the Darcy 9 friction force is higher on the right , and also the force is integrated over a greater volume on the right . As the direction of the force from every element of volume is opposed to the network flow ( Fig . 4c ) , the net force on the aggregate will be directed toward the droplet center . Importantly , this centering force does not involve a direct interaction with the droplet boundary ( e . g . push / pull ) . Rather , the centering force arises from hydrodynamic interactions of the network with the fluid cytosol at low Reynolds number . The presence of this effective centering force also explains the confined nature of the aggregate motion observed in the centered state ( Fig . 2c , d ) . To model the dynamics of the magnetic recentering experiments ( Fig . 3 ) , we performed additional simulations in which the aggregate was free to move ( Fig . 4f - h ) . To emulate the experimental configuration , we assume initial conditions in which the network distribution is equal to the steady - state distribution in the centered state that is then displaced toward the side ( Fig . 4f ; Supplementary Information ) . We simulate the evolution of the system , by numerically solving the coupled equations for the network and fluid dynamics iteratively , whereby at each step the aggregate moves in response to the net force acting on it ( details in the Supplementary Information ) . The simulated aggregate recenters to the middle of the droplet with a centripetal velocity that decreases as a function of its displacement from the droplet center . The movement of the aggregate in the simulation is correlated with the extent of asymmetry in the actin network distribution , which agrees with our experimental observations ( Fig . S5 ) . Moreover , we find that the decrease in velocity is not linear ; rather the velocity stays disproportionally high at greater distances from the center , and then decreases faster close to the center ( Fig . 4g , h ) . The explanation for these results is as follows : when the aggregate is shifted away from the center , a higher network density accumulates at the side of the aggregate facing the center , creating greater friction with the cytosol there and generating a strong centering force . As the aggregate drifts to the center in response to this force , the network takes time to remodel so the density asymmetry persists for a while , effectively keeping the centering force higher than it would be if the drift to the center was very slow . Thus , the aggregate moves to the center faster at first , and only near the center , when it slows down , the network has sufficient time to remodel and the drift rate decreases . Symmetry - breaking is induced by interaction with the boundary The hydrodynamic interaction generates a centering force that explains the stability of the centered state . But how does the system break symmetry and become polar ? Why is the symmetry state of the system size - dependent ? We posit that the decentering is driven by an attractive interaction between the actin network and the droplet boundary ( Fig . 5 ) , for example by crosslinking of the network filaments to 10 proteins on the boundary . In this scenario , the symmetry state of the system is determined by a competition between the hydrodynamic centering force and the attractive interaction with the boundary . To test this idea experimentally , we modulated the interaction between the actin network and the boundary by adding low concentrations of Bodipy - conjugated ActA , which is an actin nucleation promoting factor that has been engineered to localize to the water - oil interface 16 , 29 . The presence of ActA at the interface activates the actin nucleator Arp2 / 3 and promotes the nucleation of actin filaments at the surface . We reasoned that the addition of low levels of ActA ( much lower than the amounts required to form a continuous cortical network 16 ) would have a negligible influence on the bulk actin network , but would increase the likeliness of the bulk network transiently attaching to the boundary via the surface nucleated filaments . We find that indeed as the concentration of ActA is increased , the system shifts toward a polar configuration ( Fig . 5b ) . To model the size - dependent symmetry state of the system , we considered a simple effective model which incorporates the hydrodynamic centering force ( Fig . 4d , e ) and also assumes that the network can stochastically engage with the boundary ( Supplementary Information ) . While the exact nature of the interaction between the bulk actin network and the boundary is not known , we assume the network interacts by a stochastic “clutch” mechanism , with a characteristic on - rate ( k on ) and off - rate ( k off ) , that when engaged pulls the aggregate to the closest boundary . We further assume that the probability to engage with the boundary depends on the actin network density near the boundary , reasoning that the on and off - rates should increase or decrease , respectively , as a function of the network density close to the boundary . Since the network density falls off as a function of the distance from the contraction center , we assume the on - rate increases when the aggregate is closer to the boundary ( since the network density near the boundary becomes larger ) while the off rate decreases . Specifically , for simplicity , we assume that the off - rate is proportional to the distance between the aggregate and the closest boundary , while the on - rate is inversely proportional to that distance . Finally , we assume that when the aggregate is engaged , it moves at a constant speed toward the closest boundary , to mimic the directed motion we observe during symmetry breaking ( Fig . 2 ) . This simple model recapitulates the size - dependent symmetry states in the system , predicting that small droplets will be polar and large droplets will be centered , with a transition zone for intermediate - sized droplets . The centered state in this model is metastable ; while larger droplets tend to stay centered for long periods because the probability to engage the clutch is lower , eventually , due to the stochastic nature of the surface interaction , they can break symmetry . As a result , the size - dependence of the symmetry states in the system evolves over time , with larger and larger droplets becoming polar as observed experimentally ( Fig . S1 ) . Furthermore , when we enhance the interaction with the boundary by increasing 11 the probability of clutch engagement and / or decreasing the probability for disengagement , to mimic the increase in cortical actin following the addition of ActA at the interface ( Fig . 5b ) , the model predicts that the transition between the symmetry states occurs at larger droplet sizes , which is aligned with our experimental observations ( Fig . 5c ) . Note , that the alternative to the clutch model would be assuming the presence of a constant interaction force with the boundary that is a function of the distance between the aggregate and the boundary . However , such a model would predict that following the magnetic force pulling experiments , which bring the aggregate close to the boundary , the interaction force with the boundary would either be stronger than the hydrodynamic centering force , in which case we would not expect the aggregate to recenter , or weaker than the hydrodynamic centering force , whereby decentering would never take place . This contradicts our observations ( Figs . 3 , S4 ) . The clutch model , on the other hand , is consistent with the system’s behavior following the magnetic perturbations , and also accounts for the observed time - dependence : 1 ) Larger droplets remain centered over a finite time interval because the frequency of the clutch engagement decreases with radius . 2 ) After sufficient time , decentering occurs even in large droplets , because when the clutch is engaged , the interaction with the boundary overcomes the hydrodynamic force ( Fig . S1 ) . We can further test the model predictions by varying the geometry of the droplets or the properties of the contracting network . The model predicts that for non - spherical droplets , symmetry breaking will be biased toward the boundary closest to the droplet’s center . Indeed , we find that in squished , pancake - shaped droplets , symmetry breaking occurs preferentially toward the top or bottom interface , in contrast with the more homogenous angular distribution in spherical droplets ( Fig . S6 ) . Another way to shift the balance between the hydrodynamic centering force and the surface interaction is to increase the network contraction which is expected to generate a larger centering force ( due to the increase in the relative velocity between the network and the fluid ) . Experimentally , we can increase the network contraction rate by adding components of the actin disassembly machinery which increase actin turnover and enhance contraction 19 ( see Methods ) . We observe more effective centering in this case , with smaller droplets remaining in the centered state , consistent with the predictions for a larger centering force ( Fig . S7 ) . Discussion We developed a model system to study actin - based localization in artificial cells . The system exhibits two stable configurations ; a centered configuration in which the contraction center is actively maintained at the middle of the cell and a decentered one where the contraction center is near the boundary ( Fig . 1 ) . 12 While the contracting network dynamics are largely determined by the interplay between internal forces , namely the myosin induced contractile force and the opposing force which is primarily due to the viscosity of the network 19 , the size - dependent localization of the contraction center is determined by the smaller friction forces between the network and the fluid it is immersed in and the interactions between the network and the droplet boundary . By combining experimental measurements and theoretical modeling , we show that a simple and robust hydrodynamic centering mechanism is responsible for actively maintaining the contraction center at the middle of the droplet ( Fig . 4 ) . The hydrodynamic centering is based on the presence of a persistent centripetal network flow , that is subject to Darcy friction with the surrounding cytoplasm . A net centering force arises from an imbalance in the friction forces when the network distribution is asymmetric , providing an indirect way to sense the shape of the cell as the boundary of the domain in which the reaction - diffusion - convection dynamics of the network take place . The hydrodynamic centering requires rapid network turnover and a continuous input of energy , to maintain the persistent network flows in a dissipating environment 19 . Importantly , this centering mechanism is extremely robust to perturbations , since the network naturally self - organizes into an asymmetric configuration when the contraction center is skewed , allowing cells to dynamically respond and adapt to changes in their shape . Furthermore , unlike other cytoskeletal - based cellular centering mechanisms 30 , 31 , the hydrodynamic centering mechanism does not involve any direct interactions with the boundary . Our system can also break symmetry , and transition from the centered state to an asymmetric polar state , in a size - dependent manner . Our results suggest that this transition reflects a competition between the hydrodynamic centering force and attractive interactions with the boundary , that can be enhanced by the presence of cortical actin ( Fig . 5 ) . Since the network turns over rapidly , the interactions with the boundary are likely transient . While the exact nature of these interactions is not well characterized , our results suggest that the tendency to polarize in smaller droplets arises primarily from the higher probability for the contracting network to engage with the boundary in these droplets . We model the interaction between the contracting network and the boundary as a transient ‘clutch’ . While the actual interactions are likely more complicated than assumed in this simplified model , the agreement between our experimental results under different conditions and the predictions of this model , suggest that the simplified model captures , at least qualitatively , the basic features responsible for the size - dependent centering and decentering of the contraction center . This novel symmetry breaking mechanism joins an array of different actin - myosin - based symmetry breaking mechanisms that have been previously discovered 6 , 16 , 32 - 35 , demonstrating yet another way in which these active networks can break symmetry and generate large scale motion . In all these examples , 13 the symmetry breaking mechanisms reflect an inherent mechanical instability in the system , which can be biased by the presence of directional cues , allowing cells to polarize in response to various signals 6 . Similarly , in our system the transition from a centered state to a polar one is spontaneous and occurs in a random direction , yet the same mechanism could allow cells to respond to a directional signal , e . g . if nucleation of cortical actin was enhanced locally , in a particular region of the cell boundary , the system would polarize in that direction . The involvement of persistently flowing actomyosin networks in cellular centering and decentering is seen in diverse cellular contexts . Examples include the localization of the nucleus in migrating cells that transition from a centered state in stationary cells to a polar localization in motile cells in fibroblasts 36 and keratocytes 37 . Note also that this decentering and polarization is often the hallmark of motility initiation in cells , both in 2D 35 and in 3D 38 , adding to the significance of the mechanism that we uncovered . Future research will show if Darcy forces could be part of the motility initiation phenomena in cells . An important feature of the localization mechanisms based on actin network flow is their ability to operate across scales and drive transport even over macroscopic scales . The transport of cellular components can be directly driven by the network flow , as seen e . g . during chromosome congression in star fish oocytes 11 , or indirectly via friction based mechanisms as observed recently during ooplasm segregation in zebrafish oocytes 12 , 13 . In our system , the movement of the aggregate during decentering is directly coupled to the flow of the contracting actin network , whereas the centering is indirectly mediated by a hydrodynamic interaction between the contracting network and the surrounding cytoplasm . There is an analogy between the localization mechanism we observed and a general class of mechanisms that can regulate switches between centering and decentering , based on shifting the balance between the interaction of the network periphery with the cell boundary and forces that act along the network length 30 , 39 , 40 . The novelty of our mechanism is that the centering force along the network length is hydrodynamic in nature . There was , in fact , a previous proposal that cytoplasmic flow generated by drag from dynein - driven cargo on astral microtubules can position organelles in large cells 41 , 42 . Involvement of an actin - network - generated cytoplasmic flow in decentering of meiotic spindle in mouse oocytes was also proposed 43 . In general , the appreciation for the presence of cytoplasmic flow in cells , driven by either actin - myosin 44 or microtubule - kinesin - dynein networks 45 , is increasing . The contribution of our study is that we demonstrate the significance of such flow for subcellular localization in a minimal in vitro system . 14 The characteristics of our in vitro system , such as the size of the cells , the viscosity of the cytosol and the typical velocities , are comparable to those found in oocytes and large embryonic cells , so we expect that the localization mechanisms explored here can be relevant for cellular localization in vivo . Notably , the hydrodynamic centering mechanism proposed is generic ; the centering force does not depend on the specific molecular components involved . Rather , the same centering mechanism would function in the presence of continuous flow of any cellular component . The important features are the presence of persistent flow patterns that generate directed Darcy friction forces , and a dynamic density of the flowing components that changes in response to its cellular localization . The development of in vitro model systems to study centering and decentering mechanisms in cells , as exemplified by this work , provides important insights to understand the complex dynamics that determine the internal cellular organization , which is an essential step toward deciphering the underlying operation principles of the living cell . Acknowledgments We thank Yariv Kafri , Erez Braun , Guy Bunin and members of our lab for useful discussions and comments on the manuscript . We thank Nicolas Minc for comments on the manuscript , and Peter Lenart for useful discussions . We thank Silvia Jansen for help with the experiments , and Gidi Ben Yoseph for excellent technical help . This work was supported by a grant from the Israel Science Foundation ( grant No . 957 / 15 ) to K . K . , a grant from the United States - Israel Binational Science Foundation ( grant No . 2013275 ) to K . K . and A . Mogilner , a grant from the United States - Israel Binational Science Foundation to K . K and B . G . ( grant No . 2017158 ) , a grant by the US Army Research Office ( grant W911NF - 17 - 1 - 0417 ) to A . Mogilner , and by grants from the Brandeis NSF MRSEC DMR - 1420382 and the National Institutes of Health ( R01 - GM063691 ) to B . G . . A . Manhart was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health ( grant GM121971 ) . Materials and Methods 1 . 1 Cell extracts , Proteins and Reagents Concentrated M - phase extracts were prepared from freshly laid Xenopus laevis eggs as previously described 16 , 19 , 46 . Briefly , Xenopus frogs were injected with hormones to induce ovulation and laying of unfertilized eggs for extract preparation . The eggs from the different frogs were collected and washed with 1X MMR ( 100mM NaCl , 2mM KCl , 1mM MgCl 2 , 2mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1mM EDTA , 5mM Hepes , pH 7 . 8 , 16◦C ) . The jelly envelope surrounding the eggs was dissolved using 2 % cysteine solution ( in 100mM KCl , 2mM MgCl 2 , and 0 . 1mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 8 – 7 . 9 ) . Finally , eggs were washed with CSF - XB ( 10mM K - 15 Hepes pH 7 . 7 , 100mM KCl , 1mM MgCl 2 , 5mM EGTA , 0 . 1mM CaCl 2 , and 50mM sucrose ) containing protease inhibitors ( 10µg / ml each of leupeptin , pepstatin and chymostatin ) . The eggs were then packed using a clinical centrifuge and crushed by centrifugation at 15000g for 15 minutes at 4°C . The crude extract ( the middle yellowish layer out of three layers ) was collected , supplemented with protease inhibitors ( 10 µg / ml each of leupeptin , pepstatin and chymostatin ) and 50mM sucrose , snap - frozen in liquid N 2 as 10µl aliquots and stored at −80◦C . Typically , for each extract batch a few hundred aliquots were made . Different extract batches exhibit similar behavior qualitatively , but the values of the contraction rate and disassembly rate vary 19 . All comparative analysis between conditions was done using the same batch of extract . ActA - His - Cys was purified from strain DP - L4363 of Listeria monocytogenes ( a gift from Julie Theriot , Stanford University ) and conjugated with ∼ 6 – 8 molecules of Bodipy FL - X - SE ( # D6102 , Molecular Probes ) per protein as previously reported 16 , 46 . ActA - Bodipy was stored at a concentration of ∼ 30µM at −80 °C . Before use , ActA - Bodipy was sonicated on ice for 15 min and centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min at 16 , 000 g to remove aggregates . Cor1B and AIP1 were expressed and purified from transfected HEK293T cells ( ATCC ) . Human Cof1 was expressed in BL21 ( DE3 ) E . Coli . Proteins were purified as described in 19 . Purified proteins were concentrated , aliquoted , snap - frozen in liquid N 2 , and stored at −80 °C until use . Actin networks were labeled with GFP - Lifeact purified from transformed E . Coli ( gift from Chris Fields , Harvard Medical School ) . The purified protein was concentrated to a final concertation of 252µM in 100mM KCL , 1mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1mM CaCl 2 , 1mM DTT and 10 % Sucrose , and stored at −80 °C until use . 1 . 2 Emulsion preparation An aqueous mix was prepared by mixing the following : 8µl crude extract , 0 . 5µl 20× ATP regeneration mix ( 150mM creatine phosphate , 20mM ATP , 20mM MgCl 2 and 20mM EGTA ) 0 . 5µM GFP - Lifeact and any additional proteins as indicated . The final volume was adjusted to 10µl by adding XB ( 10mM Hepes , 5mM EGTA , 100mM KCl , 2mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1mM CaCl 2 at pH 7 . 8 ) . The concentration of the components of the actin machinery in the mix can be estimated based on 47 . The total actin concentration is estimated to be ∼ 20µM . The ATP regeneration mix enables the system to continuously flow for more than 1 - 2 hours . Emulsions were made by adding ∼ 3 % by volume extract mix to degassed mineral oil ( Sigma ) containing 4 % Cetyl PEG / PPG - 10 / 1 Dimethicine ( Abil EM90 , Evonik Industries ) and stirring for 1 minute at 4 °C . The emulsions were put in 30µm or 100µm thick chambers for imaging , or in 100µm thick glass capillaries . 30 µm or 100 µm thick chambers were prepared by separating two passivated coverslips with double sided tape , and sealing with VALAP ( 1 : 1 : 1 mix of vaseline , lanolin and paraffin ) . In 30µm thick samples the imaged droplets were squished , allowing for better imaging of the actin network due to the flat glass - droplet surface , while in the 100µm samples all but the largest droplets ( R > 50 µm ) were spherical , minimizing interactions with the interface and maximizing boundary symmetry . 1 . 3 Magnetic manipulation 1µm diameter Dynabeads MyOne Sterptavidin C1 superparamagnetic beads ( Invitrogen ) were washed 3 times and resuspended in XB to 200 µg / ml . The washed beads were incubated for 30 minutes with 0 . 6µm biotin , washed 3 more times and resuspended in XB to 5 mg / ml ( 3 - 5 × 10 6 beads / µl ) . For magnetic manipulation assays , 0 . 5µl magnetic beads ( 5 mg / ml ) were added to the motility mix . For droplets in the size range examined ( R ~ 50 - 100 µm ) we estimate the number of beads in the aggregate to be 10 - 100 beads . Emulsions prepared as described above were loaded into rectangular glass capillaries ( cross - section : 100µm x 2000 µm ) by capillary forces . Droplets in a symmetric configuration that were 16 positioned near the capillary wall were identified and a horizontal magnetic force was applied by placing a magnetic needle ( the tip of a steel sewing needle attached to a K & J Magnetics D14 - N52 neodymium magnet 1 / 16 " dia . x 1 / 4 " thick ) , mounted on a three - axis micrometer manipulator , at a distance of about 200µm from the droplet ( Fig . S3 ) . At this distance , the magnetic force on a single bead is ∼ 0 . 5pN . The magnetic needle was held in place for 40 - 80 seconds during which the contraction center moved toward the side of the droplet . Since the droplets are not anchored to the surface , the external force also leads to some movement of the entire droplet toward the capillary wall . The Magnetic needle was then removed to allow the contraction center to reposition under the influence of internal forces . Bright - field and confocal images of the process were acquired using a spinning disk microscope as described below . The proximity to the capillary wall introduces some optical artifacts due to the glass curvature . The magnetic force on a single bead was estimated by imaging beads in water in the capillaries and measuring their velocity toward the magnetic needle . Under the influence of the magnetic field , the beads formed straight chains that moved axially toward the magnet . Each chain was tracked and measured automatically using MATLAB . The drag force on each chain was estimated as the force on a cylinder , and the magnetic force per bead obtained by dividing by the estimated number of beads in the chain . 1 . 4 Microscopy Bright - field Images were acquired on a Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope using a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 CCD camera or a QuantEM camera . Confocal images were acquired using a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk attached to a Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope and acquired with an EM - CCD ( QuantEM ; Photometrics ) . Symmetry state statistics images of emulsions in 100µm thick chambers were taken using 40x ( NA = 1 . 3 ) or 63x ( NA = 1 . 4 ) objectives . For each sample , 20 - 50 positions were chosen , containing droplets 30 - 120µm in diameter , and z - stacks of bright - field images at a 3 - 5µm separation of the sample were taken at several time - points between 15 to 60 minutes after sample preparation . Magnetic manipulation experiments and aggregate tracking experiments were imaged by bright - field and spinning disk confocal microscopy in glass capillaries using a 20x ( NA = 0 . 5 ) or a 10x ( NA = 0 . 5 ) objective . Magnetic manipulation experiments were imaged at a single plane , with 2 seconds time interval for up to 15 minutes , starting several minutes after sample preparation . Aggregate tracking experiments were performed by following 3 - 5 droplets at a time , using 100µm thick samples , 5 - 9 z - planes at 5µm separation , at 30 seconds intervals . The imaging was initiated several minutes after sample preparation and lasted for 1 hour . Fluorescence spinning - disk images were taken using 488nm and 561nm lasers and appropriate emission filters . Device controls and image acquisition were carried out using Slidebook software . 1 . 5 Analysis Image analysis was carried out using custom - written code in Matlab . 2D and 3D positions of the droplets and aggregates were extracted from bright - field or confocal images and z - stacks , either manually or in an automated fashion . For the statistical analysis of symmetry states , the x - y positions of the droplet centers were determined automatically from the bright - field images using a circle detection built - in Matlab function based on the Circular Hough Transform . The x - y positions of the aggregate centers were determined by fitting a circle to the aggregates in the images manually . The z - position of the droplet and aggregate centers were determined manually from the z - stack . Three droplet size ranges – small ( polar ; denoted red in the figures ) , intermediate ( transition ; yellow ) and large ( symmetric ; green ) – were determined for each data set as follows : A threshold of 0 . 4 aggregate displacement droplet radius  was used to categorize droplets as centered ( 0 ) or polar ( 1 ) , and a symmetry breaking curve was defined as a moving Gaussian 17 mean over droplet diameter ( using a Gaussian window with a variance , 2 5 µm  ) of these binary symmetry states . A cumulative mean of the symmetry breaking curve was used to determine the border between the small ( polar ) and the intermediate droplet size ranges , where the cumulative mean drops below 0 . 95 of its max - min , and a reverse cumulative mean of 1 minus the symmetry breaking curve was similarly used to determine the border between the large ( centered ) and the intermediate droplet size ranges . In the aggregate tracking experiments , the position of the contraction centers was determined from movies taken with 5 - 9 z planes at 5µm separation at each time - point as follows . The initial droplet and aggregate positions were marked by hand . Subsequently in each frame the droplet position was determined by scanning the vicinity of the droplet position from the previous frame for a circle of the same size with maximum intensity . The vicinity of the aggregate from the previous frame was scanned for the brightest or highest - gradient elliptical ring in all z - planes , and the x - y position of the aggregate was defined as the centroid of this ring . The z - position was determined to sub - pixel resolution in the z - direction using a 3 - point Gaussian interpolation over the ellipses scores ( brightness or gradient ) in the different z - planes . The z - position was determined as the center of the Gaussian . Droplets that broke symmetry were defined as droplets which reached 0 . 3 aggregate displacement droplet radius  during the movie . An initial estimate of the initiation time of the symmetry breaking process was defined to be the last time at which the displacement was 0 . 05 of the droplet radius ( point A ) . The end of the symmetry breaking process in each droplet was determined as the first time the aggregate reached 0 . 97 of its maximum displacement ( point C ) . The time of highest velocity - velocity correlation at 2 seconds interval between A and C was determined ( point B ) , and the last point between A and B that had a negative radial velocity was taken as the start of the symmetry breaking process . If no such point exists , point A was considered instead . The duration of the symmetry breaking process was defined as the interval between the start and end points described above . The mean squared displacement and velocity - auto correlation of the contraction centers of droplets that remained symmetric , and of the symmetry breaking process in droplets that broke symmetry , were analyzed from the tracks of the aggregates centers using MSDanalyzer MATLAB package described in 48 . The magnetic experiments were imaged in a single z - plane . The aggregate and droplet x - y positions were determined as detailed above . The actin network flow patterns were extracted by PIV analysis of time lapse movies of droplets as described previously 19 . 1 . 6 Computational modeling Mathematical modeling and numerical analysis of the Darcy flow , actomyosin network dynamics , forces on the network and aggregate , and aggregate positioning were done by solving Darcy equations , force balance equations and stochastic differential equations , as outlined in detail in the Supplementary Information . 18 Figures Figure 1 . Size - dependent localization of the contraction center . ( a ) Schematic illustration of the two stable configurations of the system : a symmetric state with a centered aggregate ( left ) , and a polar state in which the aggregate is positioned near the droplet’s boundary ( right ) . ( b ) Bright - field ( top ) and spinning disk confocal ( bottom ) images of the equatorial cross section of droplets in a symmetric state ( left ; Movie 1 ) and a polar state ( right ; Movie 2 ) . The aggregate is visible both in the bright - field images , and as an exclusion zone surrounded by regions of high actin network density in the florescence images . The actin network is labeled with GFP - Lifeact . ( c ) The actin network velocity field as determined by correlation analysis of the time lapse movies of the symmetric and polar droplets in ( b ) . The network exhibits contractile flows directed toward the aggregate in both cases . ( d - f ) The position of the aggregate surrounding the contraction center was determined for a population of droplets of different sizes , 40 19 minutes after sample preparation . ( d ) Bright - field images of droplets of different sizes . The aggregate position in each droplet was determined from the images , and its displacement from the droplet’s center was measured ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( e ) The displacement of the aggregate from the center is plotted as a function of droplet radius . The dashed black line marks the droplet radius , and the dashed red line marks the displacement where the aggregate reaches the boundary ( droplet radius minus aggregate radius ) . ( f ) Histograms of the aggregates localization for droplets in different size ranges : small , intermediate and large ( Materials and Methods ) . The distance of the aggregate from the center of the droplet was normalized to be between 0 ( centered ) and 1 ( polar ) . Small droplet ( R < 31 µm ) are polar ( red ; left ) . Intermediate droplets ( 31 µm < R < 40 µm ) exhibit a bipolar distribution with both symmetric and polar droplets ( yellow ; center ) . Large droplet ( 40 µm < R ) are symmetric ( green ; right ) . 20 Figure 2 . Dynamics of centering and symmetry breaking . The dynamics of the contraction center were followed by imaging droplets over time for an hour . ( a ) Spinning disk confocal ( top ) and Bright - field ( bottom ) images from a time lapse movie ( Movie 3 ) of a droplet that starts in a centered state and breaks symmetry to become polar . ( b ) The symmetry breaking transition of droplets from a symmetric state to a polar state was characterized in 18 different droplets . The displacement of the aggregate from the center of the droplet is shown as a function of time for the different droplets . Time zero is defined as the onset of symmetry breaking for each droplet ( see Methods ) . ( c - h ) Analysis of the dynamics of aggregate position as a function of time in droplets in the centered state ( c - e ; N = 12 ) and during symmetry breaking ( f - h ; N = 18 ) . ( c , f ) Tracks depicting the position of the aggregate in different droplets . ( d , g ) The mean squared displacement of aggregate positions as a function of time . The droplets in the centered state exhibit 21 confined random fluctuations ( d ) , whereas during symmetry breaking , the movement is directed ( g ) . ( e , h ) The normalized velocity autocorrelation           V t V t c V t V t       ( mean ± STD ; averaged over different droplets ) is shown for the tracks on the left . The velocity autocorrelation ( for t≥ 0 . 5 min ) is essentially zero in the centered state ( e ) . During symmetry breaking , the aggregate velocity exhibits a positive correlation for time scales of up to ∼ 10 minutes ( h ) . Figure 3 : Recentering following magnetic perturbations . The stability of the centered state was examined by introducing superparamagnetic beads that become trapped within the aggregate , and applying external magnetic fields to displace the aggregate toward the droplet’s boundary . ( a ) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup . A magnetic needle is introduced from the side , near a droplet placed within a glass capillary with a rectangular cross - section . The magnet exerts a pulling force on the aggregate , displacing it toward the side . The magnetic needle is then removed and the aggregate position is tracked . ( b ) Bright - field image of a sample , showing the tip of the magnetic needle positioned ~ 200 µm from a droplet in a capillary . ( c ) Time traces showing the displacement of the aggregate from the center 22 ( black ) and its radial velocity ( green ) during the magnetic perturbation experiment ( Movie 4 ) . During the pulling phase , the magnetic needle is held at a fixed position and the aggregate is displaced toward the side of the droplet ( “pulling phase” ) . After the needle is removed , the aggregate starts moving and reaches a maximal inward velocity after ~ 2 minutes ( “reorganization phase” ) . The recentering continues with the aggregate gradually slowing down and eventually stopping as it approaches the droplet’s center ( “recentering phase” ) . ( d ) Spinning - disk confocal images of the actin network labeled with GFP - Lifeact from a timelapse movie showing the recentering of the contraction center following a magnetic perturbation ( Movie 4 ) . ( e ) The position of the aggregate as a function of time after removing the magnet is shown for different droplets ( dotted lines - reorganization phase , solid lines - recentering phase ) . ( f ) The recentering velocity as a function of time is shown for different droplets . The thick grey line depicts the average over different droplets . The time in ( e , f ) is adjusted so the droplets reach zero velocity at t = 0 . ( g ) The recentering velocity is plotted as a function of the displacement from the droplet center . The thick grey line depicts the average over different droplets . 23 Figure 4 : Recentering model : friction between the contracting network and the fluid cytosol generates a centering force . ( a ) Schematic illustration of the model . The system is modeled as a two - phase system composed of a contracting actin network and the surrounding fluid . ( b - e ) Simulation results of the model when the aggregate’s position is held fixed ( see Supplementary Information ) . The simulation results for the steady - state actin network density and flow ( b ) and the surrounding fluid flow and force density ( c ) are shown . ( d ) The centering force is calculated from the simulation as the net force exerted on the aggregate as a function of the displacement from the droplet’s center at steady - state . The net centering force is plotted as a function of the displacement for droplets of different sizes ( dots - simulations results ; line - linear fit ) . ( e ) The effective spring constant of the centering force , determined 24 from the slope of the linear fit to the simulation results in ( d ) , is plotted as a function of the droplet radius ( R ) . The effective spring constant increases as R 3 . ( f - h ) In the dynamic model ( see Supplementary Information ) , the aggregate position is part of the dynamic variables of the system and moves according to the net force acting on it . ( f ) Schematic illustration of the dynamic model used to model the magnetic perturbation experiments . The initial conditions are obtained by displacing a centered steady - state configuration toward the side . Subsequently , the dynamics of the system lead to recentering of the aggregate . ( g ) The simulation results for the displacement of the aggregate as a function of time ( red line ) are compared to the average displacement determined experimentally ( black line ; mean ± STD ; Fig . 3e ) . ( h ) The simulation results for the recentering velocity as a function of displacement ( red line ) are compared to the average recentering dynamics determined experimentally ( black line ; mean ± STD ; Fig . 3g ) . Figure 5 : Symmetry breaking is induced by an attractive interaction with the boundary . ( a ) Schematic illustration of the system which contains a bulk contracting network that has some attractive interaction with the boundary . Experimentally , the interaction with the boundary can be enhanced by adding increasing concentrations of Bodipy - conjugated ActA that localizes to the water - oil interface and nucleates actin filaments there 16 . In simulations , we introduce a clutch that can engage and disengage 25 stochastically , connecting the contracting actin network with the boundary ( Supplementary Information ) . The competition between the recentering force that drives the aggregate to the center and the attractive interaction with the boundary , leads to size - dependent localization . ( b ) The aggregate displacement as a function of droplet radius is shown for standard conditions ( left ) , and samples supplemented with 25nM ( center ) or 100nM ( right ) Bodipy - ActA . The colored regions depict the different size ranges : small droplets that are primarily polar ( red ) , intermediate range with both polar and symmetric droplets ( yellow ) , and large droplets which are mostly centered ( green ) . The dashed black line marks the droplet radius , and the dashed red line marks the displacement where the aggregate reaches the boundary ( droplet radius minus aggregate radius ) . As the interaction with the boundary is enhanced by increasing ActA concentrations , larger droplets are found in a polar state . ( c ) Simulation results for the aggregate displacement as a function of droplet radius . The interaction with the boundary is enhanced by increasing the clutch engagement rate ( k on ) and decreasing the disengagement rate ( k off ) , resulting in changes in the size - dependent localization of the aggregates that resemble the changes observed experimentally in ( b ) . 26 Supplementary Figures Figure S1 . Size - dependent localization of the contraction center as a function of time . The position of the aggregate surrounding the contraction center was determined for a population of droplets of different sizes , 15 minutes ( left ) , 30 minute ( center ) or 45 minutes ( right ) after sample preparation . The displacement of the aggregate from the center is plotted as a function of droplet radius based on the experimental data ( top ) and the simulation ( bottom ; see Supplementary Information ) . The colored regions depict the different size ranges : small droplets that are primarily polar ( red ) , intermediate range with both polar and symmetric droplets ( yellow ) , and large droplets which are mostly centered ( green ) . The dashed black line marks the droplet radius , and the dashed red line marks the displacement where the aggregate reaches the boundary ( droplet radius minus aggregate radius ) . The centered state is metastable , with larger droplets becoming polar over time . 27 Figure S2 . Analysis of the dynamics of aggregate position as a function of time in droplets before symmetry breaking . ( a ) The position of the aggregate in different droplets that eventually break symmetry was followed ( as shown in Fig . 2b ) . Tracks of the aggregates position are depicted during the initial period in which the aggregates remained nearly centered ( i . e . for t < 0 in Fig . 2b ; N = 17 ) . ( b ) The mean squared displacement of the aggregate position in different droplet is shown as a function of time . Thick gray line – mean MSD of droplets that remain centered for over an hour as shown in Fig 2d . The aggregates exhibit confined random fluctuations before breaking symmetry , similar to the dynamics of aggregates in centered droplets ( Fig . 2d ) . ( c ) The normalized velocity autocorrelation ( mean ± STD ; N = 17 , averaged for the different droplets ) is shown for the tracks on the left . The velocity is considerably less correlated over time than during the symmetry breaking phase ( Fig . 2h ) . Figure S3 . Magnetic pulling experimental setup . ( a ) Image of the manipulator with the magnetic needle mounted on the inverted microscope . ( b ) Image of the magnetic needle near the sample placed in a rectangular capillary . ( c ) Bright field image overlaid with a spinning disk confocal image of a droplet containing fluorescent beads . Fluorescent beads were used only for demonstration ; during the experiments non - fluorescent , magnetic beads were used . Inset . Zoomed confocal image of the fluorescent beads localized in the aggregate . 28 Figure S4 . Transition to a polar state following a magnetic perturbation . During the magnetic pulling experiments , 5 out of 31 droplets broke symmetry following the perturbation . ( a ) The position of the aggregates in 3 droplets that broke symmetry after the perturbation are plotted as a function of time . The dashed lines depict the pulling phase , while the solid lines depict the dynamics after the magnet was removed . ( b ) Bright - field and spinning - disk confocal images of the actin network labeled with GFP - Lifeact from a time lapse movie of a droplet which became polar after the magnetic perturbation ( Movie 5 ) . 29 Figure S5 . Asymmetric actin network distribution during recentering . Left : A kymograph showing the angular distribution of the actin network density around the aggregate ( x - axis ; scheme on the left ) as a function of time ( y - axis ) during the magnetic perturbation experiments ( top ) and their simulation ( bottom ) . Right : Graphs depicting the recentering velocity as a function of time during the magnetic perturbation experiments ( top ) and their simulation ( bottom ) . The correlation between the asymmetry in the actin network distribution around the aggregate and the recentering velocity is evident both in the experiments and in the simulations . 30 Figure S6 . Sample geometry induces anisotropy in the localization of the aggregate in the polar state . The angular distribution of the position of polar aggregates was determined for ( a ) a population of spherical droplets ( 100 µm chamber height ) , and ( b ) a population of pancake - shaped droplets , squished in a 30 µm - high chamber . The measured angular probability - density histograms are plotted together with the angular distribution predicted for an isotropic process ( dashed line ) . In spherical droplets , the measured angular distribution is broad , whereas in squished droplets there is an obvious preference to break symmetry toward the top and bottom interface . Both squished and spherical droplets exhibit a slight upwards bias , ( toward θ = 0 ) , implying that the aggregate is likely buoyant relative to the surrounding fluid . Figure S7 . Size - dependent localization of the contraction center is influenced by actin disassembly factors . The position of the aggregate surrounding the contraction center was determined for a population of droplets formed with 80 % extract ( standard ; left ) and samples supplemented with components of the actin disassembly machinery : 12 . 5µM Cofilin , 1 . 3µM Coronin and 1 . 3 µM Aip1 ( CCA ; right ) . The displacement of the aggregate from the center is plotted as a function of droplet radius . The colored regions depict the different size ranges : small droplets that are primarily polar ( red ) , intermediate range with both polar and symmetric droplets ( yellow ) , and large droplets which are mostly centered ( green ) . The dashed black line marks the droplet radius , and the dashed red line marks the displacement where the aggregate reaches the boundary ( droplet radius minus aggregate radius ) . The faster actin network 31 contraction in the presence of higher actin turnover rates in the CCA - supplemented sample 19 , increases the likeliness of smaller droplets to remain symmetric . Supplementary Movies Movie 1 . Steady - state dynamics in a symmetric droplet . This movie shows spinning disc confocal images of a contracting actomyosin network labeled with GFP - Lifeact in a symmetric droplet ( Fig . 1b , c , left ) . The droplet was squished in a 30µm - high chamber to improve the imaging . Images were taken at the equatorial plane . Movie 2 . Steady - state dynamics in a polar droplet . This movie shows spinning disc confocal images of a contracting actomyosin network labeled with GFP - Lifeact in a polar droplet ( Fig . 1b , c , right ) . The droplet was squished in a 30µm - high chamber to improve the imaging . Images were taken at the equatorial plane . Movie 3 . Symmetry breaking in a droplet that transitions from a symmetric state into a polar state . The dynamics of the actin network labeled with GFP - Lifeact in a spherical droplet were followed by spinning disc confocal time lapse imaging . The movie shows a symmetry breaking process , in which the aggregate moves from the center of the droplet toward the side . Movie 4 . Recentering dynamics following a magnetic perturbation . This movie shows spinning disc confocal and bright - field images of a magnetic perturbation experiment ( Fig . 4b - d ) . The aggregate was pulled from the center using a magnetic needle , and subsequently recentered after the magnet is removed . Movie 5 . Transition to a polar state following a magnetic perturbation . This movie shows spinning disc confocal and bright - field images of a magnetic perturbation experiment in which the droplet became polar following the perturbation ( Fig . S4 ) . The aggregate was pulled from the center using a magnetic needle , and subsequently continued moving in the same direction until it reached the boundary . 32 References 1 . Rafelski , S . M . & Marshall , W . F . Building the cell : design principles of cellular architecture . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 9 , 593 ( 2008 ) . 2 . van Bergeijk , P . , Hoogenraad , C . C . & Kapitein , L . C . Right time , right place : probing the functions of organelle positioning . Trends in cell biology 26 , 121 - 134 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Gundersen , G . G . & Worman , H . J . Nuclear positioning . Cell 152 , 1376 - 1389 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Letort , G . , Nedelec , F . , Blanchoin , L . & Thery , M . Centrosome centering and decentering by microtubule network rearrangement . Molecular biology of the cell 27 , 2833 - 2843 ( 2016 ) . 5 . Mitchison , T . et al . Growth , interaction , and positioning of microtubule asters in extremely large vertebrate embryo cells . Cytoskeleton 69 , 738 - 750 ( 2012 ) . 6 . Mullins , R . D . Cytoskeletal mechanisms for breaking cellular symmetry . Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 2 , a003392 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Mogessie , B . , Scheffler , K . & Schuh , M . Assembly and positioning of the oocyte meiotic spindle . Annual review of cell and developmental biology 34 , 381 - 403 ( 2018 ) . 8 . Wuּhr , M . , Dumont , S . , Groen , A . C . , Needleman , D . J . & Mitchison , T . J . How does a millimeter - sized cell find its center ? Cell cycle 8 , 1115 - 1121 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Grill , S . W . & Hyman , A . A . Spindle positioning by cortical pulling forces . Developmental cell 8 , 461 - 465 ( 2005 ) . 10 . Almonacid , M . et al . Active diffusion positions the nucleus in mouse oocytes . Nature cell biology 17 , 470 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Lenart , P . et al . A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes . Nature 436 , 812 - 818 ( 2005 ) . 12 . Shamipour , S . et al . Bulk Actin Dynamics Drive Phase Segregation in Zebrafish Oocytes . Cell 177 , 1463 - 1479 . e1418 ( 2019 ) . 13 . Ierushalmi , N . & Keren , K . Cellular Organization : Bulk Actin Network Flows Drive Ooplasm Segregation . Current Biology ( 2019 ) . 14 . Holy , T . E . , Dogterom , M . , Yurke , B . & Leibler , S . Assembly and positioning of microtubule asters in microfabricated chambers . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 94 , 6228 - 6231 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Laan , L . et al . Cortical dynein controls microtubule dynamics to generate pulling forces that position microtubule asters . Cell 148 , 502 - 514 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Abu - Shah , E . & Keren , K . Symmetry breaking in reconstituted actin cortices . eLife 3 ( 2014 ) . 17 . Grill , S . W . , GoֳEnczy , P . , Stelzer , E . H . K . & Hyman , A . A . Polarity controls forces governing asymmetric spindle positioning in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . Nature 409 , 630 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Vogel , S . K . , Pavin , N . , Maghelli , N . , Jֳulicher , F . & Toliִc - Nֳorrelykke , I . M . Self - organization of dynein motors generates meiotic nuclear oscillations . PLoS biology 7 , e1000087 ( 2009 ) . 19 . Malik - Garbi , M . et al . Scaling behaviour in steady - state contracting actomyosin networks . Nature Physics ( 2019 ) . 20 . Pinot , M . et al . Confinement induces actin flow in a meiotic cytoplasm . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 11705 - 11710 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Tang , S . , Renz , M . , Shemesh , T . , Driscoll , M . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Cytoplasmic self - organization established by internal lipid membranes in the interplay with either actin or microtubules . bioRxiv , 506436 ( 2018 ) . 22 . Almonacid , M . , Terret , M . - E . & Verlhac , M . - H . e . in Seminars in cell & developmental biology , Vol . 82 34 - 40 ( Elsevier , 2018 ) . 23 . Uraji , J . , Scheffler , K . & Schuh , M . Functions of actin in mouse oocytes at a glance . J Cell Sci 131 , jcs218099 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Ohnishi , Y . & Okamoto , T . Nuclear migration during karyogamy in rice zygotes is mediated by continuous convergence of actin meshwork toward the egg nucleus . Journal of plant research 130 , 339 - 348 ( 2017 ) . 33 25 . Tanimoto , H . , Sallֳe , J . , Dodin , L . & Minc , N . Physical forces determining the persistency and centring precision of microtubule asters . Nature Physics 14 , 848 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Mogilner , A . & Manhart , A . Intracellular fluid mechanics : Coupling cytoplasmic flow with active cytoskeletal gel . Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 50 , 347 - 370 ( 2018 ) . 27 . Charras , G . T . , Yarrow , J . C . , Horton , M . A . , Mahadevan , L . & Mitchison , T . J . Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells . Nature 435 , 365 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Schmidt , C . F . , Baermann , M . , Isenberg , G . & Sackmann , E . Chain dynamics , mesh size , and diffusive transport in networks of polymerized actin : a quasielastic light scattering and microfluorescence study . Macromolecules 22 , 3638 - 3649 ( 1989 ) . 29 . Tan , T . H . et al . Self - organization of stress patterns drives state transitions in actin cortices . Science Advances 4 , eaar2847 ( 2018 ) . 30 . Tanimoto , H . , Kimura , A . & Minc , N . Shape - motion relationships of centering microtubule asters . The Journal of cell biology 212 , 777 - 787 ( 2016 ) . 31 . Wu , H . - Y . , Nazockdast , E . , Shelley , M . J . & Needleman , D . J . Forces positioning the mitotic spindle : Theories , and now experiments . Bioessays 39 , 1600212 ( 2017 ) . 32 . van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . Cooperative symmetry - breaking by actin polymerization in a model for cell motility . Nature cell biology 1 , 493 ( 1999 ) . 33 . van der Gucht , J . , Paluch , E . , Plastino , J . & Sykes , C . e . Stress release drives symmetry breaking for actin - based movement . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102 , 7847 - 7852 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Kozlov , M . M . & Mogilner , A . Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophysical journal 93 , 3811 - 3819 ( 2007 ) . 35 . Barnhart , E . , Lee , K . - C . , Allen , G . M . , Theriot , J . A . & Mogilner , A . Balance between cell - substrate adhesion and myosin contraction determines the frequency of motility initiation in fish keratocytes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 , 5045 - 5050 ( 2015 ) . 36 . Gomes , E . R . , Jani , S . & Gundersen , G . G . Nuclear movement regulated by Cdc42 , MRCK , myosin , and actin flow establishes MTOC polarization in migrating cells . Cell 121 , 451 - 463 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Yam , P . T . et al . Actin - myosin network reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarized cell motility . The Journal of cell biology 178 , 1207 - 1221 ( 2007 ) . 38 . Callan - Jones , A . C . & Voituriez , R . Actin flows in cell migration : from locomotion and polarity to trajectories . Current opinion in cell biology 38 , 12 - 17 ( 2016 ) . 39 . Zhu , J . , Burakov , A . , Rodionov , V . & Mogilner , A . Finding the cell center by a balance of dynein and myosin pulling and microtubule pushing : a computational study . Molecular biology of the cell 21 , 4418 - 4427 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Fogelson , B . & Mogilner , A . Actin - myosin force generation and symmetry breaking in the model contractile fiber . SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 78 , 1754 - 1777 ( 2018 ) . 41 . Shinar , T . , Mana , M . , Piano , F . & Shelley , M . J . A model of cytoplasmically driven microtubule - based motion in the single - celled Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 10508 - 10513 ( 2011 ) . 42 . Niwayama , R . , Shinohara , K . & Kimura , A . Hydrodynamic property of the cytoplasm is sufficient to mediate cytoplasmic streaming in the Caenorhabiditis elegans embryo . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 11900 - 11905 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Yi , K . , Rubinstein , B . & Li , R . Symmetry breaking and polarity establishment during mouse oocyte maturation . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 368 , 20130002 ( 2013 ) . 44 . Keren , K . , Yam , P . T . , Kinkhabwala , A . , Mogilner , A . & Theriot , J . A . Intracellular fluid flow in rapidly moving cells . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 1219 - 1224 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Monteith , C . E . et al . A mechanism for cytoplasmic streaming : Kinesin - driven alignment of microtubules and fast fluid flows . Biophysical journal 110 , 2053 - 2065 ( 2016 ) . 46 . Abu - Shah , E . , Malik - Garbi , M . & Keren , K . Reconstitution of actin cortices , in Building a cell from its component parts . ( eds . J . Ross & W . Marshall ) ( Elsevier , 2014 ) . 34 47 . Wuhr , M . et al . Deep proteomics of the Xenopus laevis egg using an mRNA - derived reference database . Current Biology 24 , 1467 - 1475 ( 2014 ) . 48 . Tarantino , N . et al . TNF and IL - 1 exhibit distinct ubiquitin requirements for inducing NEMO - IKK supramolecular structures . The Journal of cell biology 204 , 231 - 245 ( 2014 ) . Supplementary Information Centering and symmetry breaking in conﬁned contracting actomyosin networks Niv Ierushalmi Maya Malik - Garbi , Angelika Manhart , Enas Abu - Shah , Bruce L . Goode , Alex Mogilner and Kinneret Keren Supplementary Text 1 Model Overview Our model describes a two - phase system , consisting of an incompressible ﬂuid phase and a viscous contracting actin network phase . Both phases coexist in a spherical droplet , with an impenetrable spherical aggregate located at the network contraction center . As an input to the simulation we use previously measured actin network dynamics [ 1 ] : the network contracts homogeneously toward the aggregate with a local ﬂow velocity that is proportional to the distance from the aggregate , and turns over with a constant assembly rate and a disassembly rate that is proportional to the local network density ( all model parameters are gathered in the tables below ) . We solve three coupled dynamic equations presented in detail below . The ﬁrst one is the reaction - drift equation for the network density , which is essentially the mass conservation equation for the actin network describ - ing its assembly , disassembly and ﬂow . The second one is the Darcy ﬂow equation to determine the ﬂow velocities and pressure distributions in the cytosol . Finally , there is a force balance equation to determine the total force on the aggregate , or the aggregate velocity . Two type of simulations are performed . First , we perform a dynamic simulation in which the aggregate is free to move in response to the forces acting on it . To emulate the magnetic force pulling experiments , we allow the system to evolve to a symmetric steady state with the aggregate at the droplet center . We then translocate the aggregate to a decentered state , and use the shifted steady state network density distribution ( with the network compressed to ﬁt inside the droplet ) as initial conditions for the simulation . From this point the aggregate is free to move according to the net forces on it determined by the network and ﬂuid dynamics , and its position and velocity are measured . In the second type of simulation , the aggregate is held ﬁxed in place , at a certain distance from the droplet center , and the system is allowed to reach a steady state in which the net - work dynamics , ﬂuid motion , and forces are determined . As described below , we use this simulation to estimate the eﬀective centering force on the aggregate . 1 2 Model Description All variables and parameters of the model and their values and orders of magnitude are provided in the tables below . We solve numerically the coupled system of equations for the actin density dynamics , the ﬂuid dynamics and force balancing in a 3D geometry as described below . The equations are solved in a domain given by Ω : = B R ( 0 ) \ B r A ( Q ) , where B R ( 0 ) , is a sphere of radius R > 0 , and B r A ( Q ) is an excluded spherical volume ( the aggregate ) of radius r A at position Q . A . Density dynamics : We model the actin density ρ ( X , t ) at position X = ( x , y , z ) and time t > 0 by the following equation : ∂ t ρ + ∇ · ( V ρ ) + ˙ Q · ∇ ρ = α − βρ . ( 1 ) The ﬁrst term on the l . h . s . is the rate of change of the density ρ , the second term describes the centripetal drift of the network with velocity V ( X , t ) relative to the aggregate , and the third term accounts for the eﬀective movement of the network with the aggregate’s speed ˙ Q ( t ) . ∇ denotes the gradient with respect to the spatial coordinates . The ﬁrst and second terms on the r . h . s . are responsible for the actin assembly and disassembly with rates α and β , respectively . The boundary condition for Eq . ( 1 ) is zero density at the droplet boundary : ρ ( | X | = R , t ) = 0 . ( 2 ) Note that the Darcy friction forces have no inﬂuence on the actin network dynamics in this model . The justiﬁcation for this is that , as we explain below , the magnitude of the Darcy friction forces is in the ten pN range , while we assume that the myosin contraction and viscous forces in the actin network are at least an order of magnitude larger , based on previous estimates and measurements [ 1 ] . B . Fluid dynamics : We solve numerically the Darcy ﬂow equation for the ﬂuid ﬂow U ( X , t ) and the pressure p ( X , t ) [ 4 ] κ µ ∇ p = V + ˙ Q − U , ( 3 ) where ∇ p is the local pressure gradient , µ is the ﬂuid dynamic viscosity and V ( X , t ) is the given actin network velocity relative to the aggregate ( see Eq . ( 7 ) below ) . κ is the network permeability coeﬃcient , which is a function of network density ρ ; we use the density - permeability relation given by : κ = l 2 φ 1 / 3 f , l = 1 . 87 µ m µ m 1 / 2 √ ρ , ( 4 ) where φ f is the volume fraction of the ﬂuid and l is the network meshsize [ 2 , 3 ] . The equation is complemented by the incompressibility condition for the ﬂuid , ∇ · U = 0 , ( 5 ) 2 and no - ﬂux conditions at the droplet and aggregate boundary , U ( | X = R | ) · n = 0 , U ( | X − Q | = r A ) · m = 0 , ( 6 ) where n and m are the local unit normal vectors at the droplet and aggregate boundaries , respectively . In Eq . ( 5 ) , we neglect the eﬀect of variability of the small volume frac - tion of actin . Based on measurements , we assume that the actin centripetal contraction speed relative to the aggregate V increases linearly away from the aggregate and has the following form : V = γ ( Q − X ) (cid:20) 1 − r A | Q − X | (cid:21) . ( 7 ) The term in the square brackets accounts for the observation that the actin ﬂow becomes zero at the aggregate boundary . 2 . 1 Model of recentering dynamics In order to ﬁnd the aggregate speed ˙ Q at each time step , we use the assumption that the total Darcy friction force on the whole actin network is equal to zero ( more precisely , that forces other than the total Darcy friction force are negligibly small ) : (cid:90) Ω µ κ ( V + ˙ Q − U ) dΩ = 0 , ( 8 ) where dΩ is the volume element . The aggregate speed is determined by an iteration procedure from Eq . ( 3 ) at each computational step . Initial Density Condition : To mimic the experimental setup in the magnetic pertu - bation experiments , we performed two steps to calculate the initial actin network density : 1 . We assumed Q = ˙ Q = 0 , i . e . the aggregate is positioned at the droplet center . We simulated Eqs . ( 1 ) - ( 2 ) on a time interval suﬃciently large to attain a stationary density distribution . 2 . Then the aggregate and actin density were shifted together away from the center along the x - axis toward the droplet boundary , and the actin on the side closer to the droplet edge was compressed to remain inside the droplet . The resulting density was used as initial condition for further simulations to determine the dynamics of the actin network , the ﬂuid , and the position of the aggregate . 2 . 2 Model with a ﬁxed contraction center In this case , we shifted the aggregate to position Q from the aggregate center and ﬁxed the aggregate at this position . Consequently we used ˙ Q = 0 in Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) . We ﬁrst solved Eqs . ( 1 ) - ( 2 ) on a time interval suﬃciently large to attain a stationary density distribution . Then we solved Eqs . ( 3 ) - ( 5 ) to obtain the pressure and ﬂuid ﬂow . The main 3 change was in Eq . ( 8 ) : Now that the aggregate is held in place , there is a net total Darcy friction force applied to it given by the equation F = (cid:90) Ω µ κ ( V − U ) dΩ . ( 9 ) We used this equation to calculate the eﬀective hydrodynamic centering force on the ag - gregate and varied the aggregate position and droplet radius to ﬁnd the force dependence on these parameters . 3 Simulation Reformulation in cylindrical coordinates . Note that all above equations are given in 3D - space . However we have cylindrical symmetry along the axis on which the aggregate moves ( the x - axis ) : If positioned at Q = ( Q , 0 , 0 ) , the aggregate will continue to move along the x - axis , i . e . ˙ Q = ( ˙ Q , 0 , 0 ) . Switching to cylindrical coordinates ( x , y , z ) → ( x , r , ϕ ) , x = x , y = r cos ϕ , z = r sin ϕ , ( 10 ) we can replace Eqs . ( 3 ) - ( 5 ) by equations for ˜ p ( x , r ) and ˜ U ( x , r ) = ( U x ( x , r ) , U r ( x , r ) ) , where U x and U r are the ﬂuid components of the solution in the z = 0 plane in the x and in the radial direction , respectively . κ µ ∇ ˜ p = ˜ V + ˙˜ Q − ˜ U . ( 11 ) ˜ V = γ (cid:18) Q − x − r (cid:19) (cid:20) 1 − r A | Q − X | (cid:21) , ˜ Q = (cid:18) Q 0 (cid:19) ( 12 ) Note that now ∇ = ( ∂ x , ∂ r ) . The main change can be seen in the incompressibility condition which becomes , ∇ · ˜ U = − 1 r U r , ( 13 ) which is a consequence of the use of cylindrical coordinates . The boundary conditions are unchanged . Note that ˜ U and ˜ p are the solution in the z = 0 plane . The full solution can then be obtained for the pressure from p ( x , y , z ) = ˜ p ( x , r ) , and for the ﬂuid speed by rotation , i . e . U ( x , y , z ) = ( U x , cos ϕ U r + sin ϕ U r ) , where r = (cid:112) y 2 + z 2 . We can also rewrite the actin density equation in cylindrical coordinates , which yields an equation for ˜ ρ ( x , r , t ) : ∂ t ˜ ρ + ∇ · ( ˜ V ρ ) + ˙˜ Q · ∇ ˜ ρ = α − β ˜ ρ + γ (cid:20) 3 − 2 r A | Q − X | (cid:21) ˜ ρ . ( 14 ) Again we can obtain the full solution by ρ ( x , y , z , t ) = ˜ ρ ( x , r , t ) . 4 Simulation details . We used the Lax - Friedrichs scheme for the density equation on a rectangular grid and a Finite Element Method for the ﬂuid simulation using Matlab’s PDE toolbox . At each time interval [ t , t + dt ] we performed the following steps : 1 . Determine aggregate speed such that ( 8 ) is fulﬁlled by repeatedly solving ( 11 ) , ( 13 ) . 2 . Calculate the ﬂuid ﬂow from ( 11 ) , ( 13 ) using the correct aggregate speed . 3 . Solve the density equation ( 14 ) on [ t , t + dt ] using the correct aggregate speed . The density was interpolated from the rectangular grid to the triangular FEM grid at each time step . To solve the ﬂuid equation we reformulated ( 11 ) , ( 13 ) in terms of the pressure only . This can be done by taking the divergence of ( 11 ) and using ( 13 ) . Tables 1 , 2 and 3 list the used parameters and variables . 4 Parameters Variables Name Meaning Computed order of magnitude U Fluid velocity 10 µ m / min V Actin network velocity 10 µ m / min ρ Actin network density 5 µ m f Hydrodynamic force density fN / µ m 3 Q Distance of the aggregate to the droplet center 10 µ m Table 1 : Variables . Biological Parameters Name Meaning Value Reference µ Fluid viscosity 1 . 7 10 − 4 pN min / µ m 2 10x the viscosity of water κ Actin network permeability see ( 4 ) Eq ( 19 ) in [ 3 ] and in Supp Mat of [ 2 ] γ Contraction rate 0 . 67 / min Measured experimentally [ 1 ] . α Actin assembly rate 1 µ m / min Estimated to give experimentally measured density β Actin disassembly rate 1 . 43 / min Measured experimentally [ 1 ] . R Droplet radius 20 - 60 µ m Measured experimentally r A Aggregate radius 4 - 12 µ m Proportional to droplet radius , measured experimentally [ 1 ] . Table 2 : Parameters . 5 Numerical parameters Name Meaning Value ∆ x Spatial step , density simulation 0 . 5 - 0 . 75 µ m ∆ t Temporal step , density simulation ≈ 10 − 3 min dt Temporal step 0 . 5 min H max Maximum mesh edge length of FEM mesh 1 µ m Table 3 : Numerical parameters . 6 5 Symmetry Breaking Model The symmetry breaking is modeled as driven by a stochastic two - state interaction with the boundary . When the interaction is on , the aggregate moves outward in the radial direction at a constant velocity , and when the interaction is oﬀ , the aggregate recenters under the inﬂuence of the centering force discussed above . Additionally , the aggregate undergoes a small random Brownian motion . The movement is modeled in 3D , but the interaction with the boundary is always taken to be in the current radial direction ( i . e . with the closest interface ) . 5 . 1 Model Parameters The symmetry breaking velocity , V out , is estimated from the experiments and taken as a constant for simplicity . The centering velocity V cen is size - independent and linear in the displacement from the droplet’s center as observed in the experiments and in the centering simulation , V cen = K in · d , where d is the distance from the center . The rate of transition to the on state , k on , is taken to be inversely proportional to the distance of the aggregate from the droplet edge , k on ∝ 1 R − d , and its order of magnitude is estimated from the experiments . This dependence accounts in a simpliﬁed manner for the increase in the probability of the network to interact with the boundary , as the network density near the edge increases as the aggregate moves closer to the boundary . Similarly k off , the transition rate to the oﬀ state , is proportional to that distance , k off ∝ R − d . For both rates , the proportionality factor is varied manually within the same order of magnitude to simulate diﬀerent interaction strengths . Thus we have : k off = r off × ( R − d i ) k on = r on × 1 ( R − d i ) where r on and r off are constant . Finally , the aggregate diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is estimated from the experiments , based on the random ﬂuctuations of the aggregate in the centered state ( Fig . 2d ) . 5 . 2 Simulation A collection of droplets of various sizes is initiated in a centered state . At each time step i , a random variable for each droplet determines whether the interaction will switch state or remain the same , based on the relevant on and oﬀ rates . The aggregate moves outward or inward based on the interaction state , with an additional random diﬀusive motion . If the aggregate reaches displacement d ≥ 0 . 75 R , it remains there for the rest of the simulation . We model the stochastic trajectory of the aggregate by a combination of dynamical Markov process method and Langevin equation . We use a random number generator and dynamical Markov process method to simulate the switches between the on and oﬀ states as follows . Let rr ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] be a uniformly distributed random variable , if the state s i is oﬀ and rr < k on · ∆ t , the system transitions to state s i + 1 on . If the state s i is on and rr < k off · ∆ t , then the system transitions to state s i + 1 oﬀ . Then the subsequent 7 movement is dependent on the interaction on / oﬀ state . If s i + 1 is on ( i . e . the interaction with the droplet boundary is engaged ) , we solve the following Langevin equation : (cid:126)d i + 1 = (cid:126)d i + V out · ˆ d i ∆ t + sqrt ( 2 D ∆ t ) · (cid:126)η otherwise (cid:126)d i + 1 = (cid:126)d i − K in · (cid:126)d i ∆ t + sqrt ( 2 D ∆ t ) · (cid:126)η where (cid:126)η is a standard normal distributed random vector . Parameters Name Meaning Value Reference V out Symmetry breaking velocity 2 µ m min − 1 Measured experimentally ( Fig 2b ) K in Centering velocity coeﬃcient 0 . 5 min − 1 Measured experimentally ( Fig 3g ) and from simulation r off Oﬀ - rate coeﬃcient 0 . 0125 − 0 . 0013 µ m − 1 min − 1 Order of magnitude estimated from experiment ( Fig 2b ) r on On - rate coeﬃcient 4 − 40 µ m min − 1 Estimated to give reasonable results D Aggregate diﬀusion coeﬃcient 0 . 5 µ m 2 min − 1 Measured experimentally R Droplet radius 15 − 100 µ m ∆ t Time step 0 . 1 min Table 4 : Parameters . References [ 1 ] Malik - Garbi , M , Ierushalmi , N , Jansen , S , Abu - Shah , E , Goode , BL , Mogilner , A , Keren , K . Scaling behaviour in steady - state contracting actomyosin networks . Nature Physics 2019 ; 15 : 509 – 516 . [ 2 ] Charras GT , Yarrow JC , Horton MA , Mahadevan L , Mitchison TJ . Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells . Nature . 2005 ; 435 ( 7040 ) : 365 . [ 3 ] Schmidt , CF , Baermann , M , Isenberg , G , Sackmann , E . Chain dynamics , mesh size , and diﬀusive transport in networks of polymerized actin : a quasielastic light scattering and microﬂuorescence study . Macromolecules . 1989 ; 22 ( 9 ) : 3638 – 3649 . [ 4 ] Mogilner , A . & Manhart , A . Intracellular ﬂuid mechanics : Coupling cytoplasmic ﬂow with active cytoskeletal gel . Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 50 , 347 - 370 ( 2018 ) . 8