Quantitative Phenotyping of Cell – Cell Junctions to Evaluate ZO - 1 Presentation in Brain Endothelial Cells K ELSEY M . G RAY , 1 D AKOTA B . K ATZ , 1 E RICA G . B ROWN , 1 and K IMBERLY M . S TROKA 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 1 Fischell Department of Bioengineering , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 , USA ; 2 Biophysics Program , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 , USA ; 3 Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine , University of Maryland , Baltimore , MD 21201 , USA ; and 4 Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of Maryland , Baltimore , MD 21201 , USA ( Received 6 December 2018 ; accepted 6 April 2019 ; published online 15 April 2019 ) Associate Editor Dan Elson oversaw the review of this article . Abstract — The selective permeability of the blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) is controlled by tight junction - expressing brain endothelial cells . The integrity of these junctional proteins , which anchor to actin via zonula occludens ( e . g . , ZO - 1 ) , plays a vital role in barrier function . While disrupted junctions are linked with several neurodegenerative diseases , the mechanisms underlying disruption are not fully under - stood . This is largely due to the lack of appropriate models and efﬁcient techniques to quantify edge - localized protein . Here , we developed a novel junction analyzer program ( JAnaP ) to semi - automate the quantiﬁcation of junctional protein presentation . Because signiﬁcant evidence suggests a link between myosin - II mediated contractility and endothe - lial barrier properties , we used the JAnaP to investigate how biochemical and physical cues associated with altered con - tractility inﬂuence ZO - 1 presentation in brain endothelial cells . Treatment with contractility - decreasing agents increased continuous ZO - 1 presentation ; however , this increase was greatest on soft gels of brain - relevant stiffness , suggesting improved barrier maturation . This effect was reversed by biochemically inhibiting protein phosphatases to increase cell contractility on soft substrates . These results promote the use of brain - mimetic substrate stiffness in BBB model design and motivates the use of this novel JAnaP to provide insight into the role of junctional protein presenta - tion in BBB physiology and pathologies . Keywords — Matrix stiffness , Mechanotransduction , Mechanobiology , Blood – brain barrier . INTRODUCTION The tight junctions of the blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) play a vital role in regulating barrier perme - ability and brain homeostasis . 1 Tight junctions ( e . g . , occludins , claudins ) anchor to the actin cytoskeleton via zonula occludens ( e . g . , ZO - 1 ) 12 , 17 and work to - gether with adherens junctions ( e . g . vascular endothe - lial cadherin , VE - cadherin ) to stabilize brain microvascular endothelial cells ( BMECs ) within the barrier . Junction integrity is required for the mainte - nance of normal physiological processes . As such , disruption of cell – cell junctions is linked with dysreg - ulated transport across the barrier and numerous neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s dis - ease and multiple sclerosis . 19 Therefore , understanding the key players driving junction stability could hold signiﬁcant promise for therapeutic discovery . Despite this , the mechanisms underlying junction disruption aren’t fully understood . This is largely due to the lack of appropriate BBB models and eﬃcient techniques to quantify the junctional proteins as they are presented at the cell edge . Importantly , previous studies have linked edge - presentation of VE - cadherin with junction and barrier maturity . Speciﬁcally , linear VE - cadherin structures parallel to the cell boundary are considered to be stable and mature , while imma - ture junctions take the form of discontinuous focal adherens presenting a punctate or serrated morphol - ogy . 40 Therefore , a useful parameter in evaluating monolayer integrity is the amount of mature ( i . e . , continuous or linear ) vs . immature ( i . e . , discontinuous ) junctions localized at the cell perimeter . Quantiﬁcation of this parameter , however , remains cumbersome due to deﬁcient techniques for analysis . Here , we aimed to Address correspondence to Kimberly M . Stroka , Fischell Department of Bioengineering , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 , USA . Electronic mail : kstroka @ umd . edu Annals of Biomedical Engineering , Vol . 47 , No . 7 , July 2019 ( (cid:2) 2019 ) pp . 1675 – 1687 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 019 - 02266 - 5 BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY 0090 - 6964 / 19 / 0700 - 1675 / 0 (cid:2) 2019 Biomedical Engineering Society 1675 address this gap by developing the junction analyzer program ( JAnaP ) , a semi - automated program capable of measuring the percent of cell perimeters covered by continuous and discontinuous junction , or no junction . We used this program to quantify the eﬀect of cell contractility on ZO - 1 presentation in human BMECs ( HBMECs ) . Cell contractility and actin ﬁber formation have been directly linked with adherens junction presen - tation in several EC types , including BMECs . 40 Fur - thermore , these have been correlated with barrier permeability , where increased contractility drives junc - tion disassembly , leading to vascular leakage 38 and increased transmigration of immune and cancer cells . 31 Additionally , we and others have previously shown that peripheral EC tension and adherens junction presenta - tion can be modulated by altering the subendothelial matrix stiffness , a phenomenon driven by myosin II - mediated contractility . 6 , 8 , 40 , 46 , 47 Speciﬁcally , stable , lin - ear adherens junctions are observed in cells on soft sub - strates , 40 or in cells with low tension and active Rac , 13 while discontinuous junctions and increased permeability are observed in cells on stiff substrates , 46 or in cells experiencing high tension and active Rho . 13 The link between myosin II - mediated contractility and vascular barrier properties ( e . g . , cell – cell junctions , permeability ) has been recently reviewed . 10 , 37 The effects of cell con - tractility , and speciﬁcally its modulation via substrate stiffness , on HBMEC barriers and ZO - 1 junction for - mation , however , remains relatively understudied . The effects of matrix stiffness are of particular interest , as matrix modulation remains a tunable parameter of in vitro model design , and because vascular stiffening is associated with cardiovascular injury , disease and stroke . 7 , 9 , 27 , 54 Most in vitro BBB modeling is still per - formed on Transwell inserts , tissue culture plastic , and glass , with the approximate stiffness in the MPa - GPa range . This is much stiffer than the in vivo brain extra - cellular matrix ( ~ 1 kPa ) and peripheral subendothelial matrices ( ~ 3 – 7 kPa ) . 33 , 41 As ZO - 1 has been a suggested regulator of cell – cell tension and junctional assembly via actomyosin organization , 48 and actin reorganization is involved in the cellular response to substrate stiffness , 46 here we aimed to use the JAnaP to quantify ZO - 1 pre - sentation in response to biochemical and physical cues associated with altered states of contractility . MATERIALS AND METHODS Development of Novel Junction Analyzer Program ( JAnaP ) Provides Quantitative Measure of Cell and Junction Phenotypic Properties To quantitatively analyze cell – cell junction presen - tation , we developed a Python - based program to analyze immunoﬂuorescent images of ZO - 1 . We inte - grated the ability to calculate junction data in con - junction with cell morphology to streamline analysis processes . The JAnaP source code , guided user inter - face , and detailed instructions have been made avail - able on GitHub ( https : / / github . com / StrokaLab / JAna P ) for practitioners to download and use . The ﬁrst step when using the JAnaP is to load the monolayer images into the program . Figure 1a pre - sents one example image . Each image is then converted to grayscale using the formula for effective lumines - cence , p _ i = 0 . 2989 * r + 0 . 5870 * g + 0 . 1140 * b , where r = red , g = green , and b = blue . This algo - rithm converts the color value of each pixel to an intensity ( p _ i ) between 0 ( pure black ) to 255 ( pure white ) . Next , the images are inverted relative to their maximum intensity values and a White Tophat ﬁlter is applied with a 5 - pixel disk - shaped structuring element to correct for the non - uniform background noise . To avoid over - ﬁltering , the original image is normalized to 10 % of this modiﬁed image and added to the modiﬁed image to generate a ‘‘cost image’’ used to trace the cell perimeter . For perimeter tracing , the user marks the edges of each cell fully contained within the image with a small number of single - pixel dots ( typically 5 – 10 waypoints per cell ) ( Fig . 1b ) . This process is termed ‘‘way - pointing’’ . As the user adds each waypoint on the original image , the program uses the cost image to generate a ‘‘minimum cost path segment’’ between each waypoint using the Scikit path - ﬁnding algorithm . This essentially generates the path between each way - point based on the maximum intensity present in the original image ( i . e . follows the perimeter based on junction presentation ) . Conveniently , each path seg - ment is generated in real time , so the user can adjust the waypoints , if needed , to accurately capture the cell edge . Each path segment is subsequently stitched to - gether to create a full loop or ‘‘path’’ around the cell edge ( Fig . 1b ) . This waypoint process generates an ordered set of points that is speciﬁc to every cell , each identiﬁed by their center coordinates ( Fig . 1c ) . Note that this process allows the user to select only the cells in which the junction detail is visible around the entire perimeter of the cell . As such , we only analyzed cells that were fully attached and spread to the substrate and excluded any rounded and overexposed cells . A numpy array representing the polygon bounded by the path is then generated using the scikit Python module . This binary two - dimensional array is used with the scikit measure module to calculate a more accurate measure of the cell perimeter by accounting for diagonal lengths across pixels , the value of which is then converted to the l m - scale and used to calculate cell area ( Fig . 1d ) . Cell circularity can then be calcu - lated using the formula 4 p ( area ) / perimeter 2 . Next , a convex hull is ﬁt to the cell path using the Scipy library BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1676 BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1677 ( Fig . 1e ) . The area of this hull is calculated via the Shoelace Method and used to calculate the cell solidity using the formula : ( cell area ) / ( convex hull area ) . The cell presented in Fig . 1 has a perimeter , area , circu - larity , and solidity of 132 l m , 771 l m 2 , 0 . 55 , and 0 . 93 , respectively . Figure 1f illustrates each junction presentation evaluated using this technique . To quantify the junc - tions , a threshold value is identiﬁed to differentiate between regions with and without immunoﬂuores - cently tagged ZO - 1 ( Fig . 1g ) . Here , the optimal intensity threshold for this set of images was deter - mined to be 15 ( Supplemental Fig . S1 ) and was used for the entire study . The program then compares the intensity of each pixel along the cell path to this threshold . Any pixel above this value is categorized as a ‘‘junction’’ , while ‘‘no junction’’ is any pixel below this threshold ( Fig . 1h ) . For intensity - threshold com - parison , a feature mask is generated by creating a matrix equal to the image size . A ‘‘feature’’ is a con - tiguous region within the image ( i . e . , junction ) . Every feature is labeled by assigning each element of the matrix to a unique integer based on the feature it is a part of via a fully connected structuring element . This feature mask can then be ﬁltered down to include only the features which lie on the perimeter of the cell of interest . Then , junctions can be categorized into con - tinuous or discontinuous by measuring the length of the cell path that passes through the feature , termed ‘‘Path Length’’ , and comparing it against a ‘‘Contin - uous Minimum Length’’ , determined here to be 15 pixels ( Supplemental Fig . S2 ) ( for a 1024 - pixel 9 1024 - pixel image , ~ 2 . 7 l m ) . If the Path Length is less than the Minimum Length , that junction feature is consid - ered discontinuous ; otherwise , it is grouped as con - tinuous ( Fig . 1i ) . The cumulative sum of the path length of all junctions divided by the entire cell perimeter provides the total ZO - 1 coverage ( i . e . , overall edge - localization ) for that cell . In Fig . 1 , 57 . 9 % of the cell edge is covered by ZO - 1 junction , while 42 . 1 % has no junction localized at the perimeter . On the other hand , the cumulative sum of the path length of each feature type divided by the entire perimeter of the cell provides a measure of the fraction of the cell edge expressing each junction type . Here , continuous junctions are expressed at 34 . 1 % of the cell edge ( Fig . 1j—magenta color ) , while 23 . 8 % of the perimeter is covered by discontinuous junctions . The discontinuous junctions can be further catego - rized into punctate or perpendicular , based on the ‘‘relative aspect ratio’’ of that feature calculated as the tip - to - tip distance ( thickness measure ) divided by the Path Length ( Fig . 1i ) . A threshold value of 1 . 2 was determined ( Supplemental Fig . S3 ) , such that any feature with a relative aspect ratio less than 1 . 2 would be categorized as punctate , while any larger ratio would render the feature perpendicular . In Fig . 1 , 21 . 7 % of the cell edge is covered by punctate junction while 2 . 1 % is covered by perpendicular junction ( Fig . 1j—light and dark blue colors ) . Finally , the program was qualitatively and quanti - tatively validated by selecting 10 cells that included a mix of junction types and shape factors . The cells were traced in ImageJ and the shape descriptors were di - rectly compared . The line tool was used to manually calculate the percentage of the cell perimeter covered by each junction type . The percent diﬀerence calcu - lated between the JAnaP results and ImageJ calcula - tions were within 1 % for cell area , 2 % for perimeter and solidity , and 3 % for circularity and all junction types ( Supplemental Table S . I . ) . Cell Culture and Treatments Ethics approval for all studies were obtained from the University of Maryland , Institutional Biosafety Committee ( Protocol Number ESSR # 15 - 06 ) . HBMECs were purchased from Cell Systems and cul - tured as previously described . 22 Cells ( passage 7 – 10 ; 5e5 per coverslip ) were seeded onto collagen - coated glass coverslips or polyacrylamide gels ( as described below ) and grown for 2 days . For conditions with cAMP supplements , 250 l M 8 - ( 4 - chlorophenylthio ) adenosine - 3 ¢ , 5 ¢ - cyclic monophosphate sodium salt ( CPT - cAMP ) ( Abcam ) and 17 . 5 l M 4 - ( 3 - butoxy - 4 - methoxybenzyl ) imidazolidin - 2 - one ( RO - 20 - 1724 ) ( Tocris Bioscience ) were added to culture medium 24 h after cells were plated . These concentrations were se - lected because they are routinely used for culturing brain endothelial cells and are cited in many several b FIGURE 1 . Workﬂow of the JAnaP to quantify cell morphology and junction presentation . An example monolayer is presented in ( a ) with cell of interest denoted with the white - hashed box . ( b ) Presents that cell after the waypointing process . The white arrows point to each waypoint seeded around the perimeter , with a zoomed - in clip in the top corner . The thin white line presents the perimeter traced by the program by connecting each waypoint using the Scikit path - ﬁnding algorithm . The entire monolayer after the waypointing process is presented in ( c ) with the center coordinates of each cell denoted in white . ( d and e ) Depict the cell perimeter ( white ) and convex hull ( black ) , respectively , as calculated and traced by the JAnaP and used to calculate perimeter , area , circularity , and solidity . ( f ) Illustrates the different junction presentations quantiﬁed using this program . The cell of interest after each pixel has been compared to the threshold intensity value to isolate each junction as presented in ( g ) . ( h ) Presents the same image as ( g ) but the regions around the cell perimeter classiﬁed as ‘‘no junction’’ are traced in red . ( i ) Presents the categorization criteria for each junction type and ( j ) depicts the isolated junctions classiﬁed as punctate ( magenta ) , perpendicular ( light blue ) , or continuous ( blue ) for the example cell . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1678 previous studies . 14 , 34 , 51 , 52 Myosin II was inhibited with 50 l M ( - ) - blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h at 37 (cid:3) C after 48 h of culture ( with or without cAMP supple - ments ) . The vehicle control consisted of medium con - taining 0 . 6 % DMSO ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . After 48 h , protein phosphatases were inhibited via 0 . 1 nM caly - culin A ( Santa Cruz ) treatment for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C . The vehicle control consisted of DMSO at equal vol - ume to that used in the calyculin conditions ( 0 . 1 % ﬁnal concentration ) . These concentrations were selected for blebbistatin and calyculin A because we have previ - ously measured lower and higher cell traction forces , respectively , for these inhibitors , while still maintaining cell viability . 42 All experiments were repeated two to four times . Polyacrylamide Gel Preparation Thin polyacrylamide gels were synthesized on glass coverslips as ﬁrst described by Wang and Pelham , 50 and used in our previous publications . 20 , 45 – 47 Here , gels were composed of acrylamide and bisacrylamide ( bis ) ( BIO RAD ) at the following concentrations : 15 % acrylamide + 1 . 2 % bis , 8 % acrylamide + 0 . 2 % bis , 8 % acrylamide + 0 . 07 % bis , and 3 % acry - lamide + 0 . 2 % bis . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) was used to measure the Young’s modulus of each gel composition , as described and presented in the Sup - plemental Method S1 and Fig . S2 . Gels were activated using sulfo - SANPAH ( Thermo Fisher ) and then coated with 100 l g / mL collagen type 1 ( Sigma - Al - drich ) for 4 h at room temperature ( RT ) . For glass experiments , cells were plated on unactivated cover - slips ( 22 9 22 mm , Fisher Scientiﬁc ) that had been exposed to UV for 20 min and coated in 100 l g / mL collagen for 1 – 4 h . Immunostaining HBMECs were rinsed with warm PBS , ﬁxed with 1 % formaldehyde ( Fisher Scientiﬁc ) for 10 min , and permeabilized in 0 . 25 % TritonX - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 5 min . Cells were washed with PBS three times between each step , and then blocked in 2 % goat serum ( Abcam ) for 1 h at RT . Primary antibody ( rabbit polyclonal IgG to ZO - 1 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , sc - 10804 ) was then added to cells at a 1 : 50 dilution in 2 % goat serum and incubated overnight at 4 (cid:3) C . The next day , samples were washed with PBS , then blocked again with 2 % goat serum for 1 h at RT . Cells were then incubated in 1 : 100 secondary antibody ( goat anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 , Abcam ) and 1 : 2500 Hoechst ( ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc ) , in PBS , for 1 h at RT , then rinsed with PBS . Microscopy All samples were imaged on an Olympus IX83 in - verted microscope using a 60 9 oil objective and Olympus cellSens Software . Images were collected to maximize the monolayer coverage within that image . Image analysis was performed on raw images such that the pixel intensities were comparable between groups ; however , the images presented in this manuscript have been adjusted to improve visibility . Monolayer Coverage Quantiﬁcation ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) was used to quantify monolayer coverage of each image . Visible holes in the monolayer were manually traced and quantiﬁed in ImageJ , and the total void area was summed per image . Monolayer coverage was ex - pressed as a percentage by multiplying the fraction of the total uncovered area divided by the total image area by 100 and then subtracting it from 100 % . When mono - layer coverage was less than the void area , the covered area was traced instead , and the void area was calculated by subtracting the sum of the covered area from the total image area . While all other data presented is on a per - cell basis , this measure is presented on a per - image basis . Note that this parameter is the only variable in this manuscript that was not quantiﬁed using the JAnaP . Statistical Analysis For instances where two groups of data are com - pared ( i . e . , Fig . 2 ) , statistical analyses were completed used an unpaired t test . For other shape factor group calculations , a one - way ANOVA with a post hoc Tu - key test for multiple comparisons was used . For grouped junction analysis , a two - way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey test for multiple comparisons was used . Outliers were identiﬁed using the Grubbs’ method with alpha = 0 . 0001 to remove only deﬁnite outliers . Measurements stated in this paper are pre - sented in the format mean ± SEM . Note that only * * * p £ 0 . 001 and * * * * p £ 0 . 0001 have been presented here due to large cell numbers included in analysis , however full statistical data can be found in the Sup - plemental Tables S . II – S . V . Unless otherwise marked with brackets , signiﬁcance is with respect to the control within the same treatment group ( e . g . , control with cAMP vs . experimental with cAMP ) . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1679 RESULTS cAMP Supplements Quantitatively Increase ZO - 1 Junction Coverage in HBMECs on Glass Several previous studies have shown that CPT - cAMP and RO - 20 - 1724 increase tight junctions in various EC types . 5 , 53 Therefore , to ﬁrst investigate the use of the JAnaP , we quantiﬁed the effects of these supplements on HBMECs on collagen - coated glass . Representative images of cells immunostained for ZO - 1 comparing the use of cAMP supplements are shown in Fig . 2a , and an example cell analyzed by the JAnaP is presented in Fig . 2b . The addition of cAMP sup - plements decreased the average cell perimeter and area from 195 . 0 ± 6 . 1 to 156 . 5 ± 3 . 6 l m and from 1185 . 0 ± 66 . 2 to 938 . 8 ± 37 . 0 l m 2 , respectively , but increased solidity and circularity , leading to smaller but more rounded cells ( Fig . 2c – f ) . Monolayer cover - age was approximately 47 ± 3 % and was unaffected by cAMP supplements ( Fig . 2g ) . Note that the same initial seeding density was used throughout the manuscript , and while here , monolayer coverage was low , the same seeding density in subsequent conditions led to a signiﬁcant increase in monolayer coverage . While cAMP supplements did not inﬂuence monolayer coverage , the overall ZO - 1 localization increased from 15 . 2 ± 0 . 9 % to 27 . 6 ± 0 . 9 % , resulting from increased continuous and punctate junction presentation from 4 . 6 ± 0 . 5 % to 11 . 3 ± 0 . 7 % and 9 . 7 ± 0 . 5 % to 14 . 3 ± 0 . 4 % , respectively ( Fig . 2h ) . These results suggest that while elevating cAMP induces slight changes in cellular morphology , it signiﬁcantly increases the edge - localization of ZO - 1 . These quanti - ﬁed results are in line with the large body of qualitative evidence that cAMP agents improve junction archi - tecture in EC barriers . Since edge - localization of b FIGURE 2 . The effect of cAMP supplements on HBMECs on collagen - coated glass . ( a ) Presents immunoﬂuorescent images of ZO - 1 in HBMECs with and without cAMP supplement ( scale bar = 20 l m ) . An example cell of interest is denoted with the white hashed box and is presented in ( b ) with the junctions categorized by the JAnaP . ( c – f ) Present the average cell perimeter , area , solidity , circularity as calculated using the JAnaP . N = 177 cells without cAMP and N = 327 cells with cAMP . The coverage of the monolayer within each image is presented in ( g ) while the coverage of each junction per cell perimeter is presented in ( h ) . For ( g ) , N = 36 and 41 monolayer images for without and with cAMP , respectively . For ( h ) , the bars represent the average results for N = 179 and 329 cells for without and with cAMP groups , respectively . Statistical analysis was performed using an unpaired t - test , * * * p £ 0 . 001 and * * * * p £ 0 . 0001 . The colors of the statistics in ( h ) indicate the differences with and without cAMP for each junction type . ( i and j ) Present the relationship between total ZO - 1 coverage and monolayer coverage ( i ) without and ( j ) with cAMP supplements , with each dot representing the average of all cells within each image . Full statistical data is included in Supplemental Table S . II . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1680 junctional proteins typically requires homophilic interactions with an adjacent binding partner in regions of cell – cell contact , we investigated the inﬂu - ence of monolayer coverage on total ZO - 1 presenta - tion . A positive correlation was found between monolayer and junction coverage ( r - squared = 0 . 6078 ) in the absence of supplements ( Fig . 2i ) . However , this relationship was mitigated with the addition of supplements ( Fig . 2j ; r - squared = 0 . 0078 ) , suggesting that cAMP additives increase and stabilize the level of edge - localized ZO - 1 at these conﬂuency levels . Biochemical Inhibition of Myosin II on Stiﬀ Substrates Increases Continuous ZO - 1 Junctions Despite the increase in junction localization with cAMP supplements on glass , the overall junction and monolayer coverage remained low . These cAMP sup - plements function to ( 1 ) inhibit myosin light chain phosphorylation which decreases EC contraction , and ( 2 ) activate Rac1 to increase cortical actin stabilization and decrease actin stress ﬁber formation . 30 Therefore , we investigated the interplay of blebbistatin , a myosin - II inhibitor , and cAMP supplements , to test the effects of further decreasing contractility on HBMEC barrier formation and junctional presentation . Representative images of ZO - 1 immunostaining and JAnaP results are presented in Figs . 3a and 3b . The average cell area ranged from 1201 ± 64 to 1579 ± 83 l m 2 and was unchanged with blebbistatin or cAMP treatment ( Fig . 3c ) . Other morphological parameters can be found in Supplemental Fig . S4 , with statistical comparisons presented in Table S . III . Monolayer coverage , however , increased over 20 % when cells were treated with blebbistatin ( irrespective FIGURE 3 . The effect of blebbistatin treatment with and without cAMP supplement on collagen - coated glass . ( a ) Presents immunoﬂuorescent images of ZO - 1 in HBMECs for each treatment ( scale bar = 20 l m ) . An example cell of interest is denoted with the white hashed box and is presented in ( b ) with the junctions categorized by the JAnaP . ( c ) Presents the average cell area calculated using the JAnaP ( 129 £ N £ 195 , where N is the number of cells ) and ( d ) shows the coverage of the monolayer within each image ( 32 £ N £ 35 , where N is the number of images ) . The coverage of each junction per cell perimeter is presented in ( e ) ( 136 £ N £ 188 , where N is the number of cells ) . Statistical analysis was performed using a one - way ANOVA for ( c and d ) and a two - way ANOVA for ( e ) , both with a post hoc Tukey test for multiple comparisons , * * * * p £ 0 . 0001 . The statistics represent differences between the experimental group and the control with the same cAMP treatment unless otherwise marked with a bracket . The color of the statistics in ( e ) indicate the differences for the corresponding junction type . Full statistical information is included in Supplemental Table S . III . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1681 of cAMP supplement ) ( Fig . 3d ) . Total ZO - 1 edge - coverage also increased from 14 . 2 ± 0 . 8 % to 22 . 9 ± 1 . 0 % with blebbistatin , and further to 43 . 3 ± 1 . 7 % when treated with both blebbistatin and cAMP supplements ( Fig . 3e ) . This increase was driven by signiﬁcant increases in continuous junctions , as no change was observed in punctate or perpendicular junctions . The increase in both monolayer coverage and continuous junctions indicate improved barrier formation with decreased myosin II - mediated con - tractility , especially when HBMECs were supple - mented with cAMP . Decreasing Matrix Stiﬀness Increases Continuous ZO - 1 Junctions Previous results suggest that substrate stiﬀness modulates myosin II - mediated EC contractility 46 and monolayer traction forces . 29 Given the monolayer and junctional alterations observed with myosin II inhibi - tion ( Fig . 3 ) , we next investigated the mechanobio - logical effects of substrate stiffness on barrier formation . HBMECs were plated on collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels and immunostained for ZO - 1 ( Fig . 4a and 4b ) . The speciﬁc gel compositions were selected to span a wide range of physiologically - and pathologically - relevant stiffness . The brain extracel - lular matrix is approximately 1 kPa and peripheral subendothelial matrices range from 3 to 7 kPa , 46 and hence our lower gel stiffnesses represent physiologi - cally ‘‘healthy’’ matrices in terms of mechanical prop - erties . Blood vessel stiffening is associated with vascular injury , and thus the 15 and 194 kPa gels represent a ‘‘diseased’’ stiffness range , as evidenced by previous studies where atomic force microscopy was used to quantify the mechanical properties of endothelial cell substrates in peripheral arteries ex vivo FIGURE 4 . HBMECs on collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels of varying stiffness . ( a ) Presents immunoﬂuorescent images of ZO - 1 in HBMECs with cAMP supplement on each gel stiffness ( scale bar = 20 l m ) . An example cell of interest is denoted with the white hashed box and is presented in ( b ) with the junctions categorized by the JAnaP for each condition . ( c ) Presents the average cell area calculated using the JAnaP ( 167 £ N £ 327 , where N is the number of cells ) and ( d ) shows the coverage of the monolayer within each image ( 31 £ N £ 50 , where N is the number of images ) . The coverage of each junction per cell perimeter is presented in ( e ) ( 228 £ N £ 343 , where N is the number of cells ) . Statistical analysis was performed using a one - way ANOVA for ( c and d ) and a two - way ANOVA for ( e ) , both with a post hoc Tukey test for multiple comparisons , * * * * p £ 0 . 0001 . The color of the statistics in ( e ) indicate the differences for the corresponding junction type . Full statistical information is included in Supplemental Table S . IV . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1682 and found diseased models to increase in stiffness from 3 – 5 kPa to 10 – 15 kPa . 26 , 28 The Young’s moduli of the gels were previously determined 45 and conﬁrmed again in our lab using AFM ( Supplemental Method S1 and Fig . S5 ) . Because our previous results ( Figs . 2 and 3 ) suggested barrier improvement with cAMP , the results in Fig . 4 present only conditions with cAMP supplement ( see Supple - mental Fig . S6 for results without supplement and full shape factor analysis ) . Note that the results on colla - gen - coated glass from Fig . 2 are also included here for comparison . Interestingly , cell area was consistent on all gels , despite the large stiﬀness range , and was roughly double the size of the cells cultured on glass ( Fig . 4c ) . Monolayer coverage ranged from 92 . 2 ± 1 . 0 to 95 . 2 ± 0 . 6 % on the gels , which was roughly 50 % higher than the average monolayer coverage on glass ( Fig . 4d ) . Total ZO - 1 edge - localization increased on gels vs . glass , with the greatest ( 55 . 8 ± 1 . 3 % ) observed on 1 kPa gels . This resulted from increased continuous presentation on 1 kPa , covering 35 . 5 ± 1 . 5 % of the cell perimeter ( at least 12 % more than any other condition ) ( Fig . 4e ) . Without cAMP supplement , HBMECs also demonstrated higher junctional cover - age on gels vs . glass ; however , the ampliﬁed enhance - ment of these parameters on 1 kPa gels was absent ( Supplemental Figure S6C ) . No change in perpendic - ular junction coverage was observed , but punctate junctions increased between selective substrates . Overall , this suggests that while HBMEC morpholog - ical parameters are insensitive to matrix stiffness within a physiological ( 1 and 8 kPa ) and even patho - logical ( 15 and 194 kPa ) 46 range , they are affected by the orders of magnitude difference between polyacry - lamide gels ( kPa range ) and glass ( GPa ) . However , ZO - 1 presentation seems to be more mechanosensitive , as more mature junctions were observed on 1 kPa compared to stiffer gels . Inhibition of Protein Phosphatases on Soft Substrates Decreases ZO - 1 Junction Coverage Given the improved monolayer coverage and ZO - 1 localization in conditions associated with decreased cell contractility ( i . e . , via blebbistatin treatment and soft substrate stiffness ) , we next investigated whether the opposite effect would be observed with increased contractility . HBMECs on collagen - coated 1 kPa gels or glass were treated with calyculin - A , a protein phosphatase inhibitor linked with increased cellular contractility , 11 , 36 immunostained for ZO - 1 , and ana - lyzed via the JAnaP ( Fig . 5a ) . In line with the Fig . 4 results , cells were smaller and exhibited lower mono - layer coverage on glass vs . 1 kPa gels ( Fig . 5b and 5c ; see Supplemental Fig . S7 for additional morphological parameters ) . While calyculin treatment had no effect on cell area on the respective substrates , this treatment decreased monolayer coverage from 89 . 5 ± 3 . 5 to 70 . 0 ± 3 . 3 % on 1 kPa gels . Notably , this effect was not observed on glass . Similarly , total ZO - 1 localization decreased from 30 . 8 ± 1 . 0 to 13 . 7 ± 0 . 9 % with calyculin treatment on 1 kPa gels , while junc - tional coverage on glass remained at ~ 19 – 20 % for both conditions ( Fig . 5d ) . This calyculin - induced de - crease in ZO - 1 on 1 kPa resulted from a decrease in both continuous and punctate junction presentation compared to the 1 kPa control ( Fig . 5d ) . DISCUSSION The expression of EC junctional proteins plays a vital role in the physiology and pathophysiology of vascular barriers . 49 However , the ability to quantita - tively measure the protein presentations as localized in a cellular monolayer has been signiﬁcantly lacking in the ﬁeld , limiting analysis of how various parameters involved with homeostasis or pathology inﬂuence junctional expression . Here , we developed a program that calculates edge - localized junction presentations in conjunction with cell morphological parameters . The program provides a streamlined analysis process in a semi - automated fashion , since the user only needs to identify the perimeter of each cell via waypointing and the remainder of the calculations are performed auto - matically . This helps to minimize human error beyond that which exists when identifying the cell perimeter , though , use of the Scikit path - ﬁnding algorithm fur - ther helps to minimize human error during this step . Note that this program is limited by image and microscope resolution ; however , this same limitation exists in current manual analysis techniques . While others have manually calculated the percent of the cell perimeter covered by linear junctions , 40 to our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst program that allows for a streamlined and automated approach to this otherwise tedious task . Additional reports of junction quantiﬁ - cation includes the number 3 and width 25 , 27 of tight junctions around the cell edge . Although not explicitly presented here , the JAnaP also measures these parameters in its overall calculations . Importantly , this program could theoretically be expanded to study virtually any cellular system in which immunoﬂuores - cent staining or ﬂuorescent protein - tagging of cell – cell junctional proteins is feasible . Indeed , the program could also prove useful for analyzing dynamics of cell – cell junction presentation in real time in response to drug treatments , mimicked disease conditions , or other BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1683 relevant processes using ﬂuorescently - tagged junc - tional proteins and live cell imaging . Use of this program was exempliﬁed by investigat - ing the eﬀect of cAMP supplements and substrate stiﬀness on ZO - 1 presentation in HBMEC monolayers . The addition of cAMP supplements increased contin - uous junctions in every condition and also increased punctate and perpendicular junctions on glass . This was not surprising , as signiﬁcant evidence showing improvements in barrier properties with cAMP sup - plements exists in the literature . In ECs , cAMP reportedly blocks myosin light chain phosphorylation through Rho / ROCK signaling inhibition , 16 which has been linked with increased linear VE - cadherin forma - tion , 48 and Beese et al . reported the supplements to improve continuous junction development in human umbilical vein ECs due to actin cytoskeleton reorga - nization . 5 Our results further support these points , since continuous ZO - 1 presentation was further increased when myosin II was inhibited via blebbistatin treatment . Onken et al . , previously observed increased actin stress ﬁbers in HBMECs on polyacrylamide gels of increasing stiffness and a correlation between decreased substrate stiffness and increased linear VE - cadherin junctions as measured manually . 40 This aligns with our data since we found increased continuous ZO - 1 on all gels ( vs . glass ) , with the highest continuous presentation on the softest 1 kPa gels with cAMP supplements . In fact , total junctional coverage was lowest on glass , which increased with blebbistatin and further increased on 1 kPa gels . Consistent with this trend was the overall monolayer coverage with cAMP , which was lowest on glass , increased with blebbistatin , FIGURE 5 . HBMECs treated with calyculin on 1 kPa collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels or glass . ( a ) Presents immunoﬂuorescent images of ZO - 1 in HBMECs on each gel with cAMP supplement and an example cell of interest ( denoted with the white hashed box ) with the junctions categorized by the JAnaP for each condition ( scale bar = 20 l m ) . ( b ) Presents the average cell area calculated using the JAnaP ( 131 £ N £ 236 , where N is the number of cells ) and ( c ) shows the coverage of the monolayer within each image ( 15 £ N £ 35 , where N is the number of images ) . The coverage of each junction per cell perimeter is presented in ( d ) ( 131 £ N £ 215 , where N is the number of cells ) . Statistical analysis was performed using a one - way ANOVA for ( c and d ) and a two - way ANOVA for ( e ) , both with a post hoc Tukey test for multiple comparisons , * * * p £ 0 . 001 and * * * * p £ 0 . 0001 . The color of the statistics in ( e ) indicate the differences for the corresponding junction type . Full statistical information is included in Supplemental Table S . V . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1684 and further increased on hydrogels . Overall , this indi - cates improved barrier formation in cells cultured on gels of biologically - relevant stiffness . Importantly , however , monolayer coverage could be inﬂuencing the overall ZO - 1 presentation results , since junctional proteins typically localize to sites of cell – cell contact . We therefore investigated the relationship between total junction coverage and monolayer coverage for all conditions tested in this manuscript ( Supplemental Fig . S8 ) . Only a slight positive correlation emerged ( r - squared = 0 . 3007 ) , suggesting that while monolayer coverage ( and therefore , cell – cell contacts ) may play a role , it is not the only driving force regulating ZO - 1 edge - localization . Given our previous result that substrate stiﬀness modulates EC contractility , 46 it is likely that cells on glass are highly contractile , inducing the poorest bar - rier properties of the conditions tested . Meanwhile , decreasing contractility on glass , via blebbistatin , led to improved barrier properties , though not to the extent that resulted from decreased substrate stiffness . This suggests that mechanical modulation of the cell’s microenvironment may adjust cellular contractility to a more optimal level . This was further supported by the ﬁnal study , where calyculin signiﬁcantly disrupted linear ZO - 1 and increased discontinuous ZO - 1 on 1 kPa gels . On 1 kPa , cells are likely minimally con - tracted such that calyculin treatment induced con - traction , leading to disrupted junctional presentation . On glass , however , calyculin treatment did not affect ZO - 1 edge - localization , likely because cells are already highly contractile , rendering calyculin ineffective in further enhancing contractility . The JAnaP has important implications in the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering and can serve as a tool to gain fundamental biological information about cell – cell junctions , as well as to help inform therapeutic strategies that require knowledge of drug transport mechanisms across vascular barriers . In particular , the JAnaP generates quantitative data that can undergo statistical analysis on cell – cell junctions , rather than relying on a person’s subjective interpretation of qualitative images . For example , the JAnaP could provide quantitative measures of continuous , punctate , and perpendicular tight junction protein alterations in ECs in response to interactions with tumor or immune cells , 15 , 20 , 31 inﬂammatory cytokines , 24 ischemia , 2 VEGF or thrombin treatment , 23 , 39 or even in response to mechanical injury such as traumatic brain injury . 4 , 21 Additionally , it could be used to quantify the extent of barrier opening when investigating new techniques for therapeutic delivery via BBB - penetration ( e . g . , ultra - sound , 18 , 35 , 44 photodynamic therapy , 43 photothermal therapy ) . 32 In summary , we investigated the role of matrix stiﬀness and myosin II - mediated contractility on ZO - 1 junction presentation in HBMECs using a novel Junctional Analyzer Program that provides quantita - tive measures of cell – cell junction morphologies . Interestingly , the highest percentage of mature junc - tions was observed on the 1 kPa gels , which was the most physiologically relevant to the brain microenvi - ronment and within the range of reported values for subendothelial matrix stiﬀness in vasculature . This further suggests that mimicking the mechanical envi - ronment of the in vivo system may be an effective approach to optimizing endothelial barrier properties for in vitro study ; however , further investigation into the effects of these parameters on other tight junction proteins ( e . g . claudins , occludins ) is needed to fully understand the effects on barrier phenotype . Further - more , additional experiments are needed to understand the physiological role ( e . g . , local permeability to mo - lecules and cells ) of each junction presentation type . Expanded use of this novel program could provide insight into the role of tight and adherens junction presentation in BBB physiology and pathology and possibly enable the study of junctional protein pre - sentation in peripheral endothelial and epithelial cell monolayers . Understanding what conditions ( e . g . , contractility states ) inﬂuence speciﬁc junction presen - tation and how that affects barrier properties could lead to the development of therapeutics capable of traversing the BBB for delivery to the brain or for diseases associated with BBB dysfunction . ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 019 - 02266 - 5 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge Kyle Thomas at Yellow Basket , LLC ( kyle @ yellowbasket . io ) for software development support . The authors also acknowledge funding from the Burroughs Wellcome Career Award at the Scientiﬁc Interface ( to KMS ) , the Fischell Fel - lowship in Biomedical Engineering and the Dr . Mabel S . Spencer Award for Excellence in Graduate Achievement ( to KMG ) , and the University of Mary - land . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1685 REFERENCES 1 Abbott , N . J . , and A . Friedman . Overview and introduc - tion : the blood - brain barrier in health and disease . Epilepsia 53 ( Suppl 6 ) : 1 – 6 , 2012 . 2 Abdullahi , W . , D . Tripathi , and P . T . Ronaldson . Blood - brain barrier dysfunction in ischemic stroke : targeting tight junctions and transporters for vascular protection . Am . J . Physiol . Physiol . 315 : C343 – C356 , 2018 . 3 Adamson , R . H . , B . Liu , G . N . Fry , L . L . Rubin , and F . E . Curry . Microvascular permeability and number of tight junctions are modulated by cAMP . Am . Physiol . Soc . 274 : H1885 – H1894 , 1998 . 4 Andrews , A . M . , E . M . Lutton , S . F . Merkel , R . Razm - pour , and S . H . Ramirez . Mechanical injury induces brain endothelial - derived microvesicle release : implications for cerebral vascular injury during traumatic brain injury . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 10 : 43 , 2016 . 5 Beese , M . , K . Wyss , M . Haubitz , and T . Kirsch . Effect of cAMP derivates on assembly and maintenance of tight junctions in human umbilical vein endothelial cells . BMC Cell Biol . 11 : 68 , 2010 . 6 Birukova , A . A . , X . Tian , I . Cokic , Y . Beckham , M . L . Gardel , and K . G . Birukov . Endothelial barrier disruption and recovery is controlled by substrate stiffness . Microvasc . Res . 87 : 50 – 57 , 2013 . 7 Boutouyrie , P . , A . I . Tropeano , R . Asmar , I . Gautier , A . Benetos , P . Lacolley , and S . Laurent . Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of primary coronary events in hypertensive patients : a longitudinal study . Hypertens . ( Dallas , Tex . 1979 ) 39 : 10 – 15 , 2002 . 8 Byﬁeld , F . J . , R . K . Reen , T . P . Shentu , I . Levitan , and K . J . Gooch . Endothelial actin and cell stiffness is modulated by substrate stiffness in 2D and 3D . J . Biomech . 42 : 1114 – 1119 , 2009 . 9 Chen , Y . , F . Shen , J . Liu , and G . - Y . Yang . Arterial stiff - ness and stroke : de - stiffening strategy , a therapeutic target for stroke . BMJ 2 : 65 – 72 , 2017 . 10 Cheney , R . E . Myosins in cell junctions . Bioarchitecture 2 : 158 – 170 , 2012 . 11 Cho , Y . - E . , D . - S . Ahn , K . G . Morgan , and Y . - H . Lee . Enhanced contractility and myosin phosphorylation in - duced by Ca 21 - independent MLCK activity in hyperten - sive rats . Cardiovasc . Res . 91 : 162 – 170 , 2011 . 12 Dejana , E . , F . Orsenigo , and M . G . Lampugnani . The role of adherens junctions and VE - cadherin in the control of vascular permeability . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 2115 , 2008 . 13 Dorland , Y . L . , and S . Huveneers . Cell – cell junctional mechanotransduction in endothelial remodeling . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 74 : 279 – 292 , 2017 . 14 Eigenmann , D . E . , G . Xue , K . S . Kim , A . V . Moses , M . Hamburger , and M . Ouﬁr . Comparative study of four immortalized human brain capillary endothelial cell lines , hCMEC / D3 , hBMEC , TY10 , and BB19 , and optimization of culture conditions , for an in vitro blood - brain barrier model for drug permeability studies . Fluids Barriers CNS 10 : 33 , 2013 . 15 Escribano , J . , M . B . Chen , E . Moeendarbary , X . Cao , V . Shenoy , J . Manuel Garcia - Aznar , R . D . Kamm , and F . Spill . Balance of mechanical forces drives endothelial gap formation and may facilitate cancer and immune - cell extravasation . 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 375931 . 16 Essler , M . , J . M . Staddon , P . C . Weber , and M . Aepfel - bacher . Cyclic AMP blocks bacterial lipopolysaccharide - induced myosin light chain phosphorylation in endothelial cells through inhibition of rho / rho kinase signaling . J . Immunol . 164 : 6543 – 6549 , 2000 . 17 Fanning , A . S . , B . J . Jameson , L . A . Jesaitis , and J . M . Anderson . The tight junction protein ZO - 1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 29745 – 29753 , 1998 . 18 Goutal , S . , M . Gerstenmayer , S . Auvity , F . Caille´ , S . Me´riaux , I . Buvat , B . Larrat , and N . Tournier . Physical blood – brain barrier disruption induced by focused ultra - sound does not overcome the transporter - mediated efﬂux of erlotinib . J . Control . Release 292 : 210 – 220 , 2018 . 19 Grammas , P . , J . Martinez , and B . Miller . Cerebral microvascular endothelium and the pathogenesis of neu - rodegenerative diseases . Expert Rev . Mol . Med . 13 : e19 , 2011 . 20 Hamilla , S . M . , K . M . Stroka , and H . Aranda - Espinoza . VE - cadherin - independent cancer cell incorporation into the vascular endothelium precedes transmigration . PLoS ONE 9 : e109748 , 2014 . 21 Hemphill , M . A . , S . Dauth , C . J . Yu , B . E . Dabiri , and K . K . Parker . Traumatic brain injury and the neuronal microenvironment : a potential role for neuropathological mechanotransduction . Neuron 85 : 1177 – 1192 , 2015 . 22 Hsu , J . , D . Serrano , T . Bhowmick , K . Kumar , Y . Shen , Y . C . Kuo , C . Garnacho , and S . Muro . Enhanced endothelial delivery and biochemical effects of a - galactosidase by ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers for Fabry disease . J . Con - trol . Release 149 : 323 – 331 , 2011 . 23 Huveneers , S . , J . Oldenburg , E . Spanjaard , G . van der Krogt , I . Grigoriev , A . Akhmanova , H . Rehmann , and J . de Rooij . Vinculin associates with endothelial VE - cadherin junctions to control force - dependent remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 196 : 641 – 652 , 2012 . 24 Kakei , Y . , M . Akashi , T . Shigeta , T . Hasegawa , and T . Komori . Alteration of cell – cell junctions in cultured human lymphatic endothelial cells with inﬂammatory cytokine stimulation . Lymphat . Res . Biol . 12 : 136 – 143 , 2014 . 25 Katt , M . E . , R . M . Linville , L . N . Mayo , Z . S . Xu , and P . C . Searson . Functional brain - speciﬁc microvessels from iPSC - derived human brain microvascular endothelial cells : the role of matrix composition on monolayer formation . Fluids Barriers CNS 15 : 7 , 2018 . 26 Klein , E . A . , L . Yin , D . Kothapalli , P . Castagnino , F . J . Byﬁeld , T . Xu , I . Levental , E . Hawthorne , P . A . Janmey , and R . K . Assoian . Cell - cycle control by physiological matrix elasticity and in vivo tissue stiffening . Curr . Biol . 19 : 1511 – 1518 , 2009 . 27 Kohn , J . C . , M . C . Lampi , and C . A . Reinhart - King . Age - related vascular stiffening : causes and consequences . Front . Genet . 6 : 112 , 2015 . 28 Kothapalli , D . , S . - L . Liu , Y . H . Bae , J . Monslow , T . Xu , E . A . Hawthorne , F . J . Byﬁeld , P . Castagnino , S . Rao , D . J . Rader , E . Pure´ , M . C . Phillips , S . Lund - Katz , P . A . Jan - mey , and R . K . Assoian . Cardiovascular protection by ApoE and ApoE - HDL linked to suppression of ECM gene expression and arterial stiffening . Cell Rep . 2 : 1259 – 1271 , 2012 . 29 Krishnan , R . , D . D . Klumpers , C . Y . Park , K . Rajendran , X . Trepat , J . van Bezu , V . W . M . M . van Hinsbergh , C . V . Carman , J . D . Brain , J . J . Fredberg , J . P . Butler , and G . P . van Nieuw Amerongen . Substrate stiffening promotes endothelial monolayer disruption through enhanced phys - ical forces . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 300 : 146 – 154 , 2011 . 30 Li , A . Q . , L . Zhao , T . F . Zhou , M . Q . Zhang , and X . M . Qin . Exendin - 4 promotes endothelial barrier enhancement BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY G RAY et al . 1686 via PKA - and Epac1 - dependent Rac1 activation . Am . J . Physiol . Physiol . 308 : C164 – C175 , 2015 . 31 Li , B . , W . - D . Zhao , Z . - M . Tan , W . - G . Fang , L . Zhu , and Y . - H . Chen . Involvement of Rho / ROCK signalling in small cell lung cancer migration through human brain microvascular endothelial cells . FEBS Lett . 580 : 4252 – 4260 , 2006 . 32 Li , C . - H . , M . - K . Shyu , C . Jhan , Y . - W . Cheng , C . - H . Tsai , C . - W . Liu , C . - C . Lee , R . - M . Chen , and J . - J . Kang . Gold nanoparticles increase endothelial paracellular permeability by altering components of endothelial tight junctions , and increase blood - brain barrier permeability in mice . Toxicol . Sci . 148 : 192 – 203 , 2015 . 33 Mckee , C . T . , J . A . Last , P . Russell , and C . J . Murphy . Indentation vs . tensile measurements of young’s modulus for soft biological tissues . Tissue Eng . Part B 17 : 155 – 164 , 2011 . 34 McRae , M . P . , L . M . LaFratta , B . M . Nguyen , J . J . Paris , K . F . Hauser , and D . E . Conway . Characterization of cell - cell junction changes associated with the formation of a strong endothelial barrier . Tissue Barriers 6 : 1 – 9 , 2018 . 35 Mesiwala , A . H . , L . Farrell , H . J . Wenzel , D . L . Silbergeld , L . A . Crum , H . R . Winn , and P . D . Mourad . High - inten - sity focused ultrasound selectively disrupts the blood - brain barrier in vivo . Ultrasound Med . Biol . 28 : 389 – 400 , 2002 . 36 Mierke , C . T . , N . Bretz , and P . Altevogt . Contractile forces contribute to increased glycosylphosphatidylinositol - an - chored receptor CD24 - facilitated cancer cell invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 34858 – 34871 , 2011 . 37 Newell - Litwa , K . A . , R . Horwitz , and M . L . Lamers . Non - muscle myosin II in disease : mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities . Dis . Model . Mech . 8 : 1495 – 1515 , 2015 . 38 Nieuw Amerongen , V . G . P . , C . M . L . Beckers , I . D . Achekar , S . Zeeman , R . J . P . Musters , and V . W . M . Van Hinsbergh . Involvement of Rho kinase in endothelial bar - rier maintenance . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 27 : 2332 – 2339 , 2007 . 39 Nitz , T . , T . Eisenblatter , K . Psathaki , and H . - J . Gaı¨ . Ser - um - derived factors weaken the barrier properties of cul - tured porcine brain capillary endothelial cells in vitro . Brain Res . 981 : 30 – 40 , 2003 . 40 Onken , M . D . , O . L . Mooren , S . Mukherjee , S . T . Shahan , J . Li , and J . A . Cooper . Endothelial monolayers and transendothelial migration depend on mechanical proper - ties of the substrate . Cytoskeleton 71 : 695 – 706 , 2014 . 41 Peloquin , J . , J . Huynh , R . M . Williams , and C . A . Rein - hart - King . Indentation measurements of the subendothelial matrix in bovine carotid arteries . J . Biomech . 44 : 815 – 821 , 2011 . 42 Raman , P . S . , C . D . Paul , K . M . Stroka , and K . Kon - stantopoulos . Probing cell traction forces in conﬁned microenvironments . Lab Chip 13 : 4599 – 4607 , 2013 . 43 Semyachkina - Glushkovskaya , O . , J . Kurths , E . Borisova , S . Sokolovski , V . Mantareva , I . Angelov , A . Shirokov , N . Navolokin , N . Shushunova , A . Khorovodov , M . Ulanova , M . Sagatova , I . Agranivich , O . Sindeeva , A . Gekalyuk , A . Bodrova , and E . Rafailov . Photodynamic opening of blood - brain barrier . Biomed . Opt . Express 8 : 5040 – 5048 , 2017 . 44 Sheikov , N . , N . McDannold , N . Vykhodtseva , F . Jolesz , and K . Hynynen . Cellular mechanisms of the blood - brain barrier opening induced by ultrasound in presence of microbubbles . Ultrasound Med . Biol . 30 : 979 – 989 , 2004 . 45 Stroka , K . M . , and H . Aranda - espinoza . Neutrophils dis - play biphasic relationship between migration and substrate stiffness . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 : 328 – 341 , 2009 . 46 Stroka , K . M . , and H . Aranda - Espinoza . Endothelial cell substrate stiffness inﬂuences neutrophil transmigration via myosin light chain kinase - dependent cell contraction . Blood 118 : 1632 – 1640 , 2011 . 47 Stroka , K . M . , I . Levitan , and H . Aranda - Espinoza . OxLDL and substrate stiffness promote neutrophil trans - migration by enhanced endothelial cell contractility and ICAM - 1 . J . Biomech . 45 : 1828 – 1834 , 2012 . 48 Tornavaca , O . , M . Chia , N . Dufton , L . O . Almagro , D . E . Conway , A . M . Randi , M . A . Schwartz , K . Matter , and M . S . Balda . ZO - 1 controls endothelial adherens junctions , cell – cell tension , angiogenesis , and barrier formation . J . Cell Biol . 208 : 821 – 838 , 2015 . 49 Wallez , Y . , and P . Huber . Endothelial adherens and tight junctions in vascular homeostasis , inﬂammation and angiogenesis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 1778 : 794 – 809 , 2008 . 50 Wang , Y . L . , and R . J . Pelham . Preparation of a ﬂexible , porous polyacrylamide substrate for mechanical studies of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 489 – 496 , 1998 . 51 Wilhelm , I . , C . Fazakas , and I . A . Krizbai . In vitro models of the blood - brain barrier . Acta Neurobiol . Exp . 71 : 113 – 128 , 2011 . 52 Winger , R . C . , J . E . Koblinski , T . Kanda , R . M . Ranso - hoff , and W . A . Muller . Rapid remodeling of tight junc - tions during paracellular diapedesis in a human model of the blood - brain barrier . J . Immunol . 193 : 2427 – 2437 , 2014 . 53 Wong , K . H . K . , J . G . Truslow , and J . Tien . The role of cyclic AMP in normalizing the function of engineered human blood microvessels in microﬂuidic collagen gels . Biomaterials 31 : 4706 – 4714 , 2010 . 54 Zieman , S . J . , V . Melenovsky , and D . A . Kass . Mecha - nisms , pathophysiology , and therapy of arterial stiffness . Aterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 25 : 932 – 943 , 2005 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with re - gard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institu - tional afﬁliations . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY ZO - 1 Presentation Quantiﬁed in Brain Endothelial Cells 1687