Differences in Entrepreneurial Opportunities : The Role of Tacitness and Codiﬁcation in Opportunity Identiﬁcation * by Brett R . Smith , Charles H . Matthews , and Mark T . Schenkel The role of opportunities in the entrepreneurial process remains relatively under - developed . To address this issue , we develop a deﬁnition of an entrepreneurial opportunity and draw upon a distinction from the domain of knowledge manage - ment to suggest a continuum of entrepreneurial opportunities ranging from codiﬁed to tacit . Though both traditional and contemporary research has examined how individual differences relate to the identiﬁcation of opportunities , we focus instead on the importance of differences in the opportunities themselves . Speciﬁcally , we examine how relative differences in the degree of opportunity tacitness relate to the process of opportunity identiﬁcation . We ﬁnd that relatively more codiﬁed opportu - nities are more likely to be discovered through systematic search , whereas more tacit opportunities are more likely to be identiﬁed due to prior experience . These ﬁndings contribute to an increased understanding of the role of the opportunity in entre - preneurship research and have important implications for economic theories of entrepreneurship , entrepreneurial learning , entrepreneurial networks , and entrepre - neurial education . * An earlier version of this article was published in the 2005 Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research . We would like to thank Jim Fiet , Jill Kickul , Pankaj Patel , and Christopher Stevens for helpful comments on earlier versions of this article . We would also like to thank Julio De Castro for his editorial guidance and two anonymous reviewers for invaluable feedback on this article . Brett R . Smith is an assistant professor of entrepreneurship and founding director of the Center for Social Entrepreneurship , Richard T . Farmer School of Business , Miami University . Charles H . Matthews is a distinguished professor and executive director for the Center for Entrepreneurship Education and Research , University of Cincinnati . Mark T . Schenkel is an assistant professor of entrepreneurship at Belmont University . His teaching and research interests include entrepreneurial cognition , strategic decision - making and corporate entrepreneurship . Address correspondence to : Brett R . Smith , Department of Marketing , Miami University , Oxford , OH 45056 , U . S . A . Tel . : 513 - 529 - 9744 ; Fax : 513 - 529 - 3288 ; E - mail : smithbr2 @ muohio . edu . Journal of Small Business Management 2009 47 ( 1 ) , pp . 38 – 57 JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 38 Introduction How are opportunities identiﬁed ? One of the central questions in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship has focused on the identiﬁcation of opportunities . The iden - tiﬁcation of opportunities is important in part because it is often the ﬁrst step in the entrepreneurial process ( Baron and Shane 2005 ) . Historically , this line of inquiry has sought to understand why some people , and not others , identify entrepreneurial opportunities ( Shane and Venkataraman 2000 ) . This approach has led to a great deal of research attempting to specify how individual differences allow certain people to identify entrepre - neurial opportunities . For example , early research in the ﬁeld sought to address this question partly through a trait - based approach ( e . g . , McClelland 1961 ) . More recently , the resurgence of an individual difference approach to entrepreneurship research has taken on a more cognitive approach , highlighting the role of cogni - tive decision - making ( Busenitz and Barney 1997 ) and pattern matching ( Baron and Ensley 2006 ) used by entre - preneurs to identify opportunities . Whereas person - centric approaches have contributed much to the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship , the domain of the ﬁeld has been respeciﬁed to include two phe - nomena : the aforementioned presence of enterprising individuals and the presence of entrepreneurial opportunities ( Venka - taraman 1997 ) . The reconceptualization of the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship as an individual – opportunity ( I – O ) nexus calls for increasing attention of the role of entrepreneurial opportunities and how these entrepreneurial opportunities may affect the entrepreneurial process . Responding to this call , research related to entrepreneurial opportunities and opportunity identiﬁcation is increasing . For example , recent research suggests opportunity insights are directly related to opportunity identiﬁcation experiences ( Corbett 2005 ) and the match of learning style demanded by a given situation ( Dimov 2007 ) . Studies also suggest that though women and men utilize their unique stocks of human capital to identify opportunities , they use fundamentally different processes of opportunity identi - ﬁcation ( DeTienne and Chandler 2007 ) . While research is continuing to develop , much of this work in the area of opportunity identiﬁcation remains focused on the importance of individual differences with respect to opportunities . By contrast , we focus on the importance of relative differences in opportunities , not individuals . This distinction is impor - tant because “variation in opportunities themselves can account for at least some of the observed patterns in entrepreneur - ial activity” ( Shane 2003 , p . 18 ) . The idea that opportunities may differ on various dimensions is not entirely new . A comparison of early research draws attention to the idea that opportu - nities may differ on such important dimensions as their expected value and innovativeness . For example , differences have been identiﬁed between Schumpe - terian ( i . e . , those that are mainly in - novative in nature ) opportunities and Kirznerian ( i . e . , those that are discovery driven in nature ) opportunities ( for a full review of this distinction , see Shane 2003 ) . Although this work is frequently and broadly acknowledged in current research , scholars have noted that rela - tively less work has examined how these differences may affect the entrepreneur - ial process . In this article , we seek to extend the growing line of research that emphasizes a more prominent role of the entrepre - neurial opportunity ( e . g . , Dimov 2007 ; Plummer , Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 ; Corbett 2005 ; Shane and Venkataraman 2000 ) by focusing on relative differences in opportunity types . Speciﬁcally , we borrow from the domain of knowledge management to draw on the distinction between the degrees of tacitness of entre - preneurial opportunities . Whereas some SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 39 theorists have suggested that relatively codiﬁed opportunities or neat packages should be excluded from the domain of entrepreneurship ( Shane 2003 ; Ven - kataraman 1997 ) , we believe a more inclusive view of entrepreneurial opportunities may open the door for a greater understanding of both entrepre - neurial opportunities and the entrepre - neurial process . Accordingly , we draw upon the distinction between codiﬁcation and tacitness to argue that the nature of the opportunity may be related to the process of opportunity identiﬁcation ( sys - tematic search versus discovery ) and the role of prior knowledge in the process . In so doing , we begin to shed light on how the attributes of the opportunity itself may affect the entrepreneurial process , and we contribute to the relatively limited empiri - cal work that has accounted for variance in the opportunities . This article will proceed as follows . First , we provide a review of the literature on entrepreneurial opportunities to develop a more inclusive deﬁnition of an entrepreneurial opportunity and to demarcate the attributes of the opportu - nity and the attributes of the individual . Second , the distinction between tacitness and codiﬁcation is introduced and deﬁned as an attribute of the opportunity . Third , drawing upon this distinction , we develop a typology and present hypoth - eses about how the degree of tacitness of the opportunity may be related to the process through which the opportunity is identiﬁed and the role of prior knowl - edge . Fourth , we discuss the ﬁndings of this study and its implications for economic theories of entrepreneurship , entrepreneurial learning , entrepreneurial networks , and entrepreneurial education . Theoretical Background Deﬁning an Entrepreneurial Opportunity What is an entrepreneurial opportu - nity ? As the role of an entrepreneurial opportunity becomes increasingly impor - tant , there continues to be a lack of clarity about its deﬁnition . Shane and Venkataraman ( 2000 , p . 220 ) deﬁned an entrepreneurial opportunity as “those situations in which new goods , services , raw materials , and organizing methods can be introduced and sold at greater than their cost of production . ” To differ - entiate entrepreneurial opportunities from all other proﬁt opportunities , the authors required the discovery of “new means – ends relationships . ” Though this deﬁnition has been adopted by some scholars and even used as the starting point for a special issue on entrepreneur - ial opportunities in Small Business Economics , questions exist about the utility and comprehensiveness of this deﬁnition . Scholars have suggested “the lan - guage of ‘new means – ends’ framework in particular leads to easy confusion and the confounding of ideas” ( Plummer , Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 , p . 366 ) . To illustrate this point , these authors used the example of Dell Computer’s origin to point out that under the new means – ends deﬁnition , Michael Dell would not have been exploiting an entre - preneurial opportunity , “since the manu - facture and sale of personal computers was a well - established economic activity at the time Dell started his venture” ( Plummer , Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 , p . 366 ) . As a result , Plummer and his colleagues suggest the differentiation between objectively new and underex - ploited opportunities is one of the central challenges of developing theory and research about entrepreneurial opportunities . In an effort to accommodate underex - ploited situations , Singh ( 2001 ) deﬁned an entrepreneurial opportunity as “a feasible , proﬁt - seeking potential venture that provides an innovative new product or service to the market , improves on an existing product / service , or imitates a proﬁtable product / service in a less - than - saturated market” ( Singh 2001 , p . 11 ) . JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 40 This deﬁnition , adopted by others ( e . g . , DeTienne and Chandler 2007 ) , broadens the understanding of an entrepreneurial opportunity beyond “objectively new” means – ends frameworks . Yet in a rebuttal to this deﬁnition , Shane and Venkataraman ( 2001 ) suggest that even this deﬁnition may be too narrow on several fronts . First , these authors argue that an entrepreneurial opportunity does not have to be exploited by a new venture . As such , they argue for the removal of this lan - guage and the expansion of a deﬁnition to include a range of methods to exploit . Second , they suggest that Singh’s deﬁni - tion is restricted to products and services and fails to include new organizing methods and new raw materials . There - fore , they suggest that an expansion of the deﬁnition to include these forms of opportunity is necessary . Finally , they contend that the deﬁnition needs to be expanded to include any market inefﬁ - ciency due to information asymmetry . In sum , rather than objecting to Singh’s attempt to broadening previous deﬁni - tions , these authors actually argue for a still larger expansion of the deﬁnition of an entrepreneurial opportunity . The discussion above illustrates the complexity and challenge of establishing interdisciplinary consensus on how an entrepreneurial opportunity should be deﬁned . It also suggests that rather than seeking such consensus where consen - sus may not be possible , “it may be far more important for scholars to simply take a stance on this issue and then clearly articulate their position and deﬁ - nition of what is and is not opportunity” ( McMullen , Plummer , and Acs 2007 , p . 279 ) . We agree that this may indeed be the most important step to advancing extant theory . Accordingly , we now turn attention toward articulating the deﬁni - tion of an entrepreneurial opportunity utilized in this study by drawing upon the exchange between Singh ( 2001 ) and Shane and Venkataraman ( 2001 ) . Following the extant work of previous theorists , we begin ﬁrst with the notion that opportunities are “objective” phe - nomena in that there is “always an opportunity to do something , ” and are , therefore , a “means” to an end ( McMullen , Plummer , and Acs 2007 , p . 277 ) . We deﬁne an entrepreneurial opportunity more speciﬁcally as a fea - sible proﬁt - seeking situation to exploit a market inefﬁciency that provides an innovative , improved or imitated product , service , raw material , or orga - nizing method in a less - than - saturated market . The purpose of this deﬁnition is to accommodate a broader view of entre - preneurial opportunities that moves beyond the new means – ends language , includes raw materials and organizing methods , and allows for entrepreneurial efforts that focus on adding value by addressing market inefﬁciencies . Conceptualization of the opportunity recognition process has shifted toward an I – O nexus perspective in recent years ( Shane and Eckhardt 2003 ) . From such a perspective , the role of the opportunity takes on increasing importance in the extension and development of our current understanding of entrepreneur - ship . In particular , expanding some prior conceptions of an entrepreneurial oppor - tunity to include underexploited oppor - tunities suggests that there is likely to be substantial variance within the overall set of entrepreneurial opportunities . Thus , coupling a more prominent role of opportunities and the increased variance in opportunities implies that “one might expect that some theories of entrepre - neurship , and their normative prescrip - tions , would need revision” ( Plummer , Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 , p . 376 ) . Another implication of such a shift is that it becomes increasingly important to be able to delineate the attributes of the individual from the attributes of the opportunity in order to avoid confound - ing the role of each in theory and empiri - cal research ( Shane and Venkataraman SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 41 2000 ) . As such , an important deﬁnitional issue in the case of entrepreneurial opportunities is the distinction between knowledge ( an attribute of the indi - vidual ) and information ( an attribute of the opportunity ) . Though some schools of thought , such as the classical approach of eco - nomics , consider knowledge and infor - mation to be interchangeable terms ( e . g . , Ancori , Bureth , and Cohendet 2000 ) , Boulding ( 1953 ) suggested We cannot regard knowledge as simply the accumulation of infor - mation in a stockpile , even though all the messages that are received by the brain may leave some deposit here . Knowledge must itself be regarded as a structure , a very complex and quite loose pattern with its parts connected in various ways by ties of varying degrees of strength . Knowledge is an attribute of the indi - vidual that involves a cognitive process for acquisition . Knowledge is structured and coherent . By comparison , informa - tion is independent of the individual . Information can stand alone ; it is frag - mented and transitory ( Ancori , Bureth , and Cohendet 2000 ) . Summarizing the difference between information and knowledge , Machlup ( 1983 ) suggested , “ [ e ] ven in everyday parlance people sense a difference that can be seen from the fact that at railroad stations , airports , department stores and large public build - ings we expect to ﬁnd a booth or counter marked ‘Information’ but never one marked ‘Knowledge . ’ ” In this study , we draw on the distinc - tion between knowledge and informa - tion to deﬁne further an entrepreneurial opportunity as a piece or collection of information related to the aforemen - tioned feasible proﬁt - seeking market inefﬁciency . We believe this distinction is important to advancing the study of opportunity because though knowledge may be used by the individual to combine information , it is not necessary for the opportunity to exist . Thus , the present deﬁnition allows for the separa - tion of the attribute of the individual ( knowledge ) from the attribute of the opportunity ( information ) . In this article , we argue that the process of opportunity identiﬁcation may differ based upon the relative differences of the entrepreneurial opportunities in question . Speciﬁcally , we draw upon the distinction between tacitness and codiﬁ - cation to suggest that the nature of the opportunity ( i . e . , its degree of tacitness ) may affect whether the opportunity is identiﬁed through a process of system - atic search or discovery and the impor - tance of prior knowledge . This typology suggests that different types of opportunities will be identiﬁed through different types of opportunity identiﬁcation processes . The top half of the diagram considers relatively more tacit opportunities and suggests that if an opportunity is tacit , then the opportunity may either be identiﬁed through the dis - covery process , or utterly overlooked . The relative tacitness of the opportunity obscures the opportunity from prospec - tive entrepreneurs and makes it more difﬁcult to identify . 1 However , when armed with prior knowledge ( Shane 2000 ) , a prospective entrepreneur is more likely to overcome the challenges inherent in recognizing a tacit oppor - tunity , and therefore identify the op - portunity . This view is consistent with the Austrian economic view of the entrepreneur . Conversely , the bottom half of the matrix considers relatively more codiﬁed opportunities and suggests that the sys - 1 We thank an anonymous reviewer for clarifying this point . JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 42 tematic search for such opportunities is possible , as advanced in psychological and informational economic theories . The reason search is possible is because the explicit nature or relative codiﬁcation of the opportunity allows the entrepre - neur to engage in a search and compari - son between different “neat packages” of entrepreneurial opportunities . In this case , the relative codiﬁcation of the opportunity attenuates the utility of prior knowledge because the explicit nature of the opportunity manifests itself more readily to prospective entrepreneurs . As such , the level of difﬁculty in identifying a relatively more codiﬁed opportunity is reduced . To further explain how the nature of the opportunity may affect the opportunity identiﬁcation process , we ﬁrst turn to an explanation of role of tacitness . The Tacit Distinction In the domain of knowledge manage - ment , the nature of knowledge has been distinguished by the degree to which the knowledge is tacit or codiﬁed . The codi - ﬁcation of knowledge , with reference to codes , relates to the degree to which knowledge is able to be made explicit or documented primarily through codes ( Cowan , David , and Foray 2000 ) . Knowl - edge is codiﬁed to the extent that it can be articulated or transmitted in formal , symbolic language . As such , one can draw the conclusion that everything that is articulable is codiﬁable , and that everything that has been articulated is actually codiﬁed ( Johnson , Lorenz , and Lundvall 2002 ) . By comparison , tacit knowledge tends to be context speciﬁc , more challenging to articulate , and represented by the absence of agreed upon language . Polanyi ( 1966 , p . 4 ) introduced the concept of tacit knowledge by suggest - ing , “I shall reconsider human knowl - edge by starting from the fact that we know more than we can tell . ” In review - ing the literature on tacit knowledge , Ambrosini and Bowman ( 2001 ) identi - ﬁed four characteristics of tacit knowl - edge . First , tacit knowledge is difﬁcult to write down or to formalize . Second , tacit knowledge is personal knowledge and often difﬁcult for the knower to commu - nicate to others . Third , tacit knowledge is practical and describes a process . It has often been referred to as know - how ( Kogut and Zander 1992 ) . Finally , tacit knowledge is context speciﬁc and is often acquired on the job . The importance of tacit knowledge rests on the issue that its inarticulable nature makes it difﬁcult to imitate , and therefore may be an asset that leads to a competitive advantage ( Kogut and Zander 1992 ) . However , though poten - tial beneﬁts may exist , the tacitness of knowledge also contributes to some challenges , suggesting that the degree of tacitness may result in a contingent rela - tionship . For example , in a study of 120 new product development projects within 41 divisions of a large electronics company , Hansen ( 1999 ) found tacit and codiﬁed knowledge affected differen - tially the search and transfer of knowl - edge within the ﬁrm . Speciﬁcally , he found that both weak and strong network ties have relative strengths and weaknesses for the search and transfer of knowledge . The “net effect on project completion time of having either weak or strong inter - unit ties is contingent on the complexity of the knowledge to be trans - ferred across the sub - units” ( Hansen 1999 , p . 105 ) . Weak ties facilitated the search for knowledge , but impeded knowledge transfer when the knowledge was tacit . Strong ties limited the search for knowledge , but improved the transfer of tacit knowledge between subunits . As such , this study provides evidence that the utility of knowledge is con - tingent upon its degree of tacitness . Having identiﬁed how the degree of tacitness may affect knowledge pro - cesses , we now turn to see how the nature of tacitness may also be related to SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 43 contingent relationships in entrepreneur - ial processes . Tacit and Codiﬁed Opportunities Although the tacit distinction has typi - cally been applied to individual and organizational knowledge , we believe that it is also possible to use the same distinction to advance our current under - standing of entrepreneurial opportuni - ties . We borrow the distinction of tacitness and codiﬁcation and apply it not as an attribute of knowledge of the entrepreneur , but rather as an attribute of an entrepreneurial opportunity . Spe - ciﬁcally , we propose that there are two different types of opportunities—codiﬁed and tacit 2 —and that the type of oppor - tunity inﬂuences the identiﬁcation of the opportunity . A codiﬁed opportunity is well - documented , articulated or communi - cated proﬁt - seeking situation in which a person seeks to exploit market inefﬁ - ciency in a less - than - saturated market . The documented and articulated nature of the opportunity suggests a codiﬁed opportunity is more likely to focus on imitated or moderate improvements of products , services , raw materials , or organizing methods . By comparison , a tacit opportunity is a proﬁt - seeking situ - ation that is difﬁcult to codify , articulate or communicate , in which a person seeks to exploit market inefﬁciency in a less - than - saturated market . 3 In the case of tacit opportunities , the inarticulable nature of the opportunity is likely to focus on major improvements or new innovations of products , services , raw materials , or organizing methods . In addition , the market is likely to be severely underexploited or completely new ( i . e . , previously non - existent ) . Having deﬁned tacit and codiﬁed oppor - tunities , we now turn our attention toward developing hypotheses about how the degree of tacitness may be related to the opportunity identiﬁcation process . Systematic Search versus Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities In the extant literature , two different processes have been postulated as paths to the identiﬁcation of an entrepreneurial opportunity—systematic search and dis - covery ( for a thorough review of these processes , see Shane [ 2000 ] ) . In the case of systematic search , prospective entre - preneurs intentionally seek out or search for exploitable venture ideas ( Shaver and Scott 1991 ) . This model , based upon informational economics , suggests entre - preneurs will search to the extent that the marginal beneﬁts gained by the search exceed the marginal costs of con - ducting the search ( Stigler 1961 ) . Implicit in the search model is the assumption that the object of the search is readily identiﬁable . In contrast to systematic search , Austrian economists have argued in favor of a discovery process of oppor - tunity recognition . From this perspective , an “opportunity for pure proﬁt , by its nature , cannot be the object of system - atic search” ( Kirzner 1997 ) because it is “unknown until it is discovered” ( Kaish and Gilad 1991 ) . Though these two views of entrepre - neurial opportunity identiﬁcation appear to contradict one another , it may be pos - 2 It should be noted that the distinction between codiﬁed and tacit opportunities represent two anchor points on a continuum rather than a dichotomy . Rather than existing as mutually exclusive categories , these two forms of opportunities—codiﬁed and tacit—exist along a continuum ranging from a low to a high degree of tacitness ( for a similar argument of the nature of knowledge , see Ambrosini and Bowman [ 2001 ] ) . 3 Tacit opportunities are likely to become more codiﬁed through the passage of time . The more codiﬁed the opportunity becomes , the lower the entrepreneurial rents that are likely to be gained through the exploitation of the opportunity ( Shane 2003 ) . JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 44 sible to reconcile these views by exam - ining the nature of the opportunity . That is , the two views of opportunity identiﬁ - cation may not be contradictory because they may be referring , in part , to differ - ent types of entrepreneurial oppor - tunities . One of the key points of differentiation between the search and discovery models is how well articulated is the object of the search ( i . e . , the opportunity ) . When the opportunity is relatively more codiﬁed , as in the case of imitated or moderate improvements to existing products , services , raw materi - als , or organizing methods , the articu - lable nature of the opportunity facilitates the ability of the entrepreneur to conduct a search for the opportunity . That is , the systematic search of opportunities is more likely to occur when the opportu - nity is relatively more codiﬁed , because the articulable nature of the opportunity facilitates the search process . By contrast , in the case of tacit oppor - tunities ( Shane 2000 ) , we concur with the discovery process offered by Austrian economists . When an opportunity is rela - tively more tacit , as in the case of major improvements or new innovations of products , services , raw materials , or organizing methods , the search for the opportunity is , at best , challenging , because it is difﬁcult to search for some - thing that is hidden ( Polanyi 1966 ) or utterly overlooked ( Kirzner 1997 ) . As a result , we argue that the process of opportunity identiﬁcation is contingent upon the nature or type of entrepreneur - ial opportunity ; different types of oppor - tunities are related with different identiﬁcation processes . This argument leads to our ﬁrst hypothesis . H1 : The degree of tacitness of an oppor - tunity is inversely related to system - atic search . Role of Prior Knowledge The role of prior knowledge has been identiﬁed as an important individual dif - ference in the identiﬁcation of entrepre - neurial opportunities . As such , we begin to examine how the role of prior knowl - edge relates to the opportunity type within the context of the broader oppor - tunity identiﬁcation process . As sug - gested in the extant literature , prior knowledge creates a knowledge corridor that allows people to recognize certain opportunities ( Venkataraman 1997 ; Hayek 1945 ) . Through qualitative research , Shane ( 2000 ) provided evi - dence that people’s prior knowledge of markets , how to serve markets , and customer problems were related to the opportunities that they identiﬁed . Though this work provides some evi - dence to understand why some people identify certain opportunities but not other opportunities , we believe the ﬁnd - ings can be extended by drawing on our more inclusive deﬁnition of an entrepre - neurial opportunity . The case study approach employed by Shane ( 2000 ) relied exclusively on novel , technological opportunities to examine the role of prior knowledge . The theo - retical sample used in this research did not include relatively more codiﬁed opportunities given his use of a more restrictive deﬁnition of an entrepreneur - ial opportunity as a new means – ends relationship . As a result , the ﬁndings may not generalize to the population of all opportunities described in the more inclusive deﬁnition of entrepreneurial opportunities . More importantly , given the preoccupation with the innovation in the domain of entrepreneurship ( Baumol 1993 ) , such sampling exclusions are likely to be rather common in many empirical studies , including those that examine how prior knowledge affects the entrepreneurial process . As such , we know very little about how the role of prior knowledge varies across different types of opportunities . Relying again on the distinction between tacit and codiﬁed opportunities , we suggest that the utility of prior knowl - SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 45 edge in opportunity identiﬁcation will be contingent on the nature of the opportu - nity . This is because knowledge obtained through prior industry work experience allows one to add to the stocks of knowl - edge in a speciﬁc domain . This type of domain - speciﬁc knowledge , often referred to as know - how or tacit knowl - edge ( Cowan , David , and Foray 2000 ) , allows some people to identify previ - ously unarticulated and undocumented opportunities within those domains . Though relatively more tacit opportuni - ties are generally more difﬁcult to iden - tify , the prior knowledge gained through industry experience reduces the level of difﬁculty of opportunity identiﬁcation for those possessing such knowledge . However , in the case of codiﬁed oppor - tunities , the explicit nature of the oppor - tunity reduces the necessity of such tacit knowledge to create the knowledge cor - ridor to identify the opportunity . For relatively more codiﬁed opportunities , the beneﬁt of prior knowledge gained through industry experience is less useful in the identiﬁcation of the oppor - tunity , as the opportunity is already well documented and available . The explicit nature of the codiﬁed opportunity reduces the level of difﬁculty of recog - nizing the opportunity and allows it to be identiﬁed by a larger number of prospec - tive entrepreneurs . Therefore , we expect that the role of prior knowledge will have a contingent relationship with type of entrepreneurial opportunity . This argument leads to our second hypothesis . H2 : The degree of tacitness of an oppor - tunity is positively related to prior knowledge . Methods Sample and Data Collection We drew on archival data from the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics ( PSED ) . The PSED database was speciﬁ - cally developed and designed by the Entrepreneurial Research Consortium ( ERC ) to address questions related to nascent entrepreneurial activity ( see Rey - nolds [ 2000 ] for an extended review of this database’s development and content ) . Because the PSED sample is nationally representative , it provides an excellent means of examining a large cross - section of entrepreneurial opportu - nities that may vary on their degree of tacitness . Variables Degree of Opportunity Tacitness . The difﬁculty in measuring different types of opportunities required the use of proxies . We used items from PSED to operationalize the variable of degree of opportunity tacitness . Because no single item fully captured the construct of tac - itness of the opportunity , we used three items to construct a formative index of opportunity type . The primary difference between reﬂective and formative indica - tors is the direction of causation . In the case of reﬂective indicators , the observ - able indicators are assumed to represent or reﬂect the construct . This means that the construct should be unidimensional and the items correlated ( Helm 2005 ) . As such , an increase in one indicator is asso - ciated with increases of the other indica - tors ( Chin and Newsted 1999 ) . By comparison , formative indicators “cause” the latent variable and represent differ - ent dimensions of the variable ( Helm 2005 ) . The latent construct reﬂects a summative index of the observed vari - ables . The indicators need not be corre - lated nor represent the same underlying dimension ( Bollen and Lennox 1991 ) . The degree of tacitness index con - sisted of three items addressing the type of business , the availability of information , and duration of the oppor - tunity . The ﬁrst item asked respon - dents to identify whether the business was an independent business , a fran - chise , or a purchase of existing busi - ness , a corporate - supported business , or JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 46 unknown . If the business was an inde - pendent business , it was coded 1 for tacit . If the business was a franchise or the purchase of an existing business , it was coded 0 for codiﬁed . Corporate sponsored and unknown responses were eliminated . Though it is possible that an independent business may also be the replication of an existing business , a more inclusive deﬁnition of entrepre - neurial opportunities includes these as underexploited opportunities . Although the independent start - up of an underex - ploited opportunity may not be sub - stantially novel , the creation of an independent business is relatively more likely to be tacit than either a franchise or existing business . The second item asked respondents whether the informa - tion used in recognizing the business opportunity was widely available . Infor - mation that is more codiﬁed is likely to be more broadly disseminated because of the ease of dissemination . As such , the distribution of information is an impor - tant attribute in the tacitness of the opportunity . If the information was not widely available , it was coded 1 for tacit . Otherwise , it was coded 0 for codiﬁed . The third item asked respondents about the future availability of the opportunity . The future availability of the opportunity speaks to the extent to which the oppor - tunity has been “used up” ( Plummer , Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 ) . This item was used as a measure of the documented nature of the opportunity , because the more documented the opportunity , the more likely it would not be available in the future , because people would have already exploited the opportunity . This variable was scored on a ﬁve - point scale ( 1 = completely dis - agree to 5 = completely agree ) . Opportu - nities where the respondent either agreed or completely agreed were coded as 1 for tacit ; otherwise , it was coded 0 . Following the coding of each of the three items , we added the scores of the three items to create a continuous variable ranging from 0 ( codiﬁed ) to 3 ( tacit ) , with higher scores indicating a greater degree of tacitness . Systematic Search . We used continuous responses ( 1 = completely disagree to 5 = completely agree ) to the item “I have engaged in a deliberate , systematic search for an idea for a new business” as the measure of systematic search . As such , higher scores indicated a search process occurred . Prior Knowledge . We used responses ( 1 = checked ; 0 = not checked ) to the fol - lowing item , “Which of the following led to your business idea ? My experience in a particular industry or market , ” as the measure of prior knowledge in the iden - tiﬁcation of the opportunity . As such , a dichotomous variable was created with higher scores , indicating that prior knowledge was an important factor in the identiﬁcation of the opportunity . Results We present the descriptive statistics and regression models in Tables 1 and 2 , respectively . Table 1 presents the corre - lations , means , and standard deviations . H1 predicts that the degree of tacit - ness of the opportunity will be inversely related to systematic search . To examine H1 , we regressed systematic search on the degree of tacitness of the opportu - nity . Consistent with H1 ( see model 1 of Table 2 ) , the coefﬁcient for systematic search was a signiﬁcant negative predic - tor ( b = - 0 . 17 ; p < . 01 ) of opportunity tacitness . Thus , higher levels of system - atic search were associated with the identiﬁcation of relatively more codiﬁed ( rather than tacit ) opportunities . Our second hypothesis predicts that prior knowledge will be positively related to opportunity tacitness . To examine this hypothesis , we added the variable of prior knowledge to the regression equation . The ﬁndings pre - sented in model 2 of Table 2 show that SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 47 prior knowledge is positive and signiﬁ - cant when regressed on opportunity tac - itness ( b = 0 . 17 ; p < . 01 ) . These ﬁndings support H2 , providing evidence that the role of prior industry experience is sig - niﬁcantly related to the identiﬁcation of relatively more tacit opportunities . Discussion Research in the entrepreneurship lit - erature has increasingly recognized the role of opportunity in the entrepreneur - ial process . The current study makes important contributions to the literature on entrepreneurial opportunities and opportunity identiﬁcation by providing an exploratory look into the role of tac - itness and codiﬁcation of entrepreneurial opportunities . The present ﬁndings provide theoretical and preliminary empirical evidence that opportunity type is an important contingency in the opportunity identiﬁcation process spe - ciﬁcally as it relates to systematic search and the role of prior knowledge . As sug - gested by previous research advocating for a paradigmatic shift of the ﬁeld toward an I – O nexus perspective , this research takes a step toward a greater understanding the I – O nexus by address - ing more explicitly the variance in the opportunity . As such , this research makes several contributions that have important implications for the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship . Perhaps the broadest contribution of this investigation to the ﬁeld of entrepre - neurship is that it extends previous efforts at deﬁning an entrepreneurial opportunity , thereby resulting in a more inclusive deﬁnition . Speciﬁcally , this research draws on prior and more recent research efforts that introduce the notion of under or imperfect exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities ( Plummer , Table 1 Correlations , Means , and Standard Deviations Mean StandardDeviation 1 2 1 . Opportunity type a 1 . 78 0 . 75 2 . Systematic search 2 . 81 1 . 37 - 0 . 17 * * 3 . Prior knowledge 0 . 54 0 . 50 0 . 17 * * - 0 . 03 a For opportunity type , higher values indicate a greater degree of tacitness ; n = 285 . * p (cid:2) . 05 ( two - tailed ) * * p (cid:2) . 01 ( two - tailed ) Table 2 Results of Hierarchical Regression Analysis for Degree of Opportunity Tacitness Variables Model 1 Model 2 ConstantSystematic Search - 0 . 17 * * - 0 . 16 * * Prior Knowledge 0 . 17 * * D R 2 0 . 03 * * 0 . 03 * * Total R 2 0 . 03 * * 0 . 06 * * * * p (cid:2) . 05 ( two - tailed ) * * p (cid:2) . 01 ( two - tailed ) * * * p (cid:2) . 001 ( two - tailed ) JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 48 Haynie , and Godesiabois 2007 ) . It illus - trates that opportunities whose origins are derived from less than or incomplete prior exploitation efforts represent an important theoretical dimension of the opportunity construct . As such , this research provides an explanation for how extant entrepreneurship theorizing has been incomplete , and thus , how it might be further extended in the future . At a more speciﬁc level , this research has important implications for current theoretical debates in the entrepreneur - ship literature . For example , this research begins to open the black box of the opportunity identiﬁcation process by highlighting how variance in the charac - teristics of an opportunity may affect the process ( es ) through which opportunities are identiﬁed and subsequently devel - oped . In this research , we developed a typology ( see Figure 1 ) that integrates opportunity type , the role of prior expe - rience , and the entrepreneurial discovery process . As suggested , this typology pro - vides a means of reconciling the theoreti - cal perspectives of systematic search and discovery that may otherwise be viewed as competing . Recent theoretical work on search and discovery processes of opportunity identiﬁcation suggests much more work lies ahead . In developing a model of constrained systematic search , Fiet ( 2007 ) argued that entrepreneurs are not searching for a particular idea or opportunity , but rather only for known information channels . Our current research challenges this idea by arguing that entrepreneurs may in fact search for opportunities when those opportunities are codiﬁed . As such , future theories about the search and discovery of entre - preneurial opportunities may need to be expanded to accommodate both tacit and codiﬁed opportunities . This research also has important implications for increasing our knowl - edge about the I – O nexus . In the past , questions have been raised about the utility and validity of research focused on the individual entrepreneur ( e . g . , Gartner 1990 ) . The results of this study suggest that the relatively limited success of this line of research may be due in part to the myopic focus on the entrepre - neur and the failure to measure and account for variance in the opportunity itself . “Empirical support ( or lack of support ) for attributes that differentiate entrepreneurs from other members of society is often questionable , because these attributes confound the inﬂuence of opportunities and individuals” ( Shane and Venkataraman 2000 , p . 218 ) . In this research , we ﬁnd evidence in support of this argument that the entrepreneurial opportunity also plays a signiﬁcant role in the entrepreneurial process . Accord - Figure 1 Opportunity Identiﬁcation : An I - O Nexus Approach Systematic Search Focused Search Overlooked Discovery Prior Knowledge No Prior Knowledge Entrepreneur’s Knowledge Tacit Codified O ppo r t un it y ( A tt r i bu t e ) SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 49 ingly , this research provides an impor - tant foundation for future research to begin to develop greater speciﬁcation of how the attributes of the opportunity and the attributes of the entrepreneur may relate . Two examples may help illustrate how new lines of inquiry and greater knowledge speciﬁcation may be possible by the inclusion of both individual and opportunity attributes . The ﬁrst example focuses on tolerance for ambiguity ( Budner 1962 ) . Though the tolerance for ambiguity has been found to differentiate entrepreneurs from nonentrepreneurs , the explanatory power of this variable has been relatively low . Yet a more - ﬁne grained understanding of the tolerance for ambiguity may be possible when combining this individual attribute with the opportunity attribute of tacitness or codiﬁcation . For example , in the extant literature , a prospective entrepreneur may be differentiated from a nonentre - preneur based upon their relatively higher tolerance for ambiguity . What then explains why some people with relatively low tolerance for ambiguity also becoming entrepreneurs ? One pos - sible explanation is that an individual with a lower tolerance for ambiguity may be more likely to become an entrepre - neur when the opportunity is relatively more codiﬁed . That is , the codiﬁed nature of the opportunity reduces some of the ambiguity encompassed within the entrepreneurial process . This example suggests how future research could develop a better understanding of how individual level variables ( e . g . , risk taking propensity , need for achievement , and locus of control ) may be related to attributes of the opportunity ( e . g . , degree of codiﬁcation , level of innovativeness , projected expected value ) . A second example highlights how individual and opportunity attributes may provide greater insight into the opportunity identiﬁcation process . Recent work ( Barbosa , Kickul , and Liao - Troth 2007 ) has resurrected Dickson and Gaglierano’s multidimensional nature of entrepreneurial risk : the risk of sinking the boat ( failure ) and risk of missing the boat ( missing out on a good opportu - nity ) . Combining these dimensions of risk perception with different types of opportunities , it is likely that the type of perceived risk and the type of entre - preneurial opportunity may be related . For example , it may well be that the risk of sinking the boat ( failure ) is reduced by pursuing a relatively more codiﬁed opportunity . Though we did not explore the relationship between opportunity type and risk , our typology suggests that a codiﬁed opportunity should theoreti - cally represent a lower degree of risk given its clearly articulated nature . Knight ( 1921 ) distinguished between risk ( where the probability distribution of outcomes could be calculated ) and uncertainty ( where the distribution of outcomes was unknowable ) . Employing this Knightian distinction between risk and uncertainty , it is likely that a codiﬁed opportunity lends itself more to a calcu - lation of probable outcomes due to the clear articulation of the opportunity . By comparison , a tacit opportunity involves a greater degree of risk because time , effort , and money must be invested before the distribution of returns is known ( Venkataraman 1997 ; Knight 1921 ) . However , though the risk of sinking the boat may be reduced with codiﬁed opportunities , the risk of missing the boat may increase . If an opportunity is more codiﬁed , it is also available for a greater number of pro - spective entrepreneurs to exploit . There - fore , the window of opportunity for a codiﬁed opportunity may be shorter than for a tacit opportunity , because there is less information asymmetry . Rather than unique knowledge being possessed by only certain individuals , the information about a codiﬁed opportunity may be known by and widely available to a larger number of individuals . As a result , JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 50 the length of time an opportunity will be available to any individual is relatively shorter for codiﬁed opportunities than for tacit opportunities . Therefore , more research is needed to understand how the nature of and the mechanisms for opportunity transitions from tacit to codi - ﬁed occur over time , and how trade - offs are made between expected value and risk based on opportunity type in order to extend the current state of entrepre - neurship theory . Beyond the mere attributes of indi - viduals , the current research may also contribute to a greater understanding of opportunity identiﬁcation processes themselves by allowing the mapping of identiﬁcation processes onto different opportunity types . Chandler , Lyon , and DeTienne ( 2005 ) suggested four pro - cesses by which opportunities are iden - tiﬁed : ( 1 ) learn / replicate , ( 2 ) learn / innovate , ( 3 ) learn / acquire , and ( 4 ) innovate / educate . According to these authors , the learn / replicate process occurs when an individual , with experi - ence and knowledge of an industry , identiﬁes unmet market demand and replicates an existing product or service to serve the unmet demand . The learn / acquire process occurs when an indi - vidual identiﬁes a proﬁtable business concept and exploits it by acquiring the business . Applying the distinction between tacit and codiﬁed opportunities , both the learn / replicate and the learn / acquire opportunity identiﬁcation pro - cesses can be understood as being focused on relatively more codiﬁed opportunities , whereas the learn / innovate and innovate / educate processes can be understood as being focused on relatively more tacit opportunities . Recently , DeTienne and Chandler ( 2007 ) found evidence of gender differences in opportunity identiﬁcation processes whereby men were signiﬁcantly more likely than women to use learn / replicate and learn / acquire opportunity identiﬁca - tion processes . One possible explanation for why these processes covaried is that both processes are focused on the iden - tiﬁcation of relatively codiﬁed opportu - nities . As a result , an important direction for future research is to explore how the opportunity identiﬁcation processes relate to the types of opportunities identiﬁed . This research provides important implications for the growing stream of research on opportunity identiﬁcation and entrepreneurial learning . Recent work in this domain has highlighted how differences in acquiring and transform - ing information and experiences may lead to the identiﬁcation of differing numbers of opportunities ( Corbett 2007 ) . Combining the notion of different acqui - sition and transformation processes with our research on different forms of entre - preneurial opportunities suggests that a more nuanced understanding of oppor - tunity identiﬁcation beyond the number of opportunities identiﬁed may be pos - sible . For example , though the intention mode of transforming information has been found to be related to the iden - tiﬁcation of fewer opportunities , it is possible that the identiﬁcation of opportunities may have been inﬂuenced by the nature of opportunity being explored . That is , the relatively tacit nature of the technology being explored may confound the number of opportuni - ties with the nature of the opportunities . To more fully understand how informa - tion acquisition and transformation pro - cesses relate , it may be useful to include both relatively more tacit and more codi - ﬁed opportunities within the quasi - experiment , as individuals who tend toward intention may recognize fewer tacit opportunities but perhaps more codiﬁed opportunities . In this way , research could begin to disentangle the contingencies of opportunity identiﬁcation - related differences in the type ( or tacitness ) of the opportunity . Though additional work is clearly needed to extend the current ﬁndings , SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 51 this research does provide an example of how researchers can simultaneously account for variance in both spheres of the I – O nexus in order to further under - stand the opportunity recognition and learning processes . Another contribution of this research is related to the development and use of social networks and entrepreneurial teams in the identiﬁcation of opportuni - ties . Normative prescriptions have often encouraged the development of diverse social networks and entrepreneurial teams because such networks are thought to be more useful for the iden - tiﬁcation of opportunities ( e . g . , Singh 2001 ) . However , this research suggests that such prescriptions may need to be modiﬁed based on important contingen - cies ( e . g . , the tacitness of the opportu - nity ) that affect the search and transfer of such information . Diverse social net - works may be more useful in the search for and identiﬁcation of relatively more codiﬁed opportunities because the infor - mation associated with such opportuni - ties is easily communicated even across relatively weak network ties . Therefore , the search beneﬁts of the diverse network are maximized ( Granovetter 1973 ) . However , in the case of tacit opportunities , the search for and identi - ﬁcation of novel information may be more than offset by the difﬁculties in the transfer of information from one member of the network to the entrepreneur . This has been referred to as the search – transfer problem ( Hansen 1999 ) . Thus , the present research suggests that entre - preneurial networks may need to be developed based upon the ﬁt between the social network structure and the type of entrepreneurial opportunity . The application of a ﬁt perspective ( Kristof 1996 ) between individuals and opportu - nities represents an important future direction of understanding the I – O nexus . Our ﬁndings raise important issues for further understanding the intentionality and rationality of entrepreneurial action . McMullen and Shepherd ( 2006 ) devel - oped a conceptual model relating knowl - edge and motivation to entrepreneurial action . In their model , they draw an important distinction between third - person and ﬁrst - person opportunities . A third - person opportunity exists as a potential opportunity for someone in the marketplace . According to their model , the transition from a third person to a ﬁrst person occurs as a result of the desirability and feasibility of exploita - tion . Extending the current research , a codiﬁed opportunity may reduce con - cerns about the feasibility of the exploi - tation of an entrepreneurial opportunity . As a result , a greater degree of opportu - nity codiﬁcation may affect the willing - ness of someone to engage in entrepreneurial action by lowering the threshold for entrepreneurial action by reducing doubt associated with the fea - sibility assessment by the entrepreneur . In addition , as prospective entrepreneurs engage in the exploitation of relatively more codiﬁed opportunities , they may either experience changes in self - efﬁcacy ( Bandura 1982 ) due to the relative success of the exploitation . This inﬂu - ence on self - efﬁcacy may affect the future desirability of entrepreneurial endeavors . Therefore , future research should examine the relative success of entrepreneurial efforts based upon the degree of tacitness of the opportunity in terms of overall value , persistence , and future engagement in entrepreneurial activities . In sum , the codiﬁcation of an opportunity appears to represent an important contribution requiring future research given the relationship to several aspects of the entrepreneurial process . This study also has important implica - tions for entrepreneurship education . For example , the inclusion of the relatively more codiﬁed or underexploited oppor - tunities may be an important process whereby novice entrepreneurs could reﬁne their cognitive processes of JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 52 pattern recognition ( Baron and Ensley 2006 ) . Given the seminal contributions of scholars such as Schumpeter , entre - preneurially oriented education pro - grams often have a tendency to focus disproportionately on the identiﬁcation and exploitation of tacit opportunities or new innovations . When comparing novice and experienced entrepreneurs , Baron and Ensley ( 2006 ) found novice entrepreneurs were more likely than experienced entrepreneurs to have mental prototypes of business opportu - nities that focused on the novelty of the idea , the use of new technology , and the potential to change an industry . By com - parison , experienced entrepreneurs had a more pragmatic focus on solving a cus - tomer’s problem and generating positive cash ﬂow while managing their risk . Integrating these ideas , entrepreneurship educators may better serve their students by focusing on these underexploited opportunities as a means to reshape the cognitive frameworks of novice or student entrepreneurs to encourage more focus on pragmatic considerations and reduce the likelihood of novice entrepreneurs being “cognitively dazzled” by the novelty of the opportu - nity . As such , codiﬁed opportunities may provide an important real - life laboratory for students , particularly undergraduate students , who seek to move directly into an entrepreneurial career . Similarly , the matching of the aforementioned learning styles and different types of entrepre - neurial opportunities suggests that peda - gogical reﬁnements in entrepreneurship education that accommodate a wider range of opportunities varying in their degree of tacitness may be necessary . Limitations and Future Research Though our research offers several important contributions , these contribu - tions must be considered in the context of the potential limitations . One potential limitation is the measure used to opera - tionalize the degree of tacitness of an entrepreneurial opportunity . Since we did not have a direct measure of the degree of tacitness of an opportunity , we developed a formative index of three items ( business structure , availability of information , and future availability of the opportunity ) as a proxy to measure this variable . We realize the operationaliza - tion of opportunity type is potentially coarse and open to discussion . For example , though opportunities measured at the endpoints of the continuum ( tacit = 3 ; codiﬁed = 0 ) were less prob - lematic , the summation of the formative index presents the potential for disparate interpretation at midpoints along the continuum . Should a franchise with limited availability of information and extensive future availability of the oppor - tunity be considered relatively more tacit than an independent business developed on widely available information ? There - fore , the results warrant caution in their interpretation . To minimize the issues of interpreta - tion and to more accurately represent the potential distribution of opportunities , we used a continuous scale rather than a dichotomous scale for the degree of tac - itness of the opportunity . In addition , we conducted post - hoc analysis using a dichotomous variable operationalizing this variable in two different ways ( 3 and all other [ 0 , 1 , and 2 ] ; all other [ 1 , 2 , and 3 ] and 0 ) . In both cases , the direction and pattern of the results remained unchanged , which provides substantive evidence that the results were related to the underlying variable rather than the manner in which it was operationalized . Given the prominence of the role of the opportunity in the I – O nexus , a major priority for future research in the area of entrepreneurship is the measurement and operationalization of entrepreneurial opportunities . Though some work has begun in this regard ( e . g . , DeTienne and Chandler 2007 ) , additional work is needed in the area of measurement of SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 53 entrepreneurial opportunities . As one example related to the current study , future research could draw upon work in knowledge management , which has begun to address issues associated with how to operationalize tacit knowledge ( Ambrosini and Bowman 2001 ) . The work on the measurement of tacit knowl - edge could then be applied in the measurement of tacit opportunities . As noted , this is an exploratory study to both operationalize the opportunity and to separate it from the individual . Second , in the current study , we viewed the opportunity as an objective phenomenon ( Shane and Venkataraman 2000 ) . Though the objective view of the opportunity represents an interesting direction , other researchers have argued for different views on the opportunity ( Sarasvathy et al . 2003 ) . Further research should examine if degree of codiﬁcation has both objective and subjective com - ponents . Using perspectives of both the prospective entrepreneur and a panel of experts to assess the same opportunity may be one way to examine these differing views of entrepreneurial opportunities . Third , the current study used data col - lected from the PSED . Though the use of PSED offers many beneﬁts , it also has some drawbacks . For example , the use of secondary data limits input from the researcher about the measurement of constructs . In the current study , such limitations included a dichotomous vari - able for the work experience . The PSED has also been criticized for shortcomings , including difﬁcult and confusing ques - tions and data collection from a single source . Despite these limitations , the PSED offered a nationally representative sample of nascent entrepreneurial opportunities . As such , it avoided many of the challenges of survivorship bias . Future research should begin to collect primary data that allows for more control and external validity of the measurement of entrepreneurial opportunities . Fourth , our study focuses only on the opportunity type and recognition process implications . Future research is needed to explore the inﬂuence of opportunity type on important entrepre - neurial outcomes , such a performance . For example , the extant literature argues that opportunities differ in expected value ( Eckhardt and Shane 2003 ) . Though the distinctive advantage offered by a tacit opportunity may lead to a higher expected value , the potential lower risk of a codiﬁed opportunity may also impact the expected value of the opportunity . Future research may help guide both researchers and practitioners in this regard . Conclusion This study adds to the emerging research on the role of entrepreneurial opportunities and their effect on the entrepreneurial process at the I – O nexus . Speciﬁcally , this research con - tributes to the relatively limited empiri - cal work that focuses on how variance in the entrepreneurial opportunity may affect the process of opportunity iden - tiﬁcation . By offering an expanded deﬁ - nition of an entrepreneurial opportunity and attempting to measure the degree of tacitness of the opportunity , this research begins to open the black box of opportunity identiﬁcation . Based upon the ﬁndings in this study , the type of entrepreneurial opportunity revealed a contingent relationship to both the entrepreneurial discovery process and the role of prior knowledge . Relatively codiﬁed opportunities were more likely to be discovered through systematic search , whereas prior experience was more useful for the discovery of tacit opportunities . Continued research that accounts for variance in both the indi - vidual and the opportunity is needed within and beyond the scope of oppor - tunity identiﬁcation to continue to move the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship forward . JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 54 References Ambrosini , V . , and C . Bowman ( 2001 ) . “Tacit Knowledge : Some Suggestions for Operationalization , ” Journal of Management Studies 38 , 811 – 829 . Ancori , B . , A . Bureth , and A . Cohendet ( 2000 ) . “The Economics of Knowl - edge : The Debate about Codiﬁcation and Tacit Knowledge , ” Industrial and Corporate Change 9 ( 2 ) , 255 – 287 . Bandura , A . ( 1982 ) . “Self - Efﬁcacy Mecha - nism in Human Agency , ” American Psychologist 37 , 122 – 147 . Barbosa , S . , J . Kickul , and M . Liao - Troth ( 2007 ) . “Development and Validation of a Multidimensional Scale of Entre - preneurial Risk Perception , ” Academy of Management Best Paper Pro - ceedings , Academy of Management meeting , Philadelphia , PA . Baron , R . , and M . Ensley ( 2006 ) . “Oppor - tunity Recognition as the Detection of Meaningful Patterns : Evidence from Comparisons of Novice and Experi - enced Entrepreneurs , ” Management Science 52 ( 9 ) , 1331 – 1344 . Baron , R . , and S . Shane ( 2005 ) . Entrepre - neurship : A Process Perspective . Mason , OH : South - Western . Baumol , W . ( 1993 ) . “Formal Entrepre - neurship Theory in Economics : Exist - ence and Bounds , ” Journal of Business Venturing 8 , 197 – 210 . Bollen , K . , and R . Lennox ( 1991 ) . “Con - ventional Wisdom on Measurement : A Structural Equation Perspective , ” Psy - chological Bulletin 100 , 305 – 314 . Boulding , K . ( 1953 ) . The Organization Revolution . New York : Harper & Brothers . Budner , S . ( 1962 ) . “Intolerance of Ambi - guity as a Personality Variable , ” Journal of Personality 30 , 29 – 50 . Busenitz , L . , and J . Barney ( 1997 ) . “Dif - ferences between Entrepreneurs and Managers in Large Organizations : Biases and Heuristics in Strategic Decision - Making , ” Journal of Business Venturing 12 ( 1 ) , 9 – 30 . Chandler , G . , D . Lyon , and D . DeTienne ( 2005 ) . “Antecedents and Exploitation Outcomes of Opportunity Identiﬁca - tion Processes , ” Academy of Manage - ment Best Paper Proceedings , Academy of Management meeting , Honolulu , HI . Chin , W . , and P . Newsted ( 1999 ) . “The Partial Least Squares Approach to Structural Equation Modeling , ” in Sta - tistical Strategies for Small Sample Research . Eds . R . H . Hoyle and H . Rick . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage , 307 – 341 . Corbett , A . ( 2005 ) . “Entrepreneurial Learning within the Process of Oppor - tunity Identiﬁcation and Exploitation , ” Entrepreneurship , Theory and Prac - tice 29 , 473 – 491 . ——— ( 2007 ) . “Learning Asymmetries and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities , ” Journal of Business Venturing 22 ( 1 ) , 97 – 118 . Cowan , R . , P . David , and D . Foray ( 2000 ) . “The Explicit Economics of Knowledge Codiﬁcation and Tacit - ness , ” Industrial and Corporate Change 9 , 211 – 253 . DeTienne , D . , and G . Chandler ( 2007 ) . “The Role of Gender in Opport - unity Identiﬁcation , ” Entrepreneur - ship , Theory and Practice 31 ( 3 ) , 365 – 386 . Dimov , D . ( 2007 ) . “From Opportunity Insight to Opportunity Intention : The Importance of Person - Situation Learn - ing Match , ” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31 ( 4 ) , 561 – 583 . Eckhardt , J . , and S . Shane ( 2003 ) . “The Importance of Opportunities to Entre - preneurship , ” Journal of Management 29 ( 3 ) , 333 – 349 . Fiet , J . ( 2007 ) . “A Prescriptive Analysis of Search and Discovery , ” Journal of Management Studies 44 ( 4 ) , 592 – 611 . Gartner , W . ( 1990 ) . “What Are We Talking about When We Talk about SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 55 Entrepreneurship ? ” Journal of Busi - ness Venturing 5 ( 1 ) , 15 – 29 . Granovetter , M . ( 1973 ) . “The Strength of Weak Ties , ” American Journal of Soci - ology 78 ( 6 ) , 1360 – 1380 . Hansen , M . ( 1999 ) . “The Search - Transfer Problem : The Role of Weak Ties in Sharing Knowledge across Organiza - tion Subunits , ” Administrative Science Quarterly 44 , 82 – 111 . Hayek , F . ( 1945 ) . “The Use of Knowl - edge in Society , ” American Economic Review 35 , 519 – 530 . Helm , S . ( 2005 ) . “Designing a Formative Measure for Corporate Reputation , ” Corporate Reputation Review 8 ( 2 ) , 95 – 109 . Johnson , B . , E . Lorenz , and B . Lundvall ( 2002 ) . “Why All This Fuss about Codi - ﬁed and Tacit Knowledge ? ” Industrial and Corporate Change 11 , 245 – 262 . Kaish , S . , and B . Gilad ( 1991 ) . “Charac - teristics of Opportunities Search of Entrepreneurs versus Executives : Sources , Interests and General Alert - ness , ” Journal of Business Venturing 6 , 45 – 61 . Kirzner , I . ( 1997 ) . “Entrepreneurial Dis - covery and the Competitive Market Process : An Austrian Approach , ” Journal of Economic Literature 35 , 60 – 85 . Knight , F . ( 1921 ) . Risk , Uncertainty and Proﬁt . New York : Augustus Kelley . Kogut , B . , and U . Zander ( 1992 ) . “Knowl - edge of the Firm , Combinative Capa - bilities and Their Replication of Technology , ” Organization Science 3 ( 3 ) , 383 – 397 . Kristof , A . ( 1996 ) . “Person - Organization Fit : An Integrative Review of Its Con - ceptualizations , Measurement , and Implications , ” Personnel Psychology 49 ( 1 ) , 1 – 49 . McClelland , D . ( 1961 ) . The Achieving Society . Glencoe , IL : The Free Press . Machlup , F . ( 1983 ) . Knowledge , Its Cre - ation , Distribution and Economic Sig - niﬁcance . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . McMullen , J . , and D . Shepherd ( 2006 ) . “Entrepreneurial Action and the Role of Uncertainty in the Theory of the Entrepreneur , ” Academy of Manage - ment Review 31 , 132 – 152 . McMullen , J . , L . Plummer , and Z . Acs ( 2007 ) . “What Is an Entrepreneurial Opportunity ? ” Small Business Eco - nomics 28 , 273 – 283 . Plummer , L . , J . Haynie , and J . Godesia - bois ( 2007 ) . “An Essay on the Origins of Entrepreneurial Opportunity , ” Small Business Economics 28 , 363 – 379 . Polanyi , M . ( 1966 ) . The Tacit Dimension . Garden City , NY : Doubleday . Reynolds , P . ( 2000 ) . “National Study of U . S . Business Start - Ups : Background and Methodology , ” in Advances in Entrepreneurship , Firm Emergence and Growth . Ed . J . Katz . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 153 – 228 . Sarasvathy , S . , N . Dew , S . Velamuri , and S . Venkataraman ( 2003 ) . “Three Views of Entrepreneurial Opportunity , ” in Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research : An Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction . Eds . Z . Acs and D . Audretsch . Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers , 141 – 160 . Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities , ” Organization Science 11 ( 4 ) , 448 – 469 . ——— ( 2003 ) . A General Theory of Entre - preneurship The Individual - Opportunity Nexus . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Shane , S . , and J . Eckhardt ( 2003 ) . “The Individual - opportunity Nexus , ” in Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research : An Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction Z . Eds . J . Acs and D . B . Audretsch . Boston , Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , 161 – 191 . Shane , S . , and S . Venkataraman ( 2000 ) . “The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research , ” Academy of Management Review 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 56 ——— ( 2001 ) . “Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research : A Response to Zahra and Dess , Singh and Erikson , ” Academy of Management Review 26 ( 1 ) , 13 – 16 . Shaver , K . , and L . Scott ( 1991 ) . “Person , Process , Choice : The Psychology of New Venture Creation , ” Entrepreneur - ship Theory and Practice 16 ( 2 ) , 23 – 42 . Singh , R . ( 2001 ) . “A Comment on Devel - oping the Field of Entrepreneurship through the Study of Opportunity Rec - ognition and Exploitation , ” Academy of Management Review 26 ( 1 ) , 10 – 12 . Stigler , G . ( 1961 ) . “The Economics of Information , ” Journal of Political Economy 3 , 213 – 225 . Venkataraman , S . ( 1997 ) . “The Distinc - tive Domain of Entrepreneurship Research , ” in Advances in Entrepre - neurship , Firm Emergence and Growth . Eds . J . Katz and R . Brock - haus . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 119 – 138 . SMITH , MATTHEWS , AND SCHENKEL 57