Interfering with the Sugar Code : Design and Synthesis of Oligosaccharide Mimics Anna Bernardi Università degli Studi di Milano , Dipartimento di Chimica Organica e Industriale , via Venezian 21 , 20133 Milano , Italy , anna . bernardi @ unimi . it Over the past two decades it has become clear that many fundamental biological processes are controlled in their initial steps by the selective formation of a carbohydrate - protein complex . Oligosaccharide determinants of cellular glycoconjugates appear to interact with protein receptors triggering a variety of cellular responses within a wide range of physiological and pathological processes ( adhesion , growth regulation , inflammation , infection etc ) and with exquisitely tuned selectivity . This has led to formulate the hypothesis that a sugar code exists and that sugar - binding proteins ( lectins ) act to decipher it and translate it into biological responses . [ 1 ] Interference with these recognition events could thus be used to modulate or alter signal transmission , or to prevent the onset of diseases . Despite the great structural complexity of many bioactive oligosaccharides , often only small portions of these molecules are actually recognized by their receptor proteins . The remaining part appears to act as a scaffold that orients the binding determinants in the appropriate conformation and provides a connection to the aglycons . This analysis suggests that functional mimics of carbohydrates may be designed by replacing the seemingly inactive fragments with simpler , non - carbohydrate scaffolds . Such molecules should be more stable to hydrolytic enzymes and generally more drug - like than oligosaccharides themselves . The properties of such glycomimetic ligands can be estimated in silico , using computational tools , and optimized by an iterative process of design , synthesis and biological activity evaluation . Some examples from our work on the design and synthesis of glycomimetic inhibitors of the cholera toxin [ 2 ] and of the dendritic cell receptor DC - SIGN [ 3 ] will be discussed . 1 . Gabius , H . - J . , Siebert , H . - J . , André , S . ; Jiménez - Barbero , J . , Rüdiger H , ChemBioChem 2004 , 5 , 740 - 764 . 2 . Bernardi , A . , Podlipnik , C . , Jiménez - Barbero , J . , GM1 Glycomimetics and Bacterial Enterotoxins in “Protein - Carbohydrate Interactions in Infectious Diseases” C . A . Bewley Ed . , RSC Publishing 2006 , pp - 73 - 91 – ISBN 0 85404 802 2 . 3 . Reina , J . J . , Sattin , S . , Invernizzi , D . , Mari , S . , Martínez - Prats , L . , Tabarani , G . , Fieschi , F . , Delgado , R . , Nieto , P . M . , Rojo , J . , Bernardi , A . , ChemMedChem 2007 , 2 , 1030 – 1036 .