Developmental Cell Review Actin Dynamics at the Leading Edge : From Simple Machinery to Complex Networks Robert H . Insall 1 , * and Laura M . Machesky 1 , * 1 CRUK Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , Garscube Estate , Switchback Road , Bearsden , Glasgow G61 1BD , Scotland * Correspondence : r . insall @ beatson . gla . ac . uk ( R . H . I . ) , l . machesky @ beatson . gla . ac . uk ( L . M . M . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 08 . 012 Cell migration is an essential feature of eukaryotic life , required for processes ranging from feeding and phag - octyosis to development , healing , and immunity . Migration requires the actin cytoskeleton , speciﬁcally the localized polymerization of actin ﬁlaments underneath the plasma membrane . Here we summarize recent developments in actin biology that particularly affect structures at the leading edge of the cell , including the structure of actin branches , the multiple pathways that lead to cytoskeleton assembly and disassembly , and the role of blebs . Future progress depends on connecting these processes and components to the dynamic behavior of the whole cell in three dimensions . Introduction Actin assembly provides a major force for cell movement , in particular by driving the protrusions such as lamellipods and ﬁlo - pods that propel the leading edge . In the past decade , a string of advances led to a satisfying and increasingly coherent model of how polymerization of actin ﬁlaments can allow cells to migrate . These include the reconstitution of minimal actin - based motility machines from puriﬁed proteins ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ; Ma et al . , 1998 ) . While these breakthroughs emphasized that a subset of motility could be recreated in relatively simple systems , subse - quent years have continued to reveal the complexity of actin systems at work in eukaryotic cells . New actin regulatory pro - teins are still being discovered every year and there is much left to be revealed about how they all function . Actin powers protrusions by polymerizing just under the plasma membrane . The cell has two basic choices of ﬁlament geometry : branched ﬁlaments leading to sheet - like protrusions , or long parallel or bundled ﬁlaments leading to spikes . Once ﬁla - ments are established , they can elongate without help ( although they are assisted in vivo by various proteins that bind to mono - mers or to ﬁlament ends ) , but there is a strong kinetic barrier to initiating ( ‘‘nucleating’’ ) new ﬁlaments . Branched ﬁlament net - works found in sheet - like protrusions and on the surface of internal vesicular structures are assembled by Arp2 / 3 complex . The main activators of Arp2 / 3 complex are the WASP family proteins , of which the best known are Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) and Suppressor of cyclic AMP receptor mutation and WASP and Verprolin homologous protein ( SCAR / WAVE ) , which have multiple isoforms in mammals . WASP family proteins act as scaffolds that couple signal intermediates to the initiation of actin branches by the Arp2 / 3 complex , and thus allow sig - naling to catalyze rapid ﬁlament growth . A series of biochemical experiments , together with electron microscopy , have shown that Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates new actin ﬁlaments in the form of branches off the sides of preexisting ﬁlaments ( Figure 1 and Pollard , 2007 ) and that this process drives lamellipodia ( sheet - like ) protrusion . Spiky protrusions such as ﬁlopodia can be formed in two ways : from branched networks by the actions of actin bundling proteins such as fascin , or directly nucleated as unbranched actin ﬁlaments by the formin family of proteins ( Figure 1 ) . The role of formins has been fully described in recent reviews ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ; Pollard , 2007 ) , so we will only describe some new developments . While the ﬁeld has identiﬁed some of the major players in the formation of structures such as lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , much remains to be discovered about the mechanism of assembly and dynamics of these and related structures in actual physiological settings . Receptors in the plasma membrane signaling to small GTPases such as Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 can trigger nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments via speciﬁc downstream pathways to generate either branched or linear ﬁlament arrays . The discovery of these pathways at the turn of the millennium promised a clear understanding of how cells move ( reviewed in Heasman and Ridley , 2008 ) . While the discovery of how small GTPases control actin structures and dynamics in cells has revolutionized cell biology , it is clear that the control of actin - based processes is multidimensional and that no simple linear relationship exists between activation of a GTPase and any single cellular structure output . Various guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs , which activate GTPases ) and GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs , which cause inactivation ) provide speciﬁcity and thus allow signaling networks to drive multiple cell processes via a relativelysmall ( around 25inhumans ) setofRhofamilymembers . Additionally , lipids and proteins in the plasma membrane provide spatial information and an additional level of control for actin - based protrusions . Hundreds of actin binding proteins also participate by modifying ﬁlament structures and regulating their turnover and dynamics—including examples that can sever and cut up old networks , chaperone actin monomers , and regulate subunit addition and loss at the ﬁlament ends . While lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are seen as the main types of protrusions that cells produce when moving on 2D surfaces , other structures are also important for motility . For example , when cells are moving in 3D matrices , they need to squeeze through the matrix , rather than just walk across it , so they look and behave very differently to cells on a ﬂat surface . They fre - quently appear to use fat , bubble - like protrusions called blebs , which are initially driven by hydrostatic pressure rather than by actin polymerization . Cells in 3D matrices also move using pseudopods that are bulkier and rounder than the sheet - like 310 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . lamellipodia seen in cells moving on ﬂat surfaces . Both blebs and fat pseudopods may be key to certain forms of migration in 3D . While they have been recently reviewed in full elsewhere ( Char - ras and Paluch , 2008 ; Charras et al . , 2005 ; Fackler and Grosse , 2008 ; Mitchison et al . , 2008 ) , we will discuss some of the more recent developments . Molecular Mechanisms of Branch Formation The Arp2 / 3 complex is one of the main powerhouses of actin ﬁlament generation and biochemical and cell biological data suggest that it nucleates new actin ﬁlaments from the sides of preexisting ﬁlaments in the form of branched networks . Arp2 / 3 complex consists of seven subunits , with Arp2 and Arp3 being similar in structure and sequence to actin , and the other ﬁve subunits ( ARPC1 – 5 ) being unique and highly conserved in evolu - tion ( Machesky and Gould , 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex in its pure form is biochemically inactive , but becomes maximally activated via interactions with both a WASP family protein C - terminal sequence known as VCA and an actin ﬁlament . Because the Arp2 / 3 complex only shows maximal activity in vitro as a part of this multimolecular structure , it has been difﬁcult to visualize the so - called activated state of the complex . Several recent advances in our understanding of the mecha - nism of actin branch formation have led to a detailed molecular picture of how the Arp2 / 3 complex functions ( Figure 2 ) . Since Arp2 / 3 complex is thought to undergo major structural changes when it interacts with WASP family proteins and actin ﬁlaments ( Robinson et al . , 2001 ) , the holy grail in the ﬁeld has been struc - tural information about the activated Arp2 / 3 complex and its interactions with activators . The original X - ray crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 shows the inactive complex , in which Arp2 and Arp3 reside in an arrangement that is incompatible with nucleation of the daughter branch ﬁlament and in which much of the Arp2 structure is unresolved ( Robinson et al . , 2001 ) . Additionally , Arp3 is nucleotide free in the original structure , leaving the nucle - otide binding pocket wide open . Newer structures have added the ATP back to Arp3 and observed conformational changes ( Kiselar et al . , 2007 ; Nolen and Pollard , 2007 ) , but the conforma - tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex when it is bound to a mother ﬁlament and to the appropriate WASP family activator ( s ) has not yet been visualized directly . Biochemical experiments have provided hints about the structure of the activated complex , and have suggested mecha - nisms for the activation cycle of Arp2 / 3 - complex - based actin nucleation . The C - terminal tail of N - WASP and its relatives can be directly crosslinked to Arp2 , Arp3 , and ARPC1 ( Pan et al . , 2004 ; Weaver et al . , 2002 ) , suggesting interactions between these subunits and WASP proteins . Recent biochemical data shows that Arp2 / 3 complex lacking the Arp2 subunit is still able to bind to the N - WASP tail , meaning that Arp2 is not essen - tial for the interaction ( Nolen and Pollard , 2008 ) . However , Arp2 - free complex does not nucleate actin , supporting the idea that Arp2 and Arp3 cooperate to form an active dimer for nucleation . This is further supported by studies using structural mass spec - trometry , where peptides from both Arp2 and Arp3 have been found to both interact with WASP , consistent with a closed con - formation resembling an actin dimer for these subunits ( Kiselar et al . , 2007 ) . Kinetic modeling of the activation cycle for Arp2 / 3 complex shows that the interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin ﬁlaments is the slowest step in the assembly of branches , perhaps because of the large conformational changes required of both the Arp2 / 3 complex and the mother ﬁlament and their large surface area of contact ( Beltzner and Pollard , 2008 ) . In an elegant attempt to force Arp2 / 3 into its active state , a synthetically activated complex has been generated in which actin is crosslinked to the activating peptide from N - WASP ( Figure 2 ) . This formed an N - WASP : actin : Arp2 / 3 cocomplex that could be completely puriﬁed and analyzed by X - ray scat - tering ( Boczkowska et al . , 2008 ) . This complex is not in a branch junction , which may affect how representative of the active state it is , but it is bound to N - WASP and the ﬁrst new actin subunit of the branch . This model , together with studies of actin and WASP - homology 2 ( WH2 ) domain interactions ( Lee et al . , 2007 ; Rebowski et al . , 2008 ) , suggests that the tail of N - WASP makes extensive contacts with the Arp2 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex , which spotlights Arp2 as the subunit that contacts the ﬁrst new actin monomer of the daughter ﬁlament . The X - ray scattering model of Boczkowska et al . compares with electron tomography studies of an actual branch junction to reveal conformational changes in both the Arp2 / 3 complex and the mother actin ﬁlament that are important for branch formation ( Rouiller et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 2 ) . Rouiller et al . provide the ﬁrst and best - resolved structure of the activated Arp2 / 3 complex , Figure 1 . The Major Mechanisms of Actin Nucleation in Cells and Some of Their Accessory Proteins Both the Arp2 / 3 complex and formins use actin monomers topolymerize actin ﬁlaments . The Arp2 / 3 complex is a stable assembly of seven subunits including two actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 . Formins are dimers that sitonthegrowingendsofactinﬁlamentsandmediateelongationoflinearactinnetworks . They use proﬁlin ( not shown ) to help recruit actin monomers and facilitate rapid actin assembly . Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 311 Developmental Cell Review although this complex is not in association with a WASP family protein . Arp2 / 3 complex has an extensive area of contact with the mother ﬁlament , with all seven subunits of Arp2 / 3 complex implicated . The studies of Rouiller and Boczkowska et al . together basically agree on the orientation of Arp2 / 3 complex in branch junctions and provide the most detailed insight yet into how the molecules that coordinate actin assembly at the leading edge of the cell participate in branch formation . While there are still details that are unclear between the various studies , the clear consensus is that the Arp2 / 3 complex makes new ﬁlaments by side - branching . Whatever the precise branch structure is during nucleation , it appears that the Arp2 and Arp3 subunits form the base for the initiation of the new daughter ﬁlament . The C - terminal acidic and WH2 domains of WASP proteins likely bind in an extended conformation along the ﬁrst actin subunit of the new ﬁlament , and along Arp2 and other subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Boczkowska et al . , 2008 ) . The binding of WASP family proteins and the loading of ATP to Arp3 , as well as its binding to the mother ﬁlament , are likely to be key for the conformational change that activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Also possibly important in regulation of the ‘‘activated state’’ of Arp2 / 3 complex is that the Arp2 subunit contains two phosphorylation sites , one a threonine and the other a tyrosine . Biochemically , phosphorylation of at least one site is required for actin - nucleating activity , though neither kinase has yet been identiﬁed ( LeClaire et al . , 2008 ) . Perhaps further structural and biochemical studies will be needed to try to reconcile the recent ﬁnding that N - WASP and likely also WASP act as dimers to activate Arp2 / 3 complex ( Padrick et al . , 2008 ) . This may also change our interpretation of the X - ray scat - tering model of Arp2 / 3 complex bound to WASP , since we don’t know where the second WASP binding site might be . The 3D geometry of how branches form in actin networks , and how the process is regulated , is rapidly becoming very conceptually complicated . Regulation of the Arp2 / 3 Complex While we are rapidly gaining a picture of the geometry and struc - ture of how actin branches are initiated and formed , it is also becoming increasingly clear that because the Arp2 / 3 complex is so important as a regulator of actin dynamics , its regulation in cells is tightly controlled and multidimensional . The WASP family members act as scaffolds to integrate signals from small GTPases such as Rac and Cdc42 , signal adapters such as Grb2 and Nck , membrane phospholipids such as PIP2 , and protein kinases . If the integrated signal exceeds the threshold Figure 2 . Models of Activated Arp2 / 3 Complex ( A ) StructureoftheArp2 / 3complexinabranchjunctionbasedonBoczkowskaetal . ( 2008 ) . Themotheranddaughterﬁlamentsandtheirrespectivebarbedor ( + ) endsaremodeledinforreference ( whiteandgray ) , butthepreciseorganizationofthebranchwasnotaddressedinthisstudy . Subdomains1 – 4ofactin andArp2 and subdomains 2 and 4of Arp3 are numbered . ARPC1 – 5 represent theﬁve subunitsofthe Arp2 / 3 complexbesidestheactin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 . In the active structure , Arp2 moves to occupy a ﬁlament - like conformation next to Arp3 . The ﬁrst actin subunit ( blue ) , bound to the WCA region in the C terminus of N - WASP ( longthinredandpurple ; labeledWforWH2motif , Cforconnectingmotif , andAforacidicmotif ) , bindsatthebarbedendofArp2 . Trp499ofN - WASPis thoughttobekeyfortheinteractionofN - WASPwithArp2 / 3complexandishighlightedhere . Thepositionoftheactin - binding Wmotifintheactivatedcomplexis derived from the crystal structure ( Chereau et al . , 2005 ) . ( B ) Model of theArp2 / 3 branch showing the surface representation of Arp2 / 3 complex and actin based on Rouiller etal . ( 2008 ) . Actin subunits are shown inwhite or gray . D1 and D2 are the ﬁrst two subunits in the daughter ﬁlament . Numbers indicate Arp subdomains , based on the nomenclature derived from the original actin monomer 3D structure . Three different views are shown rotated 90 (cid:2) clockwise . ( C ) Thethreeviewsofthestructureshownin ( A ) , showingthemotherﬁlamentwithareasofcontactwithsubunitsoftheArp2 / 3complexcolor - codedaccordingto thesamecodeasin ( B ) andreproducedfromRouilleretal . ( 2008 ) . M1 – M6denotesubunitsofthemotheractinﬁlament . Inthemiddleview , theArp2 / 3complexis viewed from the aspect of the mother ﬁlament ( turned 180 (cid:2) clockwise from B with points of mother ﬁlament contact marked in gray [ subunits M2 and M4 ] and white [ subunits M1 , M3 , M5 and M6 ] ) . Bar , 5 nm . Reproduced from Boczkowska et al . ( 2008 ) and Rouiller et al . ( 2008 ) ( originally published in The Journal of Cell Biology ; doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200709092 ) with permission . 312 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review for activation , they become activated and transmit the signal to actin polymerization through the Arp2 / 3 complex . In mammals , WASP family members fall into three groups : WASPs ( WASP and N - WASP ) ; SCAR / WAVEs ( SCAR / WAVE1 – 3 ) ; and the recently identiﬁed WASH , WHAMM , and JMY ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ; Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . WASP was the ﬁrst to be discovered . It is expressed exclusively in hematopoietic cells and its mutation or absence causes a range of immune system dysfunctions known collectively as Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome ( Ochs and Thrasher , 2006 ) . N - WASP is a near - ubiquitously expressed homolog of WASP . The WASPs are activated by Cdc42 and regulate endocytic processes at the plasma membrane and some aspects of migration . Recent in vitro data suggest that N - WASP may also be a target of Rac1 , although this has yet to be shown in cells ( Tomasevic et al . , 2007 ) . SCAR / WAVE proteins ( Bear et al . , 1998 ; Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Miki et al . , 1998 ) are particularly important at the leading edge of migrating cells , and are speciﬁcally controlled by Rac proteins ( Figure 3 ) . WASH , WHAMM , and JMY are poorly understood , but appear to have a role in coupling intracellular vesicle behavior to the actin cytoskeleton . SCAR / WAVE proteins are exclusively found in vivo in a ﬁve - membered complex ( known variously as the SCAR / WAVE complex , WAVE Abi Nap PIR121 [ WANP ] complex , or WAVE Regulatory Complex [ WRC ] ) . The complex members are strongly conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution and in mammals consist of a single selection from each of the groups listed in Table 1 . This confusing range of names transpired because each component was identiﬁed , often multiple times , before the nature of the complex emerged ; different organisms use addi - tional names for some subunits , adding to the confusion . Since many of the mammalian subunits have multiple isoforms , it has been very difﬁcult to unravel whether the different possible combinations have different physiological functions . Many publi - cations have compared the biochemistry of complexes with various isoforms , but no clear differences have yet been revealed among them . This is even true for isoforms of SCAR / WAVEs , as it was originally published that SCAR / WAVE1 was speciﬁcally required for dorsal rufﬂe formation ( Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ) , but this was later shown not to be generally the case ( Legg et al . , 2007 ) . Proteins in the Abi family , which were originally identiﬁed as targets of the Abelson kinase , are clearly key components of the SCAR / WAVE regulatory complex ( Figure 3 ) . Abelson ( c - Abl ) is a conserved protooncogene that has been implicated in growth and differentiation , but also cell motility , for example during Drosophila embryogenesis ( Comer et al . , 1998 ) . The ﬁrst direct connection between Abi proteins and actin emerged with the identiﬁcation of the SCAR / WAVE regulatory complex ( Eden et al . , 2002 ; though curiously , Abi is barely visible in Eden et al . ’s puriﬁed complex ; see Figure 1 in Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Since then it has emerged as a core member of the SCAR / WAVE complex in all organisms examined , including Dictyostelium ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) and plants ( Uhrig et al . , 2007 ) , demon - strating that its connection with SCAR / WAVE is evolutionarily far older than its interaction with Abelson kinase . However , recent data suggest that Abi proteins have a wider role as a hub involved in multiple actin regulatory pathways . Abi directly connects the SCAR / WAVE complex with another major actin - assembling formin protein , mDia2 ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting Figure 3 . Cross - Regulation between the SCAR / WAVE Complex , Arp2 / 3 , and Formins Certain cells , for example cultured Drosophila ML - DmD16 - c1cells ( left , showingstainingofactinﬁla - ments ) , have leading edges that comprise simple lamellipods organized by SCAR / WAVE . Others , for example J774 mouse macrophages ( right , showing ﬁlamentous actin ) , are mostly made up of ﬁlopods , which are thought to be driven by diaphanous - related formins ( DRFs ) . However , the majority of migrating cells—for example mouse melanoma cells ( center left , showing ﬁlamentous actin ) and growth cones from chick dorsal root ganglion neurites ( center right , with ﬁlamentous actin shown in green ) —have hybrid leading edges that include elements of both structures with different degrees of dominance . It is not clear to what extent the SCAR / WAVE complex and for - mins cross - regulate in these cells , or whether the cross - regulation is inhibitory or stimulatory , but the system is plainly complex . The SCAR / WAVE complex consists of ﬁve subunits ( SCAR / WAVE , H [ HSPC300 ] , Abi , Nap1 , and PIR121—see Table 1 ) . Arrows are shown from WASP , EPS8 , and NAV2 to Abi , to indicate that these proteins have been associated with stimulation of signals tomigrationviaaconnectionwithAbiandpossiblywiththeSCAR / WAVE complex ( Disanza et al . , 2004 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ; Schmidt et al . , 2009 ) . The question marks indicate possible unknown regulators that control the balance between the ﬁlopod - and lamellipod - producing activities of the two complexes . Rac is thought to be the main activator of the SCAR / WAVE complex , while Rho and Cdc42 are more tightly connected with formins . PhotoCredits : ML - DmD16 - c1cell : BuzzBaum , UniversityCollegeLondon ; melanomacell : IreenKo¨nig , BeatsonInstitute , Glasgow ; neurite : RachelJacksonand Britta Eickholt , King’s College London ; macrophage : Simon Johnston , University of Birmingham . Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 313 Developmental Cell Review cross - regulation of Arp2 / 3 - complex - generated actin branches and formin - generated parallel ﬁlaments . Abi proteins also interact with mDia formins at cell junctions and contribute to cad - herin - based adhesion through an unknown mechanism ( Ryu et al . , 2009 ) . Abi has been shown to interact with a number of other proteins at the interface of signaling and migration , partic - ularly N - WASP ( Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) , the adaptor protein EPS8 ( Disanza et al . , 2004 ; Roffers - Agarwal et al . , 2005 ) , and the motility regulator NAV2 / unc - 53 ( Schmidt et al . , 2009 ) . It is not yet clear to what extent the Abi family acts as a member of multiple different subcomplexes , but most genetic mutants and RNAi studies of Abi proteins give a primarily SCAR / WAVE - related phenotype , suggesting that the principal role of Abi is as a part of the SCAR / WAVE complex . Models for the regulation of the SCAR / WAVE complex have been controversial , and progress has been confounded by the differences in methods of analysis and handling of the puriﬁed or reconstituted complex . Rac1 is clearly a central regulator— the active GTP - bound form binds to the PIR121 subunit , and Rac is genetically linked to SCAR / WAVE function in Drosophila ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ) . However , surprisingly few studies have actually addressed the role of Rac1 binding to the complex in cells or localized the Rac1 binding site precisely ( Kobayashi et al . , 1998 ) . The control of SCAR / WAVE complex is likely to be multilayered ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ; Ibarra et al . , 2006 ; Weiner et al . , 2006 ) . When the complex was ﬁrst identiﬁed ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) , it was proposed that the role of the larger complex members is to inhibit SCAR / WAVE , and that Rac1 activates SCAR / WAVE by causing their dissociation . Further studies sug - gested that the complete SCAR / WAVE complex was constitu - tively active , and Rac1 merely served to localize the complex to the membrane at sites of new actin assembly ( Innocenti et al . , 2004 ; Kim et al . , 2006 ) . However , some of the controversy appears to be resolving , with recent papers ﬁnding that intact SCAR / WAVE complex is normally inactive , as originally sug - gested , butthat GTP - bound Rac1 causes activation via a confor - mational change , rather than dissociation of inhibitory compo - nents of the complex ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ismail et al . , 2009 ) . The conﬂicting nature of the evidence suggests that this huge molecular complex is hard to purify or reconstitute in the native state that occurs in cytoplasm . Many of the subunits are phos - phorylated at multiple sites , with unknown physiological conse - quences . Partial proteolysis , subunit dissociation , and aggrega - tion state are also likely to affect some biochemical preparations . Ismail et al . point out that they have achieved around a 10 - fold higher activity of their activated complex than some previous reports through more careful biochemistry ( avoiding freeze - thaw , etc . ) . It is clear that a standard needs to be developed by which to judge how active puriﬁed or reconstituted SCAR / WAVE complex ought to be before we can evaluate data from biochemical reconstitutions in a meaningful way . Investigators using in vitro actin nucleation assays should also quantify their results with parameters such as the number of barbed ends created in an assay , rather than just show a series of polymeriza - tion curves , since this would allow direct , meaningful compar - ison with other studies . Formins and VASP in Filopodia and Cables Formins can cause the assembly of long parallel networks of actin ﬁlaments , which are used in structures such as ﬁlopodia and stress ﬁbers ( Figure 1 ) . They initiate new actin ﬁlament assembly by recruiting actin monomers and causing them to form a new ﬁlament seed . They are then able to maintain ﬁlament elongation by remaining bound to the fast growing end and promoting addition of further monomers ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) . In living cells , actin monomers that are ready for polymerization are usually complexed to proﬁlin in a complex that has a unique ability to add on to the fast growing ends of actin ﬁlaments , thus promoting rapid ﬁlament assembly . Many organisms have multiple isoforms of proﬁlin , which appear to be tailored to work together with speciﬁc for - mins to promote actin assembly ( Neidt et al . , 2009 ) . Monomer addition is greatly enhanced by the recruitment of proﬁlin - actin complexes via a proline - rich sequence in the formin - homology 1 ( FH1 ) region . The formin - homology 2 ( FH2 ) domain , containing two antiparallel actin binding domains , acts as a processive motor for elongation and promotes the addition of the proﬁlin - actin complexes to the fast growing ﬁlament end ( Shimada et al . , 2004 ; Xu et al . , 2004 ) . Among the formins of mice and humans are the three diapha - nous - related formins ( DRFs ; confusingly , DRF1 = mDia1 , DRF2 = mDia3 , and DRF3 = mDia2 ) . They have overlapping yet distinct functions and biochemical differences , and show some tissue - speciﬁc expression . They have been implicated in a wide variety of cellular processes and they interact with the microtubule cyto - skeleton to affect microtubule stability . As connectors between the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons , they have roles in cyto - kinesis , membrane trafﬁcking , and cell motility and adhesion . A thorough discussion of the function of DRFs is beyond the scope of this review , but we refer the readers to excellent recent reviews ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ; Paul and Pollard , 2009 ) . Vasodilator stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) , and its rela - tives Mena and EVL , function to promote the elongation of actin ﬁlament arrays in both ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia , and have been termed actin ﬁlament ‘‘anticappers’’ by virtue of their ability to remain associated dynamically with ﬁlament growing ends and prevent them from being blocked by capping proteins ( Bear Table 1 . Nomenclature of the Members of the Human SCAR / WAVE Complex Subunit Names Human Gene Name Unigene ID SCAR / WAVE1 – 3 SCAR1 / WAVE1 WASF1 Hs . 75850 SCAR2 / WAVE2 WASF2 Hs . 590909 SCAR3 / WAVE3 WASF3 Hs . 635221 Nap1 / 2 Nap1 , NckAP1 , Hem - 2 , or KIAA0587 NCKAP1 Hs . 603732 Nap2 or Hem - 1 NCKAP1L Hs . 182014 Cyﬁp1 / 2 Cyﬁp1 CYFIP1 Hs . 26704 Cyﬁp2 , POP , PIR121 , KIAA1168 , or p140Sra CYFIP2 Hs . 519702 Abi 1 – 3 Abi1 ABI1 Hs . 508148 Abi2 ABI2 Hs . 471156 Abi3 , or NESH ABI3 Hs . 130719 HSPC300 HSPC300 or Brick1 C3orf10 Hs . 649307 314 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review and Gertler , 2009 ) . VASP proteins promote the formation of unbranched actin networks in lamellipodia , and promote forma - tion and elongation of ﬁlopodia . VASP proteins have been exten - sively studied , in particular biochemically , with inconsistent results . However , a recent study that analyzes the activity of VASP both in solution and on rigid surfaces may resolve some of the controversies ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ) . This study showed that VASP delivers actin monomer to the rapidly growing end of actin ﬁlaments nonprocessively , apparently staying bound to the side of the actin ﬁlament after it delivers the mono - mer . Interestingly , when VASP is on a bead , but not when it is free in solution , it can processively elongate actin ﬁlaments even in the presence of rather high concentrations of capping proteins . This suggests that clusters of VASP on a surface change the dynamics such that VASP becomes an efﬁcient anticapping protein , perhaps via steric interference . Biochemical work using mixtures of proteins that fully recon - stitute motility suggests that VASP promotes a loose connection between actin networks with the surface that the actin is pushing against and thus modiﬁes the diffusive properties of proteins associated with the actin - membrane interface ( Trichet et al . , 2007 , 2008 ) . While this observation has not yet been conﬁrmed in cells , it suggests an interesting contrast with proteins such as N - WASP , which are thought to attach the actin machinery to the plasma membrane ( Co et al . , 2007 ; Weisswange et al . , 2009 ) . Perhaps by modulating the actin - membrane interface , VASP and N - WASP could control the shapes and dynamics of various actin structures that push on membranes . The mecha - nism by which VASP loosens actin - membrane interactions , like many aspects of VASP biology , is not yet clear . In addition to their role in promoting actin assembly at the leading edge of cells , VASP proteins also localize to both cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions and regulate their dynamics . Much of their function at these structures is probably mediated through regulation of actin dynamics . It was recently discovered that Mena ( but not VASP and EVL ) speciﬁcally interacts with the tumor suppressor protein TES ( Boeda et al . , 2007 ) . TES binds to Mena , competing with other ligands of the proline - rich region , and may thus function to maintain a cytoplasmic inactive pool of Mena . Loss of TES in tumors may lead to enhanced Mena activity , and thus motility and adhesion changes that promote tumorigenesis . Perhaps in agreement with the idea that Mena could be a tumor metastasis promoting factor , an isoform of Mena has been recently found to be speciﬁcally upregulated in some tumors ( Goswami et al . , 2009 ; Philippar et al . , 2008 ) . Mena also interacts with Abi , a core component of the SCAR / WAVE actin nucleation complex ( see above ) , providing another pathway that could promote tumor cell migration ( Tani et al . , 2003 ) . Separating Filopodia and Lamellipodia Despite various mechanisms of action , geometry , and control pathways , actin nucleators generate the same product : new growing actin ﬁlaments . One emerging debate is whether they work in concert or in opposition . Beli et al . ( 2008 ) propose that DRFs and Arp2 / 3 antagonize each other , thus creating a tug - of - war between ﬁlopods and lamellipods , while Yang et al . propose a more cooperative existence of these two master regulators ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 3 ) . Beli et al . found that SCAR / WAVE and its regulatory complex bind to the formin mDia2 and hold it inactive . Loss of SCAR / WAVE or any of its regulatory complex caused an increase in mDia2 - induced ﬁlo - pods , again suggesting an ‘‘either - or’’ decision between ﬁlopods and lamellipods . However , Yang et al . ( 2007 ) found a similar interaction between the SCAR / WAVE complex and mDia2 , but concluded that the formin was a cofactor in lamellipod assembly , rather than a competitor . They showed the growth of ﬁlopodia induced by mDia2 from within lamellipodial protrusions . Filopo - dia can arise within lamellipodia , through the coalescence of actin networks into spikes ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . While it is clear that lamellipodia are not necessary for ﬁlopodia to form , and there is strong evidence that high levels of Arp2 / 3 complex are also not a prerequisite ( Steffen et al . , 2006 ) , it is clear that ﬁlopo - dia can arise from within lamellipodial networks , and that Arp2 / 3 complex and SCAR / WAVE2 do localize within dynamic ﬁlopodia ( Johnston et al . , 2008 ; Stradal et al . , 2001 ) . Evidence points to SCAR / WAVE , rather than N - WASP or WASP , as the principal Arp2 / 3 activators at the leading edge , particularly in cells that use broad lamellipods . N - WASP is present at the leading edge of carcinoma cells , but does not signiﬁcantly contribute to pro - trusion ( Sarmiento et al . , 2008 ) . However , simultaneous knock - down of SCAR / WAVE2 and N - WASP reveals that a different for - min , mDia1 , is responsive to epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) in the formation of jagged protrusions that resemble ﬁlopods ( Sar - miento et al . , 2008 ) . It is interesting that this study highlights a role for mDia1 , when the other two studies emphasized that they only see mDia2 , not mDia1 , playing a signiﬁcant role in microspikes and ﬁlopodia . Clearly , there is still room for clari - ﬁcation of the interplay between Arp2 / 3 and formins in actin dynamics . When interpreting data like these , it is important to bear in mind the existence of linkages between different actin - depen - dent processes . Knockdown of a single protein will have multiple effects within the cell , which could each alter actin dynamics in a different way . For example , if endocytosis and vesicle traf - ﬁcking are perturbed by protein knockdown , as will be the case for at least N - WASP and possibly some of the mDia pro - teins , this will affect receptor levels , integrin levels , and a myriad of indirect factors that will change lamellipodial dynamics . In addition , the levels of monomeric actin that are available might be expected to be quite different in cells where SCAR / WAVE or WASP proteins have been disabled . Thus ﬁlopodia assembly could be driven by simple increases in the available actin mono - mer pool , instead of ( or in addition to ) via direct inhibition by the SCAR / WAVE proteins . Other important considerations include differences in cell type—many labs choose the cell type that gives them a consistent and reliable output—but this means different labs have different standard models . Finally , cells likely use these pathways antagonistically or synergistically depend - ing on the context and the physiological process that they are involved in . Recycling and Remodeling of Filament Structures For cells to move , actin must be depolymerized as well as poly - merized , to ensure a consistent supply of new actin monomers . Filament elongation must also be terminated once initiated , to ensure that only the most productively oriented ﬁlaments are growing to create pushing force . Thus , the cell contains various Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 315 Developmental Cell Review proteins whose job is thought to be recycling actin by breaking apart old actin networks and recharging actin monomers with ATP for polymerization into new ﬁlaments . We will describe recent developments surrounding the activities of coﬁlin , coro - nin , and proﬁlin , all implicated in the remodeling of actin networks and the provision of rapid turnover at the leading edge . Coﬁlin , a small actin depolymerizing protein , continues to be linked with generating new actin networks and disassembling old ones ( van Rheenen et al . , 2009 ) . There has been some con - troversy in the ﬁeld over whether coﬁlin is primarily acting at the leading edge to sever established ﬁlaments in order to generate uncapped , short actin ﬁlaments to seed new actin polymeriza - tion , or to break down and depolymerize old networks for recy - cling . New evidence in support of a role in recycling comes from a thorough study of the exchange rates of lamellipodial proteins by Lai et al . ( 2008 ) . They show that SCAR / WAVE , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and actin are exclusively incorporated into the lamellipod at the leading edge , whereas the bulk of coﬁlin and another Arp2 / 3 regulator , cortactin , act throughout the lamellipod . This implies that coﬁlin mainly acts late in the pro - cess , on actin nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , and thus recy - cles old networks rather than starting new ones . These data do not agree with earlier reports showing coﬁlin activity in a zone that is closer to the plasma membrane than it is to the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleation zone in lamellipodia ( DesMarais et al . , 2004 ; Sidani et al . , 2007 ) . However , coﬁlin severs ﬁlaments opti - mally when it is at low density in vitro , calling for caution in the interpretation of studies claiming that localization is directly comparable to activity ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Chan et al . , 2009b ; Pavlov et al . , 2007 ) . A new twist in our under - standing of coﬁlin also comes from Chan et al . , who found that coﬁlin not only severs actin networks , but can also debranch them ( Chan et al . , 2009a ) . Coﬁlin binds to ADP actin ﬁlaments and induces a twist in the ﬁlament , which can lead to breakage ( McGough et al . , 1997 ) , but this twisting can also lead to the loss of actin branches . Coronin has recently come to the forefront of the ﬁeld as a major remodeling protein that can act in concert with coﬁlin at the leading edge of cells . New activities have been identiﬁed for coronin , placing it as a key mobilizer of actin networks , both branched and linear . A range of different genetic experi - ments had previously shown that coronins interact with and inhibit the Arp2 / 3 complex , perhaps by freezing it in an open and inactive conformation ( Etzrodt et al . , 2006 ; Rodal et al . , 2005 ) . Coronins also can stabilize actin ﬁlaments against depo - lymerization by coﬁlin by binding along the sides of ﬁlaments . New structural data suggest that coronin makes contact with three protomers of the actin ﬁlament , similar to the binding of three other proteins : nebulin , xin , and the salmonella protein SipA ( Galkin et al . , 2008 ) . Thus coronin is said to have a ‘‘stapling’’ effect , in that it binds the actin protomers in a ﬁlament together . This may account for its ability to protect against coﬁlin - mediated severing . It may be interesting to determine whether the stapling effect of coronin could affect branching and debranching in lamellipodia . Coronin had been postulated to remodel actin networks by directly interfering with actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Humphries et al . , 2002 ) . It had also been shown to recruit the coﬁlin phosphatase slingshot to leading edges of cells to regu - late coﬁlin activity ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Now Cai et al . have provided provocative data indicating that coronin - 1b can replace Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin at ﬁlament branchpoints , making more ﬂexible branches rather than simply unbranching them ( Cai et al . , 2008 ) . Whether these branches could disassemble by progressive phosphate release from the ADP - Pi on actin or whether coﬁlin might aid the debranching remains to be deter - mined . However , when combined with other actin - associated pro - teins , a more complex pattern emerges . Kueh and coauthors speculate that coronin - 1a cooperates with coﬁlin and another less - well - characterized protein , Aip1 , to cause the ribbon - like parallel strands of normal actin ﬁlaments to separate ; the result - ing ragged actin disassembles extremely rapidly , resulting in a series of bursts of disassembly ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . The activity required the presence of all three proteins ( coronin , coﬁlin , and Aip1 ) because coﬁlin alone was shown to simply sever ﬁlaments along the length ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . While there may be contro - versy over whether this so - called bursting activity was really different from rapid severing , a new study from Gandhi and colleagues suggests a possible mechanism for the rapid bursts of ﬁlament depolymerization observed in some conditions ( Gan - dhi et al . , 2009 ) . They found that the b - propeller domain of coro - nin enhances the severing of newly polymerized ATP - actin ﬁla - ments , while the coiled - coil domain and full - length coronin can effectively block severing of new actin networks . Thus , rapid bursts of depolymerization mediated by the tricomplex of coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 could be mediated by enhanced severing activity when coronin and coﬁlin synergize . Gandhi et al . postu - late that coronin protects new actin networks against the action of coﬁlin severing and that coronin and coﬁlin synergistically sever older ADP actin networks ( Gandhi et al . , 2009 ) . There is a dissenting voice from the strong consensus that the Arp2 / 3 complex generates new ﬁlaments by side - branching ( Koestler et al . , 2008 ; Resch et al . , 2002 ; Small et al . , 2008 ) . This argument derives from an emerging range of ultrastructural data , generated using different imaging techniques and ﬁxation methods , which suggest that the actin ﬁlaments of the mature lamellipod are unbranched . In this account , images of branched actin are artifacts caused by separate ﬁlaments annealing during critical - point drying or by addition of phalloidin to stabilize ﬁlaments . It remains tricky to reconcile these results with the substantial mass of established molecular and structural data surrounding branching . Disassembly of actin ﬁlaments and branches is as important to motility as the generation of new ﬁla - ments . It will be interesting to know how the activities proposed for coﬁlin and coronin can be reconciled , and whether these new and dramatic effects attributed to coronin and its partners will stand the test of time . Chemotaxis A clear illustration that regulation of SCAR / WAVE proteins is unlikely to be a simple linear pathway was provided by observa - tion of the dynamics of the SCAR / WAVE subunit Hem - 1 ( the homolog of Nap1 from hematopoietic cells ; see Table 1 ) in che - motaxing neutrophils ( Weiner et al . , 2007 ) . By using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , Weiner et al . were able to follow plasma membrane recruitment of the SCAR / WAVE complex with unusual speed and resolution , and concluded that 316 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review SCAR / WAVE activation occurs in waves , starting within the cell body and evolving outwards ; when the waves reach the cell edge , they can break into surges of actin polymerization and thus protrusion of the leading edge . This is different from most models , in which a membrane receptor receives a signal and transmits it to Rac , which in turn binds to SCAR / WAVE complex and activates it at the speciﬁc spot where the signal was received . Traveling waves of proteins such as SCAR / WAVE implyaself - propagatingsystemthatdoesnotdependonasignal from outside of the cell , but works from the inside . It is not yet clear how universal this phenomenon is , either in range of cell types or fundamental importance . It is also not clear whether the localization to membrane surfaces within the range of the TIRF evanescent wave reﬂects the active complex accurately . A more recent paper from the same lab ( Millius et al . , 2009 ) ﬁnds similar waves in ﬁbroblasts , though they appear far less dynamic than the neutrophil waves . Does all neutrophil migration require waves ? Or are the waves just an unusual case of normal actin movement ? Does wave generation require external signals ? Nevertheless , the existence of waves emphasizes the complex and spatially and temporally dynamic pathways that the ﬁeld needs to explain , and provides an example of a phenomenon that might be generated by feedback and feedforward loops . This approach may help to provide new paradigms in the chemotaxis ﬁeld , which has been mired in increasing complexity soon after simple principles seemed to have emerged . Type 1 phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - K ) , which generates the lipid PIP3 from PIP2 , had been seen as the key link connecting signaling pathways to cell movement and thus orchestrating chemotaxis , but the demonstration that neither neutrophils ( Fer - guson et al . , 2007 ) nor Dictyostelium ( Hoeller and Kay , 2007 ) require PI 3 - K signaling for chemotaxis reversed the optimism ( PI 3 - K may be more important for chemotaxis in less motile cells such as ﬁbroblasts ; Schneider and Haugh , 2006 ) . Further Dic - tyostelium genetics , conﬁrmed in neutrophils , has shown that another lipid signal deriving from a phospholipase A2 family member can act in parallel to PI 3 - K ( Chen et al . , 2007 ) , though the pathways downstream of this enzyme are completely unclear . Other work has shown important roles for Ras and TOR complex 2 in both chemotaxis and random movement ( Kamimura et al . , 2008 ; Zhang et al . , 2008 ) , though the evidence does not yet support either being tightly enough regulated to be the principal connection . Indeed , recent papers suggest that at least four different intracellular pathways connect upstream signaling to cell migration , suggesting that no single mechanism for signaling to induce chemotaxis exists ( Veltman et al . , 2008 ) . In this context , the papers from the Weiner lab ( Millius et al . , 2009 ; Weiner et al . , 2007 ) may provide part of an alternative paradigm . The traveling waves they see are presumably pro - duced by the SCAR / WAVE complex and its regulators , without requiring direct spatial connections to signaling . Chemoattrac - tants could thus affect migration by altering the behavior of the waves , rather than by causing formation of actin nuclei or actin structures . But they could exert similar effects by altering any one of the components of the excitable system that generates waves—and different signaling pathways could modify different components , which would leave no links that are essential for chemotaxis . This agrees much more closely with Andrew and Insall ( 2007 ) , who found that relatively shallow gradients of chemotaxis do not modify the basic motility of cells , but rather modulate the way cells choose between different protrusions . Thus the secret to chemotaxis may be in ﬁrst understanding the interlinked processes that drive basal levels of motility , rather than concentrating on the points at which signaling couples to actin , which may turn out to be too complex for comprehension in the foreseeable future . Blebs and Pseudopods at the Cutting Edge Perhaps the most surprising change in our recent view of cell migration has been the general acceptance of the idea that mammalian cells use other mechanisms to make protrusions besides actin assembly . Until recently , new actin had been presumed to drive motility through a consistent mechanism , the ‘‘Brownian ratchet , ’’ in which actin monomers added to ﬁla - ments just under the protruding membrane . This mechanism is clearly important for assembly of lamellipodia and related struc - tures . Recent improvements in microscopy technique have al - lowed cells to be examined under a wider range of physiological conditions , however , and this reveals different mechanisms . Individual cells invading through a 3D matrix , in particular , appear to move their leading edges through a different form of protrusion that sometimes resembles the blebs seen in apoptotic cells . The initial protrusion of blebs is driven by hydro - static pressure from inside the cell , and while actin assembly is important , it occurs some time after the front has protruded . This process had been repeatedly observed before ( reviewed in Charras , 2008 ) , and even formed the central plank in proposed mechanisms for chemotaxis ( Bray and White , 1988 ) , but had been more or less neglected until a number of advances between 2002 and 2004 made it clear that this mechanism for movement wasn’t restricted to a handful of strange and wonder - ful cell types , but could apply to a broad range of mammalian cells as well ( reviewed in Pinner and Sahai , 2008a ) . Furthermore , this alternative mode of motility could help to explain how some cancer cells invade other tissues during metastasis , and why drugs which block typical 2D movement have failed to inhibit metastasis in vivo ( Wolf and Friedl , 2006 ) . To differentiate the mechanisms , the terms ‘‘mesenchymal’’ and ‘‘amoeboid’’ have been used for the lamellipodial - and bleb - driven mechanisms ( the terms are unfortunate , as amoebas such as Dictyostelium use both mechanisms , with if anything an emphasis on mesen - chymal migration , but the terms have gained widespread use ) . Mesenchymal motility is characteristically driven by Arp2 / 3 and SCAR / WAVE , under the control of Rac , to give sheet - like protrusions , while amoeboid motility is more dependent on the contractility driven by myosin and regulated by Rho and its partner Rho - kinase ( ROCK ) and is mediated by rounded bleb - like protrusions . Mesenchymal motility is said to depend on the activity of matrix metalloproteases when cancer cells are moving in 3D matrices , while amoeboid motility has been shown to occur even when proteases are inhibited ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ) . The differences between mesenchymal and amoeboid migration have been one of the most interesting and rapidly moving areas of cell biology recently , and have therefore been extensively reviewed . Readers should consult these reviews for a complete description of the ﬁeld ( Charras and Paluch , 2008 ; Fackler and Grosse , 2008 ; Mitchison et al . , 2008 ) ; here we can only discuss recent developments . Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 317 Developmental Cell Review Mesenchymal motility is perhaps simpler to understand than amoeboid motility . Mesenchymal cells have been extensively studied in 2D culture conditions for many years , and we have a fairly clear picture of how lamellipodial protrusion , coupled with myosin - driven retraction at the rear of the cell and balanced by dynamic adhesion to a substrate , might drive a cell forward ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . However , amoeboid motility remains more of a mystery and thus has attracted recent atten - tion . An amoeboid cell is thought to produce blebs on its surface , which initially are membrane bubbles devoid of actin cytoskel - eton . These blebs then ﬁll in with actin cortex beneath the plasma membrane and may either retract back into the cell or be rein - forced and metamorphose into a pseudopod or a lobopod that could undergo actin - based protrusion . How blebs form and where on the surface of the cell they form is not well understood . How they transform into pseudopodia—or indeed if they do—is also unclear . The current dogma surrounding blebs and migration has been challenged by Lammermann and colleagues , who showed that leukocytes can migrate in vivo completely independently of in - tegrins , using a ﬂowing and squeezing mechanism ( Lammer - mann et al . , 2008 ) . They showed that adding the myosin II inhib - itor blebbistatin to dendritic cells prevented motility primarily by preventing forward translocation of the nucleus , while inhibiting actin assembly inhibited forward motility by preventing protru - sion . Their work strongly suggests that at least for leukocytes , actin - based protrusion drives forward motility and cortical con - traction ‘‘facilitates a protrusive mode of migration in conﬁned environments where protrusion alone is unable to act against counter - forces’’ ( Lammermann et al . , 2008 ) . This work chal - lenges the currently developing dogma surrounding amoeboid and mesenchymal motility . It also highlights that we have to be careful about how we deﬁne words such as ‘‘amoeboid’’ and how literally we take these types of deﬁnitions . However , it could be argued that even blebs need actin assembly to retract , so in order to maintain a cycle of formation and retraction of blebs , actin assembly is necessary . There is an interesting conﬂict over the source of the con - traction that powers the hydrostatic expulsion of blebs . Myosin II - based contraction , stimulated by the Rho - dependent kinase ROCK , is clearly crucial . Many authors have presumed that such contraction must occur globally , so contraction all over the cell ( but strongest , presumably , at the rear ) focuses pressure on one or a few weaknesses in the cortex . But recent papers suggest that contraction occurs in the general area of the bleb , implying that the cell is a locally deformable , elastic network rather than a hydrostatically consistent bag of ﬂuid ( Charras et al . , 2005 ) . The distinction is important , because it informs both the mechanisms driving bleb formation and the location of the signaling that controls it ; it is much easier to conceive a signal that causes local contraction than one that must communicate to the rear to obtain contractile force . Control mechanisms for myosin - driven versus actin - based protrusive migration have begun to be unpicked in some cancer cell types . Pinner et al . report interlocking signaling processes involving Rac , Rho , and ROCK ( Pinner and Sahai , 2008b ) . A screen of Rac activators revealed that a pathway involving DOCK3 , Rac , and the actin - nucleating SCAR / WAVE complex promotes mesenchymal movement , while also suppressing amoeboid motility by diminishing myosin activity . DOCKs are Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( RacGEFs ) that have been relatively understudied compared to DH - domain - contain - ing RacGEFs , despite several lines of genetic evidence under - scoring their importance ( Nolan et al . , 1998 ; Reddien and Hor - vitz , 2000 ) . Conversely , Pinner et al . postulated that ROCK activation could trigger a Rac - inactivating GAP protein , ARH - GAP22 , to inhibit Rac and thus promote amoeboid migration ( Sanz - Moreno et al . , 2008 ) . This reciprocal link could ensure that mesenchymal and amoeboid migration are separate , stable states , and cells choose either one mode or the other , though they would be interconvertible by signaling . It is not clear yet how cell - type - speciﬁc this model will be , as different cell types may favor other RacGEFs and GAPs for the control of motility pathways through Rac . Feedback , Integration , and the Whole Cell The complexity of cell motility and its regulation , combined with our increasing molecular insight into mechanisms , cries out for a more inclusive and holistic approach , using systems biology or computational modeling , to connect the pathways to overall cell behavior . Recent years have added greatly to our identiﬁ - cation of the control pathways and protein complex ‘‘hubs’’ that control aspects of cytoskeletal dynamics , and medium - throughput screens ( for example , Bakal et al . , 2007 ) have shown the wide range of proteins that are required for cell migration , but understanding of the integration of the components remains poor . Actin polymerization is a complex process using a large number of highly evolutionary conserved proteins , and is above all cyclical ; changes in disassembly at the rear of the actin mesh - work must alter the availability of free actin and Arp2 / 3 complex , as well as alter both the mechanical forces acting at the leading edge and the effects of processes like adhesion . We believe that many of the pathways of control and the relationships between actin regulators described here are in real cells tightly bound up in feedback and feedforward loops , meaning that simple linear pathways are both inappropriate and—in many cases—dangerously misleading . The inconsistencies between recent studies of the same proteins or protein complexes may reﬂect cell - type differences , but are also likely to reﬂect unintended consequences of disrupting one link in a tightly regu - lated network . We clearly need inclusive models that can be used as sieves for experiments such as knockdowns of actin regulators . There is an active and varied community of systems biologists and modelers in the cytoskeletal ﬁeld that goes back many years . For example , perhaps the best explanations for how ATP hydrolysis in actin physically couples to movement of the leading edge are the Brownian ratchet ( Peskin et al . , 1993 ) and ‘‘elastic Brownian ratchet’’ ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) , which are mathematically formed models that counterintuitively use random thermal motion to couple actin monomer addition to forward protrusion . Other models range greatly in scale , from macroscopic phenomena—the paper showing Hem - 1 waves ( Millius et al . , 2009 ; Weiner et al . , 2007 ) also has a section using a model to show that traveling waves can explain some features of chemotaxis—to models that attempt to derive features of cell movement from the interactions of actin monomers and other molecules ( Gholami et al . , 2008 ) . There is not room here for 318 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review a thorough treatment of quantitative and modeling papers , but they are reviewed in Mogilner ( 2009 ) . However , it remains disap - pointing how little attention these approaches receive relative to the mainstream of published work , and how they are frequently overlooked in favor of hypotheses based on simple linear pathways . If the cell motility ﬁeld is to emerge from the currently oversimpliﬁed approach of knocking down one or two proteins with siRNA and then basing our results on a linear model of how these proteins ﬁt into actin pathways , we must work to develop a closer relationship between observations and system - atic models like these . Whether it will be models based on cell shape and speed , on the emerging waves in neutrophils , or on parameters such as kinase and phosphatase networks , our future understanding clearly demands such intellectual frame - works that integrate simple observations with the true com - plexity of cell migration . Models of Cell Motility : A Challenge for the Future A different type of modeling , based on biophysical principles driving the evolution of cell shape , has been proposed ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . These investigators used goldﬁsh keratocytes , which are ideal for development of this kind of approach because they have a relatively well - deﬁned shape and a simple and rapid mode of migration . They were able to describe the range of shapes that keratocytes assumed using only four parameters : cell area , ‘‘D’’ versus canoe shape ( a measure of how much the leading lamellipod extended in the front of the cell ) , cell body position , and left - right asymmetry . Using these parameters , they perturbed cells in various ways and found that cells generally resumed the same shapes and speeds as before the perturbation . Thus , they concluded that cell shape and speed were intrinsic qualities of these cells and that each cell represented a dynamic system at steady state . In kerato - cytes , speed could also be predicted from the shape of the cell and the underlying actin network , indicating that the amount of polymerizing actin contributing to forward movement at any one time was the major determinant of cell speed . Will this type of model apply to other cell types ? The immediate answer is no , because the stable migration of ﬁsh keratocytes is an unusual , extreme case ; most cells assume far more reticulated and dynamically variable shapes . Cell speed is a complex parameter , with tens and perhaps arguably hundreds of vari - ables contributing to it . However , by gradually increasing the number of cell shape parameters , it should be possible to pro - duce a new model that accurately describes most aspects of the motility of , for example , ﬁbroblasts on 2D ﬂat surfaces . Of what value would such a model be ? Earlier work from Gertler and colleagues on the actin binding protein VASP suggests that loss of activity of a single actin binding protein can have complex effects on cell migration behavior , but that this can be much more comprehensibly interpreted with the help of mod - eling based on known biochemical properties of the protein ( Lacayo et al . , 2007 ) . While it is easy to criticize this approach— our knowledge of the properties and interactions of many of the molecules we work with is seriously incomplete—we would argue that at least for lamellipodial dynamics , a good under - standing of the way actin is organized and assembled is begin - ning to emerge , making informative models a realistic and sensible goal . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The recent literature is too large and too complex to be summarized completely in a selective review , and we apologize to authors whose work we were forced to neglect . We are grateful to Gareth Jones and Douwe Velt - man for their helpful and insightful comments , to Tom Pollard and Roberto Dominguez for helpful discussions and insights , and to Neils Volkmannn and Dorit Hanein for advice and permission to reproduce published ﬁgures . REFERENCES Andrew , N . , and Insall , R . H . ( 2007 ) . Chemotaxis in shallow gradients is medi - ated independently of PtdIns 3 - kinase by biased choices between random protrusions . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 193 – 200 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . Bakal , C . , Aach , J . , Church , G . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2007 ) . Quantitative morpho - logical signatures deﬁne local signaling networks regulating cell morphology . Science 316 , 1753 – 1756 . Bear , J . E . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2009 ) . Ena / VASP : towards resolving a pointed controversy at the barbed end . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1947 – 1953 . Bear , J . E . , Rawls , J . F . , and Saxe , C . L . , 3rd . ( 1998 ) . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1325 – 1335 . Beli , P . , Mascheroni , D . , Xu , D . , and Innocenti , M . ( 2008 ) . WAVE and Arp2 / 3 jointly inhibit ﬁlopodium formation by entering into a complex with mDia2 . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 849 – 857 . Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2008 ) . Pathway of actin ﬁlament branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 7135 – 7144 . Blagg , S . L . , Stewart , M . , Sambles , C . , andInsall , R . H . ( 2003 ) . PIR121regulates pseudopoddynamicsandSCARactivityinDictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1480 – 1487 . Boczkowska , M . , Rebowski , G . , Petoukhov , M . V . , Hayes , D . B . , Svergun , D . I . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2008 ) . X - ray scattering study of activated Arp2 / 3 complex with bound actin - WCA . Structure 16 , 695 – 704 . Boeda , B . , Briggs , D . C . , Higgins , T . , Garvalov , B . K . , Fadden , A . J . , McDonald , N . Q . , and Way , M . ( 2007 ) . Tes , a speciﬁc Mena interacting partner , breaks the rules for EVH1 binding . Mol . Cell 28 , 1071 – 1082 . Bray , D . , and White , J . G . ( 1988 ) . Cortical ﬂow in animal cells . Science 239 , 883 – 888 . Breitsprecher , D . , Kiesewetter , A . K . , Linkner , J . , Urbanke , C . , Resch , G . P . , Small , J . V . , and Faix , J . ( 2008 ) . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J . 27 , 2943 – 2954 . Cai , L . , Marshall , T . W . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 , 915 – 929 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antag - onizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipo - dia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2008 ) . WHAMMisanArp2 / 3complexactivatorthatbindsmicrotubulesandfunctions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009a ) . Coﬁlin Dissociates Arp2 / 3 Complex and Branches from Actin Filaments . Curr . Biol . 19 , 537 – 545 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009b ) . Coﬁlin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin ﬁlaments . Curr . Biol . 19 , 537 – 545 . Charras , G . T . ( 2008 ) . A short history of blebbing . J . Microsc . 231 , 466 – 478 . Charras , G . , and Paluch , E . ( 2008 ) . Blebs lead the way : how to migrate without lamellipodia . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 730 – 736 . Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 319 Developmental Cell Review Charras , G . T . , Yarrow , J . C . , Horton , M . A . , Mahadevan , L . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2005 ) . Non - equilibration of hydrostaticpressure inblebbing cells . Nature 435 , 365 – 369 . Chen , L . , Iijima , M . , Tang , M . , Landree , M . A . , Huang , Y . E . , Xiong , Y . , Iglesias , P . A . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 2007 ) . PLA2 and PI3K / PTEN pathways act in parallel to mediate chemotaxis . Dev . Cell 12 , 603 – 614 . Chereau , D . , Kerff , F . , Graceffa , P . , Grabarek , Z . , Langsetmo , K . , and Domi - nguez , R . ( 2005 ) . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for ﬁlament assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16644 – 16649 . Chhabra , E . S . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2007 ) . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1110 – 1121 . Co , C . , Wong , D . T . , Gierke , S . , Chang , V . , and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 – 913 . Comer , A . R . , Ahern - Djamali , S . M . , Juang , J . L . , Jackson , P . D . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1998 ) . Phosphorylation of Enabled by the Drosophila Abelson tyrosine kinase regulates the in vivo function and protein - protein interactions of Enabled . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 152 – 160 . Derivery , E . , Lombard , B . , Loew , D . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2009 ) . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton , in press . Published online February 10 , 2009 . 10 . 1002 / cm . 20342 . DesMarais , V . , Macaluso , F . , Condeelis , J . , and Bailly , M . ( 2004 ) . Synergistic interaction between the Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin drives stimulated lamelli - pod extension . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 3499 – 3510 . Disanza , A . , Carlier , M . F . , Stradal , T . E . , Didry , D . , Frittoli , E . , Confalonieri , S . , Croce , A . , Wehland , J . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Scita , G . ( 2004 ) . Eps8 controls actin - based motility by capping the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 1180 – 1188 . Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 . Etzrodt , M . , Ishikawa , H . C . , Dalous , J . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . , Bretsch - neider , T . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2006 ) . Time - resolved responses to chemoattrac - tant , characteristic of the front and tail of Dictyostelium cells . FEBS Lett . 580 , 6707 – 6713 . Fackler , O . T . , and Grosse , R . ( 2008 ) . Cell motility through plasma membrane blebbing . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 879 – 884 . Ferguson , G . J . , Milne , L . , Kulkarni , S . , Sasaki , T . , Walker , S . , Andrews , S . , Crabbe , T . , Finan , P . , Jones , G . , Jackson , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . PI ( 3 ) Kgamma has an important context - dependent role in neutrophil chemokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 86 – 91 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2003 ) . Proteolytic and non - proteolytic migration of tumour cells and leucocytes . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 70 , 277 – 285 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Brieher , W . , Kueh , H . Y . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2008 ) . Coronin - 1A stabilizes F - actin by bridging adjacent actin proto - mers and stapling opposite strands of the actin ﬁlament . J . Mol . Biol . 376 , 607 – 613 . Gandhi , M . , Achard , V . , Blanchoin , L . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2009 ) . Coronin switchesrolesinactindisassemblydependingonthenucleotidestateofactin . Mol . Cell 34 , 364 – 374 . Gholami , A . , Falcke , M . , and Frey , E . ( 2008 ) . Velocity oscillations in actin - based motility . N . J . Phys . 10 , 1 – 12 . Goswami , S . , Philippar , U . , Sun , D . , Patsialou , A . , Avraham , J . , Wang , W . , Di Modugno , F . , Nistico , P . , Gertler , F . B . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2009 ) . Identiﬁca - tion of invasion speciﬁc splice variants of the cytoskeletal protein Mena present in mammary tumor cells during invasion in vivo . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 26 , 153 – 159 . Heasman , S . J . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2008 ) . Mammalian Rho GTPases : new insights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 690 – 701 . Hoeller , O . , and Kay , R . R . ( 2007 ) . Chemotaxis in the absence of PIP3 gradi - ents . Curr . Biol . 17 , 813 – 817 . Humphries , C . L . , Balcer , H . I . , D’Agostino , J . L . , Winsor , B . , Drubin , D . G . , Barnes , G . , Andrews , B . J . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2002 ) . Direct regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex activity and function by the actin binding protein coronin . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 993 – 1004 . Ibarra , N . , Blagg , S . L . , Vazquez , F . , andInsall , R . H . ( 2006 ) . Nap1regulatesDic - tyostelium cell motility and adhesion through SCAR - dependent and - indepen - dent pathways . Curr . Biol . 16 , 717 – 722 . Innocenti , M . , Zucconi , A . , Disanza , A . , Frittoli , E . , Areces , L . B . , Steffen , A . , Stradal , T . E . , DiFiore , P . P . , Carlier , M . F . , andScita , G . ( 2004 ) . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 319 – 327 . Innocenti , M . , Gerboth , S . , Rottner , K . , Lai , F . P . , Hertzog , M . , Stradal , T . E . , Frit - toli , E . , Didry , D . , Polo , S . , Disanza , A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 969 – 976 . Ismail , A . M . , Padrick , S . B . , Chen , B . , Umetani , J . , andRosen , M . K . ( 2009 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 561 – 563 . Johnston , S . A . , Bramble , J . P . , Yeung , C . L . , Mendes , P . M . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex activity in ﬁlopodia of spreading cells . BMC Cell Biol . 9 , 65 . Kamimura , Y . , Xiong , Y . , Iglesias , P . A . , Hoeller , O . , Bolourani , P . , and Dev - reotes , P . N . ( 2008 ) . PIP3 - independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1034 – 1043 . Keren , K . , Pincus , Z . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Marriott , G . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 . Kim , Y . , Sung , J . Y . , Ceglia , I . , Lee , K . W . , Ahn , J . H . , Halford , J . M . , Kim , A . M . , Kwak , S . P . , Park , J . B . , Ho Ryu , S . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of WAVE1 regulates actin polymerization and dendritic spine morphology . Nature 442 , 814 – 817 . Kiselar , J . G . , Mahaffy , R . , Pollard , T . D . , Almo , S . C . , and Chance , M . R . ( 2007 ) . Visualizing Arp2 / 3 complex activation mediated by binding of ATP and WASp using structural mass spectrometry . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 1552 – 1557 . Kobayashi , K . , Kuroda , S . , Fukata , M . , Nakamura , T . , Nagase , T . , Nomura , N . , Matsuura , Y . , Yoshida - Kubomura , N . , Iwamatsu , A . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1998 ) . p140Sra - 1 ( speciﬁcally Rac1 - associated protein ) is a novel speciﬁc target for Rac1 small GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 291 – 295 . Koestler , S . A . , Auinger , S . , Vinzenz , M . , Rottner , K . , and Small , J . V . ( 2008 ) . Differentially oriented populations of actin ﬁlaments generated in lamellipodia collaborateinpushingandpausingatthecellfront . Nat . CellBiol . 10 , 306 – 313 . Kovar , D . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2004 ) . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 14725 – 14730 . Kueh , H . Y . , Charras , G . T . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2008 ) . Actin disassembly by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 341 – 353 . Kunda , P . , Craig , G . , Dominguez , V . , andBaum , B . ( 2003 ) . Abi , Sra1 , andKette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1867 – 1875 . Lacayo , C . I . , Pincus , Z . , VanDuijn , M . M . , Wilson , C . A . , Fletcher , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Emergence of large - scale cell morphology and movement from local actin ﬁlament growth dynamics . PLoS Biol . 5 , e233 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Block , J . , Faix , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Mannherz , H . G . , Stradal , T . E . , Dunn , G . A . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J . 27 , 982 – 992 . Lammermann , T . , Bader , B . L . , Monkley , S . J . , Worbs , T . , Wedlich - Soldner , R . , Hirsch , K . , Keller , M . , Forster , R . , Critchley , D . R . , Fassler , R . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 . LeClaire , L . L . , 3rd , Baumgartner , M . , Iwasa , J . H . , Mullins , R . D . , and Barber , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Phosphorylation of the Arp2 / 3 complex is necessary to nucleate actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 647 – 654 . 320 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review Lee , S . H . , Kerff , F . , Chereau , D . , Ferron , F . , Klug , A . , andDominguez , R . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the actin - binding function of missing - in - metastasis . Struc - ture 15 , 145 – 155 . Legg , J . A . , Bompard , G . , Dawson , J . , Morris , H . L . , Andrew , N . , Cooper , L . , Johnston , S . A . , Tramountanis , G . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2007 ) . N - WASP involvement in dorsal rufﬂe formation in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 678 – 687 . Linardopoulou , E . V . , Parghi , S . S . , Friedman , C . , Osborn , G . E . , Parkhurst , S . M . , and Trask , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet . 3 , e237 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitu - tion of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Ma , L . , Rohatgi , R . , andKirschner , M . W . ( 1998 ) . TheArp2 / 3complex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 15362 – 15367 . Machesky , L . M . , and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 – 1356 . Machesky , L . M . , andGould , K . L . ( 1999 ) . TheArp2 / 3complex : amultifunctional actin organizer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 117 – 121 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 . Millius , A . , Dandekar , S . N . , Houk , A . R . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2009 ) . Neutrophils establish rapid and robust WAVE complex polarity in an actin - dependent fashion . Curr . Biol . 19 , 253 – 259 . Mitchison , T . J . , and Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . Mitchison , T . J . , Charras , G . T . , and Mahadevan , L . ( 2008 ) . Implications of a poroelastic cytoplasm for the dynamics of animal cell shape . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 215 – 223 . Mogilner , A . ( 2009 ) . Mathematics of cell motility : have we got its number ? J . Math . Biol . 58 , 105 – 134 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . Neidt , E . M . , Scott , B . J . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2009 ) . Formin differentially utilizes proﬁlin isoforms to rapidly assemble actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 673 – 684 . Nolan , K . M . , Barrett , K . , Lu , Y . , Hu , K . Q . , Vincent , S . , and Settleman , J . ( 1998 ) . Myoblast city , the Drosophila homolog of DOCK180 / CED - 5 , is required in aRac signaling pathway utilized for multiple developmentalprocesses . Genes Dev . 12 , 3337 – 3342 . Nolen , B . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Insights into the inﬂuence of nucleotides onactinfamilyproteinsfromsevenstructuresofArp2 / 3complex . Mol . Cell 26 , 449 – 457 . Nolen , B . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2008 ) . Structure and biochemical properties of ﬁssion yeast Arp2 / 3 complex lacking the Arp2 subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 26490 – 26498 . Ochs , H . D . , and Thrasher , A . J . ( 2006 ) . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 117 , 725 – 738 . Padrick , S . B . , Cheng , H . C . , Ismail , A . M . , Panchal , S . C . , Doolittle , L . K . , Kim , S . , Skehan , B . M . , Umetani , J . , Brautigam , C . A . , Leong , J . M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Hierar - chical regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins . Mol . Cell 32 , 426 – 438 . Pan , F . , Egile , C . , Lipkin , T . , andLi , R . ( 2004 ) . ARPC1 / Arc40mediatestheinter - action of the actin - related protein 2 and 3 complex with Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein family activators . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 54629 – 54636 . Paul , A . S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Review of the mechanism of processive actin ﬁlament elongation by formins . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 606 – 617 . Pavlov , D . , Muhlrad , A . , Cooper , J . , Wear , M . , and Reisler , E . ( 2007 ) . Actin ﬁla - ment severing by coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 1350 – 1358 . Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . , and Oster , G . F . ( 1993 ) . Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 , 316 – 324 . Philippar , U . , Roussos , E . T . , Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Kim , H . D . , Giampieri , S . , Wang , Y . , Goswami , S . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A Mena invasion isoform potentiates EGF - induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis . Dev . Cell 15 , 813 – 828 . Pinner , S . , andSahai , E . ( 2008a ) . Imagingamoeboidcancercellmotilityinvivo . J . Microsc . 231 , 441 – 445 . Pinner , S . , and Sahai , E . ( 2008b ) . PDK1regulatescancercellmotilityby antag - onising inhibition of ROCK1 by RhoE . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 127 – 137 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 . Pollitt , A . Y . , andInsall , R . H . ( 2008 ) . AbimutantsinDictyosteliumrevealspeciﬁc roles for the SCAR / WAVE complex in cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 203 – 210 . Rebowski , G . , Boczkowska , M . , Hayes , D . B . , Guo , L . , Irving , T . C . , and Domi - nguez , R . ( 2008 ) . X - ray scattering study of actin polymerization nuclei assem - bled by tandem W domains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10785 – 10790 . Reddien , P . W . , andHorvitz , H . R . ( 2000 ) . CED - 2 / CrkIIand CED - 10 / Raccontrol phagocytosis and cell migration in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 131 – 136 . Resch , G . P . , Goldie , K . N . , Hoenger , A . , and Small , J . V . ( 2002 ) . Pure F - actin networks are distorted and branched by steps in the critical - point drying method . J . Struct . Biol . 137 , 305 – 312 . Robinson , R . C . , Turbedsky , K . , Kaiser , D . A . , Marchand , J . B . , Higgs , H . N . , Choe , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 , 1679 – 1684 . Rodal , A . A . , Sokolova , O . , Robins , D . B . , Daugherty , K . M . , Hippenmeyer , S . , Riezman , H . , Grigorieff , N . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2005 ) . Conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex leading to actin nucleation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 , 26 – 31 . Roffers - Agarwal , J . , Xanthos , J . B . , and Miller , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of actin cytoskeleton architecture by Eps8 and Abi1 . BMC Cell Biol . 6 , 36 . Romero , S . , LeClainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , andCarlier , M . F . ( 2004 ) . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 . Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Amann , K . J . , Egile , C . , Nickell , S . , Nicastro , D . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , Volkmann , N . , andHanein , D . ( 2008 ) . Thestructuralbasisofactin ﬁlament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 . Ryu , J . R . , Echarri , A . , Li , R . , and Pendergast , A . M . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of cell - cell adhesion by Abi / Diaphanous complexes . Mol . Cell Biol . 29 , 1735 – 1748 . Sanz - Moreno , V . , Gadea , G . , Ahn , J . , Paterson , H . , Marra , P . , Pinner , S . , Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2008 ) . Rac activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell movement . Cell 135 , 510 – 523 . Sarmiento , C . , Wang , W . , Dovas , A . , Yamaguchi , H . , Sidani , M . , El - Sibai , M . , Desmarais , V . , Holman , H . A . , Kitchen , S . , Backer , J . M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . WASP family members and formin proteins coordinate regulation of cell protrusions in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 1245 – 1260 . Schmidt , K . L . , Marcus - Gueret , N . , Adeleye , A . , Webber , J . , Baillie , D . , and Stringham , E . G . ( 2009 ) . The cell migration molecule UNC - 53 / NAV2 is linked to the ARP2 / 3 complex by ABI - 1 . Development 136 , 563 – 574 . Schneider , I . C . , and Haugh , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of gradient sensing and chemotaxis : conserved pathways , diverse regulation . Cell Cycle 5 , 1130 – 1134 . Shimada , A . , Nyitrai , M . , Vetter , I . R . , Kuhlmann , D . , Bugyi , B . , Narumiya , S . , Geeves , M . A . , and Wittinghofer , A . ( 2004 ) . The core FH2 domain of diapha - nous - related formins is an elongated actin binding protein that inhibits poly - merization . Mol . Cell 13 , 511 – 522 . Sidani , M . , Wessels , D . , Mouneimne , G . , Ghosh , M . , Goswami , S . , Sarmiento , C . , Wang , W . , Kuhl , S . , El - Sibai , M . , Backer , J . M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Coﬁlin Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 321 Developmental Cell Review determines the migration behavior and turning frequency of metastatic cancer cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 777 – 791 . Small , J . V . , Auinger , S . , Nemethova , M . , Koestler , S . , Goldie , K . N . , Hoenger , A . , and Resch , G . P . ( 2008 ) . Unravelling the structure of the lamellipodium . J . Microsc . 231 , 479 – 485 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 . Stradal , T . , Courtney , K . D . , Rottner , K . , Hahne , P . , Small , J . V . , andPendergast , A . M . ( 2001 ) . TheAbl interactor proteinslocalize tositesofactin polymerization at the tips of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Curr . Biol . 11 , 891 – 895 . Suetsugu , S . , Yamazaki , D . , Kurisu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral rufﬂe formation for ﬁbro - blast cell migration . Dev . Cell 5 , 595 – 609 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasi - liev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorga - nization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 . Tani , K . , Sato , S . , Sukezane , T . , Kojima , H . , Hirose , H . , Hanafusa , H . , and Shishido , T . ( 2003 ) . Abl interactor 1 promotes tyrosine 296 phosphorylation of mammalian enabled ( Mena ) by c - Abl kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21685 – 21692 . Tomasevic , N . , Jia , Z . , Russell , A . , Fujii , T . , Hartman , J . J . , Clancy , S . , Wang , M . , Beraud , C . , Wood , K . W . , and Sakowicz , R . ( 2007 ) . Differential regulation of WASP and N - WASP by Cdc42 , Rac1 , Nck , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Biochemistry 46 , 3494 – 3502 . Trichet , L . , Campas , O . , Sykes , C . , and Plastino , J . ( 2007 ) . VASPgovernsactin dynamics by modulating ﬁlament anchoring . Biophys . J . 92 , 1081 – 1089 . Trichet , L . , Sykes , C . , and Plastino , J . ( 2008 ) . Relaxing the actin cytoskeleton for adhesion and movement with Ena / VASP . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 19 – 25 . Uhrig , J . F . , Mutondo , M . , Zimmermann , I . , Deeks , M . J . , Machesky , L . M . , Thomas , P . , Uhrig , S . , Rambke , C . , Hussey , P . J . , and Hulskamp , M . ( 2007 ) . The role of Arabidopsis SCAR genes in ARP2 - ARP3 - dependent cell morpho - genesis . Development 134 , 967 – 977 . van Rheenen , J . , Condeelis , J . , and Glogauer , M . ( 2009 ) . A common coﬁlin activity cycle in invasive tumor cells and inﬂammatory cells . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 305 – 311 . Veltman , D . M . , Keizer - Gunnik , I . , and Van Haastert , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Four key signaling pathways mediating chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 747 – 753 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . Weiner , O . D . , Rentel , M . C . , Ott , A . , Brown , G . E . , Jedrychowski , M . , Yaffe , M . B . , Gygi , S . P . , Cantley , L . C . , Bourne , H . R . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2006 ) . Hem - 1 complexes are essential for Rac activation , actin polymerization , and myosin regulation during neutrophil chemotaxis . PLoS Biol . 4 , e38 . Weiner , O . D . , Marganski , W . A . , Wu , L . F . , Altschuler , S . J . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2007 ) . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 , e221 . Weisswange , I . , Newsome , T . P . , Schleich , S . , and Way , M . ( 2009 ) . The rate of N - WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin - based motility . Nature 458 , 87 – 91 . Wolf , K . , and Friedl , P . ( 2006 ) . Molecular mechanisms of cancer cell invasion and plasticity . Br . J . Dermatol . 154 ( Suppl 1 ) , 11 – 15 . Xu , Y . , Moseley , J . B . , Sagot , I . , Poy , F . , Pellman , D . , Goode , B . L . , and Eck , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Crystal structures of a Formin Homology - 2 domain reveal a teth - ered dimer architecture . Cell 116 , 711 – 723 . Yang , C . , Czech , L . , Gerboth , S . , Kojima , S . , Scita , G . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2007 ) . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e317 . Zhang , S . , Charest , P . G . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras activity provides directional sensing . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1587 – 1593 . Zuchero , J . B . , Coutts , A . S . , Quinlan , M . E . , Thangue , N . B . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2009 ) . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 451 – 459 . 322 Developmental Cell 17 , September 15 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review