A reactive potential for hydrocarbons with intermolecular interactions Steven J . Stuart a ) Department of Chemistry , Clemson University , Clemson , South Carolina 29634 Alan B . Tutein b ) and Judith A . Harrison c ) Department of Chemistry , U . S . Naval Academy , Annapolis , Maryland 21402 ~ Received 7 May 1999 ; accepted 19 January 2000 ! A potential function is presented that can be used to model both chemical reactions and intermolecular interactions in condensed - phase hydrocarbon systems such as liquids , graphite , and polymers . This potential is derived from a well - known dissociable hydrocarbon force ﬁeld , the reactive empirical bond - order potential . The extensions include an adaptive treatment of the nonbonded and dihedral - angle interactions , which still allows for covalent bonding interactions . Torsional potentials are introduced via a novel interaction potential that does not require a ﬁxed hybridization state . The resulting model is intended as a ﬁrst step towards a transferable , empirical potential capable of simulating chemical reactions in a variety of environments . The current implementation has been validated against structural and energetic properties of both gaseous and liquid hydrocarbons , and is expected to prove useful in simulations of hydrocarbon liquids , thin ﬁlms , and other saturated hydrocarbon systems . © 2000 American Institute of Physics . @ S0021 - 9606 ~ 00 ! 50814 - 9 # I . INTRODUCTION Computational chemists have long made use of classical molecular simulations , including molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo methods , to study systems of chemical interest . However , most of the potential functions used in these simu - lations are intended for modeling physical processes , not chemical reactions . Most of these simulation techniques simulate physical processes , and not chemical reactions . The formation and breaking of chemical bonds are inherently quantum mechanical processes , and are often studied using ﬁrst - principles methods . Nevertheless , classical potentials do exist that can empirically model changes in covalent bond - ing . One successful method for treating covalent bonding in - teractions in computer simulations is the Tersoff - type potential . 1 , 2 Unlike traditional molecular mechanics force ﬁelds , 3 – 10 the Tersoff model allows for the formation and dissociation of covalent chemical bonds during a simulation . Many - body terms reﬂecting the local coordination environ - ment of each atom are used to modify the strength of more conventional pairwise terms . With this approach , individual atoms are not constrained to remain attached to speciﬁc neighbors , or to maintain a particular hybridization state or coordination number . Models of this sort , despite being purely classical , can provide a realistic description of cova - lent bonding processes in nonelectrostatic systems . Potentials of this type have been developed to treat systems containing silicon , 1 carbon , 11 , 12 germanium , 2 oxygen , 12 or hydrogen , 12 as well as heterogeneous systems containing various combi - nations of these species . 2 , 13 – 16 One particularly successful example of a Tersoff poten - tial is the reactive empirical bond - order ~ REBO ! potential developed by Brenner . 15 – 18 This model uses a Tersoff - style potential to describe the covalent bonding interactions in car - bon and hydrocarbon systems . Originally developed for use in simulating the chemical vapor deposition of diamond , 15 the REBO potential has recently been extended to provide more accurate treatment of the energetic , elastic , and vibra - tional properties of solid carbon and small hydrocarbons . 18 In various incarnations , this potential has been used to model many different materials and processes , including fullerenes , 17 carbon nanotubes , 19 amorphous carbon , 20 and the tribology and tribochemistry of diamond interfaces . 21 – 27 The REBO potential is not appropriate for studying ev - ery hydrocarbon system , however . In particular , the absence of dispersion and nonbonded repulsion terms makes the po - tential poorly suited for any system with signiﬁcant intermo - lecular interactions . This is the case for many important hy - drocarbon systems , including liquids and thin ﬁlms , as well as some solid - state materials such as graphite and fullerenes . Even covalent materials such as diamond can beneﬁt from a treatment including nonbonded interactions . The bulk phase is dominated by covalent interactions , but longer - range forces become quite important when studying interfacial systems . 28 Various attempts have been made previously to combine nonbonded interactions with the Tersoff or REBO potentials in a way that preserves the reactive capabilities of the model . 29 – 31 One way to do this is to simply reduce the re - pulsive barrier associated with the Lennard - Jones or other potential , 32 although this results in barriers which are too large for radical species and too small for saturated com - pounds . Another alternative , taken by Nyden et al . , 30 is to allow bonds to dissociate with a Morse potential , and explic - a ! Electronic mail : ss @ clemson . edu b ! Electronic mail : tutein @ nadn . navy . mil c ! Electronic mail : jah @ nadn . navy . mil JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS VOLUME 112 , NUMBER 14 8 APRIL 2000 6472 0021 - 9606 / 2000 / 112 ( 14 ) / 6472 / 15 / $ 17 . 00 © 2000 American Institute of Physics itly check for recombination reactions between dissociated radicals . This approach has been used to model thermal de - composition of polymers , 30 but is not general enough to treat arbitrary reactions in hydrocarbons , such as addition across unsaturated bonds . Another method , used by Che et al . , 31 is to reduce the repulsive nonbonded interactions based on the covalent interaction energy , rather than the distance . This method can help eliminate nonbonded interactions during bond dissocations , but will again tend to overestimate barri - ers in association reactions . In addition to lacking nonbonded interactons , the REBO potential also lacks a torsional potential for hindered rotation about single bonds . This has not prevented the potential from being used to model small hydrocarbons or functional groups in the past . 24 , 33 However , an accurate representation of tor - sional interactions should allow these systems to be treated with greater accuracy , and will also permit the study of larger hydrocarbons . A potential is presented here that addresses these short - comings in the REBO potential , in ways that improve upon earlier extensions to the REBO model . This new potential has been developed for use in simulating reactivity in condensed - phase systems where the REBO potential cannot be used , and can in principle be used for arbitrary hydrocar - bon systems . But the primary goal was to make progress towards a fully reactive intermolecular potential , rather than to supplant the many existing potentials for modeling nonre - active hydrocarbons . Section II reviews the REBO potential and details the modiﬁcations that were required to introduce nonbonded and torsional interactions . The ﬁtting procedure used to param - etrize the new potential is described in Sec . III . Section IV discusses the structural and energetic properties that are ob - tained when the new model is applied to a variety of carbon and hydrocarbon systems , and Sec . V summarizes the novel characteristics of the new potential and describes the situa - tions in which it is expected to prove most useful . An appen - dix presents in compact form all of the equations necessary to describe the current model . II . POTENTIAL The potential described in this article is based on the reactive empirical bond - order potential of Brenner . 15 – 18 Be - cause the new potential introduces nonbonded interactions through an adaptive treatment of the intermolecular interac - tions , it shall be referred to here as the adaptive intermolecu - lar REBO potential ~ AIREBO ! . The new portions of the po - tential will be described below in detail . The covalent bonding contributions of the REBO potential are largely un - changed , and will be discussed only brieﬂy . For a more ex - haustive discussion of the development of the REBO poten - tial , the reader is referred to the original authors . 15 , 17 , 18 For completeness , all of the equations and parameters necessary to fully implement the current model—including those that are unchanged from the REBO model—are compiled in the appendix . As originally developed , the REBO potential is exclu - sively short - ranged . Two atoms interact directly only if they are separated by a distance less than a covalent - bonding cut - off of r ij max ~ e . g . , 2 . 0 Å for C – C bonds ! . Each pair of covalently bonded atoms interacts via a potential , E ij REBO 5 V ijR ~ r ij ! 1 b ij V ijA ~ r ij ! , ~ 1 ! where V ijR and V ijA are repulsive and attractive pairwise po - tentials determined by the atom types ~ carbon or hydrogen ! of atoms i and j , and that depend only on the distance r ij between the two atoms . Through its dependence on the many - body term b ij , however , the value of E ij REBO also de - pends on the position and chemical identity of atoms close to the i – j bond . The b ij bond - order term is the hallmark of a Tersoff - type potential . A variety of chemical effects that affect the strength of the covalent bonding interaction are all accounted for in this term . Coordination numbers , bond angles , and conjugation effects all contribute to the strength of a particu - lar bonding interaction in the REBO potential . For example , the carbon – carbon b ij term is larger between triply coordi - nated ( sp 2 ) carbon atoms than between quadruply coordi - nated ( sp 3 ) carbons . This weights the attractive term more heavily for sp 2 carbons , resulting in an increased strength for double bonds . It should be emphasized that , despite this ef - fective treatment of hybridization , the REBO model includes no explicit quantum mechanics . All descriptions of conjuga - tion or hybridization states are derived entirely from the sys - tem geometry ; the simulations treat the electronic degrees of freedom in a purely empirical manner . A complete discus - sion of the various contributions to the b ij term is deferred to the appendix . Additional details can also be found in prior discussions of the REBO potential . 15 , 17 , 18 A . Intermolecular interaction potential The REBO potential is very successful at describing in - tramolecular interactions in carbon and hydrocarbon materials . 15 Despite its many successes , however , the poten - tial includes no mechanism for treating intermolecular inter - actions . These include the dispersion and short - range repul - sion effects that give rise to many of the properties of liquids , polymers , and thin - ﬁlm hydrocarbon materials . In the current potential , the dispersion and intermolecular repul - sion interactions are modeled with a Lennard - Jones ~ LJ ! 12 – 6 potential , V ij LJ ~ r ij ! 5 4 e ij F S s ij r ij D 12 2 S s ij r ij D 6 G . ~ 2 ! Although the repulsive wall of the 12 – 6 LJ interaction is known to be too hard , 34 this potential was chosen over com - peting models such as an exp - 6 potential due to its math - ematical convenience , small number of adjustable param - eters , and widespread use . The inaccuracies involved are expected to be quite small for most applications . The presence of intermolecular interactions raises sev - eral difﬁculties in a reactive potential . Foremost among these is the barrier formed by the steep repulsive wall of the LJ term , preventing nonbonded atoms from approaching close enough to interact via the REBO potential . Clearly , the re - 6473 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons pulsive interactions must be diminished in certain circum - stances to preserve the reactivity that is the key feature of the REBO potential . A simple distance - dependent switch on the LJ interac - tion has been used by other authors . 29 This approach was viewed to be inadequate , because it is incapable of account - ing for variations in the chemical environment . For example , two hydrogen atoms at a particular separation may repel one another if they are covalently bound to different molecules , yet may feel an attraction at the same distance as free radi - cals . To preserve the reactive character of the potential , the chemical characteristics of the system must be considered in determining when to include or exclude the LJ interaction . Three criteria were chosen to determine whether , and at what distance , to switch off the LJ interaction . This decision is made adaptively , depending on : ~ i ! the distance separating the pair of atoms in question , ~ ii ! the strength of any bonding interaction between them , and ~ iii ! the network of bonds con - necting them . In general , two atoms will feel a LJ repulsion at short distances only if they are not likely to form a chemi - cal bond , and if they are not vicinal ~ 1 – 4 ! neighbors in the same molecule . The complete mathematical expression for the LJ interaction between atoms i and j is given by E ij LJ 5 S ~ t r ~ r ij ! ! S ~ t b ~ b ij * ! ! C ij V ij LJ ~ r ij ! 1 @ 1 2 S ~ t r ~ r ij ! ! # C ij V ij LJ ~ r ij ! , ~ 3 ! where S ( t ) is a universal switching function , S ~ t ! 5 Q ~ 2 t ! 1 Q ~ t ! Q ~ 1 2 t ! @ 1 2 t 2 ~ 3 2 2 t ! # , ~ 4 ! with Q ( t ) representing the Heaviside step function . The switching function S ( t ) is unity for t , 0 and zero for t . 1 , switching smoothly between these two values at intermediate t with a cubic spline . The function and its ﬁrst derivative are continuous at the endpoints of the switching region . The distance between a pair of atoms affects the strength of their LJ interaction through the S ( t r ( r ij ) ) term in Eq . ~ 3 ! . The scaling function t r ( r ij ) , t r ~ r ij ! 5 r ij 2 r ij LJ min r ij LJ max 2 r ij LJ min , ~ 5 ! is used to rescale the domain of the switching function S ( t ) . When r ij is greater than r ij LJ max , S ( t r ( r ij ) ) will be zero and the pair distance has no impact on the LJ interaction . When r ij , r ij LJ max , on the other hand , the ﬁrst term in Eq . ~ 3 ! is nonzero , and the LJ interactions are contingent on the values of the other two switching functions . The switching region @ r ij LJ min , r ij LJ max # was chosen such that the minimum of the LJ potential well remains unper - turbed from the unswitched interaction , and such that there is no artiﬁcial reaction barrier due to LJ repulsions at short distances when the LJ interactions are switched off . With these constraints , the switching region has its maximum width when r ij LJ min 5 s ij and r ij LJ max 5 2 1 / 6 s ij . The choice of r ij LJ min 5 s ij also has the advantage of guaranteeing that the second derivative of the potential is continuous at r LJ min . The second criterion that can affect the LJ interaction is a bonding switch represented by the S ( t b ( b ij * ) ) term in Eq . ~ 3 ! . The scaling function t b ( b ij ) , t b ~ b ij ! 5 b 2 b ij min b ij max 2 b ij min , ~ 6 ! converts a REBO bond - order term b ij to a range suitable for use in the cubic spline switching function S ( t ) . When the bond order is large , indicating that covalent bonding will occur between the two atoms in question , t b is greater than one and the repulsive LJ interactions will not be present . For low values of the bond order , indicating that covalent bond - ing is not likely , the LJ interaction will be included to a variable degree depending on the value of b ij . For sufﬁ - ciently low values of b ij , the LJ repulsion will be undimin - ished . The b ij * term in Eq . ~ 3 ! differs subtly from the term b ij used in the REBO potential . The adaptive LJ interaction in Eq . ~ 3 ! will typically be evaluated for pairs of atoms at in - termolecular distances . Because this separation typically ex - ceeds the covalent bonding distance r ij max , the REBO term b ij is not an accurate representation of the bond order between atoms i and j . Consequently , the bond - order term b ij * in the nonbonded portions of the AIREBO potential represents a hypothetical b ij term that is evaluated at r ij min , b ij * 5 b ij u r ij 5 r ij min . ~ 7 ! The distances from atoms i and j to each of their neighbors are assumed to remain unchanged when evaluating b ij * . The discussion above justiﬁes the distance and bond - order switches that are applied to the LJ interaction . The third criterion used in evaluating the contingent LJ potential is a connectivity switch , represented by C ij in Eq . ~ 3 ! . Be - cause the interactions between ﬁrst neighbors ~ 1 – 2 ! and sec - ond neighbors ~ 1 – 3 ! are modeled very well by existing com - ponents of the REBO potential , all LJ interactions are excluded for atom pairs that constitute ﬁrst or second neigh - bors . Similarly , the 1 – 4 interactions are left to the dihedral - angle potential described below . This disregard of LJ inter - actions for closely bound neighbors is comparable to similar restrictions in molecular mechanics potentials , which treat bond stretches , angle bends , and dihedral rotations separately from nonbonded interactions . Unlike molecular mechanics potentials , however , the reactive AIREBO potential allows the nonbonded interactions to be turned smoothly on or off as bonding conﬁgurations change . The smooth transition from bonded to nonbonded inter - actions as a molecule dissociates is implemented using bond - weight terms w ij ( r ij ) . The bond weight w ij is a number between zero and one , that is used as an indication of the bonding between atoms i and j . This permits the identiﬁca - tion of atom pairs as bonded ( w ij 5 1 ) , nonbonded ( w ij 5 0 ) , or partially dissociated ( 0 , w ij , 1 ) . It is implemented as a distance - based switching function that varies smoothly from one to zero over a covalent bonding region , w ij ~ r ij ! 5 S 8 ~ t c ~ r ij ! ! ~ 8 ! with t c ~ r ij ! 5 r ij 2 r ij min r ij max 2 r ij min . ~ 9 ! 6474 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison The switching function S 8 ( t ) is similar to the cubic spline function S ( t ) , but is implemented as a cosine - based switch for compatibility with the original REBO potential , S 8 ~ t ! 5 Q ~ 2 t ! 1 Q ~ t ! Q ~ 1 2 t ! 1 2 @ 1 1 cos ~ p t ! # . ~ 10 ! Lennard - Jones interactions are disabled for any atom pair that is connected by a series of three or fewer bonds , and partially disabled if the connection is via a series of partially dissociated bonds . This is implemented using the C ij connec - tivity switch in Eq . 3 , deﬁned using the strongest series of three or fewer bonds connecting i and j , C ij 5 1 2 max $ w ij ~ r ij ! , w ik ~ r ik ! w kj ~ r kj ! , ; k w ik ~ r ik ! w kl ~ r kl ! w lj ~ r lj ! , ; k , l % . ~ 11 ! When atoms i and j are neighbors , or are connected by one or two intermediate neighbors , C ij is zero and there is no LJ interaction between the atoms . Thus the three criteria that affect the strength of the LJ interactions are distance , bond order , and connectivity . Reviewing the terms in Eq . ~ 3 ! re - veals that for the LJ interactions to be fully included , the atom pair in question must not be ~ 1 , 4 ! neighbors , and must either be beyond a cutoff distance or have an unfavorable value of the bond order . Pairs that do not meet these criteria have LJ interactions which are partially diminished , or ab - sent entirely . B . Torsional interaction potential The other new component of the AIREBO potential is a term dependent on dihedral angles . The original REBO po - tential lacked any torsional interactions about single bonds , reﬂecting its original focus on network solids such as dia - mond and small molecular fragments relevant to the chemi - cal vapor deposition of diamond . With no barrier to rotation about single bonds , however , the original REBO potential is poorly suited for the simulation of saturated hydrocarbons larger than methane . As with the nonbonded interactions , the reactive nature of the potential requires some modiﬁcations to the conven - tional method of introducing torsional interactions . The usual form 35 for the torsional potential is a cosine power series in the dihedral angle v , V 5 1 2 ( k 5 1 3 V k @ 1 2 ~ 2 1 ! k cos ~ k v ! # . ~ 12 ! The coefﬁcients V k are chosen for each individual molecule based on the relative energies and barriers to rotation . But in a reactive potential , these energies and barriers must change as the molecule undergoes chemical reactions . Therefore , it is preferable if the symmetry of the torsional potential arises naturally from the local coordination environment , rather than being built into the parameter set . This is accomplished in the current potential through the use of a torsional potential with a single minimum , V tors ~ v ! 5 e F 256 405 cos 10 S v 2 D 2 1 10 G . ~ 13 ! The constants in this equation are chosen such that when the torsional interactions are summed over the nine dihedral angles in a bond between identically substituted sp 3 carbons , the overall molecular torsional potential T ( v ) has the ex - pected threefold symmetry with a barrier height of e : T ~ v ! 5 3 V ~ v ! 1 3 V S v 1 2 p 3 D 1 3 V S v 2 2 p 3 D 5 1 2 e @ 1 1 cos ~ 3 v ! # . ~ 14 ! Figure 1 illustrates the form of the novel V ( v ) torsional potential , as well as the T ( v ) combined form . This particular functional form for V tors results in a tor - sional potential which is even about its single minimum and single maximum . These features reﬂect the physical symme - tries of the repulsion ~ between atoms or bonds ! that is as - sumed to be the fundamental origin of the torsional potential . These properties are shared by any even power of cos ( v / 2 ) , i . e . , V ( v ) 5 cos 2 n ( v / 2 ) . Equation ~ 14 ! can only be recovered when n 5 3 , 4 , or 5 . In the current work , the form corre - sponding to n 5 5 was chosen based on the relative size of the barriers in V ( v ) and T ( v ) . The torsional potential given by Eq . ~ 13 ! is implemented in the AIREBO model for all dihedral angles in the system , in proportion to the bond weights that contribute to the dihe - dral angle , E tors 5 1 2 ( i ( j (cid:222) i ( k (cid:222) i , j ( l (cid:222) i , j , k w ij ~ r ij ! w jk ~ r jk ! w kl ~ r kl ! 3 V tors ~ v ijkl ! . ~ 15 ! The use of bond weights ensures that the torsional energy associated with a given dihedral angle will be removed smoothly as any of the consituent bonds are broken . There is at least one other study that has attempted to implement torsional potentials in a Tersoff - type model . 36 In contrast to that work , the current model correctly predicts a barrier to rotation about homogeneously substituted sp 3 – sp 3 bonds , and does not induce any angle - bending forces . FIG . 1 . Form of the atom - based dihedral - angle potential V ( v ) and the resulting molecular torsional potential T ( v ) for a single bond between sp 3 - hybridized atoms with six identical substituents . 6475 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons With the forms given above for the adaptive treatment of dispersion , intermolecular repulsion , and torsional interac - tions , the entire system energy is thus given by the expres - sion E 5 E REBO 1 E LJ 1 E tors , ~ 16 ! with the various components of the energy given by the equations presented earlier and in the appendix . This completes the description of the new potential model . The following section discusses a particular param - etrization suitable for condensed - phase hydrocarbons . But the primary signiﬁcance of the new model is that it extends the capabilities of current models . The methodology devel - oped above is one of very few methods available for treating both chemical reactivity and intermolecular interactions within the same system using a simple , empirical potential . III . FITTING PROCEDURE Equation ~ 16 ! describes a version of the REBO hydro - carbon potential with adaptive , intermolecular interactions . This framework could be used to introduce long - ranged in - teractions into any potential of the Tersoff type , without compromising the reactive character of the potential . As an illustration of the capabilities of the new model , it is param - etrized here speciﬁcally for condensed - phase hydrocarbons . To fully deﬁne the potential , values must be given for each of the parameters in the model . This section will describe the ﬁtting procedure used to obtain values for these parameters , for the current parametrization , and serves as an example for future development of similar models . In parametrizing the hydrocarbon AIREBO potential model , it was decided to preserve the REBO parameters at their original values whenever possible . This was done for several reasons . First , there is a large community of workers currently using the REBO potential , and this strategy mini - mizes the amount of work required to upgrade the potential to include intermolecular effects . Second , the REBO poten - tial provides an accurate description of covalent bonding in carbon and hydrocarbon materials . Although introducing LJ terms without modifying the REBO parameters does perturb the properties of the model somewhat , the effects are small in most systems where the REBO potential is applicable . Lennard - Jones interactions are typically on the order of 10 2 2 kcal / mol , whereas covalent bonding interactions are more typically 10 2 kcal / mol . Because of this difference in energy scales between covalent and intermolecular interac - tions , the LJ contribution to the potential can be param - etrized independently from the already well - parametrized REBO terms . Similarly , torsional interactions , typically con - tributing on the order of 1 kcal / mol , are small perturbations on the existing bonding terms , and can also be parametrized independently . The parameters that specify the LJ interactions include s ij and e ij , where the atom types represented by i and j are either carbon and hydrogen . In addition , values must also be chosen for the switching function cutoffs b ij max and b ij min . The r ij LJ min and r ij LJ max cutoffs are not independent parameters , but depend on the value of s ij as discussed below Eq . ~ 5 ! . The values of these various parameters were chosen to optimize the ﬁt to liquid - state hydrocarbon properties , while perturbing the properties of solid - state carbon polymorphs as little as possible . The procedure used to arrive at ﬁnal param - eter values was generally as follows . First , the values of b ij min and b ij max were chosen to guarantee that repulsive LJ interac - tions would only contribute between nonreactive species . By examining molecules in a variety of geometries , it was found that the modiﬁed bond order b CH * @ see Eq . ~ 7 ! # for a single hydrogen atom approaching a methane molecule never ex - ceeded 0 . 75 . A b CH * value of 0 . 75 or lower is thus an indica - tion that no bond is likely to form between a given atom pair at closer distances . This is a system for which the repulsive interactions should always be present . Similarly , when a hy - drogen atom approaches a methyl radical ~ a case for which the LJ repulsion should not be included ! , the value of b CH * is typically greater than 0 . 90 . The values of b CHmin and b CHmax were thus chosen to be 0 . 75 and 0 . 90 , respectively . The values of b ij min and b ij max for other combinations of atom types were chosen in a similar fashion . Their values appear in Table I . In general , the range between b ij min and b ij max was chosen to be as large as possible , while still allowing full LJ repulsion be - tween unreactive species and negligible repulsion between radicals . The properties of the AIREBO model depend only weakly on the exact width chosen for the b ij min – b ij max switch - ing range . Bond - order values in this range are typically only encountered when bonds are in the process of breaking or forming . Thus , the only system properties that depend criti - cally on the values chosen are those related to the dynamics of bond dissociation or formation . While the energetics of covalent bonding are amenable to study by empirical poten - tials such as REBO and AIREBO , the dynamic aspects of bonding are inherently quantum mechanical , and are beyond the reach of these models . In determining the LJ parameters s ij and e ij , only the homogeneous parameters ( i 5 j ) were taken to be indepen - dent parameters . The heterogeneous parameters s ij and e ij are determined using the usual Lorentz – Berthelot combining rules , 37 TABLE I . Switching function parameters in the AIREBO potential . Switch Value Equation min max r CC 1 . 7 2 . 0 A6 r CH 1 . 3 1 . 8 A6 r HH 1 . 1 1 . 7 A6 N C 3 . 2 3 . 7 A13 N 2 3 A16 s 0 . 1 0 . 1 A17 r CC 8 ~ Å ! 1 . 7 2 . 0 A20 r CH 8 ~ Å ! 1 . 3 1 . 6 A20 r HH 8 ~ Å ! 1 . 1 1 . 7 A20 r CCLJ ~ Å ! s CC 2 1 / 6 s CC A24 r CHLJ ~ Å ! s CH 2 1 / 6 s CH A24 r HHLJ ~ Å ! s HH 2 1 / 6 s HH A24 b CC 0 . 77 0 . 81 A25 b CH 0 . 75 0 . 90 A25 b HH 0 . 32 0 . 42 A25 6476 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison s ij 5 12 @ s ii 1 s jj # , ~ 17 ! and e ij 5 A e ii e jj . ~ 18 ! Thus four LJ parameters— s CC , s HH , e CC , and e HH —sufﬁce to describe the intermolecular interactions . Most potentials developed to describe condensed - phase hydrocarbons make use of signiﬁcantly more than four LJ parameters . The parameters for a sp 3 - hybridized carbon atom , for example , may differ from those of a sp 2 carbon . Molecular mechanics force ﬁelds carry this one step further , differentiating between different types of atoms based on the identity of neighboring atoms . While such an approach is possible with the model used here , it is less straightforward than in nonreactive models . Reactivity can change the bond - ing environment of a given atom , so an implementation of coordination - dependent LJ parameters must be done in a way that allows the parameters to vary smoothly as bonds are broken or formed . While certainly possible , such an ap - proach was judged unnecessary for this initial implementa - tion of the AIREBO model . To determine the LJ parameters , a selection of properties of graphite and liquid hydrocarbons were chosen that depend critically on the nature of the intermolecular interactions . Be - cause the interlayer interactions in graphite are decoupled almost completely from intralayer geometry changes , the in - terlayer separation of the graphite structure was taken as a convenient way to specify the s CC parameter . Similarly , once s CC was determined , the c 33 elastic constant of graphite provided an unambiguous way of determining the e CC pa - rameter . After the carbon LJ parameters were obtained , the hy - drogen LJ parameters were ﬁt using the properties of liquid methane and liquid ethane . By adjusting the s HH and e HH parameters , it was possible to obtain accurate ﬁts to the liq - uid structure of these two hydrocarbons and reasonable ﬁts to their enthalpies of vaporization . The four LJ parameters that gave the best ﬁt to this collection of experimental values are listed in Table II . The torsional potential described by Eq . ~ 13 ! requires a barrier height e to be speciﬁed for each of three different types of dihedral angles : H – C – C – H , C – C – C – H , and C – C – C – C . The value of e HCCH was determined by ﬁtting to the experimental barrier of 2 . 9 kcal / mol for dihedral - angle rotation in ethane . 38 The values of e CCCH and e CCCC were chosen to reproduce the 3 . 4 kcal / mol torsional barrier in propane , 39 and the 0 . 90 kcal / mol energy difference between the anti and gauche forms of butane , 40 respectively . The re - sulting values of e i CC j are given in Table II . IV . RESULTS In characterizing the potential , we have chosen to com - pare the results to experiment , and to those produced by the REBO potential . There are certainly many other hydrocarbon potentials , many of which do an excellent job of predicting the physical properties of condensed - phase hydrocarbons . 3 – 10 In fact , most perform better than the cur - rent potential . But the AIREBO potential was developed with the aim of applying it in situations where reactivity is crucial . Thus it is important to compare the potential to an - other reactive potential , of which the REBO model is cur - rently the most widely used . A . Diamond and graphite The properties of solid diamond as simulated by both REBO and AIREBO are summarized in Table III . For a net - work solid such as diamond , the dispersion forces acting between nonbonded atoms are universally attractive . When LJ interactions are included in the AIREBO model without modiﬁcation of the REBO parameters , this causes a slight contraction in crystal lattice parameters . Consequently , the AIREBO model predicts an equilibrium C – C bond length for diamond that is shorter than the REBO and experimental values by 0 . 004 Å . The torsional potential does not affect the diamond structure , because all dihedral angles are either gauche or anti . Elastic constants ~ obtained by ﬁnite difference at 298 K ! are also slightly altered by the introduction of LJ interac - tions . At the equilibrium geometry , the increased compres - sive LJ forces are balanced by increased tensile covalent - bonding forces , leading to slightly stiffer force constants and slightly larger elastic constants . Because the elastic constants TABLE II . Parameters for the AIREBO potential . All values except for e ij , s ij , and e i CC j are unchanged from the original REBO potential . a Parameter Value Eqn . CC CH HH Q ij ~ Å ! 0 . 313 460 0 . 340 776 0 . 370 471 A3 a ij ( Å 2 1 ) 4 . 746 5391 4 . 102 5498 3 . 536 2986 A3 A ij ~ eV ! 10 953 . 544 149 . 940 99 32 . 817 356 A3 B ij ( 1 ) ~ eV ! 12 388 . 792 32 . 355 187 29 . 632 593 A7 B ij ( 2 ) ~ eV ! 17 . 567 065 ﬂ ﬂ A7 B ij ( 3 ) ~ eV ! 30 . 714 932 ﬂ ﬂ A7 b ij ( 1 ) ( Å 2 1 ) 4 . 720 4523 1 . 434 4581 1 . 715 8922 A7 b ij ( 2 ) ( Å 2 1 ) 1 . 433 2132 ﬂ ﬂ A7 b ij ( 3 ) ( Å 2 1 ) 1 . 382 6913 ﬂ ﬂ A7 r ij ~ Å ! ﬂ 1 . 09 0 . 7415 887 A14 e ij ~ eV ! 0 . 002 84 A e CC e HH 0 . 001 50 A22 s ij ~ Å ! 3 . 40 12 ( s CC 1 s HH ) 2 . 65 A22 e i CC j ~ eV ! 0 . 3079 0 . 1787 0 . 1250 A28 a Reference 18 . TABLE III . Structural , mechanical , and energetic properties of diamond . All REBO properties have been recalculated by the current authors . Property REBO AIREBO Experiment r CC ~ Å ! 1 . 544 1 . 540 1 . 5445 a c 11 ~ GPa ! 1070 b 1120 ~ 30 ! 1079 ~ 5 ! c c 12 ~ GPa ! 120 b 130 ~ 20 ! 124 ~ 5 ! c c 44 ~ GPa ! 720 b 770 ~ 20 ! 578 ~ 2 ! c Bond energy ~ kcal / mol ! 169 . 0 171 . 1 170 d D f H 298 ~ kcal / mol ! 0 . 57 0 . 55 0 . 454 a Vacancy formation E ~ eV ! 7 . 2 7 . 0 7 . 2 e a Reference 62 . b Reference 18 ~ and independently veriﬁed by the current authors ! . c Reference 63 . d Reference 64 . e Reference 43 . 6477 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons of diamond were used explicitly in ﬁtting the parameters of the original REBO potential , 18 the agreement with experi - ment is slightly worse for AIREBO . The overall ﬁt is still quite good . Both potentials correctly indicate that diamond is slightly less stable than graphite , as indicated by the positive heats of formation . Both potentials also predict a bond en - ergy ~ atomization energy ! at 298 K that is within approxi - mately 1 kcal / mol of the experimental value of 170 kcal / mol . The properties of graphite , summarized in Table IV , demonstrate the same trends as were observed in diamond . The presence of attractive dispersion interactions shortens the C – C bonds , in this case by 0 . 02 Å . On the other hand , the LJ potential gives the AIREBO model the capability to model the interaction between the graphite layers , which was completely absent in the REBO potential model . The inter - layer separation of r l 5 3 . 354 Å was ﬁt to the experimental value in determining the LJ parameters . Once again , the elastic constants that depend on covalent bonding interactions are made somewhat stiffer by the intro - duction of LJ interactions . But elastic constants involving out - of - plane interactions now match experiment quite well . These elastic constants are undeﬁned in the REBO model . Overall , both empirical potentials do quite well in reproduc - ing the experimental elastic constants of diamond and graph - ite when compared to ﬁrst - principles techniques . 41 , 42 The sublimation enthalpy for graphite is near the experi - mental value of 171 . 9 kcal / mol for both models . In addition , the AIREBO model successfully predicts that the hexagonal form of graphite ~ ABAB stacking ! is more stable than the rhombohedral form ~ ABCABC ! , although the energy differ - ence is substantially smaller than that observed experimen - tally . The central feature of the AIREBO model , as with the REBO model , is its ability to model chemical reactions in an empirical manner . Because the new terms describing disper - sion , torsion , and intermolecular repulsion represent small corrections to the energy for the bulk solid phases that the REBO potential was designed for , the bonding energies re - main largely unchanged . Several representative examples are listed in Tables III and IV . In addition to the bond energy quoted above , the vacancy formation energy in diamond is also given accurately by both models . This value is calcu - lated to be 7 . 0 eV with the AIREBO model , slighty changed from the 7 . 2 eV predicted by the REBO model . The value predicted by density functional theory is also 7 . 2 eV . 43 ~ The vacancy formation energy differs from the bond energy of the solid because it takes into account the relaxation of the solid following vacancy formation . ! For graphite , the va - cancy formation energy is 7 . 7 eV under AIREBO , 7 . 5 eV under REBO , and 7 . 6 eV by density functional theory . 44 B . Hydrocarbons Although it does a respectable job of modeling extended solids such as diamond and graphite , the AIREBO potential was developed with molecular systems in mind . In particu - lar , the goal was to obtain a potential that could be used for simulations of reactions in condensed - phase hydrocarbon systems , including liquids , polymers , and self - assembled monolayers . Consequently , the structural and energetic prop - erties of several hydrocarbon liquids have been examined . The liquid - state properties were all calculated using mo - lecular dynamics simulations with 128 molecules , with LJ interactions terminated beyond 3 s . Appropriate long - range corrections were applied to the energy to account for the cutoffs . 45 The equations of motion were integrated with the velocity Verlet integrator and a simulation timestep of 0 . 5 fs . A generalized Langevin thermostat 46 was used to control the temperature . The pressure was maintained at 1 bar using a Berendsen - style barostat . 47 One sensitive test of the dispersion and intermolecular repulsions is the pair correlation function of the liquid . The pair correlation functions g CC ( r ) for methane ~ at 92 K ! and ethane ~ at 105 K and 181 K ! that result from 100 ps of simulation are shown in Figs . 2 and 3 . The structures of methane at 92 K and ethane at 181 K were used in ﬁtting the AIREBO model parameters , and the model is able to repro - duce the experimental pair correlation functions 48 , 49 quite ac - curately . The REBO model , on the other hand , generates liquids that are largely unstructured , with too many intermo - lecular pairs at close distances . This is due to the lack of TABLE IV . Structural , mechanical , and energetic properties of graphite . Property REBO AIREBO Experiment r CC ~ Å ! 1 . 420 1 . 396 1 . 415 a r l ~ Å ! ﬂ 3 . 354 3 . 354 a c 11 ~ GPa ! 1060 b 1150 1060 ~ 20 ! c c 12 ~ GPa ! 150 b 150 180 ~ 20 ! c c 13 ~ GPa ! ﬂ 10 15 ~ 5 ! c c 33 ~ GPa ! ﬂ 40 d 36 . 5 ~ 1 . 0 ! c D sub H 298 ( kcal / mol ) 170 . 2 172 . 3 171 . 9 a D f H 298 ~ rhomb ! ~ kcal / mol ! 0 0 . 0006 0 . 14 ~ 4 ! a Vacancy formation E ~ eV ! 7 . 5 7 . 7 7 . 6 e a Reference 62 . b The experimental r l value was used in evaluating elastic constants for the REBO model . c Reference 65 . d c 33 5 40 GPa at equilibrium geometry , 36 GPa at experimental geometry . e Reference 44 . FIG . 2 . Carbon – carbon pair correlation function g CC ( r ) for liquid methane at 92 K . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 48 ! , the AIREBO model , and the REBO model . 6478 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison nonbonded interactions in the REBO potential , and was one of the prime motivations for the current work . The structure of liquid ethane is correct not only at the 181 K temperature ~ near boiling ! where the model was pa - rametrized , but also at 105 K ~ near freezing ! , as shown in the upper curve of Fig . 3 . This is an indication that the potential is transferable across a variety of conditions . The structure of liquid alkanes not included in the ﬁtting procedure is also well reproduced by the AIREBO model . Figures 4 , 5 , and 6 show the structure of propane , butane , and neopentane at various temperatures . Because each of these molecules contain nonequivalent carbon atoms , the ex - perimental x - ray results 50 – 52 are reported as a combined pair correlation function G d , which is not identical to the atom – atom pair correlation function g CC that is usually calculated from simulation . The g CC pair correlation functions calcu - lated here have been converted to G d functions for propane , butane , and neopentane , following Narten . 52 The difference between g CC and G d is small , but not insigniﬁcant , for bu - tane and neopentane . Nonetheless , the G d ( r ) pair correlation functions may still be interpreted as a distribution of inter - molecular C – C distances . The structure of each of the alkanes is largely satisfac - tory . The peak locations are accurate , with the AIREBO model generating liquids that are slightly too structured at high temperatures . In propane ~ Fig . 4 ! , the shoulder near 3 . 4 Å is absent in the simulation results . This peak indicates the presence of C – C pairs that are closer than the distance of closest intermolecular approach in each of the other hydro - carbon ﬂuids studied , with the exception of benzene . The origin of this peak is not discussed in the experimental study , but is thought to be an artifact . 53 For liquid butane ~ Fig . 5 ! , the C1 – C4 intramolecular separations are included in the G d ( r ) curve , as in the experi - mental data analysis . 51 The gauche conformer is responsible for the peak near 3 . 1 Å , while the anti conformer gives sepa - rations near 4 . 0 Å , coincident with the closest intermolecular interactions . The AIREBO model predicts a smaller peak at FIG . 3 . Carbon – carbon pair correlation function g CC ( r ) for liquid ethane at 105 K ~ top ! and 181 K ~ bottom ! . The 181 K results have been displaced by 2 units along the vertical . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 49 ! , the AIREBO model , and the REBO model . FIG . 4 . Distinct intermolecular pair correlation function G d ( r ) for liquid propane at 92 K ~ top ! and 228 K ~ bottom ! . The 228 K results have been displaced by 2 units along the vertical . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 50 ! and the AIREBO model . FIG . 5 . Distinct intermolecular pair correlation function G d ( r ) for liquid butane at 140 K ~ top ! and 267 K ~ bottom ! . The 267 K results have been displaced by 2 units along the vertical . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 51 ! and the AIREBO model . FIG . 6 . Distinct intermolecular pair correlation function G d for liquid neo - pentate at 256 K ~ top ! and 423 K ~ bottom ! . The 423 K results have been displaced by 2 units along the vertical . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 52 ! and the AIREBO model . 6479 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons 3 . 1 Å than is seen experimentally , indicating that extended trans form is sampled more frequently in the simulation than in experiment . For neopentane ~ Fig . 6 ! , the agreement is good at 256 K , and somewhat too structured at 423 K . The simulations do not reproduce the oscillatory nature of the experimental data , which may represent Fourier artifacts from the experimental data treatment . The peak near 4 Å is thought to be signiﬁ - cant , however , and appears as a very weak shoulder in the simulation results . Two unsaturated liquid hydrocarbons have been exam - ined as well . Figure 7 shows the g CC pair correlation func - tions for ethylene at 106 K that result from both simulation and experiment . 54 The simulated liquid here is less ordered than the real ﬂuid , with little structure evident beyond the second solvation shell . The results for benzene ~ Fig . 8 ! are similar : accurate locations for the multiple peaks in the ﬁrst - neighbor shell , but less structure than the experimental data 55 beyond the second shell . Energetic properties of liquid hydrocarbons have been calculated also . The enthalpy of vaporization , D vap H , is cal - culated from the difference in internal energy for a single molecule in the gas and liquid phases at the speciﬁed tem - perature , D vap H 5 E gas 2 1 N E liq 1 RT . ~ 19 ! The enthalpies of vaporization of liquid methane and liquid ethane at their respective boiling points are reproduced satisfactorily ~ to within several tenths of a kcal / mol ! , because these properties were used explicitly in the ﬁtting procedure . However , Table V demonstrates that the enthalpies of other hydrocarbon liquids are predicted equally well . Due to the lack of intermolecular interactions in the REBO potential , that model predicts liquid - state energies that are essentially no different from the gas - phase energies , giving D vap H ’ RT for all molecular liquids . The observed densities of several hydrocarbon liquids under 1 bar pressure are listed in Table VI . These include each of the liquids and state points examined in Figs . 2 through 7 , including several liquids at more than one tem - perature . The average error in the density is 6 . 7 % . This is reasonable , especially given that the current model makes use of only four LJ parameters to control intermolecular in - teractions . Density errors beneath 5 % can be obtained by increasing the number of LJ parameters . 10 , 56 , 57 Errors as low as 1 % can be achieved by force ﬁelds intended for use on speciﬁc sets of molecules , such as linear alkanes . 8 , 9 But the LJ parameters used in these models would not be expected to be transferable to other classes of hydrocarbons or carbon FIG . 7 . Carbon – carbon pair correlation function g CC for liquid ethylene at 106 K . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 54 ! and the AIREBO model . FIG . 8 . Carbon – carbon pair correlation function g CC for liquid benzene at 298 K . Curves represent results from x - ray diffraction ~ Ref . 55 ! and the AIREBO model . TABLE V . Hydrocarbon properties . All D vap H values correspond to the boiling point of the liquid . Property AIREBO Expt . Enthalpies of vaporization ~ kcal / mol ! : Methane ~ 111 . 65 K ! 2 . 3 2 . 0 a Ethane ~ 184 . 55 K ! 3 . 7 3 . 5 a Propane ~ 231 . 05 K ! 5 . 0 4 . 5 a Butane ~ 272 . 65 K ! 5 . 2 5 . 4 a Conformational energy differences ~ kcal / mol ! : Ethane D E ‡ 2 . 9 2 . 9 b Propane D E ‡ 3 . 4 3 . 4 c n - Butane D E ~ gauche - anti ! 0 . 9 0 . 9 d n - Butane D E ‡ ~ synclinal - anti ! 3 . 8 3 . 6 d n - Butane D E ‡ ~ syn - anti ! 7 . 5 5 . 25 e 2 - Butene D E ~ cis - trans ! 1 . 1 1 . 0 f 2 - Methylpropane D E ‡ 3 . 9 3 . 9 g Methylcyclohexane D E ~ ax - eq ! 2 . 0 1 . 75 h Bond enthalpies ~ kcal / mol ! : H—CH 3 110 . 0 104 . 8 i H—C 2 H 5 98 . 0 100 . 3 H 3 C—CH 3 93 . 0 89 . 8 H 2 C 5 CH 2 172 . 0 172 . 0 a Reference 66 . b Reference 38 . c Reference 39 . d Reference 40 . e Reference 67 . f Reference 68 . g Reference 69 . h Cited in Ref . 70 . i Reference 58 . 6480 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison polytypes . Here we have aimed for a simple representation of the intermolecular interactions that gives reasonable results across a wide range of systems . Gas - phase hydrocarbon molecules are also modeled more accurately than they are with the REBO potential , due to the presence of a dihedral - angle potential . The torsional barriers and conformer energy differences for several small molecules are listed in Table V . The 2 . 9 kcal / mol barrier to rotation in ethane 38 is ﬁt accurately because it was used to determine the e HCCH parameter used in Eq . ~ 13 ! . Similarly , the 3 . 4 kcal / mol barrier in propane 39 and the 0 . 9 kcal / mol energy difference 40 between the gauche and anti forms of n - butane were used to determine e CCCH and e CCCC . The bar - rier heights in butane were not used in the ﬁtting procedure , however , and are accurately reproduced . Conformational energy differences are listed for several other hydrocarbons in Table V . These include energy differ - ences in more congested single - bond rotations , ring substitu - tions , and geometric isomerism . In each of these cases , the agreement with experiment is within several tenths of a kcal / mol . While certainly not a complete survey of conforma - tional energy differences , this sample suggests that the AIREBO model can be expected to provide reasonable de - scriptions of simple hydrocarbons . As with diamond and graphite , the covalent bonding properties of the model remain largely unperturbed after the introduction of nonbonded interactions . The C – H bond dis - sociation enthalpy at 298 K is 110 kcal / mol in methane and 98 kcal / mol in ethane using the AIREBO model , compared to experimental values of 105 and 100 kcal / mol , respectively . 58 For C – C bonds , AIREBO predicts dissoca - tion enthalpies of 93 kcal / mol in ethane and 172 kcal / mol in ethylene , compared to experimental values 58 of 90 and 172 kcal / mol . In each case , the AIREBO and REBO results differ from experiment by less than 5 kcal / mol . V . DISCUSSION The addition of torsion , dispersion , and nonbonded re - pulsion interactions to the REBO potential via an adaptive method has resulted in a new hydrocarbon potential that is suitable for studying reactivity in molecular condensed phases . The new potential overcomes the limitations of the REBO potential in studying systems with intermolecular in - teractions . In particular , the new potential has been designed for molecular systems such as liquid hydrocarbons and thin ﬁlms . Structural and energetic properties for a variety of small hydrocarbon molecules compare quite well with ex - periment . Further studies on self - assembled monolayers of hydrocarbon materials are also in progress , and are quite encouraging . 59 , 60 The potential performs adequately on systems where the original REBO potential excelled . The density and elastic constants for diamond are off by several percent from the REBO potential , which is itself in good agreement with ex - periment . This indicates that there are systems , such as bulk diamond , for which REBO is still better suited . This is a result of the parametrization procedure , in which it was de - cided to leave as many REBO parameters as possible unal - tered . Presumably a thorough reparametrization of the REBO portions of the potential would be able to correct these deﬁ - ciencies , resulting in a single potential that is appropriate for modeling chemical reactions over the full range of carbon and hydrocarbon systems . Such a reparametrization could also address other issues with both the REBO and AIREBO potentials . Originally , the REBO bonding potential was kept very short - ranged to prevent covalent bonding interactions between nonneighboring atoms . 15 This resulted in an exces - sively short - ranged potential , particularly for interactions with surfaces . 28 While the introduction of LJ terms alleviates some aspects of this problem , the limited range of the cova - lent bonding potential has not been addressed here . Now that a mechanism is in place to handle nonbonded interactions , a reparametrization could include a lengthening of the covalent bonding portion of the REBO potential . Another possible improvement involves an implementa - tion of coordination - dependent LJ parameters . An implemen - tation involving switching functions to smoothly vary the LJ parameters with bonding environment is fairly straightfor - ward , but has not been attempted here . The AIREBO potential is able to reproduce the structure of alkane liquids quite accurately , at a number of different state points . The agreement with experiment is generally quite good , although the high - temperature liquids are some - what too structured . The performance on the two unsaturated hydrocarbons examined , while still reasonable , demonstrates a noticeable lack of long - range order when compared with experiment . This lack of long - ranged structure is quite pos - sibly due to the complete lack of electrostatic interactions in the AIREBO model . These effects can often be ignored in saturated hydrocarbons , but unsaturated systems have non - negligible bond dipoles and polarizabilities . The addition of these electrostatic effects to the AIREBO potential would clearly be useful , not only to improve the accuracy of the potential for unsaturated hydrocarbons , but also to enable reactive simulations of systems containing heteroatoms . We have not undertaken a large - scale survey of hydro - carbon geometries and conformational energy differences , as existing molecular mechanics potentials undoubtedly do a better job of reproducing these properties for most mol - TABLE VI . Liquid hydrocarbon densities , in g / cm 3 . Liquid T ~ K ! AIREBO Expt . a Methane 92 0 . 477 0 . 453 Ethane 105 0 . 610 0 . 634 Ethane 181 0 . 518 0 . 554 Propane 92 0 . 685 0 . 725 Propane 228 0 . 539 0 . 586 Butane 140 0 . 692 0 . 726 Butane 267 0 . 548 0 . 606 Neopentane 256 0 . 601 0 . 633 Neopentane 423 0 . 322 0 . 364 Ethylene 106 0 . 631 0 . 655 Benzene 298 0 . 784 0 . 874 a Reference 58 . 6481 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons ecules . The intent was to introduce a realistic , reactive po - tential that would be reasonably accurate for simple hydro - carbons . Modern molecular mechanics potentials , for example , are typically accurate to within thousandths of an angstrom in bond lengths , where the current potential is ac - curate only to hundredths of an angstrom . With only three parameters devoted to describing torsional interactions and four to the LJ interactions , rather than dozens of each in molecular mechanics force ﬁelds , the AIREBO model will most likely fail in some manner for many exotic hydrocar - bons . Nonetheless , it performs reasonably over a fairly broad range of simple hydrocarbon species , and maintains as its principal advantage an ability to treat bond dissocation and formation . Although the AIREBO potential has been developed for cases where reactivity is relevant , the results presented here have concentrated on the structural and energetic properties of a variety of systems . This is necessary to guarantee that the wide range of nonreactive properties typically required of a simulation potential are satisﬁed , in addition to the reactiv - ity . While no dynamic properties have been considered here , these will be consequences of the potential energy surface predicted by the model . Furthermore , as indicated by the results above , the LJ and torsion interactions are only small perturbations on the unmodiﬁed covalent bonding portions of the potential , and alter their results only slightly . Thus , the bond energies and barriers presented in Tables III , IV and V , together with the prior successes of the predecessor REBO model , 15 , 17 , 20 – 27 provide some assurance that the model will provide for realistic bond dissociation and formation dynam - ics . Nonetheless , dynamic simulations involving bond disso - ciation and formation have not been presented here , and are left to future studies . In summary , it is expected that the new AIREBO poten - tial should prove to be a useful addition to the computational chemist’s arsenal , complementary to both the original REBO and traditional molecular mechanics potentials . For carbon or hydrocarbon systems in which chemical reactions are of interest , and which require nonbonded interactions to be treated , the AIREBO potential provides an effective and ac - curate method of performing molecular simulations . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Ofﬁce of Naval Re - search ~ # N00014 - 99 - WR - 20002 ! and the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research ~ # NMIPR - 99 - 5203042 ! . We gratefully acknowledge Don Brenner for supplying the parameter val - ues and computer program implementation of his REBO model prior to publication . APPENDIX The AIREBO potential can be represented by a sum over pairwise interactions , including covalent bonding ~ REBO ! interactions , LJ terms , and torsion interactions : E 5 1 2 ( i ( j (cid:222) i F E ij REBO 1 E ij LJ 1 ( k (cid:222) i , j ( l (cid:222) i , j , k E kijl tors G . ~ A1 ! The REBO interaction is based on the form proposed by Tersoff , 1 E ij REBO 5 V ij R 1 b ij V ij A , ~ A2 ! in which repulsive and attractive contributions are combined in a ratio determined by the bonding term b ij . The repulsive term has the form used by Brenner , 18 V ij R 5 w ij ~ r ij ! F 1 1 Q ij r ij G A ij e 2 a ij r ij , ~ A3 ! where the parameters Q ij , A ij , and a ij depend on the atom types i and j . Values for these and all other potential param - eters are given in Table II . The w ij term is a bond - weighting factor , w ij ~ r ij ! 5 S 8 ~ t c ~ r ij ! ! , ~ A4 ! that switches off the REBO interactions when the atom pairs exceed typical bonding distances . The switching function takes the form S 8 ~ t ! 5 Q ~ 2 t ! 1 Q ~ t ! Q ~ 1 2 t ! 12 @ 1 1 cos ~ p t ! # , ~ A5 ! where the switching region for each type of bond is given by a scaling function , t c ~ r ij ! 5 r ij 2 r ij min r ij max 2 r ij min . ~ A6 ! The attractive pair interaction in Eq . ~ A2 ! is given by a triple exponential , V ij A 52 w ij ~ r ij ! ( n 5 1 3 B ij ( n ) e 2 b ij ( n ) r ij , ~ A7 ! which is switched off smoothly for nonshort - ranged interac - tions through the use of the bond weight . The b ij term in Eq . ~ A2 ! speciﬁes the ‘‘bond order’’ for the interaction between atoms i and j , b ij 5 12 @ p ij sp 1 p ji sp # 1 p ij rc 1 p ij dh . ~ A8 ! This term is only roughly equivalent to the usual chemical concept of a bond order , and is simply a means of modifying the strength of a bond due to changes in the local environ - ment . The b ij term is larger for stronger bonds . Each of the terms that contribute to b ij is a many - body term that depends on the bonding environment surrounding atoms i and j . The principal contribution to b ij is the cova - lent bond interaction , given by the terms p ij sp and p ji sp . p ij sp 5 F 1 1 ( k (cid:222) i , j w ik ~ r ik ! g i ~ cos u jik ! e l jik 1 P ij G 2 1 / 2 . ~ A9 ! Note that p ij sp is not necessarily equal to p ji sp . The p ij sp term depends on the bond angles u jik between the r ji vector and the vectors r ki to any other neighboring atoms . The penalty function g i imposes a cost on bonds that are too close to one another . Its functional form is a ﬁfth - order spline . When the central atom is a carbon , the spline also depends on the local coordination number , deﬁned as the sum of the carbon - only and hydrogen - only coordination numbers , 6482 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison N ij 5 N ij C 1 N ij H , ~ A10 ! where N ij C 5 S ( k (cid:222) i d k C w ik ~ r ik ! D 2 d j C w ij ~ r ij ! , ~ A11 ! counts a carbon - only coordination number , with d ij repre - senting a Kronecker delta . The hydrogen - only coordination number N ij H is deﬁned similarly . ~ Note that the coordination number of atom i , in the context of the i – j bond , is deﬁned so as to exclude the neighbor j from the count . ! Using this coordination number , the angle - bending penalty function g i switches smoothly between a form g C ( 1 ) appropriate for cova - lent compounds with low coordination and another form g C ( 2 ) suitable for highly coordinated bulk materials , g C ~ cos u jik ! 5 g C ( 1 ) ~ cos u jik ! 1 S 8 ~ t N ~ N ij ! ! @ g C ( 2 ) ~ cos u jik ! 2 g C ( 1 ) ~ cos u jik ! # . ~ A12 ! At intermediate values of N , the switching function S 8 ( t N ) provides for a smooth transition , with S 8 given by Eq . ~ A5 ! , and the scaling function t N given by t N ~ N ij ! 5 N ij 2 N ij min N ij max 2 N ij min . ~ A13 ! The coefﬁcients of the g i ﬁfth - order splines are determined by the values of the function and its ﬁrst two derivatives speciﬁed at the interpolation points listed in Table VII . The two remaining terms in Eq . ~ A9 ! are small correc - tion factors . The e l jik term is added to improve the potential energy surface for abstraction of hydrogen atoms from hy - drocarbons , with l jik 5 4 d i H @ ~ d k H r HH 1 d k C r CH 2 r ik ! 2 ~ d j H r HH 1 d j C r CH 2 r ij ! # , ~ A14 ! where d ij represents the Kronecker delta for atom types i and j . The P ij term is a two - dimensional cubic spline 61 in N ij C and N ij H , whose coefﬁcients are chosen to reproduce the val - ues of P ij and its derivatives at the interpolation points listed in Table VIII . These terms are included in the REBO model to give accurate bond energies for small hydrocarbons . Al - though most REBO parameters were not modiﬁed in devel - oping the AIREBO model , the P ij values were modiﬁed at two points to counteract the additional torsion energies in the AIREBO potential for unsaturated systems such as ethylene and graphite . In addition to the covalent bonding interactions given by Eq . ~ A9 ! , the REBO potential also includes contributions to the bond order from radical and conjugation effects . These enter the potential through the p ij rc term , which is a three - dimensional cubic spline 61 in the variables N ij , N ji , and N ij conj . The indices N ij and N ji are the coordination numbers deﬁned in Eq . ~ A10 ! , and N ij conj is a local measure of conju - gation in the i – j bond , N ij conj 5 1 1 F ( k (cid:222) i , j d k C w ik ~ r ik ! S 8 ~ t conj ~ N ki ! ! G 2 1 F ( l (cid:222) i , j d l C w jl ~ r jl ! S 8 ~ t conj ~ N lj ! ! G 2 , ~ A15 ! with t conj specifying the range of coordination numbers under which a bond is assumed to be part of a radical or conjugated network : t conj ~ N ! 5 N 2 N min N max 2 N min . ~ A16 ! The N ij conj variable , which is unity for nonconjugated bonds and can be as high as nine in polyaromatic com - pounds , is an empirical measure of unsaturation that is based entirely on coordination . The interpolation points for the three - dimensional spline p ij rc are provided in Table IX . TABLE VII . Interpolation points for the quintic spline g i ( cos u ) @ cf . Eqs . ~ A9 ! and ~ A12 ! # . cos u g i ] g i / ] ( cos u ) ] 2 g i / ] ( cos u ) 2 g C ( 1 ) : 2 1 2 0 . 010 000 0 . 104 000 0 . 000 000 @ Eq . ~ A12 ! # 2 23 0 . 028 207 0 . 131 443 0 . 140 229 2 12 0 . 052 804 0 . 170 000 0 . 370 000 2 13 0 . 097 321 0 . 400 000 1 . 98 000 1 1 . 00 000 2 . 834 57 10 . 2647 g C ( 2 ) : 2 1 2 0 . 0100 00 0 . 104 000 0 . 000 000 @ Eq . ~ A12 ! # 2 23 0 . 028 207 0 . 131 443 0 . 140 229 2 12 0 . 052 804 0 . 170 000 0 . 370 000 2 13 0 . 097 321 0 . 400 000 1 . 980 00 1 8 . 000 00 20 . 2436 43 . 9336 g H : 2 1 11 . 2357 0 . 000 000 115 . 115 @ Eq . ~ A9 ! # 2 56 12 . 5953 13 . 8543 32 . 3618 2 12 16 . 8111 8 . 641 23 2 25 . 0617 1 19 . 9918 0 . 333 013 2 0 . 474 189 TABLE VIII . Interpolation points for the bicubic spline P ij ( N i C , N i H ) @ cf . Eq . ~ A9 ! # . All values not listed , and all derivatives , are zero at integral values of N i C and N i H . N ij C N ij H P ij P CC ( N ij C , N ij H ) : 0 2 2 0 . 000 500 0 3 0 . 016 125 1 1 2 0 . 010 960 1 2 0 . 006 326 2 0 2 0 . 027 603 2 1 0 . 003 180 P CH ( N ij C , N ij H ) : 0 1 0 . 209 337 0 2 2 0 . 064 450 0 3 2 0 . 303 928 1 0 0 . 010 000 1 1 2 0 . 125 123 1 2 2 0 . 298 905 2 0 2 0 . 122 042 2 1 2 0 . 300 529 3 0 2 0 . 307 585 6483 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons The remaining contribution to the bond order b ij is p ij dh . This term imposes a penalty for rotation around multiple bonds , p ij dh 5 T ij ~ N ij , N ji , N ij conj ! ( k (cid:222) i , j ( l (cid:222) i , j ~ 1 2 cos 2 v kijl ! 3 w ik 8 ~ r ik ! w jl 8 ~ r jl ! Q ~ sin ~ u jik ! 2 s min ! 3 Q ~ sin ~ u ijl ! 2 s min ! . ~ A17 ! Here T ij is another three - dimensional cubic spline , with in - terpolation points given in Table X . The torsion angle v kijl is deﬁned in the usual way as the angle between the plane deﬁned by the vectors r ik and r ij and that deﬁned by r ij and r jl , TABLE IX . Interpolation points for tricubic spline p ij rc ( N ij , N ji , N conj ) @ cf . Eq . ~ A8 ! # . The function is symmet - ric , so p ji rc ( N ji , N ij , N conj ) 5 p ij rc ( N ij , N ji , N conj ) . Only one of each symmetric pair of interpolation values is listed . All other values and derivatives not listed are zero at integral values of N ij , N ji , and N conj ij . N ij N ji N ij conj p ij rc ] p ij rc / ] N ij ] p ij rc / ] N ji ] p ij rc / ] N conj p CCrc : 0 0 > 3 0 . 004 959 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 . 021 694 0 0 0 1 0 > 2 0 . 004 959 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 . 052 500 0 0 0 1 1 2 2 0 . 002 089 0 0 0 1 1 > 3 2 0 . 008 043 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 . 024 699 0 0 0 2 0 2 2 0 . 005 971 0 0 0 2 0 > 3 0 . 004 959 0 0 0 2 1 1 0 . 004 825 2 0 . 026 250 0 0 2 1 2 0 . 015 000 0 0 0 2 1 3 2 0 . 010 000 0 0 0 2 1 4 2 0 . 011 689 0 0 2 0 . 010 022 2 1 5 2 0 . 013 378 2 0 . 027 188 0 2 0 . 010 022 2 1 6 2 0 . 015 067 2 0 . 027 188 0 0 2 1 > 7 2 0 . 015 067 2 0 . 027 188 0 0 2 2 1 0 . 047 225 0 0 0 2 2 2 0 . 011 000 0 0 0 2 2 3 0 . 019 853 0 0 0 2 2 4 0 . 016 544 0 0 2 0 . 003 309 2 2 5 0 . 013 235 0 0 2 0 . 003 309 2 2 6 0 . 009 926 0 0 2 0 . 003 309 2 2 7 0 . 006 618 0 0 2 0 . 003 309 2 2 8 0 . 003 309 0 0 2 0 . 003 309 3 0 1 2 0 . 099 899 0 0 0 3 0 2 2 0 . 099 899 0 0 0 3 0 > 3 0 . 004 959 0 0 0 3 1 2 2 0 . 062 418 0 0 . 037 545 0 3 1 > 3 2 0 . 062 418 0 0 0 3 2 1 2 0 . 022 355 0 0 0 3 2 > 2 2 0 . 022 355 0 0 . 062 418 0 p CHrc : 1 1 1 2 0 . 050 000 0 0 0 1 1 2 2 0 . 050 000 0 0 0 1 1 3 2 0 . 300 000 0 0 0 1 1 > 4 2 0 . 050 000 0 0 0 2 0 > 5 2 0 . 004 524 0 0 0 2 1 2 2 0 . 250 000 0 0 0 2 1 3 2 0 . 250 000 0 0 0 3 1 1 2 0 . 100 000 0 0 0 3 1 2 2 0 . 125 000 0 0 0 3 1 3 2 0 . 125 000 0 0 0 3 1 > 4 2 0 . 100 000 0 0 0 p HHrc : 1 1 1 0 . 124 916 0 0 0 TABLE X . Interpolation points for the tricubic spline T ij ( N ij , N ji , N conj ) @ cf . Eq . ~ A17 ! # . Values not listed , and all derivatives , are zero at integral values of N ij , N ji , and N ij conj . N ij N ji N ij conj T ij 2 2 1 2 0 . 035 140 2 2 > 2 2 0 . 004 048 6484 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison cos v kijl 5 r ji 3 r ik u r ji 3 r ik u (cid:149) r ij 3 r jl u r ij 3 r jl u . ~ A18 ! The bond - weighting function w ij 8 ~ r ij ! 5 S 8 ~ t c 8 ~ r ij ! ! , ~ A19 ! used in Eq . ~ A17 ! differs slightly from that deﬁned in Eq . ~ A4 ! , through a different scaling function t c 8 : t c 8 ~ r ij ! 5 r ij 2 r ij min r ij max 8 2 r ij min . ~ A20 ! The LJ and torsional contributions to the energy are de - scribed in detail in the text . However , for completeness , the equations and parameters are reproduced here . The LJ con - tribution to the i – j pair energy , E ij LJ 5 S ~ t r ~ r ij ! ! S ~ t b ~ b ij * ! ! C ij V ij LJ ~ r ij ! 1 @ 1 2 S ~ t r ~ r ij ! ! # C ij V ij LJ ~ r ij ! , ~ A21 ! includes the traditional LJ term V ij LJ ~ r ij ! 5 4 e ij F S s ij r ij D 12 2 S s ij r ij D 6 G , ~ A22 ! modiﬁed by several sets of switching functions . The switch - ing function S ( t ) differs in form from that of Eq . ~ A5 ! , S ~ t ! 5 Q ~ 2 t ! 1 Q ~ t ! Q ~ 1 2 t ! @ 1 2 t 2 ~ 3 2 2 t ! # . ~ A23 ! Both have continuous ﬁrst derivatives at the switching region boundaries . Below a certain separation r ij LJ max , the magnitude of the LJ term depends on the bonding environment . The gradual exclusion of LJ interactions as r ij changes is controlled by the t r scaling function , t r ~ r ij ! 5 r ij 2 r ij LJ min r ij LJ max 2 r ij LJ min . ~ A24 ! At intramolecular distances , the LJ interaction is in - cluded only if there is no signiﬁcant bonding interaction be - tween the two atoms , as speciﬁed by the t b switch , t b ~ b ij ! 5 b ij 2 b ij min b ij max 2 b ij min , ~ A25 ! and if the atoms i and j are not connected by two or fewer intermediate atoms . This latter switch is controlled by bond weights , C ij 5 1 2 max $ w ij ~ r ij ! , w ik ~ r ik ! w kj ~ r kj ! , ; k w ik ~ r ik ! w kl ~ r kl ! w lj ~ r lj ! , ; k , l % . ~ A26 ! The torsional potential for the dihedral angle determined by atoms i , j , k , and l is controlled by the term E kijl tors 5 w ki ~ r ki ! w ij ~ r ij ! w jl ~ r jl ! V tors ~ v kijl ! , ~ A27 ! where V tors ~ v kijl ! 5 256 405 e kijl cos 10 ~ v kijl / 2 ! 2 1 10 e kijl . ~ A28 ! 1 J . Tersoff , Phys . Rev . B 37 , 6991 ~ 1988 ! . 2 J . Tersoff , Phys . Rev . B 39 , 5566 ~ 1989 ! . 3 W . L . Jorgensen , J . D . Madura , and C . J . Swenson , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 106 , 6638 ~ 1984 ! . 4 N . L . Allinger , K . Chen , and J . - H . Lii , J . Comput . Chem . 17 , 642 ~ 1996 ! . 5 W . L . Jorgensen , D . S . Maxwell , and J . Tirado - Rives , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 118 , 11225 ~ 1996 ! . 6 W . D . Cornell , P . Cieplak , C . Bayly , I . R . Gould , K . M . Merz , D . M . Ferguson , D . C . Spellmeyer , T . Fox , J . W . Caldwell , and P . A . Kollman , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 117 , 5179 ~ 1995 ! . 7 T . A . Halgren , J . Comput . Chem . 17 , 490 ~ 1996 ! . 8 S . K . Nath , F . A . Escobedo , and J . J . de Pablo , J . Chem . Phys . 108 , 9905 ~ 1998 ! . 9 M . G . Martin and J . I . Siepmann , J . Phys . Chem . B 102 , 2569 ~ 1998 ! . 10 H . Sun , J . Phys . Chem . B 102 , 7338 ~ 1998 ! . 11 J . Tersoff , Phys . Rev . Lett . 61 , 2879 ~ 1988 ! . 12 D . W . Brenner , Mater . Res . Soc . Symp . Proc . 141 , 59 ~ 1989 ! . 13 M . V . R . Murty and H . A . Atwater , Phys . Rev . B 51 , 4889 ~ 1995 ! . 14 A . J . Dyson and P . V . Smith , Surf . Sci . 355 , 140 ~ 1996 ! . 15 D . W . Brenner , Phys . Rev . B 42 , 9458 ~ 1990 ! . 16 D . W . Brenner , Phys . Rev . B 46 , 1948 ~ 1992 ! . 17 D . W . Brenner , J . A . Harrison , C . T . White , and R . J . Colton , Thin Solid Films 206 , 220 ~ 1991 ! . 18 D . W . Brenner , S . B . Sinnott , and J . A . Harrison ~ unpublished ! . 19 J . A . Harrison , S . J . Stuart , D . H . Robertson , and C . T . White , J . Phys . Chem . B 101 , 9682 ~ 1997 ! . 20 S . B . Sinnott , R . J . Colton , C . T . White , O . A . Shendeova , D . W . Brenner , and J . A . Harrison , J . Vac . Sci . Technol . A 15 , 936 ~ 1997 ! . 21 J . A . Harrison , C . T . White , R . J . Colton , and D . W . Brenner , Phys . Rev . B 46 , 9700 ~ 1992 ! . 22 J . A . Harrison , R . J . Colton , C . T . White , and D . W . Brenner , Wear 168 , 127 ~ 1993 ! . 23 J . A . Harrison , C . T . White , R . J . Colton , and D . W . Brenner , J . Phys . Chem . 97 , 6573 ~ 1993 ! . 24 J . A . Harrison and D . W . Brenner , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 116 , 10399 ~ 1994 ! . 25 J . A . Harrison , C . T . White , R . J . Colton , and D . W . Brenner , Thin Solid Films 260 , 205 ~ 1995 ! . 26 M . D . Perry and J . A . Harrison , Langmuir 12 , 4552 ~ 1996 ! . 27 J . A . Harrison , S . J . Stuart , and D . W . Brenner , in Handbook of Micro / Nano Tribology , 2nd ed . , edited by B . Bhushan ~ CRC , New York , 1999 ! . 28 P . de Sainte Claire , K . Song , W . L . Hase , and D . W . Brenner , J . Chem . Phys . 100 , 1761 ~ 1996 ! . 29 R . Smith and K . Beardmore , Thin Solid Films 272 , 255 ~ 1996 ! . 30 M . R . Nyden , T . R . Coley , and S . Mumby , Polym . Eng . Sci . 37 , 1496 ~ 1997 ! . 31 J . Che , T . C¸ag˘in , and W . A . Goddard III , Theor . Chem . Acc . 102 , 346 ~ 1999 ! . 32 S . J . Stuart and B . J . Berne , J . Phys . Chem . 100 , 11934 ~ 1996 ! . 33 M . D . Perry and J . A . Harrison , J . Phys . Chem . B 101 , 1364 ~ 1997 ! . 34 A . Warshel and S . Lifson , J . Chem . Phys . 53 , 582 ~ 1970 ! . 35 W . L . Jorgensen , J . Phys . Chem . 87 , 5304 ~ 1983 ! . 36 E . Burgos , E . Halac , and H . Bonadeo , Chem . Phys . Lett . 298 , 273 ~ 1998 ! . 37 G . H . Hudson and J . C . McCoubrey , Trans . Faraday Soc . 56 , 761 ~ 1959 ! . 38 E . Hirota , Y . Endo , S . Saito , and J . L . Duncan , J . Mol . Spectrosc . 89 , 285 ~ 1981 ! . 39 J . P . Lowe , Prog . Phys . Org . Chem . 6 , 1 ~ 1968 ! . 40 D . A . C . Compton , S . Montero , and W . F . Murphy , J . Phys . Chem . 84 , 3587 ~ 1980 ! . 41 J . C . Boettger , Phys . Rev . B 55 , 11202 ~ 1997 ! . 42 A . Fukumoto , Phys . Rev . B 42 , 7462 ~ 1990 ! . 43 J . Bernholc , A . Antonelli , T . M . Del Sole , Y . Bar - Yam , and S . T . Pan - telides , Phys . Rev . Lett . 61 , 2689 ~ 1988 ! . 44 E . Kaxiras and K . C . Pandey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 61 , 2693 ~ 1988 ! . 45 M . P . Allen and D . J . Tildesley , Computer Simulation of Liquids ~ Oxford University Press , London , 1987 ! . 46 S . A . Adelman and J . D . Doll , J . Chem . Phys . 64 , 2375 ~ 1976 ! . 47 H . J . C . Berendsen , J . P . M . Postma , W . F . van Gunsteren , A . Di Nola , and J . R . Haak , J . Chem . Phys . 81 , 3684 ~ 1984 ! . 48 A . Habenschuss , E . Johnson , and A . H . Narten , J . Chem . Phys . 74 , 5234 ~ 1981 ! . 49 S . I . Sandler , M . G . Lombardo , D . S . - M . Wong , A . Habenschuss , and A . H . Narten , Chem . Phys . 77 , 2144 ~ 1982 ! . 50 A . Habenschuss and A . H . Narten , J . Chem . Phys . 85 , 6022 ~ 1986 ! . 6485 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Reactive potential for hydrocarbons 51 A . Habenschuss and A . H . Narten , J . Chem . Phys . 91 , 4299 ~ 1989 ! . 52 A . H . Narten , J . Chem . Phys . 70 , 299 ~ 1979 ! . 53 A . Habenschuss ~ private communication ! . 54 A . H . Narten and A . Habenschuss , J . Phys . Chem . 75 , 3073 ~ 1981 ! . 55 A . H . Narten , J . Chem . Phys . 67 , 2102 ~ 1977 ! . 56 G . Kaminski , E . M . Duffy , T . Matsui , and W . L . Jorgensen , J . Phys . Chem . 98 , 13077 ~ 1994 ! . 57 J . Nagy , D . F . Weaver , and V . H . Smith , Jr . , J . Phys . Chem . 99 , 8058 ~ 1995 ! . 58 CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics , edited by D . R . Lide ~ Chemical Rubber , Boca Raton , 1990 ! . 59 A . B . Tutein , S . J . Stuart , and J . A . Harrison , J . Phys . Chem . B 103 , 11357 ~ 1999 ! . 60 A . B . Tutein , S . J . Stuart , and J . A . Harrison , Langmuir 16 , 291 ~ 2000 ! . 61 W . H . Press , B . P . Flannery , S . A . Teukolsky , and W . T . Vetterling , Numerical Recipes ~ Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1986 ! . 62 N . N . Greenwood and A . Earnshaw , Chemistry of the Elements ~ Perga - mon , New York , 1984 ! . 63 H . J . McSkimin and P . Andreatch , Jr . , J . Appl . Phys . 43 , 2944 ~ 1972 ! . 64 Handbook of Carbon , Graphite , Diamond and Fullerenes , edited by H . O . Pierson ~ Noyes Publications , Park Ridge , New Jersey , 1993 ! . 65 O . L . Blakslee , D . G . Proctor , E . J . Seldin , G . B . Spence , and T . Weng , J . Appl . Phys . 41 , 3373 ~ 1970 ! . 66 F . D . Rossini , K . S . Pitzer , R . L . Arnett , R . M . Braun , and G . C . Pimentel , Selected Values of Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Hydrocar - bons and Related Compounds ~ Carnegie , Pittsburgh , 1953 ! . 67 N . L . Allinger , R . S . Grev , B . F . Yates , and H . F . Schaefer III , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 112 , 114 ~ 1990 ! . 68 N . L . Allinger , F . Li , and L . Yan , J . Comput . Chem . 11 , 848 ~ 1990 ! . 69 D . R . Lide , Jr . and D . E . Mann , J . Chem . Phys . 29 , 914 ~ 1958 ! . 70 K . Gundertofte , J . Palm , I . Petterson , and A . Stamvik , J . Comput . Chem . 11 , 200 ~ 1991 ! 6486 J . Chem . Phys . , Vol . 112 , No . 14 , 8 April 2000 Stuart , Tutein , and Harrison