Creative Writing with a Machine in the Loop : Case Studies on Slogans and Stories Elizabeth Clark 1 , Anne Spencer Ross 1 , Chenhao Tan 2 , Yangfeng Ji 1 , & Noah A . Smith 1 1 Paul G . Allen School for Computer Science & Engineering , University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA 2 Department of Computer Science , University of Colorado Boulder , Boulder , CO , USA eaclark7 @ cs . washington . edu , ansross @ cs . washington . edu , chenhao @ chenhaot . com , yangfeng @ cs . washington . edu , nasmith @ cs . washington . edu ABSTRACT As the quality of natural language generated by artifcial intelligence systems improves , writing interfaces can support interventions beyond grammar - checking and spell - checking , such as suggesting content to spark new ideas . To explore the possibility of machine - in - the - loop creative writing , we performed two case studies using two system prototypes , one for short story writing and one for slogan writing . Participants in our studies were asked to write with a machine in the loop or alone ( control condition ) . They assessed their writing and experience through surveys and an open - ended interview . We collected additional assessments of the writing from Amazon Mechanical Turk crowdworkers . Our fndings indicate that participants found the process fun and helpful and could envision use cases for future systems . At the same time , machine suggestions do not necessarily lead to better written artifacts . We therefore suggest novel natural language models and design choices that may better support creative writing . Author Keywords natural language processing ; machine in the loop ; creative writing CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing ! Natural language interfaces ; • Computing methodologies ! Natural language generation ; INTRODUCTION Researchers have made signifcant progress in advancing artifcial intelligence since Turing famously asked “Can machines think ? ” [ 32 ] . Although the focus of artifcial intelligence has been on improving the capabilities of machines , e . g . , through the use of machine learning , we propose a machine - in - the - loop framework , where the goal is to improve the ability of humans , with the machine playing Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IUI’18 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan © 2018 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4945 - 1 / 18 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 a supporting role . 1 Humans are the central actor and have full agency in deciding what to do with machine outputs . Accordingly , machine learning models should be designed to assist humans . This paper explores the possibility of incorporating a machine in the loop of creative writing . The motivation is twofold . First , writers often experience “cognitive inertia , ” a phenomenon known in the writing domain as “writer’s block” [ 11 ] . A collaborator who provides suggestions and points out new directions might help alleviate writer’s block . The new combination of a writer’s own ideas with suggested ideas is a form of psychological creativity [ 3 ] . Second , recent studies show that machines outperform humans in some tasks [ 15 , 24 , 31 ] , including identifying which message will be retweeted more on Twitter . Perhaps a machine - learned algorithm can provide valuable suggestions to writers . We explore the space of designing machine - in - the - loop systems for creative writing and learn insights from user studies that can inform future interface design and research on natural language processing models . Machines can support writers as they edit , structure , and refne their work , as demonstrated by word processors , grammar and spell checkers , version control , or even language or style analysis tools ( such as the Hemingway Editor 2 ) . We focus on systems that assist people by suggesting content as they write and that are designed to inspire creativity throughout the writing process while still leaving writers in control of the fnal written artifact . In particular , we investigate the following questions : • How can we design machine - in - the - loop systems to support diverse writing tasks and processes ? • What effect do these systems have on people’s writing , both as perceived by the writer and by other people ? • What do people want to see in machine - generated suggestions and creative writing support systems ? To answer these questions , we developed two prototype systems to help writers enhance their creativity in two tasks : 1 In contrast , human - in - the - loop machine learning actively includes humans in the process of training machine learning models by asking humans to provide feedback such as labeling diffcult examples or suggesting new features [ 4 , 6 , 9 , 20 ] . 2 http : / / www . hemingwayapp . com DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3172944 . 3172983 Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 329 story writing and slogan writing . These two creative tasks have different goals and require different writing styles . Thus , the systems that assist in these tasks should provide different types of help . We built two system prototypes that use two different models to generate suggestions . We had study participants write with these prototypes and compared their experiences and the quality of their writing to that of participants who did not receive suggestions . This paper discusses the current capabilities of machine - in - the - loop writing systems and suggests improvements both for system interfaces and models . Although providing helpful suggestions is important in a machine - in - the - loop writing system , we leave writers with complete editorial control and the freedom to disregard any unwanted suggestions . Our goal is not to replace human creativity or automate creative writing ; rather , we seek to amplify people’s creativity by providing suggestions that are most useful to them . By offering suggestions as a person writes , the writing process has elements of both collaborative writing and constrained writing tasks . It also provides a versatile setup ; a machine - in - the - loop writing system could be used as an educational tool , a writer’s tool , or for entertainment . MACHINE - IN - THE - LOOP SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS Figure 1 : Machine - in - the - loop system structure : the loop ( i ) is initiated with the person providing context and the machine responding with a suggestion . The person always has control over the fnal result ( ii ) . This paper considers machine - in - the - loop ( MIL ) systems that are composed of a person and a machine working together to create output ( Figure 1 ) . The person and machine are in a loop in which the person provides context and the machine responds with suggestions ( Figure 1 i ) . The person controls the fnal output ( Figure 1 ii ) . 3 Different creative writing tasks have different demands for MIL systems . We consider the following three characteristics for designing MIL systems : interaction structure , interaction initiation , and interaction intrusiveness . We use our story and slogan writing tasks as examples to explain each aspect , as summarized in Table 1 . Interaction Structure Interaction structure can be iterative , where a writer works with the help of a machine to refne a single idea , or additive , where the writer and machine work to add multiple ideas 3 The setup this paper explores does not represent all possible confgurations for writing with a machine . More complex setups might involve the person and the machine working in parallel or the machine directly altering the output in a mixed - initiative fashion . Story writing Slogan writing interaction structure interaction initiation interaction intrusiveness additive push high iterative pull low Table 1 : Characteristics of MIL systems for our story and slogan writing tasks . together . This can be represented as how many times the loop of the person and machine exchanging context and suggestions ( see section “i” in Figure 1 ) is repeated before the person commits to a fnal result . For example , story writing is additive because as a story unfolds , writers ( and machines ) need to introduce new ideas , and these ideas are combined into a fnal story . Slogan writing , by contrast , is a highly iterative process : the loop is repeated for a single phrase or sentence until a fnal slogan is decided upon . Interaction Initiation Interaction initiation refers to how the context - suggestion loop ( see section “i” in Figure 1 ) is triggered . It can follow a push ( automatically initiated ) or pull ( person - initiated ) method of initiation , or a combination of the two . To have breadth of exploration , we implemented the story writing system as a push - style system . At every other sentence , the machine presents a suggestion to the writer . The slogan system uses the pull method for retrieving suggestions . Writers provide a slogan - in - progress and keywords and prompt from the system whenever they want new suggestions . Interaction Intrusiveness Interaction intrusiveness describes the extent to which computer - generated suggestions are ignorable . Although writers can always edit or reject suggestions , some require more attention than others . We designed the story writing system’s suggestions to be highly intrusive . They appear directly in the text box where the person is writing , and the writer must interact with the suggestion ( even if only to delete it entirely ) before moving on in the writing process ( see Figure 2 ) . In the slogan writing system , suggestions have low intrusiveness . Suggestions appear in a separate column from the writing space and require no interaction once they are retrieved ( see Figure 4 ) . RELATED WORK We propose “machine - in - the - loop” in contrast with “human - in - the - loop” machine learning . This concept resonates with “mixed - initiative user interfaces” [ 17 ] . Although Horvitz emphasizes the development of user interfaces in settings where both the human and the computer can drive towards a shared goal ( as opposed to our human - driven setup ) , many of the principles he considers are relevant to this work , including the timing of machine contributions , providing editing capabilities , and understanding the social expectations of collaborators [ 17 ] . As in mixed - initiative interface work , the goal of our work is to explore interaction paradigms and to combine human and computational strengths to enhance human ability [ 1 ] . The mixed - initiative setup has been used for creative tasks such as game design [ 34 ] , and adapting Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 330 our systems to a more complex mixed - initiative setup ( e . g . , dynamically deciding when to offer suggestions and what format of suggestion would be most helpful ) is a promising future direction . Several tools have been developed to provide suggestions to assist people in writing , both within the research community [ 30 , 26 ] and as personal projects [ 27 ] . Swanson and Gordon’s “Say Anything” [ 30 ] provides suggestions for writing short stories by prompting writers with full sentences retrieved from a database of stories scraped from the web after every turn of writing . In “Creative Help” [ 26 ] , writers are offered suggestions as they write stories , but only when they explicitly request them ( i . e . , a pull method of interaction ) . While these systems retrieve their sentences from existing stories , we use natural language generation to provide suggestions . Author Robin Sloan created a sentence completion story - writing assistant tool that suggests the end to a partially - written sentence when prompted by the writer [ 27 ] . The focus of Sloan’s project is on how to provide suggestions to the writer . Our work focuses on the role these suggestions play in the writing process , the interface , and people’s interaction with the system . Past collaborative creativity research has also looked at other related writing tasks include headlines for newspaper articles [ 12 ] and lines for poetry [ 14 ] , and other artistic domains like music [ 16 ] and dance [ 18 ] . Finally , there is work on collaborative writing systems that bring together a group of people to write collaboratively . For example , “Ensemble” was a system that had multiple participants work together to write a single story [ 21 ] . Each story had a lead author and contributors who submitted alternate versions of a scene and voted on alternatives they liked . The lead author ultimately had the authority to choose the winning scene . The person in our work plays a similar role to the lead author in Ensemble ; they control the direction of the story and decide how to incorporate the external ( system ) input . Similarly , Soylent [ 2 ] uses crowdsourcing to provide assistance to writers . However , Soylent assists in shortening text and editing grammar rather than providing content and new ideas . STORY WRITING SYSTEM Our frst system explores writing to expand a visual prompt into a story . The setup is inspired by Exquisite Corpse , a game played by Surrealist artists in which people take turns contributing to a drawing [ 5 ] . The portions of the drawing that were completed in previous turns are partially or completely hidden from the current artist , resulting in silly and bizarre drawings . A parallel version of the game exists in literature , where each player writes a sentence of a story , folds the paper over to hide all but the most recent round of writing , and then passes it to the next player . With only two players ( as in our setting ) , hiding earlier rounds has no effect ( every sentence was written or seen by the person ) . We use the turn - taking aspect of the Exquisite Corpse game to help foster creativity while writing . We provide people with machine suggestions to encourage stories that are unexpected , unusual , and novel , all of which are characteristics of creativity [ 29 ] . These machine suggestions may surprise writers , sway them to change their own ideas about the direction of the story , and include ideas they may not have thought of . User Study Task For our story system user study , the participant is prompted to write a ten sentence story based on an unlabeled , single - panel cartoon from The New Yorker caption contest 4 ( in the space indicated in Figure 2 , section a ) . The task was either done alone ( solo condition ) or partnered with machine suggestions ( MIL condition ) . Both versions were done through a web interface , presented in Figure 2 . Participants entered the story sentence by sentence ( Figure 2 , section c ) . Once submitted , a sentence could not be edited . The complete story , along with the number of sentences completed , appeared at the bottom of interface ( Figure 2 , section d ) . In the solo case , no additional prompting or interactions were provided beyond the image . In the MIL condition , the participant began by writing the frst sentence . Once the sentence was submitted , the next sentence would be generated by the machine and “pushed” to the participant , appearing directly in the submission box ( Figure 2 , section c ) . Full sentences were used based on a preliminary study showing that people liked full - sentence suggestions as much or more than partial sentences or keywords when writing stories . The person was free to edit the machine - suggested sentence to any extent , including deleting it entirely , before submitting it . The third sentence was again written by the participant alone . This turn - taking continued until the story was 10 sentences long . Our demo system is available at http : / / bit . ly / iui - story - demo . Computational Model for Suggestions Our computational model for suggesting a sentence given preceding text is built on a neural language model . Neural language models have been used for various natural language generation tasks , including image captioning [ 33 ] , conversational modeling [ 28 ] , and poetry generation [ 13 ] . To make the generated sentences fuent and coherent in context , our language model uses contextual information both within and across sentence boundaries . Neural language models are effective at predicting words that ft well in a context locally , thereby generating coherent sentences . A sentence - level language model [ 23 ] defnes the probability distribution over the next word , from within a predefned vocabulary , conditioned on the left context ( i . e . , the context of the generated sentence so far ) . Figure 3 shows an example of next - word probabilities given “He arrived in the” . To complete this sentence , the model’s generation process randomly picks the next word based on its probability . In the example , the word “car” will have a higher chance of being generated than the other eight words . It is not a coincidence that the generation process tends to pick a word that fts well into the left context both syntactically and semantically . Language models are able to learn some syntactic and semantic patterns automatically from the data . The language model for our story writing system was trained on 390 adventure novels ( about 400 million words ) from the 4 https : / / contest . newyorker . com Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 331 Figure 2 : The MIL story writing interface : ( a ) an image prompt from the New Yorker ( actual image : [ 8 ] ) ( b ) the story so far , dark colored sentence boxes were turns written with machine suggestions , ( c ) entry box for next sentence , the machine suggestions appeared here , ( d ) the full story so far . The solo condition interface was the same except no machine suggestions appeared . Figure 3 : The probability distribution over words to follow “He arrived in the” . The x - axis shows a small sample of the vocabulary . The full vocabulary includes more than 35 , 000 words extracted from adventure novels . Toronto Book Corpus [ 35 ] . Although the model generates one word at each step , people writing with the system only see complete generated sentences . Standard language models only use the left context within a sentence to compute the probability distribution for the next word ; they ignore earlier sentences . To overcome this limitation , we adapted a neural language model that takes account of left context from both the current sentence and the previous sentence [ 19 ] . SLOGAN WRITING SYSTEM Slogans present a challenge to writers distinct from that of writing a story : to generate a concise , memorable , and powerful statement that is representative of the object , organization , or idea it promotes and matches the intention of the authors . Slogans are used in a variety of settings , ranging from organizing a social movement to promoting a product . The process of condensing information into a memorable and informative phrase used to create slogans is paralleled in other tasks , such as writing headlines , titling papers , and naming products . Therefore , a system that supports slogan writing could likely be extended to related tasks that prioritize catchy and succinct language . User Study Task For the slogan writing task , participants were asked to write a slogan for three distinct scenarios : a food packaging tool , the movie Her 5 , and a social cause that protests animal testing for cosmetic products . The prompts included descriptions and images , from which the participant had to invent an original slogan . Like in the story writing case , the task was either done alone or partnered with a machine in the loop . In the MIL condition , participants used a web interface ( see Figure 4 ) . Participants in the solo case worked in a blank Google Doc . When writing with the web interface , the writer must provide a few keywords and write an initial version of the slogan ( Figure 4 , section a ) . The writer can then “pull” machine suggestions at will ( Figure 4 , section b ) . Based on the writer’s input , the system suggests alternative slogans ( Figure 4 , section c ) , and the history of the retrieved suggestions is tracked for future reference ( Figure 4 , section d ) . The system provides at most three suggestions in response to each request . The writer’s input is on the left , and machine suggestions are on the right , reducing the intrusiveness of the suggestions . A demo system is available at http : / / tremoloop . com . Computational Model for Suggestions We developed a constrained language model that was inspired by the BRAINSUP system of Ozbal et al . [ 25 ] . First , we extract existing syntactic patterns to improve the grammaticality of the generated suggestions . Specifcally , 5 http : / / www . imdb . com / title / tt1798709 / Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 332 Figure 4 : The MIL slogan writing interface : ( a ) the person can provide keywords and the slogan , ( b ) a button to “pull” suggestions , ( c ) the current round of suggestions , ( d ) the history of all slogan submissions and corresponding suggestions . DT JJ NNS VBP RBR JJ IN DT NN . Some Human - AI interactions are more profound than a movie . Some * * are more * than a * . Figure 5 : A slogan and its resulting skeleton . The top row shows the corresponding part - of - speech tags . This slogan was written about the movie Her with a machine in the loop . we start from quotations from Wikiquotes 6 and replace all content words with a wildcard symbol . These patterns become skeletons for our generation system . Figure 5 shows an example ; the skeleton is shown at the bottom . Because the skeletons all come from real quotations , their structures are grammatically plausible , as long as the slots are flled with appropriate words . Which words are appropriate ( individually or together ) is a matter of linguistic judgment . Information from the writer’s input ( see Figure 4 , section a ) and the extracted skeletons are combined to generate slogan suggestions . To make sure that generated suggestions contain keywords from the writer’s input , we randomly sample content words from the input and treat them as target words . We identify skeletons that have empty slots that match the part - of - speech tags of the target words and choose three candidate skeletons . Given a skeleton , we follow Ozbal et al . ’s approach [ 25 ] and use beam search to fll in slots with words that approximately maximize a scoring function . The scoring function gives high scores if the target words are used to fll in slots . In addition , the scoring function factors in language model probability scores to encourage grammaticality and a word diversity score to avoid repetition . 6 https : / / en . wikiquote . org / wiki / Main _ Page . Ideally , we would use a slogan dataset . Given that there is no public slogan database , we believe that quotations and slogans share some similar characteristics , such as memorability and pithiness . USER STUDY SETUP To explore how people will interact with machine - in - the - loop writing , we had people write with or without a machine in the loop . We obtained third - party reviews of the fnal written pieces . This gave us insight into what types of interactions and suggestions people are interested in and fnd most useful when writing with a machine in the loop . Task Setup For both the story writing task and slogan writing task , we assigned half of the participants to write with the machine - in - the - loop system prototype ( the MIL condition ) and half without it ( the solo condition ) . Half of the participants in each condition ( solo and MIL ) were asked to write three stories and the other half wrote three slogans , based on three different prompts . The order of the prompts was balanced across participants . In both the solo and MIL tasks , after each story or slogan was complete , the participant completed a survey consisting of seven - point Likert scale questions about the fnal piece of writing . Table 2 lists the exact questions for each task under “Writing Survey . ” Surveys for both tasks additionally asked how satisfed participants were with the fnal piece of writing . After three rounds of writing and evaluation , participants completed a fnal survey . All participants were asked a seven - point Likert scale question on how enjoyable they found the writing process . They were then asked open - response questions on the interface design , the diffculty of the task , and what improvements could be made to the tool . The solo case participants were also asked to describe any tools that could have helped their creative process . The MIL participants were additionally asked a four - choice question on how likely they were to use the system again and Likert scale questions about the quality of the suggestions the prototype system provided ( see the exact questions under “Final Survey” in Table 2 ) , Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 333 Story Task Slogan Task Condition None Some A Lot Creative ? Writing Survey Creative ? Coherent ? “Is the fnal Catchy ? Entertaining ? product : ” Relevant ? Grammatical ? Surprising ? Final Survey Surprising ? Creative ? “Were the suggested Creative ? Catchy ? sentences : ” Grammatical ? Relevant ? Table 2 : Survey questions whether they liked the suggestions they received , and whether they appreciated the suggestions . After participants completed the three writing tasks and four surveys ( one after each writing task and one fnal survey ) , we conducted an open - ended interview about their experience with the task , their creative writing background , and their thoughts about future improvements and uses for the tool . Although participant enjoyment and personal perception of their own success are important measures of the prototypes , we also wanted to know how third - party evaluators perceived the writing done alone versus with a machine in the loop . Amazon Mechanical Turkers evaluated the writing that participants produced along the same dimensions as the participants who wrote them ( “Writing Survey” in Table 2 ) . Analysis Methods The frst two authors created an interview coding scheme [ 22 ] based on the Likert scale prompts and other areas of interest . The frst two authors independently coded two interviews , compared coding , resolved conficts , and revised the coding scheme . The fnal codes covered insights on : interface , machine suggestions , writing process , writing background , collaboration , use cases , and writing prompt . They then independently coded four more interviews , one from each of the study conditions . These codings were compared , and disparities were discussed . The frst two authors then each independently coded separate halves of the remaining interviews , evenly distributed between conditions . The coders then came together to compile results . Participant Demographics We had 36 participants complete the writing tasks , 9 in each of the 4 task categories : solo story writing , MIL story writing , solo slogan writing , and MIL slogan writing . Participants were compensated with a $ 20 Amazon gift card . We categorized participant writing experience into none , some , or a lot . Participants with a lot of experience included professional creative writers and passionate hobbyists who wrote frequently . Participants with some experience included those that wrote occasionally or had formal creative writing education in their past . Participants with no experience included those who had not done creative writing since primary school . Table 3 shows the breakdown of experience by task condition . Participants were randomly assigned to conditions regardless of experience ; there were more expert writers in the solo conditions than Solo Story 3 2 3 MIL Story 5 4 0 Solo Slogan 3 1 5 MIL Slogan 4 4 1 Table 3 : Number of participants in each condition with a given level of writing experience . Figure 6 : Sample story written with the story writing system by participant MST65 . The computer suggestions are in color and brackets ; struck out text indicates rejected submissions . ( Image prompt : [ 7 ] ) . the MIL conditions , which should be kept in mind when comparing solo and MIL results . Amazon Mechanical Turkers evaluated the fnal writing samples , with 9 evaluations collected for each of the 108 writing samples ( 3 per participant ) . Turkers were paid $ 0 . 15 for each evaluation they completed . To qualify , Turkers had to have completed over 1 , 000 tasks , have over a 95 % task acceptance rate , and be from the United States . EXPERIMENT RESULTS Due to differences in the system designs and goals , as described in the above sections , we describe results for each system separately . The participant IDs indicate task and condition : MST ( MIL story writing ) , SST ( solo story writing ) , MSL ( MIL slogan writing ) , and SSL ( solo slogan writing ) . Story Writing We present insights from the story writing system from participants and third - party evaluators . Some participant insights did not depend on condition , such as enjoyment , interface suggestions , and opinions about story writing . Other comments from the MIL condition were more focused on the strengths and weaknesses of the machine suggestions . Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 334 Enjoyment Overall , people found the story writing task fun . Two participants liked that it was a low - stakes , non - judgmental experience . Participants in both the MIL and the solo condition rated the task as highly enjoyable ( both averaged 6 . 0 ) . 7 Participants who wrote in the solo condition had higher average satisfaction with their fnal stories than those in the MIL condition ( average rating of 5 . 03 versus 4 . 59 , p = 0 . 27 ) 8 , and solo condition participants thought their stories were more creative ( 5 . 30 versus 4 . 30 , p = 0 . 01 ) . However , as seen in Figure 7 , the MIL condition did have one more positive vote (  5 on the Likert scale ) for satisfaction than the solo condition . When Help is Useful Of the participants who found the suggestions helpful in directing their stories , three said the suggestions were most useful early in their story ; they were more able to incorporate new elements from the suggestions before they had an established vision of the story . MST79 said , “By the time I’m hitting sentence 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , I’ve developed so much of the story in my head already , most of the time suggestions are so far and away from anything I want to consider . ” This is seen in Figure 6 ; earlier suggestions were incorporated , while a later suggestion was deleted entirely . Five participants liked having the suggestions throughout the writing process to help if they got writer’s block . One participant thought it would have been helpful toward the end of his writing to be prompted to start wrapping up the story . Suggestion Usefulness When asked what they considered when evaluating the creativity of their fnal stories , most participants emphasized unexpectedness or deviation from the obvious as key aspects . In the MIL condition , there were mixed reactions to the usefulness of the suggestions in enhancing creativity . All participants said that the suggestions were very random . For eight participants , this meant they disregarded most suggestions , but two participants said that the randomness of the suggestions inspired them to write sillier stories or that incorporating those suggestions lead to more odd and creative writing ; “when I took the AI into account and tried to incorporate that , it got a lot more creative because , again , it was just so spontaneous and much more random than I normally write” ( MST65 ) . Eight participants said the suggestions did or could have infuenced the direction of the story . However , six participants said they did not fnd the suggestions helpful once they had a clear direction for the story . This is refected in the ratings participants gave the suggestions ; the mean score of how much participants appreciated the suggestions is 3 . 78 , but there was high variation between participants , with answers ranging between 2 and 6 . 7 Due to the subjectiveness of evaluating writing and the varied participant background , both the self - evaluations and the Turk scores highly varied , often covering the full Likert scale ( 1 - 7 ) . 8 p - values are calculated using independent two - sample t - tests . Although we report p - values , we encourage caution in drawing frm conclusions from these calculations because of the small sample size ( 27 for each condition in both self - evaluations and third - party evaluations ) and the imbalance across conditions in author expertise . Use Condition Story Slogan I’d use it , exactly as it is now . 2 0 I’d use it , but only if the suggestions were better . I’d use it , but only if the writing set - up changed . I wouldn’t use it . 4 0 3 5 1 3 Table 4 : Responses to “Would you use this system again ? ” Participants found some elements of the suggestions more helpful than others . One participant liked using snippets of suggested dialogue , while a different participant found dialogue - heavy suggestions unhelpful . One participant mentioned taking the tone of the suggestions , and another participant appreciated a plot suggestion , although they didn’t incorporate it as it would have required more context . Characters were a divisive element ; some appreciated getting suggestions with new character names , while six others found suggestions that introduced new character names hurt the relevance of the suggestions . Consider the example in Figure 6 . Although the character names in early suggestions are all used , a later suggestion that references “Lance” is deleted as all of the characters in the story have already been introduced . Timing may also affect the usefulness of new characters because characters are often introduced in the beginning of a story , as can be seen in the example stories in Table 5 . When asked what type of help they would like to receive as they wrote , eight MIL participants mentioned the machine could contribute by suggesting plot points , tone , or keywords . One participant from the solo condition envisioned a system where the computer took the role of a character in the story and provided dialogue . Other MIL participants appreciated the idea of receiving full sentences , especially if the suggestions had been more relevant . Four participants felt more back - and - forth iterations were needed to treat the machine as a viable collaborator and would appreciate feedback on their writing , such as encouragement , agreement , or advice . Interaction Three MIL condition participants found the every - other - sentence injection into their workspace disruptive . Participant MST65 wrote , “The ‘partner’ [ MIL system ] often made no sense , so it was diffcult to incorporate their responses and often I just deleted the entire suggestion but it was a disruption . ” Four participants would have liked the ability to edit already submitted sentences , especially professional writers who were not able to follow their normal writing process . However , six participants enjoyed the constrained , non - editable , sentence - by - sentence structure as it kept them moving forward . Participant SST17 wrote , “Even when I got stuck , I eventually could tell myself , ‘Just write one sentence ! ’ and then move on . . . . it forced me to keep moving forward instead of getting bogged down in getting all the details just right and trying to overhaul the whole thing when I didn’t like one little thing . ” Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 335 Use Cases Most people who wrote with the story writing system would use it again in some capacity , with the most frequent response being they would use it again if suggestions were better , as seen in Table 4 . Of the people who said they wouldn’t use the system again , one wrote that they might actually use it for fun or ungraded work , one said they didn’t need help creating story ideas , and the third expressed skepticism at the general idea of writing technologies . Of the participants who would use the story writing tool again , two of the participants envisioned “just for fun” applications , such as a game to play with children or a short , fun activity that pops up on Facebook . Four participants saw it as a way to practice writing or a low - stake activity to become motivated to write . Three participants envisioned using the system for outlining , story boarding , or other early idea generation , while two people indicated interest in using the tool to directly write a fnal product . As for types of suggestions that may be useful , three participants wanted editorial feedback on grammar , syntax , and sentence structure . One participant envisioned feedback from the machine that more directly infuenced the content of the story . When describing experiences with human collaborators , participants said that back - and - forth iteration was a key component that they wanted machines to mimic . Other characteristics of good past human collaborators included trust and like - mindedness . Third - party Evaluations There was no statistically signifcant difference in the Amazon Mechanical Turk third - party evaluation ratings between the solo and MIL conditions . For creativity , the average score for the solo condition was 4 . 87 and was 4 . 84 for the MIL condition ( p = 0 . 88 ) . Story coherence scores had an average of 5 . 05 for solo and 4 . 77 for MIL ( p = 0 . 21 ) . It is important to note that most of the third - party scores did not correlate with the scores writers assigned their own work . The average Turker score and the self - evaluation score had Pearson correlation coeffcients of 0 . 08 , 0 . 07 , and 0 . 04 for how creative the story was , how entertaining it was , and how much they liked it , respectively . The correlations for coherence and grammaticality were slightly better ( 0 . 31 and 0 . 41 , respectively ) but still weak . Slogan Writing As with story writing , some topics from the slogan tasks were mentioned by participants regardless of condition . However , because the solo case participants did not have suggestions nor the interface , MIL participants provided some unique insights . Enjoyment Five participants found writing slogans to be very diffcult . One participant said they found it demoralizing because they felt so bad at it . Two participants expressed that writing something both succinct and informative was challenging ; the top - rated slogans tended to be shorter than the lowest - rated slogans , as seen in the examples in Table 5 . Four participants enjoyed the task and found it fun . Figure 7 : Slogan writers in the MIL condition were generally more satisfed with their fnal product than the solo slogan writers . More MIL story writers were positively satisfed with their fnal story , but only by one story . Participant self - evaluation of the fnal slogans was generally higher in the MIL condition than the solo condition , even though the scores for the slogan suggestions were low . For example , the mean score for fnal slogans from the MIL condition was higher than in the solo case for both satisfaction ( 5 . 22 vs . 4 . 07 , p < 0 . 01 ) and creativity ( 4 . 48 vs . 3 . 93 , p = 0 . 15 ) . Suggestion Usefulness Slogan participants in the MIL condition felt the suggestions did not introduce enough novelty . Three participants expressed frustration with suggestions that had just reorganized their input slogan words . These suggestions were too close to the original slogan and therefore not creative enough to be helpful . This frustration is refected in low average scores for how much participants liked the suggestions ( 2 . 00 ) and appreciated the suggestions ( 2 . 78 ) . Similar to the story writing task , appreciation varied greatly between participants , with scores ranging from 1 to 6 . When participants used the provided suggestions , it was mainly to incorporate novel , relevant words or structural elements . Seven MIL condition participants noted they would have preferred words instead of full sentences as suggestions ; the system could act as a thesaurus to bring relevant but creative words and ideas . Participants also envisioned machine contributions such as searching the web for more information on a product , or fnding similar , popular slogans as seed ideas . One participant found the machine had a different impact , “it impacted my overall thought process and creativity rather than actual words” ( MSL87 ) . Participants mentioned word play , use of literary devices ( like alliteration or puns ) , cleverness , and catchiness as elements of creative slogans that they were looking for in suggestions . Four participants described productive collaborations as bouncing ideas off someone else , building and iterating on good ideas , and coming to a feeling of “we found it ! ” Five participants thought the machine was a good collaborator , “it seemed like kind of having another pair of eyes in the room to give me some feedback and the fact that it was in real time was great and wouldn’t argue with you over coffee was great” ( MSL87 ) . One participant felt the interaction with the system was not as conducive to enhancing creativity . One Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 336 Highest - rated Lowest - rated Solo Slogan Compassion is Always in Style “Be Beautiful : End Animal Testing ! Sign our petition today to show Neutrogena animal testing is unnecessary , unkind , and needs to stop now . ” MIL Slogan The real animals are the ones who test chemicals on living things . “Stop animal research testing now ! Studies confrm ther [ sic ] is no need for such testing , and msot [ sic ] adults are opposed to this practice . ” Solo Story Norman walked into the doctor’s offce just before his last appointment ; Norman ficked his cigarette into the cold , A middle aged male is meeting with a dentist . This gentleman is so stressed that he looks like his eyes are winter night behind him as he walked into the building . The pretty blonde receptionist greeted Norman but Norman had no time for firtation or romance ; he was about to fnd popping out of his face . This meeting is part of an investigation about a crime so that’s why this meeting includes an investigator who looks creepy . the murderer of Trystan Lee and the doctor was key to this plan . MIL Story The nervous doctor cleared his throat , “Thank you . . . eh - hem . . . Mr . Collin , for coming into the offce on such short notice . ” Craig slicked back his hair , listening to his wife’s “Hey Docta Don , dis is da kat we wuz talkin’ about last night , whachu wan’ me to do wit ’im ? ” Fabin said through his cold eyes shaded by his pitch black sunglasses . He voice echoing in his head , reminding him that all of those late night trips to McDonalds would catch up with his heart eventually . “You see , we’ve found some . . . unusual . . . results tapped his fnger on the trigger and shook his head , Docta Don was never happy with how excited Fabin was to get into trouble ; he was a good man , but followed all orders from your recent stress test , and I thought it prudent to bring you in as soon as possible . ” without ever thinking things through for himself . Table 5 : Highest and lowest rated slogans and stories for a given prompt . Slogans are for an animal rights cause . Only the frst few lines of each story are shown . challenge fve participants described was that the suggestions were not aware enough of context and therefore were not working on the same idea , just with the same words . MSL33C said , “they weren’t understanding my keywords correctly , I think , so I could say something like ‘end animal harm’ and it would suggest harming animals . . . so I don’t think it was quite interpreting my intentions very well . ” Three participants also were interested in non - content - based interactions such as feedback on whether an idea was good , reminders if a slogan was too close to an older discarded slogan , or an expression of closure upon deciding on a fnal slogan . Interaction Two participants liked having the history of suggestions in order to refer back to previous slogans . Another found the history distracting and wanted to curate the list to only keep good recommendations . For the physical placement of suggestions , two participants liked that the suggestions were out of the way and not intrusive . For four others , the suggestions were too far out of the way and required effort to check . These participants would have preferred a more condensed interface . One participant would have liked the ability to have more brainstorming space , either as a free form writing space or to iterate on multiple slogans at the same time . Use Cases Like the story writing case , most people who wrote with the slogan writing system would use it again in some capacity , especially if the suggestions were better ( see Table 4 ) . The people who said they would not use the system again wrote that they received suggestions that were too far from what they wanted to motivate them to use the system again . The participants who said they would use the system again drew parallels between writing slogans and tasks such as naming courses or products , writing headlines , and writing titles . One participant said he might use a system like this to write emails in order to be reminded to be pithy and catchy . One participant did not think they would use the tool for any regular activities and would just use it for slogans . Third - party Evaluations The Amazon Mechanical Turk third - party evaluations rated the slogans written in the MIL condition as slightly less creative than the slogans from the solo condition , giving an average score of 3 . 84 and 4 . 37 ( p = 0 . 03 ) , respectively . There was no statistically signifcant difference in any of the other scores , with relevance scoring the closest between the solo ( average 5 . 98 ) and MIL ( average 5 . 93 ) conditions ( p = 0 . 76 ) . Like in the story case , most of the third - party scores did not correlate with the scores writers assigned their own work . The average Turker score and the self - evaluation score had a Pearson correlation coeffcient of 0 . 13 and 0 . 10 , for how creative the slogan was and how much they liked it , respectively . The correlation for catchiness and relevance were slightly better ( 0 . 39 and 0 . 22 , respectively ) but still weak . DISCUSSION We found that people generally enjoyed writing with the help of suggestions and were enthusiastic about the concept of writing with a “collaborator , ” especially once natural language generation capabilities improve . Though some professional authors hesitated at the idea of using computer - generated suggestions when writing a fnal product , participants envisioned the usefulness of this system as a writing warm - up Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 337 or game and for diffcult processes that are often collaborative ( naming products or papers , writing headlines , etc . ) . Another advantage of writing with a machine in the loop that participants observed was that writing with these systems allowed them to write in a judgment - free setting . Although collaborative writing is useful , it can be intimidating for less experienced writers to brainstorm or write with the pressure of a human collaborator . Writing with a machine in the loop can be a low - cost , easy way to provide new ideas and support to writers , particularly in the early stages of writing . For machine - in - the - loop writing systems , we recommend a high level of writer control over the interaction . This will allow systems to cater to a wider range of writers and to adapt to changing writer needs at different points of the writing process . We also recommend carefully considering the interaction design choices ( especially along the characteristics we describe ) and how they may affect both the enjoyment of the task and the quality of the fnal product . Systems with low intrusiveness and a pull method of interaction initiation allow people to write more closely to their normal writing process . However , these characteristics also mean that suggestions are more easily ignored and may never be requested . If the goal is to encourage interaction with the machine or a more structured interaction , a higher intrusiveness and push method system may be better . A careful introduction and framing of the system is also necessary to encourage the desired level of interaction with the machine in the loop . For story writing and other tasks that expand on a prompt and have an additive interaction structure , systems may beneft from an interface that supports outlining or non - linear writing . For example , Flower and Hayes [ 10 ] describe the hierarchical nature of the creative writing process ; future system designs could refect knowledge about the cognitive processes of writing to better support the writing process . The slogan writing task , along with other condensing writing tasks that have an iterative structure , may beneft from an interface that provides more space for brainstorming and drafting slogans . We recommend using models that strike a balance between generating coherent suggestions and surprising suggestions . An element of randomness provides new ideas and directions for a writer , but suggestions too far away from the writer’s ideas may be unhelpful and ignored . We recommend pushing towards surprising suggestions for tasks that use a pull method of initiation and have a low level of intrusiveness because when writers decide to initiate a suggestion loop , it generally means they are stuck or at least open to new ideas . Although surprising suggestions run the risk of being irrelevant , a less intrusive system means unhelpful suggestions can be easily ignored and minimally interrupt the writing process . Coherence should be a bigger priority for push method , high - intrusiveness interactions , as high levels of randomness in suggestions may distract writers . For the story writing task , we found that participants wanted more coherent suggestions from the model . For similar tasks , we recommend working towards incorporating more context into the suggestion - generating models . Characters may be an important aspect of the context to consider , as suggestions with incorrect pronouns or that lack references to existing characters are diffcult to work into a story . Models would also beneft from the ability to play with the content type of its suggestions , such as choosing to offer lines of dialogue , action - driven sentences , or descriptive lines . Models for writing slogans should provide more variety in their suggestions , particularly on a lexical level , as diverse language is important for an iterative task . Models that can generate related keywords , synonyms , and alliterative words when given a person’s ideas would be useful for this type of task . We noted that there is little to no correlation between the ratings that writers gave themselves and the ratings that Amazon Mechanical Turker workers gave them . This observation echoed the fnding in Tan et al . [ 31 ] that it is hard for humans to evaluate the quality of writing . Therefore , machine - in - the - loop writing systems that aim to improve a writer’s work should measure the system’s success not only as perceived by the writer but also by third - party evaluators . CONCLUSION By analyzing people’s experiences and results from writing with two different machine - in - the - loop systems , we fnd that participants enjoyed collaborating with a machine and would use systems like ours again , particularly as the quality of suggestions the system can generate improves . Participants who wrote with a machine in the loop were more satisfed ( in the slogan case ) or comparably satisfed ( in the story case ) to solo writers with their fnal written artifacts . The writing completed with machine - generated suggestions has yet to surpass that of the participants who wrote alone , as judged by third - party evaluators . We recommend several directions of research towards improving these suggestions , including improving the ability to control the amount of unexpectedness in suggestions and considering different generation formats ( including higher - level ideas or keywords ) based on the characteristics and the goal of the system . Furthermore , we recommend choosing the interaction structure , initiation , and intrusiveness of the system design thoughtfully according to the nature of the task and the desired level of interaction . We , along with the participants in our study , envision many possible applications in which machine - in - the - loop support would be helpful , including related writing tasks ( like writing headlines or poetry ) , education , and entertainment . Acknowledgments . This research was supported in part by NSF graduate research fellowships , the DARPA CwC program through ARO ( W911NF - 15 - 1 - 0543 ) , NSF IIS - 1702751 , a Samsung GRO award , and a UW Innovation award . Yejin Choi , Michael Ernst , James Fogarty , and Lillian Lee gave early feedback . Emily Furst , Lucy Lin , Kelvin Luu , and Maarten Sap contributed to preliminary work . The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers and the participants who took part in our study . Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 338 REFERENCES 1 . James F . Allen , Curry I . Guinn , and Eric Horvitz . 1999 . Mixed - initiative interaction . IEEE Intelligent Systems 14 , 5 ( Sept . 1999 ) , 14 – 23 . 2 . Michael S . Bernstein , Greg Little , Robert C . Miller , Björn Hartmann , Mark S . Ackerman , David R . Karger , David Crowell , and Katrina Panovich . 2010 . Soylent : a word processor with a crowd inside . In Proceedings of UIST . 3 . Margaret A . Boden . 2004 . The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms . Routledge , London ; New York . 4 . Steve Branson , Catherine Wah , Florian Schroff , Boris Babenko , Peter Welinder , Pietro Perona , and Serge Belongie . 2010 . Visual recognition with humans in the loop . In Proceedings of ECCV . 5 . Alastair Brotchie and Mel Gooding ( Eds . ) . 1995 . A Book of Surrealist Games : Including the Little Surrealist Dictionary . Shambhala Redstone Editions , distributed in the United States by Random House , Boston . 6 . Justin Cheng and Michael S . Bernstein . 2015 . Flock : hybrid crowd - machine learning classifers . In Proceedings of CSCW . 7 . Leo Cullum . 2005 . Doctor talking to patient in his offce as a man . The New Yorker 81 , 39 ( 5 Dec . 2005 ) . http : / / archives . newyorker . com / ? i = 2005 - 12 - 05 8 . Liza Donnelly . 2014 . A man and woman look at three very large birds . The New Yorker 90 , 22 ( 4 Aug . 2014 ) . http : / / archives . newyorker . com / ? i = 2014 - 08 - 04 9 . Jerry Alan Fails and Dan R . Olsen Jr . 2003 . Interactive machine learning . In Proceedings of IUI . 10 . Linda Flower and John R . Hayes . 1981 . A cognitive process theory of writing . College Composition and Communication 32 , 4 ( 1981 ) , 365 – 387 . 11 . Monica J . Garfeld . 2008 . Creativity support systems . In Handbook on Decision Support Systems 2 . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 745 – 758 . 12 . Lorenzo Gatti , Gözde Özbal , Marco Guerini , Oliviero Stock , and Carlo Strapparava . 2016 . Heady - Lines : a creative generator of newspaper headlines . In Companion Publication of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 79 – 83 . 13 . Marjan Ghazvininejad , Xing Shi , Yejin Choi , and Kevin Knight . 2016 . Generating topical poetry . In Proceedings of ACL . 1183 – 1191 . 14 . Marjan Ghazvininejad , Xing Shi , Jay Priyadarshi , and Kevin Knight . 2017 . Hafez : an interactive poetry generation system . In Proceedings of ACL ( system demonstrations ) . 43 – 48 . 15 . Kaiming He , Xiangyu Zhang , Shaoqing Ren , and Jian Sun . 2015 . Delving deep into rectifers : surpassing human - level performance on ImageNet classifcation . In Proceedings of ICCV . 16 . Guy Hoffman and Gil Weinberg . 2011 . Interactive improvisation with a robotic marimba player . Autonomous Robouts 31 , 2 – 3 ( October 2011 ) , 133 – 153 . 17 . Eric Horvitz . 1999 . Principles of mixed - initiative user interfaces . In Proceedings of CHI . 18 . Mikhail Jacob and Brian Magerko . 2015 . Viewpoints AI . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , New York , NY , 361 – 362 . 19 . Yangfeng Ji , Trevor Cohn , Lingpeng Kong , Chris Dyer , and Jacob Eisenstein . 2016 . Document context language models . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning Representations ( Workshop Track ) . 20 . Thorsten Joachims , Adith Swaminathan , and Tobias Schnabel . 2017 . Unbiased learning - to - rank with biased feedback . In Proceedings of WSDM . 21 . Joy Kim , Justin Cheng , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014 . Ensemble : exploring complementary strengths of leaders and crowds in creative collaboration . In Proceedings of CSCW . 22 . Jonathan Lazar . 2017 . In Research Methods in Human Computer Interaction ( 2nd edition ed . ) . Elsevier , Cambridge , MA , Chapter 11 . 23 . Tomáš Mikolov , Martin Karafát , Lukáš Burget , Jan ˇCernock ` y , and Sanjeev Khudanpur . 2010 . Recurrent neural network based language model . In Proceedings of Interspeech . 24 . Myle Ott , Yejin Choi , Claire Cardie , and Jeffrey T . Hancock . 2011 . Finding deceptive opinion spam by any stretch of the imagination . In Proceedings of ACL . 25 . Gözde Özbal , Daniele Pighin , and Carlo Strapparava . 2013 . BRAINSUP : brainstorming support for creative sentence generation . In Proceedings of ACL . 26 . Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S . Gordon . 2015 . Creative Help : a story writing assistant . In Proceedings of ICIDS . 27 . Robin Sloan . 2016 . Writing with the machine . ( 2016 ) . https : / / www . robinsloan . com / notes / writing - with - the - machine / 28 . Alessandro Sordoni , Michel Galley , Michael Auli , Chris Brockett , Yangfeng Ji , Margaret Mitchell , Jian - Yun Nie , Jianfeng Gao , and Bill Dolan . 2015 . A neural netowrk approach to context - sensitive generation of conversational responses . In Proceedings of ACL . 196 – 205 . 29 . Robert J . Sternberg . 2005 . Creativity or creativities ? International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 63 , 4 - 5 ( Oct . 2005 ) , 370 – 382 . 30 . Reid Swanson and Andrew S . Gordon . 2008 . Say Anything : a massively collaborative open domain story writing companion . In Proceedings of ICIDS . Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 339 31 . Chenhao Tan , Lillian Lee , and Bo Pang . 2014 . The effect of wording on message propagation : Topic - and author - controlled natural experiments on Twitter . In Proceedings of ACL . 32 . Alan M . Turing . 1950 . Computing machinery and intelligence . Mind 59 , 236 ( 1950 ) , 433 – 460 . 33 . Oriol Vinyals , Alexander Toshev , Samy Bengio , and Dumitru Erhan . 2015 . Show and tell : a neural image caption generator . In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 3156 – 3164 . 34 . Georgios N . Yannakakis , Antonios Liapis , and Constantine Alexopoulos . 2014 . Mixed - initiative co - creativity . In Proceedings of FDG . 35 . Yukun Zhu , Ryan Kiros , Rich Zemel , Ruslan Salakhutdinov , Raquel Urtasun , Antonio Torralba , and Sanja Fidler . 2015 . Aligning books and movies : Towards story - like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books . In Proceedings of ICCV . 19 – 27 . Session 4A : Information Retrieval and Search IUI 2018 , March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan 340