Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / action / journalInformation ? journalCode = hjcd20 Download by : [ 99 . 55 . 244 . 8 ] Date : 25 January 2017 , At : 08 : 45 Journal of Cognition and Development ISSN : 1524 - 8372 ( Print ) 1532 - 7647 ( Online ) Journal homepage : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / hjcd20 Grounding the Symbols for Place Value : Evidence From Training and Long - Term Exposure to Base - 10 Models Kelly S . Mix , Linda B . Smith , Jerri DaSha Stockton , Yi - Ling Cheng & Justin A . Barterian To cite this article : Kelly S . Mix , Linda B . Smith , Jerri DaSha Stockton , Yi - Ling Cheng & Justin A . Barterian ( 2017 ) Grounding the Symbols for Place Value : Evidence From Training and Long - Term Exposure to Base - 10 Models , Journal of Cognition and Development , 18 : 1 , 129 - 151 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 15248372 . 2016 . 1180296 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15248372 . 2016 . 1180296 Accepted author version posted online : 12 May 2016 . Published online : 12 May 2016 . Submit your article to this journal Article views : 71 View related articles View Crossmark data Grounding the Symbols for Place Value : Evidence From Training and Long - Term Exposure to Base - 10 Models Kelly S . Mix University of Maryland Linda B . Smith Indiana University Jerri DaSha Stockton and Yi - Ling Cheng University of Maryland Justin A . Barterian The Ohio State University Two experiments examined whether concrete models support place value learning . In Experiment 1 ( N = 149 ) , 7 - year - olds were trained with either a ) symbols alone or b ) symbols and base - 10 blocks . Children in both groups showed significant growth overall , but there were specific effects favoring one training type over another . Symbols - only training led to higher scores on a number line estimation task and was particularly effective among high - ability students , whereas blocks training led to better understanding of base - 10 structure and was particularly effective among low - ability learners . In Experiment 2 ( N = 68 ) , Montessori students , for whom concrete models play a major role in mathematics instruction , also demonstrated better understanding of base - 10 structure than did their matched peers enrolled in mainstream elementary schools . The ability to link symbols to their referents is at the core of human cognition , yet the processes by which we make these linkages , particularly in childhood , remain poorly understood . Symbol grounding is complicated because symbols usually bear no obvious relation to their referents . Instead , their meaning derives from associations constructed between the symbol system and the perceptual world . In the realm of mathematics , these associations are particularly intricate , but we know very little about their precise nature , how they are formed , or what experiences with symbol systems are critical to their formation . The present study examined these processes in young children learning the place value system , both with and without support from concrete models . From a symbol - grounding perspective , place value is Correspondence should be sent to Kelly S . Mix , University of Maryland , 3304 Benjamin Bldg . , College Park , MD 20742 , USA . E - mail : kmix @ umd . edu Kelly S . Mix , Jerri DaSha Stockton , and Yi - Ling Cheng are formerly affiliated with Michigan State University . Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www . tandfonline . com / hjcd . JOURNAL OF COGNITION AND DEVELOPMENT , 18 ( 1 ) : 129 – 151 Copyright © 2017 Taylor & Francis Group , LLC ISSN : 1524 - 8372 print / 1532 - 7647 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 15248372 . 2016 . 1180296 of interest because it involves a complex symbol system with remote ties to its referents . The place value system represents large numbers using spatial position and the multiplicative relation between base - 10 units and their counts ( e . g . , “ 429 ” stands for [ 4 × 100 ] + [ 2 × 10 ] + [ 9 × 1 ] ) . This results in a powerful representational system that converts otherwise intractable quantities into symbols we can read , write , compare , and combine with ease . Acquiring place value is a watershed in mathematical development . Children cannot progress very far without it , and those who struggle with place value in the early grades tend to face lower mathematics achievement throughout elementary school and beyond ( Ho & Cheng , 1997 ; Moeller , Pixner , Zuber , Kaufmann , & Nuerk , 2011 ) . Yet despite evidence of early - emerging , partial knowledge of place value ( Byrge , Smith , & Mix , 2014 ; Mix , Prather , Smith , & Stockton , 2014 ) , complete mastery eludes many children . Faulty place value concepts and rote , error - prone multidigit calculation are common and persistent problems ( Cauley , 1988 ; Cobb & Wheatley , 1988 ; Fuson & Briars , 1990 ; Jesson , 1983 ; Kamii , 1986 ; Kouba et al . , 1988 ; Labinowicz , 1985 ; Resnick & Omanson , 1987 ) . For these reasons , place value has been targeted as a high priority for math education starting in kindergarten ( National Council of Teachers of Mathematics , 2000 ; National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers , 2010 ) . The source of these difficulties — and the most promising target for addressing them — may be a failure of symbol grounding . Symbol - to - referent mappings can fail when there is either a ) an ambiguous correlational structure ( Uttal , O ’ Doherty , Newland , Hand , & DeLoache , 2009 ) or b ) low overall similarity between elements ( Bassok & Medin , 1997 ; Bassok , Wu , & Olseth , 1995 ; Gentner & Markman , 1994 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Both conditions hold for place value . First , the correlational structure for numbers is weak . The meaning of “ 4 , ” for example , includes not only its whole number “ count ” meaning , but also its ordinal sense , as it appears in dates and addresses , a measurement sense , a time - telling sense , its part - whole meaning in rational numbers , and a purely arbitrary sense as it appears in phone numbers ( Fuson , 1988 ) . In a multidigit numeral , these correlations are even weaker because the same digits can have different meanings based on relative position ( e . g . , 14 vs . 41 ) . Second , there is low surface similarity between the written symbols for large quantities and their referents . The written numeral “ 42 ” has no perceptual similarity linking it to a pile of 42 rocks . Without counting the rocks , there is literally nothing connecting the two , and even with counting , there are multiple layers of symbolic meaning to connect , including the counting sequence up to 42 , the spoken number name “ forty - two , ” and the written numeral . Recognizing the problems children have with grounding multidigit numerals , teachers often provide concrete referents , such as base - 10 blocks ( see Figure 1 ) . Base - 10 blocks consist of small cubes to represent ones , sticks with 10 cubes to represent tens , flats made up of 10 sticks to represent hundreds , and so forth . Thus , the size and shape of each unit corresponds analogically to the increase in magnitude ( i . e . , 10 of the tens sticks lined up side by side are literally the same in size and shape as one of the hundreds flats ) . Children can use these materials to compare and transform quantities by moving and aligning sets of blocks . They also can map the written symbols and verbal names onto these physical models . There are several reasons to expect base - 10 blocks to be beneficial . First , they physically instantiate place value relations and thus provide referents that can be directly experienced . Both classic theories of cognitive development ( e . g . , Bruner , Oliver , & Greenfield , 1966 ; Piaget , 1951 ) and current views on symbol grounding and embodied cognition ( e . g . , Barsalou , 2008 ; Glenberg , Gutierrez , Levin , Japuntich , & Kaschak , 2004 ; Lakoff & Nunez , 2001 ) hold that direct perceptual experience is critical to interpreting abstract concepts . Second , base - 10 blocks address both of the obstacles to symbol 130 MIX ET AL . grounding identified earlier . They have a strong , predictable internal structure , and they align well with written and spoken place value symbols . It is puzzling , then , that empirical research on the effectiveness of concrete models has been mixed . Some studies have shown improved mathematical performance for children taught using concrete models and manipulatives ( see Carbonneau , Marley , & Selig , 2013 , for a recent meta - analysis ) , including base - 10 blocks ( Fuson & Briars , 1990 ; Peterson , Mercer , & O ’ Shea , 1988 ) . Yet , other researchers have reported either no effect of concrete models , effects that fail to transfer , or even performance decrements ( Ball , 1992 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2009 ; McNeil , Uttal , Jarvin , & Sternberg , 2009 ; Mix et al . , 2014 ; Son , Smith , & Goldstone , 2011 ; Uttal , Amaya , Maita , Hand , et al . , 2013 ; Vance & Kieren , 1971 ) . It has been argued that concrete models are detrimental because they themselves are symbolic ; they introduce extraneous , distracting details ; and they lead to entrenched , context - specific learning ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kaminski , Sloutsky , & Heckler , 2008 ; McNeil et al . , 2009 ; Uttal , Scudder , & DeLoache , 1997 ) . What explains these discrepant findings ? On one hand , there is reason to question whether recent research has given concrete models a fair test . The studies reporting poor outcomes offered either very brief exposure to concrete models or no training at all . In these studies , the models were mostly illustrative . In contrast , the studies reporting an advantage for concrete models usually involve many weeks of training ( e . g . , Fuson & Briars , 1990 ; Miller & Stigler , 1991 ; Reimer & Moyer , 2005 ) . If concrete models impact learning by providing metaphors for symbol grounding ( e . g . , Lakoff & Nunez , 2001 ) , it makes sense this mapping process could take time and effects would not be immediate . Another difference is that research demonstrating positive effects of concrete models tends to involve hands - on materials children manipulate . In contrast , some of the recent work showing a performance decrement varies the amount of rich detail across pictorial representations , rather than providing objects to move around ( e . g . , Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2009 ) . Based on current symbol - grounding theory , direct contact and movement could be crucial ( Glenberg et al . , 2004 ; Lakoff & Nunez , 2001 ) . On the other hand , research claiming an advantage for concrete models may be overly optimistic due to weak controls . In many cases , the critical comparison has been from pretest to posttest , without comparison to an alternative treatment control group ( e . g . , Reimer & FIGURE 1 . Training materials used in the blocks condition , Experiment 1 . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 131 Moyer , 2005 ) . This approach has been used in several key studies showing an advantage of base - 10 blocks in place value learning ( Fuson , 1986 ; Fuson & Briars , 1990 ) . The problem with this approach is that what might seem to be an effect of concrete models could actually be an effect of training in general , background developmental change , or even test – retest effects . Even in studies with comparisons to abstract symbol instruction , it is not always clear to what extent the instructional content was precisely parallel across the two conditions ( vs . roughly targeting the same basic concept ; see Carbonneau et al . , 2013 , for a review ) . A stronger test of concrete models would be to compare training with them to the same instruction using symbols alone . Finally , it is possible the reported effects ( or lack thereof ) are related to individual differences in background knowledge or learning ability — differences that were not reported in previous research with children and thus may have been overlooked . For example , research with adults has suggested that high - ability learners actually perform worse with concrete models than with instruction based on abstract concepts . In contrast , novice or low - ability learners sometimes show an advantage from instruction with concrete models ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kalyuga , Ayres , Chandler , & Sweller , 2003 ) . If the same holds true for school - aged children , research could sometimes fail to show an effect of concrete models in samples composed of mostly high - ability children . The present study examined whether and under what conditions concrete models for place value impact learning . The reported experiments combined assurances of adequate training and comparisons to training without concrete models to provide a rigorous but fair test of their potential effects . We also included a range of ability levels and probed specifically for perfor - mance differences across these groups . EXPERIMENT 1 Method Participants . The total sample was composed of 149 children with a mean age of 7 ; 2 ( range = 6 ; 0 – 9 ; 0 ) . A power analysis indicated that a sample size of 75 children would be sufficient to detect a difference between conditions ( f = . 42 ) at the . 90 level ( Faul , Erdfelder , Buchner , & Lang , 2009 ) . An additional 29 children were recruited but excluded because their pretest scores were greater than 90 % correct . Childrenwererandomlyassignedtoeithertheblockstraininggroup ( n = 52 ; M age = 7 ; 2 , range = 6 ; 0 – 8 ; 7 ; 23 boys ) or the symbols - only training group ( n = 49 ; M = 7 ; 2 , range = 6 ; 0 – 8 ; 0 ; 31 boys ) . Random assignment was made for individual children within each class or childcare group and within each school or camp program . A no - training control group ( n = 48 ; M = 7 ; 0 , range = 6 ; 0 – 9 ; 0 ; 26 boys ) was recruited from the same schools and classrooms during the following academic year . The children in all three conditions attended a public elementary school in one of six school districts that served the same middle - socioeconomic status ( SES ) population ( 86 % White , 6 % Black , 5 % Hispanic or Latino ; median income = $ 54 , 087 ) . Teachers and afterschool care providers distributed consent forms to parents , and only children whose parents returned the signed consent forms were included . Data were collected in the spring of first grade ( n = 33 ) , the 132 MIX ET AL . fall of second grade ( n = 65 ) , or during the intervening summer via day camp programs ( n = 51 ) . All participating school districts had adopted Everyday Mathematics ( McGraw - Hill Education ) as their mathematics curriculum . Within this curriculum , place value and multidigit calculation are taught in first and second grade , so it is reasonable to assume children in the study had received some exposure to these topics in school . In this regard , the training provided in our experiment could be viewed as supplemental . However , as the results will show , children did not perform near ceiling on our posttests , so there remained much room for improvement . Also , we could not completely eliminate the possibility of concurrent exposure without focusing on a younger age group , for whom the subject matter may be too advanced . Methods and Procedure . Children in the blocks condition used individual sets of base - 10 blocks ( 15 ones , 15 tens , 15 hundreds , and 2 thousands blocks ) during the training sessions . They also used mats that showed how written numerals , place value names , and blocks aligned ( see Figure 1 ) . Children in the symbols - only condition completed the same lessons and activities as the blocks training group but without concrete models . In this group , the problems and activities were completed either in writing or using a set of plain white note cards with hand - written single - digit numerals on them ( range = 0 – 9 ) . Children in the no - training group com - pleted the pretests and posttests at a 4 - week interval without any intervening training . The training sessions took place over 4 to 6 weeks and focused on six content lessons that introduced children to multidigit number meanings and calculation . ( See the Appendix for a detailed description . ) Learning was assessed with three written measures : a place value test , the school sale problem , and a number line estimation task . Number line estimation was adminis - tered individually , but the other two tests were completed in small groups ( n = 4 ) . All 149 children completed the place value test , and most , but not all , completed the other two tests ( number line , n = 113 ; school sale , n = 111 ) because these measures were added later . As noted , a sample size of 75 would be sufficient to detect a medium effect ( f = . 42 ) at the . 90 level . The place value test consisted of 12 to 16 items distributed among three item types : a ) numeral ordering ( 6 items ) ; b ) numeral interpretation ( 3 to 7 items 1 ) ; and c ) multidigit addition ( 3 items ) . For numeral ordering , children a ) saw a pair of three - or four - digit numerals and indicated which of the pair was either larger or smaller ( e . g . , 567 vs . 439 , 2 , 523 vs . 2 , 851 ; 4 items ) ; b ) ordered three three - digit numerals , either by arranging cards with the numerals written on them or indicating which of four lists had the correct smaller - to - larger ordering ( e . g . , 135 , 153 , 315 ; 1 item ) ; or c ) saw two three - digit numbers with a gap in between and indicated which of four three - digit numerals would fit into the series ( 1 item ) . For numeral interpretation , children either a ) identified which of four multidigit numerals was named by the experimenter ( 2 items ) ; or b ) identified which of four numerals had a specific place value meaning ( e . g . , “ Which number has a 7 in the hundreds place ? ” ; 2 items ) . Most children ( n = 83 ) also identified which of four expanded notations matched a multidigit numeral ( e . g . , 152 = 100 + 50 + 2 ; 4 items ) . Multidigit addition items were vertically oriented two - and three - digit problems that required carrying . Children responded by writing their solutions in the test booklet ( 3 items ) . Scores on each item type were converted to percent correct so as to equate for differences in the total number of items presented . Children ’ s actual scores on the place value test 1 We combined the data from two training conditions in this experiment . Children in one condition received more numeral interpretation items than children in the other condition . See the Appendix for details . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 133 ranged from 0 % to 100 % correct . The test – retest reliability for this measure , based on scores in the no - training condition , was . 85 . The school sale problem ( Bednarz & Janvier , 1982 ) assessed children ’ s understanding of the hierarchical relations underlying place value . For example , children were told , “ Pretend you are packing things in bags and boxes to sell at school . First , you are going to pack erasers . You have 38 erasers . You can fit 5 erasers in each bag . You can fit 5 bags in each box . How many full boxes can you make with the 38 erasers you have ? ” Note that this problem is structured to reflect the same kind of nested relations represented by base - 10 notation and base - 10 blocks ( i . e . , ones , tens , and hundreds ) . We presented three versions of the problem that varied in terms of the objects ( candies or erasers ) , order of the problem ( start with total quantity and divide into units or start with units and colligate into the total ) , and the numbers involved . Each child completed all three items in a random order . They were given a paper and pencil and told they could write or draw anything that would help them solve the problem . Scores were the total number correct out of 3 possible points and ranged from 0 to 3 correct . The test – retest reliability in the no - training group was low ( . 22 ) , most likely due to widespread floor performance ; however , 68 % of children in the no - training group had the same scores at pretest and posttest . In each trial of the number line estimation task ( Siegler & Booth , 2004 ) , children were shown a horizontal 0 - to - 1 , 000 number line with the anchors labeled and a stimulus number printed above the center of the line in a circle . The stimulus numbers ranged from “ 2 ” to “ 983 . ” Children were asked to mark the number line with a pencil to indicate where the stimulus number would be placed ( 22 total trials ) . In previous research , Siegler and colleagues have found that kindergarten and first - grade students initially bunched magnitudes together such that the best fit for their responses was a logarithmic function . However , by second grade , most children correctly place different magnitudes along the line , resulting in a linear function being the best fit . This improvement has been measured using either model fit ( linear vs . logarithmic ) or percent absolute error ( PAE ; Booth & Siegler , 2006 ) . We used PAE in our analyses because this approach yielded a continuous distribution of accuracy ( range = . 04 – . 51 ) . The test – retest reliability on this task was . 69 . Results Our analyses focused on three main questions . First , to evaluate whether either training was effective , paired - samples t tests were conducted on the pretest and posttest scores for each condition . Second , we compared the effectiveness of one training condition to the other and to the control using analyses of covariance ( ANCOVAs ) that controlled for pretest differences . Third , to examine whether children of different prior ability benefitted differently from training , we conducted additional ANCOVAs with samples that were split at the median . All post - hoc comparisons were corrected using the Bonferroni method . Place Value Test . We first confirmed that children ’ s place value test scores did not differ across conditions at pretest using a one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ; M blocks = 42 % , M symbols - onl y = 46 % , M no - training = 42 % ) , F ( 2 , 146 ) = 0 . 80 , MSE = . 04 , p = . 45 , η 2 p = . 01 . Next , we compared children ’ s pretest and posttest scores and found significant improvement in both training conditions ( posttest scores , M blocks = 57 % , t [ 51 ] = 6 . 37 , p < . 0001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 88 ; M symbols - only = 62 % , t [ 48 ] = 5 . 40 , p < . 0001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 77 ) , but not in the no - training control 134 MIX ET AL . group ( M no - training = 44 % , t [ 47 ] = 1 . 05 , p = . 15 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 15 ) . The same pattern emerged in the ANCOVA . Specifically , there was a main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 145 ) = 10 . 55 , MSE = . 03 , p < . 0001 , η 2p = . 13 , such that the two training groups had higher posttest scores than the no - training control group ( blocks vs . no training , M diff = 13 % , p = . 001 ; symbols - only vs . no training , M diff = 15 % , p < . 0001 ) but did not differ from each other ( M diff = 2 % , p = 1 . 00 ) . Although neither of the training conditions seemed more effective than the other for the place value test as a whole , t tests comparing the pretests and posttests for each item type suggested a different pattern ( see Table 1 ) . Children in the blocks condition showed significant improvement on numeral interpretation items , t ( 51 ) = 3 . 34 , p = . 001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 46 , whereas children in the symbols - only condition did not , t ( 48 ) = 0 . 98 , p = . 16 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 14 . In contrast , children in both groups showed improvement on both numeral ordering ( blocks , t [ 51 ] = 2 . 79 , p = . 004 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 39 ; symbols only , t [ 48 ] = 1 . 85 , p = . 04 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 26 ) and multidigit addition ( blocks , t [ 51 ] = 4 . 06 , p < . 0001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 56 ; symbols only , t [ 48 ] = 6 . 04 , p < . 0001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 86 ) . Unlike numeral interpretation , these latter two item types were close to the material and tasks covered in the training ( see the Appendix ) . Thus , both groups improved on outcome measures that were similar to the training tasks , but only blocks training led to significant gains on numeral interpretation items , which were both novel and most clearly focused on base - 10 structure . In the no - training group , no pretest to posttest comparisons reached significance ( lowest p = . 11 , one - tailed , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 18 ) . Recall that previous work has shown differential responses to concrete models depending on overall ability . To probe for such differences , we divided children into ability groups based on their pretest scores ( median = 44 % correct ; low ability , pretest = 0 % – 43 % , n = 72 ; high ability , pretest = 44 % – 100 % , n = 77 ) , and we used this grouping as a between - subjects factor in an ANCOVA with training condition ( blocks , symbols only , no training ) as the other between - subjects factor , pretest scores as the covariate , and posttest scores as the dependent measure . 2 There was a small but significant interaction between ability and condition , F ( 2 , 142 ) = 3 . 57 , MSE = . 03 , p = . 03 , η 2p = . 05 ( see Figure 2 ) . Post - hoc comparisons showed that for the high - ability children , only symbols - only training led to greater gains than no training ( M diff = 16 % , p = . 004 ) . For high - ability children in the blocks condition , this difference was not significant ( M diff = 7 % , p = . 51 ) . In contrast , for children with low ability , there was a large blocks training advantage in comparison with no training ( M diff = 19 % , p < . 0001 ) , but this was not so following symbols - only training ( M diff = 11 % , p = . 12 ) . These performance differences are consistent with previous work showing an advantage for abstract symbols among other higher - ability learners ( e . g . , undergraduates learning a difficult science concept ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ) but also suggest that concrete models may be particularly important for children who are struggling with mathematical symbol meanings . Still , it should be noted that performance in the two training 2 The conditions were not represented equally in these ability groups because the median pretest score for the symbols - only group ( median = 50 % ) was higher than that for the blocks group ( median = 41 % ) and no training ( median = 31 % ) . This resulted in relatively more symbols - only children in the high - ability group versus the other conditions and relatively fewer symbols - only children in the low - ability group ( symbols only , high ability , n = 30 , low ability , n = 19 ; blocks , high ability , n = 26 , low ability , n = 26 ; no training , high ability , n = 21 , low ability , n = 27 ) . Because such an imbalance might lead to spurious effects due to increased power in one ability group and decreased power in the other , we repeated the analyses after shifting the 5 symbols - only children who performed directly on the median ( 44 % ) from the high - to the low - ability group . This resulted in even ability group sizes ( high ability , n = 25 ; low ability , n = 24 ) and yielded the same pattern of findings reported here . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 135 T AB L E 1 M ean pe r f o r m an c e b y t r a i n i ng c ond i t i on and i t e m t y pe , E x pe r i m en t 1 N u m e r a l O r d e r i ng N u m e r a l I n t e r p r e t a ti on M u lti d i g it A dd iti on S c hoo l Sa l e N u m b e r L i n e E s ti m a ti on PAE C ond iti on P r e t e s t P o s tt e s t P r e t e s t P o s tt e s t P r e t e s t P o s tt e s t P r e t e s t P o s tt e s t P r e t e s t P o s tt e s t S y m bo l s on l y . 71 . 76 * . 62 . 67 . 22 . 54 * . 19 . 29 . 21 . 18 * ( . 19 ) ( . 20 ) ( . 34 ) ( . 36 ) ( . 25 ) ( . 39 ) ( . 25 ) ( . 39 ) ( . 10 ) ( . 08 ) B l o c k s . 64 . 73 * . 45 . 58 * . 19 . 42 * . 18 . 41 * . 19 . 18 ( . 24 ) ( . 24 ) ( . 30 ) ( . 33 ) ( . 25 ) ( . 36 ) ( . 24 ) ( . 43 ) ( . 09 ) ( . 08 ) N o t r a i n i ng ( C on t r o l ) . 60 . 63 . 35 . 39 . 23 . 18 . 10 . 14 . 30 . 29 ( . 22 ) ( . 24 ) ( . 31 ) ( . 35 ) ( . 38 ) ( . 34 ) ( . 20 ) ( . 25 ) ( . 11 ) ( . 11 ) N o t e . F o r eac h ce ll , w e r e po r t t h e m ea n a nd s t a n d a r d d e v i a ti on . S i gn i f i ca n t g a i n s fr o m p r e t e s t t o po s tt e s t b a s e d on on e - t a il e d t t e s t s a r e i nd i ca t e d w it h a n a s t e r i s k ( p < . 05 ) . F o r nu m b e r li n e e s ti m a ti on , t h e m ea n s a r e r e po r t e d a s p e r ce n t a b s o l u t e e rr o r ( P A E ) i n s t ea d o f p e r ce n t c o rr ec t , s o t h e a s t e r i s k i nd i ca t e s a s i gn i f i ca n t d ec r ea s e . 136 conditions did not differ for either ability group ( high ability , M diff = 9 % , p = . 12 ; low ability , M diff = 8 % , p = . 40 ) , suggesting that both types of training improved performance in both groups somewhat . School Sale Problem . Recall that the school sale problem asked children to solve a challenging word problem using nested hierarchies parallel to those used in multidigit numerals ( i . e . , ones , tens , hundreds ) . Two of the three problems were worded so that children started with a total number of candies or erasers and had to report how many units resulted after packing . The third problem used the reverse order , such that children started with the total number of boxes and leftover candies / erasers and had to calculate the total . Because performance on this problem was at floor across conditions , even following training , our analyses focused on only the first two problems . Children received a score of 0 , 1 , or 2 , based on the number of these two problems they solved correctly . Six children performed at ceiling on the pretest ( i . e . , obtained a score of 2 correct ) and were excluded from further analysis . The mean percent correct for the remaining children is presented in Table 1 . We first used a one - way ANOVA to check the equivalence of the pretest scores across training groups and found them to be comparable ( M blocks = 18 % , SD = 24 % ; M symbols - only = 19 % , SD = 25 % ; M no - training = 10 % , SD = 20 % ) , F ( 2 , 108 ) = 1 . 79 , MSE = . 05 , p = . 17 , η 2p = . 03 . Comparisons of children ’ s pretest and posttest averages revealed significant improvement following blocks training ( M posttest = 41 % ) , t ( 37 ) = 4 . 02 , p < . 0001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 65 . Neither of the other pretest – posttest comparisons reached significance , though there was marginal improvement in the symbols - only group , M posttest = 29 % , t ( 28 ) = 1 . 65 , p = . 06 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 31 ; no training , M posttest = 14 % , t ( 43 ) = 0 . 72 , 0 . 00 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 30 0 . 40 0 . 50 0 . 60 0 . 70 0 . 80 0 . 90 1 . 00 Pretest Posttest Pretest Posttest P r opo r ti on C o rr ec t Symbols - Only Training Blocks Training No - Training Control Low Ability High Ability FIGURE 2 . Mean changes from pretest to posttest , by condition and ability group , Experiment 1 . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 137 p = . 25 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 11 . The superiority of blocks training also was evident in an ANCOVA using children ’ s posttest scores as the dependent variable , pretest scores as the covariate , and training condition as the between - subjects factor . 3 Specifically , there was a significant main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 107 ) = 4 . 42 , MSE = . 10 , p = . 01 , η 2p = . 08 , that was due to better performance in the blocks group versus the no - training condition ( M diff = 22 % , p = . 01 ) ; no significant difference was obtained between symbols - only training and no training ( M diff = 10 % , p = . 66 ) . Neither did the blocks group significantly outperform the symbols - only group in a direct comparison ( M diff = 12 % , p = . 42 ) . However , the finding of a blocks advantage in comparison to the no - training group is consistent with their performance on the place value test . That is , children in the blocks group demonstrated better understanding of both the school sale problem and the numeral interpretation items from the place value test — measures that specifically tap understanding of the underlying structure of multidigit numerals . To examine whether performance varied by ability , we divided children into two groups based on a median split of the place value pretest scores . We could not use the school sale problem pretest scores because two thirds of the children had scores equal to 0 . Also , using the place value pretest scores had the advantage of keeping the ability groups constant across analyses . The resulting ANCOVA , with ability group and the three training conditions as between - subjects factors , indicated that children did not benefit differentially from one training condition or the other , F ( 2 , 104 ) = 1 . 14 , MSE = . 11 , p = . 32 , η 2p = . 02 . Number Line Estimation . Recall that children were asked to mark the correct locations of multidigit numerals on a 0 - to - 1 , 000 number line . In each trial , we measured the distance between children ’ s actual responses and the correct placement for each numeral and used the PAE averaged across trials as the dependent variable in all analyses . We first examined children ’ s pretest performance and found that a condition difference existed prior to training , F ( 2 , 110 ) = 14 . 38 , MSE = . 01 , p < . 001 , η 2p = . 21 . Children in both training conditions ( M blocks = 19 % , SD = 9 % ; M symbols - only = 21 % , SD = 10 % ) had lower error rates than children in the no - training control ( M no - training = 30 % , SD = 11 % ) . During testing , we monitored performance on the place value test and school sale problem to ensure roughly equivalent performance across groups , but because the number line estimation task is more time - consuming to code , we were not aware of this discrepancy until after testing was completed . However , though not ideal , this outcome was less concerning than pretest differences between the training groups would have been . In comparisons of the pretest scores to posttest scores , only symbols - only training yielded significant improvement ( M symbols - only = 18 % , SD = 8 % , t [ 33 ] = 2 . 07 , p = . 02 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 36 ; M blocks = 18 % , SD = 8 % , t [ 35 ] = 0 . 17 , p = . 43 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 03 ; M no - training = 29 % , SD = 11 % , t [ 42 ] = 0 . 90 , p = . 19 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 14 ) . Because extreme pretest differences can bias the results using an ANCOVA ( Allison , 1990 ; Oakes & Feldman , 2001 ) , we compared performance in the three conditions using an ANOVA on the gain scores , with condition as the between - subjects variable . This analysis yielded no significant effects , F ( 2 , 110 ) = 0 . 75 , MSE = . 01 , p = . 47 , η p2 = . 01 . Nor was there a significant interaction when ability was added as a second between - subjects 3 Because scores on the school sale problem have a narrow range ( 0 – 2 ) , we repeated the reported analyses using nonpara - metric ANOVAs ( i . e . , Kruskal - Wallis tests ) . One disadvantage to this approach is that it does not permit covariates , such as the pretest scores in Experiment 1 or the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - 4 scores in Experiment 2 , to be included . Still , the results of these analyses were the same as those reported here and in Experiment 2 using ANCOVAs . 138 factor , F ( 2 , 107 ) = 1 . 01 , MSE = . 01 , p = . 37 , η p2 = . 02 . Thus , there was only weak evidence that children improved on this task after training , and only in the symbols - only group . Discussion In this experiment , we provided instruction on place value operations , either with or without the aid of base - 10 blocks . Overall , children improved in both training conditions on numeral ordering and multidigit addition , suggesting that either symbol training or symbol training with concrete models is beneficial . This result challenges the notion that concrete models interfere with learning because they are distracting and difficult to interpret ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kaminski et al . , 2009 ; McNeil et al . , 2009 ; Uttal et al . , 1997 ) . Despite the general improvement , however , there were several indications that exposure to symbols and exposure to concrete models conferred unique advantages . First , children who received blocks training demonstrated an advantage on measures that required understanding of base - 10 structure — namely , numeral interpretation items and the school sale problem . Perhaps because blocks training aligned more closely with this structure and exposed it more fully , it served to support better performance on these measures . One might wonder why , then , the same advantages were not evident on other place value tasks , such as number ordering and multidigit addition . One reason may be that knowledge of base - 10 structure is helpful , but not necessary , in these tasks . Numbers may be ordered using a rough approximation of magnitude without decomposition . Similarly , children can apply the proce - dures for multidigit calculation by rote . Thus , it is possible to show improvement on these tasks without necessarily understanding base - 10 structure . Indeed , research has suggested that the base - 10 structure of tasks like numeral ordering or multidigit calculation is not immediately apparent to learners and actually requires deliberate scaffolding to be recognized ( Kurtz , Miao , & Gentner , 2001 ; Richland & Hansen , 2013 ) . Second , only symbols - only children improved on number line estimation , suggesting that exposure to written symbols may be sufficient to induce their meaning . This was a small effect , and children in both groups were far from ceiling performance . However , the small difference evident in relatively brief training regimes could be meaningful in accounts of how children learn about the spoken and written representations of large numbers : Specifically , understanding how numerical representations are ordered on a number line may depend mostly on experience with numerical symbols . This result is consistent with previous work showing that young children begin to induce the meanings of multidigit numerals from the statistical patterns available from everyday exposure ( e . g . , two - digit numerals stand for smaller quantities than three - digit numerals ; Byrge et al . , 2014 ; Mix et al . , 2014 ) . On this view , one reason children in the blocks condition failed to show the same effect may be that they did not receive the same amount of exposure to written symbols as symbols - only group children , or it may be because the cognitive resources needed to understand the blocks limited what they could learn from the symbols themselves . This may be one sense in which concrete models were a detriment to learning , though this difference did not lead to general interference and rather , may have contributed to a specific pattern of strengths and weaknesses . We also found different responses to training based on initial ability . High - ability children had greater gains from symbols - only training than they did from training with concrete models . This finding hints that base - 10 blocks were a hindrance to children in the high - ability group , SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 139 consistent with previous research using other models ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kalyuga et al . , 2003 ) . Perhaps once learners have achieved some understanding of symbols , they find these a more efficient medium for mathematical thought than base - 10 blocks , and in this situation , base - 10 blocks have distracting or superfluous features , as others have argued ( e . g . , Kaminski et al . , 2008 ; McNeil et al . , 2009 ) . This may be why low - ability children showed the opposite pattern — exhibiting greater gains with blocks training — because they lack this compe - tence and need scaffolding from concrete models to comprehend multidigit numerals at all . The differential effects of the two training conditions , though small , remind us that under - standing place value is multifaceted and there may not be a single answer to the question of whether concrete models help . Instead , the answer may depend on the specific knowledge component being measured and the ability level of the child . Also , small effects are perhaps not surprising given the relatively brief exposure to training children received in this experiment . If children gradually internalize concrete models , as theories of embodied cognition predict , then they could require months or even years of exposure for a clear advantage of concrete models in addition to symbol training to emerge . EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment 1 , we found significant effects of blocks training , but these effects were limited . Although there were some large pretest versus posttest differences and significant contrasts with children in the no - training group , there were not significant contrasts with children in the symbols - only group . Perhaps these findings were limited because 4 to 6 weeks is too short of an exposure period . Although it would be difficult to carry out a controlled training experiment over months or years , there are naturally occurring educational situations that result in different exposure to concrete models . For place value concepts , the Montessori mathematics curriculum offers a useful test case because it centers on repeated , direct contact with concrete models . Indeed , a defining feature of Montessori education is its consistent , long - term use of sensorial materials , action - based problem solving , and careful scaffolding of written symbols to these materials and actions ( Lillard , 2012 ) . Children begin to work with base - 10 beads , for example , starting in the prekindergarten years and continue well into the elementary years ( Lillard , 1997 ) . If children benefit from extensive exposure to concrete models for place value concepts , this benefit is likely to appear for Montessori students . This experiment is also of interest because previous research on the effects of Montessori schooling has been mixed . Some studies have shown no performance differences for children in Montessori or traditional school programs ( e . g . , Lopata , Wallace , & Finn , 2005 ) . However , several carefully controlled comparisons have demonstrated an advantage of Montessori educa - tion ( e . g . , Lillard , 2012 ; Lillard & Else - Quest , 2006 ) . For example , Angeline Lillard ( 2012 ) found that 3 - to 6 - year - olds in classic , high - fidelity Montessori programs showed larger gains over the academic year in a range of subject areas , including mathematics , when compared with children in either supplemental Montessori or non - Montessori programs . In older children , these effects have not always been obtained ( e . g . , Lillard & Else - Quest , 2006 ) , but sometimes they have . For example , children who received Montessori education from preschool through fifth grade went on to have significant advantages in high school mathematics and science versus their matched classmates without prior Montessori schooling ( Dohrmann , Nishida , Gartner , 140 MIX ET AL . Lipsky , & Grimm , 2007 ) . Interestingly , this study did not reveal similar advantages for Montessori students in English or overall grade point average , as one might expect if general curricular differences ( e . g . , greater classroom autonomy ) were driving across - the - board perfor - mance differences . However , because this study assessed a broad range of skills with limited depth , it is hard to know what particular aspects of the mathematics and science curriculum might have accounted for the difference . In the present study , we probed for specific perfor - mance differences that are linked to the salient differences in Montessori curriculum content and instructional approach ( i . e . , performance on place value tests in particular ) . Perhaps this targeted approach will yield more clear - cut effects than previous studies that cast a broader net . Method Participants . The sample consisted of 68 children . Half the sample ( n = 34 ; 13 boys ) was composed of children who had been continuously attending a Montessori school from the age of 3 years . The remaining children ( n = 34 ; 14 boys ) had attended a non - Montessori preschool and at the time of the study were attending one of three elementary schools ( two public and one private ) from the same community . Children were divided into two age groups ( kindergarten , M age = 5 ; 6 , range = 4 ; 8 – 6 ; 3 , n = 36 ; and second grade , M age = 7 ; 3 , range = 6 ; 0 – 8 ; 0 , n = 32 ) . The number of Montessori and non - Montessori students within each age group was equal . An a priori power analysis indicated that a sample of 62 children would be sufficient to reveal a medium effect ( f = . 42 ) at 90 % power ( Faul et al . , 2009 ) . To guard against possible population differences between the two school groups , we matched children using Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - 4 ( PPVT - 4 ) scores . Vocabulary was chosen because it is known to correlate with SES , parent input , and IQ ( Bornstein , Haynes , & Painter , 1998 ; Hart & Risley , 1995 ; Huttenlocher , Haight , Bryk , Seltzer , & Lyons , 1991 ; Pan , Rowe , Singer , & Snow , 2005 ) . Of the total sample , 38 children were matched exactly ( i . e . , the same stanine ) , and the remaining 30 children were matched within one stanine . The difference in the raw PPVT - 4 scores for the two groups was not statistically significant ( M Montessori = 128 . 85 , M non - Montessori = 120 . 18 ) , t ( 66 ) = 1 . 43 , p = . 16 , two - tailed , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 35 , but as an added precaution , we controlled for vocabulary differences in our statistical analyses ( see Results section ) . An additional 58 children were tested but excluded due to lack of match . Data were collected during winter and spring , so children had nearly completed each grade at the time of testing . Thus , the two grade - level groups ( kindergarten and second grade ) allowed us to compare children who had received either 3 or 5 years of exposure to either Montessori or non - Montessori schooling . As in Experiment 1 , the three non - Montessori elementary schools had adopted Everyday Mathematics ( McGraw - Hill Education ) as their mathematics curriculum . Fidelity to the Montessori method varies across schools , and this variation has complicated interpretations in previous work ( Lillard , 2012 ) . Although we did not measure fidelity objec - tively , we selected Montessori schools with a strong local reputation for adhering to Montessori methods . All three were private schools , and each had been in operation for at least 25 years . One school was accredited by the Association Montessori Internationale ( AMI ) , and all three employed teachers with advanced training ( e . g . , master ’ s degrees ) from AMI - and American Montessori Society ( AMS ) - accredited programs . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 141 Materials and Procedures . Learning was assessed using the same measures as in Experiment 1 . However , Experiment 2 was not an intervention study , so the measures were given only once rather than used as a pretest and posttest . The school sale problem and number line estimation tasks were exactly the same as in Experiment 1 . The place value test was in the same format , with the same three item types as before , but items were added to ensure a sufficiently challenging range of difficulty . For example , whereas the previous multidigit calculation test included only two - and three - digit problems , the revised test included problems up to six digits . Also , whereas only addition items were analyzed in Experiment 1 , both addition and subtraction items were included in Experiment 2 ( note that the results of Experiment 2 were the same whether or not subtraction items were included ) . As a result , the place value test was also longer ( 52 items total vs . 16 items total in Experiment 1 ) . Results Place Value Test . Children ’ s mean performance is presented in Table 2 . To compare the groups , we first carried out an ANCOVA with grade ( kindergarten vs . second grade ) and curriculum ( Montessori vs . non - Montessori ) as between - subjects factors , children ’ s PPVT - 4 ( vocabulary ) raw scores as the covariate , and their percent correct on the place value test as the dependent variable . Not surprisingly , there was a significant effect of grade such that second - grade students outperformed the kindergarteners , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 24 . 93 , MSE = . 01 , p < . 0001 , η p2 = . 28 . But there also was a significant main effect of school type , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 16 . 76 , MSE = . 01 , p < . 0001 , η p2 = . 21 , that favored the Montessori students ( 26 % vs . 14 % ) . This finding indicated that even with vocabulary scores matched and controlled , children who had received a Montessori education performed better overall . There also was a significant interaction between school type and grade , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 21 . 86 , MSE = . 01 , p < . 0001 , η p2 = . 26 , due to equal performance in the two school groups in kindergarten ( M diff = 1 % , p = . 49 ) but significantly better performance in the Montessori group versus the non - Montessori group in second grade ( M diff = 24 % , p < . 0001 ) . We next carried out separate ANCOVAs for each item type , with school type as the between - subjects variable and PPVT - 4 ( vocabulary ) scores as the covariate . We analyzed only the second - grade test scores as there was no evidence in the previous analysis for a school - type difference in kindergarten . The analyses revealed a large advantage for Montessori students on multidigit calculation , F ( 1 , 29 ) = 20 . 23 , MSE = . 03 , p < . 0001 , η p2 = . 41 , and a moderate advantage on numeral interpretation , F ( 1 , 29 ) = 3 . 13 , MSE = . 07 , p = . 09 , η p2 = . 10 . Recall that in Experiment 1 , children who received blocks training showed a similar advantage on numeral interpretation problems . Interestingly , performance on numeral ordering did not differ across the two groups , F ( 1 , 29 ) = 0 . 27 , MSE = . 05 , p = . 61 , η p2 = . 009 , just as we found for the blocks and symbols - only groups in Experiment 1 . School Sale Problem . As in Experiment 1 , none of the children responded correctly on the third question for which the candies / erasers are already packed and from this , children have to compute the total number . We therefore used children ’ s scores out of 2 on the remaining questions as the dependent variable in an ANCOVA with school and grade as between - subjects variables and PPVT - 4 raw scores as the covariate . 142 MIX ET AL . T AB L E 2 M ean p e r f o r m an c e b y g r ade , sc hoo l t y pe , and i t e m t y pe , E x pe r i m en t 2 G r ad e S c hoo l T y p e N u m b e r O r d e r i ng N u m e r a l I n t e r p r e t a ti on M u lti d i g it C a l c u l a ti on S c hoo l Sa l e N u m b e r L i n e E rr o r R a t e K i nd e r g a r t e n N on - M on t e ss o r i . 42 ( . 23 ) . 23 ( . 23 ) . 00 ( . 01 ) . 03 ( . 12 ) . 34 ( . 10 ) M on t e ss o r i . 36 ( . 18 ) . 22 ( . 13 ) . 01 ( . 02 ) . 03 ( . 12 ) . 37 ( . 07 ) S ec ond g r a d e N on - M on t e ss o r i . 64 ( . 24 ) . 42 ( . 23 ) . 04 ( . 10 ) . 06 ( . 17 ) . 25 ( . 07 ) M on t e ss o r i . 68 ( . 24 ) . 63 ( . 29 ) * . 35 ( . 23 ) * . 28 ( . 3 1 ) * . 21 ( . 12 ) N o t e . M ea n s a nd s t a nd a r d d e v i a ti on s a r e r e po r t e d . S i gn i f i ca n t g r oup d i ff e r e n ce s b e t w ee n M on t e ss o r i a nd non - M on t e ss o r i b a s e d on t w o - t a il e d t t e s t s a r e i nd i ca t e d w it h a n a s t e r i s k , p < . 05 . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 143 Overall , there was a trend toward improvement on these problems from kindergarten to second grade , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 3 . 77 , MSE = . 04 , p = . 06 , η p2 = . 06 . For the comparisons involving school type , there was a significant main effect , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 4 . 66 , MSE = . 04 , p = . 04 , η p2 = . 07 , that favored Montessori students ( 15 % vs . 4 % ) and a significant interaction between school type and grade , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 5 . 07 , MSE = . 04 , p = . 03 , η p2 = . 07 . This interaction was due to equal , near - floor performance in both grades in the non - Montessori group ( M diff = 0 . 4 % , p = . 92 ) but significantly better performance for second graders than kindergarteners in the Montessori group ( M diff = 23 % , p = . 03 ) . 3 This finding demonstrates that Montessori students ultimately achieved a better understanding of the school sale problem , but not until second grade . Number Line Estimation . An ANCOVA that used children ’ s error rates as the dependent variable , with grade and curriculum as between - subjects factors and their PPVT - 4 raw scores as a covariate , revealed no significant differences based on schooling . There was a main effect of grade , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 4 . 30 , MSE = . 01 , p = . 04 , η p2 = . 06 , such that second - grade students had lower error rates than those in kindergarten ( M kindergarten = 35 % , M second grade = 23 % ) ; however , there were no other significant main effects or interactions . Thus , there was improvement with age , as in previous research on the number line task ( e . g . , Booth and Siegler , 2006 ) ; however , unlike the other two measures , there was no Montessori advantage . This finding is consistent with the lack of improvement in the blocks group on number line estimation ( Experiment 1 ) and suggests there is a distinction between the developing knowledge that underlies success on the school sale problem and number line estimation . Specifically , the school sale problem requires decomposi - tion and composition across units whereas number line estimation does not . This pattern again points to a curriculum dense in experience with manipulatives as possibly providing special support for a developing structural understanding of the place value system . Discussion There was a clear advantage for Montessori students on a range of place value tasks . Because the main distinguishing feature of Montessori mathematics instruction is its early , consistent inte - gration of concrete models , this advantage likely reflects exposure to these materials , at least in part . Interestingly , however , this advantage did not appear in kindergarten , but rather , it emerged between kindergarten and second grade . This pattern may reflect the fruition of a long incuba - tion period during which children gradually internalize their experiences with concrete models and link them to symbolic procedures , as one would predict based on the embodied cognition view ( Barsalou , 2008 ; Glenberg & Robertson , 2000 ; Lakoff & Nunez , 2001 ) . In relation to previous research on the effects of Montessori instruction , our results are consistent with several findings . First , as in other studies ( e . g . , Lillard , 2012 ) , we showed a performance advantage for Montessori students versus those in traditional schooling . Also , we showed this effect for mathematics in particular , consistent with prior work ( e . g . , Dohrmann et al . , 2007 ) . However , unlike previous studies demonstrating these effects in younger children and with less exposure ( e . g . , Lillard , 2012 , Lillard & Else - Quest , 2006 ) , our effects emerged in the second grade , after 5 years of exposure to Montessori education . One possibility is that the particular content we measured — place value concepts — requires more exposure or time to develop than the particular mathematics content measured in these previous studies ( i . e . , the Applied Problems subtest from the Woodcock Johnson - 3 ) . 144 MIX ET AL . Though our results are suggestive of a link between mathematics outcomes and instruction with concrete models , there is no way to directly connect the two in a long - range retrospective study such as the present study , raising the possibility of several alternative interpretations . For example , one might argue that Montessori teachers simply spend more time teaching place value than do teachers in traditional classrooms and this explains the observed advantage . Alternatively , the performance differences might not be related to mathematics at all , but rather to more general Montessori advantages , such as fostering better executive function ( Lillard , 2012 ; Lillard & Else - Quest , 2006 ) , that have cascading effects across academic areas ( e . g . , Blair & Razza , 2007 ; Bull & Scerif , 2001 ; Clark , Pritchard , & Woodward , 2010 ) . Finally , one might question whether SES or overall intelligence contributed to the apparent Montessori advantage , despite our efforts . These interpretations seem unlikely , however . First , the Montessori and non - Montessori samples were matched on vocabulary scores , and these scores were used as a covariate in our analyses . This approach should have reduced or eliminated any population differences or general effects of instructional method ( e . g . , executive function ) . Second , there was not a Montessori advantage across the board . Children ’ s performance was similar in the two school groups at kindergarten and on number line estimation for both grades . These findings argue against the notion that Montessori students simply receive more place value instruction or that they perform better due to fundamental differences in SES , income , cognitive function , and so forth . Indeed , the correspondence between the patterns in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 suggests that long - term experience with manipulatives may be the core difference between Montessori and non - Montessori mathematics instruction . In multiple weeks of training in Experiment 1 , children trained with blocks were better at interpreting multidigit numerals , and they showed better understanding of the structure underlying place value in the school sale problem ; in the months and years of instruction received by Montessori students in Experiment 2 , we observed the same advantages in comparisons to matched peers in other schools . In the multiple - week training of Experiment 1 , children trained only with symbols performed better on number line estimation than did children trained with blocks ; in the months and years of instruction received by Montessori students , and despite their overall higher achievement on the place value test , they did not exhibit better performance on number line estimation compared with matched peers in other schools . Clearly , further research is needed to disentangle the subtle differences in instruction that may contribute to the Montessori advantage we observed . However , the present study provides evidence suggestive of a late - emerging benefit for place value learning and , at the least , demonstrates that long - term exposure to concrete models is not detrimental . GENERAL DISCUSSION Research has shown that place value concepts are difficult for children to acquire and thereby create serious obstacles to later mathematics achievement . In the present study , we considered components of symbol grounding that might explain where and how children become stuck . In particular , we examined the effects of instruction using concrete models and asked whether differences in outcome measures , age , and ability might explain related discrepancies in the literature . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 145 In a multiweek training study that mimicked the complex training conditions of school instruction , children benefitted from training with either concrete models or symbols alone on some measures . However , for certain children and on certain measures , there was a clear advantage of training with concrete models , and for other children and other measures , there was an advantage of training with symbols alone . In a second experiment that capitalized on naturally occurring educational variation , we found that children exposed to years of instruction with concrete models showed advantages akin to those exhibited by children trained with concrete models in Experiment 1 , but the effects were even larger and more clear - cut . This pattern of findings helps to explain discrepancies in the existing literature . First , previous studies reporting a disadvantage of exposure to concrete models may not have provided adequate exposure , as our effects were strongest in Montessori students who had received 5 years of instruction with concrete models . Second , previous studies did not consider initial ability , but we found an interaction whereby high - ability children fared better with symbol - based instruction and low - ability children benefitted more from concrete models . Thus , how much a child already knows about a symbol system may determine which method is most effective . That said , we know from previous research that most children struggle to master place value notation and typically exhibit stubborn errors and misconceptions despite limited competence on some tasks ( Cauley , 1988 ; Cobb & Wheatley , 1988 ; Fuson & Briars , 1990 ; Jesson , 1983 ; Kamii , 1986 ; Kouba et al . , 1988 ; Labinowicz , 1985 ; Resnick & Omanson , 1987 ) . Perhaps children can make surface - level gains based on exposure to symbols , but these gains only take children so far . The ability to judge the rough ordinality of multidigit numbers , for example , may not be enough to support performance on more challenging tasks where understanding the multiplicative structure of base - 10 notation is required ( Laski , Ermakova , & Vasilyeva , 2014 ; Moeller et al . , 2011 ) . Concrete models may play an important role in supporting this specific process ( i . e . , grounding the meaning of this multiplicative structure ) . The finding that blocks training was particularly advantageous on novel transfer tasks that targeted base - 10 structure is consistent with this notion . Although we did not continue our training long enough to demonstrate further transfer , it seems plausible children could use this initial mapping to bootstrap their way into the more obscure nested structure of the written place value system , based on the extensive literature on analogical learning ( e . g . , Gentner , 2010 ) . One indication is the large Montessori advantage we observed for both conventional symbolic problems ( e . g . , multidigit calculation ) and specific measures of base - 10 structure ( e . g . , the school sale problem ) . This pattern , along with the evidence for smaller improvements on the same measures from blocks training in Experiment 1 , suggests that concrete models might enhance a structural understanding of place value that ultimately leads to better overall mathematics knowledge . Pertinent to this hypothesis is the finding that the Montessori advantage was not apparent in kindergarten students ; it only emerged in second grade . It makes sense that this process would be protracted because the mapping problem for place value is quite challenging . Indeed , though symbol grounding does not necessarily require lengthy exposure to a model ( e . g . , when learning words like “ cookie ” or “ cat ” ) , it might in the case of place value because of its complex internal structure . Concrete models may help bridge the gap , but as others have pointed out ( e . g . , McNeil et al . , 2009 ; Uttal et al . , 1997 ) , these models have their own representational structures that must be unpacked and mapped to be useful . It could take several years to complete this mapping , even with carefully structured models and extensive scaffolding of comparisons . If so , then research 146 MIX ET AL . on concrete models that uses only a few brief training sessions may not provide enough exposure and incubation time for positive effects to be measured . In sum , much like the existing literature related to place value acquisition and concrete models , the present study yielded mixed results . There were ways in which children learned about symbols from symbols and ways in which exposure to base - 10 blocks yielded unique insights . It seems likely that children benefit from both streams of input , and it is probably incorrect to frame this research problem in terms of absolutes . Instead , our results indicate how nuanced and context - sensitive the process of symbol grounding for place value acquisition might be . Additional research aimed at delineating the interplay of various inputs , rather than simply pitting one against the other , is needed to clarify the complex mechanisms that likely drive this learning . The most critical question may not be whether concrete models are beneficial , but rather , what underlying skills and concepts are supported by different kinds of input and what cascading consequences they have for later mathe - matics learning . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to all of the children and school personnel who participated in this study , including those from the Holt Public Schools , Okemos Public Schools , Howell Public Schools , Fowlerville Public Schools , Leslie Public Schools , Montessori Children ’ s House of Lansing , Stepping Stones Montessori School of East Lansing , Montessori Radmoor School of Okemos , St . Thomas Elementary School , and community programs in the cities of Lansing , Mason , and Grand Ledge , MI . FUNDING This research was supported by a generous grant to the first and second authors from the Institute of Education Sciences ( # R305A080287 ) . The opinions and positions expressed in this article are the authors ' and do not necessarily represent the opinions and positions of the Institute of Education Sciences or the U . S . Department of Education . REFERENCES Allison , P . D . ( 1990 ) . Change scores as dependent variables in regression analysis . Sociological Methodology , 20 , 93 – 114 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 271083 Ball , D . L . ( 1992 ) . Magical hopes : Manipulatives and the reform of math education . American Educator , 16 ( 2 ) , 14 – 18 , 46 – 47 . Barsalou , L . B . ( 2008 ) . Grounded cognition . Annual Review of Psychology , 59 , 617 – 645 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 59 . 103006 . 093639 Bassok , M . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Birds of a feather flock together : Similarity judgments with semantically rich stimuli . Journal of Memory and Language , 36 , 311 – 336 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmla . 1996 . 2492 Bassok , M . , Wu , L . , & Olseth , L . K . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretative effects of content on problem solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 354 – 367 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03197236 SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 147 Bednarz , N . , & Janvier , B . ( 1982 ) . The understanding of numeration in primary school . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 13 , 33 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00305497 Blair , C . , & Razza , R . P . ( 2007 ) . Relating effortful control , executive function , and false belief understanding to emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten . Child Development , 78 , 647 – 663 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cdev . 2007 . 78 . issue - 2 Booth , J . , L . & Siegler , R . S . ( 2006 ) . Developmental and individual differences in pure numerical estimation . Developmental Psychology , 41 , 189 – 201 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 6 . 189 Bornstein , M . H . , Haynes , M . O . , & Painter , K . M . ( 1998 ) . Sources of child vocabulary competence : A multivariate model . Journal of Child Language , 25 , 367 – 393 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0305000998003456 Bruner , J . S . , Oliver , R . R . , & Greenfield , P . M . ( 1966 ) . Studies in cognitive growth . New York , NY : Wiley . Bull , R . , & Scerif , G . ( 2001 ) . Executive functioning as a predictor of children ’ s mathematics ability : Inhibition , switch - ing , and working memory . Developmental Neuropsychology , 19 , 273 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15326942DN1903 _ 3 Byrge , L . , Smith , L . B . , & Mix , K . S . ( 2014 ) . Beginnings of place value : How preschoolers write three - digit numbers . Child Development , 85 , 437 – 443 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12162 Carbonneau , K . J . , Marley , S . C . , & Selig , J . P . ( 2013 ) . A meta - analysis of the efficacy of teaching mathematics with concrete manipulatives . Journal of Educational Psychology , 105 , 380 – 400 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0031084 Cauley , K . M . ( 1988 ) . Construction of logical knowledge : Study of borrowing in subtraction . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 202 – 205 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 80 . 2 . 202 Clark , C . A . C . , Pritchard , V . E . , & Woodward , L . J . ( 2010 ) . Preschool executive functioning abilities predict early mathematics achievement . Developmental Psychology , 48 , 1176 – 1191 . doi : 101037 / a0019672 Cobb , P . , & Wheatley , G . ( 1988 ) . Children ’ s initial understandings of ten . Focus on Learning Problems in Mathematics , 10 ( 3 ) , 1 – 28 . Dohrmann , K . R . , Nishida , T . K . , Gartner , A . , Lipsky , D . K . , & Grimm , K . J . ( 2007 ) . High school outcomes for students in a public Montessori program . Journal of Research in Childhood Education , 22 , 205 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02568540709594622 Faul , F . , Erdfelder , E . , Buchner , A . , & Lang , A . - G . ( 2009 ) . Statistical power analyses using G * Power 3 . 1 : Tests for correlation and regression analyses . Behavior Research Methods , 41 , 1149 – 1160 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BRM . 41 . 4 . 1149 Fuson , K . C . ( 1986 ) . Roles of representation and verbalization in the teaching of multi - digit addition and subtraction . European Journal of Psychology of Education , 1 , 35 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF03172568 Fuson , K . C . ( 1988 ) . Children ’ s counting and concepts of number . New York , NY : Springer - Verlag . Fuson , K . C . , & Briars , D . J . ( 1990 ) . Using a base - ten blocks learning / teaching approach for first - and second - grade place - value and multidigit addition and subtraction . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 21 , 180 – 206 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 749373 Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping the mind : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 , 752 – 775 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cogs . 2010 . 34 . issue - 5 Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural alignment in comparison : No difference without similarity . Psychological Science , 4 , 152 – 158 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 1994 . tb00652 . x Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 83 ) 90002 - 6 Glenberg , A . M . , Gutierrez , T . , Levin , J . R . , Japuntich , S . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Activity and imagined activity can enhance young children ’ s reading comprehension . Journal of Educational Psychology , 96 , 424 – 436 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 96 . 3 . 424 Glenberg , A . M . , & Robertson , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Symbol grounding and meaning : A comparison of high - dimensional and embodied theories of meaning . Journal of Memory & Language , 43 , 379 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmla . 2000 . 2714 Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems . Cognitive Psychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 0285 ( 02 ) 00519 - 4 Hart , B . , & Risley , T . R . ( 1995 ) . Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American children . Baltimore , MD : Paul H . Brookes . Ho , C . S . H . , & Cheng , F . S . F . ( 1997 ) . Training in place - value concepts improves children ’ s addition skills . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 22 , 495 – 506 . doi : 10 . 1006 / ceps . 1997 . 0947 Huttenlocher , J . , Haight , W . , Bryk , A . , Seltzer , M . , & Lyons , T . ( 1991 ) . Early vocabulary growth : Relation to language input and gender . Developmental Psychology , 27 , 236 – 248 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 27 . 2 . 236 Jesson , D . S . ( 1983 ) . The development of place value skills in primary and middle school children . Research in Education , 29 , 69 – 79 . 148 MIX ET AL . Kalyuga , S . , Ayres , P . , Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 2003 ) . The expertise reversal effect . Educational Psychologist , 38 , 23 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15326985EP3801 _ 4 Kamii , C . ( 1986 ) . Place value : An explanation of its difficulty and educational implications for the primary grades . Journal of Research in Childhood Education , 1 , 75 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02568548609594909 Kaminski , J . A . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2009 ) . The effect of concreteness on children ’ s ability to detect common proportion . In N . Taatgen & H . Van Rijn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the XXXI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 335 – 340 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kaminski , J . A . , Sloutsky , V . M . , & Heckler , A . F . ( 2008 ) . Learning theory : The advantage of abstract examples in learning math . Science , 320 , 454 – 455 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1154659 Kouba , V . L . , Brown , C . A . , Carpenter , T . P . , Lindquist , M . M . , Silver , E . A . , & Swafford , J . O . ( 1988 ) . Results of the fourth NAEP assessment of mathematics : Number , operations , and word problems . The Arithmetic Teacher , 35 , 14 – 19 . Kurtz , K . J . , Miao , C . - H . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Learning by analogical bootstrapping . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 , 417 – 446 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15327809JLS1004new _ 2 Labinowicz , E . ( 1985 ) . Learning from children : New beginnings for teaching numerical thinking . Menlo Park , CA : Addison - Wesley . Lakoff , G . , & Nunez , R . ( 2001 ) . Where mathematics comes from : How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being . New York , NY : Basic Books . Laski , E . , Ermakova , A . , & Vasilyeva , M . ( 2014 ) . Early use of decomposition for addition and its relation to base - 10 knowledge . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 35 , 444 – 454 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . appdev . 2014 . 07 . 002 Lillard , A . S . & Else - Quest , N . ( 2006 ) . The early years : Evaluating Montessori education . Science , 313 , 1893 – 1894 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1132362 Lillard , A . S . ( 2012 ) . Preschool children ’ s development in classic Montessori , supplemented Montessori , and conven - tional programs . Journal of School Psychology , 50 , 379 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsp . 2012 . 01 . 001 Lillard , P . P . ( 1997 ) . Montessori in the classroom : A teacher ’ s account of how children really learn . New York , NY : Schocken . Lopata , C . , Wallace , N . V . , & Finn , K . V . ( 2005 ) . Comparison of academic achievement between Montessori and traditional education programs . Journal of Research in Childhood Education , 20 , 5 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02568540509594546 McNeil , N . M . , Uttal , D . H . , Jarvin , L . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 2009 ) . Should you show me the money ? Concrete objects both hurt and help performance on mathematics problems . Learning and Instruction , 19 , 171 – 184 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2008 . 03 . 005 Miller , K . F . , & Stigler , J . W . ( 1991 ) . Meanings of skill : Effects of abacus expertise on number representation . Cognition and Instruction , 8 , 29 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s1532690xci0801 _ 2 Mix , K . S . , Prather , R . W . , Smith , L . B . , & Stockton , J . D . ( 2014 ) . Young children ’ s interpretation of multidigit number names : From emerging competence to mastery . Child Development , 85 , 1306 – 1319 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12197 Moeller , K . , Pixner , S . , Zuber , J . , Kaufmann , L . , & Nuerk , H . - C . ( 2011 ) . Early place - value understanding as a precursor for later arithmetic performance — A longitudinal study on numerical development . Research in Developmental Disabilities , 32 , 1837 – 1851 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ridd . 2011 . 03 . 012 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . ( 2000 ) . Principals and standards for school mathematics . Reston , VA : Author . National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers . ( 2010 ) . Common core state standards for mathematics . Washington , DC : Authors . Oakes , J . M . , & Feldman , H . A . ( 2001 ) . Statistical power for nonequivalent pretest – posttest designs : The impact of change - score versus ANCOVA models . Evaluation Review , 25 , 3 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0193841X0102500101 Pan , B . A . , Rowe , M . L . , Singer , J . D . , & Snow , C . E . ( 2005 ) . Maternal correlates of growth in toddler vocabulary production in low - income families . Child Development , 76 , 763 – 782 . Peterson , S . K . , Mercer , C . D . , & O ’ Shea , L . ( 1988 ) . Teaching learning disabled students place value using the concrete to abstract sequence . Learning Disabilities Research , 4 , 52 – 56 . Piaget , J . ( 1951 ) . Play , dreams and imitation in childhood . London , England : Heinemann . Reimer , K . , & Moyer , P . S . ( 2005 ) . Third - graders learn about fractions using virtual manipulatives : A classroom study . Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching , 24 , 5 – 25 . Resnick , L . B . , & Omanson , S . F . ( 1987 ) . Learning to understand arithmetic . In R . Glaser ( Ed . ) , Advances in instructional psychology ( Vol . 3 , pp . 41 – 95 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 149 Richland , L . E . , & Hansen , J . ( 2013 ) . Reducing cognitive load in learning by analogy . International Journal of Psychological Studies , 5 , 69 – 80 . doi : 10 . 5539 / ijps . v5n4p Siegler , R . S . , & Booth , J . L . ( 2004 ) . Development of numerical estimation in young children . Child Development , 75 , 428 – 444 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cdev . 2004 . 75 . issue - 2 Son , J . Y . , Smith , L . B . , & Goldstone , R . S . ( 2011 ) . Connecting instances to promote children ’ s relational reasoning . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 108 , 260 – 277 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2010 . 08 . 011 Uttal , D . H . , Amaya , M . , Maita , M . R . , Hand , L . L . , Cohen , C . A . , O ’ Doherty , K . & DeLoache , J . S . ( 2013 ) . It works both ways : Transfer difficulties between manipulatives and written subtraction solutions . Child Development Research , Article ID 216367 , doi : 10 . 1155 / 2013 / 216367 Uttal , D . H . , O ’ Doherty , K . , Newland , R . , Hand , L . L . , & DeLoache , J . ( 2009 ) . Dual representation and the linking of concrete and symbolic representations . Child Development Perspectives , 3 , 156 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1750 - 8606 . 2009 . 00097 . x Uttal , D . H . , Scudder , K . V . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1997 ) . Manipulatives as symbols : A new perspective on the use of concrete objects to teach mathematics . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 18 , 37 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0193 - 3973 ( 97 ) 90013 - 7 Vance , J . H . , & Kieren , T . E . ( 1971 ) . Laboratory settings in mathematics : What does research say to the teacher ? The Arithmetic Teacher , 18 , 585 – 589 . Appendix . Content of Training Sessions ( Experiment 1 ) Lesson Topics Instructional Activities Blocks Symbols - Only LESSON 1 Place Value Concepts Objective : Understand multidigit number meanings ( 1 ) Sort a pile of blocks into different block types onto place value mats . ( 2 ) Copy a written number using base - 10 blocks . ( 3 ) Given a spoken number name and construct the equivalent representation using both base - 10 blocks and number cards . ( 4 ) Identify the larger of two written numerals using blocks representations and explain in terms of the number of digits and their places . ( 1 ) Sort a pile of number cards ( 70 ) and order them smallest to largest ( 0 – 9 ) . ( 2 ) Copy a written number using the number cards . ( 3 ) Given a spoken number name and construct the equivalent representation using number cards . ( 4 ) Identify the larger of two written numerals and explain in terms of the number of digits and their places . LESSON 2 Multidigit Addition Without CarryingObjective : Learn the procedures for multidigit addition without carrying . ( 1 ) Construct representations of written addition problems using base - 10 blocks and move the blocks to reach a solution . ( 2 ) Write the sums using number cards . ( 1 ) Practice written multidigit addition problems on worksheets . ( 2 ) Write the solutions on the worksheets . ( Continued ) 150 MIX ET AL . ( Continued ) Lesson Topics Instructional Activities Blocks Symbols - Only LESSON 3 Addition With Carrying Objective : Learn the procedures for solving multidigit addition problems with carrying . ( 1 ) Learn the written notation for addition with carrying using parallel representations of blocks . ( 2 ) Practice written problems using base - 10 blocks as supports . ( 3 ) Make equivalent block patterns using different block combinations ( e . g . , 1 ten stick = 10 ones ) . ( 1 ) Learn the written notation for addition with carrying . ( 2 ) Practice written addition problems with carrying on worksheets . LESSON 4 Subtraction Without Borrowing Objective : Learn the procedures for solving multidigit subtraction problems . ( 1 ) Represent and solve problems that require borrowing using base - 10 blocks . ( 2 ) Write the solutions using number cards . ( 1 ) Learn the notation for written subtraction problems . ( 2 ) Practice written subtraction problems . LESSON 5 Subtraction With Borrowing Objective : Learn the procedures for solving multidigit subtraction problems with borrowing . ( 1 ) Learn the notation for written subtraction problems using parallel representations of blocks . ( 2 ) Practice written problems using base - 10 blocks as supports . ( 3 ) Make equivalent block patterns using different block combinations ( e . g . , 1 ten stick = 10 ones ) . ( 1 ) Learn the notation for written subtraction problems with borrowing . ( 2 ) Practice written subtraction problems with borrowing . LESSON 6 Review Mixed review and written practice problems . Mixed review and written practice problems . NOTE : Roughly one third of the 101 children ( n = 20 in the blocks condition and n = 15 in symbols - only condition ) were held to a time limit of 30 min per lesson ( or 180 total min of training ) to ensure that all children had the same amount of exposure and completed all six lessons . These children completed all six lessons . The remaining children ( n = 32 in the blocks condition and n = 34 in the symbols - only condition ) were allowed to move through the lessons as slowly as they needed to reach mastery on each subtopic , with an upper limit of 6 weeks . Some , but not all , completed the six lessons in this timeframe . Also , some children progressed very quickly and finished in less time than others , who were given even more instruction in an attempt togetthemthroughthe whole trainingset . Thisapproachresultedin arange oftrainingamounts from12sessionsto20 sessions ( mean = 14 sessions ) or 360 to 600 instructional min ( mean = 420 min ) . A preliminary analysis of variance indicated the pattern of performance on a composite posttest was parallel for children in the two groups ( time - limited and self - paced ) , F ( 1 , 93 ) = 0 . 85 , MSE = . 05 , p = . 36 , η p2 = . 01 , so we have combinedtheir data in the primary analyses . However , because not all children received the subtraction lessons , we analyzed performance on addition problems only . SYMBOL GROUNDING FOR PLACE VALUE 151