a r X i v : 0808 . 4088v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 29 A ug 2008 Aﬃne model of stress stiﬀening in semiﬂexible ﬁlament networks J . R . Blundell and E . M . Terentjev Cavendish Laboratory , University of Cambridge , Madingley Road , Cambridge , CB3 0HE , U . K . ( Dated : August 29 , 2008 ) We present a revised theoretical study of the aﬃne assumption applied to semiﬂexible networks . Drawing on simple models of semiﬂexible worm - like chains we derive an expression for the probability distribution of crosslink separations valid at all separations . This accounts for both entropic and mechanical ﬁlament stretching . From this we obtain the free energy density of such networks explicitly as a function of applied strain . We are therefore able to calculate the elastic moduli of such networks for any imposed strain or stress . We ﬁnd that accounting for the distribution of cross - link separations destroys the simple scaling of modulus with stress that is well known in single chains , and that such scaling is sensitive to the mechanical stretch modulus of individual ﬁlaments . We compare this model to three experimental data sets , for networks of diﬀerent types of ﬁlaments , and ﬁnd that a properly treated aﬃne model can successfully account for the data . We ﬁnd that for networks of stiﬀer ﬁlaments , such as F - actin , to ﬁt data we require a much smaller eﬀective persistence length than usually assumed to be characteristic of this ﬁlament type . We propose that such an eﬀectively reduced rigidity of ﬁlaments might be a consequence of network formation . PACS numbers : 82 . 35 . p , 78 . 20 . Ek , 87 . 19 . R I . INTRODUCTION Networks of crosslinked or branched semiﬂexible ﬁla - ments are found in many biologically relevant systems . These include the networks of ﬁlaments such as F - actin , intermediate ﬁlaments and microtubules that make up the cytoskeleton of cells , as well as networks of collagen and ﬁbrin found in the extracellular matrix . Looking broader , similar semiﬂexible / rigid networks are formed by segments of DNA [ 1 ] , by aggregated amyloid ﬁbrils [ 2 ] , self - assembled peptide nanotubes [ 3 ] and by carbon nanotubes , on their own or dispersed in polymer matrix [ 4 ] . Semiﬂexible networks of cytoskeleton have interest - ing and unusual elastic properties that are thought to be crucial to the way in which cells move , function and re - spond to their surroundings [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] . In particular , such networks tend to be stiﬀer than conventional polymer networks such as rubber , and show a dramatic stiﬀening over modest strains that is absent in conventional elas - tomers [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] . This novel behavior is a consequence of the semiﬂexible nature of ﬁlaments that make up the network . Such ﬁla - ments are much stiﬀer than conventional polymer chains with persistence lengths l p ranging from hundreds of nanometers to tens of microns [ 12 , 13 ] . The persistence length is of a similar magnitude to other lengths in the system namely the total ﬁlament length L and the char - acteristic length between crosslinks or branch points l c . As a consequence the ﬁlaments cannot be modeled as ﬂexible chains ( l c ≫ l p ) , nor as rigid rods ( l p ≫ l c ) , in - stead they are termed semiﬂexible because l c ∼ l p . It is this interplay of three diﬀerent length scales that distin - guishes the elastic behavior of biopolymer networks from rubbers where there is only one relevant length scale in the problem : the span between crosslinking points . There have been various theoretical ideas put forward to explain the elasticity of these semiﬂexible networks FIG . 1 : A schematic illustration of the three relevant length scales in semiﬂexible networks . Because all three lengths are of a similar scale , some very interesting elastic behavior re - sults . [ 8 , 9 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . In general these can be split into two classes . Models where the elasticity is explained in terms of the entropic stretching of individual ﬁlaments between crosslinks [ 8 , 9 , 14 ] and models where the elas - ticity is explained in terms of a transition from an en - thalpic bending - dominated regime to an entropic stretch - ing dominated regime [ 15 , 16 ] . One of the main dis - tinctions between the two approaches is that for mod - els considering only entropic stretching of ﬁlaments it is assumed that any deformation applied to the system is homogeneous down to the length scale of crosslinks , that is , the deformation ﬁeld is aﬃne [ 8 ] . For models relying on dynamic bending of ﬁlaments , the deformation must necessarily be non - aﬃne [ 15 , 17 ] . Recent experiments have claimed that the strain stiﬀ - ening of such networks is satisfactorily explained in terms of the aﬃne entropic stretching model [ 8 , 9 ] . In particu - lar Storm et al . [ 8 ] concluded that an aﬃne model that accounts for the possible mechanical stretching of ﬁla - ments is able to explain the elastic response of isotropic 2 ﬁbrogen gels . This is in a curious contrast with Gardel et al . [ 9 ] , who reported that the elasticity of crosslinked F - actin ﬁlaments at various concentrations is explained in terms of entropic eﬀects only , accounting for no mechan - ical stretching . In this paper we aim to investigate these ideas more closely by comparing an aﬃne model predic - tion for the shear modulus of semiﬂexible networks to experimental data of both Storm et al . [ 8 ] ( performed on the more ﬂexible ﬁbrogen networks ) and also to the data of Gardel et al . [ 9 ] ( performed on the more rigid F - actin networks ) . We also extend our model to the the case of uniaxial stretching , and compare it with the in - vivo results of Fernandez et al . [ 18 ] who measured the stress - stiﬀening of entire cells under uniaxial strains . We develop a simple aﬃne model that accounts for both entropic elasticity and the direct mechanical stretching of ﬁlaments in a similar way to Storm et al . [ 8 ] . This is achieved by calculating the probability distribu - tion for the separations of crosslinks based on expressions obtained for semiﬂexible worm - like chain models [ 19 , 20 ] , which we extend to be valid at all extensions . Our model is therefore able to calculate the free energy density of the network explicitly and therefore we obtain any desired shear ( or Young ) modulus at a given imposed strain . We ﬁnd that such a model does indeed explain the stiﬀening of more ﬂexible biopolymer gels ( such as ﬁbrogen ) rather well . This is in agreement with the model of Storm et al . [ 8 ] . We also ﬁnd that the same aﬃne model is able to explain the stress stiﬀening of crosslinked networks of the stiﬀer ﬁlaments F - actin [ 9 ] . However , we ﬁnd that if one properly accounts for the initial distribution of crosslink separations and orientations in the network , there is no longer a universal scaling of modulus with stress for the network as claimed in [ 9 ] . Moreover we ﬁnd that the form of the modulus - stress relation becomes sensitive to the mechanical stretch modulus of the individual ﬁlaments . We also note a curious feature , that to achieve an agree - ment with the F - actin data we have to assume that the eﬀective persistence length of the ﬁlaments in the net - work is much smaller than one usually ﬁnds in the lit - erature . In discussing this problem , we ﬁnd that similar eﬀect is known in various other systems , such as amyloid ﬁbril networks , where many authors report a high persis - tence length on the basis of image analysis of curvature of ﬁlaments deposited on a substrate surface [ 21 ] , while the few studies of bulk networks of these ﬁbrils [ 2 ] give very much shorter persistence lengths . We propose that such a reduced persistence length might be a consequence of the ﬁlaments being quenched into a network . II . QUENCHED NETWORKS The quantities of interest in this paper are the equilib - rium elastic moduli of a crosslinked ( or branched ) semi - ﬂexible polymer network . Any such equilibrium thermo - dynamic property is always expressible as a derivative of the free energy of the system , and so the task is really FIG . 2 : Schematic illustration of a strand in a semiﬂexible crosslinked network . The contour length of ﬁlament between the two crosslinks is denoted by l c while the vector connecting the two crosslinks is denoted by R . to be able to calculate the free energy of a crosslinked semiﬂexible network as a function of arbitrary imposed strain . The remainder of this section is devoted to this task . Let us initially consider a single section of a ﬁla - ment that connects two crosslink nodes . We will refer to such ﬁlament sections as “strands” . Each strand in the network is identiﬁed by the label α . The arc length of ﬁlament that makes up a strand is denoted by l c and is assumed to be the same for all α ( this is obviously a crude approximation , which however is expected to hold well in a large system with a relatively high crosslinking density ) . The displacement vector that connects the ends of a strand is denoted by R α . For the remainder of this paper we will refer to the separation vector as the dimen - sionless vector r = R / l c . These variables are shown in Fig . 2 The vectors r α will not all be the same , but will follow some distribution which is a characteristic of the ﬁla - ments making up the strands . In general , we will label this normalized probability distribution by P ( r α ) – we delay ﬁnding an adequate physical expression for P ( r α ) until the next section . Given P ( r α ) , the free energy of the network as a function of strain can be calculated in the following way : Firstly , we note that the crosslinks are quenched . That is , the time needed for a strand to explore diﬀerent con - formations is much smaller than the time needed for the crosslinks to break and re - form . This separation of timescales means that one can perform equilibrium statistical mechanics over conformations while assuming that the topology of the network remains quenched in place – a classical procedure of quenched averaging em - ployed in theories of rubber elasticity [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] . Secondly , we assume that the strands of the network do not interact apart from at crosslinks ( i . e . they are not entangled on their own ) . This approximation is also well known from rubber elasticity and we expect it to hold for open - mesh semiﬂexible networks provided l c / l p . 1 . This is due to the fact that at such length scales the strands behave very rigidly and therefore have less op - portunity to explore the surrounding space , and hence we expect excluded volume eﬀects to be negligible . Each strand α will have a free energy of : F ( r α ) = k B T ln 1 P ( r α ) ( 1 ) If one now deforms the whole network by some strain ten - sor Λ , the separation vectors r α will individually trans - 3 form to a new separation r ′ α which will depend in some way on the imposed deformation : r ′ α = λ α r α ( 2 ) where λ α ( Λ ) is the strain tensor describing the transfor - mation of the α th strand . In general the strain tensor λ α will be a function both of the applied strain Λ and of which strand we are considering , α – that is , the defor - mation does not in general have to be aﬃne . As long as the topology of the network is conserved under the deformation , the free energy of the network can be expressed as the free energy of each strand in the new strained state F ( λ α r α ) summed over the same strand labels α : f ( Λ ) = 1 V X α F ( λ α r α ) ( 3 ) We now make the assumption that the deformation ﬁeld is aﬃne . That is to say , that the strain tensors acting on each individual strand is the same as the bulk λ α = Λ . We do not attempt to justify this assumption , but rather will examine the validity of it when comparing the results of this model to experimental results . With this aﬃne assumption the free energy density of a quenched network undergoing aﬃne deformation can be written as the integral : f ( Λ ) = nk B T Z d 3 r P ( r ) ln 1 P ( Λ r ) ( 4 ) where n is the number density of strands . Provided one can obtain an expression for the probability of separation vector r occurring , one can calculate the free energy den - sity of the network using the above integral . The next section deals with the details of implementing this calcu - lation : in particular in ﬁnding an appropriate expression for P ( r ) . III . THE MODEL This section will be concerned with developing an ex - pression for the probability distribution of semiﬂexible separation vectors P ( r ) that can be used in Eq . 4 to calculate the free energy density of the network . The main diﬃculty is that although there are a number of ex - pressions that have been proposed for the form of P ( r ) [ 19 , 20 , 26 , 27 ] , all are calculated for inextensible chains and therefore have an essential zero at | r | = 1 . If one invokes the aﬃne assumption however , some chains will inevitably be stretched beyond the limit | r | = 1 . One therefore needs a probability distribution that accounts for the ﬁnite probability of the strand being in a mechanically stretched state - where the contour length of the strand has increased beyond l c by means of stretching of bonds along the ﬁlament backbone . The work of Kierfeld et . al . [ 28 ] provides an analysis of single ﬁlaments that accounts for the possible mechan - ical stretching , however they succeed only in providing extension - force relations for such ﬁlaments in diﬀerent force regimes , whereas we require the full probability dis - tribution . We achieve this in the following way : We again examine a single strand that is at its equilib - rium separation . When the separation of the strand ends r is at its equilibrium , we expect there to be no backbone stretching . The probability distribution is determined only by entropic eﬀects of the semiﬂexible ﬁlament . In this regime P ( r ) is accurately described by distributions obtained in [ 19 , 20 ] , e . g . : P ( r ) ∝ 1 ( 1 − r 2 ) 9 / 2 Exp (cid:20) − 9 a 8 ( 1 − r 2 ) (cid:21) ( 5 ) where the parameter a = l c / l p and is a measure of the ﬂexibility of the ﬁlaments and r = | r | . As one stretches the strand from this equilibrium separation , the entropic returning force of the strand increases and it becomes increasingly diﬃcult to stretch . The eﬀective modulus of this entropic elasticity µ e is given by : µ e ( r ) = k B T∂ 2 r ln 1 p ( r ) ( 6 ) This is a function of extension r and diverges like ( 1 − r ) 3 in agreement with [ 29 ] . At some value of extension , which we will label r 1 , the entropic stretching modulus µ e ( r ) will exceed the mechanical stretching modulus of the strand µ m ( related to the Young modulus of the ﬁl - ament ) , µ e ( r 1 , a ) = µ m . This deﬁnes r 1 in terms of µ m and a . We shall use a simple model for the cross - over from entropic stretching to mechanical stretching , which states that below r 1 the response of the chain is purely entropic , while above r 1 it is purely mechanical : µ ( r ) = (cid:26) µ e ( r ) 0 < r ≤ r 1 Entropic µ m r 1 < r ≤ ∞ Mechanical ( 7 ) Note we assume that the Young modulus of the ﬁlament remains constant with strain . In reality it would decrease with strain until eventual rupture of the ﬁlament , how - ever we do not deal with such terminal eﬀects in this paper . From these expressions for the stretch modulus of an individual strand , we can obtain an expression for the free energy of the strand as a function of separation r by integrating twice : βF ( r ) = (cid:26) 92 ln ( 1 − r 2 ) + 9 a 8 ( 1 − r 2 ) 0 < r ≤ r 1 12 µ m x 2 + Ax + B r 1 < r ≤ ∞ ( 8 ) where A and B are constants that are determined by requiring that the free energy and its ﬁrst derivative with 4 ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 3 : ( a ) P ( r ) plotted for values of a of 0 . 25 ( solid line ) , 0 . 5 ( large dash ) , 1 . 0 ( small dash ) , 5 . 0 ( dots ) . Note that the last distribution ( for more ﬂexible chains ) already resembles the Gaussian , with the peak at r = 0 . The value of µ m / k B T used here is 10 4 . ( b ) P ( r ) plotted for values of µ m / k B T of 5000 ( solid line ) 1000 ( large dash ) and 500 ( small dash ) . The value of a is 0 . 2 respect to separation are continuous across the boundary at r 1 . Given this free energy we can obtain an expression for the probability distribution for the chain that is valid for all separations r using the usual deﬁnition : P ( r ) = e − β [ F ( r ) − F ] , ( 9 ) where β = 1 / k B T and F = Z d 3 r e − βF ( r ) . ( 10 ) We remind the reader that the separation is a vector , and therefore integration must be performed over all orienta - tions as well as the length of r . Plots of P ( r ) for various values of the parameters a and µ m are shown in Fig . 3 ( a ) and ( b ) . The advantage of our approach is now clear ; we have a relatively simple expression for the probability distribu - tion of strand separation vectors that is valid for all sepa - rations , from which we can calculate any thermodynamic property related to a single strand . With the probability distribution deﬁned , we can proceed to calculate the free energy density of the network as a function of applied strain via Eq . 4 . This is implemented as follows : Firstly we must ﬁnd the initial minimum of the free energy as this is the equilibrium point where the net - work starts before being strained . As observed in [ 8 ] , this will not in general occur at zero strain . Instead we must allow for the possibility that the network undergoes an initial spherically symmetric bulk volume change ( an eﬀect analogous to syneresis in ordinary gels ) . That is , we allow for the possibility that all strand separations un - dergo the transformation | r | → b | r | , where b is a constant close to one . Only a spherically symmetric deformation is allowed since by symmetry it is the only spontaneous deformation possible in an isotropic network . We must therefore ﬁnd the minimum of the integral − Z ∞ 0 4 πr 2 d r P ( r ) ln P ( br ) ( 11 ) with respect to b . We solve this numerically . As pointed out in [ 8 ] , b is not an extra parameter in the problem , but is completely determined by a and µ m . For net - works considered in this paper , all values of b are less than one ; the network therefore shrinks initially after crosslinking , which is a well - known eﬀect of reducing the conformational freedom of ﬁlaments on establishing quenched crosslinks . Once the minimum of the free en - ergy has been found , we calculate the free energy density as a function of strain using Eq . 4 . We do this for two deformation geometries : shear and uniaxial extension . These are implemented as follows : A . Simple shear deformation The experiments [ 8 , 9 ] impose a simple volume - conserving shear deformation on the networks . Trans - formation of the separation vector components ( x , y , z ) under simple shear depends on a single parameter γ :   x ′ y ′ z ′   =   1 0 γ 0 1 0 0 0 1     xyz   ( 12 ) Transforming to spherical polar coordinates we can write the norm of the transformed separation r ′ in terms of the original separation r , the angles parameterizing the orientation of a strand ( θ , φ ) ( deﬁned in the usual way with respect to the polar axis z ) and the applied shear γ : r ′ = br p 1 + 2 γ sin θ cos θ cos φ + γ 2 cos 2 θ ( 13 ) The integral to be evaluated is therefore : f ( γ ) = − nk B T Z P ( r ) ln P ( r ′ ) r 2 sin θ d r d θ d φ ( 14 ) This integral is an expression for the free energy of a semiﬂexible network that has undergone aﬃne deforma - tion at any shear strain γ . The integral is performed easily in Mathematica . There is sometimes a confusion 5 in the literature about which quantity to call the “elas - tic modulus” when the deformation is not inﬁnitesimal . Two diﬀerent deﬁnitions are possible : the shear modulus G and the diﬀerential shear modulus K of the network that has been subject to a simple shear of magnitude γ in the xz plane are easily obtained from the free energy density by using the following relations [ 30 ] : G = σ xz γ = 2 γ ∂f ∂γ K = ∂σ xz ∂γ = 2 ∂ 2 f ∂γ 2 ( 15 ) . B . Uniaxial extension There are a number of experiments that impose uni - axial compression or extension on the cytoskeleton , in vitro [ 10 ] or in actual living cells [ 18 ] . To compare this aﬃne model to such experiments we must calculate the modulus in this geometry . Assuming this deformation is volume conserving , the aﬃne transformation of the sep - aration vector is :   x ′ y ′ z ′   =   1 / √ λ 0 0 0 1 / √ λ 0 0 0 λ     xyz   ( 16 ) As before , expressing this in spherical polar coordi - nates , the norm of the separation vector transforms as : r ′ = br s sin 2 θ λ + λ 2 cos 2 θ ( 17 ) Following the same arguments as in the case of sim - ple shear , the free energy density of a network that has been subject to aﬃne uniaxial volume conserving strain is therefore : f ( λ ) = − 2 πnk B T Z P ( r ) ln P ( r ′ ) r 2 sin θ d r d θ , ( 18 ) where we have picked up a factor of 2 π from the blank integration over φ . Given this elastic free energy density , the Young modulus Y and diﬀerential Young modulus E of the network are given by : Y = σ zz λ = 1 λ ∂f ∂λ E = ∂σ zz ∂λ = ∂ 2 f ∂λ 2 ( 19 ) C . Scaling of moduli For both shear and uniaxial - extension geometries , we can examine how the stiﬀness of semiﬂexible networks scales with model parameters . Of particular interest is how the linear modulus of the network ( at inﬁnites - imal deformations ) scales with the parameter a = l c / l p , and how the non - linear modulus scales with applied pre - stress . For the aﬃne model considered in this work we ﬁnd that the linear shear modulus G 0 and the linear ex - tension modulus Y 0 have a scaling with a of the form : G 0 ≈ 1 . 1 nk B T (cid:18) 4 − a a (cid:19) 2 ; Y 0 ≈ 3 . 3 nk B T (cid:18) 4 − a a (cid:19) 2 . ( 20 ) Naturally , both linear moduli are independent of µ m at inﬁnitesimal strains , and they are related by a factor of 3 as indeed required in an incompressible linear elasticity [ 30 ] . The scaling of a − 2 is how the “modulus” of sin - gle ﬁlament scales for large strains . The contribution of the form ( 4 − a ) 2 comes from the quenched averaging . Once we quench the network with cross - links , we allow a bulk spherically symmetric transformation of all separa - tion vectors , to minimize the quenched free energy . This contribution accounts for the ( 4 − a ) 2 dependence . Note that for small a = l c / l p ( very rigid ﬁlaments ) , the scaling is approximately inverse square . It has been claimed that for models considering the simple aﬃne entropic stretching of constituent strands , the scaling of the modulus K with stress σ should follow a simple power law K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 [ 9 ] . We ﬁnd that this reasoning is , however , only valid if one considers a single chain . If instead one properly treats the orientational av - eraging over the distribution of separation vectors , such universal scaling is lost . We illustrate this eﬀect in Figs . 4 and 5 by plotting the stiﬀness of a single ﬁlament as a function of tension , for various values of the stretch modulus µ m at ﬁxed a . In Fig . 4 , we plot the “modu - lus” of a single chain ∂τ / ∂x , where τ is the tension on the ﬁlament . As expected , at high τ the ﬁlaments show a power law scaling ∼ τ 3 / 2 : it is indeed true that for a worm - like chain model of a single semi - ﬂexible ﬁlament , the modulus scales like the tension to the power 1 . 5 for large extensions , exactly as argued in [ 9 ] and [ 31 ] . How - ever , if we have a crosslinked network with a collection of ﬁlaments with a corresponding distribution of separation vectors P ( r ) , this result changes . In Fig . 5 we plot the “modulus” ∂ h τ i P / ∂λ as a function of “stress” h τ i P for diﬀerent value of µ m , where h . . i P refers to averages over the probability distribution of separation vectors . We ﬁnd that no such universal scaling exists – the functional dependence is no longer a simple power law . In particu - lar , the initial non - linear exponent can be made greater than 3 / 2 provided µ m is large enough . IV . RESULTS We now compare the results of the model presented above with a series of experiments . Firstly we examine the data of Storm et al . [ 8 ] , who measure the simple shear modulus G of branched ﬁbrogen networks as a function of applied strain at various ﬁbrogen concentrations . The 6 FIG . 4 : Log - log graph of the modulus of a single ﬁlament as a function of applied tension , where there is no initial dis - tribution of separation vectors . The curves correspond to βµ m = 10 8 , 10 6 and 10 4 ( top to bottom ) , for a ﬁxed value of a = 1 . The constant gradient at high tensions corresponds to a power law scaling of ∂τ / ∂λ ∼ τ 3 / 2 ) FIG . 5 : Log - log graph of the average modulus as a function of the average tension , where averages are performed over the distribution of separation vectors P ( r ) . Curves are for βµ m = 10 10 , 10 8 , 10 6 , 10 4 ( top to bottom ) . Accounting for this distribution destroys the simple power law scaling of mod - ulus with tension , even in a 1 − d network . The dashed line shows a power law of 3 / 2 . data of [ 8 ] is taken over a wide range of strains ( up to ∼ 100 % ) and allows the model to be tested well into the regime of non - linear elasticity , up to the point of network rupture . It does not , however , provide a good opportu - nity to examine the behavior of such networks at low strains ( ≤ 5 % ) because the ﬁrst data point already oc - curs at 5 % strain . Secondly we compare the predictions of our aﬃne model to the data of Gardel et al . [ 9 ] , who examine the diﬀerential modulus K of crosslinked actin networks , as a function of applied prestress at various concentrations of actin monomer , while keeping the ratio of monomer con - centration to crosslinker concentration constant . This enables us to examine more closely how well an aﬃne model compares to experimental results in stiﬀer net - works at smaller strains . We also compare our model to the experimental re - sults of Fernandez et al . [ 18 ] who measure the uniaxial stiﬀness of entire living cells as a function of pre - stress . They ﬁnd that the uniaxial stiﬀness exhibits a universal scaling with applied pre - stress , which we ﬁnd is consis - tent with cells , whose stiﬀness is determined by an actin FIG . 6 : Schematic illustration of many strands of length l c along a ﬁlament of length L . The approximate number of such strands on a single ﬁlament is m ≈ L / l c . cytoskeleton . A . Comparing to data of Storm et . al . Before we compare our model to experiment we must choose how we are to ﬁt to data . The model we formu - lated in Eq . 4 has three parameters : n ( the number den - sity of strands in the network ) , a ( the ratio of the length of the strand to the ﬁlament persistence length l c / l p ) and µ m ( the mechanical stretching modulus of the ﬁlaments ) . However , the number density of strands n and the value of a are not independent . They are related in the fol - lowing way : Let us say that we have a ﬁlament of total length L . Crosslinks or branching points are spaced by an average length l c along the ﬁlament backbone . Assuming l c ≪ L , the number of strands m on a single ﬁlament is : m ≈ L / l c . This does not account for dangling ends , but in a densely cross - lined network this becomes irrelevant as m and m − 2 would diﬀer by a small fraction . These lengths are shown in Fig . 6 . The total number of such ﬁlaments in our system must approximately be N = L tot / L where L tot is the total length of all ﬁlaments in the system . This total length of all ﬁlaments can be written as the total mass of ﬁlament monomer , M , divided by the mass per unit length of ﬁl - ament , ρ . So the number density of ﬁlaments is c m / Lρ , where c m is the mass density of monomers , c m = M / V . Therefore the total number density of strands in the sys - tem is : n = c m Lρm = c m l c ρ = c m al p ρ ( 21 ) Since c m , l p and ρ are independently measured exper - imentally , the value of n is determined directly by the value of a . In examining experimental data , we will ﬁt a and n independently , and then use the above relation as a check on consistency of the ﬁts . We propose that if the ﬁtted parameters a and n are consistent , then the value of nal p ρ / c m should be close to unity . The parameter µ m is deﬁned above as the energy scale associated with a fractional increase in ﬁlament length . We can obtain an estimate of the value of µ m for a strand by realizing that the energy of a ﬁlament with a Young modulus E f and cross - sectional area A that has been stretched from a length l c to l is : 7 ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 7 : ( a ) Fit of the model to the data of Storm et al . [ 8 ] . The data sets are obtained from shear measurements on branched ﬁbrogen networks with monomer mass concen - trations of 4 . 5 ( (cid:7) ) , 2 . 0 ( (cid:4) ) , 1 . 0 ( • ) and 0 . 5 ( (cid:3) ) mg / ml . The model ﬁts very well to the data at all concentrations for phys - ically reasonable and consistent ﬁt parameters ( Table IV A ) , although fails to capture the concave nature of the curves at high strains , thought to be due to ﬁlament rupture . ( b ) The same ﬁt as in shown on a Linear - linear scale . E = 1 2 E f l c A ( l / l c − 1 ) 2 ( 22 ) Comparing to the original expression for µ m we see : µ m = E f Al c = E f Al p a ( 23 ) An estimate for the mechanical stretching modulus can therefore be obtained , provided one knows the Young modulus of the ﬁlament and the approximate radius of the ﬁlament . In comparing our model to the data of Storm et al . we ﬁx the value of µ m to be 5000 k B Ta . We do this because the Young modulus of the ﬁlaments should be the same at all concentrations . This is con - sistent with the measured diameter of 10nm for ﬁbrogen ﬁlaments and a Young modulus of ∼ 1MPa , which has been measured experimentally for ﬁbrin [ 32 ] . In that case , only one truly independent ﬁtting parameter re - mains ( the stiﬀness ratio a ) and thus the test is rather stringent . The resulting ﬁts are shown in Fig . 7 ( a ) and ( b ) , and the ﬁtted values of a are given in Table . ( IV A ) . Note that the check of consistency for the ﬁtted values all fall close to the estimate value of 1 . We believe this shows that the aﬃne assumption is valid for the above kinds of networks . c m ( mg / ml ) 4 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 0 0 . 5 µ m / k B Ta 5000 5000 5000 5000 a 0 . 60 0 . 75 0 . 95 1 . 40 b 0 . 994 0 . 992 0 . 987 0 . 968 k B Tn ( J / m 3 ) 9 . 7 2 . 2 0 . 69 0 . 32 nal p ρ / c m 1 . 89 1 . 21 0 . 96 1 . 31 TABLE I : Parameter values for the ﬁts to data of Storm et al . [ 8 ] . These ﬁt values have been obtained using the persistence length l p of 0 . 5 µ m ( reported in [ 8 ] ) , and a mass per unit length for ﬁbrogen ρ of 2 . 4 × 10 − 14 kg / m [ 8 ] . B . Comparing to the data of Gardel et al . To compare the aﬃne model proposed here to the data of Gardel et al . [ 9 ] , we use a slightly altered method to that described above . We do this for the following rea - son : Gardel et al . perform measurements of diﬀerential shear modulus K on scruin - crosslinked F - actin ﬁlaments . They measure both the number concentration of actin monomer in the system n A as well as the number con - centration of scruin crosslinker in the system n s . They then measure the diﬀerential shear modulus as a function of pre - stress for four values of n A while keeping the ratio ν = n s / n A = 0 . 03 constant . Recalling Eq . 21 we have a relationship between the number density of strands in our system n and the contour length of the strands l c : n = c m / l c ρ , where c m is the mass concentration of monomer and ρ is the mass per unit length for F - actin ﬁlaments . If such strands are formed at crosslinks , and each crosslink has an average coordination of z ( we shall assume z = 4 here ) , then the number density of strands n is related to the number density of cross - links n xl via n = n xl z / 2 . Therefore knowing n xl from experiment , we have an estimate for l c via : l c = 2 c m ρzn xl = m A 2 ρν ≈ 0 . 04 µ m , ( 24 ) where in the second term we have expressed l c in terms of the mass of a single actin monomer m A ( taken to be 42kD [ 33 , 34 ] ) and the ratio of crosslinker concentration to monomer concentration ν = n s / n A which was kept at a constant value of 0 . 03 in these experiments . In the ﬁnal term we have evaluated the contour length of a strand for the experimental values of [ 9 ] and ρ = 2 . 6 × 10 − 14 kg / m [ 34 ] . Note that this predicts that l c is only dependent on the ratio of crosslinker to actin monomer ν = n s / n A and so is constant for the diﬀerent data sets of Gardel et al . This is what we should expect : if strands are only formed at crosslinks as we suppose , then doubling both the number of crosslinks and the number of monomers should not result in a change of l c . This is in contrast with the argument oﬀered in [ 9 ] , where the authors pro - pose that l c is proportional to the entanglement length ( in turn , correctly estimated in [ 35 ] ) at a ﬁxed ν . Having an estimate for l c we now estimate the value 8 c m ( mg / ml ) 1 . 2 0 . 90 0 . 50 0 . 35 µ m / k B T 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 a 0 . 005 0 . 005 0 . 005 0 . 005 k B Tn ( J / m 3 ) 4 . 4 3 . 2 1 . 8 1 . 2 TABLE II : A table of the model parameters we would expect if we take the persistence length of ﬁlaments to be l p = 10 µ m . Such a value for l p would result in very stiﬀ ﬁlaments . From Fig . 8 ( a ) we see that such model parameters produce K ( σ ) curves that drastically fail to agree with experimental data . of the mechanical stretching modulus µ m from the ex - pression µ m = E f Al c , where E f is the Young modulus of F - actin ﬁlaments and A their eﬀective cross - sectional area . We can estimate the value of µ m for such ﬁlaments from the value for E f A = 5 × 10 − 8 N measured for F - actin in [ 36 ] . This yields µ m = 6 × 10 5 k B T . Since the value of l p is constant for the data sets , the value of µ m must also be constant . If we now take a value for the persistence length of actin of 10 µ m which is most frequently quoted in the literature [ 12 , 37 , 38 ] , we then have estimates for the three parameters of our model ( n , µ m , a ) taken di - rectly from experimentally measured quantities . These are shown in Table II . The predicted curves of diﬀerential modulus against applied pre - stress for the parameter values in Table II are shown in Fig . 8 ( a ) along with the plots of the original data . It is clear such parameter values give very poor ﬁts to data predicting an unstrained modulus K ( 0 ) that is out three orders of magnitude . We would like to point out that in order to get a good ﬁt to experimental data it is not simply a case of rescaling the number density of ﬁlament strands in the network n . Indeed doing so gives curves that fail to predict the onset of stress stiﬀening by over an order of magnitude . Remarkably however , we do ﬁnd that the aﬃne model can provide very good ﬁts to the data of [ 9 ] as shown in Fig . 8 ( b ) , for the diﬀerent set of ﬁtting parameters in Table . III . There are a few interesting points to note . We have ﬁxed the value of both µ m and l c for such ﬁts as we have estimates for both , based on experimentally measurable quantities . We then perform a two - parameter ﬁt by varying l p and n . Good ﬁts can only be achieved with this aﬃne model by using a value for the ratio a = l c / l p , that is two orders of magnitude larger than would be expected from the simple arguments given above – that is , a value of l p = 0 . 022 µ m . As before , we check the consistency of the values for n by calculating nl c ρ / c m which should be close to unity – and indeed we ﬁnd values that are reasonably consistent . Note we do observe a scaling resembling K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 , in agreement with the statement in [ 9 ] . However , we ﬁnd that such scaling is not universal for such networks but depends strongly on the values of a = l c / l p and µ m . It is in fact because of the particular ﬁtted values of a and µ m , that we observe a scaling like K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 . In short , we ﬁnd that assuming the persistence length ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 8 : ( a ) K ( σ ) predicted by the aﬃne model for the param - eters in Table II compared to the experimental data . If one assumes that l p = 10 µ m , then the aﬃne model produces very poor agreement with the data . Apart from the disagreement in values , the model does not show the scaling of K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 observed . ( b ) Two - parameter ﬁts of the model to the data of Gardel et al . [ 9 ] on log - log axes . The data shown corre - sponds to diﬀerential shear modulus for networks with F - actin monomer concentrations c A of 29 . 4 ( (cid:3) ) , 21 . 4 ( • ) , 11 . 9 ( (cid:4) ) and 8 . 33 µ M ( (cid:7) ) and constant value of ν = 0 . 03 . The ﬁtted value for l p = 0 . 022 µ m , assuming the value of l c remains ﬁxed at 0 . 04 µ m . The solid straight line shows a scaling of σ 3 / 2 . of F - actin ﬁlaments in these networks is ∼ 10 µ m results in the aﬃne model failing severely and predicting that the networks would be far stiﬀer than is actually mea - sured . More importantly , there is no easy way out of this disagreement because experimental data have several key features that are all linked . However , we ﬁnd the aﬃne model of ﬁlament network can be reconciled with experi - ment , and produce very good agreement provided we as - sume that the F - actin ﬁlaments behave as if they are far more ﬂexible than is usually quoted – with a persistence length of ∼ 0 . 02 µ m . Interestingly such behavior has ac - tually been reported experimentally in networks of actin ﬁlaments , who report values of the persistence length as low as 0 . 5 µ m [ 33 , 39 ] which , although still much larger than the value needed by the aﬃne model , shows that the persistence length of ﬁlaments embedded in networks can be far less than what is most frequently reported for sin - gle actin ﬁlaments . It is , of course , also possible that the in - vitro simple shear experimental geometry at large pre - stress underestimates the actual modulus , so that l p closer to 0 . 5 µ m would actually be acceptable . 9 c m ( mg / ml ) 1 . 2 0 . 90 0 . 50 0 . 35 µ m / k B T 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 6 × 10 5 a 2 . 0 2 . 0 2 . 0 2 . 0 b 0 . 92 0 . 92 0 . 92 0 . 92 k B Tn 3 . 75 1 . 25 0 . 52 0 . 29 nl c λ / c m 0 . 89 0 . 40 0 . 30 0 . 24 TABLE III : Model parameters for the ﬁt to the data of Gardel et al . [ 9 ] shown in Fig . 8 ( b ) . It is a two - parameter ﬁt for the values of n and a . Fitted values are obtained assuming the contour length of l c = 0 . 044 µ m and a mass per unit length for F - actin ρ = 2 . 6 × 10 − 14 kg / m . The ﬁtted persistence length is therefore 0 . 022 µ m . Provided we take the persistence length to be so small , we achieve good ﬁts to data with reasonably consistent values for n . C . Comparing to the results of Fernandez et . al . To highlight the fact that this model might well be of biological signiﬁcance , we compare its predictions with the data of Fernandez et al . [ 18 ] who measure the uni - axial stiﬀness E of entire cells as a function of applied pre - stress . They have found that the stiﬀness of a cell follows a simple master equation : µ ( r ) = (cid:26) E = E 0 σ < σ c E ∝ σ σ > σ c ( 25 ) which is to say , a collapse of the modulus stress curves is achieved by rescaling the modulus axis by E 0 , and rescaling the stress axis by σ c . The model presented here provides a possible explanation for this behavior . The non - linear behavior is a consequence of chains being ini - tially entropically and then subsequently mechanically stretched . The scaling behavior of E ( σ ) is a function of our key parameters a and µ m , that is , it depends on the transition from entropic stretching to mechani - cal stretching . We ﬁt this data by for a value of a = 0 . 5 and µ m = 5 × 10 6 k B T , with the result shown in Fig . 9 . The value of the ﬁtted parameter βµ m = 5 × 10 6 is consistent with ﬁlaments with Young modulus E f ∼ 10 9 Pa , diameters of d ∼ 5 nm and lengths l c ∼ 0 . 5 µ m . These values are all consistent with an actin network . This sug - gests that the stiﬀness of such cells could be determined by the actin cytoskeleton network , with strand lengths of ∼ 0 . 5 µ m and persistence lengths of ∼ 1 µ m ( note that this is also much smaller than the ‘accepted’ values of l p ∼ 10 µ m ) . V . CONCLUSIONS In this work we have shown that the equilibrium shear modulus of branched ﬁbrogen networks and crosslinked F - actin networks as a function of applied strain is satis - factorily explained by an aﬃne model that accounts for mechanical as well as entropic stretching . In the case FIG . 9 : Fit of the model to the collapsed data of Fernandez et . al . [ 18 ] . A very good ﬁt to data can be achieved by the parameters a = 0 . 5 and βµ m = 5 × 10 6 . These values are consistent with an actin network . of ﬁbrogen networks we ﬁnd the aﬃne model ﬁts the data remarkably well with ﬁt parameters which are both consistent with each other and with experimental mea - surements on individual ﬁbrogen ﬁbers . In the case of F - actin networks we ﬁnd that the model predicts the ob - served stress stiﬀening behavior accurately provided we allow the eﬀective persistence length of the ﬁlaments in the network to be more ﬂexible than is expected . That is to say , an aﬃne model agrees with the data well and has reasonably consistent ﬁt parameters provided the ef - fective persistence length of ﬁlaments in the network is taken to be l p ∼ 0 . 02 µ m . This is far lower than the ob - served persistence length of individual F - actin ﬁlaments reported in individual measurements [ 11 , 37 ] , but a re - duced persistence length ( l p ∼ 0 . 5 µ m ) has been reported experimentally in some F - actin networks [ 33 , 39 ] , and also arises from the ﬁtting of the in - vivo data of Fernan - dez et al . [ 18 ] . This suggests to us that an aﬃne model does rather well at explaining the elasticity of branched or crosslinked semi - ﬂexible ﬁlaments because in such networks the ﬁla - ments behave far more ﬂexibly than expected on the basis of measurements of ﬁlament curvature , when they are ad - sorbed on a substrate ( note that the few measurements which measure l p with quasi - elastic light scattering of ﬁl - aments in networks often report much shorter l p [ 33 , 39 ] ) . Because the length of ﬁlament strands , l c , is actually of a similar order or even greater than the eﬀective persistence length of the ﬁlaments , treating the strands as indepen - dent is a reasonable approximation – as it is for rubber – where one does indeed expect the aﬃne model to work well . For more rigid networks that are composed of ﬁl - aments where the eﬀective persistence length is smaller than the contour length of strands , l p ≫ l c , we would expect the aﬃne assumption not to be valid , and mod - els incorporating non - aﬃne deformations may well need to be considered [ 15 , 17 , 40 ] . However , it appears that in - vitro actin networks extensively studied in the recent years are not in this regime . We also ﬁnd that properly accounting for the distri - bution of cross - link separation vectors has a profound eﬀect on the scaling of the modulus of the network with 10 stress . Averaging over the distribution of initial separa - tion vectors means we do not see a universal scaling of the modulus with stress of the form K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 as pre - dicted by [ 9 ] , but rather a functional dependence that is not a power law , and whose form depends on the values of a = l c / l p and µ m for ﬁlaments in the network . The fact that such a scaling is non - universal , but depends on chain parameters , can be used to explain why diﬀerent scal - ing regimes are observed in diﬀerent networks . Although Gardel et . al . [ 9 ] observe scaling like K ( σ ) ∼ σ 3 / 2 , ex - periments on dendritic actin [ 10 ] have observed a scaling like E ( σ ) ∼ σ 0 . 3 , while experiments on entire cells [ 18 ] have observed a scaling like E ( σ ) ∼ σ . We have shown that an aﬃne model is able to capture the diﬀerent scal - ing behaviors observed by accounting for the mechanical stretching of ﬁlaments . This could be of biological sig - niﬁcance , as the non - linear behavior of the modulus will in general depend on the parameters of the constituent ﬁlaments . This suggests that one can tailor the form of the non - linear behavior of such networks by tuning the ﬁlament parameters a = l c / l p and µ m = E f Al c . That is , the form of the non - linear modulus as a function of stress K ( σ ) can be drastically altered by changing l c . VI . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS It is a pleasure to acknowledge P . Fernanazez and C . Storm for helpful discussions and for providing the data for Fig . 7 and Fig . 9 . This work has been supported by EPSRC funding . [ 1 ] Hasnain , I . , and A . Donald , 2006 . Microrheological char - acterization of anisotropic materials . Phys . Rev . E 73 : 031901 . [ 2 ] MacRaild , C . , C . Stewart , Y . - F . Mok , M . Gunzburg , M . Perugini , L . Lawrence , V . Tirtaatmadja , J . Cooper - White , and G . Howlett , 2004 . Non - ﬁbrillar components of amyloid deposits mediate the self - association and tan - gling of amyloid ﬁbrils . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 21038 . [ 3 ] Mahler , A . , M . Reches , M . Rechter , S . Cohen , and E . Gazit , 2006 . Rigid , self - assembled hydrogel composed of a modiﬁed aromatic dipeptide . Adb . Mater . 18 : 1365 . [ 4 ] Ahir , S . , E . Terentjev , S . Lu , and B . Panchapakesan , 2007 . Thermal ﬂuctuations , stress relaxation , and ac - tuation in carbon nanotube networks . Phys . Rev . B 76 : 165437 . [ 5 ] Alberts , B . , D . Bray , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and J . Watson , 1994 . Molecular Biology of the Cell . Garland , New York , 3rd edition . [ 6 ] Janmey , P . , S . Hvidt , J . Lamb , and T . Stossel , 1990 . Resemblance of actin - binding protein / actin gels to cova - lently crosslinked networks . Nature 345 : 89 . [ 7 ] Guck , J . , S . Schinkinger , B . Lincoln , F . Wottawah , S . Ebert , M . Romeyke , D . Lenz , H . Erickson , R . Anan - thakrishnan , D . Mitchell , J . Kas , S . Ulvick , and C . Bilby , 2005 . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic compe - tence . Biophys . J . 88 : 3689 – 3698 . [ 8 ] Storm , C . , J . Pastore , F . MacKintosh , T . Lubensky , and P . Janmey , 2005 . Non - linear Elasticity in biological gels . Nature 435 : 191 . [ 9 ] Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . Mackintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsudaira , and D . Weitz , 2004 . Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 : 5675 . [ 10 ] Chaudhuri , O . , S . H . Parekh , and D . A . Fletcher , 2005 . Reversible stress softening of actin networks . Nature 445 : 295 . [ 11 ] Wen , Q . , A . Basu , J . Winer , A . Yodh , and P . Janmey , 2007 . Local and global deformations in a strain - stiﬀening brin gel . New Journal of Physics 9 : 428 . [ 12 ] Gittes , F . , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard , 1993 . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin - ﬁlaments measured from thermal ﬂuctuations in shape . J . Cell . Biol . 120 : 923 – 934 . [ 13 ] Kreplak , L . , H . Bar , J . Leterrier , H . Herrmann , and U . Aebi , 2005 . Exploring the mechanical behavior of single intermediate ﬁlaments . J . Mol . Biol . 354 : 569 – 577 . [ 14 ] MacKintosh , F . , J . Kas , and P . Janmey , 1995 . Elasticity of Semiﬂexible Biopolymer Networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 : 4425 . [ 15 ] Onck , P . R . , T . Koeman , T . van Dillen , and E . van der Giessen , 2005 . Alternative Explanation of Stiﬀening in Cross - Linked Semiexible Networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 95 : 178102 . [ 16 ] Heussinger , C . , B . Schaefer , and E . Frey , 2007 . Nonaﬃne rubber elasticity for stiﬀ polymer networks . Phys . Rev . E 76 . [ 17 ] Heussinger , C . , B . Schaefer , and E . Frey , 2007 . Nonafne rubber elasticity for stiﬀ polymer networks . Phys . Rev . E 76 : 031906 . [ 18 ] Fernandez , P . , P . Pullarkat , and A . Ott , 2006 . A mas - ter relation deﬁnes the nonlinear viscoelasticity of single ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 90 : 3796 – 3805 . [ 19 ] Ha , B . - Y . , and D . Thirumalai , 1997 . Semiﬂexible chains under tension . J . Chem . Phys 106 : 4243 . [ 20 ] Blundell , J . , and E . Terentjev , 2007 . Forces and exten - sions in eemiﬂexible and rigid polymer chains and ﬁla - ments . J . Phys . A : Math . Theor . 40 : 10951 . [ 21 ] Knowles , T . , J . Smith , A . Craig , C . Dobson , and M . Welland , 2006 . Spatial persistence of angular cor - relations in amyloid ﬁbrils . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 : 238301 . [ 22 ] Flory , P . , 1943 . Statistical mechanics of cross - linked poly - mer networks I Rubberlike elasticity . J . Chem . Phys . 11 : 512 . [ 23 ] Flory , P . , 1969 . Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules . Interscience , New York . [ 24 ] Treloar , L . R . G . , 2005 . The Physics of Rubber Elasticity . OUP , Oxford , 3rd edition . [ 25 ] Deam , R . , and S . Edwards , 1976 . Theory of Rubber Elasticity . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lon . A 280 : 317 . [ 26 ] Hamprecht , B . , and H . Kleinert , 2005 . End - to - end dis - tribution function of stiﬀ polymers for all persistence lengths . Phys . Rev . E 71 : 031803 . [ 27 ] Wilhelm , J . , and E . Frey , 1996 . Radial distribution func - 11 tion for semiﬂexible polymers . Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 : 2581 . [ 28 ] Kierfeld , J . , O . Niamploy , V . Sa - yakanit , and R . Lipowsky , 2004 . Stretching of semiﬂexible polymers with elastic bonds . Eur . Phys . J . E 14 : 17 . [ 29 ] Odijk , T . , 1995 . Stiﬀ chains and ﬁlaments under tension . Macromolecules 28 : 7016 . [ 30 ] Landau , L . , and E . Lifshitz , 1986 . Theory of Elasticity . Butterworth Heinemann , 3rd edition . [ 31 ] Fixman , M . , and J . Kovac , 1973 . Polymer conformational statistics . 3 . Modiﬁed Gaussian model of stiﬀ chains . J . Chem . Phys . 58 : 1564 . [ 32 ] Guthold , M . , W . Liu , E . A . Sparks , L . M . Jawerth , L . Peng , M . Falvo , R . Superﬁne , R . R . Hantgan , and S . T . Lord , 2007 . A comparison of the mechanical and structural properties of ﬁbrin ﬁbers with other protein ﬁbers . Cell Biochem . Biophys . 49 : 165 – 181 . [ 33 ] Schmidt , C . F . , M . Barmann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sack - mann , 1989 . Chain Dynamics , Mesh Size , and Dif - fusive Transport in Networks of Polymerized Actin . A Quasielastic Light Scattering and Microﬂuorescence Study . Macromolecules 22 : 3638 . [ 34 ] Boal , D . , 2002 . Mechanics of the Cell . CUP , Cambridge , 1st edition . [ 35 ] Semenov , A . N . , 1986 . Dynamics of Concentrated Solu - tions of Rigid - chain Polymers Part 1 - Brownian Motion of Persistent Macromolecules in Isotropic Solution . J . Chem Soc . Faraday 82 : 317 . [ 36 ] Kojima , H . , A . Ishijima , and T . Yanagida , 1994 . Direct measurement of stiﬀness of single actin - ﬁlaments with and without tropomyosin by in - vitro nanomanipulation . PNAS 91 : 12962 . [ 37 ] Riveline , D . , C . Wiggins , R . Goldstein , and A . Ott , 1997 . Elastohydrodynamic study of actin ﬁlaments using ﬂuo - rescence microscopy . Phys . Rev . E 56 : 1330 – 1333 . [ 38 ] Janmey , P . , J . Peetermans , K . Zaner , T . Stossel , and T . Tanaka , 1986 . Structure and mobility of actin - ﬁlaments as measured by quasi - elastic light scattering , viscometry , and electron microscopy . J . Bio . Chem . 261 : 8357 – 8362 . [ 39 ] Piekenbrock , T . , and E . Sackmann , 1992 . Quasi - elastic light scattering study of thermal excitations of F - actin so - lutions and of growth kinetics of actin - ﬁlaments . Biopoly - mers 32 : 1471 – 1489 . [ 40 ] Huisman , E . , C . Storm , and G . Barkema , 2008 . Monte Carlo study of multiply crosslinked semiexible poly - mer networks . Preprint by correspondence arXiv : 0807 . 0720v1 [ cond - mat . soft ] .