Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 Supporting collaborative sense - making in emergency management through geo - visualization Anna Wu , Gregorio Convertino , Craig Ganoe , John M . Carroll , Xiaolong ( Luke ) Zhang n Penn State University , State College , PA 16802 , United States Received 21 January 2011 ; received in revised form 26 April 2012 ; accepted 16 July 2012 Available online 16 August 2012 Abstract In emergency management , collaborative decision - making usually involves collaborative sense - making of diverse information by a group of experts from different knowledge domains , and needs better tools to analyze role - speciﬁc information , share and synthesize relevant information , and remain aware of the activities of others . This paper presents our research on the design of a collaborative sense - making system to support team work . We propose a multi - view , role - based design to help team members analyze geo - spatial information , share and integrate critical information , and monitor individual activities . Our design uses coordinated maps and activity visualization to aid decision - making as well as group activity awareness . The paper discusses design rationale , iterative design of visualization tools , prototype implementation , and system evaluation . Our work can potentially improve and extend collaborative tasks in emergency management . & 2012 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Computer - supported cooperative work ; Geo - collaboration ; Visualization ; Collaborative sense - making ; Web - based application 1 . Introduction Decision - making in complex task situations such as emergency management often requires the collection and analysis of various kinds of information . Such decision - making processes usually involve multiple domain experts , who can interpret and synthesize domain - speciﬁc informa - tion for the team . Our previous research on the process of knowledge sharing in emergency management teams in central Pennsylvania found that the teams engaged in heavy sense - making activities require collaborative work on geo - spatial information ( Schafer et al . , 2007 , 2008 ) . With a series of laboratory studies , we investigated how emergency management teams shared knowledge , and explored the design requirements and measurement of the effects of collaborative software tools to support knowledge sharing and decision - making ( Convertino et al . , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 ) . In many American communities emergency management is carried out by a loosely coordinated group of community organizations — volunteer ﬁre companies , municipal police , partly - volunteer emergency medical technicians , and so forth . In our ﬁeld work ( Schafer et al . , 2008 ) ‘‘shadowed’’ the emergency management coordinator for Central Penn - sylvania for a year and found that coordination across these many groups is difﬁcult — even in better - integrated local government and community groups . For example , the various groups usually meet face - to - face only 1 – 2 times per year , due to the constraints of their availability , to carry out table - top simulation exercises or full scale emergency walk - through . The purpose of these exercises is to develop , debug , reﬁne , and practice regional emer - gency plans , so that various contributing organizations will be able to effectively coordinate in a real emergency and have a shared understanding upon which to base necessary improvisations that may be required in a real emergency . In studying this activity , we found that there was sig - niﬁcant plan recall failure . People just do not remember the plans very well through the many months during which they are not practicing or reviewing the plans . They do not have a good understanding of what others are doing within the plan , which could be an obstacle to effectively improvising on the www . elsevier . com / locate / ijhcs 1071 - 5819 / $ - see front matter & 2012 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2012 . 07 . 007 n Corresponding author . Tel . : þ 1 814 8639462 ; fax : þ 1 814 865 6426 . E - mail address : lzhang @ ist . psu . edu ( X . ( Luke ) Zhang ) . plan during a real emergency . In our terminology , they had rather low activity awareness ( Carroll et al . , 2003 ) . Through interaction with the regional emergency man - agement coordinators of the teams , we have learned that it would be useful if the teams could have a persistent information system that ( 1 ) depicts the plans and allows actors to see their roles and activities relative to those of other actors and that allows them to annotate and discuss the plans ; and ( 2 ) is accessible to all of the geographically - distributed participants and their organizations to over - come the constraints of distance and to have them involved in emergency management remotely and more frequently . Consider the following decision - making scenario , which summarizes key aspects of collaboration in the emergency management teams that we studied : Three experts located in different cities are called in for an emergency management operation to ﬁnd a solution for evacuating a family with special medical needs from a ﬂooded area to a shelter . They are responsible for issues in different domains : a public - work expert to examine roads , bridges , and public infrastructures ; an environmental - safety expert to monitor hazardous substances ; and a medical expert to evaluate the medical situation of and needs by the family . They must ﬁnd a shelter among four candidates so that the shelter can be reached safely by the family and has needed medical supplies . To work out a plan , each domain expert must gather and probe information in his / her own domain and share information critical to decision - making with others . Eventually , the team integrates inputs from all parties and determines the best shelter by considering the advantages and disadvantages of all shelters . Maps are used heavily in collaboration for information synthesizing and sharing . For example , the public - work expert needs to mark all constraints on transportation on her own map , and then to circle those key viable roads on a public map so that her two collaborators can take this information into account in their planning . Because of the signiﬁcant amount of information to be considered in planning , maps can get cluttered around the shelter locations , making it difﬁcult for the experts to ﬁnd what they need . As this scenario indicates , experts play domain - relevant roles in teamwork by sharing , analyzing , and synthesizing available information with their expertise . The scope of issues that affect the success of collaboration in emergency management and planning could be broad and span across various types of data , individual tasks , and group tasks , which go beyond what this role - based collaboration sce - nario can capture . However , empirical work ( Schafer et al . , 2007 ; Robinson , 2008 ) indicates that such role - based colla - boration is not unusual in collaborative decision - making . Also , from the perspective of the analysis and integration of domain - speciﬁc information , such role - based scenarios offer substantial insight into key issues that should be considered in support - system design . Brodlie et al . ( 2005 ) used a similar scenario to illustrate the challenges that collaborative geo - visualization systems should address . In support of collaboration tasks described by the scenarios , we need systems that can help collaborators deal with various challenges that may impede information sharing and activity coordination . Our work aims at augmenting the abilities of individual decision - makers with tools to support collaborative information sharing , discus - sion , and sense - making . The goal is to take advantage of the strengths of human agents in recognizing patterns , making abstractions , and assessing ill - deﬁned situations , combined with the strengths of computational tools in processing , storing , and retrieving large amounts of information . We propose a multi - view , role - based design approach that uses coordinated maps and activity visualization to aid informa - tion sharing and integration . We focus on the design of collaborative sense - making support for decision - making involving the analysis of geo - spatial information by multiple domain experts . We describe an iterative design process of a system to support geo - Collaboration with Information VIsuaLization ( CIVIL ) . The system provides visualization tools to facilitate information sharing , sense - making , and decision - making in small emergency management teams that consist of domain experts . This paper presents design solutions for the activity awareness problem by supporting collaborative sense - making in distributed group emergency management . The paper ﬁrst reviews relevant research work in the areas of computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) , geo - collaboration , and information visualization . Then , it discusses key needs for geo - collaboration in emergency management and proposes design rationales . Next , it describes an iterative design process that includes system prototype implementation , system evaluation , and system improvement . Finally , the paper concludes with discus - sions and implications of our results and future research directions . 2 . Related work Our work stands between CSCW ﬁeld and visualization technology to support geospatial decision - making . In this section , we review the related work in these areas . 2 . 1 . CSCW , group decision - making , and sense - making The cognitive resource involved in group collaboration is not the mere sum of individual intelligence . MacMillan et al . ( 2004 ) , p . 61observe that team cognition is different from individual cognition because it requires communica - tion , which is ‘‘a process that has no direct analog in individual cognition’’ . Additional cognitive resources must be invested to communicate . The relation between the process of communication and the way collaborative visualizations can support this process is a key research issue . Team communication can be facilitated through channels of communication in which participants’ actions A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 5 relative to task - relevant objects is public ( McCarthy et al . , 1991 ) . This suggests that collaborative visualization – such as deictic expressions like ‘‘this , ’’ ‘‘there , ’’ and ‘‘it’’ – may be made visible and public through the use of telepointers , pen tools , or annotation tools . The distinction between personal and shared spaces has been indicated as a useful feature of workspaces for people who work with artifacts in collaboration . When Greenberg et al . ( 1999 ) investigated how people moved their personal artifacts into the public domain and back again , they argued that the use of automatic publication may be inappropriate because it denies individuals the opportunity to express personal relevancy , and discourages people from using the tool to develop ideas not yet ready for dissemi - nation . The results of a study on annotation sharing ( Marshall and Brush , 2002 ) show that when transferred from personal to shared workspace people’s annotations undergo habitual ﬁltering or publishing operations ( e . g . , clariﬁcations ) . This suggests that the same information tends to satisfy different functions depending on whether it is presented privately ( e . g . , to aid memory ) or publicly ( e . g . , to aid communication ) . Unsupported individuals and groups are both limited and biased when they need to use large and dynamic information corpora to make decisions under uncertain conditions . We isolate three main systematic limitations or biases that affect groups’ ability to accurately share knowledge and make decisions . 1 . Groups’ biased analysis and discussion : when sharing and discussing both shared and unshared information , collaborators tend to favor familiar information over unfamiliar information . Unless corrective interventions are introduced , group discussions are systematically biased toward shared information at the expense of unshared and less familiar information ( see hidden proﬁle in Stasser and Titus , 2003 ) . 2 . Limited information processing capacity : collaborators have both a limited capacity to process massive amounts of information in a short interval of time and a limited ability to accurately distinguish and manage distinct epistemological categories of informa - tion at the same time : facts and sources , inferences about facts and sources , how - to knowledge about the task , experts’ related experience ( e . g . , Tversky and Kahneman , 1974 ) . 3 . Groups’ biased synthesis and decisions : when interpreting the meaning and weighing the relevance of information under uncertainty and social inﬂuence , a group make decisions under the inﬂuence of systematic biases such as anchoring to early hypotheses and bias in posterior - probability estimates ( e . g . , Convertino et al . , 2008 ) . Decision - making often involves sense - making activities . Sense - making is a key component of knowledge work , and occurs when people face new problems or unfamiliar situations and their knowledge is insufﬁcient for the task . Sense - making ﬁnds critical patterns in a seemingly unstructured situation by developing successively more sophisticated representations and ﬁtting information into these representations in service of a task ( Russell et al . , 1993 ) . Traditional theories of sense - making have tended to be either purely top - down or bottom - up . Top - down approaches emphasize the necessity of using proper repre - sentations in sense - making ( Russell et al . , 1993 ; Qu and Furnas , 2005 ) . A representation usually refers to a dia - grammatic ( e . g . , trees , graphs ) , pictorial , or narrative description of a data relationship . An appropriate repre - sentation is necessary to guide such sense - making activities as searching and integrating information . Bottom - up approaches de - emphasize the role of a priori representa - tions in guiding sense - making , and adopt a ‘‘from data to wisdom’’ method focused on information exploration and inductive construction of knowledge schemata ( Ackoff , 1989 ) . The strength of bottom - up approaches is in the potential for new insights and discoveries of structures and relationships in data . Recently , researchers have proposed hybrid approaches for sense - making as a process involving both ﬁnding appropriate representations to suit given structures and developing structures based on available information ( Bodnar , 2005 ; Pirolli et al . , 2005 ; Pirolli and Card , 2005 ; Klein et al . , 2006 ) . However , some questions remain , including how to connect top - down and bottom - up activities . Sense - making also exists in group activities and researchers have called for new designs to support colla - borative sense - making because of its importance to group activities . Research has shown that group sense - making often involves a team of people who analyze , share , and synthesize relevant information together ( Schafer et al . , 2008 ; Robinson , 2008 ) . Paul et al . ( 2008 ) argue the need for ﬂexible representation where tools are switched to address the gaps in sense - making between individuals and groups . Qu and Hansen ( 2008 ) suggest that shared representations among group members are important to collaborative sense - making . 2 . 2 . Awareness in distributed groups Awareness in computer - mediated groups is an issue that has been extensively researched . Generally speaking , awareness is about the knowledge of others in a group , which can help better understand the group activities and improve group performances ( Dourish and Bellotti , 1992 ) . Awareness information concerns different perspective of group behaviors , such as presence awareness ( Curry , 1999 ; Slater et al . , 1992 ) , which is about whether a person is available in workspace , and activity awareness ( Carroll et al . , 2003 ) , which emphasizes the importance of under - standing activity context in situations beyond face - to - face situations . Our interest here is in activity awareness . The term ‘‘activity’’ refers to ‘‘substantial and coherent collective A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 6 endeavors directed at meaningful objectives’’ and the ‘‘activity awareness’’ as ‘‘the sharing requirement’’ ( Carroll et al . , 2003 ) . With this deﬁnition , a team formed of multiple stakeholders with different responsibilities need to know what others are doing and how they are doing to succeed in their coordination . In coordination tasks , team members often need to share and manipulate resources ( human power , natural resources , time etc . ) . Knowing the availability of required resources and who is dealing with such resources is important as well . Knowledge of other people’s interaction with object in the shared workspace is deﬁned as action awareness , which is widely supported in synchronized collaboration ( e . g . , radar views , telepointers ) . The idea to support high - level activity awareness provides design opportunities in taking advantage of mediated tech - nology for distributed collaboration . Carroll et al . ( 2006 ) have identiﬁed potential techniques to support activity awareness from four aspects : common ground ( e . g . , radar view , media space ) , communities of practice ( e . g . , annotation , discussion board ) , social capital ( e . g . , activity log visualiza - tion , resource usage indicators ) , and human development ( e . g . , historical view of personal proﬁle , annotated workﬂow ) . Carroll et al . ( 2003 ) demonstrated an early effort in support activity awareness in virtual classroom through situation , group , task , and tool factors . 2 . 3 . Supporting geo - collaboration with visualization Generally speaking , information visualization can sup - port decision - making ( Card et al . , 1999 ) by increasing the memory and process resource available to users and by using visual representations to enhance pattern detection . In case of geo - collaboration , maps offer additional help for group activities . In this section , we ﬁrst review literature on using conventional information visualization techniques to support sense - making and group decision - making . Then , we examine visualization techniques for speciﬁc roles with the use of maps , or geo - visualization , in supporting group activities . 2 . 3 . 1 . Information visualization to support sense - making and group decision - making Weick and Meader ( 1993 ) called for ‘‘sense - making sup - port systems’’ to construct consensual deﬁnitions for building common understanding . Visualization has been used to achieve this goal . DiBiase ( 1990 ) distinguished two purposes of visual artifacts – assisting visual thinking in the private domain and facilitating visual communication in the public domain – and indicated the important role of visualization tools as a medium to enhance group communication . Studies in the military sector have shown that visualization techni - ques can help people to rapidly comprehend complexly tangled information in emergency situations ( Feibush et al . , 2000 ) . Recently , Bier et al . ( 2008 ) presented a system to facilitate the discovery and organization of relevant informa - tion in collaborative intelligent analysis ; other systems aimed speciﬁcally at increasing the quality of the group reasoning by reducing judgment bias in these collaborative conditions ( Convertino et al . , 2008 ) . The presence of visualization also can inﬂuence the level of participation of the members and the information sharing process during group decision - making . Studies of computer - supported communities have shown that mem - ber participation or community development can be inﬂuenced using appropriate tools ( Beenen et al . , 2004 ) . Shared visualizations can help collocated working groups to communicate more effectively by externalizing the communication process ( DiMicco et al . , 2003 ) . Although visualization is regarded as a powerful tool for group sense - making , most existing visualization systems largely focus on visualizing artifacts and content for the tasks . There is still very limited support for visualizing relevant aspects of the work process in order to enhance the awareness and sense - making abilities of groups . 2 . 3 . 2 . Geo - visualization to support group decision - making Maps have been used in various professions for a very long time in problem solving and decision - making by providing visual representations of geographic space ( MacEachren , 1995 ) . However , the functions of maps have been dramatically expanded in modern times . Nowadays , maps are regarded as artifacts that facilitate complex human activities involving the use , access , and organiza - tion of geo - spatial information ( MacEachren and Kraak , 2001 ) . Research in psychology also has found that maps are cognitive artifacts that can help individuals by extend - ing their memory and easing information processing ( Tversky , 2000 ) . As shared means for group tasks , they can help collaborators to jointly focus attention and communicate more effectively ( e . g . , Heiser et al . , 2004 ; Clark and Krych , 2004 ) . Geo - visualization , a new discipline that emerged from the Geographic Information Science ( GIScience ) ﬁeld , goes beyond simple graphic representations of geo - spatial infor - mation , which is the focus of cartography , and considers broader issues such as the integration of knowledge con - struction with geo - spatial information , user interface design , and cognitive challenges in perceiving and processing geo - spatial information ( MacEachren and Kraak , 2001 ) . Recent advances in computer graphics , computer net - works , collaborative software , and Web - based technology ( e . g . , Google Maps and Yahoo ! Maps ) have triggered a digital revolution in the use of maps in many aspects of human life . In this context , researchers argue that the scope of issues that geo - visualization addresses should be further extended to support advanced analytical tasks . Kraak ( 2006 ) calls for research on how to use maps to encourage knowledge exploration and stimulate new ideas and analysis . Andrienko and Andrienko ( 2006 ) indicate that computer - based geo - visual analytical tools become important to spatial decision - making activities , and identify key issues associated with geo - visual analytics , including the exploration of problems and solutions , the integration of heterogeneous A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 7 information , reasoning , deliberation , communication among stakeholders , and so on . Geo - visualization is important to group decision - making in many ways . From the perspective of carto - graphic representation , maps can facilitate group discus - sion by offering cartographic objects to talk about , objects to think about , and objects used for action coordination ( MacEachren and Cai , 2006 ) . Maps also can serve as visual mediation and event context to help group members to understand a task . For example , Armstrong and Densham ( 1995 ) showed that different map types can help people compare alternative solutions to the same problem ; research by Rinner ( 2001 , 2006 ) showed that by explicitly linking arguments in a discussion with related geographic objects , argumentation maps can improve the analysis and summarization of current status in conversations and assist people completing geospatial related planning tasks . Research efforts also have been made to investigate the design of geo - visualization systems for group activities . Brodlie et al . ( 2005 ) argue that distributed geo - visualization systems must consider the integration of three important factors : data , people , and computational resources . From the aspect of information sharing in group , Brodlie ( 2005 ) offers various models on collabora - tive visualization that can be applied in the design of different kinds of systems . Fuhrmann and Pike ( 2005 ) outline a set of user - centered design approaches for collaborative geo - visualization tools . In summary , sharing , synthesizing , and making sense of geo - spatial and non - geo - spatial information are critical to collaborative decision - making in emergency management and planning . Conventional Geographic Information Systems ( GIS ) ( e . g . , ArcGIS ) and map services ( e . g . , online digital maps ) are insufﬁcient to support such collaborative activities because they are usually designed for individual users ( MacEachren and Brewer , 2004 ) . The gap between these GIS tools and the need for geo - collaboration has been identiﬁed by some researchers ( Cai , 2005 ) . Research efforts have been made to explore new theoretical understandings of collaborative geo - visualization ( Brodlie et al . , 2005 ; MacEachren , 2005 ; Brodlie , 2005 ) and new designs to support collaborative geo - visualization ( Kemp , 2005 ; Fuhrmann and Pike , 2005 ) . However , most of these efforts are targeted for generic models or high - level design issues that are insufﬁcient to handle the complex activities in geo - collaboration we observed in emergency management and planning . 3 . Design rationale Our design rationale was based on a previous ﬁeld study ( Schafer et al . , 2007 ) . This study focused on emergency management activities in central Pennsylvania , and summar - ized key software requirements for geo - collaboration deci - sion - making in emergency management . In this section , we brieﬂy present the ﬁeldwork and design requirements , and then discuss the design of our geo - collaboration system . The ﬁeldwork studied two communities in the central Pennsylvania , observing emergency management practice . In the study , local emergency management coordinators were interviewed about their planning activities , and archival data ( e . g . , meeting minutes and e - mail records among team members ) were collected . Some emergency planning meetings were audio - recorded , transcribed , and analyzed . The study developed a set of software design require - ments to support emergency response planning activities . More importantly , the study informed the design of two lab experiments on decision - making processes in geo - collaboration ( Convertino et al . , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 ) . Both the ﬁeld study and lab work identiﬁed key sense - making processes performed by the work groups and suggested the need for better tools to support both their top - down and bottom - up sense - making activities . 3 . 1 . Tools to support bottom - up ( data - driven ) activities Bottom - up activities usually focus on exploring new data . Such data exploration activities are largely conducted on maps . Maps are effective organizers of geospatial data . Moreover , when shared in a group , they allow referencing of shared objects while the members discuss and plan together ( i . e . , deixis ) . Our system design introduced multiple , role - based views coordinated with a team view . As a result , in our laboratory studies , each group member used two maps for data exploration : one personal map with role - speciﬁc data for individual analysis and one shared map for the team to share information and build a group plan . With these maps , the individuals could conduct the following activities : (cid:2) Exploring geographic locations . To make a good emer - gency management plan , team members need to be able to explore and understand the focus areas and sur - rounding areas . Such exploration could be conducted by either individual planners or by a team . For example , ﬁnding a route to evacuate people from an emergency requires planners to know and explore road systems in the area as well as in neighboring areas . Planners can either gather such information individually or as a team . (cid:2) Labeling and annotating geographic locations . In colla - boration , planners often need to add important infor - mation related to certain locations . They may sketch on map locations or write down comments . Added information can be role - speciﬁc or shared within the team . Thus , tools to support individual and collabora - tive sketching and annotation on maps should be provided . 3 . 2 . Tools to support top - down ( representation - driven ) activities Top - down activities are guided by certain knowledge representation . Often , people use representation tools to externalize critical information and knowledge , such as A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 8 what activities individuals performed , what information was involved in discussions , what decision has been reached , and so on . Thus , tools are needed to support : (cid:2) Clustering and aggregation of information contents . The ﬁeld study ( Schafer et al . , 2007 ) shows that collabora - tive sense - making often involves the integration of relevant information from different sources . It is impor - tant to give sense - makers tools to cluster and aggregate inputs from individuals . Tools like sorting tables and histogram charts should be provided for information review and analysis . (cid:2) Representation of activity data . Activity awareness is critical to group work ( Carroll et al . , 2003 ) . Team members should know what work individuals have done , when they did that work , where their contributions were , and so on . Timeline tools should be provided for such activity awareness . The granularity of timelines can be changed , and if so , sense - makers can cluster and aggre - gate activities based on different activity attributes ( e . g . , location ) ( Zhang et al . , 2010 ) and action types ( Gotz and Zhou , 2009 ) . The above design requirements lead to the following design considerations for a geo - collaboration supporting system in emergency management . 3 . 3 . Map - centric collaboration support Geo - collaboration often involves large amount of geos - patial information . It would be desirable to have artifacts to externalize geospatial information so that collaborators can easily refer to common geospatial objects in discus - sions and planning . 3 . 4 . Annotation and sketching support Maps are often designed for general purposes . With maps , paper - based or digital , users can obtain geospatial information and common tools that map designers or systems have prepared for general public . Using maps in collaboration , individuals may need to express their per - sonal perspectives or opinions , which are usually related to objects on maps . To make such individual information reviewable for future discussions , tools are needed to record the information . Individual users should have tools to take notes of the ideas that occur to them , compare the advantages and disadvantages of speciﬁc options in dis - cussions , and add comments on spatial objects . Individuals also should have sketching tools to illustrate spatial relationships among objects of interest , and to mark where issues may reside . While annotation and sketching tools have been widely used to help individuals analyze complex information ( Fernandes et al . , 1997 ) , they also are important to group collaboration by facilitating group activities . For example , Tversky ( 2000 ) argues that tools like sketching allow people to depict their internal understanding of the external world in social interaction . 3 . 5 . Awareness support In collaboration , it is important to provide users with awareness information , i . e . , to let them know who is collaborating and what others are doing ( Dourish and Bellotti , 1992 ) . In collaboration that heavily involves information and knowledge exchange among domain experts , awareness becomes even more important to prompt information and knowledge sharing without for - cing team members to strategize the work overtly . The aim is to create the conditions for seamlessly sharing knowl - edge and coordinating action at low cost . For a geo - collaboration team with domain experts , supporting such ‘‘implicit coordination’’ ( Kleinman and Serfaty , 1989 ) requires tools to help collaborators access various indications of members’ roles and their actions . For example , team members and information artifacts associated with them ( e . g . , comments and sketches ) can be color - coded to help others recognize individual con - tributions . Telepointers ( Greenberg et al . , 1996 ) can be provided so that team members know where a teammate is focusing and what that teammate is doing . 3 . 6 . Multiple map views to support both personal and shared activities In geo - collaboration , where maps are the central artifact for collaborative activities , having both a personal or role - speciﬁc map view as well as a shared or team map view is important . Prior research has suggested that providing team members with a personal workspace improves the quality of collaboration ( Olson et al . , 1992 ) because personal workspace allows individuals to perform role - speciﬁc activities that they do not want to share with others . The availability of a shared view among collabora - tors who work on problem solving tasks improves their communication efﬁciency ( i . e . , management of content ) ( Clark and Krych , 2004 ; Heiser et al . , 2004 ) and helps them to build task structure knowledge and situation awareness ( i . e . , useful to managing the process ) ( Kraut et al . , 2002 ) . It is also important to consider , in this context , that when experts work on complex problems under real conditions , they regularly experience information overload in managing both role - speciﬁc and shared information . Therefore , they need adequate support to ﬁlter out irrelevant information . We argue that the availability of distinct views for role - speciﬁc and shared information can help each team member to ‘‘selectively’’ share with teammates their role - speciﬁc ( or unique ) content , thus limiting their cognitive load while at the same time offering a personal space for individual analysis ( Convertino et al . , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 ) . In fact , in our design , A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 9 personal ( role - speciﬁc ) and shared ( team ) map views serve different purposes . The personal map view displays role - speciﬁc information and allows individuals to analyze their own data privately and explore various options before they decide what information and knowledge to share with others . At a team level , with different role - speciﬁc views used at the same time , the team members can execute data analysis and exploration in parallel , making collaboration more efﬁcient . The team ( shared ) map , as the common view of all team members , is the place where shared information is displayed and where commonly - relevant objects and places are examined collectively . Information in the personal ( role - speciﬁc ) workspace often needs to be transferred to the shared space . Thus , the capacity to transfer information from role - speciﬁc maps to shared ones should be provided . The technique of using multiple views already has been proven useful in helping individuals make sense of complex data sets ( Roberts , 1998 ; Baldonado et al . , 2000 ) . How - ever , this technique has been largely used in the context of single - user applications to address issues like the balance between context and content information ( North and Shneiderman ( 2000 ) ) . More recently , research on colla - borative systems has pointed to new needs to be accounted for in the design of collaborative applications : the need to manage large and heterogeneous knowledge sets , different professional roles , distinct role - speciﬁc and shared data and workspaces , and support for a sufﬁcient level of mutual awareness among collaborators ( see Convertino et al . , 2005 , for a more detailed review ) . 3 . 7 . Coordinated views to support sense - making and awareness To help team collaboration , information artifacts in multiple views also need to be coordinated . Team members may contribute to the teamwork by offering new annota - tions and creating new sketches . These new objects can appear in different views , such as in the public map as well as in the team action timeline , each of which serves different purposes ( see prior section ) . To better understand and judge the contributions to teamwork by individuals , people need to understand how objects in different views are related ( e . g . , knowing which place an annotation is about in the public map and when the annotation was posted in the team action timeline ) . Using techniques such as color - coding or a dual - pointer to coordinate informa - tion artifacts in different views can help people connect objects of interest and understand the actions of team members . It should be noted that multiple coordinated views have already been used to support information analysis . For example , Roth and his colleagues have proposed designs like SageTools ( Roth et al . , 1995 ) and Visage ( Lucas and Roth , 1996 ) to use multiple views to support information exploration and analysis by individuals . Our use of multi - ple coordinated views focuses more on supporting group activities , such as sharing selective information within a group , enforcing speciﬁc roles that team members assume , and improving activity awareness ( Convertino et al . , 2005 ) . The Command Post of the Future is a real multiple - view system developed by General Dynamics ( http : / / www . gdc4 . com ) to support teams of U . S . military commanders in maintaining real - time situational awareness and coordinat - ing operations in the battleﬁeld ( the system was deployed in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars ) . The coordinated views include shared interactive maps populated with data and coordinated with graphical and text - based views ( Thomas and Cook , 2005 ) . Different from our design , this system does not include role - speciﬁc views of the map , as distinct from and coordinated with the shared team view . 4 . Design , implementation , and evaluation of system prototypes Based on the above design considerations , we developed system prototypes to support role - based geo - collaboration . These system prototypes are targeted at multi - expert teams making complex decisions based on maps . The design and implementation of system prototypes went through a two - phased iterative process that included technical system implementation , system evaluation , and system function improvement . 4 . 1 . Phase I : Java system prototype The ﬁrst system prototype was a Java application . We chose the Java technology because of its platform inde - pendence , which allows broader distributed collaboration , and the availability of geospatial information tools , which are critical to geo - collaboration support functions . Below , we brieﬂy present the ﬁnal version of the system and its evaluation in the ﬁeld and the lab . See Carroll et al . ( 2007 ) for details on earlier versions of this prototype , and Convertino et al . ( 2008 , 2009 , 2011 ) and Convertino and Carroll ( 2011 ) about the lab evaluation studies . This work in Phase I is summarized here because it was foundational for the design work that followed in Phase II ( Section 4 . 2 ) . 4 . 1 . 1 . Architecture The system architecture of our Java application is shown in Fig . 1 . This architecture was designed to facilitate independent management of geographic data content and awareness content , the coordination of multiple map views , and the integration of interactive tools with multiple views and geographic data . 4 . 1 . 1 . 1 . Server layer . This layer provides basic services for data storage and data communication among client applications . Two software packages are included in this layer : CORK ( content object replication kit ) and Geo - Tools . CORK is a Java toolkit developed to support the replication and manipulation of shared objects in both synchronous and asynchronous collaboration ( Isenhour A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 10 et al . , 2001 ) . GeoTools is an open - source Java library for the organization and manipulation of geospatial data ( http : / / geotools . codehaus . org ) . 4 . 1 . 1 . 2 . Data layer . By combining CORK and Geo - Tools , we provided data services to support group aware - ness and shared maps at this layer . We extended GeoTools objects with the CORK toolkit to support synchronously sharing changes of objects and group awareness . This layer has two components : a module for shared awareness data and a module for shared map data . While the former primarily manages data associated users , such as their roles and their actions , the latter manages data related to geospatial information and features , such as map locations and map scales . 4 . 1 . 1 . 3 . View layer . Above the data layer sits the view layer that connects the high - level interactive tools with low - level data . It provides support for the management of two views and regulates what objects should be displayed in each view and what tools can be used in each view . 4 . 1 . 1 . 4 . Tools layer . A set of tools to support geo - collaboration were implemented . We provided an annota - tion tool to add comments and a sketching tool to draw graphs on both personal ( role - speciﬁc ) and shared ( team ) maps . Annotations and sketches can be copied and transferred between the two maps . To support group awareness , a telepointer was used to show the cursor locations of other users , and the role indication tool coordinates the appearances ( e . g . , color ) of information objects so that they are consistent with the users , i . e . , roles , which they are associated with . An annotation sidebar is used to aggregate all shared annotations . 4 . 1 . 2 . User interface Fig . 2 shows the user interface of the system prototype . The user interface features a public map for team colla - boration ( on the right ) and a role - speciﬁc map ( on the left ) . Fig . 1 . System architecture of Java prototype . Fig . 2 . User interface of Java prototype . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 11 Each map displays multiple layers of geographical data . Each user’s public map has the same set of information , but information on a user’s personal map is not shared with others . Users can choose different tools ( e . g . , zooming and panning maps , adding annotations , sketching ) by either clicking tool icons organized in tool bars , or selecting menu items . The prototype also provided a sorting table to display all shared annotations . The table lists important attributes of each annotation item , including content , creator , the time the item was created , geographic location associated , person who made the most recent change , and times being reviewed . By clicking on a table column the user can re - sort all annotations . 4 . 1 . 3 . System evaluation In this research , we systematically integrated ﬁeld and lab methods to evaluate the prototype . The ﬁeldwork with real experts ensured validity and relevance to the real world . The lab studies , meanwhile , enabled us to perform controlled experimentation with the proposed design ( for details , see Convertino and Carroll , 2011 ) . We conducted ﬁeld work and a focus - group interview study in which we demonstrated the system to an emer - gency management team in central Pennsylvania and collected feedback about the overall design concept and various tools . The ﬁeld work was important because only emergency management professionals can provide accurate feedback regarding whether our high - level design is appro - priate to the real - world practice . Asking emergency management professionals to partici - pate in lab studies always presents many challenges , considering the limited availability of these individuals and their small number . Therefore , we modeled the work conditions and designed the tasks in the lab based on our ﬁeld observations and with the help of experts ( see Schafer et al . , 2007 ) and ran a lab study with university students from campus . The lab study was necessary because it allows us to accurately measure the use of designed tools by controlling the user task and the use of tools , reducing the potential impacts of other factors on user behaviors . 4 . 1 . 3 . 1 . Fieldwork . We demonstrated our system to the emergency management team and presented the major features of the system . The team expressed interest in our design . The map - centric , role - based approach was regarded as very valuable and suitable for their needs and practice in real - world planning sessions . In particular , interactive maps were welcomed by the team . Compared with paper maps they had used in the real - world practice , the digital maps offered the team more freedom in exploring and interpret - ing geo - spatial information . While the team members showed enthusiasm about the overall design concept , their attitude toward the technol - ogy was reserved . The client - server architecture offered some beneﬁts to the team by allowing individuals to work in a more distributed manner and balance role - speciﬁc and collaborative activities . However , through the discussions with the team , we found several issues that could poten - tially prevent our system from being used successfully . These issues were concerned with the technical constraints of installing , maintaining , and using the system . First , our prototype requires the management and maintenance of two key modules , CORK and GeoTools . Second , to create new training scenarios on new geographic locations , we had to add more geospatial data into the GeoTools . This is because the GeoTools is not a GIS system containing real data ; rather it is just a toolkit to process geospatial data provided by users . The team , only including emergency management professionals , lacked the technical know - how to address these concerns . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . Lab evaluation . The purpose of the lab study was to investigate the impact of our system on collaboration . In particular , we were interested in knowing how our visualization tools may facilitate the outcomes and pro - cesses of collaborative decision - making . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 1 . Experiment design . Existing research shows that proper deployment of geo - visualization tools can facilitate spatio - temporal analytics in dynamic situations ( e . g . , Andrienko and Andrienko , 2006 ) . In tasks like emergency management and planning , maps can become ‘‘visual index’’ used for various tasks , including construct - ing heuristic knowledge , ordering decision option , and arguing outcome between different stakeholders ( Jankowski and Nyerges , 2001 ) . Our experiment was aligned with this view of the role of technology in group decision . The experiment was a between - subject design . The independent variables were the way in which collaboration was conducted and technologies were involved . Two treatments were selected . One treatment was a face - to - face setup ( FTF ) , in which team members worked together in a collocated environment and with paper - based maps . The other treatment was a software environment ( SW ) , in which individual team members were put into different rooms and collaborated with each other by using our system prototype . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 2 . Participants . In total , ninety - six participants were recruited for the experiment from Pennsylvania State University . Twelve of the participants were university employees , and the rest were students . Their ages ranged from 20 to 45 . The participants had little prior experience with emergency response planning or operations . The participants were grouped into thirty - two three - person teams . To encourage equal participation and avoid male dominance ( Herring , 1993 ) , we created same - gender groups ( except in one case ) . In the FTF treatment , we had six male teams , ﬁve female teams , and one mixed - gender team with one female and two males . In the SW treatment , we had ten male teams and ten female teams . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 3 . Team task . The experimental task was to construct a plan to evacuate a family in an imaginary emergency situation , similar to the collaborative decision - A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 12 making scenario described in the beginning of this paper . Each team was asked to generate the best plan to move a family from a ﬂooded area to an appropriate shelter . Each team member was assigned to one of three expert roles ( public - work expert , environmental - safety expert , or med - ical expert ) . Since the participants were not actual experts , we had to provide each participant with a detailed description of the role he or she was to assume along with necessary role - speciﬁc background information . At the same time , we gave the participant the following informa - tion for the task : role - speciﬁc maps , information sheets with role - speciﬁc and shared information , and a shared task scenario with background information . Each team performed three task runs , developing plans for three different task scenarios of the same type . The three task scenarios were similar in that each involved a family which needed to be rescued and four possible locations in which the family could be sheltered . Among these four shelters , only one was optimal . Each scenario was of equivalent complexity and the order was counter - balanced across the teams . Over the three repeated runs , or task scenarios , each member kept the same role . Working as a team , the participants needed to integrate and synthesize information among themselves to reach the best solution . Each team member was provided with infor - mation about individual shelters , but that information was biased toward a non - optimal shelter . The team needed to compare the problems of each shelter ( e . g . , road condition to a shelter , medical equipment availability ) based on informa - tion provided by individual team members , and then to choose the least problematic shelter . This task was developed from an actual tabletop exercise observed in the ﬁeld with real emergency management teams ( see Schafer et al . , 2007 ) and conﬁrmed by the emergency management team in our ﬁeldwork . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 4 . Apparatus and lab setting . In the FTF treat - ment , each team was put in a room in which three tables at right angles to one another so that each participant could have a dedicated working area with a role - speciﬁc map . At the same time , all team members could access a common area for group work with a team map . Partici - pants could use colored post - its and colored pens to post notes on their own map and on the team map . Fig . 3 illustrates the aerial view of the table setup . The layout of three tables allowed three team members to examine their own maps and information sheet and at the same time to collaborate on the team map . In the SW treatment , participants in a team were put into three different rooms . Each room was equipped with a Dell Optiplex workstation and a 19 - inch widescreen LCD . Participants communicated verbally through a microphone and speakers on their workstations and collaborated through our prototype system , which was running on their workstations . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 5 . Procedure . Participants ﬁrst signed an informed consent form and were asked to complete an online back - ground questionnaire . After being presented a short introduction to the emergency planning problems , partici - pants were given ten minutes to read descriptions of their individual roles and the shared task scenario and another three minutes to complete a role manipulation check to verify their understanding of their task and roles . Then , the participants began to collaborate on the planning task . They were instructed to share information with the team through the shared map . When they reached a decision , they wrote down the ﬁnal plan along with three alternatives in order of preference in a ﬁnal plan docu - ment . Teams were told to try their best to ﬁnish a task scenario within twenty minutes , although we did not enforce the cut - off time . Teams decided whether a task was completed or not . The participants in the SW treatments were asked to complete a standard usability questionnaire ( see Appendix ) to evaluate the software system from the aspects of overall system quality , information quality , and user interface quality . The questionnaire was extended to include a few open - ended questions on the prototype and its components ( role - speciﬁc and shared maps ) , so that the participants could evaluate positive and negative aspects of the current design . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 6 . Results . Team interaction was recorded in both treatments . In the FTF treatment , we video - recorded the members’ interactions on the maps ( around a table - top ) , and we analyzed the task artifacts generated . In the SW treatment , we video - recorded each member , we ana - lyzed their artifacts , and we also used a screen - capture software to observe ( as video - recording and keystrokes Fig . 3 . An aerial view of the experimental setting in the FTF treatment . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 13 logs ) each member’s interaction with the software and with his or her collaborators . The recorded videos from each team were transcribed and coded for data analysis . The resulting data allowed us to conduct an in - depth analysis about group collaboration . Other publications ( Convertino et al . , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 ) of ours provided more detailed results about group activities , such as performance , communication structures , the perception of group processes and performance , and the retention of task - relevant information . Here , we report results related to group information sharing , group performance , and user feedback on the overall user interface . Increased Content Sharing when Using Software : We found that our prototype system encourages more efﬁcient sharing of information content . We ﬁrst compared the percentage of both ‘‘push’’ acts ( adding information ) and ‘‘pull’’ acts ( replying to questions ) in interactions among FTF and SW team members . We conducted this compar - ison because existing studies of common ground and media for communication have shown that changes in the proportion of some categories of dialog acts , such as querying acts , are associated with changes in the media and setting conditions for building common ground . For example , Clark and Brennan ( 1991 ) argued that extra dialogues within a group are often needed when the medium the group rely on provides comparatively less support for common ground building . Some research ( O’Conaill and Whittaker , 1997 ; Sanford et al . , 2004 ) has observed that the distributions of ‘‘align’’ and ‘‘query’’ acts in groups can vary from group to group , depending on their communicating technologies . Our data showed that the SW teams used a greater proportion of push acts ( 10 . 9 % ) than the FTF teams did ( 8 . 5 % ) , and a smaller proportion of pull acts ( 3 . 0 % ) than the FTF team ( 4 . 4 % ) . We used a semi - parametric version of the Poisson regression model ( Agresti , 2002 ) to test the effect of the collaboration setting ( FTF vs . SW ) on the proportions of push and pull acts . For the push acts , we found that the difference between two treatments approaches signiﬁcance ( ß ¼ . 26 ( 0 . 15 ) , p o . 08 ) . For the pull acts , the difference is signiﬁcant ( ß ¼ (cid:3) . 81 ( 0 . 15 ) , p o . 001 ) . This result suggests that the team members shared informa - tion more efﬁciently when they worked remotely through our interactive prototype , compared to those who worked face - to - face using physical maps . We further compared the percentage of push and pull acts between the ﬁrst and the third task scenarios in the SW treatment . We found an increment of the proportion of push acts , from 9 . 5 % to 12 . 2 % , and a decrement of the pull acts , from 3 . 7 % to 2 . 3 % ) . The increment of push acts is signiﬁcant ( ß ¼ . 12 ( 0 . 06 ) , p o . 05 ) , while the decrement of pull acts is nearly signiﬁcant ( ß ¼ . 11 ( 0 . 06 ) , p o . 06 ) . This result suggests that the support provided by the software not only offset the cost of working remotely , but also favored a faster growth in the efﬁciency of content sharing over the repeated task runs . In fact , over time the teams began to push relevant information directly into the discussion rather than waiting for a request , which makes the content sharing process more efﬁcient : i . e . , a push act ( adding information ) replaced two or more request and response acts . Also , this improvement in efﬁciency was further facilitated in the teams that used our SW prototype ( vs . physical maps ) , even if they worked remotely ( vs . face - to - face ) . Improved Process of Sharing when Using Software : We also found that using software in collaboration allows teams to share information more smoothly with less need for explicit coordination . We compared the percentage of ‘‘checking dialogue’’ acts ( e . g . , verifying one’s own or another’s understanding of previously presented informa - tion , clarifying previous information , conﬁrming the receipt of information ) between two treatments . Our analysis showed the number of checking acts in the SW teams was lower than that in the FTF teams ( 34 % vs . 39 % ) , and the difference is signiﬁcant ( ß ¼ (cid:3) . 18 ( 0 . 18 ) , p o . 001 ) . The checking acts are one measure of the costs for coordinating a sharing process ( Sanford et al . , 2004 ) . Our result shows that our software design has successfully reduced this cost . The reduction in the need for information checking allows teams to have more time for other high - level activities , such as judging ( e . g . , offering individual judg - ment , opinion , and preference on available information ) . By comparing the percentage of ‘‘judging’’ acts between two treatments , we found that a larger proportion in the SW teams than that in the FTF teams ( 23 % vs . 20 % ) . The difference is signiﬁcant ( ß ¼ (cid:3) . 40 ( 0 . 21 ) , p o . 05 ) . Good Group Performances when Using Software : Our data showed that our software enabled the teams to perform the task with slightly faster on average compared to the teams working face - to - face on paper maps ( 16 . 63 min vs . 18 . 1 min ) . The time difference is not statis - tically signiﬁcant ( t 30 ¼ 1 . 08 , p ¼ . 145 ) . The distributed teams using our prototype also were slightly better in producing optimal plans than those meeting face - to - face with paper maps — 41 . 7 % of ﬁnal plans were correct with the software treatment while 38 . 9 % were with the face - to - face treatment . The difference is not signiﬁcant using a Mann – Whitney Test ( p ¼ . 452 ) . User Feedback on User Interface : The results from the post - test questionnaire by participants in the SW team show that the participants were satisﬁed with our software design . The median of the overall rating on the system was 5 in 7 - point rating scale ( from 1 — strongly disagree to 7 — strongly agree ) , above the neutral point ( 4 ) . More speciﬁcally , participants were positive about system use ( e . g . , easy use of the system , easy to learn , etc . ) with a median of 6 , as well as user interface quality ( e . g . , pleasant user interface , having tools expected , etc . ) with a median of 5 . They were neutral about information quality ( e . g . , easy to ﬁnd information needed , clear system message ) with a median of 4 . In summary , the results from Phase I indicate that our Java - based prototype can indeed facilitate effective knowl - edge sharing and implicit coordination in geo - collaboration . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 14 However , both the ﬁeldwork and lab evaluation pointed to a number of unsolved issues . Through the ﬁeldwork , we have learned the technical constraints of installing , maintaining , and using the system . An important issue emerged from the lab study was the interaction difﬁculty in using the maps . As mentioned earlier , we built our maps with GeoTools , which is an open - source Java library for the organization and manipulation of geospatial data without any support for user - map interaction . We had to build all interactive tools from scratch . While we had provided a set of basic map interaction tools , such as zooming , panning , and location search , we found that participants demanded some advanced tools , such as calculating the distance between places and choosing different types of maps , to deal with some problems in analysis . Lacking such tools , participants had to shift away from their primary tasks and ﬁnd other methods to address their concerns . The collaboration process and outcomes may have been affected by these limitations . 4 . 2 . Phase II : Web - based prototype The lessons learned during Phase I of this research program directed us toward a Web - based approach , which we present in this section . A set of key beneﬁts introduced by a Web - based approach results from being able to leverage pre - existing online map services and , thus , focus on more advanced functions . Speciﬁcally , we observed three beneﬁts . First , online map services can reduce the burden of generating , managing , and maintaining geo - spatial information . Second , online map services offer a rich set of interactive functions , obviating the need for the extra development costs of building all the functionalities from scratch , including those most basic . Furthermore , online map services can ease the burden on learning for the users , because even non - expert users nowadays are familiar with popular online map services and their functions . Fig . 4 is the architecture of our Web - based system prototype . The architecture follows a three - tier design . The top client tier has four modules to process interactive user actions , display visual results in appropriate visualiza - tion tools , manage role - speciﬁc data not shared with others , and handle public data shared with other sense - makers . The application server tier below the client tier embeds modules to provide audio and video data , manage data storage , synchronize data across the team , and retrieve data from external sources , such as Google Maps for geo - spatial data . The storage layer at the bottom has a MySQL server to store user action and session data and a ﬁle server to store other data , such as recorded audio in collaboration . The client is a Web - based , rich Internet application ( RIA ) developed with Adobe Flex . The synchronization and audio / video modules in the application server are built on Adobe BlazeDS . Other server modules are developed with Java running on a Tomcat Web server . This RIA - based approach goes beyond http - only inter - active tools ( e . g . , hyperlink clicking ) and delivers a com - prehensive graphic user interface ( GUI ) , as seen in desktop applications , to enrich the user experience . With RIAs , we can build and maintain Web - based applications that can be deployed consistently across platforms and , more importantly , that support advanced GUI functions , such as drag and drop and free - form drawing . Currently , RIAs also can be easily integrated with server - side products to provide comprehensive collaboration and data services . The module of external data access in the application tier serves two purposes . First , it manages the access to on - demand geo - spatial information . With this module , no maps need to be stored , managed , and maintained locally . Second , the module manages the outsourcing of certain computational tasks to appropriate services . For example , when new objects are created on maps , their geographical coordinates must be calculated . Correct latitude and long - itude information is critical to the display of these objects on maps and the synchronization of these objects across the team . To avoid any potential errors , our system delegated the calculation of latitude and longitude coordi - nates to an external map service . In the long run , when more cloud - computing - based services are available , this module can be extended to manage other services ( e . g . , picture and video services that can provide images and videos associated with concerned areas ) . In our implemen - tation , we chose Google Maps as our external map service , although other services such as Yahoo Maps or ArcGIS also can be used . We select the Google Maps service because its tools are more comprehensive . Built on this architecture , the Web - based geo - collabora - tive system also can help to reduce overhead in deploying and maintaining the overall system . The client can be run on a Web browser , as long as the browser is equipped with the Adobe Flash player , which is free and available for Fig . 4 . System architecture of Web - based prototype . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 15 different platforms . The server requires Adobe BlazeDS in a Tomcat Web server and MySQL , both of which are free and easier to install and maintain than CORK and GeoTools . Of course , this Web - based approach also has its limita - tions . First , although we have embraced as many open - source products as possible ( e . g . , BlazeDS , Tomcat , and MySQL are either open - source or open to the general public ) , some tools and services do not offer transparent codes and may impose restrictions on the development , deployment , and use of Web - based applications . For exam - ple , the availability of the Google Maps service is critical to this approach , and the interruption of its service can paralyze our system . The recent outages of the Google Mail service just show the vulnerability of the dependence of online services . One way to address this issue is to integrate and rely on multiple map services , rather than just one . Second , security and privacy risks may hinder the running of complex Web - based applications . Strong security measures required to protect the data and user information on the server may increase the burdens of managing and maintaining the system . One way to deal with this challenge is to carefully classify the types of data ( or layers of map data ) involved and then to limit the sensitive data to local services or encrypt it if it must pass through the Internet . 4 . 2 . 1 . User interface of Web - based prototype Fig . 5 shows the user interface of the Web - based system prototype . The map service integrated to this user interface is Google Maps . The overall user interface is dominated by two maps — one personal ( role - speciﬁc ) , the other shared ( team ) . Below the two maps is a set of tools to support collaboration and decision - making , including a chatting tool , a table to sort all annotations , a chart to aggregate annotations , and a timeline to visualize individuals’ anno - tation activities . These tools to support decision - making are new with respect to the Java - based prototype , while the collaborative functions introduced with the earlier proto - type are still supported in the Web - based prototype . Users can interact with maps in the exactly same way as they do on the web site of Google Maps . Users can pan and zoom into and out of maps . Users can add an annotation to a location on the map by directly clicking the map ( Fig . 6a ) , and copy an annotation from the personal map to the shared one through a clicking - initiated pop - up menu ( Fig . 6b ) . Similarly , users can directly draw sketches on the map ( Fig . 7a ) and copy a sketch from the personal map to the shared one ( Fig . 7b ) . Annotations and sketches are all color - coded according to the role of the creator , as indicated by the role color legend above the public map in Fig . 5 . Fig . 5 . User interface of Web - based prototype . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 16 To help information analysis , and thus sense - making , our design also coordinates the representations of informa - tion artifacts across different tools . For example , Fig . 5 shows the view of a user who was examining the second annotation item from the table . As the item was clicked and its background turned blue , its corresponding repre - sentations in the aggregation chart ( the top dot on the second column from the left ) were also highlighted along with it in the timeline ( the single dot in the middle line ) , and in the public map ( the focused annotation as indi - cated ) . Seeing these different symbols of the same object in different visualization tools , the user can examine the same piece of information from different perspectives and within different contexts . Such coordinated design also helps to unite data - exploration activities and data - representation activities across maps , the sorting table , the aggregation chart , and the timeline . 4 . 2 . 2 . Evaluation of Web - based prototype Again , we evaluated the Web - based prototype with ﬁeldwork and lab study . The goal of the ﬁeldwork was to use a focus - group interview to validate the Web - design Fig . 6 . Annotation activities on map . ( a ) Adding an annotation and ( b ) copying an annotation . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 17 approach that involves the use of online map services . The lab study had two goals : ﬁrst , to compare the design of the Web - based approach with the design of the Java approach and , second , to systematically collect feedback on each component of the Web - based prototype to inform its future development . 4 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Fieldwork . In the ﬁeldwork , we presented the design to the emergency management team in central Pennsylvania and let the team leader , the emergency management coordinator ( EMC ) , try our system . The new Web - based application impressed him . In particular , the integration of the Google Map and its map tools was regarded as a strong point because most of team members were already familiar with Google Maps . The team leader expressed a strong desire to use our system for future training and planning sessions . We have also obtained some suggestions for further system improvement . The team wanted to see a more customizable user interface , one that would allow users to customize the presence , location , and size of various tools . Also , the team hoped that our system also could provide a Fig . 7 . Sketch activities on map . ( a ) Drawing a sketch and ( b ) copying a sketch . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 18 new set of tools that would support cross - scale collabora - tive decision - making among teams from different counties , regions , and states . One unexpected new user task was raised by the EMC when he explored our Web system . After using the tools provided our Web system , he realized that the system also would support cross - county collaboration and coordina - tion activities in emergency management if appropriate tools could be added . Such cross - county activities had never been observed by us in table - top exercises , or mentioned by the emergency management team in any meetings . Table - top exercises were largely about within - county planning , which is centered on the tasks of local teams building action plans . In comparison , cross - county emergency management , as we learned from the EMC in this study , is more centered on the activities of sharing resource among counties through a hierarchy of authority , and also involves the state government . The two situations involve different tasks , different resources , and different geographical scopes . The EMC and his team are responsible for emergency events in their own county as well as in neighboring counties . Inspired by our Web system , in particular the embedded online maps that allow the easy exploration of broad geographic locations and the browser - based tools that are very accessible , the EMC thought our Web system may offer good opportunities to combine both emergency tasks within the county and ones involving multiple counties . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Lab evaluation . In the lab study , we focused more on collecting user feedback about the design of the Web - based application , rather than analyzing group processes . This is because the Web - based application provides a set of geo - collaborative tools that is very similar to those in the Java application . First , we assessed whether or not the new prototype performed as well as the prior Java - based proto - type in terms of usability ( using the same participant pool and questionnaire ) . Second , we collected systematic feedback on the components of the prototype in order to evaluate the current design and inform future development . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Participants , procedure , and apparatus . We recruited twelve students who had participated in the study of the Java prototype for this lab study . The task and procedure in this lab study were the same as those seen in the software environment ( SW ) in the study of the Java prototype , except that each team only needed to complete two task scenarios rather than three . We used the same post - test questionnaire for system evaluation , the Compu - ter System Usability test ( CSU , Lewis , 1995 ) . The usability questionnaire was extended with a set of open - ended questions , two of which pertained to the overall prototype while several other questions focused on each tool or component . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Usability evaluation ratings : Overall assess - ment . The average ratings ( medians ) of the overall Web - based prototype were positive . Similar to the evalua - tion results about the Java - based prototype , the medians of the ratings for the Web - based prototype were above the neutral value ( 4 ) of the scale — 5 for system use quality , 5 for information quality , and 5 for interface quality . Table 1 compares the evaluation results of the Web - based system with the results of the prior Java - based version . It is a consistent ﬁnding across the evaluations of both Java - based and Web - based systems that the participant ratings were positive about the overall design . We observed a slight increment in the ratings of quality of the interface for the Web - based tool ( Median ¼ 5 inter - quartile range ¼ 1 . 2 vs . Median ¼ 5 inter - quartile range ¼ 3 ) . The ratings related to system usage were slightly lower for the web - based tool than for the prior Java - based version ( Median ¼ 5 inter - quartile range ¼ 2 vs . Median ¼ 6 inter - quartile range ¼ 1 ) . This is probably due to the fact that the participants of the Web - based study were already familiar with the general idea of the system because of their participation in the prior study of the Java - based system . Thus , their experience with the Web - based system may not be as fresh as that with the Java - based system . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Qualitative evaluation of the design and its components . In addition to the quantitative usability ratings , the participants also provided open - ended feed - back on the design and its components . They listed the top three positive and top three negative issues with the current design of the prototype . Then , they evaluated the useful - ness and ease of use for each component : the chat tool , the personal ( role - speciﬁc ) map , the shared ( team ) map , the annotations sorting table , and the two visualizations ( annotation aggregation and timeline ) . These questions were aimed at evaluating our design decisions . Participants could indicate what the valuable functions were , if any , and what aspects need to be improved or changed . Table 1 Comparison of ratings between Java - based system ( N ¼ 60 ) and Web - based system ( N ¼ 12 ) ( MED : median , IQR : inter - quartile range ) . Java - based Web - based MED IQR MED IQR Overall evaluation ( items 1 – 19 ) 5 2 ( 6 – 4 ) 5 2 ( 6 – 4 ) System use ( items 1 – 8 ) 6 1 ( 6 – 5 ) 5 2 ( 6 – 4 ) Information quality ( items 9 – 15 ) 5 3 ( 6 – 3 ) 5 2 ( 6 – 4 ) Interface quality ( items 16 – 18 ) 5 3 ( 6 – 3 ) 5 1 . 2 ( 6 – 4 . 8 ) A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 19 Not surprisingly , the chat tool and the public map were seen as the most central tools for supporting the knowledge - sharing process . The chat tool was seen as useful for discussion and clariﬁcation , comparing and analyzing , and getting a response quickly ( although to some users the chat box appeared too small ) . The public map was seen as the main means for sharing information via the map functions of annotations or sketching ; the personal ( role - speciﬁc ) map was seen as useful for pre - liminary or individual work . Regarding the maps , some users pointed to the issues of clutter , low readability , and difﬁcult retrieval of annotations once numerous notes had been added to speciﬁc areas of the map . More advanced visualization techniques , such as text annotation clustering and aggregation , are needed to simplify the visualization and management of cluttered information . Among the tools aimed at supporting the decision - making process ( annotation table and the two visualiza - tions ) , the participants considered the annotation aggrega - tion chart as the most useful and easy to use . This tool allowed them to easily compare decision choices analyzed by the team while at the same time having an overview of all discussion results . Subjects also raised some issues on the Web - based design . First , while the online maps offered more ﬂexibility and freedom in information exploration and integration , subjects suggested that the current coordination mechanism among public maps be improved . Participant indicated that syn - chronizing the type ( e . g . , road map , satellite map , etc . ) , the location , and the scale of the public map among all team members led to competition over the control of the public map . For example , when one team member was manipulat - ing the public map , others may interrupt his or her work . A better mechanism of public map synchronization , such as protocols on handling shared global views among multiple users ( Morris et al . , 2004 ) , is needed . Second , the easiness of adding tags or text annotations led to a new need for effective tag management . Subjects indicated that with many tags , it became important to have advanced tools ( e . g . , data - mining tools ) to group and aggregate tags so that when map is shrunk , tags will not clutter the view . 5 . Discussion This paper has described an iterative design research investigation of collaborative support for geo - spatial plan - ning . Through the analysis of our two prototypes , we have made progress in mapping and managing a tradeoff space of requirements for effective geo - collaboration , speciﬁcally for operations planning tasks . Our interest here is in augmenting collaborative sense - making by using visualization tools to externalize artifacts that are important to both individual and group activities . The system design includes multiple personal ( role - speciﬁc ) maps that are coordinated with a shared ( team ) map . Each user is presented with a personal map view and a shared map view . This reminds the users that they have a speciﬁc role to play in the collaborative activity and a speciﬁc set of responsibilities to their teammates . This multiple - view , role - based design helps them keep track of the information they have , and compare what they know with what their partners have presented in the shared map . These are signiﬁcant affordances in the geo - spatial planning task that are not typical in a paper - based , face - to - face version of the task ( i . e . , the real world ) . Our evaluation indicates poten - tial beneﬁts of our system in support of the sense - making processes of distributed geo - collaboration . This research also helps us develop a set of design guidelines for geo - collaboration supporting systems : (cid:2) Provide both personal ( role - speciﬁc ) and shared ( team ) maps and support information transfer between them . In collaboration , people often need personal workspace to examine information and explore options privately before sharing them with their team . People also need to share information with others through public space . In geo - collaboration , maps are what people largely focus on , so both personal and shared maps are critical . (cid:2) Provide tools that allow users to add personal comments and drawings that overlay on maps . In geo - collaboration , comments and drawings are often associated with speciﬁc geographic locations . Mapping these user - created artifacts directly onto objects on maps can improve the understanding , retrieval , and sharing of these comments and drawings . (cid:2) Provide tools for information sorting ( e . g . , tables ) and aggregation ( e . g . , bar charts and timelines ) . In particular , when decision - making involves heavy information sense - making activities , these tools should not only allow users to manipulate and examine information in various ways , but also show the interconnections of data points from different data dimensions through coordinated views . (cid:2) Leverage online maps to reduce the burden on technol - ogy management and learning . Maps are the central artifacts in geo - collaboration , so providing maps with which people are familiar could help to reduce overhead in accessing , manipulating , and sharing geospatial information . Of course , reliance on a particular map system may face the risk of system interruption , as mentioned previously . Therefore , consideration should be given to designs that integrate multiple maps services and formats ( e . g . , Google Maps , Yahoo Maps ) . This Web - based approach offers users opportunities to col - laborate from diverse devices and platforms . We also are aware of the limitations of this research . First , our systems focus on one speciﬁc geo - collaboration task . Although the task is well grounded in empirical evidence , geo - collaboration activities can be very diverse , ranging from a small - scale evacuation due to ﬂooding in a local community to a large - scale hurricane relief in a region . Different geo - collaboration purposes demand dif - ferent tools ( Cai , 2005 ) , and our current design may have A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 20 difﬁculty in supporting geo - collaboration activities with different natures . Second , our visualization tools are still limited . Tools like aggregation bar charts , sorting tables , and timelines may be good enough for the current task , but could be insufﬁcient for other broader and more compli - cated geo - collaboration tasks . For example , people may need other advanced tools to analyze multi - dimensional data when browsing U . S . census data about a region requiring evacuation , to integrate 3 - D models with maps when searching for a building in a metropolitan city , or to watch real - time photos or videos when monitoring fast - changing situations . Our current design could not help in such tasks . Furthermore , our focus here is on high - level designs concerning system architecture and visualization modules , and issues concerning tool - using behaviors , such as managing cluttered annotations and sketches on maps , have not been investigated . 6 . Conclusion The contribution of the work reported in this paper lies in the design research on a new collaborative system for teams doing complex geo - spatial planning tasks . Our design of a multi - view , role - based system has the potential to improve and extend collaborative tasks in emergency management . We will continue working with emergency management professionals to expand the task scope and task scenarios our system can address . Also , we will improve our design by implementing more tools so that users can choose what they need and customize the collection and layout of visualization tools in their user interface . We hope the availability of more tools and user interface customization can broaden the application scope of our system . Furthermore , we will deploy our system to emergency manage teams so that we can conduct longitudinal studies on user behaviors by collecting data on the use of the system . Acknowledgments This work was funded partially by the U . S . Ofﬁce of Naval research under award N000140510549 and by the National Science Foundation under Grant no . 0948601 . Appendix . System evaluation questionnaire System use quality ( 1 strongly disagree , 4 neutral , 7 strongly agree ) 1 . Overall I am satisﬁed with how easy it is to use this system . 2 . It was simple to use this system . 3 . I can effectively complete my work using this system . 4 . I am able to complete my work quickly using this system . 5 . I am able to efﬁciently complete my work using this system . 6 . I feel comfortable using this system . 7 . It was easy to learn to use this system . 8 . I believe I became productive quickly using this system . Information quality ( 1 strongly disagree , 4 neutral , 7 strongly agree ) 9 . The system gives error messages that clearly tell me how to ﬁx problems . 10 . Whenever I make a mistake using the system , I recover easily and quickly . 11 . The information ( such as online help , on - screen messages , and other documentation ) provided with this system is clear . 12 . It is easy to ﬁnd the information I needed . 13 . The information provided for the system is easy to understand . 14 . The information is effective in helping me complete the tasks and scenarios . 15 . The organization of information on the system screens is clear . Interface quality ( 1 strongly disagree , 4 neutral , 7 strongly agree ) 16 . The interface of this system is pleasant . 17 . I like using the interface of this system . 18 . This system has all the functions and capabilities I expect it to have . Overall ( 1 strongly disagree , 4 neutral , 7 strongly agree ) 19 . Overall , I am satisﬁed with this system . Open - ended questions on usefulness and usability : overall and by tool A . List the most negative aspects : 1 y ; 2 y ; 3 y ; B . List the most positive aspects : 1 y ; 2 y ; 3 y ; C . About the private map : what did you use it for ? D . About the public map : what did you use it for ? E . ( n ) About the chat tool : what did you use it for ? F . ( n ) About the annotation sorting table : was it useful and how ? Was it easy to use ? G . ( n ) About the annotation aggregation chart ( bar chart ) : Was it useful and how ? Was it easy to use ? H . ( n ) About the annotation timelines chart ( rightmost chart ) : Was it useful and how ? Was it easy to use ? ( n ) Extra items used when evaluating the web - based prototype . References Ackoff , R . L . , 1989 . From data to wisdom . Journal of Applied Systems Analysis 16 ( 1 ) , 3 – 9 . Agresti , A . , 2002 . Categorical Data Analysis . John Wiley & Sons , NJ . Andrienko , N . , Andrienko , G . , 2006 . The complexity challenge to creating useful and usable geovisualization tools . In : Proceedings of GIScience 2006 , 23 – 27 , M u¨ nster , Germany . Armstrong , M . P . , Densham , P . , 1995 . Cartographic support for colla - borative spatial decision - making . In : Proceedings of AUTOCARTO , 49 – 58 . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 21 Baldonado , M . Q . W . , Woodruff , A . , Kuchinsky , A . , 2000 . Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization . In : Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , 110 – 119 . Beenen , G . , Ling , K . , Wang , X . , Chang , K . , Frankowski , D . , Resnick , P . , Kraut , R . E . , 2004 . Using social psychology to motivate contributions to online communities . In : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 212 – 221 . Bier , E . A . , Card , S . K . , Bodnar , J . W . , 2008 . Entity - based collaboration tools for intelligence analysis . In : Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology , pp . 99 – 106 . Bodnar , J . W . , 2005 . Making sense of massive data by hypothesis testing . Proceedings of 2005 International Conference on Intelligence Analy - sis . Last retrieved on March 13 , 2010 , from / http : / / cryptome . org / intel - 2005 . htm S . Brodlie , K . , 2005 . Models of collaborative visualization . In : Dykes , J . , MacEachren , A . , Kraak , M . ( Eds . ) , Exploring Geovisualization . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 463 – 475 . Brodlie , K . , Fairbairn , D . , Kemp , Z . , Schroeder , M . , 2005 . Connecting people , data , resources : distributed geovisualization . In : Dykes , J . , MacEachren , A . , Kraak , M . ( Eds . ) , Exploring Geovisualization . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 425 – 444 . Cai , G . , 2005 . Extending distributed GIS to support geo - collaborative crisis management . Geographic Information Science 11 ( 1 ) , 4 . Card , S . K . , Mackinlay , J . D . , Shneiderman , B . , 1999 . Readings in Information Visualization : Using Vision to Think . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc , San Francisco , CA , USA . Carroll , J . M . , Neale , D . C . , Isenhour , P . L . , Rosson , M . B . , McCrickard , D . S . , 2003 . Notiﬁcation and awareness : synchronizing task - oriented collaborative activity . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies 58 ( 5 ) , 605 – 632 . Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Convertino , G . , Ganoe , C . H . , 2006 . Awareness and teamwork in computer - supported collaborations . Interacting with Computers 18 ( 1 ) , 21 – 46 . Carroll , J . M . , Mentis , M . , Convertino , G . , Rosson , M . B . , Ganoe , C . , Sinha , H . , Zhao , D . , 2007 . Prototyping collaborative geospatial emergency planning . Proceedings of ISCRAM 2007 , 105 – 113 . Clark , H . H . , Brennan , B . E . , 1991 . Grounding in communication . In : Resnick , L . B . , Levine , J . , Teasley , S . D . ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition . American Psychological Association , Washington . Clark , H . H . , Krych , M . A . , 2004 . Speaking while monitoring addressees for understanding . Journal of Memory and Language 50 ( 1 ) , 62 – 81 . Convertino , G . , Ganoe , C . , Schafer , W . , Yost , B . , Carroll , J . M . , 2005 . A multiple view approach to support common ground in distributed and synchronous geo - collaboration . In : Proceedings of the 3rd Interna - tional Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization , 121 – 132 . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , Slavkovic , A . , Ganoe , C . H . , 2008 . Articulating common ground in cooperative work : content and process . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 2008 , 1637 – 1646 . Convertino , G . , Billman , D . , Shrager , J . , Pirolli , P . , Massar , J . P . , 2008 . The CACHE study : group effects in computer - supported collaborative analysis . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 17 ( 4 ) , 353 – 393 . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . M . , Rosson , M . , Slavkovic , A . , Carroll , J . M . , 2009 . Supporting content and process common ground in computer - supported teamwork . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 2009 , 2339 – 2348 . Convertino , G . , Carroll , J . M . , 2011 . Toward experimental methods in collaborative computing research . In : Sharlene , J . , Hesse - Biber , N . ( Eds . ) , The Handbook of Emergent Technologies in Social Research . Oxford University Press . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . M . , Slavkovic , A . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , 2011 . Supporting common ground in teamwork : a design research process . in the special issue on social media and collaborative systems for crisis management . ACM Transaction of Computer – Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 18 ( 4 ) Article 22 . Curry , K . , 1999 . Supporting collaborative awareness in tele - immersion . In : Proceedings of the IPTW ‘99 . DiBiase , D . , 1990 . Scientiﬁc visualization in the earth sciences . Bulletin of the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences 59 ( 2 ) , 13 – 18 . DiMicco , J . M . , Hollenback , K . J . , Neale , D . C . , Isenhour , P . L . , Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , 2003 . The impact of increased awareness while face - to - face . Human – Computer Interaction 22 , 47 – 96 . Dourish , P . , Bellotti , V . , 1992 . Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces . In : Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 1992 , 107 – 114 . Feibush , E . , Gagvani , N . , Williams , D . , 2000 . Visualization for situational awareness . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 20 ( 5 ) , 38 – 45 . Fernandes , J . P . , Fonseca , A . , Pereira , L . , Faria , A . , Figueira , H . , Henriques , I . , Garc - ~ ao , R . , C ˆamara , A . , 1997 . Visualization and interaction tools for aerial photograph mosaics . Computers & Geoscience 23 ( 4 ) , 465 – 474 . Fuhrmann , S . , Pike , W . , 2005 . User - centred design of collaborative geovisualization tools . In : Dykes , J . , MacEachren , A . , Kraak , M . ( Eds . ) , Exploring Geovisualization . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 553 – 576 . Gotz , D . , Zhou , M . , 2009 . Characterizing users’ visual analytic activity for insight provenance . Information Visualization 8 ( 1 ) , 42 – 55 . Greenberg , S . , Boyle , M . , Laberge , J . , 1999 . PDAs and shared public displays : making personal information public , and public information personal . Personal Technologies 3 ( 1 ) , 54 – 64 . Greenberg , S . , Gutwin , C . , Roseman , M . , 1996 . Semantic telepointers for groupware . Proceedings of the Australian Conference on Computer – Human interaction 1996 , 54 – 61 . Heiser , J . , Tversky , B . , Silverman , M . , 2004 . Sketches for and from collaboration . In : Gero , J . S . , Tversky , B . , Knight , T . ( Eds . ) , Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design III . Key Centre for Design Research , Sydney , pp . 69 – 78 . Herring , S . C . , 1993 . Gender and democracy in computer - mediated communication . Electronic Journal of Communication 3 , 1 – 17 . Isenhour , P . L . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , 2001 . Supporting interactive collaboration on the Web with CORK . Interacting with Computers 13 ( 6 ) , 655 – 676 . Jankowski , P . , Nyerges , T . L . , 2001 . GIS for Group Decision Making . Taylor & Francis Publishers , UK . Kemp , Z . , 2005 . A knowledge - based collaborative environment for geovisualization : ontologies for multiple perspectives on distributed data resources . In : Dykes , J . , MacEachren , A . , Kraak , M . ( Eds . ) , Exploring Geovisualization . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 295 – 512 . Klein , G . , Moon , B . , Hoffman , R . R . , 2006 . Making sense of sense - making 2 : a macrocognitive model . IEEE Intelligent Systems 21 ( 5 ) , 88 – 92 . Kleinman , D . L . , Serfaty , D . , 1989 . Team performance assessment in distributed decision making . In : Proceedings of the Interactive Networked Simulation for Training Conference , 22 – 27 . Kraak , M . - J . , 2006 . Why maps matter in GIScience . Cartographic Journal 43 , 82 – 89 . Kraut , R . E . , Gergle , D . , Fussell , S . R . , 2002 . The use of visual information in shared visual spaces : informing the development of virtual co - presence . In : Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 2002 , 31 – 40 . Lewis , J . R . , 1995 . IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires : psychometric evaluation and instructions for use . International Jour - nal of Human - Computer Interaction 7 57 - 57 . Lucas , P . , Roth , S . F . , 1996 . Exploring information with Visage . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems 1996 , 396 – 397 . MacEachren , A . M . , 1995 . How Maps Work : Representation , Visualiza - tion , and Design . The Guilford Press , New York . MacEachren , A . M . , Kraak , M . , 2001 . Research challenges in geovisua - lization . Cartography and Geographic Information Science 28 ( 1 ) , 3 – 12 . MacEachren , A . M . , Brewer , I . , 2004 . Developing a conceptual framework for visually - enabled geocollaboration . International Journal of Geo - graphical Information Science 18 ( 1 ) , 1 – 34 . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 22 MacEachren , A . M . , 2005 . Moving geovisualization toward support for group work . In : Dykes , J . , MacEachren , A . , Kraak , M . ( Eds . ) , Exploring Geovisualization . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 445 – 461 . MacEachren , A . M . , Cai , G . , 2006 . Supporting group work in crisis management : visually mediated human - GIS - human dialogue . Envir - onment and Planning B : Planning and Design 33 ( 3 ) , 435 – 456 . MacMillan , J . , Entin , E . E . , Serfaty , D . , 2004 . Communication overhead : the hidden cost of team cognition . Team Cognition : Understanding the Factors that Drive Process and Performance , 61 – 83 . Marshall , C . C . , Brush , A . J . B . , 2002 . From personal to shared annota - tions . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 2002 , 812 – 813 . McCarthy , J . C . , Miles , V . C . , Monk , A . F . , 1991 . An experimental study of common ground in text - based communication . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 1991 , 209 – 215 . Morris , M . R . , Ryall , K . , Shen , C . , Forlines , C . Vernier , F . , 2004 . Beyond ‘‘social protocols’’ : multi - user coordination policies for co - located groupware . In : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ‘04 ) , pp . 262 – 265 . North , C . , Shneiderman , B . , 2000 . Snap - together visualization : can users construct and operate coordinated visualizations ? International Jour - nal of Human – Computers Studies 53 ( 5 ) , 715 – 739 . Olson , J . S . , Olson , G . M . , Storrøsten , M . , Carter , M . , 1992 . How a group - editor changes the character of a design meeting as well as its outcome . In : Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 1992 , 91 – 98 . O’Conaill , B . , Whittaker , S . , 1997 . Characterizing , predicting , and measuring video - mediated communication : a conversational approach . In : Finn , K . E . , Sellen , A . J . , Wilbur , S . B . ( Eds . ) , Video - Mediated Communication . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , NJ , pp . 107 – 131 . Paul , S . A . , Reddy , M . , deFlitch , C . J . 2008 . Collaborative sense - making : a ﬁeld - study in an emergency department . Position Paper Presented at the Sense - making Workshop at the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Florence , Italy . Last retrieved on March 13 , 2010 , from / http : / / sites . google . com / site / dmrussell2 / Paul - SM - workshop - ﬁnal . pdf S . Pirolli , P . , Card , S . , 2005 . The sense - making process and leverage points for analyst technology as identiﬁed through cognitive task analysis . Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis , 2 – 4 . Pirolli , P . , Good , L . , Heiser , J . , Shrager , J . , Hutchins , S . , 2005 . Evaluation of a computer support tool for analysis of competing hypotheses . Technical Report , Palo Alto Research Center . Last retrieved on March 13 , 2010 , from / http : / / www . cse . sc . edu / (cid:4) mgv / BNSeminar / UITR . doc S . Qu , Y . , Furnas , G . W . , 2005 . Sources of structure in sense - making . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems 2005 , 1989 – 1992 . Qu , Y . , Hansen , D . L . 2008 . Building shared understanding in collabora - tive sense - making . Position paper presented at the sense - making workshop at the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 2008 , Florence , Italy . Last retrieved on March 13 , 2010 , from / http : / / sites . google . com / site / dmrussell2 / Qu - SM - ﬁnal . pdf S . Rinner , C . , 2001 . Argumentation maps : GIS - based discussion support for online planning . Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design 28 ( 6 ) , 847 – 863 . Rinner , C . , 2006 . Argumentation mapping in collaborative spatial decision making . In : Dragicevic , S . , Balram , S . ( Eds . ) , Collaborative GIS , pp . 85 – 102 . Roberts , J . C . , 1998 . On encouraging multiple views for visualization . Proceedings of International Conference on Information Visualization 1998 , 8 – 14 . Robinson , A . , 2008 . Collaborative synthesis of visual analytic results . Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology , 67 – 74 . Roth , S . F . , Kolojejchick , J . , Mattis , J . , Chuah , M . C . , 1995 . Sagetools : an intelligent environment for sketching , browsing , and customizing data - graphics . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 1995 , 409 – 410 . Russell , D . M . , Steﬁk , M . J . , Pirolli , P . , Card , S . K . , 1993 . The cost structure of sense - making . Proceedings of the INTERACT ‘93 and CHI ‘93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 269 – 276 . Sanford , A . , Anderson , A . H . , Mullin , J . , 2004 . Audio channel constraints in video - mediated communication . Interacting with Computers 16 ( 6 ) , 1069 – 1094 . Schafer , W . A . , Ganoe , C . H . , Carroll , J . M . , 2007 . Supporting community emergency management planning through a geocollaboration software architecture . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 16 ( 4 – 5 ) , 501 – 537 . Schafer , W . , Carroll , J . M . , Haynes , S . , Abrams , S . , 2008 . Emergency management planning as collaborative community work . Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 5 ( 1 ) , 1 – 17 . Slater , M . , Usoh , M . , Steed , A . , 1992 . Depth of presence in virtual environments . Presence 3 ( 2 ) , 130 – 1441994 , 130 – 144 . Stasser , G . , Titus , W . , 2003 . Hidden proﬁles : a brief history . Psychological Inquiry 3 ( 4 ) , 302 – 311 . Thomas , J . J . , Cook , K . A . ( Eds . ) , 2005 . National Visualization and Analytics Center Ch . 5 , p . 139 . Tversky , A . , Kahneman , D . , 1974 . Judgment under uncertainty : heuristics and biases . Science 185 ( 4157 ) , 1124 – 1131 . Tversky , B . , 2000 . Some Ways that Mmaps and Diagrams Communicate . Spatial Cognition II . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 1849 , 72 – 79 . Weick , K . E . , Meader , D . K . , 1993 . Sense - making and group support systems . In : Jessup , L . , Valacich , J . ( Eds . ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives . Macmillan Publishing Company , New York , NY , USA , pp . 230 – 252 . Zhang , X . , Simpson , T . W . , Frecker , M . , Lesieutre , G . , 2010 . Supporting Knowledge Exploration and Discovery in Multi - Dimensional Data with Interactive Multiscale Visualization . Journal of Engineering Design . Available Online June 23 , 2010 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2010 . 487260 . A . Wu et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 71 ( 2013 ) 4 – 23 23