JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 188 No . 6 877 – 890 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200906012 JCB 877 Correspondence to Clare M . Waterman : watermancm @ nhlbi . nih . gov Abbreviations used in this paper : CB , cytoskeleton buffer ; CCD , charge - coupled device ; FA , focal adhesion ; FAKi , FAK inhibitor ; IP , immunoprecipitation ; MEF , mouse embryonic fibroblast ; PY , phosphotyrosine . Introduction Cells impinge force on their extracellular environments during tissue morphogenesis , cardiovascular and pulmonary function , directed cell motility , and the immune response . Cell forces are primarily developed by myosin IIs acting in the actin cytoskeleton ( Cai et al . , 2006 ) . Cytoskeletal forces are linked to the ECM through transmembrane  –  integrin heterodimers that cluster to form focal adhesions ( FAs ; Geiger et al . , 2009 ) . On their cytoplasmic face , integrin tails serve as scaffolds for the recruitment of FA - associated proteins , including cytoskeletal - binding and adapter proteins , and en - zymes such as kinases , phosphatases , and small GTPases and their modulators ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007a ) . These proteins contribute to FA functions in integrin - mediated signal trans - duction and form the force - bearing link between the ECM and cytoskeleton . FAs are mechanosensitive organelles that recruit cyto - plasmic proteins to grow and change composition in response to mechanical tension ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ; Riveline et al . , 2001 ) in a process known as FA matura - tion . Tension driving FA maturation can be supplied either by myosin II forces transmitted to FAs through the actin cytoskele - ton or by external forces applied to the cell . It is thought that tension - driven FA compositional changes are critical to the abil - ity of FAs to trigger different signaling pathways that promote differentiation , division , or apoptosis ( Engler et al . , 2006 ) . The mechanism of tension - mediated FA maturation is not well characterized . Tension on FA proteins could drive local - ized unfolding or conformational changes that unmask binding sites for cytoplasmic proteins ( Vogel and Sheetz , 2006 ) . For ex - ample , molecular dynamics simulations suggest that directional F ocal adhesions ( FAs ) are mechanosensitive adhe - sion and signaling complexes that grow and change composition in response to myosin II – mediated cytoskeletal tension in a process known as FA matura - tion . To understand tension - mediated FA maturation , we sought to identify proteins that are recruited to FAs in a myosin II – dependent manner and to examine the mech - anism for their myosin II – sensitive FA association . We find that FA recruitment of both the cytoskeletal adapter protein vinculin and the tyrosine kinase FA kinase ( FAK ) are myosin II and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness dependent . Myosin II activity promotes FAK / Src - mediated phosphorylation of paxillin on tyrosines 31 and 118 and vinculin association with paxillin . We show that phosphomimic mutations of paxillin can spe - cifically induce the recruitment of vinculin to adhesions independent of myosin II activity . These results reveal an important role for paxillin in adhesion mechanosensing via myosin II – mediated FAK phosphorylation of paxillin that promotes vinculin FA recruitment to reinforce the cytoskeletal ECM linkage and drive FA maturation . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation Ana M . Pasapera , 1 Ian C . Schneider , 3 , 4 , 7 Erin Rericha , 2 , 7 David D . Schlaepfer , 5 , 6 and Clare M . Waterman 1 , 7 1 Cell Biology and Physiology Center , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 2 Institute for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 3 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and 4 Department of Genetics , Development , and Cell Biology , Iowa State University , Ames , IA 50011 5 Moores Cancer Center and 6 Department of Reproductive Medicine , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 7 Physiology Course , Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , MA 02543 This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 http : / / jcb . rupress . org / content / suppl / 2010 / 03 / 22 / jcb . 200906012 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 878 Contraction was inhibited with either 20 µM of the myosin II – specific ATPase inhibitor blebbistatin ( K i = 0 . 3 µM ) or 10 µM of the Rho kinase inhibitor Y27632 ( K i = 0 . 14 µM ) . As a physiological approach to myosin II inhibition , MEFs were plated on fibronectin - coupled compliant substrates ( 1 . 0 kPa force on integrin cytoplasmic tails could induce separation of the  and  subunits ( Zhu et al . , 2008 ) to allow new protein binding . In vitro experiments suggest that forced unfolding of talin promotes vinculin binding ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) , whereas stretching p130cas unmasks a tyrosine substrate for Src family kinases ( Sawada et al . , 2006 ) . However , whether these mech - anisms operate in cells during physiological , myosin II – mediated FA maturation is not known . In spite of the lack of mechanistic insight , it is well accepted that tension - mediated FA maturation involves a se - quential cascade of compositional changes ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2004 ) . FAs are initiated by activation of integrin extracellular heads’ affinity for ECM through association of their cytoplas - mic tails with the vinculin - and actin - binding protein talin ( Tadokoro et al . , 2003 ) . Early after integrin activation , the adapter protein paxillin is recruited by an unknown mechanism , and more integrins cluster into FA ( Laukaitis et al . , 2001 ; Webb et al . , 2004 ; Wiseman et al . , 2004 ) . Further FA growth is accompanied by the recruitment of the actin - bundling protein  - actinin ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) , which with talin ( Lee et al . , 2004 ) may establish a link between integrins and the actin cytoskele - ton . Myosin II is thought to transmit tension in an  - actinin – actin network to the integrin – ECM linkage . This tension promotes elongation of an adhesion - associated actin bundle where cyto - skeletal adapter proteins vinculin and zyxin accumulate ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , tension on fibronectin - engaged  1 in - tegrins promotes integrin head binding to secondary sites on fibronectin ( Friedland et al . , 2009 ) , inducing recruitment and activation of the tyrosine kinase FAK ( Shi and Boettiger , 2003 ; Friedland et al . , 2009 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of early FA proteins , including FAK , paxillin , and p130cas ( Ballestrem et al . , 2006 ) , then act as scaffolds for phosphotyrosine ( PY ) - binding SH2 domain – containing proteins . There are also studies that show compositional differences between small or large FAs ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2003 , 2007b ; Zimerman et al . , 2004 ) , although the order of protein addition or the requirement for tension in their FA recruitment is not known . To better understand tension - mediated FA maturation , we sought proteins that are recruited to FAs in a contractility - dependent manner and examined the mechanism for their myosin II – sensitive FA association . We find that FA localization of vinculin is myosin II and ECM stiffness dependent . By exam - ining the effects of myosin II inhibition on protein interactions and phosphorylation , we deduce that the myosin II – dependent recruitment of vinculin to FA is mediated by FAK phosphoryla - tion of paxillin , which creates binding sites in FAs for vinculin to drive FA maturation . Results Inhibition of myosin II activity affects adhesion morphology and alters cell migration To gain insight into myosin II – mediated FA maturation , we characterized the effects of myosin II inhibition on migra - tion and FA morphology in mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) adhered to coverslips coated with 5 µg / ml fibronectin . Figure 1 . Rho kinase – mediated myosin II activity and substrate stiffness slow MEF migration and increase adhesion size . ( A ) Migration rates for untreated cells ( control ) , cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) or 10 µM Y27632 , or plated on 1 . 0 kPa compliant polyacrylamide substrates . Mean velocity is shown above each box plot . Arrowheads indicate lower and upper extreme outliers . n = number of cells . ( B ) Phase - contrast images of cell morphology under the same conditions as in A . Bar , 10 µm . ( C ) Immu - nolocalization of PY epitopes ( P - Tyr ) to visualize adhesions ( green ) and fluorescent phalloidin staining to visualize actin filaments ( red ) under the treatments as in A . Merged images are shown in the third column , and boxed regions are magnified in the fourth column . Bars : ( third column ) 10 µm ; ( fourth column ) 2 µm . ( D ) Area of individual adhesions within PY - immunolabeled cells under the conditions in A . Mean adhesion area ( micrometer squared ) is shown above each box plot . n = number of adhesions . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 879 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . polyacrylamide gel ) where myosin II activity is down - regulated in response to mechanosensation of a compliant ECM ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . Phalloidin staining and immunolocalization of PY epitopes ( Thomas and Brugge , 1997 ) in control cells showed lamellipodia in the cell front and F - actin bundles in the center and tail , which often terminated in PY - containing FAs ( Fig . 1 C ) . FAs ranged in size from diffraction limited ( 0 . 125 µm 2 ) at the cell front to several micrometers long ( 0 . 45 ± 0 . 75 µm 2 ) in the central and rear regions ( Fig . 1 D ) . Because a goal of this study is to determine the compositional changes that accompany FA size changes mediated by myosin II , we will not classify different - sized structures as FAs , focal complexes , or fibrillar adhesions , but will refer to all membrane plaques marked by PY or another FA protein as adhesions . Blebbistatin treatment inhibited actin bundles and induced a homogeneous network , ROCK inhibition blocked central actin bundles , and plating on compliant substrates reduced actin bundle length and intensity compared with controls ( Fig . 1 C ) . Myosin II inhibition by all three treatments decreased adhe - sion size compared with control ( Fig . 1 D ) , and in the case of blebbistatin , confined adhesions to the extreme cell periphery ( Fig . 1 C ) . These results agree with previous studies ( Totsukawa et al . , 2004 ; Even - Ram et al . , 2007 ; Schaub et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , all three treatments altered cell morphology and in - creased migration rate compared with control ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) as reported previously ( Totsukawa et al . , 2004 ; Even - Ram et al . , 2007 ) . Because myosin II ATPase and ROCK inhibition pro - duced similar effects , in the remainder of our experiments , we used 20 µM blebbistatin ( 1 h ) for pharmacological inhibition of myosin II , whereas compliant substrates were used for physi - ological down - regulation of contractility . Adhesion recruitment of FAK , vinculin , zyxin , and  - actinin is myosin II dependent To determine how adhesion composition is affected by acto - myosin activity , we performed immunofluorescence and quan - titative image analysis of cells in which contractility was inhibited . Because the adapter protein paxillin is a component of newly formed adhesions ( Laukaitis et al . , 2001 ; Choi et al . , 2008 ) , we examined the myosin II dependence of its localiza - tion to PY - containing adhesions . In both control and blebbistatin - treated cells , paxillin was nearly completely colocalized with PY in all adhesions in spite of blebbistatin’s effects on adhe - sion size , spatial distribution , and actin organization ( Fig . 2 A ) . Similarly , plating cells on compliant substrates did not alter localization of paxillin to PY - containing adhesions ( Fig . S1 ) . Thus , paxillin is present in adhesions independently of myo - sin II contractility , and therefore , we used it as an adhesion marker in further experiments . We performed immunofluorescence and quantitative image analysis to examine the blebbistatin sensitivity of adhe - sion association of several important FA proteins . We deter - mined the ratio of intensity of fluorescence in segmented adhesions in blebbistatin - treated cells relative to controls as a measure of the myosin II dependence of adhesion recruitment . This revealed a slight yet insignificant reduction in paxillin level after blebbistatin treatment in all experiments , ranging Figure 2 . Myosin II is required for recruitment of specific proteins to adhe - sions . ( A ) Immunolocalization of paxillin ( Pxn ; red ) and PY epitopes ( P - Tyr ; green ) in untreated cells ( control ) or cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) . Merged images are shown in the third column , and boxed regions are magnified in the fourth column . Bars : ( third column ) 10 µm ; ( fourth col - umn ) 2 µm . ( B ) Immunolocalization of paxillin ( red ) with either ( in green ) ; talin 1 ( Tln ) , FAK ,  1 integrin (  1 - Int ) , zyxin ( Zyx ) , vinculin ( Vcl ) , or  - actinin ( Actn ) in untreated control cells ( left ) or cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( right ) . Merged images are shown in the right column . Bar , 2 µm . ( C ) Effects of blebbistatin on adhesion localization of FA proteins expressed as the ratio of mean fluorescence intensities within segmented adhesions of blebbistatin - treated relative to control cells . Mean ratios are shown above each plot . * , P < 0 . 02 . Error bars indicate 95 % confidence interval of the mean . n = number of blebbistatin - treated cells / number of control cells . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 880 of both protein class ( i . e . , adapter , kinase , and actin binding ) and the myosin II dependence of their adhesion localization . Furthermore , in MEFs , the adapter protein vinculin exhibits particularly stable adhesion binding . Thus , we focused further study on the mechanism of actomyosin - dependent , stable vincu - lin association with adhesions . Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions is cell type independent , reversible , and physiologically relevant To characterize the generality of myosin II – dependent vinculin recruitment to adhesions , we examined its human cell type specificity . Immunofluorescence analysis of osteosarcoma ( U2OS ) , breast epithelial ( MCF - 10 ) , and endothelial ( HUVEC ) cell lines ( Fig . S3 ) and primary foreskin fibroblasts ( HFF - 1 ; Fig . 4 A ) revealed high levels of vinculin in adhesions of untreated cells but a significant reduction in vinculin in adhesions in - duced by blebbistatin treatment ( Fig . 4 B ) . To determine whether the blebbistatin - induced reduction of vinculin in adhesions was reversible , we analyzed the time course of vinculin recruitment after induction of actomyosin contractility by blebbistatin washout ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Immuno - fluorescence analysis showed that within 15 min after blebbi - statin washout , although adhesion size was still reduced compared with controls , vinculin was already colocalized with paxillin in adhesions ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Analysis of later time points in - dicated that vinculin remained colocalized with paxillin , and normal adhesion size was regained within 30 – 60 min ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Thus , blebbistatin reversibly reduces vinculin in adhe - sions , and vinculin is recruited to adhesions soon after the induction of actomyosin contraction before the completion of adhesion growth . We next sought to determine whether the myosin II – dependent recruitment of vinculin to adhesions occurs in physi - ologically relevant contexts . By examining vinculin localization in cells plated on compliant ECMs , we confirmed that reduction of contractility by ECM compliance mechanosensing reduced vinculin level in adhesions ( Fig . S1 ) . We next sought to deter - mine when in the adhesion maturation cycle vinculin is recruited to adhesions of migrating cells . Similar to blebbistatin washout , in the advancing lamellipodium of migrating cells , nascent adhe - sions form independently of actomyosin contraction followed from 61 to 91 % of controls ( Fig . 2 C ) . Similar analysis revealed no significant difference in the levels of  1 integrin and talin in paxillin - containing adhesions between control and blebbistatin - treated cells ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . In contrast , although there were high levels of FAK , zyxin , vinculin , and  – actinin in adhesions of controls , these proteins were significantly reduced in adhe - sions of blebbistatin - treated cells ( Fig . 2 C ) . Blebbistatin caused redistribution of FAK , vinculin , and zyxin from adhesions to the cytosol , whereas  - actinin was relocalized to lamellipodia . ( Fig . 2 B ) . Together , these results indicate that the recruitment of paxillin , talin , and  1 integrin to adhesions is independent of myosin II activity , whereas adhesion association of FAK , zyxin , vinculin , and  - actinin requires myosin II contraction . Vinculin is a stably bound adhesion protein We next hypothesized that strong adhesion binding affinity could override actomyosin dependence in recruitment of pro - teins to adhesions . To test this , we performed FRAP of EGFP - tagged proteins in single adhesions and determined the mean fluorescence recovery t 1 / 2 as an estimate of the stability of adhesion binding ( Bulinski et al . , 2001 ; Lele and Ingber , 2006 ) . Our hypothesis predicts long FRAP t 1 / 2 ’s for the myosin II – independent adhesion - associated proteins paxillin and talin and short FRAP t 1 / 2 ’s for the blebbistatin - sensitive adhesion proteins zyxin , FAK ,  - actinin , and vinculin . Contrary to our expectations , FRAP analysis revealed a broad range of mean t 1 / 2 ’s from < 10 s to nearly 3 min with no correlation between myosin II dependence of adhesion association and FRAP t 1 / 2 ( Fig . 3 and Fig . S2 ) . EGFP conjugates of the myosin II – independent adhesion - associated proteins paxillin and talin had similar intermediate FRAP t 1 / 2 ’s of 23 ± 3 . 4 s ( SEM ) and 25 ± 5 . 9 s . The myosin II – dependent adhesion proteins exhib - ited FRAP t 1 / 2 ’s from very short , for EGFP - FAK ( 7 ± 2 . 1 s ) and EGFP - zyxin ( 12 ± 2 . 5 s ) , to intermediate , for EGFP –  - actinin ( 36 ± 0 . 5 s ) , and to very long , for EGFP - vinculin ( 80 ± 2 . 9 s ) , which is longer than previous reports in other cell types ( Chandrasekar et al . , 2005 ; Möhl et al . , 2009 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2009 ) . In addition , EGFP - vinculin often did not exhibit complete fluorescence recovery after 300 s ( Möhl et al . , 2009 ; unpublished data ) , suggesting the presence of a stably bound fraction in adhesions . Thus , different adhesion proteins possess highly variable adhesion - binding stability , which is independent Figure 3 . Vinculin is stably bound in adhesions . EGFP fusion proteins localized to adhesions were subjected to FRAP . ( A ) Sample fluorescence recovery curves for vinculin ,  - actinin , talin 1 , paxillin , FAK , and zyxin in single adhesions . Note different x - axis scales in left and right plots ; fits are shown as solid lines . ( B ) Half - times of fluorescence recovery . Means are shown above each plot . Vcl , vinculin ; Actn ,  - actinin ; Pxn , paxillin ; Tln , talin 1 ; Zyx , zyxin . n = number of adhesions . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 881 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . relevant contexts of ECM stiffness mechanosensing and adhe - sion maturation during cell migration . The paxillin – vinculin interaction is modulated by myosin II activity Our results show that the vinculin - binding proteins talin ( Jones et al . , 1989 ) and paxillin ( Brown et al . , 1996 ) are re - cruited to adhesions independent of myosin II , suggesting that they could serve as myosin II – sensitive scaffolds for recruit - ment of subsequent proteins . To determine whether vinculin interactions with talin or paxillin were altered by myosin II activity , we assayed their associations by immunoprecipitation ( IP ) from MEF lysates prepared in the presence or absence of by their myosin II – dependent maturation ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ; Choi et al . , 2008 ) . MEFs were cotransfected with mApple - or EGFP - paxillin as a marker of nascent adhesions ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) and EGFP - or mCherry - vinculin and imaged by time - lapse TIRF microscopy ( Fig . 4 E and Video 1 ) . Quantitative analysis showed that the initiation of vinculin accumulation in adhesions lagged behind that of paxillin by 80 ± 40 s ( n = 16 FAs in four cells ; range 35 – 180 s ; Fig . 4 F ; Choi et al . , 2008 ) . The lag in vinculin accumulation relative to paxillin occurred independently of fluorescent tag or order of image acquisition ( unpublished data ) . Together , these results suggest that the re - versible , myosin II – dependent recruitment of vinculin to adhe - sions occurs in a range of cell types in the physiologically Figure 4 . Characterization of myosin II dependence of vinculin recruitment to adhesions . ( A ) Immunolocalization in human foreskin fibroblasts ( HFF1 ) of vinculin ( Vcl ; green ) and paxillin ( Pxn ; red ) in untreated ( control ) or 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) - treated cells . Bar , 10 µm . Merged , magnified images of boxed regions are shown in the third column . Bar , 2 µm . n = number of blebbistatin - treated cells / number of control cells . ( B ) Effects of blebbistatin on adhesion localization of paxillin and vinculin in the noted cell types expressed as the ratio of mean fluorescence intensities within segmented adhesions of blebbistatin - treated relative to control cells . Mean ratios are shown above each plot . * , P < 0 . 02 . Error bars indicate 95 % confidence interval of the mean . ( C ) Area of individual adhesions from paxillin immunostaining in MEF cells in untreated control cells at specific times after treatment with 20 µM blebbistatin ( 15 , 30 , and 60 min ) or washout of 20 µM blebbistatin into control media ( 15 , 30 , and 60 min w / o ) . Mean adhesion areas ( micrometer squared ) are shown next to each box plot . Red symbols indicate the outliers at more than three interquartiles ; blue symbols indicate a  95 % confidence interval of the mean . n = number of adhesions . ( D ) Immunolocalization of paxillin ( red ) and vinculin ( green ) and fluorescent phalloidin staining of actin filaments in cells after treatment ( Treat ) for 60 min and washout ( blebbistatin w / o ) for 15 , 30 , and 60 min of 20 µM blebbistatin . Merged images are shown in the fourth column , and boxed regions are magnified in the fifth column . Bars : ( fourth column ) 10 µm ; ( fifth column ) 2 µm . ( E ) Images from a time - lapse dual - color TIRF series of EGFP - paxillin ( GFP - Pxn ) and mCherry vinculin ( mCherry - Vcl ) during adhesion formation and growth in a migrating MEF cell . Time is shown in seconds . Bar , 2 µm . ( F ) Normalized fluorescent protein intensity ( green , paxillin ; red , vinculin ) in the adhesion shown in E . Horizontal lines show the value of two times the standard deviation of the normalized background fluorescence ( 2× SD Vcl or Pxn Bckg ) ; note that this is higher for mCherry because it is much dimmer than EGFP . Arrows indicate the time when the intensity rose above these values . The time difference between arrows indicates lag time between the accumulation of EGFP - paxillin and mCherry - vinculin at the adhesion ( Pxn - Vcl lag ) . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 882 ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) , suggest that contractility enhances paxillin phosphorylation on Y31 / 118 . To determine how myosin II – mediated effects on paxillin phosphorylation correlated with paxillin protein interactions , we performed paxillin IPs from lysates prepared in the presence and absence of blebbistatin and probed for interacting proteins . First , probing paxillin IPs with anti - PY antibodies showed that myosin II inhibition decreased the level of total paxillin PY ( 31 % ) by a similar amount as its reduction of pY31 and pY118 ( Fig . 6 D ) relative to controls . There was also a similar reduction to 12 % and 66 % , respectively , in the association of either FAK or Crk with paxillin in IPs from blebbistatin - treated cells compared with controls ( Fig . 6 D ) . In contrast , myosin II inhibition increased the paxillin –  - Pix interaction to 159 % of control ( Fig . 6 D ) and did not effect the adhesion localization of  - Pix ( Fig . S4 ) . Together , these results show that myosin II – dependent modulation of paxillin interactions correlates with its regulation of paxillin phosphorylation . Integrin engagement promotes FAK recruitment to adhe - sions and activation by autophosphorylation on Y397 ( pY397 - FAK ; Burridge et al . , 1992 ; Shi and Boettiger , 2003 ) . Thus , we examined the effects of myosin II activity on FAK Y397 phos - phorylation . Immunoblotting of lysates revealed , similarly to ROCK inhibition in other cell types ( Torsoni et al . , 2005 ) , that blebbistatin treatment or plating cells on compliant substrates substantially reduced pY397 - FAK relative to control ( Fig . 6 G and Fig . S1 ) . Immunofluorescence showed a blebbistatin - induced reduction in pY397 - FAK that mirrored the reduction of total FAK in adhesions ( Fig . 2 , B and C ; Fig . 6 , E and F ; and Fig . S1 ) . In contrast , the activity of Src , another kinase known to act with FAK on paxillin Y31 / 118 ( Turner , 2000 ) , was not affected by blebbistatin treatment , as assayed by immunoblot - ting for dephosphorylation on Src Y527 ( Fig . 6 G ; Kmiecik and Shalloway , 1987 ) . Thus , full FAK adhesion association and activation requires myosin II contractility . Because phosphorylation of Y31 / 118 on paxillin is regulated by FAK ( Bellis et al . , 1995 ; Schaller and Parsons , 1995 ) , our results suggest that the blebbistatin - induced effects on paxillin phosphorylation could be mediated through FAK . Indeed , by immunoblotting cell lysates , we found that paxillin phosphorylation was at similar levels in lysates of cells treated with blebbistatin , 10 µM of a small molecule FAK inhibitor ( FAKi ; PF271 ; Roberts et al . , 2008 ) , or both ( Fig . 6 G and Fig . S5 A ) . In addition , inhibition of Src by PP2 treatment did not further de - crease the paxillin phosphorylation by blebbistatin but curiously blebbistatin . IP with antivinculin antibodies followed by prob - ing for coprecipitation of talin or paxillin revealed association of both talin and paxillin with vinculin in controls ( Fig . 5 A ) . Surprisingly , the coprecipitation of paxillin with antivinculin antibodies was markedly reduced in lysates of blebbistatin - treated cells . Similarly , although vinculin was present in IPs performed with antipaxillin antibodies from controls , vinculin in paxillin IPs from blebbistatin - treated cells was substantially reduced ( Fig . 5 B ) . In contrast , the level of talin in the vinculin IPs ( or vinculin in talin IPs ) was not changed by myosin II inhibition ( Fig . 5 , A and C ) in spite of the reduction in vinculin but not of talin in adhesions of blebbistatin - treated cells , sug - gesting that these proteins form a complex in the cytoplasm . IP with a nonrelated antibody ( anti - EGFP ) did not coprecipi - tate vinculin ( see Fig . 8 K ) , paxillin , or talin ( not depicted ) . Therefore , in cell lysates , the paxillin – vinculin interaction is reduced by myosin II inhibition , whereas effects on talin – vinculin interaction are not detected . Thus , we focused further study on the role of paxillin in myosin II – mediated recruit - ment of vinculin to adhesions . Myosin II activity promotes FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation Because paxillin phosphorylation is critical to cell migration and adhesion maturation ( Petit et al . , 2000 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2003 , 2007b ; Webb et al . , 2004 ; Nayal et al . , 2006 ; Bertolucci et al . , 2008 ) , we examined its myosin II dependence . We first examined tyrosines 31 and 118 ( pY31 - paxillin and pY118 - paxillin ) , whose phosphorylation mediates Crk interaction ( Schaller and Parsons , 1995 ) yet also are close to the LD1 and LD2 domains that are in part responsible for FAK and vinculin binding ( Brown et al . , 1996 ) . Immunoblotting cell lysates with phosphospecific antibodies showed that blebbistatin reduced the level of pY31 - and pY118 - paxillin to 45 and 24 % of control ( Fig . 6 A ) . In contrast , phosphorylation at serine 273 , which is thought to mediate paxillin’s interaction with the Rac1 regula - tory complex of  - Pix , Pak , and Pkl / Git1 ( Turner et al . , 1999 ; Nayal et al . , 2006 ; Schmalzigaug et al . , 2007 ) , was slightly enhanced to 127 % of control by blebbistatin treatment ( Fig . 6 D ) . Immunofluorescence and quantitative image analysis revealed a blebbistatin - induced slight reduction in pY31 - and pY118 - paxillin to 69 % and 81 % of that in control adhesions , respec - tively , similar to the blebbistatin - induced reduction in total paxillin in adhesions to 65 – 91 % of controls ( Fig . 2 , B and C ; and Fig . 6 , B and C ) . These data , together with previous results Figure 5 . Effects of myosin II inhibition on the interactions between vinculin , paxillin , and talin . IPs were performed from lysates of un - treated control MEFs ( control ) or MEFs treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) followed by immunoblot analysis . ( A ) IP with anti - vinculin ( Vcl ) antibodies , immunoblot with anti - vinculin and antipaxillin ( Pxn ; left ) , or anti – talin 1 ( Tln ; right ) antibodies . ( B ) IP with antipaxillin anti - bodies and immunoblotting with antivinculin antibodies . White lines indicate that interven - ing lanes have been spliced out . ( C ) IP with anti – talin 1 antibodies and immunoblotting with antivinculin antibodies are shown . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 883 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . likely express the closely related paxillin homologue Hic - 5 that also binds vinculin ( Thomas et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , we performed knockdowns of paxillin and / or Hic5 by siRNA and assayed for the presence of vinculin in adhesions . 48 h after transfection of MEFs with oligonucleotide pools , the levels of paxillin and Hic - 5 protein were reduced by 45 % and 75 % , respectively , with even lower levels in the double knockdown ( 75 % for both paxillin and Hic5 ; Fig . 7 A ) . Immunofluores - cence revealed that cells with reduced levels of either paxillin , Hic5 , or both were small and poorly spread ( Fig . 7 B ) . Double - depleted cells displayed marked reduction in talin or PY - containing adhesions except in cell regions containing residual clustered paxillin / Hic5 ( Fig . 7 C ) . Instead , talin in depleted cells was evenly distributed in dim , diffraction - limited punctae , PY staining was reduced , and interference reflection micros - copy confirmed the absence of localized areas of close contact with the substrate in paxillin / Hic5 - depleted cells ( unpublished data ) . Immunolocalization of vinculin revealed a similar localization as talin in the double - depleted cells ( Fig . 7 C ) . In addition , we were unable to find cells completely lacking restored some blebbistatin - induced FAK inactivation ( Fig . 6 G ) . Together , these data suggest that myosin II – dependent recruit - ment and activation of FAK at adhesions mediates phosphor - ylation of paxillin on Y31 / 118 . Paxillin Y31 / 118 phosphomimic is sufficient to promote paxillin – vinculin interaction and vinculin recruitment to adhesions We next sought to determine the requirement for paxillin and its regulation by phosphorylation in the recruitment of vinculin to adhesions . Unfortunately , because cells lacking talin have no adhesions ( Zhang et al . , 2008 ) , talin’s role in vinculin adhesion recruitment cannot be determined . In contrast , the requirement for paxillin in vinculin adhesion recruitment is controversial because vinculin is present in adhesions of embryonic stem cells lacking the paxillin gene ( Hagel et al . , 2002 ) , whereas in smooth muscle cells , vinculin recruitment to the mem - brane requires paxillin ( Opazo Saez et al . , 2004 ) . However , cells in these previous studies , as well our MEFs ( Fig . 7 A ) , Figure 6 . Myosin II promotes tyrosine phosphorylation and interaction of paxillin , vinculin , and FAK . ( A ) Immunoblot of lysates of untreated MEF cells ( control ) and cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) using antibodies specific to paxillin ( Pxn ) or pY31 , pY118 , or pS273 paxillin ( Pxn Y31 , Pxn Y118 , and Pxn S273 ) . Numbers above each blot represent the mean of quantified Western blots ± 95 % confidence interval ( n = 4 experiments ) . ( B ) Immunolocal - ization of paxillin ( green ) and pY31 or pY118 paxillin ( red ) in untreated control cells and cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin . The third columns show merged images Bar , 2 µm . ( C ) Effects of blebbistatin on adhesion localization of pY31 and pY118 paxillin in adhesions , expressed ( also in F ) as the ratio of mean fluorescence intensities within segmented adhesions of 20 µM blebbistatin - treated relative to control cells . Antibody competition for similar epitopes precluded comparison with effects of blebbistatin on total paxillin level in the same cells . Mean fluorescence ratio is shown above each plot . n = number of blebbistatin - treated cells / number of control cells ( also in F ) . ( D ) IP with antibodies to paxillin ( left and top right ) or Crk ( bottom right ) from lysates of untreated control MEFs or MEFs treated with 20 µM blebbistatin followed by immunoblotting with antibodies to paxillin , PY epitopes ( P - Tyr ) , pY31 paxillin , FAK ,  - Pix , or Crk . Numbers above each blot represent the mean of quantified Western blots ± 95 % confidence interval ( n = 3 experiments ) . ( E ) Immunofluorescence analysis of untreated control cells or cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin using antibodies specific to pY397 FAK ( red ) or PY epitopes ( green ) . Merged images are shown in the third column . Bar , 2 µm . ( F ) Effects of 20 µM blebbistatin on adhesion localization of pY397 FAK and PY in adhesions quantified from immunofluorescence images . * , P < 0 . 02 . ( G ) Immunoblot of lysates of untreated MEF cells , cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin , or a combination of 20 µM blebbistatin and either 10 µm PP2 , 10 µm PF271 ( FAKi ) , or all three using antibodies specific to paxillin , pY31 , pY118 paxillin , FAK , pY397 FAK , Src ( c - Src ) , or pY527 Src ( cSrc Y527 ) . Error bars indicate 95 % confidence interval of the mean . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 884 We next sought to determine the requirement for paxillin phosphorylation in vinculin recruitment to adhesions . To deter - mine whether enhanced phosphorylation could induce vincu - lin recruitment to adhesions in the absence of contractility , we promoted tyrosine phosphorylation in blebbistatin - treated cells by inhibition of tyrosine phosphatases with 100 µM sodium orthovanadate ( Na 3 VO 4 ) or 10 µM phenylarsine oxide ( unpub - lished data ) . Phosphatase inhibition reversed the blebbistatin - induced decrease in pY31 - paxillin and pY397 - FAK ( Fig . 8 A ) . In addition , IP and immunofluorescence analysis revealed that Na 3 VO 4 treatment rescued the blebbistatin - induced reduction in vinculin – paxillin coprecipitation and vinculin localization in adhesions , although it did not rescue other effects of bleb - bistatin , including reduction in adhesion size and loss of central adhesions ( Fig . 8 , B – D ) . To determine whether paxillin phosphorylation was suffi - cient to promote vinculin recruitment to adhesions or whether additional myosin II – dependent processes were required , we overexpressed EGFP - tagged paxillin mutants that were either unphosphorylatable ( Y31 / 118F ) or that mimicked phosphoryla - tion charges ( Y31 / 118E ) at Y31 / 118 ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) and examined their effects on the blebbistatin sensitivity of vinculin localization to adhesions . This revealed colocal - ization of both EGFP - tagged paxillin mutants with vinculin at adhesions of control cells ( Fig . 8 E ) , with Y31 / 118F EGFP - paxillin inducing larger adhesions and the Y31 / 118E mutant in - ducing smaller adhesions ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) . Vinculin localizing in Y31 / 118F EGFP - paxillin – containing adhesions suggests either a parallel pathway for vinculin recruitment ( e . g . , talin ) or the effects of endogenous paxillin . Importantly , expression of the Y31 / 118E EGFP - paxillin mutant rescued the blebbistatin - induced reduction of vinculin but not zyxin or  - actinin in small , peripheral adhesions ( compare Fig . 8 , E – H ; with Fig . 2 , B and C ) . FRAP analysis of mCherry vin - culin in adhesions of cells expressing wild - type or Y31 / 118E EGFP - paxillin revealed long t 1 / 2 ’s of fluorescence recov - ery ( Fig . 8 I ) . In contrast , mCherry vinculin in adhesions of blebbistatin - treated cells expressing Y31 / 118E EGFP - paxillin displayed a significant reduction in FRAP t 1 / 2 ( Fig . 8 I ) , in - dicating a labile vinculin – adhesion association . In contrast , neither the Y31 / 118F EGFP - paxillin mutant nor vinculin localized to PY - containing adhesions in blebbistatin - treated cells ( Fig . 8 E ) . Corroborating the results of immunofluores - cence , IP from lysates of blebbistatin - treated cells using anti - GFP antibodies showed increased coprecipitation of vinculin with EGFP - tagged Y31 / 118E paxillin compared with EGFP - tagged wild - type or Y31 / 118F paxillin ( Fig . 8 K ) . Expression of both mutant and wild - type EGFP - tagged paxillins reduced the level of endogenous paxillin phosphorylation in both untreated and blebbistatin - treated cells by similar amounts , possibly by competition between endogenous and expressed proteins for cellular kinases ( Fig . 8 J ) . Expression of EGFP conjugates of any of the single paxillin tyrosine mutants ( Y31E , Y31F , Y118E , and Y118F ) gave partial effects compared with the double mutants in both immunofluorescence and IP assays ( unpublished data ) . Together , these results suggest that paxil - lin Y31 / Y118 phosphorylation is sufficient for promoting the paxillin or Hic5 , and no changes in adhesions were seen after treatment with scrambled siRNA controls ( unpublished data ) . These results suggest that paxillin and / or Hic5 are necessary for formation of discrete substrate adhesions , which precludes our ability to determine the requirement for these proteins in vinculin recruitment to adhesions . Figure 7 . Requirement for paxillin and Hic5 for adhesion formation . ( A ) Immunoblot analysis of paxillin ( Pxn ; left ) , Hic5 ( right ) , and tubulin ( Tub ; both ) in lysates of mock - transfected cells or cells transfected with siRNA pools against paxillin , Hic5 , or both . ( B ) Immunofluorescence localization of Hic5 ( red ) , paxillin ( red ) , and vinculin ( Vcl ; green ) in control cells or cells transfected with siRNA pools against paxillin or Hic5 . ( C ) Immunofluores - cence localization of paxillin ( red ) and vinculin , talin 1 ( Tln ) , or PY epitopes ( P - Tyr ; green ) in control cells or cells transfected with siRNA pools against both paxillin and Hic5 . ( B and C ) Merged images of boxed regions are magnified in third columns . Bars , 2 µm . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 885 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . Figure 8 . Paxillin Y31 / 118 phosphorylation is sufficient for promoting paxillin – vinculin interaction and labile vinculin recruitment to adhesions . ( A ) Immunoblot analysis of lysates of untreated ( control ) and cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( Blebb ) or with 20 µM blebbistatin and 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 using antibodies specific to paxillin ( Pxn ) , pY31 paxillin , pY397FAK , or FAK . ( B ) Comparison of cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin or 20 µM bleb - bistatin and 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 and immunolabeled with antibodies to paxillin ( red ) and vinculin ( Vcl ; green ) . Bar , 2 µm . ( C ) Effects of Na 3 VO 4 on vinculin localization in adhesions of blebbistatin - treated cells , shown ( also in G and H ) as the ratio of mean fluorescence intensities within segmented adhesions of 20 µM blebbistatin - treated cells relative to non – blebbistatin - treated cells in the presence and absence of additional Na 3 VO 4 . The mean fluorescence ratio is shown above each plot . ( D ) Antipaxillin IPs from lysates of untreated control or cells treated with either 20 µM blebbistatin , 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 , and 20 µM blebbistatin or 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 alone followed by analysis by PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies to vinculin , paxillin , or PY epitopes . ( E – I ) EGFP - conjugated paxillin ( Pxn - GFP wt ) or paxillin bearing mutations of tyrosines 31 and 118 to phenylalanines ( Pxn Y31 / 118F ) or glutamic acids ( Pxn Y31 / 118E ) were expressed in MEFs and either treated with 20 µM blebbistatin or not . ( E ) Images of cells expressing EGFP - conjugated paxillin mutants ( green ) and immunolocalization of vinculin ( red ) or PY epitopes ( P - Tyr ; red ) . Right columns show ( also in F ) merged , magnified images of the boxed regions Bar , 2 µm . ( F ) Images of EGFP - conjugated Y31 / 118E paxillin ( green ) and immunolocalization of zyxin ( Zyx ; red ) or  - actinin ( Actn ; red ) in cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin . ( G ) Effects of blebbistatin on adhesion localization of vinculin and paxillin in cells overexpressing wild type ( WT ) or mutant ( Y31 / 118E ) paxillin - EGFP . ( H ) Effects of blebbistatin on adhesion localization of zyxin ,  - actinin , and paxillin in cells overexpressing Y31 / 118E paxillin - EGFP . ( I ) FRAP analysis of mCherry - vinculin . mCherry - vinculin was expressed alone ( control ) or together with EGFP conjugates of wild - type or Y31 / 118E paxillin in untreated cells or cells treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( + Blebb ) , and FRAP was performed of the mCherry vinculin fraction in adhesions . Half - times of mCherry vinculin fluorescence recovery . Means are shown above each plot . n = number of adhesions . ( J ) Immunoblots of lysates of blebbistatin - treated ( B ) or untreated ( C ) cells that had been mock transfected or transfected with the EGFP - paxillin mutants and probed with antibodies to paxillin , pY31 paxillin , or tubulin . ( K ) Anti - GFP immunoprecipitates from MEFs expressing EGFP - tagged paxillins and either untreated ( C ) or treated with 20 µM blebbistatin ( B ) and probed by immunoblotting with antibodies to vinculin and GFP . Quantification of blots is shown below . WB , Western blot . * , P < 0 . 02 . Error bars indicate 95 % confidence interval of the mean . ( C , G , and H ) n = number of blebbistatin - treated cells / number of control cells . on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 886 results suggest that paxillin may be a critical protein , possibly in addition to talin , in the myosin II – dependent recruitment of vinculin to adhesions in cells . This study also reveals a currently unknown role for paxillin phosphorylation in regulation of its interaction with vinculin in cells . We found that that in addition to vinculin , paxillin’s interactions with FAK and Crk are promoted by myosin II activity , protein interactions specific to regulation by paxillinY31 / 118 phosphorylation ( Turner , 2000 ) . This sug - gests the interesting possibility that Crk signaling through paxillin to regulate transcription may be mechanosensitive . We also found that myosin II activity promotes phosphory - lation of an activating tyrosine on FAK , which mediates the myosin II – dependent phosphorylation of paxillin on Y31 and Y118 . Although reduction of contractility did not completely abrogate paxillin phosphorylation in adhesions , the phos - phorylation of these residues is sufficient to promote paxillin - mediated recruitment of vinculin because phosphatase inhibi - tion or overexpression of a phosphomimic promoted the paxillin – vinculin interaction and vinculin recruitment to adhesions independent of myosin II activity . We suggest that in nascent , low contractility adhesions , paxillin phosphorylation may be below a threshold required to accumulate substantial vinculin , with its labile binding to these sites as shown by FRAP ( Fig . 8 I ) . As actomyosin contractility begins to mature adhesions , the increased FAK activity it promotes may amplify paxillin phos - phorylation to the point that even low affinity vinculin binding is sufficient for visible adhesion accumulation . Our results , together with those of others , support a speculative two - step “hand - off” model for myosin II – mediated vinculin adhesion recruitment and its role in adhesion matura - tion . We suggest that nascent adhesions form by myosin II – independent talin recruitment to and activation of  1 inte - grin ( Fig . 2 ; Tadokoro et al . , 2003 ) , which together with talin’s actin - binding activity ( Jones et al . , 1989 ) may promote for - mation of initial ECM – integrin – talin – actin linkages ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . Paxillin is also recruited to nascent , myosin II – independent adhesions by an unknown mechanism ( Fig . 2 ; Webb et al . , 2004 ; Choi et al . , 2008 ) , and paxillin / Hic5 and talin are all required for formation of adhesion clusters ( Fig . 7 ; Zhang et al . , 2008 ) . Myosin II activity in an  - actinin cross - linked cytoskeleton ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) generates tension that is transmitted to nascent adhesions . Tension across the ECM – integrin – talin – actin linkage promotes engagement of second - ary binding sites between  1 integrin and fibronectin to induce recruitment and activation of FAK ( Friedland et al . , 2009 ) , which is coupled to FAK / Src - dependent phosphorylation of paxillin Y31 / 118 ( Fig . 6 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) . pY31 / 118 paxillin , with its newly revealed vinculin - binding site ( Fig . 5 ) , may cycle between adhesion - bound and cytosolic fractions , inducing labile vinculin recruitment to adhesions ( Fig . 8 ) . Subsequent to adhesion recruitment , activation of vinculin’s actin - binding activity by simultaneous proximity to talin , actin , and acidic phospholipids ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) induces activation and hand off of vinculin from labile paxillin binding to these other partners , enhancing vinculin’s binding stability to adhe - sions ( Figs . 3 and 8 ) and reinforcing the cytoskeleton – ECM paxillin – vinculin interaction and induction of a specific , labile association of vinculin with immature adhesions independent of myosin II activity . Because our results showed that FAK is critical for Y31 / 118 paxillin phosphorylation , we finally sought to deter - mine whether FAK activation is necessary or sufficient to induce the vinculin – paxillin interaction or vinculin recruit - ment to adhesions independent of myosin II activity . Unfor - tunately , this was difficult to assess because constitutively active FAK (  1 – 100 FAK ) does not target to adhesions and causes cell rounding ( Schlaepfer and Hunter , 1996 ) , whereas inhibition of FAK affects adhesion turnover ( Ili ć et al . , 1995 ; Webb et al . , 2004 ) . Indeed , treatment of cells with FAKi did not alter coprecipitation of vinculin with paxillin or recruit - ment of vinculin to paxillin - containing adhesions ( Fig . S5 ) . This is not surprising because inhibition of FAK or myosin II induces opposite adhesion phenotypes : FAK inhibition causes long - lived large adhesions ( Fig . S5 ; Ili ć et al . , 1995 ) , whereas myosin II inhibition promotes rapid turnover of tiny adhe - sions ( Fig . 1 ; Webb et al . , 2004 ; Choi et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , although the myosin II – dependent vinculin – paxillin inter - action correlates with phosphorylation of FAK - regulated sites on paxillin , there are additional FAK - independent pathways to recruit vinculin to large and stable adhesions in the pres - ence of cellular contractility . Discussion Our study has uncovered an important physiological role in adhesion maturation for paxillin in its interaction with the cytoskeletal adapter protein vinculin . To understand tension - mediated FA maturation , we sought proteins recruited to FAs in a myosin II – dependent manner and examined the mechanism of their myosin II – sensitive FA association . Using pharmacologi - cal inhibition of myosin II and ECM compliance to modulate cellular tension , we show that paxillin , talin , and  1 integrin recruitment to adhesions is independent of myosin II activity , whereas adhesion association of FAK , zyxin ,  - actinin , and vin - culin is promoted by myosin II contraction . We focused on the myosin II – dependent recruitment of vinculin to adhesions , show - ing that it is reversible and occurs across a range of cell types and in the physiologically relevant contexts of myosin II – induced adhesion maturation during cell migration and ECM stiffness mechanosensing . Although previous studies correlated vincu - lin accumulation to sites of applied tension on cells ( Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; Möhl et al . , 2009 ) , we show the first demonstra - tion of myosin II – dependent vinculin adhesion association . By assessing the myosin II sensitivity of vinculin’s protein inter - actions in cell lysates , we show that the vinculin – paxillin interaction is promoted by signaling induced by myosin II contractility , whereas we did not detect myosin II – dependent changes in the vinculin – talin interaction . It was recently shown that stretching talin promotes increased vinculin binding in vitro ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) . The IPs used in our study bias detection of myosin - dependent changes that are preserved in cell lysates , such as covalent phosphorylation of paxillin , whereas cell lysis would clearly disrupt stretch activation of talin . However , our on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 887 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . and 1 : 20 , 000 , respectively ) for 1 h . Blots were washed three times with TBS - T . Protein bands were visualized using an ECL detection system ( Milli - pore ) or fluorescent - labeled antibodies and imaging on a gel imaging system ( Odyssey ; LI - COR Biosciences ) . For analysis of ECL , digital images of Western blot bands were quantified with MetaMorph software ( MDS Analytical Technologies ) after performing local background subtraction around bands of interest . IPs MEF cells were plated in 15 - cm tissue culture plates precoated with 5 µg / ml fibronectin and supplemented with 10 % FBS for 16 h . Cells were treated with myosin II inhibitors ( 20 µM blebbistatin ) for 1 h . For EGFP - paxillin mutants , EGFP - positive cells were cell sorted and collected by flow cytom - etry and replated in dishes precoated with 5 µg / ml fibronectin after trans - fection . Cells were harvested in lysis buffer , clarified by centrifugation , and protein in supernatants was quantified by the Bradford assay . For IP , supernatants ( 1 . 0 mg total protein for untransfected cells and 500 µg for EGFP - transfected cells ) were precleared with anti – mouse or anti – rabbit IgG IP beads ( TrueBlot ; eBioscience ) , preclearing beads were pelleted , and supernatants were incubated with 1 µg primary antibody and rotated overnight at 4°C . The following day , the solution was incubated with 30 µl protein A sepharose beads ( TrueBlot ) with rotation at 4° for 1 h . Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and resuspended in 30 µl 2× Laemmli sample buffer . Samples were analyzed by Western blotting using the appropriate antibodies . Polyacrylamide substrates Flexible polyacrylamide substrates were generated as previously described ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . In brief , 22 - mm coverslips were activated by treatment with 50 % 3 - aminopropyltrimethyloxysilane and 0 . 5 % glutaralde - hyde , and each treatment was followed by extensive double - distilled H 2 O washing . Activated coverslips were inverted on a freshly mixed solution of 0 . 04 % bis / 7 . 5 % acrylamide to give an adhered gel with a stiffness of 1 . 0 kPa . 8 µl of acrylamide solution was sufficient to obtain a  15 – 20 - µm - thick gel . Coverslips with attached gel substrates were washed in double - distilled H 2 O and spun dry using a custom - made coverslip spinner . To bind fibronectin , gel substrates were activated by 2 mg / ml sulfo - SANPAH with two 8 - min UV exposures one inch from two 10 - W , 254 - nm UV bulbs ( UVP ) . Activated , gel - bound coverslips were coated with 5 µg / ml fibronectin ( EMD ) incubated for 2 h at 37°C and washed three times with PBS . Immunofluorescence Coverslips with bound cells were fixed / permeabilized for 1 min at 37°C in 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 25 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Science ) , and 1 mg / ml phalloidin in cytoskeleton buffer ( CB ; 10 mM MES , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 138 mM KCl , and 2 mM EGTA ) and fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde in CB for 20 min at 37°C . After fixation , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 in CB . Free aldehydes were reacted with 0 . 1 M glycine for 5 min , and cells were washed three times for 10 min in TBS and blocked in blocking solution ( 2 % BSA IgG free and protease free ; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , Inc . ) in TBS - T con - taining Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin ( 1 : 400 ; Invitrogen ) for at least 1 h . Coverslips were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution overnight in a humid chamber at 4°C . After primary antibody in - cubation , cells were washed four times for 10 min in TBS - T and incubated with fluorophore - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Jackson Immuno - Research Laboratories , Inc . ) diluted 1 : 250 in blocking solution for 1 h , washed again , and mounted on a slide in mounting media ( Dako ) and sealed with nail polish . Microscopy and image analysis Fixed and immunolabeled cells were imaged on an inverted microscope system ( Eclipse TE - 300 ; Nikon ; Wittmann et al . , 2003 ) with a cooled charge - coupled device ( CCD ; Orca II ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) using a 60× 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo PH objective lens ( Nikon ) for cells plated on glass or a 60× 1 . 2 NA Plan Apo violet - corrected objective lens ( WI ; Nikon ) for cells plated on poly - acrylamide substrates . Time - lapse imaging of cell migration was performed at 37°C on the same microscope using a 10× 0 . 5 NA PH Plan objective lens ( Nikon ) and 0 . 52 NA condenser ( LWD ; Nikon ) , and images were captured at 5 - min intervals for 24 h . Dual - color time - lapse TIRF microscopy of EGFP and mCherry - or mApple - tagged proteins in living MEFs was performed at 37°C in DME without Phenol red and supplemented with 10 % FBS , 25 mM Hepes , and 10 U / ml oxyrase using a 100× 1 . 49 NA Plan objective lens ( Nikon ; Shin et al . , 2010 ) and an inverted microscope system ( TE2000E2 ; Nikon ) with an evanescent field depth of  150 nm . linkage . The now matured adhesion can transmit stronger forces ( Galbraith et al . , 2002 ) to promote adhesion turnover in cell migration ( Webb et al . , 2004 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) . High forces across the cytoskeleton – integrin link may induce a parallel pathway for vinculin recruitment by stretch activation of vinculin - binding sites in talin ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) . Questions remain about the paxillin - mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions . Because vinculin does not contain PY - binding SH2 domains , it is not clear how paxillin phosphory - lation induces its interaction with vinculin or whether this inter - action is direct . pY31 / Y118 could induce a conformational change in paxillin that unmasks adjacent LD1 and LD2 domains involved in vinculin binding ( Bertolucci et al . , 2008 ) . Addition - ally , the alternate pathways for vinculin adhesion recruitment that occur when FAK is inhibited ( Fig . S5 ) remain unknown . Future studies may help to clarify these and other questions . Materials and methods Cell culture , transfection , and reagents MEFs were obtained from American Type Culture Collection and main - tained in DME supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Invitrogen ) at 5 % CO 2 . For experiments , cells were plated on 22 × 22 – mm # 1 . 5 coverslips that had been coated with 5 µg / ml fibronectin ( EMD ) in PBS for 2 h at 37°C . Cells were plated at a low confluency ( 30 – 40 % ) for 16 h before experimental manipulations . Cells were transfected by nucleofector ( Lonza ) by using MEF1 solution and program T20 . The following pharmacological inhibitors were used : 20 µM blebbistatin ( Toronto Research Chemicals ) , 10 µM Y - 27632 ROCK inhibitor ( EMD ) , 10 µM Src inhibitor PP2 ( EMD ) , 100 µM FAKi PF - 271 ( Roberts et al . , 2008 ) , 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 10 µM phenylarsine oxide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The following antibodies were used : rabbit anti – pY118 - paxillin , rabbit anti – pY31 - paxillin , rabbit anti – pY397 - FAK , mouse anti - FAK , and rabbit anti – pY273 - paxillin ( Invitrogen ) ; mouse anti - Hic5 , mouse antipaxillin , and mouse anti - Crk ( BD ) ; rabbit anti - paxillin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) ; mouse antitalin clone 84d , mouse antivinculin clone 4505 , and mouse anti –  - actinin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) ; anti - PY clone 4G10 ( Millipore ) ; rabbit anti – Src - pY527 ( Signal Transduction ) ; mouse anti - Src ( provided by J . Brugge , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA ) ; rabbit antizyxin ( provided by M . Beckerle , Huntsman Cancer Insti - tute , Salt Lake City , UT ) ; mouse anti –  - Pix ( Millipore ) ; and rabbit anti - GFP ( Abcam ) . The following expression constructs were used : sources of EGFP conjugates of  - actinin , talin , paxillin , FAK , and zyxin were described pre - viously ( Hu et al . , 2007 ) . EGFP - paxillin was obtained from R . Horwitz ( University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) and mApple - paxillin , EGFP vinculin , and mCherry vinculin were provided by M . Davidson ( Florida State University , Tallahassee , FL ) . The EGFP conjugates of paxillin and pax - illin mutants were based on the original sequence for avian paxillin - EGFP ( Laukaitis et al . , 2001 ) but were generated by synthesis ( Blue Heron Biotechnology ) and included mutations rendering dead an internal transla - tion site of avian paxillin as described previously ( Tumbarello et al . , 2005 ; Schneider et al . , 2009 ) . Western blot analysis Whole cell extracts from MEF cells were prepared in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 5 % glycerol , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 25 mM NaF , and 2 mM NaVO 4 supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Cells were freeze thawed twice in liquid nitrogen and clarified by centrifugation at 16 , 000 g . Proteins from supernatants were quantified by the Bradford method . 10 µg of proteins were mixed with an equal volume of 2× Laemmli sample buffer and separated by SDS - PAGE . After electrophoresis , proteins were electrotransferred to an immobilon - P membrane . For protein detection , membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5 % nonfat dry milk ( wt / vol ) or 3 % BSA for tyrosine phosphorylation blots in TBS - T buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 6 , 137 mM NaCl 2 , and 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 [ vol / vol ] ) and incubated overnight at 4°C with the indicated antibodies . After primary antibody incubation , blots were washed three times with TBS - T ( 10 min each ) and incubated with appropri - ate HRP - conjugated or fluorescent - labeled secondary antibodies ( 1 : 5 , 000 on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 888  1 integrin , zyxin , vinculin ,  - actinin , pY397 FAK , pY118 paxillin , or pY31 paxillin ) of the same cell . The mean intensity of the fluorescence in FAs was background subtracted and averaged over several cells . 95 % con - fidence intervals were calculated for paxillin ( or PY ) and the FA proteins in control and blebbistatin - treated cells . The mean paxillin ( or PY ) or FA pro - tein intensity of the adhesions in blebbistatin - treated cells was divided by the mean intensity of the same protein in adhesions in control cells to gener - ate the fractional FA immunofluorescence signal change after blebbistatin treatment as reported in the figures . For vanadate treatment experiments , mean FA protein intensity in adhesions in the blebbistatin - treated cells was divided by the mean FA protein intensity in cells treated with both bleb - bistatin and vanadate . Statistical significance ( P < 0 . 02 ) was measured by a two - tailed Student’s t test between control and blebbistatin - treated cells . The metric that was tested for significance was the background - subtracted intensity of the FA component divided by the background - subtracted intensity of paxillin ( or PY ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that substrate compliance causes reduction of vinculin and FAK in adhesions and reduction of FAK phosphorylation . Fig . S2 shows FRAP analysis of EGFP - tagged adhesion proteins . Fig . S3 shows that myosin II – mediated vinculin recruitment to adhesions is cell type indepen - dent . Fig . S4 shows that  - Pix localization to adhesions is myosin II in - dependent . Fig . S5 shows that pharmacological inhibition of FAK does not inhibit vinculin binding to paxillin or localization to adhesions . Video 1 shows time - lapse TIRF images of EGFP - paxillin and mCherry - vinculin in an adhesion forming and growing at the leading edge of a migrating MEF cell . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200906012 / DC1 . We thank Joan Brugge , Mike Davidson , and Mary Beckerle for reagents , the NHLBI Flow Cytometry Core Facility , William Shin , Sergei Plotnikov , and mem - bers of the Waterman laboratory . Experiments in Fig . 3 were first performed in conjunction with Michelle Knowles in the Physiology Course at the Marine Biological Laboratory ( Woods Hole , MA ) . This work was supported by NHLBI ( C . M . Waterman and A . M . Pasapera ; and grant HL093156 to D . D . Schlaepfer ) and the Burroughs Wellcome Fund ( E . Rericha ) . Submitted : 2 June 2009 Accepted : 19 February 2010 References Ballestrem , C . , N . Erez , J . Kirchner , Z . Kam , A . Bershadsky , and B . Geiger . 2006 . Molecular mapping of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins in focal adhesions using fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 866 – 875 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02794 Bellis , S . L . , J . T . Miller , and C . E . Turner . 1995 . Characterization of tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin in vitro by focal adhesion kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 17437 – 17441 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 29 . 17437 Bertolucci , C . M . , C . D . Guibao , and J . J . Zheng . 2008 . Phosphorylation of paxil - lin LD4 destabilizes helix formation and inhibits binding to focal adhe - sion kinase . Biochemistry . 47 : 548 – 554 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi702103n Brown , M . C . , J . A . Perrotta , and C . E . Turner . 1996 . Identification of LIM3 as the principal determinant of paxillin focal adhesion localization and charac - terization of a novel motif on paxillin directing vinculin and focal adhesion kinase binding . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 1109 – 1123 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 135 . 4 . 1109 Bulinski , J . C . , D . J . Odde , B . J . Howell , T . D . Salmon , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2001 . Rapid dynamics of the microtubule binding of ensconsin in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 3885 – 3897 . Burridge , K . , C . E . Turner , and L . H . Romer . 1992 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin and pp125FAK accompanies cell adhesion to extracellular matrix : a role in cytoskeletal assembly . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 893 – 903 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 119 . 4 . 893 Cai , Y . F . , N . Biais , G . Giannone , M . Tanase , G . Y . Jiang , J . M . Hofman , C . H . Wiggins , P . Silberzan , A . Buguin , B . Ladoux , and M . P . Sheetz . 2006 . Nonmuscle myosin IIA - dependent force inhibits cell spreading and drives F - actin flow . Biophys . J . 91 : 3907 – 3920 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 084806 Chandrasekar , I . , T . E . Stradal , M . R . Holt , F . Entschladen , B . M . Jockusch , and W . H . Ziegler . 2005 . Vinculin acts as a sensor in lipid regulation of adhe - sion - site turnover . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 1461 – 1472 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01734 Chen , H . , D . M . Choudhury , and S . W . Craig . 2006 . Coincidence of actin filaments and talin is required to activate vinculin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 40389 – 40398 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M607324200 For EGFP images , the 488 - nm laser was used , and for mCherry or mApple , the 561 - nm laser was used . Pairs of EGFP and mCherry or mApple images were captured in rapid succession at 10 - s intervals using a CCD ( HQ2 ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) operated in the 14 - bit readout mode . FRAP of EGFP - tagged FA proteins was performed using a 100× 1 . 49 NA Plan Apo objective lens on an inverted microscope system ( TE2000E2 ) . 488 - nm and 561 - nm illumination provided by a 20 - mW argon laser and a 10 - mW solid - state laser , respectively ( CVI Melles Griot ) , was fiber optically coupled ( Oz Optics ) to a dual - port photostimulation epi - illuminator ( Nikon ) , which centered and expanded the laser beams on the objective lens back aperture to form a diffraction - limited spot at the specimen plane . The position of the specimen was adjusted using a robotic stage ( Applied Scientific Instruments ) to center the spot onto a single fluo - rescent FA . An electronic shutter ( Sutter Instrument Co . ) was used to limit exposure of the specimen to the laser beam to the time needed for photo - bleaching . For imaging , mercury arc illumination coupled to the epi - illuminator was electronically shuttered ( Sutter Instrument Co . ) and filtered ( Chroma Technology Corp . ) to provide excitation specific for EGFP or mCherry . Images were acquired at 1 – 30 - s intervals before and after photobleaching using an EM - CCD ( 512B ; Photometrics ) operated in the 14 - bit mode using EM gain . Image frequency was adjusted depending on the fluorescence photobleaching recovery rate of the fluorescent - tagged adhesion protein being imaged . To quantify cell migration rate , time - lapse microscopy was per - formed at 37°C using an inverted microscope ( Eclipse TE - 300 ) . Phase - contrast images were acquired every 5 min using a 10× 0 . 25 NA Plan objective lens and a 0 . 52 NA condenser ( LWD ) . Positions of the cell nuclei were manually tracked over time using MetaMorph software . Instan - taneous cell velocities were calculated as the displacement ( micrometers ) between consecutive frames divided by the elapsed time . Area of individual adhesions was measured from manually thresholded images of immuno - localized paxillin or PY as described previously ( Schneider et al . , 2009 ) . In brief , adhesion area was quantified by thresholding the paxillin or PY immunostaining image by eye to include only adhesion areas using Meta - Morph software . The normalized fluorescence in adhesions was calculated by dividing the background - subtracted mean fluorescence in the adhesion area by the background - subtracted mean fluorescence in the cytosol . FRAP experiments were analyzed as follows . The intensity recovery of the bleached region was extracted from the images , corrected for photo - bleaching , and analysis of FRAP curves was performed as described previ - ously ( Phair et al . , 2004 ) . In brief , to extract the characteristic recovery time for the assayed fluorescent - tagged proteins , normalized and photobleaching - corrected curves were fit to single exponential functions . In the vinculin FRAP experiments , a single exponential fit often systematically deviated from the data , overestimating the recovery for early time points . These curves were subsequently fit with double exponentials , and the long time constant was reported . We attribute the fast time scale , needed to fit the early time points ( < 10 s ) , to diffusion of the unbound protein ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009 ) . If the fit parameters did not converge within 20 % of the optimum value for the 95 % confidence bounds , the fast time scale and the offset were constrained to their midpoint values and the fit was recomputed . Analysis of the intensity of EGFP and mCherry - or mApple - tagged proteins in adhesions in TIRF images was performed as follows . The maxi - mal area of a single adhesion in a time - lapse sequence was outlined , and the intensity in that region in both image channels was recorded for each image in the two series . The mean ( or standard deviation ) of the back - ground for each channel was considered as the mean ( or standard devia - tion ) of the intensity in this region before the assembly of the adhesion . The intensity values in each series were corrected by mean background subtrac - tion and normalization to the maximal intensity in the series . A significant rise in intensity , indicating the initiation of recruitment of the fluorescent - tagged protein in the region , was considered as the first image in the series in which the corrected intensity rose to greater than two times the standard deviation of the background . The difference between initiation times for the two image channels represents the lag time between the accumulation of paxillin and vinculin at adhesions . The change in the level of different FA proteins in adhesions after blebbistatin treatment in double - labeled immunofluorescence images was quantified in the following manner . Images of immunolocalized paxillin or PY were median filtered with a three - pixel square kernel , background flattened with a 13 - pixel square kernel , and binarized based on a manu - ally selected threshold level that allowed all FAs to be included . The bound - aries of thresholded areas were used to create regions around segmented adhesions . The regions were transferred from the paxillin ( or PY ) immunoflu - orescence image to the FA protein immunofluorescence image ( talin 1 , FAK , on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 889 Myosin II – mediated recruitment of vinculin to adhesions by paxillin • Pasapera et al . Phair , R . D . , S . A . Gorski , and T . Misteli . 2004 . Measurement of dynamic protein binding to chromatin in vivo , using photobleaching microscopy . Methods Enzymol . 375 : 393 – 414 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 03 ) 75025 - 3 Riveline , D . , E . Zamir , N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , T . Ishizaki , S . Narumiya , Z . Kam , B . Geiger , and A . D . Bershadsky . 2001 . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 1175 – 1186 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 6 . 1175 Roberts , W . G . , E . Ung , P . Whalen , B . Cooper , C . Hulford , C . Autry , D . Richter , E . Emerson , J . Lin , J . Kath , et al . 2008 . Antitumor activity and pharma - cology of a selective focal adhesion kinase inhibitor , PF - 562 , 271 . Cancer Res . 68 : 1935 – 1944 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 5155 Sawada , Y . , M . Tamada , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , O . Cherniavskaya , R . Sakai , S . Tanaka , and M . P . Sheetz . 2006 . Force sensing by mechanical exten - sion of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell . 127 : 1015 – 1026 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 09 . 044 Schaller , M . D . , and J . T . Parsons . 1995 . pp125FAK - dependent tyrosine phos - phorylation of paxillin creates a high - affinity binding site for Crk . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 2635 – 2645 . Schaub , S . , S . Bohnet , V . M . Laurent , J . J . Meister , and A . B . Verkhovsky . 2007 . Comparative maps of motion and assembly of filamentous actin and myosin II in migrating cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 3723 – 3732 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 - 09 - 0859 Schlaepfer , D . D . , and T . Hunter . 1996 . Evidence for in vivo phosphorylation of the Grb2 SH2 - domain binding site on focal adhesion kinase by Src - family protein - tyrosine kinases . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 5623 – 5633 . Schmalzigaug , R . , M . L . Garron , J . T . Roseman , Y . Xing , C . E . Davidson , S . T . Arold , and R . T . Premont . 2007 . GIT1 utilizes a focal adhesion targeting - homology domain to bind paxillin . Cell . Signal . 19 : 1733 – 1744 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2007 . 03 . 010 Schneider , I . C . , C . K . Hays , and C . M . Waterman . 2009 . Epidermal growth factor - induced contraction regulates paxillin phosphorylation to temporally separate traction generation from de - adhesion . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 3155 – 3167 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 03 - 0219 Shi , Q . , and D . Boettiger . 2003 . A novel mode for integrin - mediated signaling : tethering is required for phosphorylation of FAK Y397 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 4306 – 4315 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 01 - 0046 Shin , W . , R . S . Fischer , P . Kanchanawong , Y . Kim , J . Lim , K . A . Meyers , Y . Nishimura , S . V . Plotnikov , I . Thievessen , D . Yarar , et al . 2010 . A versa - tile , multi - color total internal reflection fluorescence and spinning disk con - focal microscope system for high - resolution live cell imaging . In Live Cell Imaging . A Laboratory Manual . R . D . Goldman , J . Swedlow , and D . L . Spector , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . 119 – 138 . Tadokoro , S . , S . J . Shattil , K . Eto , V . Tai , R . C . Liddington , J . M . de Pereda , M . H . Ginsberg , and D . A . Calderwood . 2003 . Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science . 302 : 103 – 106 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1086652 Thomas , S . M . , and J . S . Brugge . 1997 . Cellular functions regulated by Src family kinases . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 : 513 – 609 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 13 . 1 . 513 Thomas , S . M . , M . Hagel , and C . E . Turner . 1999 . Characterization of a focal adhesion protein , Hic - 5 , that shares extensive homology with paxillin . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 181 – 190 . Torsoni , A . S . , T . M . Marin , L . A . Velloso , and K . G . Franchini . 2005 . RhoA / ROCK signaling is critical to FAK activation by cyclic stretch in car - diac myocytes . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 289 : H1488 – H1496 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpheart . 00692 . 2004 Totsukawa , G . , Y . Wu , Y . Sasaki , D . J . Hartshorne , Y . Yamakita , S . Yamashiro , and F . Matsumura . 2004 . Distinct roles of MLCK and ROCK in the regulation of membrane protrusions and focal adhesion dynamics during cell migration of fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 164 : 427 – 439 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200306172 Tumbarello , D . A . , M . C . Brown , S . E . Hetey , and C . E . Turner . 2005 . Regulation of paxillin family members during epithelial - mesenchymal transforma - tion : a putative role for paxillin delta . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 4849 – 4863 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02615 Turner , C . E . 2000 . Paxillin interactions . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 4139 – 4140 . Turner , C . E . , M . C . Brown , J . A . Perrotta , M . C . Riedy , S . N . Nikolopoulos , A . R . McDonald , S . Bagrodia , S . Thomas , and P . S . Leventhal . 1999 . Paxillin LD4 motif binds PAK and PIX through a novel 95 - kD ankyrin repeat , ARF - GAP protein : A role in cytoskeletal remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 851 – 863 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 145 . 4 . 851 Vogel , V . , and M . Sheetz . 2006 . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 265 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1890 Webb , D . J . , K . Donais , L . A . Whitmore , S . M . Thomas , C . E . Turner , J . T . Parsons , and A . F . Horwitz . 2004 . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK Choi , C . K . , M . Vicente - Manzanares , J . Zareno , L . A . Whitmore , A . Mogilner , and A . R . Horwitz . 2008 . Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 1039 – 1050 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1763 Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , and K . Burridge . 1996 . Rho - stimulated contractil - ity drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 1403 – 1415 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 133 . 6 . 1403 del Rio , A . , R . Perez - Jimenez , R . C . Liu , P . Roca - Cusachs , J . M . Fernandez , and M . P . Sheetz . 2009 . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vincu - lin binding . Science . 323 : 638 – 641 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1162912 Engler , A . J . , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , and D . E . Discher . 2006 . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell . 126 : 677 – 689 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 06 . 044 Even - Ram , S . , A . D . Doyle , M . A . Conti , K . Matsumoto , R . S . Adelstein , and K . M . Yamada . 2007 . Myosin IIA regulates cell motility and actomyosin - microtubule crosstalk . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 299 – 309 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1540 Friedland , J . C . , M . H . Lee , and D . Boettiger . 2009 . Mechanically activated inte - grin switch controls alpha5beta1 function . Science . 323 : 642 – 644 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1168441 Galbraith , C . G . , K . M . Yamada , and M . P . Sheetz . 2002 . The relationship be - tween force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 695 – 705 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200204153 Geiger , B . , J . P . Spatz , and A . D . Bershadsky . 2009 . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 : 21 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2593 Hagel , M . , E . L . George , A . Kim , R . Tamimi , S . L . Opitz , C . E . Turner , A . Imamoto , and S . M . Thomas . 2002 . The adaptor protein paxillin is essential for normal development in the mouse and is a critical transducer of fibronectin signal - ing . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 : 901 – 915 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 22 . 3 . 901 - 915 . 2002 Hu , K . , L . Ji , K . T . Applegate , G . Danuser , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2007 . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science . 315 : 111 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1135085 Ili ć , D . , Y . Furuta , S . Kanazawa , N . Takeda , K . Sobue , N . Nakatsuji , S . Nomura , J . Fujimoto , M . Okada , and T . Yamamoto . 1995 . Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhesion contact formation in cells from FAK - defi - cient mice . Nature . 377 : 539 – 544 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 377539a0 Jiang , G . Y . , G . Giannone , D . R . Critchley , E . Fukumoto , and M . P . Sheetz . 2003 . Two - piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton de - pends on talin . Nature . 424 : 334 – 337 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01805 Jones , P . , P . Jackson , G . J . Price , B . Patel , V . Ohanion , A . L . Lear , and D . R . Critchley . 1989 . Identification of a talin binding site in the cyto - skeletal protein vinculin . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2917 – 2927 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 109 . 6 . 2917 Kmiecik , T . E . , and D . Shalloway . 1987 . Activation and suppression of pp60c - src transforming ability by mutation of its primary sites of tyrosine phos - phorylation . Cell . 49 : 65 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 87 ) 90756 - 2 Laukaitis , C . M . , D . J . Webb , K . Donais , and A . F . Horwitz . 2001 . Differential dynamics of  5 integrin , paxillin , and  - actinin during formation and disassembly of adhesions in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 1427 – 1440 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 7 . 1427 Lee , H . S . , R . M . Bellin , D . L . Walker , B . Patel , P . Powers , H . J . Liu , B . Garcia - Alvarez , J . M . de Pereda , R . C . Liddington , N . Volkmann , et al . 2004 . Characterization of an actin - binding site within the talin FERM domain . J . Mol . Biol . 343 : 771 – 784 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2004 . 08 . 069 Lele , T . P . , and D . E . Ingber . 2006 . A mathematical model to determine molecular kinetic rate constants under non - steady state conditions using fluores - cence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . Biophys . Chem . 120 : 32 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpc . 2005 . 10 . 007 Möhl , C . , N . Kirchgessner , C . Schäfer , K . Küpper , S . Born , G . Diez , W . H . Goldmann , R . Merkel , and B . Hoffmann . 2009 . Becoming stable and strong : the interplay between vinculin exchange dynamics and adhe - sion strength during adhesion site maturation . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 66 : 350 – 364 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20375 Nayal , A . , D . J . Webb , C . M . Brown , E . M . Schaefer , M . Vicente - Manzanares , and A . R . Horwitz . 2006 . Paxillin phosphorylation at Ser273 localizes a GIT1 - PIX - PAK complex and regulates adhesion and protrusion dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 173 : 587 – 589 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200509075 Opazo Saez , A . , W . Zhang , Y . Wu , C . E . Turner , D . D . Tang , and S . J . Gunst . 2004 . Tension development during contractile stimulation of smooth muscle requires recruitment of paxillin and vinculin to the membrane . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 286 : C433 – C447 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00030 . 2003 Pelham , R . J . Jr . , and Y . L . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 25 . 13661 Petit , V . , B . Boyer , D . Lentz , C . E . Turner , J . P . Thiery , and A . M . Vallés . 2000 . Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues 31 and 118 on paxillin regulates cell migration through an association with CRK in NBT - II cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 957 – 970 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 148 . 5 . 957 on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010 JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 890 and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 154 – 161 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1094 Wiseman , P . W . , C . M . Brown , D . J . Webb , B . Hebert , N . L . Johnson , J . A . Squier , M . H . Ellisman , and A . F . Horwitz . 2004 . Spatial mapping of integrin in - teractions and dynamics during cell migration by image correlation mi - croscopy . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 5521 – 5534 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01416 Wittmann , T . , G . M . Bokoch , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2003 . Regulation of leading edge microtubule and actin dynamics downstream of Rac1 . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 845 – 851 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303082 Wolfenson , H . , A . Lubelski , T . Regev , J . Klafter , Y . I . Henis , and B . Geiger . 2009 . A role for the juxtamembrane cytoplasm in the molecular dynamics of focal adhesions . PLoS One . 4 : e4304 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0004304 Zaidel - Bar , R . , C . Ballestrem , Z . Kam , and B . Geiger . 2003 . Early molecular events in the assembly of matrix adhesions at the leading edge of migrat - ing cells . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 4605 – 4613 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00792 Zaidel - Bar , R . , M . Cohen , L . Addadi , and B . Geiger . 2004 . Hierarchical assem - bly of cell - matrix adhesion complexes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 32 : 416 – 420 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BST0320416 Zaidel - Bar , R . , S . Itzkovitz , A . Ma’ayan , R . Iyengar , and B . Geiger . 2007a . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 858 – 867 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb0807 - 858 Zaidel - Bar , R . , R . Milo , Z . Kam , and B . Geiger . 2007b . A paxillin tyrosine phos - phorylation switch regulates the assembly and form of cell - matrix adhe - sions . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 137 – 148 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03314 Zhang , X . , G . Jiang , Y . Cai , S . J . Monkley , D . R . Critchley , and M . P . Sheetz . 2008 . Talin depletion reveals independence of initial cell spreading from integrin activation and traction . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 1062 – 1068 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1765 Zhu , J . H . , B . H . Luo , T . Xiao , C . Z . Zhang , N . Nishida , and T . A . Springer . 2008 . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell . 32 : 849 – 861 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 11 . 018 Zimerman , B . , T . Volberg , and B . Geiger . 2004 . Early molecular events in the assembly of the focal adhesion - stress fiber complex during fibroblast spreading . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 58 : 143 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20005 on A ugu s t 24 , 2010 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 22 , 2010