Implications of Requirements Engineering on Software Design : A Cognitive Insight Rahul Mohanani M3S ( M - Group ) P . O . Box 3000 , FI 90014 University of Oulu Oulu , Finland rahul . mohanani @ oulu . fi ABSTRACT There is a broad consensus that understanding software requirements is critical in designing a good software system . Software engineering research literature is rife with state of the art practices and techniques that are proposed to improve requirements engineering techniques . Also , creative approaches are used to determine system requirements in a better way . However , little empirical research has investigated the critical underpinnings of human psychology on design performance from elicited requirements , and its implications on high - level design creativity . The foremost objective of this research will be to explore the harmful effects of human cognitive biases on the designers’ ability to generate conceptual designs from a set of requirements , and then to mitigate the harmful effects of biases by developing specific de - biasing technique ( s ) to enhance creativity of such design concepts . The research will adopt a quantitative approach , i . e . , data will be collected through controlled experiments ; also the existing literature will be reviewed . Exploring the manifestation of cognitive biases and its subsequent mitigation techniques shall help augmenting the focus of software engineering design research approach from technological to psychological . Categories and Subject Descriptors D . 2 . 1 [ Software Engineering ] : Requirements / Specifications ; D . 2 . 10 [ Software Engineering ] : Design General Terms Experimentation , Human Factors , Design , Performance Keywords Design creativity , Requirements , Cognitive Bias , De - Bias 1 . PRIOR WORK AND PROBLEM RATIONALE Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . ICSE ' 16 Companion , May 14 - 22 , 2016 , Austin , TX , USA © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4205 - 6 / 16 / 05… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2889160 . 2889254 It is widely accepted in software engineering ( SE ) research discipline that requirements engineering ( RE ) is one of the most crucial stages of software development . The assumption that software projects have discoverable , documentable requirements and that ‘good requirement’ would lead to a good software [ 15 , 30 ] has stimulated a variety of literature to improve RE process . Broadly , requirements engineering can be considered as a process where analysts , based on the domain - knowledge and problem solving skills , transform information gathered from multiple stakeholders into a complete and accurate set of system requirements [ 26 ] . However , the issue here is that most software projects have only a handful of uncontroversial requirements which is not enough for common RE techniques to make sense [ 18 ] . Hence , utilizing such well - elicited requirements may still not be a necessary condition for software success . Moreover , connoting desiderata ( something for which a desire or longing is felt ; something wanted and required or desired ) as requirements denotes heavy compulsion , certainty and unambiguousness which might lead to convergent thinking resulting into reduced design - space exploration and thereby curtailing innovation [ 18 ] . It appears that a clearer , well - structured , already - solved , simplified and rationalized account of what is needed or required will increase likelihood of project success . Whereas , interdisciplinary design literature suggests that design as a process involves understanding of a problem domain , its framing and solution generation are fundamentally the same cognitive process [ 5 , 22 ] . Moreover , a myriad of empirical studies has found that over - structuring and over - concentration on a problem ( requirements ) may not lead to effective solutions ( designs ) [ 6 , 17 ] . Evidence also suggests that ill - structured problems or non - specific goals lead to more learning by reducing cognitive load [ 27 ] and that designers create better designs from a very moderate amount of information and by quickly assimilating them into the problem - schema [ 11 ] . Traditional RE techniques show little scope for enhancing domain knowledge that improves problem comprehension and working memory that allows designers to explore the solution space effectively [ 8 , 21 ] . Although , the requirements are getting more structured , the psychological implications of feeding these requirements to designs have not been investigated much . Cognitive biases are “cognitions or mental behaviors that prejudice decision quality in a significant number of decisions for a significant number of people” [ 1 ] or “a systematic deviation from optimal judgment” [ 25 ] and are a result of various cognitive phenomena such as mental heuristics and cognitive illusions [ 16 ] . Moreover , the way a situation is framed can have powerful effects on the cognition and performance of human participants , where framing effect is the “tendency to give different responses to problems that have surface dissimilarities but that are really formally identical” [ 24 ] . Some ( e . g . [ 19 ] ) even suggests that framing the context of a 2016 IEEE / ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering Companion 835 software development project in terms of requirements may deleteriously affect design creativity . Specifically , misperceiving all ‘requirements’ as compulsory may interfere with design space exploration . Yet , little research has empirically investigated the effects of presenting desiderata as ‘requirements’ on design creativity . To summarize the above discussion , it seems that over - structuring desiderata as requirements might , in fact , be a paradox . Although , a lot of research has seen the emergence of requirements engineering to generate better and creative requirements , not much research has been conducted to investigate the critical underpinnings of human psychology - - - in the form of cognitive biases - - - that might affect designers during the process of designing from system requirements and its implications on conceptual design creativity . The problem not only lies with the quality of the generated requirements , but also with the effects of core epistemic status of all desiderata connoted as ‘requirements’ or better ‘prioritized requirements’ on design concepts that seem to be an interesting avenue to investigate . 2 . OBJECTIVES OF THE RESEARCH The principal objective of this research is to empirically explore and assess the suspected harmful effects of cognitive biases on the ability of designers to explore the solution space from the list of desiderata framed as requirements . It would be followed by developing specific de - biasing technique ( s ) to mitigate the effect of biases and enhance the creativity of conceptual designs . Contrary to the conventional wisdom in requirements engineering , some research [ 2 , 14 , 28 ] suggests that less structured , more ambiguous presentation of goals , problems and requirements might lead to more creative solutions . In a way , it is suspected that re - framing problem context to induce skepticism might enhance designers’ ability to better explore the design space , thereby improving the creativity of conceptual designs . Based on this , we propose a series of experiments to answer the question : What is the effect of requirements presentation on solution generation ? 3 . RESEARCH QUESTIONS The first phase of this research is to systematically analyze the knowledge about cognitive biases studied in the context of requirements engineering . Consequently , the RQ 1 ( sub - divided into RQ 1 . 1 and RQ 1 . 2 ) is as follows . RQ 1 : What is the current state of research on cognitive biases in RE ? RQ 1 . 1 : What are the cognitive biases that are investigated in RE ? RQ 1 . 2 : What are the current practices used to mitigate the harmful effects of cognitive biases in RE ? The next level of analysis involves investigating the effects of desiderata framing on conceptual design generation . It is suspected that misperceiving all the ‘requirements’ as mandatory or compulsory might interfere with design space exploration . The RQ 2 ( sub - divided as RQ 2 . 1 and RQ 2 . 2 ) addresses this issue as follows : RQ 2 : What are the effects of desiderata framing on creativity of design concepts ? RQ 2 . 1 : Does framing desiderata as ‘requirements’ negatively affect creativity in design concept generation ? RQ 2 . 2 : Does framing desiderata as ‘prioritized requirements’ negatively affect creativity in design concept generation ? Depending on the results of the two aforementioned experiments , the next part of the dissertation would focus on developing and testing specific de - biasing technique ( s ) that would aim to mitigate the effects of biases and enhance creativity of design concepts . RQ 3 addresses this issue as follows : RQ 3 : What are the interventions that could be used to mitigate the harmful manifestation of cognitive biases in software design ? 4 . RESEARCH APPROACH The research approach would be to design and execute randomized controlled experiments to explore manifestation of cognitive biases and testing de - biasing techniques . Students and / or professionals are randomly assigned to two groups . Each group is provided a set of specifications and asked to design solutions . The solutions , once anonymized , would be graded by expert judges for its creativity . Whether one group has significantly higher grades than the other will be assessed through hypothesis testing . The study to answer RQ 2 . 1 would present the control group with ‘ideas’ specifications , and treatment group with ‘requirements’ specifications . Whereas , RQ 2 . 2 would be answered by assigning ‘prioritized requirements’ to the control group , and ‘ideas’ specifications to the treatment group . Addressing RQ 3 would first require analyzing the interdisciplinary literature from psychology , sociology , management and software engineering fields in order to adopt or develop de - biasing techniques that will then be empirically tested by utilizing experiments with both students and IT professionals . To test this approach , a pilot run was conducted amongst students enrolled for one of the Master’s courses at the University of Oulu , Finland . This allowed the researcher to get familiar with task preparation , data collection , data analyses , and to validate the experimental design . 5 . METHODOLOGY This study would utilize literature reviews and a series of randomized controlled experiments . Systematically reviewing literature [ 9 , 12 ] seems to be an appropriate means to answer RQ 1 . It aims to present a solicit view of the existing literature on cognitive biases in SE by investigating biases in RE with the purpose of structuring and evaluating the knowledge from the perspective of this research . Experiments [ 29 ] will then allow explaining the relationship between variables . Investigating the relationship between desiderata framing and its effects on designers’ creativity , as stated in RQ 2 , will be carried out using a set of controlled experiments . The experiments will be executed in academic settings using students and subsequently replicated with IT professionals as subjects . It is theorized that cognitive biases affect everyone , and are not easily mitigated by work experience [ 10 ] . Although it might be difficult to generalize the findings to a population of professionals or experienced software developers , we must consider that the studies reported in [ 31 , 32 ] showed how the more skilled students can perform at the same level , or even out - perform , some of the more experienced professionals . For example , in the domain of software testing , it is reported [ 33 , 34 ] that results obtained from skilled students were comparable to novice professionals . The final phase of this research ( RQ 3 ) involves developing de - biasing interventions and testing their effectiveness using controlled experiments where the treatment group completes RE tasks using the de - biasing intervention . Pre and post study questionnaires would be used as a part of the experimental process to determine subjects’ demographics , 836 experience and certain manipulation checks . Such information could be useful to get more insights and provide support for the experiments´ results . 6 . CONTRIBUTION Many studies have listed diverse success [ 23 ] , abandonment [ 7 ] and risk factors [ 4 ] to identify factors contributing to software design project failures [ 3 ] . One such factor is human cognitive biases . This research is primarily aimed to tackle this inherent issue . The results would suggest that research in RE should not be entirely concentrated on eliciting better quality requirements , but also on improving higher level design decisions . Research should even focus on presenting and analyzing ill - structured design tasks to better explore the solution space . Moreover , SE as a discipline would benefit from psychological research on epistemic rationality . For practitioners , the results would suggest that inducing skepticism via ambiguity and uncertainty might even be beneficial for a better design performance . The dominant view of RE in software engineering education is that analyst elicit requirements and designers generate system design based on the presented requirements . The results would encourage more training in creative techniques , dealing with ambiguous software projects and discourage over - simplified views of software development . Focus should also be given to the much unexplored facet of design concept generation . 7 . PROGRESS STATUS At the moment two studies have already been published [ 13 , 20 ] . In order to answer RQ 2 . 1 , the first study utilized a controlled experiment in which we studied whether framing desiderata as ‘requirements’ might lead to less creative designs . The study concluded that framing desiderata as ‘requirements’ may cause requirements fixation where designers’ preoccupation with satisfying explicit requirements inhibits their creativity . The objective of the second study was to explore the possibility that requirements engineering , in principle , is detrimental to software project success . An interdisciplinary literature review revealed that RE should focus more on enhancing domain knowledge and less on providing structure to the task . This study would contribute towards answering RQ 3 by providing theoretical ground to develop specific de - biasing techniques . The first paper suffers a threat to external validity since the findings are hardly generalizable to industrial context ; nevertheless , it manages to provide evidence that a significant relationship and causality exists between the constructs . From the methodological perspective such experiments allow to validate the experimental design and increase the confidence in using data analysis and reporting techniques . Regarding the status of a third study that tries to answer RQ 2 . 2 , the collected raw data is currently being analyzed . This would be used to test the hypothesis that framing desiderata as ‘prioritized requirements’ might lead to lower creativity . This is done in parallel with the literature review addressing RQ 1 and its sub - questions . The experiment focusing on testing de - biasing technique is planned to take place in academic settings for fall 2016 . Furthermore , experiment’s replications , involving the same constructs , are planned to be executed in industrial context . Refer Table 1 for an overview of completed and future studies . 8 . EVALUATION For the purpose of this doctoral research , there are two types of evaluations that can be considered . The first level of evaluation would require the experimental design and results be evaluated by other researchers and peers . External replication is the most viable approach to test experiment based studies . In order to do so , a lab - package consisting of necessary task materials and study protocol to externally replicate the experiments in academic setting has been created . Moreover , a similar lab package to externally replicate the experiments in industry is under preparation . The second level involves the evaluation of the de - biasing technique . The objective is to test the developed de - biasing technique in an industrial setting in order to validate its acceptability . Table 1 : Publication plan and time - table Year Paper RQ Approach Forum Current status 2014 - 15 # 1 RQ 2 . 1 Experiment ICSE , 2014 Published 2015 - 16 # 2 RQ 3 * Literature review ICSE , 2015 Published # 3 RQ 1 SLR IST , 2016 Ongoing 2016 - 17 # 4 RQ 2 . 2 Experiment RE , 2016 Ongoing # 5 RQ 3 Experiment ESEM , 2017 Planning 2017 Thesis - Compilation - - 9 . LIST OF PUBLICATIONS 1 . Mohanani , R . , Ralph , P . , Shreeve , B . Requirements fixation . In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Software Engineering , Hyderabad , India : ACM / IEEE , June . 2 . Ralph , P . and Mohanani , R . 2015 . Is Requirements Engineering Inherently Counterproductive ? Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on the Twin Peaks of Requirements and Architecture , IEEE . 10 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to thank my principal supervisor , Prof . Burak Turhan and co - supervisors , Dr . Paul Ralph and Dr . Pilar Rodriguez and my colleague , Davide Fucci for their guidance and encouragement at every stage of my doctoral research . This research is supported in part by the Academy of Finland with decision / grant no : 278354 . 11 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Arnott , D . 2006 . Cognitive Biases and Decision Support Systems Development : A Design Science Approach . Information Systems Journal 16 , 55 - 78 . [ 2 ] Butler , A . B . , Scherer , L . L . , and Reiter - Palmon , R . 2003 . Effects of Solution Elicitation Aids and Need for Cognition on the Generation of Solutions to Ill - Structured Problems . Creativity Research Journal , vol . 15 , no . 2 , pp . 235 – 244 . 837 [ 3 ] Celdman , J . 2007 . Designing with Web Standards . New Riders , Berkeley , California , USA . [ 4 ] Charette , R . N . 2005 . Why Software Fails . IEEE Spectrum Online . http : / / www . spectrum . ieee . org / sep05 / 1685 . [ 5 ] Cross , N . , Dorst , K . and Roozenburg , N . 1992 . Research in design thinking . Delft University Press . [ 6 ] Cross , N . 2004 . Expertise in design : an overview . Design Studies , vol . 25 , no . 5 , pp . 427 – 44 . [ 7 ] Ewusi - Mensah , K . 2003 . Software development failures . Cambridge : Mit Press . [ 8 ] Hambrick , D . 2002 . Effects of Domain Knowledge , Working Memory Capacity , and Age on Cognitive Performance : An Investigation of the Knowledge - Is - Power Hypothesis . Cognitive Psychology , vol . 44 , no . 4 , pp . 339 – 387 . [ 9 ] Kitchenham , B . 2004 . Procedures for performing systematic reviews . Keele , UK , Keele University , 33 , 1 - 26 . [ 10 ] Klayman J . and Brown K . 1993 . Debias the environment instead of the judge : an alternative approach to reducing error in diagnostic ( and other ) judgment . Cognition 49 : 97 – 122 . [ 11 ] Kruger , C . , and Cross , N . 2006 . Solution driven versus problem driven design : strategies and outcomes . Design Studies , vol . 27 , no . 5 , pp . 527 – 548 . [ 12 ] Mian , P . , Conte , T . , Natali , A . , Biolchini , J . , and Travassos , G . 2005 . A systematic review process for software engineering . In Proceedings of the 2nd Experimental Software Engineering Latin American Workshop ( ESELAW ‟ 05 ) , Brazil . [ 13 ] Mohanani , R . , Ralph , P . and Shreeve , B . 2014 . Requirements fixation . In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Software Engineering , Hyderabad , India : ACM / IEEE . [ 14 ] Moss , J . , Kotovsky , K . , and Cagan J . 2007 . The influence of open goals on the acquisition of problem - relevant information . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , vol . 33 , no . 5 , pp . 876 – 891 . [ 15 ] Mund , J . , Femmer , H . , Fernández , D . M . , and Eckhardt , J . 2015 . Does Quality of Requirements Specifications matter ? Combined Results of Two Empirical Studies . IEEE . [ 16 ] Pohl , R , 2004 . Cognitive Illusions . Psychology Press , East Sussex , UK , 22 . [ 17 ] Purcell , A . T . and Gero , J . S . 1996 . Design and other types of fixation . Design Studies . 17 , 4 , 363 – 383 . [ 18 ] Ralph , P . 2011 . Introducing an empirical model of design . In The 6th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems . [ 19 ] Ralph , P . 2013 . The Illusion of Requirements in Software Development . Requirements Engineering . 18 , 3 , 293 – 296 . [ 20 ] Ralph , P . and Mohanani , R . 2015 . Is Requirements Engineering Inherently Counterproductive ? Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on the Twin Peaks of Requirements and Architecture , IEEE . [ 21 ] Rietzschel , E . , Nijstad , B . A . , and Stroebe , W . 2007 . Relative accessibility of domain knowledge and creativity : The effects of knowledge activation on the quantity and originality of generated ideas . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , vol . 43 , no . 6 , pp . 933 – 946 . [ 22 ] Schön , D . A . 1983 . The reflective practitioner : how professionals think in action . Basic Books . [ 23 ] Standish Group . 2009 . Chaos Summary 2009 . Boston , MA , USA . [ 24 ] Stanovich , K . 2009 . What Intelligence Tests Miss : The Psychology of Rational Thought . Yale University Press . [ 25 ] Tversky , A . , and Kahneman , D . 1974 . Judgment under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases . Science 185 , 1124 - 1131 . [ 26 ] Vitalari , N . P . , and Dickson , G . W . 1983 . Problem solving for effective systems analysis : an experimental exploration . Communications of the ACM , 26 ( 11 ) , 948 - 956 . [ 27 ] Vollmeyer , R . , and Burns , B . D . 2002 . Goal Specificity and Learning with a Hypermedia Program . Experimental Psychology , vol . 49 , no . 2 , pp . 98 – 108 . [ 28 ] Ward , T . , Patterson , M . , and Sifonis , C . 2004 . The Role of Specificity and Abstraction in Creative Idea Generation . Creativity Research Journal , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 9 . [ 29 ] Wohlin , C . , Runeson , P . , Host , M . , Ohlsson , C . , Regnell , B . , and Wesslén , A . 2000 . Experimentation in software engineering : an introduction . Book – SpringerLink . [ 30 ] Young , R . R . 2001 . Effective requirements practices . Addison - Wesley Longman Publishing Co . , Inc . [ 31 ] Mortensen , T . , Fisher , R . , and Wines , G , 2012 . Students as surrogates for practicing accountants : Further evidence . In Accounting Forum , volume 36 , pages 251 – 265 . Elsevier . [ 32 ] Host , M . , Regnell B . , and Wohlin , C . , 2000 . Using students as subjects - comparative study of students and professionals in lead time impact assessment . Empirical Softw . Engg . , 5 ( 3 ) : 201 – 214 . [ 33 ] J . Bowyer and J . Hughes . Assessing Undergraduate Experience Of Continuous Integration And Test - Driven Development . In Proceedings Of The 28th International Conference On Software Engineering , pages 691 – 694 . ACM , 2006 . [ 34 ] M . Muller and A . Hofer . The E ff ect of Experience on the Test - driven Development Process . Empirical Software Engineering , 12 ( 6 ) : 593 – 615 , 2007 . 838