The Content Analysis Guidebook by Kimberly A . Neuendorf Table of Contents ( with hyperlinks ) Acknowledgements List of Text Boxes List of Tables and Figures Foreword Chapter 1 Defining Content Analysis Isn ' t content analysis " easy " ? Myth # 1 : Content analysis is easy Myth # 2 : The term " content analysis " applies to all examinations of message content Myth # 3 : Anyone can do content analysis ; it doesn ' t take any special preparation Myth # 4 : Content analysis is for academic use only A six - part definition of content analysis 1 . Content analysis as relying on the scientific method A . Objectivity / intersubjectivity B . An a priori design C . Reliability D . Validity E . Generalizability F . Hypothesis testing 2 . The message as the unit of analysis and / or the unit of data collection 3 . Content analysis as quantitative 4 . Content analysis as summarizing 5 . Content analysis as applicable to all contexts A . Individual messaging B . Interpersonal and group messaging C . Organizational messaging D . Mass messaging E . Applied contexts 6 . All message characteristics are available to content analyze Manifest vs . latent content Content vs . form characteristics Text analysis vs . other types of content analysis Chapter 2 Milestones in the History of Content Analysis The growing popularity of content analysis Milestones of content analysis research Rhetorical analysis Biblical concordances and the quantification of history The Payne Fund studies The language of politics ( and Harold Lasswell ) The war at home - - advances in social and behavioral science methods during WWII Speech as a personality trait Department of Social Relations at Harvard ( and the General Inquirer computer program ) Television images - - violence and beyond The power of computing The global content analysis village Chapter 3 Beyond Description - - An Integrative Model of Content Analysis The language of the scientific method How content analysis is done - - a flowchart for the typical process of content analytic research Human coding vs . computer coding Approaches to content analysis Descriptive content analysis Inferential content analysis Psychographic content analysis Predictive content analysis The integrative model of content analysis Evaluation with the integrative model of content analysis First - order linkage Second - order linkage Third - order linkage Linking message and receiver data Linking message and source data Developing new linkages Chapter 4 Message Units and Sampling Units Unitizing a continuous stream of information Defining the population Archives The evaluation of archives Medium management The brave new digital world Sampling Random sampling Nonrandom sampling Sample size Chapter 5 Variables and Predictions Identifying " critical " variables A consideration of universal variables Using theory and past research for variable collection A grounded or " emergent " process of variable identification Attempting to find medium - specific critical variables Hypotheses , predictions , and research questions Conceptual definitions Hypotheses Research questions Chapter 6 Measurement Techniques Defining " measurement " Validity , reliability , accuracy , and precision Validity Reliability Accuracy Precision How the standard interrelate Types of validity assessment External validity / generalizability Face validity Criterion - related validity Content validity Construct validity Operationalization Categories or levels that are exhaustive Categories or levels that are mutually exclusive An appropriate level of measurement Computer coding Dictionaries for text analysis Selection of a computer text content analysis program Number of cases / units analyzed Unit size limitation Frequency output Alphabetical output KWIC / concordance Standard dictionaries Custom dictionaries Specialty analyses Human coding Codebooks and coding forms Coder training The process Medium modality and coding Index construction in content analysis Chapter 7 Reliability Intercoder reliability standards and practices Issues in the assessment of reliability Agreement vs . covariation Reliability as a function of coder and unit subsamples Threats to reliability Reliability for manifest vs . latent content Reliability and unitizing Pilot and final reliabilities Intercoder reliability coefficients - - issues and comparisons Agreement Agreement controlling for the impact of chance agreement Covariation Calculating intercoder reliability coefficients The reliability subsample Subsample size Sampling type Assignment of units to coders Treatment of variables that do not achieve an acceptable level of reliability The use of multiple coders Advanced and specialty issues in reliability coefficient selection Beyond basic coefficients The possibility of " consistency " intra - coder reliability assessment Controlling for covariates Sequential overlapping reliability coding Chapter 8 Results and Reporting Hypothesis testing Hypotheses and research questions - - a reminder Inferential vs . non - parametric statistics Selecting the appropriate statistical tests Frequencies Co - occurrences and in - context occurrences Timelines Bivariate relationships Multivariate relationships Chapter 9 Contexts Psychographic applications of content analysis Thematic content analysis Clinical applications Open - ended written and pictorial responses Linguistics and semantic networks ( e . g . , CL Research ) Stylometrics and computer literary analysis Interaction analysis ( e . g . , CHILDES , RIB Interaction Scheme ) Other interpersonal behaviors Violence in the media Gender roles Minority portrayals Advertising News Political communication Web analyses Other applied contexts Commercial and other client - based applications of content analysis Funded research conducted by academics Commercial applications of text analysis Content analysis for standards and practices Applied web analyses Future directions Appendix A Message Archives General collections Film , television , and radio archives Political messages Literary and general corpora Open - ended data archives Appendix B Using NEXIS for Text Acquisition for Content Analysis Appendix C Computer Content Analysis Software , by Paul Skalski Part I : Quantitative computer text analysis programs VBPro CATPAC Computer Programs for Text Analysis ( Eric Johnson ) Concordance Diction 4 . 0 DIMAP General Inquirer Intext Lexa LIWC ( Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ) MCCA Lite MECA MonoConc SALT ( Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts ) TABARI ( Text Analysis by Augmented Replacement Instructions ) TextAnalyst TEXTPACK 7 . 0 TextQuest TextSmart by SPSS WordStat Part II : VBPro How - to and Executional Flowchart Appendix D An Introduction to PRAM - - A Program for Reliability Assessment with Multiple Coders Appendix E The Content Analysis Guidebook Website References Author index Subject index List of Text Boxes Box 1 . 1 - - Defining Content Analysis : Some of the main " players " in the development of quantitative message analysis present their points - of - view Box 1 . 2 - - Analyzing Communication in Crisis : Perpetrator and negotiator interpersonal exchanges Box 1 . 3 - - The Variety of Content Analysis : Religious TV - - Tapping message characteristics ranging from communicator style to dollar signs Box 2 . 1 - - Content Analysis Timeline : Content Analysis and Text Analysis Box 2 . 2 - - When Movies were King Box 3 . 1 - - A Flowchart for the Typical Process of Content Analysis Box 3 . 2 - - The Practical Prediction of Advertising Readership Box 3 . 3 - - Creating the " Perfect " Advertisement : Using content analysis for creative message construction Box 3 . 4 - - Approaching Causality - - Does Press Coverage Cause Public Opinion ? Box 4 . 1 - - Standard Error and Confidence Intervals Box 5 . 1 - - The Critical Variable that Almost Got Away : Camera technique in music videos Box 5 . 2 - - Message Complexity : An example of a possible " universal " variable for content analysis Box 6 . 1 - - Comparing Reliability , Accuracy , and Precision Box 6 . 2 - - Sample Codebook - - Character Demographics Analysis Box 6 . 3 - - Sample Coding Form - - Character Demographics Analysis Box 6 . 4 - - The Evolution of a Dictionary Set - - Political Speech Indexing Box 7 . 1 - - Popular Agreement Coefficients - - Calculating Percent Agreement , Scott ' s pi , Cohen ' s kappa , and Krippendorff ' s alpha Box 7 . 2 - - Popular Covariation Coefficients - - Calculating Spearman rho and Pearson correlation ( r ) Box 7 . 3 - - Humor , A Problematic Construct : Partitioning a construct on the basis of reliability - imposed constraints Box 8 . 1 - - Selecting Appropriate Statistics Box 9 . 1 - - Content Analysis in the Year 2100 List of Tables and Figures Table 1 . 1 - - Medical Primetime Network Television Programming , 1951 - 1998 Figure 3 . 1 - - A Flowchart for the Typical Process of Content Analysis Table 8 . 1 - - Reprinted from Olson ( 1994 ) Figure 8 . 1 - - Reprinted from Cecil ( 1998 ) Figure 8 . 2 - - Reprinted from Sengupto ( 1996 ) Figure 8 . 3 - - Reprinted from Chang ( 1998 ) Table 8 . 2 - - KWIC analysis of fear in Coleridge ' s The Rime of the Ancient Mariner Figure 8 . 4 - - Reprinted from Willnat & Zhu ( 1996 ) Figure 8 . 5 - - Reprinted from Finkel & Geer ( 1998 ) Table 8 . 3 - - Reprinted from Schreer & Strichartz ( 1997 ) Table 8 . 4 - - Reprinted from Taylor & Taylor ( 1994 ) Table 8 . 5 - - Reprinted from Cutler & Javalgi ( 1992 ) Figure 8 . 6 - - Reprinted from Pettijohn & Tesser ( 1999 ) Table 8 . 6 - - Reprinted from Naccarato & Neuendorf ( 1998 ) Figure 8 . 7 - - Reprinted from Andsager & Powers ( 1999 ) Figure 8 . 8 - - Reprinted from Palmquist , Carley , & Dale ( 1997 ) Figure 8 . 9 - - Reprinted from Watt & Welch ( 1993 ) Figure 8 . 10 - - Reprinted from Whissell ( 1996 ) Table C . 1 - - Computer Text Analysis Software