251 Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing DANIEL JOHNSON , Queensland University of Technology , Australia KATELYN WILEY , University of Saskatchewan , Canada CALE PASSMORE , University of Saskatchewan , Canada ELLA HORTON , University of Tasmania , Australia ROGER ALTIZER , University of Utah , USA REGAN L . MANDRYK , University of Saskatchewan , Canada When facing mental health concerns , men seek help less , confront greater stigma in accessing treatment , and experience more severe consequences . Interventions targeted at men are often grounded in activity and situated in appealing contexts , such as sporting or gaming spaces . In this paper , we question how pinball—a social tangible and digital leisure activity—can support men’s mental health and wellbeing , through thematic analysis of in - depth semi - structured interviews ( n = 15 ) with male pinball enthusiasts . Our contribution is threefold : first , we evidence pinball as a context that provides incidental benefits to mental health directly , and indirectly throughsocialconnectedness ; second , thatenthusiastsactivelyenhancetheirsociallivesandresultingwellbeing via pinball ; and third , that pinball contexts are suited for designing interventions that provide mental health supports within subcultures that appeal to men . We situate our findings in theories of wellbeing , activity - based communication , shoulder - to shoulder self - disclosure , and the importance of third - spaces for social wellness . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; • Applied computing → Computer games ; • Software and its engineering → Interactive games . Additional Key Words and Phrases : pinball , wellbeing , social play , games , men’s health ACM Reference Format : DanielJohnson , KatelynWiley , CalePassmore , EllaHorton , RogerAltizer , andReganL . Mandryk . 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , CHI PLAY , Article 251 ( October 2022 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3549514 1 INTRODUCTION Approximatelyoneintwopeoplewillexperienceamentalhealthissueintheirlife [ 6 , 7 ] . Inadditionto the generic barriers to accessing mental health treatment ( e . g . , lack of therapists , access to insurance , geographical access geography or income [ 51 , 63 ] ) , there are issues specific to men that prevent their access to mental health care [ 9 ] . For example , men tend to have lower rates of help - seeking than women [ 36 , 71 ] and are not as comfortable with structured mental health interventions [ 16 ] . Researchers have suggested that stigma of weakness is a particular barrier for men who may feel pressure to uphold traditionally masculine values of independence , toughness , and resilience [ 27 , 36 ] , and that lower help - seeking among men might be attributable to conformity to several masculine Authors’ addresses : Daniel Johnson , dm . johnnson @ qut . edu . au , Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane , Australia ; Katelyn Wiley , katelyn . wiley @ usask . ca , University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon , Canada ; Cale Passmore , cale . passmore @ usask . ca , University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon , Canada ; Ella Horton , ella . horton @ utas . edu . au , University of Tasmania , Hobart , Australia ; Roger Altizer , Roger . Altizer @ utah . edu , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , USA ; Regan L . Mandryk , regan @ cs . usask . ca , University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon , Canada . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . 2573 - 0142 / 2022 / 10 - ART251 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3549514 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 2 Daniel Johnson , et al . norms , including self - reliance [ 93 ] . These barriers to care have severe consequences ; for example , men are more than three times more likely to die by suicide than women in the UK [ 9 ] , the USA [ 10 ] , Australia [ 5 ] , and Canada [ 12 ] . There is a clear need for targeted initiatives proactively aimed at men to facilitate their help - seeking for mental health problems [ 71 ] . To provide better mental health supports for men , targeted initiatives have been made to deliver mental health interventions within subcultures that appeal to men [ 71 ] . For example , in the Coping Through Football intervention [ 40 ] , researchers aimed to improve mental , physical , and social health for men with severe and enduring mental health problems in London , UK , through football and fanship . Similarly , the EuroFIT project [ 95 ] harnessed local football team loyalty to improve physical health and wellbeing . And the MindMax project [ 22 ] embedded psychoeducational modules using teaching strategies derived from positive psychology [ 77 ] and acceptance and commitment ther - apy [ 43 ] into an Australian Football League ( AFL ) - themed app , specifically to support men’s mental health . Moving beyond sport , in Australia [ 88 ] , New Zealand [ 15 ] , Canada [ 53 ] , and other parts of the world , ‘Men’s Sheds’ are becoming increasingly common . Men’s Sheds are spaces designed to provide a safe , friendly and inclusive environment where men can meet one another and collaborate on meaningful projects ( ranging from gardening , cooking , making toys for local childcare groups , to bee - keeping ) [ 4 ] . Research has confirmed that such sheds have a range of wellbeing benefits [ 88 ] . These intervention examples are action - based , as opposed to talk - based , which follows recent recommendations for the design of mental health interventions tailored to men [ 36 ] . Some inter - ventions were explicitly designed to provide mental health benefits ; whereas others have focused on the incidental benefits to mental health that result from participation in a social activity . Whereas the MindMax app [ 22 ] embedded explicit mental health supports into their sports - themed app , the EuroFIT project [ 95 ] focused on gathering men to play sports , which resulted in incidental benefit to their mental health . Men’s Sheds provide a mixture of both incidental benefits ( connecting men , providing activities upon which they can focus ) and explicit benefits such as health and wellbeing seminars [ 4 ] . Whether designed explicitly or with incidental benefits in mind , one common feature to many of these interventions is that they focus on a shared playful or physical activity , such as a sport or sporting league . However , there are men who might not be drawn to traditional sports nor want to engage with physical activities . On the other hand , computer gaming has also shown many of these same incidental benefits to mental health . For example , although not focused specifically on men’s participation , in Vella et al . ’s [ 87 ] qualitative study of Pokémon Go players , the authors discuss the ways in which the game facilitated social connectedness in the form of a sense of place , a sense of belonging , connection to strangers and the strengthening of existing social ties . In McEwan et al . ’s [ 59 ] study of online game lounges , the authors note that a subset of people participate specifically to form social ties . People have been shown to use online social gaming to form and maintain relationships ( e . g . , [ 50 , 81 , 90 ] , and even combat loneliness ( e . g . , [ 30 ] ) , resulting in tangible benefits to wellbeing ( e . g . , [ 55 ] ) . Gaming as a hobby has further been suggested to provide mental health resilience for people experiencing a first episode of psychosis [ 49 ] , help people self - manage depression [ 21 ] , and help people manage challenging times in their lives ( e . g . , [ 39 , 47 ] ) . The online social support that started among teams of esports athletes was found to translate into offline social support over time [ 86 ] . Although these findings were not specific to men , many of the studies described over - represented men in their samples . Building on these findings , the ‘WellPlayed ! ’ project [ 44 ] sought to connect players with one another as a means of building social support and friendships . In contrast to existing ‘matchmaking’ services that exist for videogame players , which focus on matching based on skill , ‘WellPlayed ! ’ aimed to match players based on alternative metrics such as communication and teamwork . Al - though computer gaming has been shown to yield these social benefits , the evolution over time into primarily online play has left a gap for physically co - located groups to gather together . Further , as Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 3 with traditional sports - based interventions being limited to those who will participate in exercise , gaming spaces are appealing to a group of people who enjoy digital screen - based interactions . Pinball—an arcade machine—is a hybrid digital and physical game that involves a ball inside the ma - chine , propelled through two ( or more ) player - controlled flippers , which can be aimed to hit different ramps , bumpers , toys , and targets ( see Figure 1 ) . Players can play alone , or turn take ( up to 4 players ) with the goal of scoring as many points as possible until they fail to keep the ball inside the play area ( ‘draining’ the ball between the flippers or via one of two ‘outlanes’ ) . Machines are themed , generally involve a loose narrative , and require strategic play combined with physical skill ( e . g . , ‘nudging’ , ‘trapping’ ) to generate high scores . Played in homes and in arcades ( sometimes called ‘barcades’ when combined with a bar ) , pinball supports a range of structured social play , from drop - in pinball bars , to weekly leagues , to competitive tournaments at a local or international scale . Pinball ( in its current recognizable form ) has been around since the 1930s , but is also experiencing a recent resurgence in popularity [ 1 , 2 ] . Although played by all genders , pinball is a male - dominated activity , with barcades , leagues , and tournaments generally attracting competitors who identify as men [ 17 , 52 , 75 ] . Further , pinball can be a shared playful interaction that is not dependent on strength nor fitness , but combines both physical and digital elements . Given these characteristics , we see an opportunity for pinball contextstoprovideincidentalbenefitstomen’smentalhealththroughasharedplayfulleisureactivity . Further , weseektoprovideevidenceastowhetherornotexplicitmentalhealthinterventions—similar to those seen in football ( e . g . , MindMax ) or computer gaming ( e . g . , WellPlayed ! ) —could be designed within a pinball context . Overall , we question how pinball—a social tangible and digital leisure activity—can support men’s mental health and wellbeing . In line with the World Health Organisation [ 94 ] we define wellbeing relatively broadly , incorporating not just the absence of mental ill health , but positive mental health ( e . g . , flourishing , thriving ) including both hedonic aspects ( e . g . , pleasure and emjoyment ) and eudaimonic aspects ( e . g . , meaning and purpose ) of wellbeing [ 56 ] . Fig . 1 . Several players standing shoulder - to - shoulder , playing pinball . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 4 Daniel Johnson , et al . 1 . 1 Our Approach To explore whether pinball can support men’s mental health and wellbeing , in this paper , we seek evidence in support of four research questions : • RQ1 . How do men play pinball ? • RQ2 . Why do men play pinball ? • RQ3 . How does pinball affect men’s wellbeing ? • RQ4 . How does pinball affect men’s social connectedness ? To answer these questions , we conducted in - depth semi - structured interviews ( n = 15 ) with pinball enthusiasts who identify as men . Interviews were transcribed and analyzed using thematic analy - sis [ 18 ] . We developed four themes for How People Play ( Growing Up ; Seasons Change ; Playing Now , Integration with Life ) , three for Why People Play ( Nostalgia ; Flashing Lights ; Competition , Competence , and Control ) , and three for How Pinball affects Wellbeing ( Mental Health ; Financial Impact ; Time Spent ) . For How Does Pinball Affect Social Connectedness , we developed two groupings : Relating to Others , containing three themes ( Contained Friendships ; Extended Friendships ; Ability to Disclose ) , and Pinball Community , containing three themes ( Uniquely Welcoming ; Boy’s Club ; Community Care ) . Our findings evidence that pinball is a very social hobby , with friendships that are both contained by—and extend—the hobby itself , which offers men an opportunity to connect . Our contribution is threefold : first , we evidence pinball as a context that provides incidental benefits to mental health directly , and through social connectedness ; second , that enthusiasts actively enhance their social lives and wellbeing via pinball ; and third , that pinball contexts are particularly suited for designing interventions that aim to provide men with wellbeing supports where they are at , in contexts that appeal . We situate our findings in theories of wellbeing , activity - based communication , shoulder - to shoulder self - disclosure , and the importance of sociability and third - spaces for social wellness . We introduce these theories when interpreting our findings , in line with an inductive qualitative approach [ 18 , 29 ] . Finally , we discuss the potential design space for pinball - based mental health interventions targeted at men . Our work proposes pinball as a subculture that appeals to men , in which players can engage in an instrumental task that provides incidental benefits to wellbeing , but most importantly , offers an opportunity for shoulder - to - shoulder self - disclosure and social support . 2 METHODS 2 . 1 Gathering the Data The interview questions were iteratively developed by the research team drawing both on considera - tions of those naive to pinball and those who were members of the pinball community . The questions were designed to collect background information ( including participants’ personal history with pin - ball ) , what drew participants to pinball ( and kept them playing ) , whether and how they have formed connectionswithothers , andhowpinballhasimpactedtheirlives ( includingtheirmentalandphysical health ) . All interviews were conducted using a semi - structured approach such that if new directions emerged as participants were speaking , these were encouraged and followed by the interviewer . Two different members of the research team conducted the interviews drawing on the pre - determined set of questions . The majority ( n = 10 ) of interviews were conducted by a researcher with no experience with pinball and who was unfamiliar with the participants . Participants ( n = 15 ) were recruited via existing contacts of the research team , recommendations from these contacts and recommendations from key figures in the pinball community ( i . e . , podcasters and owners of pinball venues ) . We ceased data collection at the point at which it appeared we had met data saturation . Our participants all identified as male , with ages ranging from 33 to 62 years ( average age of 44 . 7 years ) . Participants were provided with a $ 20 ( currency removed for anonymous review ) voucher in return for their time . Interviews were conducted both in person and online , with all interviews recorded . The Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 5 audio files were converted to text using a dedicated transcription service . All transcribed interviews were reviewed by research staff for accuracy ( and original recordings used to clarify any points of uncertainty and potential errors ) . 2 . 2 Analyzing the Data The interviews were analyzed using thematic analysis , a qualitative analysis method that involves identifying patterns ( themes ) across data . We followed the steps outlined by Braun and Clarke [ 18 ] for conducting thematic analyses : 1 . Familiarizing yourself with the data , 2 . Generating initial codes , 3 . Searching for themes , 4 . Reviewing themes , and 5 . Defining and naming themes . We chose to take an inductive approach , meaning our process for identifying themes was not shaped by any existing theory ; rather , it was data - driven . Inductive approaches generally prescribe that theory should be considered at the interpretation stage , so as not to promote tunnel vision in conducting the analysis ( see for example [ 29 ] ) or in identifying themes using theories built from dominant voices that silence marginalized perspectives [ 92 ] ; we embed our findings in theoretical frameworks within Section 4 : Discussion . The initial codes were generated through complete coding of the dataset , meaning we coded everything related to our research questions . These codes then guided our development of themes . To minimise pre - existing bias , primary analysis was conducted by two members of the research team who were external to the study design and data gathering processes , and with little prior knowledge of—or experience with—the pinball community . They were primed on the study ( topics , objectives , and methods ) but were otherwise unfamiliar with the larger project . The analysts were provided with the research questions to restrain code and guide theme construction , but were not given further direction about the intended research contribution . After discussions with the team ( which included experts in pinball ) , the final theme structure was determined collectively . 3 RESULTS Here we present the themes generated from the thematic analysis . We organize them based on our research questions : how people play , why they play , and how pinball affects wellbeing and social connectedness . A summary of the thematic analysis can be seen in Table 1 . Research Question Themes How do men play pinball ? Growing Up ; Seasons Change ; Playing Now ; Integration with Life Why do men play pinball ? Nostalgia ; Flashing Lights ; Competition , Competence , and Control How does pinball affect men’s wellbeing ? Mental Health ; Financial Impact ; Time Spent How does pinball affect men’s social connectedness ? Relating to Others : Contained Friendships ; Extended Friendships ; Ability to Disclose Pinball Community : Uniquely Welcoming ; Boy’s Club ; Community Care Table 1 . We describe several themes on pinball experience , organized by research question . 3 . 1 RQ1 . How do People Play Pinball ? 3 . 1 . 1 Growing Up . “Look , theearliest Icanremember wasprobablywhen Iwas aboutsix orseven , and mybroth - ers got me into it . And I grew up in [ city name ] and pinball was such a big part of [ country ] culture anyway , growing up , probably the weather and the surf culture . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 6 Daniel Johnson , et al . All fifteen participants described first playing pinball as a child , ranging in age from around four to thirteen years old . These early experiences with pinball took place in milk bars ( i . e . , general stores ) , shops and arcades . For example , one participant remembered , “ [ . . . ] playing pinball as a kid growing up , in a country town , the video shop having machines , and going to the bowling alley and seeing machines there . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . Participants did not describe seeking out pinball ; rather , they were exposed to it through the local built environment and culture . Participants noted that , “Pinball was such a big part of [ country ] culture . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) and that “You could walk through the city and hit five or six different arcades” ( P15 , age 43 ) . Often , participants encountered machines through their daily routines , such as walking home from school : “So we used to have people on machines in milk bars . So once you’d leave school there would be a pinball machine on the way home . So yeah , that’s what we do . I also did ice skating and roller skating , and back in the 70s pinball was everywhere , so I would play that . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Many participants were introduced to pinball by older siblings or adults . One participant said , “I remember watching the big kid’s play and tilting and moving the machines . Then I remember going up to a machine and trying to move it back and even make it budge . I’m like , what the hell , how do they do that ? I remember doing that . Just with all my might , I couldn’t even make it move an inch . ” ( P9 , age 39 ) . Wanting to emulate the “big kids” was an initial draw for participants . Another participant remembered watching older kids that were playing , “like 18 , 19 , 20 year olds . So , they seemed cool . And I thought , I could do that . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 Seasons Change . “It was only maybe five years ago , six years ago now , that I came back to seeing pinball . It had a pretty dead zone through the late noughties I guess . The whole industry kind of died , similar to what arcades did , I suppose . They just sort of dropped off the radar . And doing a PhD , I didn’t get to do much else . Just fell completely off the radar . ” ( P15 , age 43 ) This theme describes how participants’ behaviour changed from when they were children . Many participants experienced a break in playing . While they played growing up , as machines became less common in public places and with lifestyle changes , they described breaks of several years before coming back . Participants described a change in the built environment as they grew up . One participant noted that pinball machines “ [ . . . ] literally just disappeared . You couldn’t find one . Because the poker machines came in and they obviously made a shit load of more money on that . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . While pinball machines were ubiquitous in participants’ childhoods , they described the shift to a lack of public machines as the primary reason they stopped playing : “I mean , I would’ve played pinball and arcade machines right through my early twenties and that , and then I didn’t actually buy my own one till probably about 10 years ago . But there’s probably a break of about 10 years or 15 years in between , because I mean , after the nineties , the arcades pretty much , I mean , the local ones just died . ” ( P12 , age 51 ) . Some participants also described drifting away from pinball as they prioritized other aspects of their lives , like living abroad , jobs , family and other hobbies . One participant described this shift , saying : “I think it was more just to focus on other areas of life , like obviously relationships , or it could be a job or friendships or other interests and connecting with other people through other things , like obviously sport or playing sport . I think that the time with pinball just wasn’t there . Yeah . Or friends that were really into pinball either , so that was the other thing , so yeah . ” ( P6 , age 38 ) . 3 . 1 . 3 Playing Now . “I didn’t realize that it was still something out there that people were into and that it was making a resurgence . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 7 For many participants , their ‘re - entry’ into playing pinball revolved around privately owned , home machines . One participant described his experience of buying a pinball machine , saying : “But it wasn’t something that I was massively into again , that didn’t happen until I bought a machine . Finally got one at home and I just couldn’t believe that all my life , particularly as a kid , a six and a seven year old , when I was obsessed with pinball , all I dreamed of was having a pinball machine at home and I finally got one at home . And then that led to all these pinball meets and then getting into competitive pinball . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Other participants started playing pinball again through tournaments . For these participants , the discovery of tournaments was often revelatory and surprising , as one participant described : “Just saw up on the wall that there was some results of the [ Regional ] Pinball monthly tournament . I said , “What the ? You’re kidding me . ” People getting together and playing pinball seriously , so I just Googled it up [ . . . ] And that was quite exciting that all of a sudden you had a whole group of people getting together to play pinball , but playing in competition format . ” ( P14 , age 62 ) . Participants described playing most frequently in these two distinct settings : tournaments , and “social meetups” at people’s houses . Tournaments were described as much more competitive and focused on gameplay , whereas social meetups were more about having fun and socializing . As a description of these social meetups , one participant said : “They’re typically held at people’s houses usually . Acoupleoffriendshaveprettydecentcollectionsandwillopentheirhouses . Usuallyjusttoagroup of friends , sometimes there’s a forum ‘ [ forum name ] Arcade’ where there’s a monthly pinball meet [ . . . ] So people nominate themselves to open their house to pretty much anyone on that forum . ” ( P15 , age 43 ) . Both tournaments and social meetups were described as being organized through social media . According to one participant , “It used to be , once upon a time , forums and posters at the arcades in the past were used as the vehicle of organizing the events . But these days Facebook has actually taken over as the main point . ” ( P1 , age 40 ) . 3 . 1 . 4 Integration with Life . “It’s just a matter of . . . I’m [ Participant 5 ] and I play pinball and I have a lot things about my life that revolve around pinball , for better or worse . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) This theme describes the permeation of pinball into many aspects of participants’ lives . At home , participants collected machines . They were often financially committed to pinball , through buying machines and travelling to tournaments . Many participants also had some sort of business involve - ment in pinball , from organizing tournaments to selling and fixing machines , and even running arcade bars . One business owner noted that he had been interested in making money from pinball since he was 12 , saying to his parents , “I want to go buy a machine because I can put it somewhere , people will put money in it and I’ll make my money back and I get to play for free . ” ( P3 , age 45 ) . Participants played pinball alone and with others and in many different settings : at home , at social meetups in other players’ homes , in public places like pubs , and at tournaments . Participants were also engaged with pinball in digital spaces . Some participants streamed pinball games and produced podcasts about pinball . Most participants engaged in online forums and social media groups centered on pinball . Summing up all these experiences , one participant described his commitment to pinball : “Now , it’s intrinsically a part of my life . . . I’ll do pinball streams , I’ll go to social meets with people . I’ll go interstate for tournaments . I’ll play tournaments in [ city name ] . I managed the pinball sales page on Facebook . I mean , I have so many sort of things that I do with pinball . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . Participants also brought pinball into other areas of their lives . One participant said he , “managed to convince where I was working to actually site one in the lunchroom for a little while as a charity . Some of the money would go to the charity that the business used to run , so I got away with that . ” ( P1 , age 40 ) . He also organized his daughter’s birthday party around pinball . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 8 Daniel Johnson , et al . 3 . 2 RQ2 . Why do People Play Pinball ? 3 . 2 . 1 Flashing Lights . “I think the machines have being designed to feed you information that stimulates the senses , whether it’s light shows , or whether it’s sounds , or whether it’s feeding you a free game . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) Many participants describe being initially drawn to pinball due to its physical features and the sensory experience . One participant said , “But honestly it still just boils back to the feel , the sound , and just that whole hearing the ball roll over the wood and hitting stuff . That I think above all else is what sells it to me . ” ( P1 , age 40 ) . Participants also described loving the themes and artwork of the machines . For example , one participant discussed music as his entry into pinball , saying , “Well , I suppose that the thing that first got me into it was just I like Star Trek : the Next Generation , and I loved the music in the machine and that just got me into it . I would pick a particular mode just to hear the music . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . These physical features were often identified as what set pinball apart and made it more attractive than other activities . Participants often compared pinball to video games , noting that they preferred pinball because of its physicality and thus “randomness” . One participant explained : “It is the nature of the fact that unlike say , Street Fighter , or Mortal Kombat , or NBA Jam , or arcade games where you can learn it to the point where you can play it blindfolded , and you can beat the game because you know exactly how everything will react . If you do X , the game will do Y every single time . Pinball I find while there is an element of things are generally consistent , because of the laws of physics and gravity and things like that , it’s always going to be different . ” ( P1 , age 40 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control . “To see how good I am . To see if I can win tournaments . To beat mates . ” ( P7 , age 45 ) When asked why they play pinball , participants often discussed feelings of competence , challenge and control . For some , these feelings related to the competitive elements of pinball , such as wanting to win tournaments and maintain the high score on machines . These participants made statements such as , “I get the highest score on each machine I play . . . Being the grand champion on each machine . That’s why I do it . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . For others , these feelings of competence and challenge did not come from competition with others , but rather an internal source . One participant described it as a “personal drive” , saying : “Yeah , just that personal drive to be better , be calmer . Calmer in heavy situations . Then I just love , for me when I’m playing a pinball machine , on my own basis , I’m not usually looking at the score . I’m usually just trying to get into a wizard mode . Once I get the wizard mode , I’m kind of , yeah , I’m done with that game for a little bit . ” ( P9 , age 39 ) . Often participants expressed playing for both the competitive aspects and the personal challenges , noting that they enjoyed both for different reasons . This feeling was described by one participant who said , “Playing on my own is more about problem solving , trying different things to do , getting absorbed in thegame , wherewhenyou’replayingwithothers , it’smuchmoreaboutchallengingyourself , seeingifyou canholdatthesamelevelyoucanperformatwhenyou’reonyourownonthesamemachine . ” ( P14 , age62 ) . Participants also appreciated the sense of control that pinball afforded them . One participant noted that this was particularly appealing as a child , describing the feeling as : “Here is this fantasy world whether it’s mechanical or video , where I actually got control over every part of it . And I don’t have someone telling me “No” the whole time . That’s absolutely addictive and it has less to do with what the game is and just more about the concept of I have control over this world , whereas every other part of my life I do not . ” ( P8 , age 52 ) . These feelings of control were also identified as being meaningful in adulthood . One participant noted that pinball was “a thing that we control the destiny of” . He then goes on to say , “Where the rest of Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 9 societycontrolsitforotherthingsandI’mthinkingoflikethreeorfouroftheguysthatthey’dprobablysayexactlythesamething . IplayitbecausethisiswhatI’mgoodatinsocietyandthisismyplace . ” ( P4 , age47 ) . 3 . 2 . 3 Feelings of Nostalgia . “It was almost like I connected back with my 13 year old self , I was giddy with happiness to be honest . ” ( P2 , age 46 ) Another strong draw for players to continue playing pinball was nostalgia for their experiences in their youth . Participants discussed fond memories and feelings of re - connection with their childhood . One participant said , “That immediate I guess link to my childhood was just an amazing sensation . I thought , I want others to experience that as well . ” ( P2 , age 46 ) . These experiences were described as very visceral , often based on the physical sensations of pinball : “So I went over to his house , and he had like a bunch of pinball machines there and arcade games and he had Indian Jones in the corner . And that’s the one that I remember from my childhood almost the most . And I went and I played it , [ . . . ] all the sounds are triggering with me like , Oh I remember this ! [ . . . ] I started going there all the time because it was a really cool place to hang out . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . One participant speculated that nostalgia was initially the main draw for most players , saying , “You get a chance to go over to their place , play machines , and experience machines that you have that nostalgic draw to . I think that’s how most people get into it , “Oh , I remember playing this as a boy . I loved that machine . ” And that’s how it all starts . . . ” ( P7 , age 45 ) . Participants also attributed the demographic profile of pinball players to the influence of nostalgia ( e . g . , P13 ( age 34 ) : “The age demographic . A lot of people , I think pinball comes from a big nostalgia thing . [ . . . ] It’s just people trying to relive a certain part of their childhood . When things were simpler or seemingly simpler than what it is now . ” ) . However , it was also noted that younger players might also experience a draw to the past ( e . g . , P9 ( age 39 ) : “If you come here [ a barcade ] on a Saturday , there’s 18 - year - olds to 60 - year - olds . There’s the nostalgia aspect for everybody . ” ) 3 . 3 RQ3 . How Does Pinball Affect Wellbeing ? 3 . 3 . 1 Mental Health . “It’s given me an outlet , it’s given me something to enjoy and something to sort of , yeah , share with friends to get me out of a darker place . ” ( P6 , age 38 ) Participants often spoke of pinball as having a positive effect on their mental health . While these effects were often linked to the social connectedness that came from their involvement in pinball , participants also spoke of other distinct benefits , which is what this theme will focus on . Many participants described pinball as an outlet they could use to escape from everyday stressors . Participants described feeling like they could “turn the brain off” ( P1 , age 40 ) and like they weren’t “thinking of anything else on earth” ( P9 , age 39 ) while playing pinball . One participant even compared pinball to meditation , saying , “I meditate , and pinball is another way of doing that . You can get yourself absorbed and focused into it , and there’s lots of things , you got squared attention happening and things . ” ( P14 , age 62 ) . While most of the stressors mentioned by participants were mundane worries , some described using pinball to cope with larger life events : “It’s helped me through some difficult times with marriage breakdown and stuff as well in the last six months . So pinball’s been sort of my outlet , where I can go and sort of take my mind off things , at least while I’m playing that game . ” ( P6 , age 38 ) Most participant did describe this escape as temporary . For example , one participant said , “And when I turn it off , I’ll probably revert back to , “Oh , shit , that’s right , I’ve got to deal with this now , ” but while playing with pinball it certainly does give you that escapism , and take you away . ” ( P7 , age 45 ) . However , participants did also describe this kind of escape as serving a larger purpose , like in the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 10 Daniel Johnson , et al . case of one participant who said , “It’s a good way of just clearing your head . So I’ll do it while I’m studying sometimes , just if I want to walk away from something I’m working on , and go back to it for editing or something , I’ll go play pinball for half an hour . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . Participants also discussed pinball as a type of “crutch” for their mental health , and that it was preferable to other activities . One participant said : “It was almost a crutch or a tool to use to get around the fact that I was extremely unhappy . I actually think it was an incredibly positive thing . Because what are the alternatives ? I go drink , I go smoke , I go binge eat or do destructive things , whereas going and spending five , 10 dollars and playing pinball for 25 minutes is much better use of my time and gets the head in a much better place than going out , having a smoke , and then developing a pack a week habit or something like that because of that . ” ( P1 ) . Another participant echoed this experience , saying , “I think there’s people . . . So , like myself , who are very addictive personalities . If I wasn’t doing this , I might be doing , I don’t know woodworking or something . You throw yourself into it 100 % . And I know there’s guys in our group that have had substance abuse problems and they see this as a crutch type thing . A supporter for that . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . One participant summed it up , saying “I feel like there’s a lot of mental health positivity that comes out of pinball . ” ( P9 , age 39 ) . 3 . 3 . 2 Financial Impact . “Wow , you paid that much for a pinball machine ? “ And it’s like , ”How much do you put on happiness ? ” ( P2 , age 46 ) Whilemanyparticipantsdidmentionthehighcostofpinball , usuallywhentalkingaboutacquiring personal machines , they often considered these costs as an acceptable expense , saying things like , “How much do you put on happiness ? ” ( P2 , age 46 ) and “You’ve got to do something with your money . You’ve got to enjoy yourself somehow . . . I’m here for a good time , not a long time . As long as you can afford to pay the bills and the mortgage and all that sort of stuff . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . No participants mentioned spending money they didn’t have or any significant financial hardship due to spending on pinball . Some participants did describe relationship tensions due to the financial impact . For example , one participant said : “The financial strain can be intense sometimes . I guess I’m lucky enough that the affordability for us is there , but I buy machines maybe once a year . At least that’s what’s happened the last probably two / three years . I’ve bought one a year , and every time I tell my wife , “That’s it . I promise , honey . I love you , but no more . ” And she looks at me and literally sticks a knife in my side , saying , “It better be . ” And it never is . ” ( P7 , age 45 ) Participants did note that pinball did not have to be an expensive hobby , saying , “It’s a fun hobby that you can get into . It’s cheap . You don’t need to spend that much money on it , you can spend $ 2 at a time playing pinball if you want . Or , even easier , you can just come to a pinball tournament , make friends with somebody that is into pinball , and play their machines . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . This participant then went on to note that even the “best player in [ country ] ” did not own any personal machines . 3 . 3 . 3 Time Spent on Pinball . “I’ve still got my friends from before pinball , but I spend so much more time with my pinball friends and they have become more of my friends than my old friends . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Similar to the financial impacts , when participants did mention time spent playing pinball , they generally qualified the effects as acceptable , given the outstanding benefits . Occasionally , participants would muse on the time they spent on pinball , with one participant saying , “Rather than concentrat - ing on other things in my life , it’s probably been a lot more about pinball . . . Maybe I’m spending too much time playing pinball when I could be doing something else . . . ” ( P6 , age 38 ) . Another participant described an impact on his sleep , as he would stay up engaging with pinball forums online , “Jumping on the forum and just almost going into a rabbit hole and just diving into discussions that by the time Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 11 I realize it’s already one , two o’clock in the morning and I have to get up at 6 : 30 to get to work , so yeah . And I do that almost every night and I don’t know why . I don’t learn , but it’s a fascinating discussion that I see and I want to partake in . ” ( P2 , age 46 ) . While participants did think about the time they spent on pinball , they did not view it as overly negative . For example , one participant said that while pinball might take away time from doing other things , like going for a jog , if he was honest , he “probably wouldn’t do those sort of things anyhow . ” ( P15 , age 43 ) . One participant did describe getting in trouble at work for playing too much pinball , after he convinced his workplace to install a machine in the lunchroom . However , again this negative effect was qualified , with the participant saying pinball hadn’t really harmed him , as “that’s when I hated my job and didn’t really care . Hiding in the lunchroom and playing games was far more appealing than going upstairs and dealing with people I didn’t like and a workplace I didn’t really enjoy being at . ” ( P1 ) . Another participant notably described the time he spent on pinball as interfering with his relation - ships , saying , “it’shardtoseeyourprioritieskindofchangedsometimeswithhangingoutwiththefamily or hanging out with your partner . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . He went on to provide an example , saying : “If my partner said , “Would you rather play a video game tonight by yourself or have sex ? ” , I’d be like , “Have sex . ” But if she was like , “Hey , I want to have sex tonight , can you stay home ? ” And it was some big tournament or something that I’d been working towards , in pinball I’d be like , “Well , pinball” . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . Other participants also noted that pinball could cause relationship tensions but found that their partners were understanding of its unique influence in their lives . One participant described his experience : “I guess after my diagnosis of ADHD , my wife now sees pinball as a solace thing for me . And she’s quite supportive of me doing these competitions and things . Where if I hadn’t pulled that ADHD card , she would’ve said , “All right . You’re looking for an excuse to go with the boys on a Saturday and blah blah blah . ” But when I’m telling her the guys are all kind of like me , she goes , “Oh , that’s really cool . ” And when I tell her how good I am at it , she goes , “Well , that’s really cool . You should do it and focus on it . ” So , that was pretty cool . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . 3 . 4 RQ4 . How Does Pinball Affect Social Connectedness ? 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others . This collection of themes describes aspects of the friendships participants formedthroughplayingpinball . The ContainedFriendships themedescribestheexperienceofmeeting and forming friendships through playing pinball . The Extended Friendships theme explores how participants’ initial friendships can extend beyond pinball into other aspects of their lives . Ability to Disclose refers to how participants felt pinball gave them an environment in which they could have meaningful conversations . Contained Friendships . “And if those topics are compatible , well then you can see that you’ve got a friendship there . If they’re not well , then you just keep talking about pinball . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) Participants spoke very highly of the opportunities pinball gave them to form friendships . They described pinball as a space uniquely conducive to forming friendships , particularly in the early stages of meeting people . One participant said , “It really takes the pressure off of conversation if you’re standing there playing pinnies , and you’re just talking about the game , and like , “Oh , rough game , ” “Oh , the machine’s playing terrible , ” stuff like that . And it’s kind of a crutch , I guess , for socializing , and when you take that away you’ve got that one less thing that you can lean on to talk about , so yeah , maybe some silences will ensue . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . Participants appreciated having friends who shared a passion and hobby . One participant even said he preferred the company of his pinball friends , saying , “I mean , I feel bad saying this , but I’ve still got my friends from before pinball , but I spend so much more time with my pinball friends and they have become more of my friends than my old friends . I just think because we are sharing something Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 12 Daniel Johnson , et al . that is probably the most thing I’m passionate about” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Another participant said , “I think there’s maybe something about the camaraderie and that we’re in this tiny little niche together . It’s just we are passionate about this same weird little thing together . ” ( P9 , age 39 ) . The experience of a shared hobby was seen as beneficial for connecting with different types of people . Participants knew they would always have something in common with people they met play - ing pinball , even if it ended at pinball . One participant described his experience like this : “Sometimes with these people , you realize pinball is the only thing that you’ve got in common . And outside of that , you’re not really compatible . [ . . . ] I met these people , pinball people , pinballed , had a great time , joined up on Facebook and find out that they’re massive racists . So that’s something I don’t have in common . So , we can only have pinball in common . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Pinball was seen as a common ground from which to explore the potential for further friendship . P7 ( age 45 ) said , “It’s like anything , that you find that common ground . You’ve got pinball in common , and then it’s just a matter of sort of opening it up further and finding out a little bit more about them . If you’ve got more in common , then you will tend to spend more time together and chat a bit more , than those that you don’t have more in common with” . Building on this concept , P13 ( age 34 ) noted , ”Yeah , it’s helped me meet a lot of people that I wouldn’t have normally met . It’s helped me make friends” . Extended Friendships . “I like these people enough that if I lost all of my pinball machines , I would happily have a barbie or whatever . You know ? ” ( P5 , age 46 ) Participants viewed pinball as a way to organically form friendships , despite having difficulties making friends as an adult in other spaces . One participant said , “I count so many of the people in this pinball community , really , really good friends and it’s unusual . I mean , I understand that as you get older , you have a . . . When you’re kids , kids will naturally go out and they will try and , “Oh , here’s my new friend . Oh , he’s my friend . ”” ( P5 , age 46 ) . Participants noted that these kinds of friendships could be especially difficult “for middle - aged men , 40 - to 50 - year - old men” , and that “there’s that social element that’s very positive . ” ( P9 ) . Another participant said , “And I think that is just guys . I mean a lot of guys don’t feel comfortable putting themselves out there . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . Some participants described how the context of pinball afforded conversation that could easily extend into other topics : “Some people you might chat to more , and find out a bit more about how long they’ve been playing , what they do for a living , something like that . And every now and then [ . . . ] you’ll actually have a friendship with , and you’ll identify common interests with them . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . He went on to list several of his own interests that he found he shared with other pinball players by talking to them at tournaments and barcades , noting : “It’s just , yeah , you meet a lot of people and I guess you can kind of flag the ones that share your interests , and it’s easy just to chat about that stuff between games . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . Beyond the initial stages of meeting people and forming social connections , most participants described forming genuine , lasting friendships through pinball . One participant expressed being able to lean on his friends from pinball in times of need , saying “I know that I could probably call any of these guys up anytime and say , “Mate , can we have a chat ? Because I’m struggling” . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . Participants discussed their pinball friends as providing “a support network” ( P7 , age 45 ) . One participant discussed the support he received after telling his pinball friends that he was having marriage difficulties : “I opened up to pinball people about it and everyone is more than willing , no one’s like , “Oh , okay , well you’ll figure it out . ” And stuff like that . People genuinely care about me and my happiness and my relationship and want to help out . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . And many times , conversations starting around pinball extended much more beyond it : “ [ . . . ] but this one guy had a pretty nasty breakup with his wife and took the kids and all that kind of stuff . So , after one competition , we just stuck together for a little while and had a couple of drinks and had a chat about that . ” ( P4 , age 47 ) . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 13 Ability to Disclose . “You’vegottheguysupin [ location ] , thatIknow , likeIsaidinalotofcasesprobablywouldn’t havegiveneachotherthetimeofthedayinapuborwherever , butyetbecauseofpinballwedo . I will go and hang out with these guys and I will go and just drink beer , talk crap , play pinball for a few hours with them at that part of the world . For that I’m thankful . It’s been good . ” ( P1 ) Whileinteractionsbetweenfriendswereprimarilydescribedasrevolvingaroundpinball ( forexam - ple , getting together at someone’s house to play ) , the social interactions were often described as more important than the actual pinball gameplay . One participant described getting together with friends , saying , “We’lljustbecasuallychattingwhilewe’replayingstuffandjustdon’treallycareifwedrainaball orwe’renotpayingattention , wejusttalk . Andeventuallyjustenduptalkingcompletelybecausewe’retoo distracted by whatever conversation we’re having . ” ( P1 ) . Participants described having wide - ranging conversations with pinball friends , covering difficult topics like politics , divorce and grief . Shared conversations about pinball were seen as an easy gateway to other conversations , with one participant saying “Now through talking about your love of pinball , you then will branch out into other topics . Andifthosetopicsarecompatible , wellthenyoucanseethatyou’vegotafriendshipthere . Ifthey’re not well , then you just keep talking about pinball . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Another noted , ”Well , you’re used to leaningonthispinballmachineandkindoftakingitinturns . Itreallytakesthepressureoffofconversation if you’re standing there playing pinnies , and you’re just talking about the game” ( P11 , age 33 ) . One participant spoke poignantly about losing his mother and dealing with depression . He said , “Losing my mum was a game changer because I was extremely close to my mother . . . I still get upset about it . But the fact that I’ve had an outlet of people I can talk to and things like that , that sort of , for me , had a massive , a massive thing for me . It actually yeah , really helped me . ” . He described being able to confide in his friends from pinball , despite knowing that “ . . . when you wear your heart on your sleeve , you put yourself out there to potentially be hurt . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . Another noted that the pinball community offered some unique benefits when talking about the challenges in his marriage : “I mean I’ve got a lot of friends in my life like friends from high school and family friends and stuff like that , but I almost feel a lot more comfortable talking to pinball people because maybe that they know less about my life and they can give me more abstract advice than someone who knows [ my wife ] ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community . This collection of themes covers participants’ descriptions of the broader pinball community . While pinball facilitated close friendships for many participants , they also felt it connected them to a larger community , particularly in recent years as pinball became more popular again , through its Uniquely Welcoming characteristics and Community Care activities , but did note the lack of diversity in what was often characterised as a Boy’s Club . Uniquely Welcoming . “I’ve never felt as comfortable being myself than I have around pinball people . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) Participants were overwhelmingly grateful to feel connected to the pinball community . Expressing this , one participant said , “It’s naturally a social type thing . What I felt was I could go and have a beer and talk shit or whatever and joke around and that’s what . It’s just been a revelation . It’s honestly , I would say , it’s changed my life . ” ( P5 , age 46 ) . Speaking about the process of joining the pinball community , one participant noted “Everybody has all these fears going into these communities , but once they arrive , they actually have this look on their faces where they go , “Oh my God , I’m home . I am amongst my people . ” And that’s probably what I’ve experiencedalot , whichisprobablythemostprofoundthing , ispeoplecominguptomesaying , “Youknow , I’ve loved pinball , but I thought I was the only person . And now I’ve discovered all these people that love it as well . ” And they become happier because they found people that share their passion . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 14 Daniel Johnson , et al . Many participants described the pinball community as kind and welcoming ; for example , saying , “Itfeelsapproachable . Peoplearegenuinelyniceinthecommunity , theywelcomeallnewcomers , especially young people that actually don’t have any ties to pinball” ( P2 , age 46 ) , and noting that , “It’s a healthy community to engage with” ( P11 , age 33 ) . One participant expressed that he appreciated the influence of the community on his personality , saying , “That’s why I like pinball , because they’re so kind and they’re so generous that they make me want to be kind as well . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . Another participant noted that even at tournaments people were kind , saying , “You got good players that are quite serious , they want to win , but they’re just as happy to help you and point out where you might have missed some sort of aspect . ” ( P14 , age 62 ) . Thistypeofinclusiveandkindcommunitywasseenasunusual . Oneparticipantexpresseddisbelief at the type of community he found through pinball , saying : “Because they’re in this pinball community , people are really , really nice . It’s really hard to quantify . I would never have believed it . Some of the people I’m mates with , really close friends with . . . . I don’t have too much in common with them apart from I met themthroughpinball , butwe’vejustbecomegoodmates . It’sjust . . . It’sbullshit . It’strulycrazy . ” ( P5 , age46 ) Boy’s Club . “But it’s really just like white guys , right ? . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) While participants did feel like the pinball community was largely welcoming , they also recognized that these experiences might not be universal . When talking about the community , they used descrip - tions like , “very , very male dominated” ( P2 , age 46 ) , “ [ country ] bloke culture” ( P5 , age 46 ) , and “a boy’s club” ( P9 , age 39 ) . Reflecting on the experience of a female friend , one participant said , “She’s the kind of person who can be in a tournament with 40 other guys and be comfortable , but she seems comfortable . But after talking to her , I realized that she doesn’t feel that comfortable because guys are always like making comments . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . Another participant noted that women might not feel comfortable going into pubs on their own , while most pinball competitions were in pubs . He felt that this was “was not actually so much about the gender , it’s just the calculus of going into a pub on your own . ” ( P14 , age 62 ) . Some participants , particularly business owners , discussed trying to actively make pinball spaces more welcoming for women . One owner of an arcade bar said he and his business partner were able to attract a “50 - 50” mix of men and women , giving the credit to their partners’ involvement : “We still had that fear of if it’s too dark and too dingy , is there a danger that it might inhibit female people from coming ? But because of both of our wives were very vocal on the decor and all the plants , the music , lighting , and it just works perfectly . ” ( P9 , age 39 ) . Another business owner felt that he learned about gender through his interactions : “Through tournament directing and through these situations , I think I’ve become a little bit more , I guess , sensitive and understanding to other groups of people and people that are non - binary . Non - binary was such a foreign concept to me and now I kind of understand it a little bit more . ” ( P13 , age 34 ) . Fromseeingmorewomenbecomeinvolvedinpinball , thisparticipantalsohopedthatpinballwould becomemoreinclusiveof“culturaldiversities” : “Everyone’sprettyacceptingofeveryonebeingdifferent . . . I like to say , different cultural diversities , but it’s really just like white guys , right ? For some reason there aren’tmanyAfrican - Americansintopinball , andtherearen’tmanypeopleofanAsiandescentintopinball . Imean , there’ssomeAsianguysthatarecomingupin [ cityname ] , butit’slike , Idon’tknow , it’sjustsucha whitething . I’mnotsurewhetherit’sbecauseithasbeeninthepast , youknowwhatImean ? ” ( P13 , age34 ) . While participants have commented on aspects of race , gender , disability , and other intersec - tions of marginalization , we have abstained from assessing the validity of these statements ( e . g . , Are specific ethnic groups really less interested in pinball ? Are these observations unique to the experience of participants in our study ? If these groups are indeed less represented , is it a lack of interest in pinball or awareness of the existing lack of diversity which makes the organised group events less appealing ? ) . Demonstrated throughout intersectional scholarship [ 26 , 28 ] , as well as Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 15 excellent scholarship in gaming culture from BIPOC , trans - , disabled , Indigenous , and intersectional perspectives [ 20 , 41 , 42 , 62 , 64 ] , the unique experiences of BIPOC ( Black , Indigenous and People of Colour ) people warrant a study on their own from perspectives beyond how we authors are situated . It is encouraging however , to note participant interest in and awareness of building inclusivity in the pinball playing population among our participants . Community Care . “Let’s call it evangelism , right ? That’s how I would say , probably the closest word . I love it so much that I want other people to love it so much . It’s that simple . ” ( P10 , age 49 ) Overall , participants felt strongly about growing the pinball community . They expressed wanting to share the joy of pinball with others and ensure that pinball wouldn’t die as a hobby . Competitive players were especially interested in recruiting players for tournaments : “Like anything I guess , if you enjoy something , you think other people might enjoy it as well , you often want to bring them into the fold if you can . For us as well , if we can get people interested in the competitive side , that’s good for everybody . ” ( P15 , age 43 ) . Participantswereparticularlypassionateaboutpassingpinballontotheirkidsand “theyoungergen - eration” ( P2 , age 46 ) . One participantnoted , “Thisis predominantlyprobablyanywhere betweena35 / 40 - plus generation of players that play , certainly competitively in the scene . It would be good that if those 18 / 19 - year - oldkids , andevenyoungercomethroughandjustkeepthescenealiveabitaswell . ” ( P7 , age45 ) . As well , participants appreciated the inclusive attitude towards growing the pinball community , noting that anyone was welcome . P2 ( age 46 ) said , “When we get invited to people’s places that have got 20 - 30machinesandthey’vegot40 , 50pluspeoplecomingover , it’salwaysanopeninvitetobringyourkids . If you got kids or a partner or whatever may be , it’s always inclusive . It’s not , you know , “You’ve got a be a hardcore pinball player or fan , ” or whatever to be able to go . And that’s one of the things I like about it too . ” Finally , participants also wanted to pass on pinball knowledge and culture . One participant said , “I love introducing people to pinball as well , my friends and family , they’re probably sick of it by now . I love explaining the game to them , and yeah , just things people don’t know about it , telling them a little bit about the engineering that goes on behind it , the history , and also that it was banned in the States for like 30 years . And , yeah , I think it’s just something that’s a bit under the surface in pop culture but has every right to be at the forefront . ” ( P11 , age 33 ) . 4 DISCUSSION Collectively our findings paint a picture of an activity that has a range of mental health benefits ( see section 3 . 3 . 1 Mental Health ) , as well as highlighting a small number of caveats . Pinball is an activity that was discovered early by all of our participants ( see section 3 . 1 . 1 Growing Up ) , that many then drifted away from only to return later in life ( see section 3 . 1 . 2 Seasons Change ; and 3 . 1 . 3 Playing Now ) . The ability to access privately owned machines , tournaments , and less formal social meet - ups all play a part in their re - discovery of pinball ( see sections 3 . 1 . 3 Playing Now ; and 3 . 1 . 4 Integration with Life ) . Following this re - discovery , many participants found pinball developed into something that permeated their lives more broadly . Our participants spoke of a range of broad benefits to mental health and wellbeing ( see section 3 . 3 . 1 Mental Health ) , but importantly , specifically spoke of the value of pinball ( and the associated community ) when dealing with difficult life events ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Ability to Disclose ) . In terms of community ( see section 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community ) and relatedness ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) , a range of themes emerged . Our participants spoke of friendships that were limited to pinball and pinball - related activities , but also of friendships that extended beyond pinball . The ability to disclose to others in the community emerged as an important aspect of connectedness . The pinball community was described as uniquely welcoming , and participants also spoke of their own interests in building the community . While overall the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 16 Daniel Johnson , et al . picture that emerged was extremely positive , our participants also noted that the hobby was , for some people , quite expensive ( see section 3 . 3 . 2 Financial Impact ) and involved a large time investment ( see section 3 . 3 . 3 Time Spent on Pinball ) . Additionally , a lack of diversity in the community was noted as a key shortcoming that was slowly being redressed ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) . There are several key theories that help explain and situate our findings . 4 . 1 Self Determination Theory Noting the well established evidence that both sport [ 85 ] and videogames [ 76 ] are extremely effective at satisfying self - determination needs , it is not surprising that our findings suggest that pinball is also an activity that can satisfy needs for competency , autonomy and relatedness . In terms of competence our participants spoke about the challenge of play , the joys of competition and the satisfaction that comes with improving and winning tournaments ( see section 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ) . While autonomy was not explicitly mentioned by our participants , it is arguably implied both by the choice to re - engage pinball and spend time on the hobby , as well as by the freedom to buy machines in their later life . More broadly it is also suggested by our participants discussion of pinball being the part of their lives they ’can control’ ( see section 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ) . The evidence of pinball’s ability to satisfy needs for relatedness , however , was explicit and extensive . The different types of relationships our participants mentioned ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) as well as their engagement with , and maintenance of , a thriving community ( see section 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community ) speaks to an activity that provides a strong sense of relatedness . The ability of pinball to satisfy these needs confirms ( and provides insight into the mechanisms behind ) pinball’s likely positive impacts on wellbeing . In addition to competence , autonomy and relatedness , recent research has explored the potential of beneficence as an additional psychological need essential to psychological wellness [ 57 , 58 ] . While there is still debate about whether beneficence should be considered an additional psychological need or a “wellness enhancer” , there is agreement that beneficence ( or having a positive impact on the lives of others ) is an additional mechanism through which people can improve their own wellbeing [ 58 ] . In the responses of our participants , there is clear evidence of them engaging in beneficent acts ( e . g . , organising tournaments , inviting others into their homes ; ( see sections 3 . 1 . 4 Integration with Life ; and 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ) . Beneficence is thus another likely process through which pinball is positively influencing player wellbeing . 4 . 2 Sociability and Social Capital There were various levels of ‘friendship’ described in our findings ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) —some that were deep and intimate , and some that were more superficial , revolving around the activity of pinball itself . These more superficial interactions can be viewed as a form of sociability , described by the sociologist Georg Simmel [ 78 ] , and recently used to characterize the value of some online environments such as massively - multiplayer role - playing games ( MMORPGs ) [ 33 ] , social virtual spaces [ 19 ] , and online game lounges [ 59 ] . Simmel describes sociability as “association for its own sake” without the burdens that often accompany interactions in society . Seen as a rather formalized and rule - governed interaction , deeper , personal , and more contentious aspects of human relationships ( e . g . , politics , religion , divorce ) are intentionally set aside so that the interaction is satisfactory for all involved . However , sociable interactions should not necessarily be viewed as ‘less than’ , but as serving a purpose in supporting connection and a sense of belonging . For some men , pinball spaces ( e . g . , barcades ) may serve as a conduit for ‘sociability’ , enacted in a physical context with contained friendships , or even ephemeral social connections . Related to the differing orientations of social interaction , is the concept of social capital . The Social Capital Framework [ 70 ] centres on the idea that social networks have value . Thus , social capital is the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 17 collectivevalueofone’ssocialnetworks , whichreturnvalueintheformofsocialsupport , information sharing , shared identity and reciprocity , ultimately benefiting wellbeing . Two kinds of relationships are described in the framework : bridging ties exist between individuals from diverse backgrounds and while more distal in nature they broaden one’s social horizon , bonding ties are stronger and closer relationshipsthatprovidemoreemotionalandsocialsupport . Ingeneral , bridgingrelationshipscanbe thought of as providing breadth while bonding relationships provide greater depth . The social capital framework has been used rather extensively to characterise interactions in online gaming contexts ( e . g . , [ 30 , 67 , 86 , 90 ] ) , with both types of capital providing value to the community members . Our participants clearly described experiencing both kinds of relationship through pinball—in some cases talking about people with whom they really only shared an interest in pinball and who differed from them in key ways ( bridging ; ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Contained Friendships ) and in other cases talking about people whom they had become close with , sharing intimate details and providing reciprocal emotional support ( bonding ; ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) - Extended Friendships ) . Overall , it is likely that pinball is generating valuable social capital for the participants in our study ; however , specific research on the nature and value of this social capital needs to be undertaken . 4 . 3 Activity - based Communication As these lighter - weight social interactions , such as sociability and social bridging capital , have a place in satisfying our social needs , there are additional mechanisms through which these types of interactions can occur . In Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) literature , the ‘work of working together’ is called articulation work ( e . g . , [ 68 , 84 ] . This concept of building relationships through working together has also been seen in playful contexts : Rogerson et al . [ 73 ] discuss how articulation work in board gaming ( referred to as distributed cognition ) to cooperatively accomplish play may have an important social function . The ‘chores’ of playing ( e . g . , keeping score , moving tokens ) , which could be automated , do contribute to the sociability of collective play . Although in pinball , there may be less articulation work in turn - taking or accomplishing play than in board game contexts , our participants clearly discussed the benefits of event organization ( see section 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ) , and how the work of working together on community care activities facilitated their sense of community ( see section 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community ) . Beyond the conversational aspects of articulation work in pinball community care , participants also discussed conversations that took place about pinball itself—such as about the game , different machines , machine maintenance , and tournaments ( see sections 3 . 1 . 3 Playing Now ; and 3 . 4 . 1 Re - lating to Others ) . Further , the act of playing together can be seen as a mechanism that reinforces social closeness . In their study of gaming lounges , McEwan et al . [ 59 ] discuss how the game moves themselves can represent ‘conversational turns’ , acting as a proxy for communication . Similarly , in a study on building trust in distributed teams through social online gaming , Depping et al . [ 31 ] noted that social interactions about gameplay are not merely impoverished versions of rich bonds formed through personal information exchange , but rather engender genuine social bonds . Brown and Bell [ 19 ] describe this as “performing a friendship” in their study of virtual worlds . They argue that acting together around objects ( called “social action” ) builds up a shared history of collective experiences , not unlike the articulation work described in CSCW or the distributed cognition of boardgamers . This type of social interaction around the game itself has been distinguished from social interaction mediated by the game [ 82 ] ( similarly , in the context of MMORPGs , Ducheneaut et al . [ 34 ] differentiate between “instrumental” and “social” activities in game ) . Stenros and Waern [ 83 ] argue that gameplay can be ‘paratelic’—not a means to an end , but an end in itself . In this sense , playing together can be seen as the catalyst that facilitates conversation , but equally can be seen as the social activity itself—as a social action that holds inherent value . Our participants reflected both of these views ; the act of playing pinball together was sometimes described as the social action —the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 18 Daniel Johnson , et al . paratelic experience that was the authentic goal and that , similar to [ 31 ] , engendered genuine social bonds ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Contained Friendships & Extended Friendships ) . Pinball was also described as an instrumental activity—a vehicle that catalyzed conversations about and beyond pinball , leading to self - disclosure ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Ability to Disclose ) . 4 . 4 Shoulder - to - Shoulder Activities and Self - Disclosure Within the field of men’s mental health , it is generally accepted that “shoulder - to - shoulder” ap - proaches are the most effective . The term was originally used to refer to forms of solidarity where people stand together to face issues , but within men’s health has come to refer to the notion that men are likely to experience greater wellbeing benefits from undertaking instrumental tasks with one another , in contrast to any more direct , face - to - face approaches ( such as counselling ) [ 66 , 72 ] . More broadly , the idea is that men are more likely to feel comfortable discussing “difficult” issues if they are concurrently undertaking a task or activity [ 66 , 72 ] . This notion is clearly supported in our results , wherein participants spoke about playing pinball while discussing and disclosing issues ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Ability to Disclose ) they were experiencing that were unrelated to pinball ( e . g . , divorce , health concerns ) . It seems likely that pinball is providing a common focus from which men can feel comfortable easing into more challenging or personal topics . Consideration of pinball as a shoulder - to - shoulder activity leads into the notion of self - disclosure itself . Self - disclosure has been shown to be a key element of friendship [ 38 ] . According to social - penetration theory , when people first meet they generally disclose relatively superficial information , but if reciprocated , the disclosures will increase in intimacy [ 14 ] , leading to increased liking of one another [ 80 ] . Oncefriendshipsarebuilt , self - disclosureremainskeyfortheirmaintenance [ 38 ] andfor generating mutual trust [ 89 ] . Self - disclosure is noted as being both an implicit and explicit friendship maintenance strategy—that is , people knowingly use self - disclosure to maintain friendships , but also self - disclosure that occurs more intuitively ( through providing support , or discussing concerns ) is also a key part of friendship maintenance [ 38 , 74 ] . Further , self - disclosure may happen traditionally through conversations [ 32 ] , but also has been observed occurring through asynchronous texting ( e . g . , [ 69 ] , social media posting ( e . g . , [ 91 ] , and even media exchange ( e . g . , [ 61 ] ) . Through this lens , our findings that pinball provided a space in which participants could disclose information to one another identifies another mechanism through which connectedness and wellbeing benefit . 4 . 5 Sense of Community , Common Ground , and Third Places Considering all these theoretical connections collectively , there is a sense that pinball can create a unique community for players to inhabit . Significant research has investigated what defines a sense of community among its members , with consensus noting that it includes feelings of membership , feelings of influence , integration and fulfillment of needs , and shared emotional connection [ 60 ] . Our findings support the notion that there is a sense of community among pinball enthusiasts ( see section 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community ) , with a uniquely welcoming community that has opportunities for evange - lism and organization , fulfilling needs of competence and relatedness ( see section 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ; and 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) , and allowing members to share emotional connections through interactions both about and beyond pinball ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) . Members of a community generally share ‘common ground’—defined by Clark [ 23 ] as “mutual knowledge , mutual beliefs , mutual assumptions and other mutual attitudes” ( pg . 6 ) . Community common ground is reinforced through mutual membership in a collective identity , and the strength of a relationship between two people can be largely attributed to the magnitude and type of common ground between them [ 24 ] . Our participants clearly discussed the community membership that pinball afforded , often using the words “common ground” to describe the nature of pinball friends . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 19 People maintain relationships by establishing or reaffirming common ground ; in terms of mecha - nisms by which common ground can be built , Clark [ 23 ] suggests that joint conversational or shared perceptual experiences are the most prevalent ways of forming common ground . Our participants noted talking about both pinball and external topics ( joint conversation , ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ) , while the experience of playing pinball itself is a shared perceptual experience ( e . g . , the experience of the lights and sounds of the environment , ( see section 3 . 2 . 1 Flashing Lights ) . Beyond the overall sense of community , and the common ground that pinball affords , our findings also suggest that pinball may provide its community members with a ‘third place’ [ 65 ] . Oldenberg coined the term to refer to social surroundings that exist beyond home ( the first place ) and work ( the second place ) [ 65 ] . More specifically he defines third spaces as “a generic designation for a great variety of public places that host the regular , voluntary , informal , and happily anticipated gatherings of individuals beyond the realms of home and work” . Oldenberg ( and others ) have argued that such spaces are key to the health of communities [ 45 , 48 , 65 ] . Commonly identified third places include barber shops , bars , coffee shops and libraries , but the concept has also been applied to Massively Multiplayer Online ( MMO ) videogames and other virtual spaces [ 34 , 65 , 81 ] . While space precludes an in - depth analysis of the extent to which pinball meets all the elements of a third place , it seems clear that our participants experienced pinball ( particularly barcades and tournaments ) as offering an appealing space to inhabit that existed outside home and work ( see sections 3 . 1 . 3 Playing Now ; and 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ) . Perhaps more to the point , pinball is clearly creating the sense of community and communication ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others ; and 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community ) that Oldenberg identified as key benefits of third places [ 48 , 65 ] . 4 . 6 Implications We consider the implications of our work across multiple domains . First , in terms of men’s mental health , it seems clear that pinball provides a range of incidental as well as explicit mental health and wellbeing benefits ( see sections 3 . 3 . 1 Mental Health ; 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Extended Friendships and Ability to Disclose ; and 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community - Community Care ) . This highlights the value of pinball for men that may not have existing connections with other communities ( e . g . , sports ) . While pinball can clearly play a valuable role for men experiencing hardships ( as described by our partici - pants , seesections3 . 3 . 1MentalHealth ; and3 . 4 . 1RelatingtoOthers - AbilitytoDisclose ) , weemphasise that hardship should not be seen as a pre - requisite for men to benefit from playing pinball and being part of the pinball community . Indeed , modern conceptions of wellbeing stress that it is more than the absence of dysfunction and , in fact , extends to positive health [ 46 ] . Our findings suggest pinball is well positioned to help men experience positive health , for example by building social capital and mental resilience that will help them flourish ( see sections 3 . 3 . 1 Mental Health ; 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Contained Friendships , Extended Friendships , and Ability to Disclose ; and 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community - Community Care ) , which , in turn , places them in a strong position for future challenges as they arise . In terms of design implications , we see potential opportunities for pinball designers to further leverage the benefits and positive experiences that pinball provides . As is often the case , the in - dustry is already exploring the possibilities in this space . For example , two of the largest pinball manufacturers have recently launched functionality that connects pinball machines ( and players ) online , allowing players to see each other’s scores in real time , offer challenges , and track each others in - game achievements [ 11 , 13 ] . These developments acknowledge and attempt to further enhance the social connectivity that pinball provides for players ( see section 3 . 2 . 2 Competition , Competence and Control ; and 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - all subthemes ) . The other opportunity we see for the industry is further diversifying the player base ( see section 3 . 4 . 2 Pinball Community - Boys Club ) . Again , it is clear that industry leaders are aware of this and working on this issue , for example , with a focus on tournaments for those who don’t identify as men . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 20 Daniel Johnson , et al . Our findings also highlight the potential for pinball as a space for mental health and wellbeing interventions . It is recommended that mental health interventions for men , rather than being talk - based , should focus on building strengths ( as opposed to reducing deficiencies ) , and be informal and action - based [ 35 , 37 ] . Perhaps of most relevance for this paper , we argue that such interventions should be embedded within subcultures men already inhabit , as this reduces the burden men may experience in help seeking [ 71 ] . Pinball offers unique opportunities in this space in terms of being a space men already inhabit and involving a ‘shoulder - to - shoulder’ activity that requires turn - taking , which organically creates regular gaps for conversation ( see section 3 . 4 . 1 Relating to Others - Ability to Disclose ) . The potential for pinball as a space for improving men’s mental health and wellbeing is emphasised by our findings around men’s willingness to discuss such traditionally stigmatised or taboo topics [ 27 ] while playing pinball . We further propose that organisations focused on men’s mental health could usefully explore the potential in and around pinball . 4 . 7 Limitations and Future Work The limitations of our work primarily relate to our sample . While our decision to focus on male pinball players was deliberate , the exclusion of participants of other genders in some ways limits the interpretation of our findings . Future research exploring the experience of players who identify as other genders will provide additional context ; for example , how other genders experience the male - dominated space and how the desire to further diversify the community might best be realised . Relatedly , our participant sample is largely middle - aged . While this is reasonably representative of the pinball playing population , it would again be informative to hear from younger players . There is a stated desire to attract younger players to the hobby [ 8 ] ( and indeed , in 2017 the world championship was won by a then 13 year old , Escher Lefkoff [ 3 ] ) . The experience of younger players may again be quite different from that described in our study , and future research could also usefully explore the experience of this group . In the same vein , while our participants made remarks regarding cultural and ethnic diversity , we did not collect any data regarding the ethnic / cultural backgrounds of our participants . Future research could usefully consider this context as well as deliberately seeking input from a broader range of participants . Additionally , our recruitment methods naturally led us to a sample of relatively passionate and entrenched members of the pinball community . This facilitated our exploration of their experiences with pinball over time , but precluded insight into the experience of more casual players who might be newer to the scene . It would again be useful for future research to expand to this group . One final possibility , in terms of future research that build on our findings , is exploring the role that pinball might play in deliberate attempts to improve wellbeing . We note that a great deal of promise has been shown for videogames in this way [ 21 , 25 , 54 , 79 ] . 5 CONCLUSIONS Our work proposes pinball as a context that may provide incidental benefits to men’s wellbeing through a shared playful leisure activity in a subculture that appeals . Beyond the incidental and explicit wellbeing benefits that pinball provides , our work identifies the pinball community as a potential opportunity for those working in the men’s mental health space . Finding ways to encour - age men facing mental health concerns to confront stigma , by seeking help and accessing social supports , may help avoid more severe consequences . We present a thematic analysis of in - depth semi - structured interviews with pinball enthusiasts who identify as men , describing themes that illustrate : 1 ) How people play ; 2 ) Why people play ; 3 ) How pinball affects wellbeing ; and 4 ) How pinball affects social connectedness . Our findings evidence that pinball is a very social hobby , with friendships that develop both within and beyond the hobby itself . Participants described the inci - dental benefits of engaging with pinball , through stress relief and escapism , but also discussed how the pinball community supports relating to others . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 21 We explore how participants’ statements express a sense of community that they obtain through their hobby , and how pinball barcades and tournaments can be viewed as third spaces in which they can gather with like - minded others . We describe how activity - based communication around play itself , and ‘social action’ of performing a friendship together through play can be viewed as a form of sociability that offers value , and that playing pinball together and organizing events may build social capital . Finally , we explore how pinball is a shoulder - to - shoulder activity that offers an instrumental task around which men can discuss topics that extend beyond the game , as a form of activity - scaffolded social - support seeking . We hope that the ideas we present—grounded in the words of the participants themselves—may prompt researchers and designers to think differently about how the physical environment and structured play format of pinball can be designed to best support the already - present shoulder - to - shoulder activity - based communication among players , as captured by P4 ( age 47 ) : “Some people have a footie team or a cricket team that’s their guy support network . And I think for us , it’s the pinball . ” . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank our participants for their generosity in sharing their time and insights with us . REFERENCES [ 1 ] 2014 . Inside the Wild Comeback of Pinball . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / edition . cnn . com / 2014 / 06 / 09 / living / pinball - popularity - comeback - wired / index . html [ 2 ] 2017 . Resurgent Pinball Attracts Wizards of all Ages . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . cbsnews . com / news / resurgent - pinball - attracts - wizards - of - all - ages - today / [ 3 ] 2022 . 13 - year - old is new pinball world champion . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / sports . yahoo . com / 13 - year - old - new - pinball - world - champion - 201554864 . html [ 4 ] 2022 . Australian Government Department of Health : About Men’s Sheds . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . health . gov . au / initiatives - and - programs / mens - sheds / about - mens - sheds [ 5 ] 2022 . AustralianInstituteofHealthandWelfare : SuicideandSelf - HarmMonitoring . RetrievedFebruary , 23 , 2022fromhttps : / / www . aihw . gov . au / suicide - self - harm - monitoring / data / deaths - by - suicide - in - australia / suicide - deaths - over - time [ 6 ] 2022 . Black Dog Institute : Facts and Figures about Mental Health . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . blackdoginstitute . org . au / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 04 / 1 - facts _ figures . pdf [ 7 ] 2022 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention : About Mental Health . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . cdc . gov / mentalhealth / learn / index . htm [ 8 ] 2022 . Competitive Pinball Is A Thing . Just Ask The World’s Best Players . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / andyfrye / 2018 / 10 / 17 / competitive - pinball - is - now - a - thing - just - ask - the - worlds - best - players / ? sh % 3D6f4c7a7f2545 & sa = D & source = docs & ust = 1645668328988345 & usg = AOvVaw2nza2qdd8cTUvBT1Fso _ 6j [ 9 ] 2022 . Men’s Health Forum , UK . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . menshealthforum . org . uk / key - data - mental - health [ 10 ] 2022 . National Institutes of Mental Health : Suicide Statistics . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . nimh . nih . gov / health / statistics / suicide [ 11 ] 2022 . Scorbit . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / scorbit . io [ 12 ] 2022 . Statistics Canada : Suicide Rates : An Overview . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www150 . statcan . gc . ca / n1 / pub / 82 - 624 - x / 2012001 / article / 11696 - eng . htm [ 13 ] 2022 . Stern Pinball . Insider Connected . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / insider . sternpinball . com / insider [ 14 ] I Altman and A Dalmas . 1973 . Social penetration : the development of interpersonal relationships ( 2 ed . ) . Holt , Rinehart and Winston , New York . [ 15 ] David Anstiss , Darrin Hodgetts , and Ottilie Stolte . 2018 . Men’s re - placement : Social practices in a Men’s Shed . Health and Place 51 , April ( 2018 ) , 217 – 223 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . healthplace . 2018 . 04 . 009 [ 16 ] Philip J . Batterham and Alison L . Calear . 2017 . Preferences for Internet - Based Mental Health Interventions in an Adult Online Sample : Findings From an Online Community Survey . JMIR Ment Health 2017 ; 4 ( 2 ) : e26 https : / / mental . jmir . org / 2017 / 2 / e26 4 , 2 ( 6 2017 ) , e7722 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / MENTAL . 7722 [ 17 ] Sara Bernard . 2016 . Flipping Off the Gender Gap in Seattle’s Pinball Scene . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . seattleweekly . com / news / flipping - off - the - gender - gap - in - seattles - pinball - scene / [ 18 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 22 Daniel Johnson , et al . [ 19 ] B . Brown and M Bell . 2006 . Play and Sociability in There : Some Lessons from Online Games for Collaborative Virtual Environments . In Avatars at Work and Play , R . Schroeder and A . S . Axelsson ( Eds . ) . Springer - Verlag , Berlin / Heidelberg , 227 – 245 . [ 20 ] Emeline Brulé and Katta Spiel . 2019 . Negotiating Gender and Disability Identities in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 218 – 227 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328369 [ 21 ] Michelle Colder Carras , Antonius J . Van Rooij , Donna Spruijt - Metz , Joseph Kvedar , Mark D . Griffiths , Yorghos Carabas , and Alain Labrique . 2018 . Commercial video games as therapy : A new research agenda to unlock the potential of a global pastime . Frontiers in Psychiatry 8 , JAN ( 1 2018 ) , 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / FPSYT . 2017 . 00300 / BIBTEX [ 22 ] VanessaWanSzeCheng , TraceyDavenport , DanielJohnson , KellieVella , JoMitchell , andIanB . Hickie . 2020 . Naturalistic evaluation of a sport - themed mental health and wellbeing app aimed at men ( MindMax ) , that incorporates applied video games and gamification . Internet Interventions 20 ( 4 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . invent . 2020 . 100306 [ 23 ] Herbert H Clark . 1992 . Arenas of language use . University of Chicago Press . [ 24 ] Herbert H Clark . 1996 . Using language . Cambridge University Press . [ 25 ] Michelle Colder Carras , Anna Kalbarczyk , Kurrie Wells , Jaime Banks , Rachel Kowert , Colleen Gillespie , and Carl Latkin . 2018 . Connection , meaning , and distraction : A qualitative study of video game play and mental health recovery in veterans treated for mental and / or behavioral health problems . Social Science & Medicine 216 ( 11 2018 ) , 124 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2018 . 08 . 044 [ 26 ] Patricia Hill Collins . 2019 . Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory . Duke University Press , Durham . [ 27 ] Patrick W . Corrigan and Amy C . Watson . 2007 . The stigma of psychiatric disorders and the gender , ethnicity , and education of the perceiver . Community Mental Health Journal 43 , 5 ( 10 2007 ) , 439 – 458 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S10597 - 007 - 9084 - 9 / TABLES / 2 [ 28 ] Kimberle Crenshaw . 1991 . Mapping the Margins : Intersectionality , Identity Politics , and Violence against Women of Color . Stanford Law Review 43 , 6 ( 7 1991 ) , 1241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1229039 [ 29 ] John W Creswell and J David Creswell . 2017 . Research design : Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches . Sage publications . [ 30 ] Ansgar E . Depping , Colby Johanson , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2018 . Designing for friendship : Modeling prop - erties of play , in - game social capital , and psychological well - being . In CHI PLAY 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play . Association for Computing Machinery , Inc , 5 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242671 . 3242702 [ 31 ] Ansgar E . Depping , Regan L . Mandryk , Colby Johanson , Jason T . Bowey , and Shelby C . Thomson . 2016 . Trust Me . In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 116 – 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2967934 . 2968097 [ 32 ] Valerian J Derlega , Barbara A Winstead , and Kathryn Greene . 2008 . Self - disclosure and starting a close relationship . In Handbook of relationship initiation . Psychology Press , Derlega , Valerian J . : Department of Psychology , Old Dominion University , Norfolk , VA , US , 23529 - 0267 , vderlega @ odu . edu , 153 – 174 . [ 33 ] Nicolas Ducheneaut and Robert J . Moore . 2004 . The social side of gaming : a study of interaction patterns in a massively multiplayer online game . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’04 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 360 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1031607 . 1031667 [ 34 ] Nicolas Ducheneaut , Robert J Moore , and Eric Nickell . 2007 . Virtual ’third places’ : A case study of sociabil - ity in massively multiplayer games * . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 16 , 1 - 2 ( 2007 ) , 129 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 007 - 9041 - 8 [ 35 ] Louise A . Ellis , Philippa Collin , Tracey A . Davenport , Patrick J . Hurley , Jane M . Burns , and Ian B . Hickie . 2012 . Young men , mental health , and technology : Implications for service design and delivery in the digital age . Journal of Medical Internet Research 14 , 6 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 2291 [ 36 ] Louise A . Ellis , Philippa Collin , Patrick J . Hurley , Tracey A . Davenport , Jane M . Burns , and Ian B . Hickie . 2013 . Young men’s attitudes and behaviour in relation to mental health and technology : Implications for the development of online mental health services . BMC Psychiatry 13 , 1 ( 4 2013 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 244X - 13 - 119 / TABLES / 3 [ 37 ] Louise A Ellis , Philippa Collin , Patrick J Hurley , Tracey A Davenport , Jane M Burns , and Ian B Hickie . 2013 . Young men’s attitudes and behaviour in relation to mental health and technology : implications for the development of online mental health services . BMC Psychiatry 13 , 1 ( 12 2013 ) , 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 244X - 13 - 119 [ 38 ] B . Fehr . 2012 . Friendship . In Encyclopedia of Human Behavior . Elsevier , 205 – 213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 375000 - 6 . 00174 - 9 [ 39 ] Jessica Formosa , Daniel Johnson , Selen Türkay , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2022 . Need satisfaction , passion and wellbeing effects of videogame play prior to and during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Computers in Human Behavior 131 ( 6 2022 ) , 107232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2022 . 107232 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 23 [ 40 ] Bettina Friedrich and Oliver John Mason . 2018 . Qualitative evaluation of a football intervention for people with mental health problems in the north east of London . Mental Health and Physical Activity 15 ( 10 2018 ) , 132 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mhpa . 2018 . 10 . 002 [ 41 ] Kishonna L . Gray . 2018 . Gaming out online : Black lesbian identity development and community building in Xbox Live . Journal of Lesbian Studies 22 , 3 ( 7 2018 ) , 282 – 296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10894160 . 2018 . 1384293 [ 42 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design . ProceedingsoftheACMonHuman - ComputerInteraction 3 , CSCW ( 112019 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 43 ] Steven C . Hayes , Kirk D . Strosahl , Kara Bunting , Michael Twohig , and Kelly G . Wilson . 2004 . What Is Acceptance and Commitment Therapy ? In A Practical Guide to Acceptance and Commitment Therapy . Springer , Boston , MA , 3 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 23369 - 7 { _ } 1 [ 44 ] Ella Horton and Daniel Johnson . 2016 . Finding and Building Connections : Moving Beyond Skill - Based Matchmaking in Videogames . In 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI 2016 ) . 1 – 3 . [ 45 ] Kirralie Houghton , Marcus Foth , and Evonne Miller . 2013 . The continuing relevance of the library as a third place for users and non - users of IT : the case of Canada Bay . The Australian Library Journal 62 , 1 ( 2 2013 ) , 27 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00049670 . 2013 . 771764 [ 46 ] Felicia A . Huppert , Nick Baylis , and Barry Keverne ( Eds . ) . 2005 . The Science of Well - Being . Oxford University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780198567523 . 001 . 0001 [ 47 ] Ioanna Iacovides and Elisa D Mekler . 2019 . The Role of Gaming During Difficult Life Experiences . ( 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300453 [ 48 ] Leo W . Jeffres , Cheryl C . Bracken , Guowei Jian , and Mary F . Casey . 2009 . The impact of third places on community quality of life . Applied Research in Quality of Life 4 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 333 – 345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11482 - 009 - 9084 - 8 [ 49 ] Daniel Johnson , Victoria Gore - Jones , Frances Dark , Stephen D . Parker , Sharon Foley , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2021 . VideogamePlayandWellbeingAmongaFirstEpisodePsychosisPopulation . ProceedingsoftheACMonHuman - Computer Interaction 5 , CHIPLAY ( 10 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474708 [ 50 ] Rachel Kowert and Julian a . Oldmeadow . 2013 . ( A ) Social reputation : Exploring the relationship between on - line video game involvement and social competence . Computers in Human Behavior 29 , 4 ( 7 2013 ) , 1872 – 1878 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2013 . 03 . 003 [ 51 ] Anil Kumar and HR Phookun . 2016 . Barriers in the treatment of psychiatric disorders . Open Journal of Psychiatry & Allied Sciences 7 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 99 – 102 . [ 52 ] Claire Loewen . 2016 . Ball Bustin’ Bitches Create Opportunity for Women in Male - Dominated Pinball Community . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / thelinknewspaper . ca / article / ball - bustin - bitches - create - opportunity - for - women - in - male - dominated - pinball [ 53 ] Corey S . Mackenzie , Kerstin Roger , Steve Robertson , John L . Oliffe , Mary Anne Nurmi , and James Urquhart . 2017 . Counter and Complicit Masculine Discourse Among Men’s Shed Members . American Journal of Men’s Health 11 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 1224 – 1236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1557988316685618 [ 54 ] Regan L . Mandryk , Max V . Birk , Sarah Vedress , Katelyn Wiley , Elizabeth Reid , Phaedra Berger , and Julian Frommel . 2021 . Remote Assessment of Depression Using Digital Biomarkers From Cognitive Tasks . Frontiers in Psychology 12 ( 12 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 767507 [ 55 ] Regan L . Mandryk , Julian Frommel , Ashley Armstrong , and Daniel Johnson . 2020 . How Passion for Playing World of Warcraft Predicts In - Game Social Capital , Loneliness , and Wellbeing . Frontiers in Psychology 11 , September ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 02165 [ 56 ] Herbert W . Marsh , Felicia A . Huppert , James N . Donald , Marcus S . Horwood , and Baljinder K . Sahdra . 2019 . The Well - Being Profile ( WB - Pro ) : Creating a Theoretically Based Multidimensional Measure of Well - Being to Advance Theory , Research , Policy , and Practice . Psychological Assessment 32 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 294 – 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / pas0000787 [ 57 ] Frank Martela and Richard M . Ryan . 2016 . The Benefits of Benevolence : Basic Psychological Needs , Beneficence , and the Enhancement of Well - Being . Journal of Personality 84 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 750 – 764 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jopy . 12215 [ 58 ] Frank Martela and Richard M Ryan . 2019 . Distinguishing between basic psychological needs and basic wellness enhancers : the case of beneficence as a candidate psychological need . Motivation and Emotion 0123456789 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11031 - 019 - 09800 - x [ 59 ] Gregor McEwan , Carl Gutwin , Regan L Mandryk , and Lennart Nacke . 2012 . “I’m Just Here to Play Games” : Social Dynamics and Sociality in an Online Game Site . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 549 – 558 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145289 [ 60 ] David W . McMillan and David M . Chavis . 1986 . Sense of community : A definition and theory . Journal of Community Psychology 14 , 1 ( 1 1986 ) , 6 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1520 - 6629 ( 198601 ) 14 : 1 < 6 : : AID - JCOP2290140103 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - I [ 61 ] Matthew K . Miller and Regan L . Mandryk . 2021 . Meeting with Media : Comparing Synchronous Media Sharing and Icebreaker Questions in Initial Interactions via Video Chat . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . 251 : 24 Daniel Johnson , et al . 5 , CSCW2 ( 10 2021 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479518 [ 62 ] Souvik Mukherjee . 2018 . Playing Subaltern . Games and Culture 13 , 5 ( 7 2018 ) , 504 – 520 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555412015627258 [ 63 ] John A Naslund , Kelly A Aschbrenner , Ricardo Araya , Lisa A Marsch , Jürgen Unützer , Vikram Patel , and Stephen J Bartels . 2017 . Digital technology for treating and preventing mental disorders in low - income and middle - income countries : a narrative review of the literature . The Lancet Psychiatry 4 , 6 ( 2017 ) , 486 – 500 . [ 64 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela D . R . Smith , Alexandra To , and Kentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376392 [ 65 ] R Oldenburg . 1989 . The Great Good Place : Cafes , Coffee Shops , Bookstores , Bars , Hairsalons and Other Hangouts at the Heart of Community . Marlowe and Company , New York . [ 66 ] Sarah Patrick and Steve Robertson . 2016 . Mental health and wellbeing : Focus on men’s health . British Journal of Nursing 25 , 21 ( 2016 ) , 1163 – 1169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12968 / bjon . 2016 . 25 . 21 . 1163 [ 67 ] Ryan Perry , Anders Drachen , Allison Kearney , Simone Kriglstein , Lennart E . Nacke , Rafet Sifa , Guenter Wallner , and DanielJohnson . 2018 . Online - onlyfriends , real - lifefriendsorstrangers ? Differentialassociationswithpassionandsocial capital in video game play . Computers in Human Behavior 79 ( 2018 ) , 202 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2017 . 10 . 032 [ 68 ] David Pinelle , Carl Gutwin , and Saul Greenberg . 2003 . Task analysis for groupware usability evaluation . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 10 , 4 ( 12 2003 ) , 281 – 311 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 966930 . 966932 [ 69 ] Lukasz Piwek and Adam Joinson . 2016 . “What do they snapchat about ? ” Patterns of use in time - limited instant messaging service . Computers in Human Behavior 54 ( 1 2016 ) , 358 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 08 . 026 [ 70 ] Robert D Putnam . 2000 . Bowling alone : The collapse and revival of American community . Simon and schuster . [ 71 ] Simon M . Rice , Rosemary Purcell , and Patrick D . McGorry . 2018 . Adolescent and Young Adult Male Mental Health : Transforming System Failures Into Proactive Models of Engagement . Journal of Adolescent Health 62 , 3 ( 3 2018 ) , S9 – S17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . JADOHEALTH . 2017 . 07 . 024 [ 72 ] Steve Robertson , Brendan Gough , Esmée Hanna , Gary Raine , Mark Robinson , Amanda Seims , and Alan White . 2018 . Successful mental health promotion with men : The evidence from ’tacit knowledge’ . Health Promotion International 33 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 334 – 344 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / heapro / daw067 [ 73 ] MelissaJ . Rogerson , MartinR . Gibbs , andWallySmith . 2018 . CooperatingtoCompete . In Proceedingsofthe2018CHICon - ferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173767 [ 74 ] Lawrence B . Rosenfeld and W . Leslie Kendrick . 1984 . Choosing to be open : An empirical investigation of subjective reasons for self - disclosing . Western Journal of Speech Communication 48 , 4 ( 12 1984 ) , 326 – 343 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10570318409374168 [ 75 ] Adam Ruben . 2017 . Women find sexism in male - dominated pinball—so they’ve started leagues of their own . Retrieved February , 23 , 2022 from https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / lifestyle / women - find - sexism - in - male - dominated - pinball - - so - theyve - started - leagues - of - their - own / 2017 / 10 / 27 / 1ef2c5be - b4f9 - 11e7 - be94 - fabb0f1e9ffb _ story . html [ 76 ] R Ryan , S Rigby , and A Przybylski . 2006 . The motivational pull of video games : a self - determination theory approach . Motivation and Emotion 30 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 347 – 363 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11031 - 006 - 9051 - 8 [ 77 ] Martin E P Seligman , Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi , M E P Seligman , and M Csikszentmihalyi . 2014 . Positive Psychology : An Introduction . In Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology : The Collected Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi . Vol . 9789401790888 . Springer , Dordrecht , 279 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 017 - 9088 - 8 { _ } 18 [ 78 ] Georg Simmel and Everett C Hughes . 1949 . The Sociology of Sociability . Amer . J . Sociology 55 , 3 ( 2 1949 ) , 254 – 261 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2771136 [ 79 ] Velvet Spors and Imo Kaufman . 2021 . Respawn , Reload , Relate . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CHI PLAY ( 10 2021 ) , 1 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474690 [ 80 ] Susan Sprecher , Stanislav Treger , Joshua D . Wondra , Nicole Hilaire , and Kevin Wallpe . 2013 . Taking turns : Reciprocal self - disclosure promotes liking in initial interactions . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 , 5 ( 9 2013 ) , 860 – 866 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2013 . 03 . 017 [ 81 ] Constance A . Steinkuehler and Dmitri Williams . 2006 . Where everybody knows your ( screen ) name : Online games as “third places” . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 11 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 885 – 909 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2006 . 00300 . x [ 82 ] Jaakko Stenros , Janne Paavilainen , and Frans Mäyrä . 2009 . The many faces of sociability and social play in games . In Proceedings of the 13th International MindTrek Conference : Everyday Life in the Ubiquitous Era on - MindTrek ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1621841 . 1621857 [ 83 ] JStenrosandAWaern . 2011 . GamesasActivity : CorrectingtheDigitalFallacy . In VideogamesStudies : Concepts , Cultures , and Communication . BRILL , 11 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1163 / 9781848880597 { _ } 003 [ 84 ] Anselm Strauss . 1988 . The Articulation of Project Work : An Organizational Process . The Sociological Quarterly 29 , 2 ( 6 1988 ) , 163 – 178 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1533 - 8525 . 1988 . tb01249 . x Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 . Shoulder - to - Shoulder : How Pinball Supports Men’s Wellbeing 251 : 25 [ 85 ] Pedro J Teixeira , Eliana V Carraça , David Markland , Marlene N Silva , and Richard M Ryan . 2012 . Exercise , physical activity , and self - determination theory : A systematic review . International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 9 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1479 - 5868 - 9 - 78 [ 86 ] Sabine Trepte , Leonard Reinecke , and Keno Juechems . 2012 . The social side of gaming : How playing online computer games creates online and offline social support . Computers in Human Behavior 28 , 3 ( 5 2012 ) , 832 – 839 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2011 . 12 . 003 [ 87 ] K Vella , D Johnson , V W S Cheng , T Davenport , J Mitchell , M Klarkowski , and C Phillips . 2017 . A sense of belonging : Pokemon GO and social connectedness . Vol . IN PRESS . 1 – 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555412017719973 [ 88 ] Andrea Waling and Dave Fildes . 2017 . ‘don’t fix what ain’t broke’ : Evaluating the effectiveness of a men’s shed in inner - regionalAustralia . HealthandSocialCareintheCommunity 25 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 758 – 768 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / hsc . 12365 [ 89 ] Linda R . Weber and Allison Carter . 1998 . On constructing trust : temporality , self - disclosure , and perspective - taking . International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 18 , 1 ( 2 1998 ) , 7 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 01443339810788290 [ 90 ] D . Williams , Nicolas Ducheneaut , N . Yee , and Eric Nickell . 2006 . From Tree House to Barracks : The Social Life of Guilds in World of Warcraft . Games and Culture 1 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 338 – 361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555412006292616 [ 91 ] Patricia Williams , Trey Stohlman , and Heather Polinsky . 2017 . Me , My “Selfie” and I : A Survey of Self - disclosure Motivations on Social Media . IAFOR Journal of Cultural Studies 2 , 2 ( 10 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22492 / ijcs . 2 . 2 . 05 [ 92 ] Carla Willig and Wendy Stainton Rogers . 2017 . The SAGE handbook of qualitative research in psychology . Sage . [ 93 ] Y . Joel Wong , Moon Ho Ringo Ho , Shu Yi Wang , and I . S . Keino Miller . 2017 . Meta - analyses of the relationship between conformity to masculine norms and mental health - related outcomes . Journal of Counseling Psychology 64 , 1 ( 1 2017 ) , 80 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / COU0000176 [ 94 ] World Health Organization . 2006 . Official records of the World Health Organization ( Vol . 2 ) . Technical Report . Geneva , Switzerland . https : / / apps . who . int / iris / bitstream / handle / 10665 / 85573 / Official _ record2 _ eng . pdf [ 95 ] Sally Wyke , Christopher Bunn , Eivind Andersen , Marlene N . Silva , Femke van Nassau , Paula McSkimming , Spyros Kolovos , Jason M . R . Gill , Cindy M . Gray , Kate Hunt , Annie S . Anderson , Judith Bosmans , Judith G . M . Jelsma , Sharon Kean , Nicolas Lemyre , David W . Loudon , Lisa Macaulay , Douglas J . Maxwell , Alex McConnachie , Nanette Mutrie , Maria Nijhuis - van der Sanden , Hugo V . Pereira , Matthew Philpott , Glyn C . Roberts , John Rooksby , Øystein B . Røynesdal , Naveed Sattar , Marit Sørensen , Pedro J . Teixeira , Shaun Treweek , Theo van Achterberg , Irene van de Glind , Willem van Mechelen , and Hidde P . van der Ploeg . 2019 . The effect of a programme to improve men’s sedentary time and physical activity : The European Fans in Training ( EuroFIT ) randomised controlled trial . PLOS Medicine 16 , 2 ( 2 2019 ) , e1002736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 1002736 Received February 2022 ; revised June 2022 ; accepted July 2022 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 251 . Publication date : October 2022 .