The embryo as a laboratory : quantifying transcription in Drosophila Thomas Gregor 1 , 2 , Hernan G . Garcia 1 , and Shawn C . Little 3 1 Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 085444 , USA 2 Lewis - Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA 3 Department of Molecular Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA Transcriptional regulation of gene expression is funda - mental to most cellular processes , including determina - tion of cellular fates . Quantitative studies of transcription in cultured cells have led to signiﬁcant advances in iden - tifying mechanisms underlying transcriptional control . Recent progress allowed implementation of these same quantitative methods in multicellular organisms to ask how transcriptional regulation unfolds both in vivo and at the single molecule level in the context of embryonic development . Here we review some of these advances in early Drosophila development , which bring the embryo on par with its single celled counterparts . In particular , we discuss progress in methods to measure mRNA and protein distributions in ﬁxed and living embryos , and we highlight some initial applications that lead to funda - mental new insights about molecular transcription pro - cesses . We end with an outlook on how to further exploit the unique advantages that come with investigating transcriptional control in the multicellular context of development . Transcription in the early embryo All biological systems require the appropriately timed expression of gene products in amounts sufﬁcient to carry out cellular activities [ 1 ] . Nowhere is this maxim better illustrated than in the patterning of the early Drosophila embryo . In this system , maternally supplied patterning cues direct the establishment of distinct gene expression ( see Glossary ) programs with exquisite precision and re - producibility . During the ﬁrst 3 hours following egg fertili - zation , cells receive patterning inputs in the form of transcription factors whose nuclear concentration differs by less than 10 % between cells at a given position along the anterior – posterior axis . This leads to the establishment of spatial identities along the long axis of the egg that are reproducible from embryo to embryo to within less than the linear dimension of a single cell , that is , less than 1 % egg length [ 2 – 8 ] . These features of early ﬂy embryogenesis have provided researchers with unprecedented opportu - nities for assessing general properties of transcriptional regulation of gene expression ( Box 1 ) . Many central concepts of metazoan transcription , such as enhancer modularity , the combinatorial activities of transcription factors ( both cooperative and competitive in nature ) , long - range inter - actions of enhancers with promoters , and the phenomenon of polymerase pausing , have emerged from over three decades of research in Drosophila embryos [ 9 – 11 ] . These studies have led to ﬁrst generation quantitative measure - ments exploring the interplay between maternal signals and zygotically expressed patterning factors that generate diverse gene expression patterns [ 12 , 13 ] . Gene expression patterns , cell fate determination , and morphogenesis events unfold in a characteristic and Review Glossary Antibody staining : technique to label proteins in fixed tissue with fluorescently tagged antibodies . Enhancers : regulatory DNA regions that control the expression of nearby genes . Expression noise : stochastic fluctuations in mRNA or protein expression levels ; typically reported as a coefficient of variation , that is , the ratio between standard deviation and mean expression level . Extrinsic noise : gene - independent fluctuations in gene expression levels , attributed to environmental fluctuations such as the number of available Pol II molecules per nucleus . Gap genes : class of genes that orchestrate anterior – posterior patterning in the early Drosophila embryo ( Box 1 ) ; typical expression pattern has two to three broad domains during nuclear cycle 14 . Gene expression : act of generating gene products , such as mRNA and protein ; often stands for the amount of mRNA or protein present in a particular cell . Gene regulatory network : gene products that can regulate the activity of other genes ; genes are nodes , and interactions between genes are links of the network . Intrinsic noise : gene - intrinsic fluctuations in gene expression levels , attributed to the stochastic nature of the biochemical processes in transcription such as Pol II binding to the DNA . Maternal gradients : protein concentration gradients in the embryo that are set up by the female during oogenesis . MS2 system : RNA stem loops that are bound by complementary coat proteins . Oogenesis : process of egg formation in the female ( lasts 2 – 3 days in Drosophila melanogaster ) . Pair - rule genes : class of genes that orchestrate anterior – posterior patterning in the early Drosophila embryo ( Box 1 ) ; typical expression pattern is seven stripes during mid - nuclear cycle 14 . Polymerase ( Pol ) II : molecular complex that binds promoters on the DNA and transcribes DNA into mRNA . Segmentation : process of generating body segments . smFISH : single molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization is an mRNA labeling technique that uses fluorescently tagged complementary DNA probes that bind mRNA molecules in fixed tissue . These DNA probes can be bound to a fluorophore for direct detection or to a molecule that is then detected using antibodies . Syncytium : cell with many nuclei that are not separated by cell membranes . Transcription factors : proteins that bind to promoters and enhancers to control gene expression . Zygotic genes : genes whose expression occurs in the embryo ( i . e . , the zygote ) , not during oogenesis in the female . 0168 - 9525 / (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tig . 2014 . 06 . 002 Corresponding author : Gregor , T . ( tg2 @ princeton . edu ) . Keywords : gene regulatory networks ; embryogenesis ; quantitative biology ; single molecule FISH ; live imaging . 364 Trends in Genetics , August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 extremely reproducible manner across all wild type em - bryos . The process of development , or the ‘experiment’ , takes place without the intervention of the experimenter . By merely observing the underlying molecular processes , the experimenter can discern how embryo - wide patterns of gene expression emerge from discrete molecular events , such as the association and dissociation of transcription factors with promoter and enhancer elements of individual gene loci effectively using the embryo as a laboratory . Subsequently , it becomes straightforward to construct mathematical models from these observations , and there - after test their predictions using genetic methods to alter transcription factor activity and transgenesis to test the effects of modiﬁed DNA regulatory elements . These approaches are greatly aided by several advan - tages of early embryos . First , developmental reproducibili - ty under a given set of environmental conditions is well documented at both the molecular and morphologic levels [ 14 , 15 ] . Spatially , extremely low variability in gene expres - sion between embryos results in the unique speciﬁcation of the fates of individual rows of cells along the anterior – posterior axis [ 2 , 3 ] . Temporally , observations of the forma - tion of morphological features [ 16 ] indicate that morpho - genetic events occur with differences between embryos of no more than 1 to 2 minutes [ 3 ] . Because early patterning events are driven by maternally supplied factors , this reproducibility suggests that every individual instance of the experiment , that is , each embryo , possesses very simi - lar starting conditions . For example , mRNA and protein amounts of the maternally supplied transcription factor Bicoid ( Bcd ) are highly reproducible between embryos [ 2 , 17 ] . Thus , available evidence suggests that embryos themselves represent nearly identical iterations of the same set of processes ( Figure 1A , B ) . Second , the newly fertilized embryo undergoes 13 rounds of rapid mitosis without cytokinesis , resulting in a hexagonal 2D array of syncytial nuclei , nearly all of which are found just beneath the egg cortex inhabiting a shared cytoplasm . The positioning of the nuclear layer facilitates imaging by minimizing specimen thickness in a geometrically simple arrangement . The shared cyto - plasm simpliﬁes internuclear communication and mini - mizes variability between nuclei in the numbers of vital molecules such as RNA polymerases or transcription fac - tors ( Figure 1C ) . Therefore , the extent of so - called ‘extrin - sic’ or environment - driven variability that is typically observed in bacterial cultures [ 18 , 19 ] is greatly reduced , unmasking ‘intrinsic’ or process - speciﬁc events that deter - mine the magnitude and variability of expression dynam - ics . Third , this array of approximately 6000 nuclei is syn - chronized by the mitotic cycle , all of which simultaneously undertake gene expression decisions ( Figure 1D ) . Each nucleus acts as an independent unit responding to the natural gradients of patterning activity , wherein the posi - tion of a nucleus in the embryo correlates with the amount ( or concentration ) of input activity that the nucleus observes . Thus , transcriptional responses can be observed simultaneously across a physiologically relevant range of signaling input levels . This minimizes potential challenges encountered in cultured cells to ensure synchronization , and in which probing the effects of different input condi - tions requires multiple experiments ( Figure 1E ) . Thus , the design features of early embryos present unique advan - tages over cells prepared in culture . Despite these advantages of the developing Drosophila embryo , it has proven challenging to assess transcriptional events with the quantitative rigor achieved in organisms grown in laboratory culture . For cultured organisms , re - cently developed technologies allow the visualization of absolute numbers of biomolecules in living cells on a cell by cell basis [ 20 , 21 ] . The measurement of gene expression in Box 1 . Segmentation by transcription During the first 3 hours of its development , the 500 - m m long Drosophila embryo transitions from a single cell to a differentiated multicellular structure with a single layer of approximately 6000 regularly arranged cells just below its surface . These cells express differential combinations and amounts of gene products specifying cell types , thus laying out a spatial blueprint for the structures in the future adult organism . This blueprint originates during the construction of the egg , when localiza - tion processes place symmetry - breaking gene products at the poles along the axes of the egg . The signaling cascades that initiate patterning are triggered upon fertilization at time zero , establishing maternal activity gradients that spread along the anterior – posterior axis . One such maternal factor is Bicoid , a transcription factor required to determine anterior fates . Maternal gradients are established during the first 1 – 2 hours following fertilization , when nuclei undergo 13 rounds of mitotic division without cytokinesis . The absence of membranes between nuclei permits the free diffusion of molecules within the embryonic syncytium . Bicoid and other maternal factors activate the zygotic patterning genes in specific spatial domains , generating the aforementioned blueprint . The extended 14th interphase takes place during the 3rd hour of development , when zygotic gene products accumulate to high levels and membranes are deposited between nuclei forming individual cells . The patterning genes compose a hierarchical transcription network with three layers ( Figure I ) : maternal genes , such as Bicoid ( green ) ; gap genes , whose expression domains demarcate large territories spanning many cell diameters ( Hunchback , red ) ; and pair - rule genes that form an iterative pattern of seven stripes ( Even - skipped , blue ) , presaging the formation of the larval body segments . Three maternal anterior – posterior patterning systems reg - ulate the expression of > 12 gap genes whose combined activity regulates seven pair - rule genes . These genes encode a network of transcription factors , the interactions of which determine the positions of gene expression boundaries . Anterior Posterior 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 0 0 . 5 1 Anterior – posterior axis posi(cid:2)on ( % ) C o n c e n t r a (cid:2) o n ( a r b . un i t s ) Bicoid Hunchback Even - skipped TRENDS in Genetics Figure I . Hierarchy of patterning genes in the early Drosophila embryo . The maternal factor Bicoid activates hunchback and various other gap genes in broad domains , which all work together to regulate the activity of pair - rule genes such as even - skipped . Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 365 absolute units has generated exciting new insights into the regulatory mechanisms that produce mRNA and protein molecules [ 22 , 23 ] , and enabled the formulation and testing of thermodynamic and stochastic quantitative models of gene expression [ 24 – 28 ] . Among the more striking ﬁndings has been that , at least for cells grown in culture , gene expression is exceedingly variable : genetically identical cells almost always possess large differences in their abso - lute mRNA and protein content [ 29 – 33 ] , in stark contrast to observations from ﬂy embryos [ 2 , 3 , 34 ] . Many questions thus arise regarding how embryos achieve precise gene expression . In particular , are the observations from cul - tured cells relevant to understanding patterning in a multicellular organism ? Or , do embryos employ specialized mechanisms to ensure precision ? We currently have a very limited grasp of how the magnitude of gene expression , that is , the rate of transcription of target genes , is con - trolled by maternal patterning inputs and / or interactions between zygotic gene products at a given position in the embryo . Moreover , we possess limited understanding re - garding the underlying mechanisms that result in highly variable stochastic gene expression [ 35 ] . In general , to resolve any of these problems – be it in single cells or in whole embryos – we need to know how discrete transcrip - tion factor binding events at speciﬁc DNA elements lead to the control of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) activity . Recent advances now endow the study of Drosophila embryos with the same quantitative rigor achieved in studies of cultured cells . Combined with an array of genetic and molecular tools , ﬂy embryos are set to lead to profound new molecular insights regarding transcriptional regula - tion . Here , we highlight some of the advantages of exam - ining gene expression in Drosophila and brieﬂy review some recent examples of quantitative studies in the early embryo , with particular emphasis on the patterning along the anterior – posterior axis . Our goal is to transmit the current excitement for investigating metazoan transcrip - tion with new quantitative approaches , bringing real opportunities for novel mechanistic insights into the fun - damental processes governing transcription across phyla . Quantitative methods to measure transcription in the embryo Studies of ﬂy patterning over the past few decades have revealed how maternally supplied patterning gradients subdivide the anterior – posterior axis of the early embryo into broad territories of zygotic gene expression [ 36 ] , and how these events are necessary to generate the familiar iterated pattern of segmented gene expression stripes observed during the 3rd hour following fertilization [ 37 ] ( Box 1 ) . We now possess an essentially complete list of the critical maternal inputs , the vital zygotically expressed factors that ensure correct spatial modulation of transcrip - tion , and we know how zygotic gene products regulate each other’s expression [ 12 , 38 ] . Yet many questions remain unaddressed . Broadly speaking , we would like to relate the discrete transcription factor binding events at promo - ters and enhancers to the dynamics of Pol II activity , how these dynamics give rise to mRNA and protein expression rates and variability , and how the resulting gene products interact at DNA elements and reﬁne transcriptional be - havior to ultimately give rise to the precise placement of gene expression boundaries . Advancing our understanding of complex systems such as the fruit ﬂy segmentation network requires direct quan - titative access to the spatiotemporal evolution of network components . Ideally , we would like to measure at all times Cells in culture Cells in an embryo Limited synchrony Synchrony Need for an inducible circuit Space varying gradients ( A ) S y s t e m p r e p a r a (cid:2) o n ( D ) C e ll c y c l e s y n c h r o n y ( C ) C e ll – c e ll c o mm un i c a (cid:2) o n ( B ) V a r i a b ili t y i n e x p r e ss i o n ( E ) M o du l a (cid:2) o n o f i npu t c o n c e n t r a (cid:2) o n s Highly reproducible expression levels Highly reproducible boundary posi(cid:2)ons Highly variable TRENDS in Genetics Figure 1 . Cells in different contexts : culture versus embryo . ( A ) Cells in culture require careful preparation to assure reproducibility across experiments . Female flies naturally prepare embryos in a high - throughput and reproducible manner . ( B ) Culturing allows examination of gene regulatory network behavior across a range of conditions in a synthetic environment . As such , it is not a priori evident which part of observed cell to cell variability ( which can range between 50 % and 500 % ) is due to sample preparation versus inherent fluctuations in the system . Studies of embryos reveal the degree of natural variability in gene expression that is tolerated by an intact system . As a system , the embryo is designed to generate a specific gene expression pattern within tight temporal and spatial constraints . This tight control results in levels of gene expression that can be reproducible within 10 % and boundary positions with a 1 % egg length reproducibility . ( C ) The absence of membranes between nuclei in the early embryo allows for the mixing of regulatory factors by diffusion . ( D ) Synchrony of the cell cycle is hardwired in the early fly developmental program . ( E ) Titrating input concentrations of transcription factors in cell culture requires the implementation of synthetic inducible circuits in multiple experiments . By contrast , transcription factor gradients in the early embryo span the natural range of patterning dynamics required for proper development . Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 366 and all locations in the embryo the production rates of any mRNA and protein of interest ( Figure 2A ) . For each mo - lecular species , two complementary methods exist : one based on snapshots of ﬁxed embryos , the other based on live imaging . In the ﬁrst method , proteins or mRNA mole - cules are labeled in chemically ﬁxed embryos to provide a very accurate snapshot of the intact system . Although it requires halting the developmental process , this approach has the advantage that it can be readily applied to any genetic background as long as labeling reagents are avail - able . The second method allows the direct observation of dynamics by labeling with genetically encoded ﬂuorescent reporters . In these cases , embryos can be observed in real time as development unfolds . However , much care must be taken to determine whether such labeling alters the char - acteristics of the molecules in question and of the develop - mental process in general , which might be perturbed by the addition of synthetic reporters . Here , we outline applica - tions of both ﬁxed and live measurement techniques of proteins and mRNA molecules ( Figure 2B ) . Relative protein level measurements in ﬁxed tissue Immunohistochemistry has been used historically to dis - cern protein localization and relative levels of expression [ 39 ] . Many regulatory relationships between early expressed genes have been inferred by antibody labeling of zygotically expressed transcription factors and subse - quent testing by use of mutants [ 40 – 42 ] . Such studies have found that activating cues are provided by maternal inputs [ 43 – 47 ] and that the majority of zygotically expressed transcription factors inhibit transcription , mutually repressing each other , thus establishing expression bound - aries that deﬁne broad pattern territories [ 48 – 51 ] . More recently , much effort has been put towards assembling a full - time course of spatial protein expression proﬁles by preparing embryos at varying ages and carefully quantify - ing expression levels [ 3 , 52 , 53 ] . These methods rely on a strong ability to estimate embryo ages from ﬁxed tissue , which can be done with varying accuracy . Before the 14th interphase , the mitotic cycles allow staging of embryos with an accuracy of 2 to 4 minutes [ 54 , 55 ] . During the 3rd hour of development , when most of the gene expression dynamics of the segmentation network occurs , membranes are deposited from the surface and invaginate , thus divid - ing the nuclei in the syncytium and giving rise to individual cells . The timing of membrane deposition provides a timer that correlates precisely with age and allows for staging accuracy of 1 to 2 minutes [ 3 , 16 ] . However , analysis of ﬁxed tissue data can only indirectly assess dynamics , and abso - lute protein levels are accessible only in combination with biochemistry on bulk samples and are thus associated with excessive measurement error . Overall , relative protein concentration measurements have led to insights into pattern formation , but direct access to gene expression rates has been limited . Live protein concentration measurements with ﬂuorescent fusion proteins The advent of green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) and the creation of ﬂuorescent protein fusions have granted us direct access to transcription factor dynamics using live microscopy . The technique has worked exceedingly well for examining many aspects of gene expression dynamics in the ﬂy . For example , in early embryos , ﬂuorescent tags to maternally provided gene products have revealed the dy - namics of mitotic divisions through fusions to histones [ 56 ] , intricate cell mechanics during gastrulation [ 57 ] , and cell membrane formation through protein traps [ 58 ] . Dynam - ics of the maternal transcription factors Bcd and Dorsal have led to several important quantitative insights re - garding their activities [ 2 , 59 – 63 ] . For Bcd in particular , it is notable that the gradient of nuclear localization is very similar between nuclear cycles despite the geometric increase in nuclear number [ 60 ] . Indeed , various func - tional protein fusions to Bcd have allowed the measure - ments of absolute protein concentrations , production rates , diffusion constants , and degradation times [ 2 , 64 – 67 ] , all of which are attuned to the requirements of the system . In combination with the antibody - based observations mentioned above , these studies have deter - mined that Bcd and its downstream targets exhibit very similar degrees of precision [ 2 , 3 ] . These ﬁndings have led to a model in which tightly controlled transcriptional inputs are processed by a highly reliable , precise set of processes to result in the correct degree of gene expres - sion precision with low variability ( see the section ‘From transcription to patterns’ ) . But also beyond the early embryo , during larval devel - opment , fusions of ﬂuorescent proteins to the secreted factors Decapentaplegic ( Dpp ) and Wingless ( Wg ) have allowed the estimation of biophysical parameters that give Cytoplasmic mRNA Fluorescent oligos Primaryan(cid:2)body Protein Secondaryan(cid:2)bodies Fluorescentdye Matura(cid:2)on (cid:2)me GFP GFP Protein mRNA F i x e d (cid:2) ss u e L i v e e m b r y o s MCP - GFP MS2 loop NascentmRNA Promoter RNA polymerase Finished messengerRNA Protein Nucleus Cytoplasm ( A ) ( B ) NascentmRNA TRENDS in Genetics Figure 2 . Visualizing the central dogma in the embryo . ( A ) Developmental decisions can be assessed at multiple stages of the central dogma : from nascent mRNA transcript formation ( and thus the number of active RNA polymerases loaded on the promoter ) to cytoplasmic mRNA and protein distributions . ( B ) Methods to measure mRNA and protein distributions during development in fixed and living embryos ( see text ) . Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 367 rise to the observed gradients in the wing imaginal disc , the larval precursor of the adult wing [ 68 ] . These studies have demonstrated , for example , the scaling of the Dpp gradient with tissue size [ 69 ] , although for both Dpp and Wg , many questions remain regarding the mechanism ( s ) underlying gradient formation [ 70 ] . Indeed , for Wg , a gradient arising from extracellular protein transport is dispensable [ 71 ] . Dpp and Wg dynamics using ﬂuorescent protein fusions will no doubt prove invaluable to addres - sing how the graded distributions of these factors contrib - ute to patterning and growth . Whereas the study of maternally supplied molecular activities has beneﬁtted greatly from ﬂuorescent fusions , the study of early zygotic gene expression using ﬂuorescent tags remains challenging . Ideally , one would like to ob - serve the interactions of transcription factors with DNA , requiring single molecule measurements that are just becoming possible in single cells [ 72 ] . Signiﬁcant techno - logical improvements will be necessary to increase the sensitivity of these imaging techniques for use in embryos . Another challenge is the fact that the dynamics of gene expression occur at time scales comparable to the time required for newly synthesized reporter proteins to mature and acquire ﬂuorescence [ 73 ] . The time lag between ﬂuo - rescent protein translation and the moment when it actu - ally becomes ﬂuorescent complicates the interpretation of dynamic observations , as revealed by differences between live and ﬁxed measurements [ 3 , 8 , 67 , 74 , 75 ] . Moreover , an engineered fusion protein should ideally possess wild type functionality when expressed at or near the levels of the endogenous protein , a requirement that is not always easy to assess . For many of these requirements new advances at the level of the chemistry of ﬂuorescent protein engineer - ing will be necessary , and it will take another round of interdisciplinary interactions to solve the challenge of a new generation of ﬂuorescent proteins . Fixed tissue mRNA counting Because patterns emerge from the modulation of transcrip - tion in space and time , full understanding of the segmen - tation network can only be achieved through examining transcriptional activity directly . Historically , the use of in situ hybridization has been instrumental in determining the spatial positions of gene expression domains [ 76 , 77 ] and in the analysis of artiﬁcial reporter constructs in which critical DNA elements are altered or missing [ 78 – 81 ] . Such studies have determined , for example , how striped pat - terns of pair - rule genes emerge from combinatorial regu - lation by transcription factors [ 82 ] and the combined activity of multiple enhancer elements [ 83 ] . Overall , such studies have revealed many qualitative insights about the spatial modulation of gene expression levels , but these have been limited in part by nonlinearities introduced by the prevalent use of enzymatic ampliﬁcation to label mRNA molecules . Recent advances have enabled the visualization of in - dividual transcripts through the use of nucleic acid probes complementary to a gene of interest , termed single mole - cule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) . These probes are either covalently linked to a ﬂuorophore [ 34 ] or contain an epitope that is subsequently recognized by labeling with ﬂuorescently tagged antibody [ 5 , 84 ] . The resulting signal - to - noise ratio is substantially higher than observed for previous approaches that rely on enzymatic reactions to produce either ﬂuorescence or solid precipi - tate . Such high contrast allows for the resolution of indi - vidual mRNA molecules , which has now been demonstrated in a variety of contexts [ 33 , 85 – 88 ] . This method permits simultaneous visualization of transcript levels of multiple genes . Studies employing FISH have shown that the transcripts of several early expressed genes accumulate at very similar rates with high precision in the syncytial embryo ( discussed below [ 34 ] ) , whereas at late times , following the formation of cells in the embryo , transcript content can vary substantially between cells [ 5 ] . In many cases , studies employing FISH focus on mea - suring cytoplasmic mRNA distributions in order to infer the microscopic mechanisms behind transcriptional regu - lation [ 5 , 84 ] . Cytoplasmic RNA counts necessarily result from many processes : the production of mRNAs in the nucleus , the processing of pre - mRNAs to produce mature transcripts , export to the cytoplasm , and transcript degra - dation . Thus , mRNA counts do not provide the most direct access to the processes that direct Pol II holoenzyme assembly and entry into productive elongation . Neverthe - less , FISH allows assessment of the process of transcrip - tional initiation through the careful examination of ﬂuorescence intensities at sites of nascent transcript for - mation inside nuclei [ 89 , 90 ] . Such foci have traditionally been used to determine whether a given nucleus is engaged in transcription [ 89 , 91 – 93 ] . However , these foci can pro - vide additional information : their ﬂuorescence intensities are a measure of the amount of nascent mRNA , and therefore an estimate of the number of bound Pol II com - plexes , present at a transcription site at the moment of embryo ﬁxation [ 34 ] . Thus , it becomes possible to use ﬂuorescent intensities to gauge either relative transcrip - tional activity [ 94 ] , or to determine activity in absolute units by normalizing transcription site intensities to the mean intensity of labeled cytoplasmic transcripts [ 34 ] . Live mRNA measurements and polymerase counting Although the single molecule precision of smFISH can provide indirect insights about the temporal evolution of transcriptional decisions , the observations of transcript production in real time is now commonplace in the context of single cells [ 95 – 98 ] . Such dynamic measurements are achieved with the use of an mRNA tagging system in which a reporter transgene is tagged with multiple repeats of a stem loop sequence recognized by a cognate binding pro - tein fused to GFP . One example is the MS2 bacteriophage stem loop and the MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) tagged with GFP [ 99 , 100 ] . This system has been implemented to study maternal mRNA transport in ﬂy oocytes [ 101 ] and has recently been applied to the study of transcription [ 102 , 103 ] . In this context , the MCP – GFP fusion is provided maternally , so that all GFP molecules are ﬂuorescent before fertilization . As a result , once Pol II transcribes the stem loops , the nascent mRNA becomes ﬂuorescently tagged . Thus , unlike the dynamics of ﬂuorescent reporters of zygotic gene activity , mRNA dynamics can be accessed on time scales that are limited only by the diffusion and Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 368 binding of MCP – GFP to its target mRNA . In embryos , the detection threshold of this method is around a few hundred ﬂuorescent proteins [ 2 , 102 ] , unlike in cultured cells where single molecule detection is commonplace [ 104 ] . However , live ﬂuorescence signals in embryos can be converted to absolute units of transcribing Pol II molecules and num - bers of produced mRNA molecules by calibrating MS2 signals and smFISH measurements [ 102 ] , thereby produc - ing dynamic descriptions of gene expression in absolute terms . From transcription to patterns The tools described in the previous section allow for the quantitative study of transcriptional regulation in a mul - ticellular organism and its role in the formation of patterns and subsequent speciﬁcation of biological structures . Al - ready , these tools have provided key insights into develop - mental decision making that challenge the picture of transcriptional regulation stemming from classic studies performed in cell culture . Transcription noise versus developmental precision The inherent variability in transcription processes is a widely appreciated phenomenon . In particular , a multi - tude of experiments performed in single cells have shown that variability in transcriptional output – calculated as the ratio of the standard deviation over the mean number of mRNAs of a given gene per cell – can be as high as 500 % [ 33 , 86 , 105 ] , leading to a view that transcription is not precisely controlled . If transcriptional activity is inherent - ly variable , how then are precise developmental outcomes achieved ? Recent work has found that the instantaneous transcriptional activity in the early ﬂy embryo can vary up to 50 % , despite the fact that the resulting cytoplasmic mRNA and protein distributions vary by less than 10 % [ 34 ] . In the ﬂy embryo , this high transcriptional variability is buffered by the syncytial cytoplasm : in the absence of membranes , variable mRNA production in an individual nucleus is averaged both in space and time between neigh - bors . Compared with the mRNAs of cultured cells , the lifetime of which may be on the order of hours [ 106 ] , transcripts of the early embryo are relatively short lived , especially during the highly dynamic 14th interphase [ 76 , 107 ] . However , before this time point the mRNA life - time is sufﬁciently long ( on the order of an hour ) to permit rapid accumulation [ 28 ] . By sharing long - lived transcripts , the embryo reduces the variability in the cytoplasmic distribution of both mRNA and protein molecules [ 34 ] ( Figure 3A ) . Straightforward spatial averaging thus reduces the requirement for more complicated feedback mechanisms that are usually proposed to ensure precision . As spatial averaging tends to smoothen patterns , addition - al regulatory interactions may be required to ensure ‘sharp’ borders [ 93 , 108 ] . Furthermore , spatial averaging can only occur in the absence of membranes , thus begging the question of how transcriptional variability is buffered during later developmental stages . To reveal the mecha - nisms of variability buffering in later stages , staining and imaging protocols will have to be adapted to access the more complex 3D structures that form after embryo gas - trulation . It is tempting to speculate that the precision in Sites of nascent mRNA forma(cid:2)on ( 50 % variability ) Cytoplasmic mixing of mRNA ( 10 % variability ) k on r RNAP mRNA k oﬀ Two - state transcrip(cid:2)on model Two modes of ac(cid:2)vator readout Molecular noise vs developmental precision A c (cid:2) v a (cid:2) o n DNA looping DNA accessibility Ac(cid:2)vatorbinding site Ac(cid:2)vator Promoter ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) OFF state ON state Possible switching mechanisms A c (cid:2) v a t o r c o n c e n t r a (cid:2) o n Posi(cid:2)on along the embryo axis Ac(cid:2)velocus Inac(cid:2)velocus Binary decision Analogdecision Rate of ini(cid:2)a(cid:2)on of ac(cid:2)ve loci TRENDS in Genetics Figure 3 . Signatures for the transcriptional basis of pattern formation in the fly embryo . ( A ) The variability in the instantaneous amount of mRNA being produced at sites of nascent transcript formation is as high as 50 % . However , the mRNA molecules produced in different nuclei are averaged in the common cytoplasm of the syncytium , effectively reducing variability in the distribution of cytoplasmic mRNA molecules to 10 % . ( B ) The variability in mRNA production observed in nuclei in ( A ) suggests a mechanism of transcription where the promoter switches between an ON and an OFF state . The molecular nature of this mechanism could be associated with enhancer – promoter looping or transient changes in chromatin accessibility , for example . ( C ) Live mRNA production monitoring reveals that patterns are formed by two serial steps of transcriptional regulation in single cells . First , a locus of a given gene makes a random binary decision whether to turn ON or not , with the local concentration of activator biasing this decision . Loci that are OFF will remain so for the whole interphase . By contrast , loci that turn ON will produce mRNA at a rate that is modulated by the local concentration of activator in an analog manner . It is the combination of these two regulatory strategies that leads to macroscopic patterns of expression throughout the embryo . Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 369 mRNA counts at later times would be aided by rapid transcript production : compared with cultured cells where transcripts may be produced at only one mRNA per hour [ 109 ] , ﬂy embryos engage in extremely rapid transcription with up to approximately ﬁve mRNAs per minute [ 28 ] . If mRNAs are relatively stable and allowed to accumulate , high production rates reduce ﬂuctuations in potentially variable processes , such as Pol II binding and progression , by integrating production over time , thus allowing each cell in a given collection a greater chance of achieving the mean level of gene expression and minimizing variability . Variability in transcription and the two - state model Over the past few years , the use of variability ( or ‘noise’ ) in gene expression as a lens through which to view the in vivo molecular mechanisms of transcription has gained atten - tion [ 27 , 110 ] . As discussed in Box 2 , the simplest model of transcription states that the distribution of Pol II mole - cules on a given gene will be given by Poisson statistics , with variance equal to the mean . However , experiments performed both in single celled and multicellular organ - isms have yielded values for the variance that are usually several times higher than the mean , arguing against a simple model of gene expression and suggesting the pres - ence of additional rate - limiting step ( s ) . One simple mechanism to invoke this increased vari - ance is that of a promoter that can switch between an ON and an OFF state ( Box 2 ) . This model predicts that mRNA molecules are produced in ‘bursts’ , increasing the variabil - ity in the mRNA output , which is consistent with observa - tions made for single cell organisms [ 96 ] . In this model , repressor molecules can switch the promoter to the OFF state , and the action of activators increases the probability of ﬁnding the promoter in the ON state . Further , a satu - rating concentration of activator effectively ﬁxes the pro - moter in the ON state . This reverts expression to the simple case of a promoter producing mRNA at a constant rate with Poissonian ﬂuctuations . This simple prediction has been tested and falsiﬁed in the context of the early embryo : even at saturating con - centrations of activating factor ( s ) , where gene expression output is maximal , the observed variance of several early expressed genes is more than two times higher than the mean [ 34 ] . This argues for the presence of further ‘switch - ing’ steps , even for fully activated genes that both limit the maximum achievable magnitude of gene expression and constrain the degree of attainable precision . The molecular identity of these mechanisms is unclear , but it could be related to nucleosome remodeling , changes in chromatin state , Pol II promoter proximal pausing , or stochastic processes of enhancer – promoter looping [ 111 – 114 ] ( Figure 3B ) . Recent theoretical work demonstrates that some molecular mechanisms can reduce variability instead of increasing it [ 23 ] . As a result , even variability consistent with a Poisson mechanism can result from the interplay between noise - increasing and noise - decreasing mecha - nisms . Although more theoretical and experimental work is required , this example demonstrates that the embryo is now poised to reveal fundamental mechanisms behind transcriptional regulation with a degree of quantitative rigor previously reserved for its single celled counterparts . Dynamic strategies for pattern formation Most of our knowledge of transcriptional decisions in de - velopment stems from examining ﬁxed tissue . Extracting dynamic parameters from such snapshots depends on the adoption of a speciﬁc model . The model of promoter ON / OFF switching put forth above has been explicitly tested in some cases in single cells [ 35 , 96 , 105 , 115 , 116 ] , but not yet in the context of the development of a multicellular organ - ism . Recent work based on ﬁxed tissue has also suggested that promoters enriched for paused Pol II can turn on in a more synchronous manner than those promoters that do not exhibit Pol II pausing [ 91 , 114 ] . Additionally , using similar techniques the existence of ‘memory’ has been proposed in the regulation of transcription throughout the developmental cascade in the early embryo [ 92 ] . All these claims are of a dynamic nature and can be best tested by accessing transcriptional dynamics in a living embryo . The genetically encoded MS2 system in combination with live imaging , as described above , should provide such access to the dynamics of developmental decisions . For example , this method has shown that the ﬁnal structure of gene expression patterns arises from multiple independent transcriptional decisions [ 102 , 103 ] . A given gene locus of a hunchback reporter ﬁrst determines whether to enter the ON or OFF state in a random manner , biased by the local concentration of activator . The ON / OFF decision is subse - quently maintained throughout interphase , so that an inactive locus remains inactive continuously . Loci that enter the ON state modulate their rate of transcription initiation by , once again , reading out the local concentra - tion of the activator . Thus , the resulting pattern of gene expression emerges from the combination of decisions of whether to express a gene and , if so , at what level of activity ( Figure 3C ) . Such a ﬁnding cannot be derived from ﬁxed analysis alone because only living embryos reveal whether and how often switching occurs between active and inactive states . The molecular origin of the random decision to turn a gene locus ON or OFF remains elusive . Interestingly , in previous nuclear cycles all loci of this hunchback reporter are active ( or in the ON state ) , indicating that this random decision is only made in the 3rd hour of development . This temporal change in the behavior of nuclear activity sug - gests the presence of a new regulatory landscape as a result of , for example , the action of newly expressed zygotic repressors or change in local chromatin modiﬁcation [ 117 – 120 ] . A new set of mutant screens for the involved molecular players will be necessary and these efforts will present the opportunity to shed light on the role of chro - matin conformation in transcriptional regulation in single cells , a process that had been previously mostly assessed in bulk experiments [ 26 , 121 , 122 ] . From genome to form By taking advantage of the methods described above , the examples we have presented make it clear that ﬂy embryos present new opportunities for investigating metazoan transcription . As such , we are undoubtedly at the brink of a new set of mechanistic insights into the processes that ensure the presence of the necessary amount of gene product at the correct place and time in the developing Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 370 Box 2 . Variability as a window into molecular mechanisms A straightforward model of transcription , the ‘Poisson promoter’ , proposes that Pol II initiates transcription at a constant rate ( Figure I ) . This rate is then modulated by the relative abundance of activators and repressors [ 145 ] . Because of the inherent stochasticity of biochemical reactions , a constant rate of transcriptional initiation leads to a Poisson distribution of transcribing Pol II molecules along the gene , with variance equal to the mean number of Pol II molecules . A variance higher than the mean number of actively transcribing Pol II molecules indicates the presence of extra regulatory steps along the transcriptional cascade . The simplest model consistent with in - creased variance consists of a promoter that switches between transcriptionally permissive ( ‘ON’ ) and restrictive ( ‘OFF’ ) states , a ‘two - state promoter’ ( Figure I ) . When switching occurs more slowly than the rate of transcriptional initiation , mRNA molecules are produced in ‘bursts’ , increasing the variability in Pol II loading . Cartoons such as shown in Figure 2A in the main text , where all Pol II molecules are uniformly loaded on the DNA , represent a special case . Pol II molecules have a physical footprint such that there is a minimum spacing between contiguous molecules on a gene . When the rate at which Pol II can attempt initiation is higher than the time required for the previously loaded Pol II to traverse the length of its footprint , the rate of Pol II clearance from the promoter becomes limiting . As a result of this ‘traffic jam’ of Pol II molecules , the variance in Pol II loading will be smaller than its mean , resulting in a sub - Poissonian distribution [ 146 ] , that is , a ‘deterministic promoter’ ( Figure I ) . Finally , it is important to note that the simple reaction schemes discussed here represent only a small subset of all possible mechanisms of transcription initiation . More complex regulatory behavior , such as the regulation of transcriptional elongation [ 147 ] , can lead to an increase or decrease of the variance with respect to the mean [ 23 , 146 ] . As a result , making claims about regulatory mechan - isms from the magnitude of the variance with respect to the mean are generally insufficient . Uncovering the intricacies of transcriptional cascades in vivo requires experimentation wherein regulatory parameters are varied systematically and their effect on the variance is measured [ 110 ] . Number of Pol II molecules transcribing Number of Pol II molecules transcribing P r o b a b ili t y M e a n Standarddevia(cid:2)on M e a n Standarddevia(cid:2)on Mean = variance Mean < variance = standarddevia(cid:2)on 2 Poisson promoter Two - state promoter k on r RNAP RNAP r RNAP RNAP Burst size Burst frequency k oﬀ Determinis(cid:2)c promoter r r > > P r o b a b ili t y Number of Pol II molecules transcribing Variance ≈ 0 P r o b a b ili t y Speed Speed Size Size TRENDS in Genetics Figure I . Variability of Pol II gene loading and molecular mechanisms of transcriptional initiation . Different mechanisms of promoter clearance by Pol II and transcriptional initiation lead to qualitatively different distributions of Pol II molecules along the gene . In the ‘Poisson promoter’ , Pol II molecules escape the promoter at a constant rate . In the ‘two - state promoter’ , the promoter switches between an ON and OFF state . Only when the promoter is in the ON state do Pol II molecules initiate transcription . In the ‘deterministic promoter’ , the rate of Pol II loading is higher than the time it takes for the previous Pol II to escape the promoter , leading to a chain of closely spaced Pol II molecules along the gene . Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 371 embryo and beyond . The study of transcription in an intact developing organism opens new possibilities that simply cannot be addressed in unicellular systems . For example , one striking aspect of development is the generation of diverse morphologies from a limited number of network components and signaling systems [ 38 , 123 , 124 ] . Can any aspect of form be predicted by the linear string of nucleo - tides [ 125 ] ? This question can now be addressed quantita - tively by asking how expression rates change and expression boundaries shift as a function of sequence alterations to enhancer and promoter elements . This effort becomes all the more tractable given recent technological developments such as BAC transgenesis [ 126 ] and CRISPR - mediated genome modiﬁcation [ 127 ] that allow such alterations to be made at endogenous loci . In addition , the insertion of stem loop sequences into endogenous genes for live imaging bypasses the need to construct reporter transgenes , minimizing position effects that are often ob - served in transgenesis experiments [ 128 ] . Such experi - ments will quantitatively address , for example , the role of ‘shadow’ enhancers ( secondary enhancers that work together with a primary enhancer , which typically has been discovered ﬁrst ) functioning as redundant systems that ensure correct gene expression patterns [ 129 – 131 ] . Additionally , the past few years have resulted in an accumulated body of evidence for the role of nucleosome positioning , chromatin conformation , and modiﬁcations in modulating transcriptional activity in a plethora of devel - opmental contexts [ 10 , 132 – 135 ] . Current technology , how - ever , has only allowed for the observation of these processes in bulk , often leading to the loss of the spatio - temporal information behind them . The ability to access transcriptional decisions in space and time with high precision in the context of the embryo laboratory provides the exciting prospect of the development of new technolo - gies aimed at visualizing enhancer – promoter looping [ 136 ] and its coupling to DNA accessibility and chromatin inter - actions [ 137 ] in real time [ 138 ] . Finally , an exciting possibility is that of simultaneously labeling multiple network components to assess regulatory relationships and correlations in expression dynamics . For example , a live mRNA labeling system based on the PP7 bacteriophage can be combined with MS2 to observe the simultaneous expression of two genes using different col - ored coat protein fusions [ 139 ] . Previous observations of coexpressed gene products have relied on ﬁxed material [ 3 , 34 ] . Data from such experiments have given rise to models of cross - regulatory relationships between pairs of genes expressed in spatially overlapping domains . Such models generally propose that reproducible positioning of expression boundaries emerges largely from interactions across expression borders [ 7 , 63 , 140 – 144 ] . These models thus provide predictions ( either qualitative or quantitative ) about how expression rates will change as zygotic gene products accumulate at different locations in the embryo . The ability to monitor transcription in real time will provide the ﬁrst rigorous quantitative test of these models . Because expression patterns emerge from numerous interactions of many activators and repressors at gene loci , experiments of this type will at long last allow researchers to ascertain the contribution of such interactions to boundary formation . By combining the above methods to measure expression rates with genetic manipulations of transcription factor activity , it will now become possible to determine how each activating or repressing factor contributes to expression rates , and thus to the dynamics of pattern formation , for any target gene of interest . These are early days for the quantitative study of tran - scription in the context of developmental programs . A revolution in our understanding of the microscopic pro - cesses leading to cellular decision making has been spear - headed by studies in cultured cells over the past 15 years . The novel experimental methods to quantify and manipu - late transcription in embryos combined with theoretical models aimed at predicting regulatory behavior have the potential of furthering this revolution and bringing it to the forefront of metazoan evolution . Acknowledgments We thank J . Bothma , H . Grabmayr , W . Li , and A . Sgro for comments on the manuscript . This review does not aim to be a comprehensive survey of the literature . Rather , it is a reﬂection of some of our favorite examples , which we believe to be illustrative of this new wave of quantitative dissection of developmental decisions in the early ﬂy embryo . We apologize to the community if we omitted some pertinent references . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant P50 GM071508 and R01 GM097275 , and by Searle Scholar Award 10 - SSP - 274 to T . G . H . G . G . holds a Career Award at the Scientiﬁc Interface from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund and a Princeton Dicke Fellowship . References 1 Balazsi , G . et al . ( 2011 ) Cellular decision making and biological noise : from microbes to mammals . Cell 144 , 910 – 925 2 Gregor , T . et al . ( 2007 ) Probing the limits to positional information . Cell 130 , 153 – 164 3 Dubuis , J . O . et al . ( 2013 ) Accurate measurements of dynamics and reproducibility in small genetic networks . Mol . Syst . Biol . 9 , 639 4 Crauk , O . and Dostatni , N . ( 2005 ) Bicoid determines sharp and precise target gene expression in the Drosophila embryo . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1888 – 1898 5 Pare , A . et al . ( 2009 ) Visualization of individual Scr mRNAs during Drosophila embryogenesis yields evidence for transcriptional bursting . Curr . Biol . 19 , 2037 – 2042 6 Jaeger , J . et al . ( 2004 ) Dynamic control of positional information in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 430 , 368 – 371 7 Manu et al . ( 2009 ) Canalization of gene expression in the Drosophila blastoderm by gap gene cross regulation . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000049 8 Liu , F . et al . ( 2013 ) Dynamic interpretation of maternal inputs by the Drosophila segmentation gene network . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 6724 – 6729 9 Levine , M . ( 2010 ) Transcriptional enhancers in animal development and evolution . Curr . Biol . 20 , R754 – R763 10 Li , L . M . and Arnosti , D . N . ( 2011 ) Long - and short - range transcriptional repressors induce distinct chromatin states on repressed genes . Curr . Biol . 21 , 406 – 412 11 Lagha , M . et al . ( 2012 ) Mechanisms of transcriptional precision in animal development . Trends Genet . 28 , 409 – 416 12 Jaeger , J . et al . ( 2012 ) Drosophila blastoderm patterning . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 22 , 533 – 541 13 Knowles , D . W . and Biggin , M . D . ( 2013 ) Building quantitative , three - dimensional atlases of gene expression and morphology at cellular resolution . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Dev . Biol . 2 , 767 – 779 14 Gergen , J . P . et al . ( 1986 ) Segmental pattern and blastoderm cell identities . In Gametogenesis and the Early Embryo ( Gall , J . G . , ed . ) , pp . 195 – 220 , Liss Inc . 15 Kornberg , T . B . and Tabata , T . ( 1993 ) Segmentation of the Drosophila embryo . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 3 , 585 – 594 16 Lecuit , T . et al . ( 2002 ) slam encodes a developmental regulator of polarized membrane growth during cleavage of the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Cell 2 , 425 – 436 Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 372 17 Petkova , M . D . et al . ( 2014 ) Maternal origins of developmental reproducibility . Curr . Biol . 24 , 1283 – 1288 18 Rosenfeld , N . et al . ( 2005 ) Gene regulation at the single - cell level . Science 307 , 1962 – 1965 19 Hensel , Z . et al . ( 2012 ) Stochastic expression dynamics of a transcription factor revealed by single - molecule noise analysis . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 19 , 797 – 802 20 Geiler - Samerotte , K . A . et al . ( 2013 ) The details in the distributions : why and how to study phenotypic variability . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 24 , 752 – 759 21 Xia , T . et al . ( 2013 ) Single - molecule ﬂuorescence imaging in living cells . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 64 , 459 – 480 22 Li , G . W . and Xie , X . S . ( 2011 ) Central dogma at the single - molecule level in living cells . Nature 475 , 308 – 315 23 Sanchez , A . et al . ( 2013 ) Regulation of noise in gene expression . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 42 , 469 – 491 24 Bintu , L . et al . ( 2005 ) Transcriptional regulation by the numbers : models . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 15 , 116 – 124 25 Bintu , L . et al . ( 2005 ) Transcriptional regulation by the numbers : applications . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 15 , 125 – 135 26 Segal , E . and Widom , J . ( 2009 ) From DNA sequence to transcriptional behaviour : a quantitative approach . Nat . Rev . Genet . 10 , 443 – 456 27 Munsky , B . et al . ( 2012 ) Using gene expression noise to understand gene regulation . Science 336 , 183 – 187 28 Coulon , A . et al . ( 2013 ) Eukaryotic transcriptional dynamics : from single molecules to cell populations . Nat . Rev . Genet . 14 , 572 – 584 29 Elowitz , M . B . et al . ( 2002 ) Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 30 Raser , J . M . and O’Shea , E . K . ( 2005 ) Noise in gene expression : origins , consequences , and control . Science 309 , 2010 – 2013 31 Newman , J . R . et al . ( 2006 ) Single - cell proteomic analysis of S . cerevisiae reveals the architecture of biological noise . Nature 441 , 840 – 846 32 Cohen , A . A . et al . ( 2009 ) Protein dynamics in individual human cells : experiment and theory . PLoS ONE 4 , e4901 33 Taniguchi , Y . et al . ( 2010 ) Quantifying E . coli proteome and transcriptome with single - molecule sensitivity in single cells . Science 329 , 533 – 538 34 Little , S . C . et al . ( 2013 ) Precise developmental gene expression arises from globally stochastic transcriptional activity . Cell 154 , 789 – 800 35 Sanchez , A . and Golding , I . ( 2013 ) Genetic determinants and cellular constraints in noisy gene expression . Science 342 , 1188 – 1193 36 Jaeger , J . ( 2011 ) The gap gene network . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 68 , 243 – 274 37 Papatsenko , D . ( 2009 ) Stripe formation in the early ﬂy embryo : principles , models , and networks . Bioessays 31 , 1172 – 1180 38 Rosenberg , M . I . et al . ( 2009 ) Heads and tails : evolution of antero – posterior patterning in insects . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1789 , 333 – 342 39 Warn , R . et al . ( 1979 ) Myosin as a constituent of the Drosophila egg cortex . Nature 278 , 651 – 653 40 Carroll , S . B . and Scott , M . P . ( 1986 ) Zygotically active genes that affect the spatial expression of the fushi - tarazu segmentation gene during early Drosophila embryogenesis . Cell 45 , 113 – 126 41 Frasch , M . and Levine , M . ( 1987 ) Complementary patterns of even - skipped and fushi tarazu expression involve their differential regulation by a common set of segmentation genes in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 1 , 981 – 995 42 Stanojevic , D . et al . ( 1989 ) Sequence - speciﬁc DNA - binding activities of the gap proteins encoded by hunchback and Kruppel in Drosophila . Nature 341 , 331 – 335 43 Driever , W . and Nusslein - Volhard , C . ( 1989 ) The bicoid protein is a positive regulator of hunchback transcription in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 337 , 138 – 143 44 Rivera - Pomar , R . et al . ( 1995 ) Activation of posterior gap gene expression in the Drosophila blastoderm . Nature 376 , 253 – 256 45 Hou , X . S . et al . ( 1996 ) Marelle acts downstream of the Drosophila HOP / JAK kinase and encodes a protein similar to the mammalian STATs . Cell 84 , 411 – 419 46 Yan , R . et al . ( 1996 ) Identiﬁcation of a Stat gene that functions in Drosophila development . Cell 84 , 421 – 430 47 Liang , H . L . et al . ( 2008 ) The zinc - ﬁnger protein Zelda is a key activator of the early zygotic genome in Drosophila . Nature 456 , 400 – 403 48 Carroll , S . B . and Vavra , S . H . ( 1989 ) The zygotic control of Drosophila pair - rule gene expression . II . Spatial repression by gap and pair - rule gene products . Development 107 , 673 – 683 49 Hulskamp , M . et al . ( 1990 ) A morphogenetic gradient of hunchback protein organizes the expression of the gap genes Kruppel and knirps in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 346 , 577 – 580 50 Kraut , R . and Levine , M . ( 1991 ) Mutually repressive interactions between the gap genes giant and Kruppel deﬁne middle body regions of the Drosophila embryo . Development 111 , 611 – 621 51 Steingrimsson , E . et al . ( 1991 ) Dual role of the Drosophila pattern gene tailless in embryonic termini . Science 254 , 418 – 421 52 Fowlkes , C . C . et al . ( 2008 ) A quantitative spatiotemporal atlas of gene expression in the Drosophila blastoderm . Cell 133 , 364 – 374 53 Surkova , S . et al . ( 2013 ) Quantitative dynamics and increased variability of segmentation gene expression in the Drosophila Kruppel and knirps mutants . Dev . Biol . 376 , 99 – 112 54 Foe , V . E . and Alberts , B . M . ( 1983 ) Studies of nuclear and cytoplasmic behaviour during the ﬁve mitotic cycles that precede gastrulation in Drosophila embryogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 61 , 31 – 70 55 Di Talia , S . et al . ( 2013 ) Posttranslational control of Cdc25 degradation terminates Drosophila’s early cell - cycle program . Curr . Biol . 23 , 127 – 132 56 Clarkson , M . and Saint , R . ( 1999 ) A His2AvDGFP fusion gene complements a lethal His2AvD mutant allele and provides an in vivo marker for Drosophila chromosome behavior . DNA Cell Biol . 18 , 457 – 462 57 Mason , F . M . et al . ( 2013 ) Apical domain polarization localizes actin – myosin activity to drive ratchet - like apical constriction . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 926 – 936 58 Morin , X . et al . ( 2001 ) A protein trap strategy to detect GFP - tagged proteins expressed from their endogenous loci in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 15050 – 15055 59 DeLotto , R . et al . ( 2007 ) Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling mediates the dynamic maintenance of nuclear Dorsal levels during Drosophila embryogenesis . Development 134 , 4233 – 4241 60 Gregor , T . et al . ( 2007 ) Stability and nuclear dynamics of the bicoid morphogen gradient . Cell 130 , 141 – 152 61 Gregor , T . et al . ( 2008 ) Shape and function of the Bicoid morphogen gradient in dipteran species with different sized embryos . Dev . Biol . 316 , 350 – 358 62 Kanodia , J . S . et al . ( 2009 ) Dynamics of the Dorsal morphogen gradient . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 21707 – 21712 63 Reeves , G . T . et al . ( 2012 ) Dorsal – ventral gene expression in the Drosophila embryo reﬂects the dynamics and precision of the dorsal nuclear gradient . Dev . Cell 22 , 544 – 557 64 Abu - Arish , A . et al . ( 2010 ) High mobility of bicoid captured by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy : implication for the rapid establishment of its gradient . Biophys . J . 99 , L33 – L35 65 Grimm , O . and Wieschaus , E . ( 2010 ) The Bicoid gradient is shaped independently of nuclei . Development 137 , 2857 – 2862 66 Drocco , J . A . et al . ( 2011 ) Measurement and perturbation of morphogen lifetime : effects on gradient shape . Biophys . J . 101 , 1807 – 1815 67 Little , S . C . et al . ( 2011 ) The formation of the Bicoid morphogen gradient requires protein movement from anteriorly localized mRNA . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000596 68 Kicheva , A . et al . ( 2012 ) Investigating the principles of morphogen gradient formation : from tissues to cells . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 22 , 527 – 532 69 Wartlick , O . et al . ( 2011 ) Dynamics of Dpp signaling and proliferation control . Science 331 , 1154 – 1159 70 Kornberg , T . B . ( 2012 ) The imperatives of context and contour for morphogen dispersion . Biophys . J . 103 , 2252 – 2256 71 Alexandre , C . et al . ( 2014 ) Patterning and growth control by membrane - tethered Wingless . Nature 505 , 180 – 185 72 Hammar , P . et al . ( 2012 ) The lac repressor displays facilitated diffusion in living cells . Science 336 , 1595 – 1598 73 Cubitt , A . B . et al . ( 1995 ) Understanding , improving and using green ﬂuorescent proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 20 , 448 – 455 74 Ludwig , M . Z . et al . ( 2011 ) Consequences of eukaryotic enhancer architecture for gene expression dynamics , development , and ﬁtness . PLoS Genet . 7 , e1002364 Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 373 75 Berezhkovskii , A . M . and Shvartsman , S . Y . ( 2014 ) On the GFP - based analysis of dynamic concentration proﬁles . Biophys . J . 106 , L13 – L15 76 Edgar , B . A . et al . ( 1986 ) Repression and turnover pattern fushi tarazu RNA in the early Drosophila embryo . Cell 47 , 747 – 754 77 Jackle , H . et al . ( 1986 ) Cross - regulatory interactions among the gap genes of Drosophila . Nature 324 , 668 – 670 78 Driever , W . et al . ( 1989 ) Determination of spatial domains of zygotic gene expression in the Drosophila embryo by the afﬁnity of binding sites for the bicoid morphogen . Nature 340 , 363 – 367 79 Schroder , C . et al . ( 1988 ) Differential regulation of the two transcripts from the Drosophila gap segmentation gene hunchback . EMBO J . 7 , 2881 – 2887 80 Jiang , J . et al . ( 1991 ) The dorsal morphogen gradient regulates the mesoderm determinant twist in early Drosophila embryos . Genes Dev . 5 , 1881 – 1891 81 Pankratz , M . J . et al . ( 1992 ) Spatial control of the gap gene knirps in the Drosophila embryo by posterior morphogen system . Science 255 , 986 – 989 82 Stanojevic , D . et al . ( 1991 ) Regulation of a segmentation stripe by overlapping activators and repressors in the Drosophila embryo . Science 254 , 1385 – 1387 83 Clyde , D . E . et al . ( 2003 ) A self - organizing system of repressor gradients establishes segmental complexity in Drosophila . Nature 426 , 849 – 853 84 Boettiger , A . N . and Levine , M . ( 2013 ) Rapid transcription fosters coordinate snail expression in the Drosophila embryo . Cell Rep . 3 , 8 – 15 85 Femino , A . M . et al . ( 1998 ) Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 , 585 – 590 86 Raj , A . et al . ( 2006 ) Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol . 4 , e309 87 Zenklusen , D . et al . ( 2008 ) Single - RNA counting reveals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1263 – 1271 88 Raj , A . et al . ( 2010 ) Variability in gene expression underlies incomplete penetrance . Nature 463 , 913 – 918 89 Shermoen , A . W . and O’Farrell , P . H . ( 1991 ) Progression of the cell cycle through mitosis leads to abortion of nascent transcripts . Cell 67 , 303 – 310 90 Wilkie , G . S . et al . ( 1999 ) Transcribed genes are localized according to chromosomal position within polarized Drosophila embryonic nuclei . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1263 – 1266 91 Boettiger , A . N . and Levine , M . ( 2009 ) Synchronous and stochastic patterns of gene activation in the Drosophila embryo . Science 325 , 471 – 473 92 Porcher , A . et al . ( 2010 ) The time to measure positional information : maternal hunchback is required for the synchrony of the Bicoid transcriptional response at the onset of zygotic transcription . Development 137 , 2795 – 2804 93 Perry , M . W . et al . ( 2012 ) Precision of hunchback expression in the Drosophila embryo . Curr . Biol . 22 , 2247 – 2252 94 McHale , P . et al . ( 2011 ) Gene length may contribute to graded transcriptional responses in the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Biol . 360 , 230 – 240 95 Fusco , D . et al . ( 2003 ) Single mRNA molecules demonstrate probabilistic movement in living mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 13 , 161 – 167 96 Golding , I . et al . ( 2005 ) Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 , 1025 – 1036 97 Larson , D . R . et al . ( 2011 ) Real - time observation of transcription initiation and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 , 475 – 478 98 Lionnet , T . et al . ( 2011 ) A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat . Methods 8 , 165 – 170 99 Bertrand , E . et al . ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 , 437 – 445 100 Urbinati , C . R . and Long , R . M . ( 2011 ) Techniques for following the movement of single RNAs in living cells . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . RNA 2 , 601 – 609 101 Forrest , K . M . and Gavis , E . R . ( 2003 ) Live imaging of endogenous RNA reveals a diffusion and entrapment mechanism for nanos mRNA localization in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1159 – 1168 102 Garcia , H . G . et al . ( 2013 ) Quantitative imaging of transcription in living Drosophila embryos links polymerase activity to patterning . Curr . Biol . 23 , 2140 – 2145 103 Lucas , T . et al . ( 2013 ) Live imaging of bicoid - dependent transcription in Drosophila embryos . Curr . Biol . 23 , 2135 – 2139 104 Elf , J . et al . ( 2007 ) Probing transcription factor dynamics at the single - molecule level in a living cell . Science 316 , 1191 – 1194 105 So , L . H . et al . ( 2011 ) General properties of transcriptional time series in Escherichia coli . Nat . Genet . 43 , 554 – 560 106 Perez - Ortin , J . E . et al . ( 2013 ) Eukaryotic mRNA decay : methodologies , pathways , and links to other stages of gene expression . J . Mol . Biol . 425 , 3750 – 3775 107 Edgar , B . A . and Datar , S . A . ( 1996 ) Zygotic degradation of two maternal Cdc25 mRNAs terminates Drosophila’s early cell cycle program . Genes Dev . 10 , 1966 – 1977 108 Perry , M . W . et al . ( 2011 ) Multiple enhancers ensure precision of gap gene - expression patterns in the Drosophila embryo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 13570 – 13575 109 Sun , M . et al . ( 2012 ) Comparative dynamic transcriptome analysis ( cDTA ) reveals mutual feedback between mRNA synthesis and degradation . Genome Res . 22 , 1350 – 1359 110 Sanchez , A . et al . ( 2011 ) Effect of promoter architecture on the cell - to - cell variability in gene expression . PLoS Comput . Biol . 7 , e1001100 111 Buecker , C . and Wysocka , J . ( 2012 ) Enhancers as information integration hubs in development : lessons from genomics . Trends Genet . 28 , 276 – 284 112 Krivega , I . and Dean , A . ( 2012 ) Enhancer and promoter interactions – long distance calls . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 22 , 79 – 85 113 Petesch , S . J . and Lis , J . T . ( 2012 ) Overcoming the nucleosome barrier during transcript elongation . Trends Genet . 28 , 285 – 294 114 Lagha , M . et al . ( 2013 ) Paused Pol II coordinates tissue morphogenesis in the Drosophila embryo . Cell 153 , 976 – 987 115 Chubb , J . R . et al . ( 2006 ) Transcriptional pulsing of a developmental gene . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1018 – 1025 116 Yunger , S . et al . ( 2010 ) Single - allele analysis of transcription kinetics in living mammalian cells . Nat . Methods 7 , 631 – 633 117 Ahmad , K . and Henikoff , S . ( 2001 ) Modulation of a transcription factor counteracts heterochromatic gene silencing in Drosophila . Cell 104 , 839 – 847 118 Tadros , W . and Lipshitz , H . D . ( 2009 ) The maternal - to - zygotic transition : a play in two acts . Development 136 , 3033 – 3042 119 Bai , L . et al . ( 2011 ) Multiple sequence - speciﬁc factors generate the nucleosome - depleted region on CLN2 promoter . Mol . Cell 42 , 465 – 476 120 Chen , H . et al . ( 2012 ) A system of repressor gradients spatially organizes the boundaries of Bicoid - dependent target genes . Cell 149 , 618 – 629 121 Naumova , N . and Dekker , J . ( 2010 ) Integrating one - dimensional and three - dimensional maps of genomes . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1979 – 1988 122 Voss , T . C . and Hager , G . L . ( 2014 ) Dynamic regulation of transcriptional states by chromatin and transcription factors . Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 , 69 – 81 123 Liu , P . Z . and Kaufman , T . C . ( 2005 ) Short and long germ segmentation : unanswered questions in the evolution of a developmental mode . Evol . Dev . 7 , 629 – 646 124 Perry , M . W . et al . ( 2009 ) Evolution of insect dorsoventral patterning mechanisms . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 74 , 275 – 279 125 Stern , D . L . and Orgogozo , V . ( 2008 ) The loci of evolution : how predictable is genetic evolution ? Evolution 62 , 2155 – 2177 126 Venken , K . J . et al . ( 2006 ) P [ acman ] : a BAC transgenic platform for targeted insertion of large DNA fragments in D . melanogaster . Science 314 , 1747 – 1751 127 Bassett , A . R . et al . ( 2013 ) Highly efﬁcient targeted mutagenesis of Drosophila with the CRISPR / Cas9 system . Cell Rep . 4 , 220 – 228 128 Markstein , M . et al . ( 2008 ) Exploiting position effects and the gypsy retrovirus insulator to engineer precisely expressed transgenes . Nat . Genet . 40 , 476 – 483 129 Frankel , N . et al . ( 2010 ) Phenotypic robustness conferred by apparently redundant transcriptional enhancers . Nature 466 , 490 – 493 130 Perry , M . W . et al . ( 2010 ) Shadow enhancers foster robustness of Drosophila gastrulation . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1562 – 1567 Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 374 131 Barolo , S . ( 2011 ) Shadow enhancers : frequently asked questions about distributed cis - regulatory information and enhancer redundancy . Bioessays 34 , 135 – 141 132 Ho , L . and Crabtree , G . R . ( 2010 ) Chromatin remodelling during development . Nature 463 , 474 – 484 133 Van Nostrand , E . L . and Kim , S . K . ( 2011 ) Seeing elegance in gene regulatory networks of the worm . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 21 , 776 – 786 134 Vastenhouw , N . L . and Schier , A . F . ( 2012 ) Bivalent histone modiﬁcations in early embryogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 , 374 – 386 135 White , R . ( 2012 ) Packaging the ﬂy genome : domains and dynamics . Brief . Funct . Genomics 11 , 347 – 355 136 Ronshaugen , M . and Levine , M . ( 2004 ) Visualization of trans - homolog enhancer – promoter interactions at the Abd - B Hox locus in the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Cell 7 , 925 – 932 137 Jin , F . et al . ( 2014 ) A high - resolution map of the three - dimensional chromatin interactome in human cells . Nature 503 , 290 – 294 138 Fisher , J . K . et al . ( 2013 ) Four - dimensional imaging of E . coli nucleoid organization and dynamics in living cells . Cell 153 , 882 – 895 139 Hocine , S . et al . ( 2013 ) Single - molecule analysis of gene expression using two - color RNA labeling in live yeast . Nat . Methods 10 , 119 – 121 140 Jaeger , J . ( 2009 ) Modelling the Drosophila embryo . Mol . Biosyst . 5 , 1549 – 1568 141 Bieler , J . et al . ( 2011 ) Whole - embryo modeling of early segmentation in Drosophila identiﬁes robust and fragile expression domains . Biophys . J . 101 , 287 – 296 142 Kicheva , A . et al . ( 2012 ) Developmental pattern formation : insights from physics and biology . Science 338 , 210 – 212 143 Kozlov , K . et al . ( 2012 ) Modeling of gap gene expression in Drosophila Kruppel mutants . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002635 144 Sokolowski , T . R . et al . ( 2012 ) Mutual repression enhances the steepness and precision of gene expression boundaries . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002654 145 Kaern , M . et al . ( 2005 ) Stochasticity in gene expression : from theories to phenotypes . Nat . Rev . Genet . 6 , 451 – 464 146 Boettiger , A . N . ( 2013 ) Analytic approaches to stochastic gene expression in multicellular systems . Biophys . J . 105 , 2629 – 2640 147 Kwak , H . and Lis , J . T . ( 2013 ) Control of transcriptional elongation . Ann . Rev . Genet . 47 , 483 – 508 Review Trends in Genetics August 2014 , Vol . 30 , No . 8 375