Personas and user - centered design : How can personas beneﬁt product design processes ? Tomasz Miaskiewicz , NOVA School of Business and Economics , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , Campus de Campolide , 1099 032 Lisbon , Portugal Kenneth A . Kozar , Leeds School of Business , UCB 419 , University of Colorado , Boulder , CO 80309 , USA This paper investigates personas , an alternative method for representing and communicating customer needs . By using a narrative , picture , and name , a persona provides product designers with a vivid representation of the design target . Numerous beneﬁts of incorporating personas into product design approaches have been suggested , but the present literature fails to identify the most signiﬁcant and universal advantages of persona use . By incorporating expert opinion through the use of Delphi methodology , this research ﬁrst examines the beneﬁts of incorporating personas into design processes . After gaining consensus on the perceived importance of the individual beneﬁts , this paper then elaborates on the most signiﬁcant beneﬁts of persona use and needed future research on the personas method . ! 2011 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : personas , design processes , design methodology , research methods T he product design practice has made signiﬁcant strides in facilitating the development of products that satisfy individual needs and are easy to use . Since the popularization of user - centered design ( UCD ) , the us - ability of web sites , systems , and many products has improved ( Vredenburg , Mao , Smith , & Carey , 2002 ) . User - centered design , also commonly referred to as human - centered design and customer - centered design , represents a gen - eral philosophy toward design that brings the users or consumers into the de - sign process ( Veryzer & Borja de Mozota , 2005 ; Vredenburg et al . , 2002 ) . However , the widespread acceptance of user - centered principles has not elimi - nated frustration with the design of modern products . While preaching the im - portance of practicing user - centered concepts , many organizations fail to consider the consumer needs as the focal point of their design processes ( Gulliksen et al . , 2003 ) . As a result , many design processes are still not reaching their target , the consumers or users of the product ( Dahl , Chattopadhyay , & Gorn , 1999 ; Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ; Scha ﬀ er , 2004 ) . The well - documented usability Corresponding author : Tomasz Miaskiewicz tmiask @ fe . unl . pt www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X $ - see front matter Design Studies 32 ( 2011 ) 417 e 430 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2011 . 03 . 003 417 ! 2011 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . issues of web sites , systems , and products provide further anecdotal evidence that today’s product design processes still require improvements ( e . g . , Kalin , 1999 ; Nielsen & Norman , 2000 ; den Ouden , 2006 ; Temkin & Hult , 2005 ) . For example , den Ouden ( 2006 ) found that as many as half of product returns are caused by product complexity and customers’ inability to use the desired features . Personas , the central topic of this research , potentially can help address some of the issues with current user - centered approaches . Personas are ‘ﬁctitious , speciﬁc , concrete representations of target users’ ( Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 : p 11 ) . A persona represents an aggregate of target users who share common be - havioral characteristics ( i . e . , is a hypothetical archetype of real users ) ( Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ) . Since their introduction by Cooper ( 1999 ) , personas have been integrated into the design processes of prominent ﬁrms such as Discover Fi - nancial Services , SAP , and FedEx ( Manning , Temkin , & Belanger , 2003 ) . The anecdotal evidence from practice suggests that persona use can facilitate useful and usable designs ( e . g . , Cooper , 1999 ; Cooper & Reimann , 2002 ; Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ; Leggett & Bilda , 2008 ) . For example , personas aided design e ﬀ orts of the MSN Explorer application at Microsoft ( Pruitt & Grudin , 2003 ) and Sony’s personal entertainment system for airplane passen - gers ( Cooper , 1999 ) . Floyd , Jones , and Twidale ( 2004 ) provide a thorough review of personas literature and the characteristics of personas . Even though personas have received some attention in the literature , they lack solid empirical grounding and a rigorous and thorough examination of the per - sonas method is still lacking ( Chapman & Milham , 2006 ) . In this study , the Del - phi method is used to examine personas and to provide a stronger foundation for future research on personas . Fields such as information systems ( e . g . , Brancheau & Wetherbe , 1997 ) , education ( e . g . , Raskin , 1994 ) , medicine ( e . g . , Fleuren , Wie ﬀ erink , & Paulussen , 2004 ) , operations management ( e . g . , Malhotra , Stelle , & Grover , 1994 ) , and product design ( Denton , 1997 ) , have used the Delphi methodology to lay a foundation for and spur new re - search . The Delphi method is a group process used to seek , aggregate , and gain consensus on the opinions of a group of panelists ( Schmidt , 1997 ) . By seeking opinions from individuals with extensive experiences with per - sonas , this research ﬁrst identiﬁes and gains consensus on the importance of speciﬁc beneﬁts of utilizing personas as part of user - centered design . After the panelists reach consensus , the implications of the most signiﬁcant beneﬁts are elaborated upon . The ﬁndings also provide a starting point for further em - pirical examination of the e ﬀ ectiveness of personas and the processes through which they inﬂuence product designers . 1 Introducing personas Personas are abstractions of groups of real consumers who share common char - acteristics and needs ( Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ) . A persona is represented through 418 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 a ﬁctional individual , who in turn represents a group of real consumers with sim - ilar characteristics ( Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ; Turner & Turner , 2010 ) . Even though a persona is not a real person , a name and a picture are selected to represent the ﬁctional representative . Second , a persona is described in narrative form . This narrative has two goals : ( 1 ) to make the persona seem like a real person , and ( 2 ) to provide a vivid story concerning the needs of the persona in the context of the product being designed . The narrative of a persona starts with a descrip - tion of the type of individual that the persona is , likes and dislikes , occupation , and so forth . This part of the narrative brings the persona to life ( Cooper , 1999 ; Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ) . Then , the persona’s speciﬁc needs and personal goals in the context of the product being designed are described . This segment of the nar - rative helps to inform the resulting design decisions ( Manning et al . , 2003 ; Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ) . These are the same needs that one would ﬁnd in a standard requirements document but are now written in the context of the narrative describing a speciﬁc persona . 1 . 1 Proposed beneﬁts of personas A primary focus of previous accounts of persona use has been on the perceived beneﬁts of incorporating personas into design processes . The proposed bene - ﬁts of personas , as compared to other approaches of communicating user in - formation , are summarized in Table 1 . One of the widely described beneﬁts in literature is improved communication about the target users within the design team and with other stakeholders ( Cooper , 1999 ; Cooper & Reimann , 2002 ; Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ; Ma & LeRouge , 2007 ) . Also , persona use has been commonly linked to an increased focus on the needs of the target users ( Cooper , 1999 ; Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ; Long , 2009 ; Ma & LeRouge , 2007 ; Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ) . However , diverging opinions also exist concerning the primary beneﬁts of personas . For example , persona use has been suggested as beneﬁcial to guiding product - related e ﬀ orts such as marketing campaigns ( Cooper & Reimann , 2002 ) , the extrapolation of the information from the per - sona to diverse situations ( Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ) , enhancing identiﬁcation with the users ( Ma & LeRouge , 2007 ) , and a reduction of changes at the end of the product development process ( Cooper , 1999 ) . As evidenced by Table 1 , the present literature on personas fails to reach con - sensus on the signiﬁcant and universal beneﬁts of incorporating personas into design processes . The wide variety of claims provides a convoluted picture of personas and make personas seem like a universal ﬁx to issues within the prod - uct design process and related e ﬀ orts . Additionally , the cited accounts of per - sona use have reported speciﬁc beneﬁts based on ﬁrst - hand experiences with personas or the interpretation of the experiences of others . In this study , we seek to substantiate those claims by using a panel of experts . The Delphi method is predicated on the rationale that ‘two heads are better than one’ ( Dalkey , 1972 : p . 15 ) . While the perspectives might not generalize to all con - texts , the collective opinion of a Delphi panel is more representative than of Personas and user - centered design 419 a single individual ( Linstone & Turo ﬀ , 1975 ) . As a result , an application of the methodology with a panel of persona experts allows us to make more conclu - sive statements concerning how personas most beneﬁt design processes . Further , the consolidated and validated list of beneﬁts provides a stronger foun - dation for more focused follow - up research . As been claimed by others ( e . g . , Cooper and Reimann , 2002 ; Floyd et al . , 2004 ) , personas have been reported to ‘work’ e they help bring about superior design outcomes . However , a key question remains : ‘If personas are e ﬀ ective , then how do they work ? ’ Groups of identiﬁed beneﬁts can help build an understanding of the mechanisms through which personas inﬂuence individual designers and product design teams . 2 Delphi methodology The Delphi methodology is a group process that was originally developed by the RAND Corporation in the late 1950s ( Linstone & Turo ﬀ , 1975 ; Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . The Delphi process is characterized by anonymity , itera - tion , feedback , and the aggregation of group responses ( Rowe & Wright , 1999 ) . In multiple rounds or stages , the panelists submit their responses with - out the knowledge of the identity of the other individuals . This anonymity helps to overcome a serious issue with other group processes that seek consen - sus e the inﬂuence of dominant individuals ( Dalkey , 1972 ) . Table 1 Benefits of persona use suggested in literature Source Speciﬁed beneﬁts Cooper ( 1999 ) - Increase focus on the users and their goals - Facilitate e ﬀ ective communication about users - Reduce necessary changes at the end of the development process Cooper and Reimann ( 2002 ) - Build consensus and commitment to design - Help to measure a design’s e ﬀ ectiveness - Deﬁne the product’s feature set - Facilitate e ﬀ ective communication within the project team - Help other related e ﬀ orts such as marketing plans Grudin and Pruitt ( 2002 ) - Facilitate a focus on users and work contexts - Allow for extrapolation from partial knowledge of users to diverse contexts - Make assumptions about users explicit - Facilitate e ﬀ ective communication about the users - Increase focus on a speciﬁc audience Long ( 2009 ) - Strengthen focus on the users during the development process - Lead to more user - friendly designs - Make the user needs more explicit - Guide decision making Ma and LeRouge ( 2007 ) - Facilitate effective communication about the users - Enhance identiﬁcation with the target users - Increase focus on user needs Pruitt and Adlin ( 2006 ) - Make assumptions about users explicit - Narrow the users being designed for - Lead to better design decisions - Increase engagement among the design team - Build empathy for the users 420 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 The method has been used in over 460 studies in a variety of ﬁelds ( Gupta & Clarke , 1996 ) . The methodology has been primarily applied in two speciﬁc areas : ( 1 ) forecasting and issue identiﬁcation / prioritization , and ( 2 ) conceptual frame - work development ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . The method is particularly useful when applied to research topics that lack a strong empirical foundation and that could beneﬁt from the opinion of experts ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . There are many variations in the application of the Delphi method . In this re - search , a variation called the ranking - type Delphi study was selected . The ranking - type approach was chosen because it attempts to overcome the limita - tions of previous applications of the Delphi methodology such as a lack of an appropriate measure of consensus ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ; Schmidt , 1997 ) . The framework developed by Schmidt ( 1997 ) and later reﬁned by Okoli and Pawlowski ( 2004 ) provides a rigorous , step - wise variation of the Delphi process . In the ﬁrst phase of the ranking - type approach , brainstorming , a consolidated and validated list of items is gathered from the panelists . In the second phase , narrowing - down , the list of items is reduced to a manageable size . In the third phase , ranking , the list of items is ranked iteratively until consensus is reached . One of the goals of this study is to develop a list of persona beneﬁts and to order the list with regard to importance . An appropriate source for this infor - mation is a product design expert with extensive experiences with personas in the ﬁeld . However , an expert working at a speciﬁc organization is unlikely to possess experiences in the variety situations where personas can be employed . A wider scope of individuals is needed . The Delphi process provides us the facility for capturing and reaching consensus on the opinions of a group of experts . 2 . 1 Expert selection and panel composition As suggested by Okoli and Pawlowski ( 2004 ) , this research used the procedure proposed by Delbecq , Van de Ven , and Gustafson ( 1975 ) for the selection of the most qualiﬁed experts . Through the creation of the Knowledge Resource Nom - ination Worksheet ( KRNW ) , this procedure ﬁrst attempts to identify the broad - est classes of possible experts . In this study , the three classes were ( 1 ) organizations or associations such as the Usability Professional Association , ( 2 ) companies such as Cooper Interactive and Microsoft , and ( 3 ) relevant liter - ature such as the Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference . The KRNW then was populated with names of 38 possible experts . Next , each of the individuals was contacted and directed to the study’s website for informa - tion about the study and the Delphi methodology . The contacted persons also were asked to nominate any additional individuals who have used personas extensively . Finally , the individuals were directed to an online registration form , where demographic information and speciﬁc qualiﬁcations were collected . This information was the basis for panel selection . Personas and user - centered design 421 Table 2 summarizes the qualiﬁcations of the 19 experts that were selected as panelists . Due to the strong qualiﬁcations of each of the experts , one more panelist than the recommended panel size of 10 e 18 suggested in Delphi literature was included ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . In case that at - trition normally encountered with the Delphi approach occurred ( Witkin & Altschuld , 1995 ) , the larger panel size also provided an additional bu ﬀ er . A majority of the selected experts worked at small companies with less than 50 employees , and they possessed senior roles at their organization such as president and principal . The median number of years that the panelists worked with personas was at least ﬁve years . This qualiﬁcation was partic - ularly signiﬁcant because personas have only been in use for about seven years at the time of this study . Also , a majority of the panelists had not only used personas , but also created personas for eight or more projects . Table 2 Qualification of the selected experts Years of experience < 1 year 1 e 2 years 3 e 4 years ! 5 years # of years worked with personas 0 0 4 15 Persona qualiﬁcation ranges None 1 to 2 3 to 4 5 to 7 8 þ # of design projects used personas 0 0 1 2 16 # of design projects for which created personas 0 0 2 4 13 # of articles , case studies , books , and papers written on personas 5 6 3 3 2 # of tutorials , seminars , and classes taught about personas 2 4 3 2 8 # of presentations given about personas 0 1 2 1 15 Company size 1 e 49 50 e 999 1000 e 4999 5000 þ # of experts working for a company with a speciﬁc number of employees 12 2 2 3 Position / Role President / CTO Director / VP Principal Strategist Designer / Sr . designer # of experts with a speciﬁc position / role 2 6 8 1 2 422 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 The remaining criteria show that a signiﬁcant number of panelists had ex - periences teaching , giving presentations , and writing about personas . Based on these qualiﬁcations , the selected individuals were clearly persona experts . 2 . 2 Data collection and analysis method Data were collected electronically from the selected panelists using a custom - ized online application . Paper - based Delphi studies traditionally have su ﬀ ered from long turnaround times . By conducting the study online , the data collec - tion time was decreased to eight weeks . Phase 1 of the study consisted of two questionnaires . In the ﬁrst question - naire , the panelists were asked to name and deﬁne at least six beneﬁts of personas . The researchers then consolidated the submissions . In the second questionnaire , the panelists were asked to validate the consolidated list . Ac - cording to Schmidt ( 1997 : p . 769 ) , without this second questionnaire ‘there is no basis to claim that a valid , consolidated list has been produced . ’ The panelists were asked to comment on the individual items , to validate that duplicate items did not exist , and to suggest any additional beneﬁts of personas . Phase 2 of the ranking - type approach narrows down the consolidated list of items to a manageable size . The target size for a list should be no more than 20 to 23 items ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . After the ﬁrst phase of this study , the consolidated list consisted of22items , which was within the boundsofa man - ageable number of items . Therefore , the study continued directly to the third phase for ranking . Phase 3 iterated through multiple rounds of questionnaires in which the pan - elists were asked to rank and re - rank the beneﬁts according to their impor - tance . The item that was judged to be the most signiﬁcant was ranked ﬁrst , the item that was judged as second most important was ranked second , and so on . In the ﬁrst round , the panelists were asked to uniquely rank each beneﬁt and provide a short justiﬁcation for their rankings . In the following rounds , the panelists also were provided with ( 1 ) their previous rankings , ( 2 ) the mean rankings of the group , ( 3 ) a summary of the justiﬁcations provided by others for their rankings , and ( 4 ) an indication of the level of consensus among the experts . As suggested by Schmidt ( 1997 ) , the consensus among the rankings was mea - sured using Kendall’s W . A value of zero indicates no consensus , whereas a Kendall’s W value of one indicates perfect consensus . The third phase con - tinued until one of the following conditions was met : ( 1 ) strong consensus was achieved as indicated by a Kendall’s W of at least 0 . 70 , ( 2 ) the mean rankings Personas and user - centered design 423 did not signiﬁcantly change between two questionnaires , or ( 3 ) the feasibility of another round became an issue ( Schmidt , 1997 ) . 3 Results During the ﬁrst phase of the study , the panelists generated a consolidated and validated list of persona beneﬁts . As described above , the individual beneﬁts were gathered from each of the panelists during the ﬁrst round . The re - searchers consolidated the list of beneﬁts , and this list was veriﬁed with the participants who could suggest changes in wording , deletion of items , and ad - dition to the ﬁnal list . Table 3 presents the names and the deﬁnitions of the ﬁnal 22 beneﬁts of persona use . As previously explained , this study proceeded directly to the third phase for ranking . In the ﬁrst round of this phase , the panelists were only asked to rank the relative importance of each of the 22 items ( i . e . , each beneﬁt received a ranking from 1 to 22 ) . In subsequent rounds , the participants also received the rankings of the group , a summary of the justiﬁcations for the importance of individual items , and an indication of the overall level of consensus . The ad - ditional information concerning the group’s responses is intended to drive the panel toward consensus on the relative rankings of the items . The ﬁrst round of the third phase resulted in a Kendall’s W of 0 . 42 signifying weak consensus ( Schmidt , 1997 ) . As expected , this result showed that persona experts initially had diverging views of how personasare most beneﬁcial . The sec - ond round increased Kendall’s W value from a weak consensus to a moderate consensus level of 0 . 52 . In the third round , Kendall’s W value only increased to 0 . 56 , again signifying moderate consensus . At this point , it was decided not to continue the Delphi study because the panelists only made minor adjust - ments to their rankings ( the 2nd stopping rule ) . A moderate level of consensus already was reached , which warranted a fair degree of conﬁdence in the ﬁnal rankings ( Schmidt , 1997 ) . Other Delphi studies also have stopped when moder - ate consensus has been achieved ( e . g . , Brancheau & Wetherbe , 1997 ) . Achieving moderateconsensus was encouragingdue tothe divergingwaysthatpersonas are used in practice , and the strong opinions expressed by the experts in this study when justifyingtheir rankings . Additionally , the panelistsstartedexpressing frus - tration with the length of the ranking phase , and many were not willing to con - tinue with another ranking round ( 3rd stopping rule ) . The results of the three rounds of the ranking phase are summarized in Table 4 . 4 Discussion The results of our Delphi study have several signiﬁcant implications . First , we attempted to address the basic question of ‘what do the experts think about personas’ . Our work attempts to go beyond the anecdotal beliefs and provide some substantiation for the beneﬁts of personas . The listing of the individual beneﬁts also provides a checklist of ways that personas 424 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 Table 3 The names and definitions of the identified benefits of personas # Beneﬁt name Beneﬁt description 1 Audience focus Focus product development on users / customers and their goals ( rather than the speciﬁc limitations or opportunities presented by technology ) 2 Product requirements prioritization Prioritize product requirements and help to determine if the right problems are being solved 3 Audience prioritization Prioritize audiences and bring about a focus on the most important audience ( s ) 4 Challenge assumptions Bring to the surface and challenge long - standing ( and often incorrect ) organizational assumptions about the users / customers 5 Prevention of self - referential design Help individuals realize how the users / customers are different from themselves 6 Decision guide Are the basis for product design decisions by providing a clear picture of customer needs , and the context / environment for these needs 7 Agreement catalyst Aid in achieving agreement on product deﬁnition decisions by clarifying the user / customer goals to varied stakeholders and interests 8 Engagement and uniﬁcation Engage , unify , and educate individuals who are not close to the users or the user research ( such as potential investors , product marketers , or engineers ) by creating a clear picture of the product or service 9 Empathy creation Create an understanding of and emotional identiﬁcation with the users / customers 10 Innovative thinking Stimulate innovative thinking that produces new and better solutions that meet the user goals 11 Team collaboration Foster collaboration among team members from different disciplines through a clear understanding of the customers / users 12 Communication aid Through the shared knowledge of an archetype , assist in communicating within and across teams and stakeholders 13 Problem scope deﬁnition Help with deﬁning the scope of a problem that needs to be solved 14 Evaluation guide Guide the evaluation of product deﬁnition decisions 15 Organization of research data Assist in organizing and utilizing research ﬁndings about users / customers by structuring research data in a more vivid form than raw data 16 Articulate stakeholders’ vision Help to articulate the product vision and target market strategies of executives and other stakeholders 17 Improved usability Aid in designing more usable products because the goals and the needs of the users / customers are understood 18 Product offerings Can be used by a business to determine what types of products / services to offer and highlight new business opportunities 19 Product evaluation Can be used to evaluate existing products and their strengths and weaknesses 20 Intuitiveness Can be used by specialists and non - specialists because individuals intuitively understand stories and how characters work 21 Product marketing Through the use of marketing materials , can be used to tell a compelling story that helps to convince potential customers that their needs and goals are understood 22 Reuse of research data Allow for reuse of user research data for products in the same domain with similar ‘types’ of users / customers Personas and user - centered design 425 can help individual designers and improve organizational design processes . Various opinions have been provided in previous accounts , but our study talked directly with the experts . Many of our panelists have been using and discussing personas since their development by Cooper ( 1999 ) . In the next section , we elaborate on the ﬁve beneﬁts of personas that were ranked as most critical by the experts . Next , we illustrate how this research could provide a foundation for future empirical work . Groups of the most highly ranked beneﬁts can help researchers identify signiﬁcant variables and derive propositions that are examined in follow - up studies . We hope that more fo - cused follow - up research that uses the results of this Delphi study as a foun - dation can uncover the mechanisms through which personas inﬂuence individual design choices and lead to a more rigorous understanding of the personas method . 4 . 1 Implications for product design practice According to the experts , the ﬁve beneﬁts with the lowest mean rankings , au - dience focus through prevention of self - referential design , point to the areas of design processes that would most signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from persona use . A strong consensus also was achieved among the rankings of these ﬁve items . The most signiﬁcant beneﬁt of personas is their ability to focus product design teams on the actual goals of the target customers . Instead of talking about gen - eral ‘consumers’ , personas bring the target consumers to life and help to Table 4 Mean rankings of the 22 benefits ( low score indicates a higher rank ) # Beneﬁt name Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 1 Audience focus 3 . 3 2 . 5 2 . 3 2 Product requirements prioritization 6 . 5 4 . 8 4 . 1 3 Audience prioritization 6 . 5 6 . 1 5 . 8 4 Challenge assumptions 8 . 2 7 . 1 6 . 5 5 Prevention of self - referential design 9 . 5 7 . 7 6 . 7 6 Decision guide 7 . 7 7 . 7 8 . 4 7 Agreement catalyst 9 . 0 8 . 7 8 . 8 8 Engagement and uniﬁcation 9 . 6 9 . 1 9 . 5 9 Empathy creation 9 . 7 9 . 6 10 . 4 10 Innovative thinking 9 . 2 9 . 5 10 . 5 11 Team collaboration 10 . 6 11 . 3 10 . 6 12 Communication aid 11 . 2 11 . 0 11 . 4 13 Problem scope deﬁnition 11 . 5 12 . 6 12 . 8 14 Evaluation guide 14 . 2 14 . 1 13 . 4 15 Organization of research data 13 . 5 13 . 6 13 . 9 16 Articulate stakeholders’ vision 15 . 2 14 . 8 14 . 1 17 Improved usability 13 . 5 14 . 9 14 . 6 18 Product offerings 13 . 2 14 . 1 14 . 8 19 Product evaluation 16 . 2 16 . 6 16 . 4 20 Intuitiveness 16 . 1 17 . 2 17 . 7 21 Product marketing 19 . 5 19 . 8 19 . 7 22 Reuse of research data 20 . 2 20 . 3 20 . 7 426 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 integrate their needs and goals as a central driver of design processes . Through the increased audience focus , personas help to overcome the disconnect be - tween the designers and the consumers , which has been cited as a common problem with UCD processes ( Grudin & Pruitt , 2002 ; Gulliksen et al . , 2003 ) . According to the panelists , this beneﬁt is vital because it allows for a ‘fo - cus on who the users are and to formulate design hypotheses accordingly’ and facilitates a ‘clear focus on who the product / service is designed for , who it is not , and what the goals are . ’ Similarly , two other important beneﬁts , prevention of self - referential design and challenge assumptions , point to the personas’ ability to establish a truly consumer - centered design attitude . One participant explained , ‘Personas bring to the surface and challenge long - standing ( and often incorrect ) orga - nizational assumptions about the users / customers’ . In addition , as evi - denced by the two critical prioritization beneﬁts , personas not only instill a stronger consumer focus but also aid with targeting the most signiﬁcant consumer segments . One of the participants explained , ‘A persona helps project teams answer two fundamental questions : who are we solving for and who are we not solving for ? ’ Personas help to narrow the target audi - ence ; instead of designing for everyone , designers can design for the per - sona ( s ) . Personas focus product designers on the one ( or a few ) consumer audiences , which helps to limit the resulting product feature sets . Products that satisfy 100 % of the needs of a few personas will have a great chance of success than products that serve 10 % of the needs of the all encompassing ‘everyone’ . 4 . 2 Implications for future research In addition to the implications for practice , the items judged most signiﬁcant by the panelists can aid with the identiﬁcation of variables and the generation of propositions for future research ( Okoli & Pawlowski , 2004 ) . In the follow - ing section , a speciﬁc future direction is proposed , which highlights how the results of the Delphi study can provide a starting point for follow - up studies . However , it should be noted that the suggested future direction is not intended to be the sole interpretation of the results . Additional links and alternative in - terpretations are certainly possible based on our results . Other researchers are encouraged to use these Delphi study results as a basis for their own proposi - tion development . 4 . 2 . 1 Example research direction Psychology and marketing literature has focused extensively on the inﬂuence of choices on individual behavior . Recent research has found that increased choice leads to decreased individual satisfaction when selecting from an as - sortment of choices ( e . g . , Iyengar & Lepper , 2000 ) . For example , when con - sumers in a grocery store were presented with either 24 ﬂavors or 6 ﬂavors of jam , they initially opted for the larger variety , but then were less motivated Personas and user - centered design 427 to buy the product that they selected from the larger assortment ( Iyengar & Lepper , 2000 ) . Similarly , research found that consumers forced to make a choice from a wider assortment of products are less conﬁdent in their even - tual choice ( Chernev , 2003a ; Chernev , 2003b ) . The popular notion that ‘the more choices , the better’ has been challenged by recent research results e in - dividuals are experiencing an e ﬀ ect of ‘overchoice’ ( Gourville & Soman , 2005 ) . Designers could experience the same phenomenon of overchoice when attempt - ing to choose among design options available for a particular product . In many design scenarios , the target consumer audience tends to be all encompassing e designers are commonly asked to design for ‘everyone’ ( Pruitt & Adlin , 2006 ) . Without a clear vision of the users and the speciﬁc features that these users desire , designers are able to generate endless design alternatives . Research has shown that individuals are hindered in making e ﬀ ective judgments when they need to consider even a dozen options . One of the reasons is that the conscious consid - eration of each of the option leads to the focus on a limited number of options without taking into account other relevant information ( Dijksterhuis & Nordgren , 2006 ) . Perhaps , this is one of the factors contributing to the unneces - sary complexity , poor usability , and consumer frustration with many modern product designs . Designers are not able to focus on a speciﬁc design target , and as a result the available design options seem endless . Design for ‘everyone’ could lead to design for “no one . ” Two of the identiﬁed beneﬁts of personas , audience prioritization and product requirements prioritization , point to the personas’ ability to limit the design choices available to designers and to allow for calculated design decisions . By limiting for whom the product is designed for and what features are vital , personas limit the design alternatives that are available to the designers . For example , when a designer is asked to design a new product ( e . g . , a new DVD player ) for older users and is provided with an elderly persona ( e . g . , ’George’ ) , then the designer will be able to generate a more limited set of design alternatives than when s / he is simply told to ‘design a DVD player for elderly individuals’ . Most likely , a speciﬁc component ( e . g . , the ’play’ button ) can still be designed several di ﬀ erent ways to allow George to accomplish his goals , but now each of the alternatives is inferred from the persona narrative . This lim - ited choice set could lead to simplicity and reduce complexity , a beneﬁt for all users . 5 Conclusions Based on the results of this study , the many beneﬁts of incorporating personas into user - centered design processes are evident . Through the ranked list of beneﬁts , this study also provides a foundation for future research examina - tions of persona use . Further , we hope that this study builds further awareness and an increased research focus on the personas method . Personas’ potential 428 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011 to signiﬁcantly improve the design of products should not be ignored by re - searchers . Personas have the potential to help us achieve the adage fundamen - tal to user - centered design : ‘Know thy user , for she is not you’ . References Brancheau , J . C . , & Wetherbe , J . C . ( 1997 ) . Key issues in information systems management . MIS Quarterly , 11 ( 1 ) , 23 e 45 . Chapman , C . N . , & Milham , R . P . ( 2006 ) . The persona’s new clothes : methodo - logical and practical arguments against a popular method . In Proceedings of the human factors and Ergonomics Society ( pp . 634 e 636 ) . HFES . Chernev , A . ( 2003a ) . Product assortment and individual decision processes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 1 ) , 151 e 162 . Chernev , A . ( 2003b ) . When more is less and less is more : the role of ideal point availability and assortment in consumer choice . Journal of Consumer Research , 30 ( 2 ) , 170 e 183 . Cooper , A . ( 1999 ) . The inmates are running the asylum . Indianapolis : Morgan Kaufmann . Cooper , A . , & Reimann , R . M . ( 2002 ) . About Face 2 . 0 . Indianapolis : Wiley Publishing . Dahl , D . W . , Chattopadhyay , A . , & Gorn , G . J . ( 1999 ) . The use of visual imagery in new product design . Journal of Marketing Research , 36 ( 1 ) , 18 e 28 . Dalkey , N . C . ( 1972 ) . The Delphi method : an experimental study of group opin - ion . In N . C . Dalkey , D . L . Rourke , R . Lewis , & D . Snyder ( Eds . ) , Delphi and decision - making ( pp . 13 e 54 ) . Lexington , MA : Lexington Books . Delbecq , A . L . , Van de Ven , A . H . , & Gustafson , D . H . ( 1975 ) . Group techniques for program planning : A guide to nominal group and delphi processes . Glenview , IL : Scott - Foresman . Denton , H . G . ( 1997 ) . Multidisciplinary team - based project work : planning fac - tors . Design Studies , 18 ( 2 ) , 155 e 170 . Dijksterhuis , A . , & Nordgren , L . F . ( 2006 ) . A theory of unconscious thought . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 1 ( 2 ) , 95 e 109 . Fleuren , M . , Wie ﬀ erink , K . , & Paulussen , T . ( 2004 ) . Determinants of innovation within health care organizations . International Journal for Quality in Health Care , 16 ( 2 ) , 107 e 123 . Floyd , I . R . , Jones , M . C . , & Twidale , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Resolving incommensurable debates : a preliminary identiﬁcation of persona kinds , attributes , and charac - teristics . Artifact , 2 ( 1 ) , 12 e 26 . Gourville , J . T . , & Soman , D . ( 2005 ) . Overchoice and assortment type : when and why variety backﬁres . Marketing Science , 24 ( 3 ) , 382 e 395 . Grudin , J . , & Pruitt , J . ( 2002 ) . Personas , participatory design and product devel - opment : An infrastructure for engagement . In Proceedings of the participatory design conference ( pp . 144 e 161 ) . ACM Press . Gulliksen , J . , G € oransson , B . , Boivie , I . , Blomkvist , S . , Persson , J . , & Cajander , A . ( 2003 ) . Key principles for user - centered systems design . Behaviour & Informa - tion Technology , 22 ( 6 ) , 397 e 409 . Gupta , U . G . , & Clarke , R . E . ( 1996 ) . Theory and applications of the Delphi tech - nique : a bibliography . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 53 ( 2 ) , 185 e 211 . Iyengar , S . S . , & Lepper , M . R . ( 2000 ) . When choice is demotivating : can one de - sire too much of a good thing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 ( 6 ) , 995 e 1006 . Personas and user - centered design 429 Kalin , S . ( 1999 ) . Usability : mazed and confused . CIO Web Business Magazine . http : / / www . cio . com / archive / webbusiness / 040199 _ use . html . Leggett , M . , & Bilda , Z . ( 2008 ) . Exploring design options for interactive video with the Mnemovie Hypervideo System . Design Studies , 29 ( 6 ) , 587 e 602 . Linstone , H . A . , & Turo ﬀ , M . ( 1975 ) . The Delphi method : Techniques and applica - tions . London : Addison - Wesley . Long , F . ( 2009 ) . Real or imaginary ? The e ﬀ ectiveness of using personas in prod - uct design . In Proceedings of the Irish Ergonomics Society Annual Conference ( pp . 1 e 10 ) . Irish Ergonomics Society . Ma , J . , & LeRouge , C . ( 2007 ) . Introducing user proﬁles and personas into infor - mation systems development . In Proceedings of the Americas Conference on information systems . AIS . Malhotra , M . K . , Stelle , D . C . , & Grover , V . ( 1994 ) . Important strategic and tac - tical manufacturing issues in the 1990s . Decision Sciences , 25 ( 2 ) , 189 e 214 . Manning , H . , Temkin , B . , & Belanger , N . ( 2003 ) . The power of design per - sonas . Forrester Research . http : / / www . forrester . com / ER / Research / Report / 0 , 1338 , 33033 , 00 . html . Nielsen , J . , & Norman , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Usability on the web isn’t a luxury . Infor - mation Week . http : / / www . informationweek . com / 773 / web . htm . Okoli , C . , & Pawlowski , S . D . ( 2004 ) . The Delphi method as a research tool : an example , design considerations and applications . Information & Management , 42 ( 1 ) , 15 e 29 . den Ouden , E . ( 2006 ) . Development of a design analysis model for customer com - plaints . Technical University of Eindhoven Thesis . http : / / alexandria . tue . nl / extra2 / 200513824 . pdf . Pruitt , J . , & Adlin , T . ( 2006 ) . The persona lifecycle : Keeping people in mind throughout product design . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Pruitt , J . , & Grudin , J . ( 2003 ) . Personas : practice and theory . In Proceedings of Conference on designing for user experiences ( pp . 1 e 15 ) . ACM Press . Raskin , M . S . ( 1994 ) . The Delphi Study in ﬁeld instruction revisited : expert con - sensus on issues and research priorities . Journal of Social Work Education , 30 ( l ) , 75 e 89 . Rowe , G . , & Wright , G . ( 1999 ) . The Delphi technique as a forecasting tool : issues and analysis . International Journal of Forecasting , 15 ( 4 ) , 353 e 375 . Scha ﬀ er , E . ( 2004 ) . Institutionalization of usability . Boston : Pearson Education . Schmidt , R . C . ( 1997 ) . Managing Delphi surveys using nonparametric statistical techniques . Decision Sciences , 28 ( 3 ) , 763 e 774 . Temkin , B . , & Hult , P . ( 2005 ) . Usability ﬂaws of ﬁnancial service web sites . Forrester Research . http : / / www . forrester . com / Research / Document / Excerpt / 0 , 7211 , 37302 , 00 . html . Turner , P . , & Turner , S . ( 2010 ) . Is stereotyping inevitable when designing with personas ? Design Studies 1 e 15 . Veryzer , R . W . , & Borja de Mozota , B . ( 2005 ) . The impact of user - oriented design on new product development : an examination of fundamental relationships . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 22 ( 2 ) , 128 e 143 . Vredenburg , K . , Mao , J . , Smith , P . , & Carey , T . ( 2002 ) . A survey of user - centered design in practice . In Proceedings of the conference on human factors in computing systems processing ( CHI ) ( pp . 471 e 478 ) . ACM Press . Witkin , B . R . , & Altschuld , J . ( 1995 ) . Planning and conducting needs assessment : A practical guide . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . 430 Design Studies Vol 32 No . 5 September 2011