Designing Interfaces to Enrich Personalization James R . Eagan GVU Center / College of Computing Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA 30332 eaganj @ cc . gatech . edu ABSTRACT Peripheral awareness systems offer signiﬁcant promise to help people to manage the abundance of information avail - able to them without placing signiﬁcant additional demands on attention . Rich personalization is essential to enabling these systems to provide relevant information to a particular person’s individual needs in their own particular situation . I focus on rich personalization and its implications for the interfaces that can enable it . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H5 . 2 . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : User Interfaces . GENERAL TERMS Design , Human Factors . INTRODUCTION Peripheral awareness systems offer the exciting potential to help people manage the onslaught of information and the re - sulting demands on attention [ 2 ] caused by increased infor - mation availability . Tickers , toolbars , portals , ambient dis - plays , and peripheral displays all aim to promote the user’s awareness while limiting the demands placed on his or her attention . Information , however , is individual in nature . What is rele - vant to one person may not be relevant to another . To help an individual manage his or her information , an awareness sys - tem must offer the ability to express just what information is potentially of interest . Most existing awareness systems offer at least some degree of personalization . Web Portals ( such as “my Yahoo” ) , for example , allow the user to choose which high - level content appears on the screen : weather , movies , news headlines , etc . The user can also select ba - sic properties of the content : locations for the weather and movies ( e . g . city names or zip codes ) and which news head - lines the user is interested in ( e . g . world news headlines and gossip ) . Few systems , however , offer rich personalization : the ability to extensively tailor the system to the individual’s Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . DIS 2006 , June 26 – 28 , 2006 , University Park , Pennsylvania , USA . ACM 1 - 59593 - 341 - 7 / 06 / 0006 . own needs or interests . And for good reason : supporting rich personalization can have signiﬁcant impacts on the de - sign of the system , from the interface that enables the user to express her interests to the software architecture that backs the interface . Sideshow [ 1 ] is one system that offers rich personalization . Users can select from a collection of available “tickets , ” mini - tickers that dock into a sidebar on the desktop . Additionally , it offers a plug - in API through which programmers can write new tickets . Although Sideshow caters to both casual users and to programmers , it does so by providing two distinct in - terfaces for interaction : casual users can add pre - fabricated tickets and adjust properties ( e . g . to specify an email account to monitor ) . Programmers can write new code to deﬁne en - tirely new behaviors using the Sideshow SDK , but there is no blending of the two roles of interaction . A casual user must drop out of the Sideshow interface and switch into an entirely different mindset to interact with the system . This problem is not peculiar to Sideshow . MacLean et al identify this difﬁculty in their work with Buttons , customiz - able widgets for the desktop [ 5 ] . They describe different classes of users : workers , tinkerers , and programmers , each who possesses different skills and motications . Gantt and Nardi independently identify similar classes of users [ 3 ] as well as the notion of a gardener or a guru , who bridges be - tween the workers and the programmers . MacLean et al de - scribe the workers as living in the valley , tinkerers as living in the foothills , and the programmers as living in the moun - tains . In this metaphor , there are steep cliffs between the various hill - folk . Each of these studies has demonstrated the difﬁculty for users in one class to perform tasks from an - other : the slope is not gentle ; there are cliffs in the way [ 4 ] . A goal of a personalization system , therefore , is to smooth out the hills and turn them into a gentle slope . Thus , a casual user who desires to make somewhat more extensive changes would need only to expend somewhat more effort . While these works have presented the notion of different classes of users , one of the guiding premises of this research is the notion that these distinctions are ﬂuid . Rather than classes , we should think of them as roles . The particular role a user assumes will depend on a combination of the in - dividual skillsets of the user , the user’s motivation , and the speciﬁc task . Thus , a user who may typically fall under a worker role will , with motivation and the absence of insur - mountable barriers , take on the role of a tinkerer or a pro - grammer . Likewise , a programmer by trade may typically take on the role of a worker , as in the Unix guru on a Mac . Thus , the design of a richly personalizable system must fa - cilitate as simple as feasible a transition between different degrees of customization . The design should not present artiﬁcial barriers to keep a casual user from , for example , creating a brand new “ticket . ” Eliminating these artiﬁcial barriers poses various design challenges : the interface must be sufﬁciently simple as to allow a casual user to perform straight - forward tasks easily . Meanwhile , advanced users should still be able to perform their tasks with an appropriate additional expenditure of effort . Such support goes beyond separating the distinct levels of complexity into different in - terfaces ; the connections must be made clear . Thus , a casual user who wishes to accomplish a slightly more complex task should see clearly the path to take . Just as user roles are ﬂuid , so , too , must the interfaces be ﬂuid . APPROACH I am focusing on providing interfaces and designs that sup - port the user in personalizing their software . This approach uses the idea ﬂuid user roles to drive the design of these in - terfaces . Two systems help situate this exploration : What’s Happening [ 6 ] and The Buzz . What’s Happening is a com - munity awareness system that does not support customiza - tion . The Buzz uses the awareness approach of What’s Hap - pening , but strives to provide a richly personalizable infor - mation awareness system . This personalization can take a variety of forms , depending on the roles the user may as - sume . In keeping with its community - oriented goals , What’s Hap - pening follows a one - size - ﬁts - all approach to presenting in - formation : what one user sees is what all users see . Each minute , the system displays an information collage auto - matically generated from some particular data source . For What’s Happening , these sources are about or by the com - munity ( primarily from the College of Computing web server ; see [ 6 ] for more details ) . Additionally , the system also presents “value - added” collages . These are collages of information that is neither by nor about the community , but which is likely to be of interest to most of the community . The Buzz focuses on these value - added collages and presents them on a secondary display on the desktop or on a large , public dis - play . While What’s Happening’s community - orientednature precludes user - customization of these collages , such cus - tomization lies at the heart of The Buzz’s design . CONTRIBUTIONS I hope to identify interface designs and techniques that sup - port the user in ﬂuidly migrating between these various roles . Although this work is motivated by a speciﬁc information awareness system , I expect that many of these ﬁndings will generalize to many other sorts of personalization applica - tions . How can the interface offer simplicity to the casual user , while not only enabling the advanced user to accom - plish advanced tasks , but also giving the casual user a glimpse of the path he or she might take to accomplish a more ad - vanced task . This research will suggest speciﬁc interfaces and techniques and provide a qualitative evaluation of their success . How do these interfaces foster ( or not ) the ﬂuidity of user roles ? What principles can future designers follow to support personalizable interfaces ? STATUS OF RESEARCH I have conducted interviews with past users of What’s Hap - pening and with potential users of The Buzz to identify their speciﬁc informationforaging habits . This information helped to identify the various design requirements of the system— the sorts of information the system should support and what elements people may desire to tailor . Currently , I am imple - menting the interface - independent infrastructure to support these tasks . The challenge lies in designing interfaces to sup - port the user in tasks as simple as choosing interesting tickets from a selection of available tickets , conﬁguring properties of tickets or their appearance , to deﬁning entirely new tick - ets and even new behaviors . Upon settling on a particular promising design , I will deploy the system to the College of Computing ( and the Internet at large ) for evaluation . Evaluating these personalization capabilities poses some chal - lenges . I currently plan to augment the system with logging capabilities to record when key events occur , such as select - ing tickets , changing properties of tickets , creating new tick - ets , etc . In follow - up interviews , I will probe how these ca - pabilities were ( or were not ) being used . What about the interface might have prevented the user from taking advan - tage of some capabilities ? Did the user know the capability was there and choose not to use it ? REFERENCES 1 . J . J . Cadiz , G . Venolia , G . Jancke , and A . Gupta . Designing and deploying an information awareness interface . In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 314 – 323 . ACM Press , 2002 . 2 . T . H . Davenport and J . C . Beck . The Attention Economy : Understanding the New Currency of Business . Harvard Business School Press , Cambridge , MA , June 2001 . 3 . M . Gantt and B . A . Nardi . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among cad users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 107 – 117 , New York , NY , USA , 1992 . ACM Press . 4 . W . E . Mackay . Triggers and barriers to customizing software . In CHI ’91 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 153 – 160 . ACM Press , 1991 . 5 . A . MacLean , K . Carter , L . Lövstrand , and T . Moran . User - tailorable systems : pressing the issues with buttons . In CHI ’90 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 175 – 182 , New York , NY , USA , 1990 . ACM Press . 6 . Q . A . Zhao and J . Stasko . What’s Happening ? : Promoting community awareness through opportunistic , peripheral interfaces . In Proceedings of the Advanced Visual Interfaces Conference , pages 69 – 74 , Trento , Italy , May 2002 .