Title : COVID - 19 and children with cancer : Parents’ experiences , anxieties , and support needs Anne - Sophie E Darlington PhD 1 , Jessica E Morgan PhD 2 , 3 , Richard Wagland PhD 1 , Samantha Sodergren PhD 1 , David Culliford PhD 4 , Ashley Gamble 5 , Bob Phillips PhD 2 , 3 Affiliations 1 . School of Health Sciences , University of Southampton , SO171BJ Southampton , United Kingdom 2 . Centre for Reviews and Dissemination , University of York , YO10 5DD York , United Kingdom 3 . Department of Paediatric Oncology , Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust , LS1 3EX Leeds , United Kingdom 4 . NIHR Applied Research Collaboration Wessex , University of Southampton , SO171BJ Southampton , United Kingdom 5 . Children’s Cancer and Leukaemia Group , LE1 7GB Leicester , United Kingdom Corresponding author Anne - Sophie Darlington School of Health Sciences University of Southampton University Road Southampton SO171BJ United Kingdom Tel . + 44 02380597888 e - mail : a . darlington @ soton . ac . uk . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Abstract Background Children with cancer were considered to be extremely clinically vulnerable to severe COVID - 19 disease if they were to contract SARS - CoV - 2 due to immune suppression as a result of anti - cancer treatment . The aim was to explore experiences , information and support needs , and decision - making of parents with a child with cancer in response to the early phase of the COVID - 19 pandemic in the UK . Methods Parents of a child with cancer completed a survey in April 2020 , as the UK moved into a period of ‘lockdown’ , with restrictions of movement outside of the home . An online survey was developed to capture parents’ experiences , information and support needs , and decision - making , using closed statements and open text boxes . Descriptive quantitative analyses and qualitative thematic content analysis were undertaken . Findings 171 parents / caregivers completed the survey . 85 % of parents worried about the virus and the majority of parents were vigilant about virus ( 92 % ) or cancer symptoms ( 93 . 4 % ) . For two - thirds ( 69 . 6 % ) hospital was no longer considered a safe place . Parents worried about their own health ( 81 . 1 % ) and about the child getting the virus from them ( 89 . 1 % ) . Eight overarching themes , related to the virus : 1 ) risk of infection , 2 ) information , guidance and advice , 3 ) health care provision , 4 ) fears and anxieties ; or related to lockdown / isolation : 5 ) psychological and social impact , 6 ) keeping safe under lockdown , 7 ) provisions and dependence , and 8 ) employment and income . Interpretation This is the first study to report experiences of parents of a child with cancer during the SARS - CoV - 2 / COVID - 19 pandemic . The study demonstrated that the majority of parents are worried about SARS - CoV - 2 , and worried about transmitting the virus to their child . Hospital was no longer a safe place , and parents were worried about suboptimal cancer care . Parents describe fear and anxiety and the psychological , social and economic impact of isolation as a family . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint RESEARCH INTO CONTEXT Evidence before this study Quarantine due to a pandemic can be traumatic for families . No evidence exists about experiences of families with a clinically vulnerable child with possible increased risk of SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Added value of this study Insight into high levels of worry about the child with cancer becoming infected by parents , healthcare professionals , or from a hospital visit . Increased vigilance of symptoms , fear and anxiety , psychological impact of isolation , and the need for clear information and guidance . Implications of all available evidence Understanding parents’ worries and needs can shape information provision and guidance , and inclusion of vulnerable children in national policy . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Introduction Families are worried about SARS - CoV - 2 infection ; a rapid systematic review of the experience of families under quarantine for recent severe respiratory viruses ( SARS - CoV - 1 , MERS ) showed very high levels of traumatic distress . 1 Parents feel their child with cancer is vulnerable to developing COVID - 19 . 2 While cases are few , 3 and the disease caused by infection has been shown to be relatively mild , surveillance in these groups is encouraged . 4 - 6 In the UK , the administrations in England , Wales and Scotland , initially considered children and young people with cancer to be extremely clinically vulnerable to severe COVID - 19 disease if they were to contract SARS - CoV - 2 , due to immune suppression as a result of anti - cancer treatment . They were recommended to ‘shield’ – to remain at home at all times and have no face - to - face contact with anyone outside of their household , except to attend to medical needs . The general population also entered ‘lockdown’ ( 23 March 2020 ) , with restrictions of movement outside of the home other than for specific designated purposes ( i . e . exercise , shopping for essentials , and ‘key workers’ defined as employees who provide vital services maintaining health and essential infrastructure ) . During this period of time the understanding of the transmissibility of SARS - CoV - 2 was uncertain , the nature of the symptoms was evolving , panic buying ( stockpiling ) was seen and availability and implementation of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) varied . Through this time , comprehensive and updated advice for parents of children with cancer was compiled and disseminated through national charities and professional organisations in the UK . 2 Children and young people undergoing treatment face ongoing compromises to the immune system , forcing families to manage infection risks regularly . Decision - making , around continuing treatment , shielding and accessing hospital , under these threatening circumstances needs to be well understood . 7 This is made even more difficult as new information emerges , for instance with the reporting on multi - system inflammatory disease in children . 8 , 9 When information changes , choices change , producing inconsistencies and difficulties . 10 - 12 For example , fewer visits by children in emergency departments have already been recorded . 13 Families of children with cancer have indicated they feel forgotten , with their voice not represented . Existing professional networks of charities , clinicians , academics and parents were mobilised to develop a study to increase our understanding of evolving experiences , . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint information needs and decision - making of these families under these extraordinarily stressful circumstances . Aims To explore experiences , information and support needs , and decision - making of parents of a child with cancer in response to COVID - 19 . Methods A survey study of parents of a child with cancer , assessing experiences , information and support needs , and decision - making . The findings presented here are part of a larger longitudinal study assessing experiences of parents and children with different paediatric conditions , over time . The survey opened to responses on 6 April 2020 and closed on 4 May 2020 , capturing experiences and needs of parents during the first wave , and lockdown , of the COVID - 19 pandemic within the UK . The study was approved by the University of Southampton and UK NHS Health Research Authority Research Ethics Committees ( IRAS nr . 282176 ) . Participants Parents of a child with cancer aged between 0 - 18 years able to read and respond in English . Parents were recruited through two principal treatment centres in the UK and through social media , national charities and targeted closed Facebook groups , to minimise the burden on the health system during the pandemic . Electronic consent was obtained before completing the online survey . Approximately 150 - 200 respondents were intended to be recruited to ensure sufficient numbers of participants to map the range of issues and experiences , identify common issues across them 14 - 16 carry out meaningful subgroup analyses , and provide rich data from the open text qualitative data . Survey Survey content was based on currently available literature 17 - 19 expert clinician input , and parents . The survey contained the following sections and number of closed statement items : Experiences ( n = 6 ) , Information ( n = 7 ) , Decisions ( n = 7 ) and Support needs ( n = 5 ; Figure 1 ) Response options for the closed statement items were Not at all , A little , Quite a bit , Very much ( except for two conditional questions with Yes / No as response options ) . Each section started with a free text box for comment before the questions guided the respondent’s thinking . For simplicity , SARS - CoV - 2 was referred to as “the virus” . The number of items was purposely small , allowing for rapid analysis and dissemination and increased likelihood . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint of completion . Prior to distributing the survey , feedback from parents was sought about the value and timing of the research , along with detailed questions about the survey in terms of content , phrasing and completeness , and changes were made accordingly . Data analysis Descriptive statistics were carried out using IBM Statistical Package for Social Science ( SPSS ) 19 to summarise the demographic data , and undertake simple descriptive statistics of the closed statement items ( collapsing the lowest two response options ( Not at all , A little ) , and the highest two response options ( Quite a bit , Very much ) into a binary outcome ) . Subgroup analyses were carried out on an item level , using Chi - squared analyses , according to child’s age ( split around the median , age 7 years ) , treatment ( on / off treatment ) , and diagnosis ( Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ( ALL ) , solid tumour , Central Nervous System ( CNS ) tumour , or other ) . Open text box data were subjected to a thematic content analysis , informed by a three - stage coding process : 20 - 21 stage 1 ) Initial sample of 35 comments were open coded into broad comment categories by two researchers ( SS and RW ) , developing an initial framework , and resolving any conflicts with a third researcher ( ASD ) ; stage 2 ) the framework used to categorise all comments from the data , with further refinement ; stage 3 ) overarching themes were identified from analysis of similarities in the content between categories . Number of comments were counted , to identify weight of themes . Given the overlap in comments to categories the total number of comments did not match the number of participants . Results Participants 171 respondents completed the survey , of which the majority were mothers ( n = 143 , 83 . 6 % ) , and nine fathers ( Table 1 ) . The child’s median age was 7 years ( range 1 - 24 years ) . The majority were on treatment ( 67 . 3 % ) and 28 . 7 % were off treatment less than 5 years . The majority of patients were children with ALL ( 75 , 43 . 9 % ) , and 43 ( 25 . 1 % ) with a solid tumour ( Wilms , Rhabdomyosarcoma , Germ Cell tumour , Osteosarcoma , Fibrolamellar Hepatocellular Carcinoma , Neuroblastoma , Retinoblastoma , Ewings Sarcoma , Renal Cell Carcinoma ) , 12 Lymphoma ( 7 . 0 % ) , 11 CNS / brain ( 6 . 4 % ) , and six with AML ( 3 . 5 % ) . Table 1 . Sample characteristics Variables Values Completed by , n ( % ) Mothers 143 ( 83 . 6 % ) . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Father Parent Other Missing 9 ( 5 . 3 % ) 9 ( 5 . 3 % ) 4 ( 2 . 3 % ) 6 ( 3 . 5 % ) Caregiver mean age , years , median ( range ) 39 ( 22 - 67 ) Child’s age , years , median ( range ) 7 ( 1 - 24 ) Child’s treatment status , n ( % ) On treatment Off treatment < 5 years Off treatment > 5 years Missing 115 ( 67 . 3 % ) 49 ( 28 . 7 % ) 5 ( 2 . 9 % ) 2 ( 1 . 2 % ) Diagnosis , n ( % ) Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Solid tumour Lymphoma Brain tumour Acute Myeloblastic Leukaemia Other Missing 75 ( 43 . 9 % ) 43 ( 25 . 1 % ) 12 ( 7 . 0 % ) 11 ( 6 . 4 % ) 6 ( 3 . 5 % ) 8 ( 4 . 7 % ) 16 ( 9 . 4 % ) Closed statement items A large percentage – those respoding ‘Quite a bit , or Very much - of parents worried about the virus ( 85 . 4 % ) , and the majority of parents were vigilant about virus symptoms ( 92 % ) or cancer symptoms ( 93 . 4 % ) . For two - thirds ( 69 . 6 % ) of the respondents hospital was no longer considered a safe place . Parents received information from their clinical team ( 48 . 8 % ) and accessed information on social media ( 83 . 9 % ) , which for some led to feeling anxious ( 40 . 6 % of those who accessed social media information ) . Parents isolated their chid from immediate family ( 81 . 9 % ) . They worried about their own health ( 81 . 1 % ) and about the child contracting the virus from them ( 89 . 1 % ) . The reported worries did not lead to parents stopping or reducing chemotherapy ( only 2 . 3 % ) . The need for support to reduce worries for themselves or others was reported by 20 - 30 % of parents . Group differences in terms of age ( 0 - 7 years versus 7 - 18 years ) were found for two items . Parents of younger children were more worried about nurses / carers visiting at home ( p = 0 . 001 ) , and more likely to want information on ways to support family members ( p = 0 . 002 ) . Parents with a child on treatment were more likely to report that the child should be isolated from everyone except parents / caregivers ( p = 0 . 025 ) . No differences were found according to cancer type . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Figure 1 . Closed statements percentages ( of those who agree Quite a bit or Very much ) Open text boxes Experiences open text box In total , 130 parents ( 76 % of the total ) responded to the question about experiences . Overall , the responses to this question covered 38 subthemes ( Table 2 , including illustrative quotes ) which were organised into the following eight overarching themes , related to the virus ( four themes ) or lockdown and isolation ( four themes ; Figure 2 ) : Virus : 1 ) risk of infection , 2 ) information , guidance and advice , 3 ) health care provision , and 4 ) fears and anxieties ; Lockdown and isolation : 5 ) ) psychological and social impact , 6 ) keeping safe under lockdown , 7 ) provisions and dependence , 8 ) employment and income ( Table 2 ) . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Figure 2 . Open text boxes overarching themes Virus The largest number of comments ( n = 44 ) related to the perceived compromised immune system of their children and their greater susceptibility to the virus . The second largest number of comments ( n = 22 ) described safety concerns relating to hospital visits either for outpatient appointments or overnight stays . Safety of the home environment was felt to be compromised by the virus being brought in by family members who were engaged in a designated ‘essential occupation’ ( known as keyworkers in the UK ) , visiting ( community ) health professionals or visits to the hospital . Concerns relating to limited or unclear information from both the hospital and the government were voiced by 17 ) parents . Another strong theme ( n = 14 ) involved a concern amongst parents that the response to the COVID - 19 situation would lead to suboptimal cancer care or had already led to postponed or . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint cancelled clinic appointments , and several parents were concerned that relapses would be missed . Parents described feeling ‘scared’ , ‘terrified’ or ‘petrified’ of the risk of their child becoming infected . Lockdown and isolation Parents described the psychological impact ( n = 14 ) , for both themselves and their children , of the emergence of the virus and subsequent lockdown and classification of the child as ‘shielded’ , with children struggling mentally , and missing out on life , particularly for those with a limited life expectancy . For parents with children who had recently completed treatment , the lockdown brought with it several frustrations relating to delayed resumption of normality . Parents also described difficulties in coping with the uncertainty of the situation , lack of control , and limited support mechanisms in place which was particularly true for lone parents . Some parents described strategies for coping with the stressful situation , such as the avoidance of or restricted access to news broadcasts and social media . While under lockdown , parents ( n = 10 ) were also concerned about the lack of respect for social distancing shown by some members of the public , the delayed response by the government , and some ( n = 3 ) expressed concern about how things might change when restrictions are relaxed . Access to food home delivery , for families with a child classified as ‘shielded’ , and lack of recognition of parents as needing priority status ( rather than just the child ) ( n = 13 ) were concerns . Financial and employment concerns were also expressed ( n = 10 ) : parents described having to give up paid work to ‘shield’ their child . In addition , parents expressed frustration in terms of not being eligible for furlough ( the government’s Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme , which allowed employers to continue paying wages via a government subsidy ) . Additional free text responses Information 18 parents wanted more information , specifically ( n = 4 ) in relation to safety of hospitals , information tailored to children with cancer rather than to adults , information relevant to . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint children with rare cancers and those off treatment , and their child’s level of risk of catching the virus given their particular situation ( on or off - treatment ) or diagnosis . For the majority of parents ( n = 89 ) charities provided them with information regarding the virus , followed by clinical staff ( n = 50 ) and news outlets ( n = 41 ) . Support 99 parents described a need for additional support related to the provision of more information , specifically more guidance or support from the hospital . The need for information and reassurance surrounding the safety of the hospital environment including the availability and use of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) as well as testing of staff was further reinforced by 22 parents . In addition , four parents proposed remote contact with hospital staff and services delivered within the community as an option to protect their child . Decisions Parents were more likely ( n = 44 ) to turn to clinical staff when making decisions about their child’s care , while 35 parents described relying on their own judgements based on their knowledge of their child and past experience and 6 were also led by their child when making decisions . Positive Some parents ( n = 5 ) highlighted the positives of the lockdown in terms of bringing the family together and the social restrictions making them ‘feel safe at home’ , providing them with a ‘protective bubble’ . Some parents ( n = 3 ) suggested that things could be worse , or drew comparisons between the isolation imposed during cancer treatment and that of the virus and that they were better equipped than most to face the challenges . In addition , 12 parents took the opportunity to use the survey to communicate their gratitude to the hospital and charities for the care and support they had received . Table 2 . Themes and subthemes of open text boxes Theme Subtheme Number Quotes VIRUS Risk of infection Concern over child’s low immunity 44 We are concerned that Covid - 19 could get to her easier than the average child Concern over visiting hospitals 22 A place that once was considered safe for our son I now consider to be a great risk due to the risk of catching the virus ; The thought of us having to go in overnight is keeping me awake at . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint night . Family member has / had Covid - 19 7 It’s very worrying more so now as my eldest child has symptoms of the virus Concern over infection entering the home from parent having to work or shop for provisions 6 I am very nervous about going into shops etc . in case I pick something up and take it home . Concern over varied approach to wearing PPE 5 Some staff are wearing PPE and some are not . Vigilance of symptoms 2 Extremely on edge about a temperature spike Information , guidance and advice Limited information / mixed messaging 17 All the information seemed geared at adults not families with vulnerable children . There was a lot of mixed information at the start of the isolation period and far too many grey areas . Need for targeted advice and support 8 Children within 2 years of transplant are high risk , those people with spleen issues are high risk . Where does this leave our 8 year old ? Surely , she cannot be the same low risk as a child who has not had leukaemia , pneumonia , lung fungal infection , possible spleen issues . But we are left on our own in terms of guidance . Information regarding child’s vulnerability status not issued 4 We didn’t receive a letter saying “X” was at high risk but when I spoke to somebody at Macmillan they said she was high risk and should be shielding Good information from staff 3 Luckily our key workers and Leeds children’s hospital have given more specific advice appropriate for children with working parents . Feel need to seek info from other sources 2 Constantly researching the internet looking for case studies for reassurance Healthcare provision Concern over strained hospital facilities , sub - optimal treatment and care and relapses might be missed 14 His next scan is likely to be cancelled so this is causing concern - he has a high - grade tumour which could return quickly so we are worried we could miss a recurrence More support required 6 Would have preferred some more reassurance and advice from the primary care centre / oncologist as we mainly relied on watching government press conferences . New ways of working in the hospital 7 Previously , for his chemo appointments , there ' s a dedicated entrance but now the hospital makes everyone enter through the main entrance which gives an increased possibility in coming into possible coronavirus patients . I understand infection control and some things have to be done but telling us that both parents can be present for 1st chemo session , then that night being informed that wasn’t the case and I would have to come alone was quite difficult . Priority of Covid - 19 over cancer care 2 Feel the virus takes priority over everything and we have been left without the same support we had prior to the virus . Fears and anxieties General expressions of fear 6 I think for me it is genuinely the unknown Concern over ability to look after child if parent ill or dies 5 I am asthmatic and also fear that if I were to get it I couldn ' t care for her . Concern child or parent will die 4 What if me and my husband get it and one of us dies , that can ' t happen . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Things could be worse 3 On the flip side , we are relishing this time together as a family and so grateful that we are not in the middle of treatment and needing to go to the hospital . Separation if child becomes ill from rest of family 3 I worry that if he catches it I’ll have to be in hospital with him away from my other children Child has had / possibly had Covid - 19 2 My child has had the virus and it was very mild symptoms . I was very worried about him catching it and thought it would have a bad effect on him but it was very mild LOCKDOWN AND ISOLATION Psychological and social impact Psychological impact on child and family , missing out on life , boredom 14 The isolation has been quite triggering for him , he is bringing up emotions and questions from when he was on treatment . An additional worry , another thing to keep life from being normal . It has restricted any chance of normality during last months of my son’s life . We know we only have months , have accepted that , but now we are unable to do the basic things , like go out for coffee , visit grandparents , simple things that bring him pleasure . Parental coping ( struggles , strategies used ) 13 Panic of not being in control again . As a single parent , it is tough . I need more support from family and friends , that I normally have , but cannot . Feels incredibly lonely . Delayed resumption of normality after treatment 9 We were already isolated from August 19 but we were starting to look forward to that relaxing a bit in the next few months . That has made my daughter really sad . Parallel with cancer treatment isolation 7 As a family we are coping well as isolation is not unusual due to cancer treatment . Missing family and friends 5 It’s been hard not seeing family and friends though - this is what has pulled us through our difficult journey and my son is too young to understand why he can only see his grandparents through a window . Impractical nature of social distancing 4 We could not adhere to the ridiculous guidelines set out in the letter of keeping a 2m distance from our young children… caused a lot of stress for families on top of our usual daily stresses . Social and educational development 3 Worry of his social skills being reduced and the long - term impact on him . Missing emotional support for parents from friends and family 3 The virus has taken away my comfort blanket if I feel anxious , I don’t have that physical access to family and friends that we did at diagnosis . Use of technology to keep in touch 3 We are using technology to keep in touch with friends and family as that is the hardest bit . Separation from partners / parents / children 4 My husband’s work will also not furlough him due to him being a key worker so he has had to move out into the garage for the 12 weeks . Keeping safe under lockdown Concern over societal compliance in social distancing in society and delayed lockdown 10 I was very worried starting in January that nothing was being done to protect our children especially as it is a brand new disease and nobody knows enough about it . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint Being on lockdown keeps child safe 6 In some ways because society have restrictions it makes it easier . Concern once restrictions are lifted / adjustment concerns 3 I worry about re - interacting with society . Provisions and dependence Difficulty securing provisions ( food , cleaning , medication ) 13 The hardest with everything is probably the food shopping . We have bought our food online since diagnosis a year ago as we wanted to avoid the shops and now we can’t get any delivery slots Lack of priority status 4 One of us is having to go shopping as we are not able to access online shopping as the vulnerable status is in the child’s name . Reliance on friends and family to pick up provisions 4 Having to rely on others for everything is quite patronising . Employment and income 10 Worry about finances as both my husband and I have decided to stay home to shield her . Discussion This is the first study to report experiences of parents of a child with cancer during the SARS - CoV - 2 / COVID - 19 pandemic in the UK . The study has found that the majority of parents were worried about SARS - CoV - 2 , worried about their own health if they are infected , and worried about transmitting the virus to their child . They described vigilance about SARS - CoV - 2 symptoms and cancer - related symptoms , and for a lot of parents the hospital was no longer a safe place during the first month of the lockdown . The qualitative findings show that the threat of SARS - CoV - 2 leads to concerns about getting infected and therefore to fear of the hospital and healthcare teams visiting the family at home . Parents got information from their medical team , and almost all parents looked at social media for information , which for some led to feeling anxious . Parents wanted clear information and guidance , which included the shielding policy in the UK . Changes in healthcare provision led some parents to think their care will be suboptimal , and that care for COVID - 19 patients was prioritised over that of cancer patients , and that the health service was strained . Parents were anxious about the unknown , about who will look after their child if they get ill ( or die ) . Remarkably , only around one quarter of parents expressed a wish for additional support , and some described how their experience with cancer treatment had made them better prepared for ‘lockdown’ than those without this background . The lockdown and imposed isolation by the UK government has led to psychological impact in terms of children missing out , feeling bored , missing family and friends , and a delay in social and emotional development , mirroring evidence from studies focusing on young . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint people’s mental health during the pandemic . 23 - 25 Parents miss their support network , even though technology is available to connect with others . The designation of children as requiring ‘shielding’ provided particular challenges ; the English Government advice described attempting to maintain complete isolation from all other people , even those living in the same household . This lack of age - related nuance may have increased the level of anxiety for some families , particularly around food shopping . Parents struggled with going out to grocery stores , as they did not want to expose themselves to the risk of getting the virus ( and thus increasing the chances of the child becoming infected ) . In common with many people during the lockdown , parents are worried about employment and money ; the study group of parents have the additional concern of transmitting the virus to their child . Uncertainty and lack of clarity in communication were strong themes in the parents’ responses . A clearer , more open , and reasoned account of the various measures being planned and implemented may have assisted with reducing this distress . Much of the uncertainty arose from the true lack of knowledge about the effect of SARS - CoV - 2 , but few participants reflected this . The all - age signalling of government guidance failed to help families and placed them in an invidious position – to apparently defy the government guideline and risk adversely affecting their child through infection , or follow the guidelines strictly and adversely affect their child with restriction on activity and contact with one parent or siblings . 26 Reduced attendances in paediatric emergency care facilities with any form of injury or illness were reported . 13 This , combined with data emerging from this survey on concern about the safety of hospitals , led the charities involved in the research along with local health providers and national paediatric bodies to promote the message of hospitals being ‘safe to attend’ . Worries about the possible reduction in anti - cancer therapy were addressed with information co - produced by parents and medical professionals and disseminated through the same routes , explaining the process of contingency planning and the routes to these planned recommendations . The most marked change in care provision was the move to more remote / virtual follow - up appointments , and delay or omission of planned surveillance imaging for patients off treatment . These elements have rarely been shown to have significant survival advantage but contain great emotional weight . 27 Limitations of the study relate to the bias in the sample - although strenuous efforts were made to widely circulate the survey across children’s cancer interested social media , the respondents may not be representative of the whole population . The responses were mostly from mothers ( 86 % ) , and the largest group of patients had ALL ( 46 % ) . While this is . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint disproportionate compared to the diagnoses made in the UK ( where it accounts for around one quarter of malignancies ) , it is also treated for 2 - 3 years , in comparison with the shorter time frame ( under 9 months ) of most treatment trajectories . The high proportion of mothers responding is in keeping with surveys about children , as well as the observation mothers being the primary caregiver for the vast majority of children . In addition , parents responding to the survey could have self - selected to represent those parents who were most concerned . Finally , subgroup analyses findings may be based on chance given the number of analyses carried out ( n = 23x3 ) and the number of group differences ( n = 3 ) We believe this study demonstrates how the views and experiences of a classically ‘vulnerable’ population can be captured by using existing research networks , and agile governance response and inclusion of patient partners from the commencement of the study . We have found high levels of concern about the consequences of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in children with cancer and the consequences of presumed preventative interventions to the children and their families . We propose true uncertainty , coarse recommendations , and a lack of clarity behind decision - making process in national administrations may have worsened these experiences . As the pandemic continues , survey studies such as this will be important in understanding the ongoing experience of families and tuning support and information to their changing needs . Acknowledgements We would like to thank all parents who contributed their time and experiences to this study . References 1 . Brooks SK , Webster RK , Smith LE , Woodland L , Wessely S , Greenberg N , Rubin GJ . The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it : rapid review of the evidence . Lancet 2020 ; 395 : 912 - 920 2 . https : / / www . cclg . org . uk / Coronavirus - advice 3 . Pathak EB , Salemi JL , Sobers N , Menard J , Hambleton IR . COVID - 19 in Children in the United States : Intensive Care Admissions , Estimated Total Infected , and Projected Numbers of Severe Pediatric Cases in 2020 . Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 2020 ; 26 : 325 - 333 4 . Kotecha RS . Challenges posed by COVID - 19 to children with cancer . Lancet 2020 ; 5 : e235 5 . Minotti C , Tirelli , Barbieri E3 , Giaquinto C , Donà D . How is immunosuppressive status affecting children and adults in SARS - CoV - 2 infection ? A systematic review . The Journal of Infection 2020 Apr 23 . 6 . Hrusak O , Kalina T , Wolf J , Balduzzi A , et al . Flash survey on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus - 2 infections in paediatric patients on anticancer treatment . European Journal of Cancer 2020 ; 132 : 11 - 16 . 7 . Sung L , Feldman BM , Schwamborn G , Paczesny D , Cochrane A , Greenberg ML , Maloney AM , Hendershot EI , Naqvi A , Barrera M , Llewellyn - Thomas HA . Inpatient . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint versus outpatient management of low - risk pediatric febrile neutropenia : measuring parents ' and healthcare professionals ' preferences . Journal of Clinical Oncology 2004 ; 22 : 3922 - 9 . 8 . PICS society : https : / / picsociety . uk / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 04 / PICS - statement - re - novel - KD - C19 - presentation - v2 - 27042020 . pdf 9 . Whittaker E , Bamford A , Kenny J , et al ; for the PIMS - TS Study Group and EUCLIDS and PERFORM Consortia . Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome Temporally Associated With SARS - CoV - 2 . JAMA 2020 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 10369 10 . Reyna VF , Nelson WL , Han PK , Pignone MP . Decision making and cancer . American Psychologist 2015 ; 70 : 105 - 118 . 11 . Rimer BK , Briss PA , Zeller PK , Chan ECY , Woolf SH . Informed decision making : What is its role in cancer screening ? Cancer 2004 ; 101 ( 5 Suppl ) : 1214 – 1228 . 12 . Peters E , Klein W , Kaufman A , Meilleur L . Dixon A . More Is Not Always Better : Intuitions About Effective Public Policy Can Lead to Unintended Consequences . Social Issues and Policy Review 2013 ; 7 : 114 - 148 13 . Isba R , 2 , Edge R , Jenner R , Broughton E , Francis N , Butler J . Where have all the children gone ? Decreases in paediatric emergency department attendances at the start of the COVID - 19 pandemic of 2020 . Archives of Disease in Childhood 2020 May 6 . 14 . Hill R . What sample is ‘enough’ in internet survey . Interpersonal computer and Technology Journal 2016 ; 6 15 . Gay LR , Diehl PL . Research Methods for Business and Management . 1992 New York : Macmillan . 16 . Safdar , N . et al . Research Methods in Healthcare Epidemiology : Survey and Qualitative Research . Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology 2016 ; 37 ; 1272 - 1277 . 17 . Robertson EG , Wakefield CE , Shaw J , et al . Decision - making in childhood cancer : parents ' and adolescents ' views and perceptions . Supportive Care in Cancer 2019 ; 27 : 4331 - 4340 18 . Morgan JE , Cleminson J , Stewart LA , Phillips RS , Atkin K . Meta - ethnography of experiences of early discharge , with a focus on paediatric febrile neutropenia . Supportive Care in Cancer 2018 ; 26 : 1039 - 1050 . 19 . Morgan JE , Phillips B , Stewart LA , Atkin K . Quest for certainty regarding early discharge in paediatric low - risk febrile neutropenia : a multicentre qualitative focus group discussion study involving patients , parents and healthcare professionals in the UK . BMJ Open 2018 ; 8 : e020324 . 20 . IBM Corp . Released 2019 . IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows , Version 26 . 0 . Armonk , NY : IBM Corp . 21 . Mason J . Qualitative Researching . 2002 , SAGE Publications . 22 . Wagland R , Bracher M , Drosdowsky A , et al . Differences in experiences of care between patients diagnosed with metastatic cancer of known and unknown primaries : mixed - method findings from the 2013 cancer patient experience survey in England . BMJ Open 2017 ; 7 : e017881 . 23 . Fegert JM , Vitiello B , Plener PL , Clemens V . Challenges and Burden of the Coronavirus 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) Pandemic for Child and Adolescent Mental Health : A Narrative Review to Highlight Clinical and Research Needs in the Acute Phase and the Long Return to Normality . Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health 2020 ; 20 : 14 - 20 . 24 . Saurabh K , Ranjan S . Compliance and Psychological Impact of Quarantine in Children and Adolescents due to Covid - 19 Pandemic . Indian Journal Pediatrics 2020 ; 29 : 1 - 5 . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint 25 . Clerici CA , Massimino M , Ferrari A . On the clinical psychologist ' s role in the time of COVID - 19 , with particular reference to experience gained in pediatric oncology . Psychooncology 2020 Jun 5 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pon . 5418 . 26 . https : / / www . itv . com / news / 2020 - 05 - 06 / four - year - old - with - cancer - reunited - with - father - after - seven - weeks - kept - apart - in - lockdown / 27 . Morgan JE , Walker R , Harden M , Phillips RS . A Systematic Review of Evidence for and Against Routine Surveillance Imaging After Completing Treatment for Childhood Extracranial Solid Tumors . Cancer Medicine 2020 May 19 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cam4 . 3110 . . CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International license It is made available under a is the author / funder , who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . ( which was not certified by peer review ) The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 12 , 2020 . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 11 . 20128603 doi : medRxiv preprint