Local invasion can be considered an initial and essen - tial step in the malignancy of carcinomas , leading to the generation of usually fatal distant metastasis . Tumour invasion appears to be controlled by a coordi - nated series of cellular and molecular processes that enable tumour cells to dissociate and migrate from the primary tumour . The changes in cell adhesion and migration during tumour invasion are reminiscent of an important developmental process termed epithelial – mesenchymal transition 1 , 2 ( EMT ; FIG . 1 ) , a process that also has an active role in other stages of the metastatic cascade such as intravasation 3 . One of the hallmarks of EMT is the functional loss of E - cadherin ( encoded by CDH1 ) , which is currently thought to be a suppressor of invasion during carcinoma progression 4 . The char - acterization of E - cadherin regulation during malignant progression has provided important insights into the molecular mechanisms implicated in tumour invasion . In particular , transcriptional repression has recently emerged as a fundamental mechanism for the dynamic silencing of CDH1 during tumour progression . Indeed , several transcription factors that strongly repress CDH1 ( such as members of the Snail , ZEB and basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH ) families ) are now thought to be involved in tumour progression , thus having potential clinical interest 5 . Nevertheless , the specific role of these different repressors in tumorigenesis is not fully understood . Despite the increasing evidence that EMT occurs in vivo , the influence of EMT in human tumours is currently a matter of controversy 6 , 7 . In this Review , we will focus our attention on the role of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors in the regulation of epithelial cell plasticity during tumour progression . We will summarize recently identified signalling pathways , transcriptional mechanisms and target genes , as well as new functions assigned to these factors and their expression profile in human tumours . Finally , we will discuss the potential interplay between these factors during tumour progression , and how the tumour microenvironment governs the action of these factors in suppressing the epithelial phenotype . Factors that repress E - cadherin The characterization in 2000 of the zinc - finger fac - tor snail ( Snail homologue 1 , hereafter called SNAI1 ( REF . 8 ) ) as a transcriptional repressor of CDH1 and an inducer of EMT 9 , 10 was an important breakthrough , providing new insights into the molecular mechanisms of tumour invasion . Since then , other CDH1 repressors and EMT inducers have been described . Because of the importance of these factors during tumour progres - sion , a huge effort has been made to understand how these factors behave . SNAI1 and SNAI2 ( also known as slug ) 11 , 12 belong to the Snail superfamily of zinc finger transcriptional repressors that participate in develop - mental EMT ( BOX 1 ) and other processes 8 . ZEB1 ( also known as TCF8 and δ EF1 ) and ZEB2 ( also known as ZFXH1B and SMAD interacting protein 1 ( SIP1 ) ) , two members of the ZEB family ( BOX 2 ) , have also emerged as key factors that regulate E - cadherin and the induction of EMT 13 , 14 and are also implicated in the malignancy of different human tumours . Similarly , there is increas - ing evidence that some bHLH factors , as well as the Id HLH subfamily ( BOX 3 ) , are important during tumour cell invasion and metastasis . These transcription fac - tors are members of a large family of proteins that have Departamento de Bioquímica , Facultad de Medicina , Universidad Autónoma de Madrid ( UAM ) , Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas ‘Alberto Sols’ CSIC - UAM , Arturo Duperier 4 , 28029 Madrid , Spain . Correspondence to A . C . e - mail : acano @ iib . uam . es doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2131 Published online 17 May 2007 Tumour invasion Inasive tumour cells are able to dissociate and emigrate from primary tumours into adjacent tissues . Epithelial – mesenchymal transition The cellular and molecular processes by which epithelial cells lose cell – cell interactions and apico - basal polarity at the same time as acquiring mesenchymal and migratory properties . EMT has a fundamental role in specific developmental stages under strict spatio - temporal regulation . Intravasation The process by which tumour cells penetrate the blood or lymphatic vessels , allowing their eventual dissemination to distant organs . Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors in tumour progression : an alliance against the epithelial phenotype ? Héctor Peinado , David Olmeda and Amparo Cano Abstract | The molecular mechanisms that underlie tumour progression are still poorly understood , but recently our knowledge of particular aspects of some of these processes has increased . Specifically , the identification of Snail , ZEB and some basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH ) factors as inducers of epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) and potent repressors of E - cadherin expression has opened new avenues of research with potential clinical implications . NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 415 REVIEWS © 2007 Nature Publishing Group E - cadherin The major calcium - dependent cell – cell adhesion molecule , functionally organized in cadherin – catenin complexes at adherens junctions and essential for the establishment of embryonic epithelium and the homeostasis of adult epithelial tissues . The functional loss of E - cadherin occurs in most carcinomas associated with a high tumour grade and invasiveness . Epithelial cell plasticity Progressive changes occurring in the gene - expression programmes that correspond with the diverse phenotypic manifestations that are seen as cells progress from an epithelial cell type to a complete mesenchymal phenotype and vice versa . historically been implicated in lineage determination , of which E47 ( encoded by the E2A gene , also known as TCF3 ) , TCF4 ( also known as E2 - 2 ) and TWIST1 act as CDH1 repressors and inducers of EMT 15 , 16 ( V . Sobrado and A . C . , unpublished data ) . Therefore , it is important to understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate the expression and function of these factors in both physiological and pathological situations . Signalling pathways that regulate CDH1 repressors . Snail proteins are involved in development through facilitating EMT , so many of the signalling pathways that regulate their expression have been described . During development , EMT is induced both in inver - tebrate and vertebrate systems by receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs , which are activated by different sig - nals , such as fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , platelet derived growth factor ( PDGF ) and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) ) , the transforming growth factor β ( TGF β ) – bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) pathway and Wnt signalling ( see FIG . 2a for an overview ) 1 , 2 , 8 , 17 . Studies in cell lines and transgenic mouse models have confirmed that similar signalling pathways regulate SNAI1 , and to a lesser extent SNAI2 , in EMT associ - ated with carcinogenesis ( reviewed in REFS 1 , 8 , 18 , 19 ) . Significantly , there is cross - talk between some of these pathways , such as TGF β , RTKs – Ras , Notch , hedgehog and / or Wnt or β - catenin pathways 20 – 24 . In particular , many of these pathways coordinate CDH1 repression by SNAI1 , or collaborate with β - catenin signalling in the induction of EMT 20 , 25 or SNAI2 expression , both during avian and Xenopus development and in tumour cell lines 26 – 28 . Recently , the high - mobility group protein HMGA2 has been proposed as a major integrator of TGF β - mediated EMT in human cell lines , coordinating the induction of SNAI1 , SNAI2 , TWIST and the repression of ID2 ( REF . 29 ) . In recent years additional signals have emerged that participate in the regulation of CDH1 repression in mammals ( FIG . 2a ) , such as the induction of SNAI1 and ZEB1 expression by prostaglandin E2 ( PGE2 ) 30 , 31 . Autocrine or paracrine signals can also induce the expression of the Snail genes in different systems , including endothelin 1 , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , autocrine motility factor ( AMF ) , stem cell factor ( SCF ) – KIT , RAF1 , calreticulin , hypoxia , reactive oxygen species or laminin 5 ( REFS 32 – 40 ) . Interestingly , although some of these pathways also induce TWIST ( VEGF and Wnt ) or ZEB factors ( TGF β – BMP ) , others appear to be specific to SNAI1 and SNAI2 or ZEB factors ( FIG . 2a ) . The regulation of CDH1 repres - sors by steroid and related receptors has been anal - ysed in some hormone - associated cancer cells . For example , in prostate cancer cells , the androgen ana - logue dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ) can induce SNAI2 and to a lesser extent SNAI1 expression 41 . Signalling through the oestrogen receptor ( ER ) negatively regu - lates SNAI1 expression in breast cancer cells ( FIG . 2a ) through a mechanism involving metastasis - associated gene 3 ( MTA3 ) , a subunit of the nucleosome remodel - ling and histone deacetylation ( NuRD ) transcriptional co - repressor complex . Therefore , the loss of MTA3 or ER and SNAI1 upregulation is associated with a poor prognosis in breast cancer 42 . By contrast , ZEB1 can be induced by oestrogen signalling cascades 43 , although the biological significance of this finding in tumorigenesis remains unknown . Comparative analysis of SNAI1 and SNAI2 promot - ers from different species has identified conserved and functional response elements 18 , such as AP1 and AP4 sites , SMAD - binding elements , LEF1 binding sites and two conserved E - boxes 21 , 22 , 28 , 44 – 46 . Recent studies have shown that SNAI1 binds to and represses its own promoter , indicating the existence of an autoregulatory loop 44 . In addition , a negative - feedback mechanism was recently described for the regulation of SNAI1 by scatter factor ( also known as hepatocyte growth factor , HGF ) involving the mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) target protein early growth response 1 ( EGR1 ) , which is also a SNAI1 target gene 47 ( TABLE 1 ) . Surprisingly , avian SNAI2 has the ability to self - activate during neural crest development following inductive signals from a BMP – SOX2 – protein kinase A ( PKA ) pathway 27 . Importantly , this latter work proposes an activator function for SNAI2 , in contrast to the assumed function of Snail factors as repressors 48 ( BOX1 ) . At a glance • Local tumour invasion represents the first step of the metastatic cascade of carcinomas , and requires profound changes in the cell adhesion and migration properties of tumour cells that are reminiscent of developmental epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . EMT is thought to be a dynamic and transient process , and as such is a manifestation of epithelial cell plasticity during tumour progression . • The loss of functional E - cadherin is a hallmark of EMT and carcinoma cell invasiveness . Transcriptional repression mediated by factors from the Snail ( SNAI1 and SNAI2 ) , ZEB ( ZEB1 and ZEB2 ) and basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH : E47 and TWIST ) families is a basic mechanism for the dynamic silencing of CDH1 ( the gene that encodes E - cadherin ) . • Post - transcriptional modifications are emerging as a meaningful additional level of regulation of various repressors . The protein stability , nuclear localization and functional activity of SNAI1 seem to be controlled by a delicate balance between phosphorylation , zinc transporter proteins and interaction with lysyl - oxidase - like proteins . • Besides CDH1 , additional direct and indirect target genes of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors are being described that encode proteins involved in EMT as well as in cell proliferation , cell survival or angiogenesis , indicating that these factors have additional functions beyond the repression of CDH1 and the induction of EMT . • Snail and bHLH factors have recently been implicated in cell - survival and acquired resistance to genotoxic agents by cancer cells , providing new insights into the biological properties conferred by these factors , with potential clinical implications . • The expression patterns of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors in different human carcinomas , together with functional studies , indicate that the various factors have different roles during tumour progression , with a more prominent role for SNAI1 in the induction of EMT in primary tumours , whereas the other factors are involved in maintaining the migratory phenotype . • Complex signalling networks from the tumour microenvironment , including hypoxia and transforming growth factor β ( TGF β ) , can coordinate the expression and / or function of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors , and promote their interplay in orchestrating CDH1 repression and malignant tumour migration . R E V I E W S 416 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Epithelial cell Tumour cell Fibroblast Mesenchymal tumour cell Tumour cell under transient MET Immune cell EMT MET EMT E - boxes Recognition sequences for basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH ) factors and other transcription factors like Snail and ZEB . They are formed by the consensus palindromic sequence CANNTG . Apart from some of the signals indicated above , little information is available regarding the specific regulation of bHLH and ZEB factors during tumour progression ( FIG . 2a ) . The regulation of the expression of Id factors might influence that of bHLH factors , as Id proteins can repress the activities of bHLH class I proteins ( BOX 3 ) . Indeed , Id proteins may be induced in response to sev - eral inducers of EMT and / or oncogenic pathways in mammalian cell systems , such as TGF β – BMP , VEGF or insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) , as well as by acti - vated Ras , β - catenin or phosphotidylinositol - 3 kinase ( PI3K ) ( reviewed in REFS 49 , 50 ) ( FIG . 2a ) . Therefore , they may , through their dominant negative action , impinge on the activity of E47 factors . With regards to ZEB fac - tors , ZEB2 can modulate TGF β signalling and influence TGF β - mediated EMT 51 in different contexts . Dynamic repression mechanisms . The mechanisms through which different repressors control CDH1 and other genes during EMT are being uncovered ( FIG . 2b ) . The modification of chromatin structure has emerged as a major regulatory event promoted by these proteins during EMT 52 , 53 , and pioneering analysis of SNAI2 repression highlighted the involvement of histone deacetylases ( HDACs ) 54 . Accordingly , we defined a model for SNAI1 repression of CDH1 involving the direct recruitment of a repressor complex formed by the co - repressor SIN3A , and HDAC1 and HDAC2 ( REF . 55 ) ( FIG . 2b ) . However , other co - repressors can also regulate the activity of the Snail proteins , like the C - terminal binding protein CTBP1 , as first character - ized in Drosophila melanogaster 48 . SNAI2 also represses BRCA2 through CTBP1 and HDAC1 in human breast cancer cell lines 56 , and SNAI2 can cooperate with CTBP1 and CTBP2 , and HDAC1 and HDAC3 to repress CDH1 through a mechanism that remains to be elucidated ( V . Bolós and A . C . , unpublished data ) ( FIG . 2b ) . This interaction seems to be indirect , as the CTBP - binding sequence is not conserved in vertebrate SNAI2 ( REF . 48 ) and SNAI2 does not directly bind to either CTBP 57 . Studies in several cancer cell lines show that CTBP co - repressor complexes may also collaborate in the repression of CDH1 by ZEB factors 58 , although the ZEB2 – CTBP interaction is dispensable for CDH1 repression 59 . Importantly , CTBP and p300 co - regulator levels seem to be crucial in controlling CDH1 expres - sion in colorectal tumours because they can regulate ZEB1 repressor or activator activity 60 , as has previously been shown for ZEB factors in mammalian cells and during Xenopus development 61 . The activity of CTBP co - repressor complexes can be further modified by interaction with other co - factors , such as PNN , that relieve CTBP1 - mediated CDH1 repression 62 ( FIG . 2b ) . Notably , protein acetylation and sumoylation can mod - ulate the efficiency with which CTBP represses CDH1 , as these protein modifications alter either the nuclear localization of CTBP or its interactions with ZEB2 ( REFS 63 , 64 ) ( FIG . 3c ) . Furthermore , CTBP activity is regulated by NADH levels 65 . Unfortunately , so far the mechanisms involved in the E47 and TWIST - mediated repression of CDH1 remain largely unknown . However , although the information available points to heterodimerization with Id regulators 29 , 66 ( E . Cubillo and A . C . , unpublished data ) , other mechanisms cannot be ruled out . The fact that SNAI1 , SNAI2 , ZEB1 and ZEB2 recruit specific chromatin - remodelling complexes supports a dynamic link between transcriptional repression and the epigenetic gene silencing of CDH1 during tumour progression and EMT 52 . Whether these factors also control other genes by this mechanism during EMT remains to be established . Post - transcriptional regulation . Important advances have been made recently in understanding the post - transcriptional regulatory mechanisms that affect EMT regulators such as SNAI1 ( FIG . 3a ) . The subcel - lular localization of SNAI1 can be modulated by phosphorylation 67 involving the p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) 68 . Interestingly , the nuclear localization of SNAI1 in zebrafish embryos can also be controlled by the expression of the zinc transporter LIV1 , which lies downstream of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) 69 . On the other hand , glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) phosphorylation of the Figure 1 | EMT as a dynamic process and a manifestation of epithelial plasticity . Schematic diagram of the main cell properties affected in a transient versus stable epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) process . Cells that underwent EMT during tumour invasion are characterized by the loss of cell – cell adhesion and polarity accompanied by cytoskeleton rearrangements and increased cell motility . Sometimes , cells that had previously undergone EMT could transiently re - acquire an epithelioid phenotype by reverse mesenchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) as the result of new interactions with the tumour microenvironment . EMT could also have an active role during metastatic spreading by promoting other malignant properties such as tumour cell intravasation 16 , and stable MET can occur at established secondary metastases 2 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 417 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Box 1 | Snail factors The Snail superfamily is divided into the Snail and Scratch families , with three members of the Snail family having been described in vertebrates to date : SNAI1 , SNAI2 and SNAI3 ( REF . 8 ) . Members of the Snail family are zinc - finger transcription factors that share a common organization : a highly conserved C - terminal region , containing four – six zinc fingers ( C 2 H 2 type ) and a divergent N - terminal region ( see figure ) . The zinc fingers function as the sequence - specific DNA - binding domains that recognize consensus E2 - box type elements C / A ( CAGGTG ) 17 . Snail factors are currently thought to be transcriptional repressors 48 . Their repressor capacity is dependent on the SNAG domain 55 : 7 – 9 amino acids in the N - terminal part of the protein that are conserved between Snail and growth factor independence ( Gfi ) proteins . The central region of the Snail proteins have a serine – proline - rich region that is highly divergent between Snail members . SNAI2 proteins contain the so - called slug domain in this region , the function of which remains elusive . By contrast , two different functional domains have been identified in the central region of SNAI1 proteins : a regulatory domain containing a nuclear export signal ( NES ) 67 and a destruction box domain 70 . The phosphorylation of proline / serine residues in both regions and potential modification of adjacent lysine residues has been implicated in the subcellular localization of SNAI1 , protein stability and repressor activity 67 , 70 , 72 . SNAI1 is expressed during mesoderm formation , gastrulation and neural crest development , as well as in most developmental processes in which epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) is required 2 , 17 . SNAI2 expression has been associated with mesoderm and migratory neural crest cells , as well as in other tissues not always associated with EMT 8 . SNAI1 is essential for mouse gastrulation 166 , and SNAI1 and SNAI2 for neural crest development in frog and avian embryos , respectively 17 . However , they seem not to be essential for mouse neural crest formation , but are instead involved in left – right asymmetry 167 . Comparative scheme of the main structural domains found in mammalian SNAI1 and SNAI2 . SNAI1 nuclear export signal ( NES ) and destruction box ( BOX 1 ) provokes its cytoplasmic export and ubiquitin - mediated proteasome degradation 70 , 71 . In addition to phosphorylation , other interactions also appear to influ - ence the stability of SNAI1 , such as cooperation with lysyl - oxidase like 2 and 3 ( LOXL2 and LOXL3 ) to repress CDH1 and induce EMT 72 . Interestingly , LOXL2 stabilizes SNAI1 by regulating its interaction with GSK3 β , sup - porting a model in which SNAI1 activity is balanced by opposing signals 73 ( FIG . 3a ) . Less is known about the post - transcriptional regulation of SNAI2 , although a recent study in Xenopus indicates that the partner of paired ( Ppa ) protein modulates its stability and degradation 74 ( FIG . 3b ) . Unfortunately , even less is known about the post - transcriptional regulation of ZEB factors . Although the repressor activity of ZEB2 seems to be impaired by PC2 - mediated sumoylation , preventing its interaction with CTBP 63 ( FIG . 3c ) , the functional consequences for tumour progression remain to be established . Post - translational regulation of bHLH factors is more complex . The specific expression pattern of particular members regulates their capacity to form functionally active or inactive heterodimers in specific cells or tissues ( BOX 3 ) . Phosphorylation also influences bHLH activity ( FIG . 3d ) and the p38 kinase or MAPK - activated protein kinase 2 ( MAPKAPK2 ) regulate the homo and heterodimerization and / or DNA - binding capacity of E47 ( REFS 75 , 76 ) . E2A gene products ( E12 and E47 ) are also targets for G1 cyclin - dependent kinases ( CDKs ) regulating B - cell growth and survival during development 77 . Interestingly , extracellular sig - nal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) - mediated phosphorylation of E47 controls its degradation in response to Notch signalling during lymphocyte differentiation 78 ( FIG . 3d ) . These different regulatory mechanisms might explain the pleiotropic effects described for E47 in different cell , tissue and tumour contexts . Gene targets : somewhere beyond E - cadherin . The CDH1 repressors share several target genes involved in EMT . However , each repressor can also confer certain specific - ity to the process by differentially regulating a subset of EMT - and / or tumour - related genes 79 , 80 . Functional and gene - expression studies of CDH1 repressors have shown that they act as molecular triggers of the EMT programme by repressing a subset of common genes that encode cadherins , claudins , cytokeratins , integrins , mucins , pla - kophilin , occludin and ZO proteins that could be classed as an epithelial cluster of molecules mainly targeted to Box 2 | Zeb family factors The ZEB family of transcription factors contains two members ( ZEB1 , also known as δ EF1 , and ZEB2 , also known as SIP1 ) encoded by independent genes ( ZFHX1A and ZFHX1B , respectively ) . They are characterized by the presence of two zinc - finger clusters at each end and a central homeodomain . ZEB1 and ZEB2 contain 3 or 4 zinc fingers of the C2H2 and C3H type in each cluster ( see FIG . 2 , 3 ) . Apart from the homeobox , other domains can be found in members of this family , such as the the CTBP - binding sequence or the SMAD - interacting domains in ZEB2 ( REFS 61 , 102 ) . ZEB factors interact with DNA through the simultaneous binding of the two zinc - finger domains to high - affinity binding sites composed of bipartite E - boxes ( CACCT and CACCTG ) , as found in the CDH1 promoter , but whose orientation and spacing can vary in different targets 13 , 14 , 102 . The specific transactivation domains have not yet been defined . ZEB factors can transactivate through the recruitment of either co - activators ( PCAF or p300 for ZEB1 ) or co - repressors ( CTBP for ZEB2 ) 61 . ZEB factors are expressed during development in the central nervous system , heart , skeletal muscle and haematopoietic cells . In these tissues , a functional deficiency in one of these factors can be partially compensated by the other , indicative of a common role for both factors 168 . However , the Zeb2 knockout mouse is embryonic lethal with specific defects in neural crest emigration that can not be compensated for by Zeb1 ( REF . 169 ) . Major differences are found in the expression pattern of both factors in lymphocytes , with a predominant expression of ZEB1 in the thymus during T - lymphocyte development and of ZEB2 in spleen B cells 168 . SNAI2 SLUG domain SNAI1 SNAG domain S - P rich domain NESdomain Destruction box Zinc fingers R E V I E W S 418 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group promote EMT ( TABLE 1 ) . More importantly , chromatin immunoprecipitation assays ( ChIP ) indicate that some of these repressed genes are direct targets of these repressors . For example , in human cancer cells ZEB2 binds directly to plakophilin 2 and ZO3 promoters 81 , whereas SNAI1 has been shown to bind cytokeratins 17 and 18 , vitamin D receptor ( VDR ) , occludin , hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 α ( HNF4 α ) , HNF1 β , EGR1 47 , 82 – 86 , as well as its own pro - moter 44 . Similarly , SNAI2 directly binds to the occludin promoter 36 , and SNAI1 and SNAI2 have also been found to bind promoters that encode proteins related with cell survival or apoptosis , such as p53 , BID , DFF40 , PUMA and BRCA2 ( REFS 56 , 86 , 87 ) ( TABLE 1 , see below ) . Regarding the genes controlled by each repres - sor , SNAI1 has been shown to regulate several genes potentially implicated in different processes during tumorigenesis , such as cyclin D2 , proliferating cell nuclear antigen ( PCNA ) , skeletrophin , prostaglandin dehydrogenase ( HPGD ) , ATPase β 1 or cadherin 16 ( REFS 30 , 82 , 88 – 91 ) . Similarly , SNAI2 controls other genes , such as integrin α 3 , collagen 2 α 1 in human cell lines as well as itself , as has been shown during avian neural crest formation 45 , 92 , 93 . Specific gene regulation has also been observed in microarray studies showing that Snail and E47 factors have different roles during EMT in epithe - lial cell lines 79 , 84 . Nevertheless , in some specific contexts these transcription factors could also share the control of common target genes , albeit in opposing ways 79 , 94 . Although all the aforementioned factors were initially characterized as CDH1 repressors , the upregulation of mesenchymal genes observed after their expression indicates that they might also act as gene inducers 95 . Indeed , ZEB factors have been described as transcrip - tional activators in some specific contexts 43 , 96 . It is note - worthy that TWIST can induce N - cadherin 97 expression in prostate cancer cells , whereas E47 induces INK4a ( encoded by CDKN2A ) , p21 ( encoded by CDKN1A ) and could be involved in the induction of α - smooth muscle actin in different cell systems 94 , 98 , 99 . As Snail fac - tors have generally been thought to be transcriptional repressors 48 , the mechanisms by which they induce mesenchymal genes remain largely unknown , and seem to be indirect and / or context - dependent . In fact , SNAI1 , ZEB2 and TGF β indirectly upregulate matrix metal - loproteinase 2 ( MMP2 ) expression through the ETS1 transcription factor 100 , and the induction of MMP9 by mouse SNAI1 involves activated MAPK and the SP1 and ETS factors 101 . Interestingly , we recently detected a cluster of mesenchymal genes similarly upregulated by SNAI1 , SNAI2 and E47 factors in Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells , including genes that encode several collagens and ECM - related proteins , such as SPARC , plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 ( PAI1 ) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 ( TIMP1 ) 79 . These data suggest that at least in some specific backgrounds , additional markers could be used to track EMT inde - pendently of the leading cause , opening the door to future studies to define the ‘genetic signature of EMT’ . We can speculate about the hierarchy of Snail , ZEB and bHLH repressors during EMT , irrespective of their expression pattern and interactions 53 . A binding affinity strategy is a possible mechanism through which these factors might target specific promoters . Although all factors bind to highly related E - box elements ( BOX 1 , 2 , 3 ) , SNAI1 and ZEB2 seem to recognize E - boxes with higher affinity than SNAI2 , E47 and ZEB1 , respectively , in both cellular and developmental studies 11 , 13 , 51 . Interestingly , the requirement of bipartite E - boxes for ZEB2 to bind to DNA suggest that ZEB factors could also use a shield strategy , blocking the access of other transcription fac - tors to some specific promoters in Xenopus embryos 102 . Undoubtedly , complete knowledge of both the specific E - box sequences recognized and the binding strategies of each factor will be useful in the future to define new potential therapeutic targets during EMT and tumour progression . Snail , bHLH and ZEB factors in cancer Expression of repressors in cancer . Since SNAI1 was originally shown to be expressed in invasive carcinoma cells 9 , 10 , these CDH1 repressors have increasingly been detected in tumours and derived cell lines ( see TABLE 2 for recent data from human tumours ) . The expres - sion of SNAI1 in breast carcinomas is associated with E - cadherin repression and metastasis 70 , 103 – 105 , and with tumour recurrence and poor prognosis 106 , 107 . Similarly , the expression of SNAI2 has been associated with poor clinical outcome in breast and ovarian tumours 106 , 108 , but SNAI2 expression also correlates with a partially differentiated phenotype in breast carcinoma 105 , indi - cating that SNAI1 and SNAI2 might have different effects on the invasive behaviour of breast cancers 105 , 109 . Box 3 | bHLH family factors The basic common structure for all helix loop helix ( HLH ) family members involves two parallel amphipatic α - helices joined by a loop required for dimerization . This structure can be found alone , as seen in the Id protein family , or accompanied by a basic domain ( bHLH ; FIGS 2 , 3 ) . Additional regulatory domains can be found in some family members , such as a leucine zipper domain ( MYC ) or a PAS domain ( bHLH – PAS , hypoxia inducible factor 1 α ( HIF1 α ) ) 170 . bHLH proteins bind to DNA using a consensus E - box ( CANNTG ) site as homo - or heterodimers 171 ( FIGS 2 , 3 ) . Transcriptional transactivation activity has been mapped to the AD1 domain , at the N - terminal half of some bHLH proteins , and a second activation domain can also be found in some bHLHs 172 . In some cases , bHLH proteins can act as transcriptional inducers or repressors by the recruitment of histone acetyl transferase ( HAT ) proteins , such as p300 or the SPT – ADA – GCN5 – acetyltransferase ( SAGA ) complex , or co - repressors such as groucho or SIN3A 170 . The HLH family members have been classified into seven families according to their tissue distribution , dimerization capacities and DNA - binding specificities ( reviewed in REF . 170 ) . With regards to epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , the most representative belong to class I , also known as E - proteins , encoded by TCF3 ( E12 and E47 isoforms ) , TCF4 ( E2 - 2A and E2 - 2B isoforms ) and TCF12 ( α / β isoforms ) . They are widely expressed and act as homodimers or heterodimers with class II proteins . Class II factors are tissue - specific bHLH proteins that always act as heterodimers with class I factors , among which TWIST1 and TWIST2 can be found . Class V HLHs , known as Id proteins ( Id1 – 4 ) , lack the basic domain and so are unable to bind DNA . Ids act as class I and class II dominant - negative factors because of their high heterodimerization affinity with class I bHLHs . bHLH heterodimers are involved in cell lineage determination and the control of cell proliferation , whereas Id proteins are key regulators of a wide range of developmental and cellular processes , including cell - cycle regulation , proliferation and angiogenesis 49 , 50 , 170 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 419 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group ZEB1 / ZEB2 bHLH a b FGF / PDGF TGF β – BMPs * Wnt – β catenin * Hedgehog – GLI1 NotchEGF * Ras – MAPK * HMGA2 * COX2 – PEG2 * Endothelin 1 AMF / PGI Hypoxia – HIF * ROSLaminin 5 * VEGF * DHT * HGF – MAPK – EGR1 NF κ B OestrogensMTA3 TGF β – BMP * COX2 – PEG2 * OestrogensSRC – collagen I NF κ B Hypoxia – HIF * ? TWIST FRZB / sFRP3 * DN - LRP5 * TWIST1 TGF β * Wnt1VEGF * HMGA2 * E47 TGF β * Hypoxia – HIF * Ids TGF β – BMP * Wnt – β - catenin * FSH IGF Ras * – PI3K VEGF * Ids HMGA2 * TGF β – BMP * Wnt – β - catenin * EGF * Ras – MAPK * HMGA2 * SCF – KIT RAF1CalreticulinLaminin 5 * VEGF * DHT * BMP – SOX2 – PKA FRZB – sFRP3 * DN - LRP5 * SNAI1 SNAI2 ? ? HDAC1 / 2 SIN3A HDAC1 / 3 CTBP1 / 2 ? HDAC1 / 2 CTBP1 / 2 Therefore , although the expression of both SNAI1 and SNAI2 is associated with lymph node status , SNAI2 might participate in the cohesive migration of invasive semi - differentiated tubules of ductal carcinomas 105 . Studies in colorectal cancer indicated SNAI1 expression was associated with the downregulation of VDR and E - cadherin 60 , 85 , 110 , with therapeutic implications both for vitamin D treatment in Snail - negative tumours 111 and for the likelihood of distant metastases 112 . The expression of SNAI2 in colorectal cancer is thought to be an indepen - dent marker of poor prognosis 113 . Initial studies showed SNAI1 mRNA transcripts were associated with CDH1 downregulation in diffuse - type gastric tumours 114 , but this was not confirmed in an immunohistochemical analysis of a larger series 115 . SNAI1 expression has been associated with MMP expression and / or invasiveness in squamous - cell car - cinomas ( SCC ) and hepatocarcinomas 116 – 119 . Moreover , SNAI1 has been associated with distant metastasis , CDH1 silencing and promoter hypermethylation in oesophageal SCC 116 , as well as with E - cadherin - deficient invasive areas in hepatocarcinomas 120 . Another study of oesophageal SCC reported that SNAI2 expression in primary tumours correlates with the reduced expression of E - cadherin , increased inva - sive behaviour , lymph node status and poor clinical outcome 121 . The expression of SNAI1 was not analysed in this study . Increased S NAI2 mRNA expression has also been described in primary lung adenocarcinomas and is associated with shorter time to recurrence and reduced overall survival 122 , 123 . Remarkably , the expres - sion of Snail factors has also been reported in synovial sarcomas as an alternative to inactivating mutations that silence CDH1 and induce the spindle cell pheno - type 124 . SNAI2 expression might also contribute to malignancy in melanomas 125 . Figure 2 | Signalling pathways and repressor mechanisms implicated in the regulation and function of Snail , bHLH and ZEB factors . a | Overview of the main signalling pathways implicated in the regulation of the expression of Snail , bHLH and ZEB factors , underscoring the recently described pathways and the pathways that could be implicated in the regulation of several transcription factors ( indicated by an asterisk ) . b | Schematic view of the main repression mechanism of these factors , representing the main co - repressor complexes or proposed interactions in the repressor mechanism of each transcription factor . AMF , autocine mobility factor ; DN - LRP5 , dominant negative low density lipoprotein receptor - related protein 5 ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; FRZB , frizzled - related protein ; FSH , follicle stimulating hormone ; HMG , high mobility group ; PEG2 , prostaglandin E2 ; PGI , phosphoglucose isomerase ; PKA , protein kinase A ; sFRP3 , secreted frizzled - related protein 3 . R E V I E W S 420 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group These studies indicate that SNAI1 is associated with invasion , secondary metastasis and a poor clinical out - come , as well as occasionally being expressed in distant metastases 117 ( TABLE 2 ) . However , no significant associa - tion between SNAI1 and SNAI2 and clinical parameters has been observed , and contradictory expression data for the same tumour type have been reported by differ - ent groups 103 , 105 , 106 . These discrepancies might be due to technical issues , possibly derived from the unde - fined specificity of most commercial anti - SNAI1 and 2 antibodies and , importantly , from the inappropriate assessment of nuclear staining and / or the discrimina - tion between cytoplasmic and nuclear Snail stain found in most studies . Unfortunately , these drawbacks mean that the data available regarding SNAI1 and SNAI2 expression in tumour samples must be interpreted with care . In addition , although studies on the expres - sion of Snail factors by reverse transcription PCR ( RT - PCR ) from whole tumour samples might overcome the uncertainties derived from immunohistochemistry , they are not suitable for differential cellular localiza - tion or detection in specific tumour regions such as invasive areas . Furthermore , additional problems with interpretation of RT - PCR data may arise from the exis - tence of a SNAI1P human retrogrene with a sequence very similar to SNAI1 but whose expression is not cor - related with invasive or metastatic behaviour 126 . The recent characterization of independent anti - SNAI1 antibodies that show clear nuclear staining might more accurately assess the involvement of SNAI1 in human biopsy samples 115 , 127 . Interestingly , initial studies indicate that SNAI1 expression is weakly associated with SCC tumour cells , but it shows more prominent staining at the tumour – stroma interface 127 , indicating that SNAI1 is expressed in restricted areas and perhaps in both tumour and reactive stromal cells , as previously indi - cated by in situ hybridization ( ISH ) 103 , 120 . It also seems plausible that stromal - positive cells represent tumour cells that have undergone EMT 127 . The expression of the ZEB and bHLH factors has also been reported in different tumour series , some - times in parallel with analyses of Snail expression . Following initial studies on ZEB1 and ZEB2 expres - sion 13 , 95 , most studies in human tumours have focused on one of the two factors . Although ZEB2 expression has been analysed in ovarian , SCC , gastric and pancre - atic tumours 106 , 109 , 114 , 128 , 129 , ZEB1 expression has mainly been studied in colorectal tumours 60 , 110 and uterine cancers , where it has been associated with aggressive behaviour 130 ( TABLE 2 ) . In contrast to the behaviour of SNAI1 in breast tumours , some of these studies indicate a differential pattern of expression for ZEB and Snail factors in specific tumour types , with higher expression levels of ZEB2 in ovarian carcinoma effusions than in solid metastases 109 . Alternatively , ZEB1 seems to be involved in CDH1 repression in colon carcinomas that lack SNAI1 ( REF . 60 ) . Although the expression of TWIST was originally associated with lobular breast carcino - mas 16 , this observation has not been confirmed in other series 131 . Indeed , CDH1 is irreversibly inactivated by genetic and epigenetic alterations in most lobular breast carcinomas 132 . Nevertheless , increased TWIST expression has been associated with high - grade inva - sive ductal carcinomas 131 and a fatal clinical outcome 108 . The association of TWIST expression with solid metas - tasis has been reported in prostate cancer , oesophageal SCC and hepatocarcinomas 133 – 135 , and is associated with poor survival in patients with endometrial tumours 136 or melanomas 137 ( TABLE 2 ) . No information is currently available on the expression of E47 in human tumour biopsy samples . Nevertheless , recent statistical micro - array data analyses of breast carcinomas suggest that E47 mRNA expression is associated with the basal subtype of breast carcinomas ( E . Cubillo , G . Moreno , J . Palacios and A . C . , unpublished data ) . In contrast to the paucity of data on bHLH factors in human samples , several studies have assessed the expression of Id fac - tors in different tumour types . An association was made Table 1 | Gene targets of the CDH1 repression factors * Transcription factor EMT - related genes Other genes References SNAI1 CDH1 ‡ ; CK17 / 18 ‡ ; SNAI1 ‡ ; VDR ‡ ; occludin ‡ ; HNF4 α ‡ ; HNF1 β ‡ ; claudin - 1 / - 3 / - 4 / - 7 ; collagen 2 α 1 ; MUC1 ; ZEB1 § TP53 ‡ ; BID ‡ ; DFF40 ‡ ; RAB25 ‡ ; PFKP ‡ ; SLC27A2 ‡ ; EGR1 ‡ ; CDKN1A ; CCND2 ; PCNA ; skelethrophin ; PGDH ; ATPase β 1 9 , 10 , 30 , 44 , 47 , 55 , 82 – 86 , 88 , 92 , 94 , 95 , 156 SNAI2 CDH1 ‡ ; occludin ‡ ; claudin 1 ; integrin α 3 ; collagen 2 α 1 ; SNAI2 § | | ; CK8 ; CK19 PUMA ‡ ; BRCA2 ‡ ; TP53 ‡ ; BID ‡ ; DFF40 ‡ 11 , 12 , 27 , 36 , 56 , 86 , 87 , 92 , 93 , 156 ZEB2 CDH1 ‡ ; plakophilin 2 ‡ ; connexin 26 ‡ ; ZO3 ‡ Integrin α 4 | | 13 , 81 , 102 , 128 ZEB1 CDH1 ‡ ; MUC1 CCNG2 ‡ § ; RBL2 ‡ § ( p130 ) ; integrin α 4 § | | 14 , 95 , 102 , 173 E47 CDH1 CDKN2A ‡ § ; smooth muscle actin ‡ § ; CDKN1A § 15 , 94 , 98 , 99 TWIST1 CDH1 CDKN1A 16 , 94 * Gene targets described from promoter assays and / or electrophoretic mobility assays ( EMSA ) . ‡ Genes analysed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays ( ChIP ) . § Upregualated genes . | | Studies in non - mammalian systems . CCND2 , cyclin D2 ; CDH1 , E cadherin ; CDKN , cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor ; CK , cytokeratin ; DFF , DNA fragmentation factor ; EGR1 , early growth response 1 ; MUC , mucin ; PFKP , phosphofructokinase , platelet type ; PGDH , hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase ; RBL , retinoblastoma like ; SLC27A2 , solute carrier family 27 , member 2 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 421 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group SNAI2 SNAI1 2EB1 / 2 ? ProteinSumoylation ProteinUbiquitylation ProteinUbiquitylation PhosphorylationLysyne oxidation Protein transportation Phosphorylation Phosphorylation Nucleus Cytoplasm Degradation E47 Homo / heterodimerization Phosphorylation Phosphorylation a b c d Stable SNAI1 ? Degradation Degradation Degradation P42 / 44 P38MAKPK2 CTBP PC2 PPa GSK3 β GSK3 β ? PAK1LOXL2LIV1 P P P Ub P P Ub P P P between Id1 expression , metastasis and poor prognosis in several carcinomas ( reviewed in REF . 49 ) . However , the lack of specificity of available anti - Id1 antibodies has brought into question some of the previous data that indicates Id1 expression only increases in a subset of highly aggressive metaplasic breast carcinomas and in transitional bladder carcinomas 138 . This latter study also highlights the current difficulties in accurately assessing the expression of different EMT regulators in tumour biopsy samples . New functions in tumour progression . Recent informa - tion on the function of Snail factors indicates that , in addition to inducing EMT , they also alter cell prolifera - tion and cell survival , with important implications for tumour progression 8 , 82 . SNAI1 - expressing cells that have undergone EMT have a low proliferative potential 22 , 91 , showing partial G1 / S cell - cycle arrest that is at least in part due to the repression of CCND2 ( the gene that encodes cyclin D2 ) . However , it seems that this behaviour might be cell - or tissue - type dependent 8 , 139 , 140 . The active participation of E47 and Id members in cell cycle and proliferation control has also been reported 49 ( TABLE 1 ) . Perhaps the most fascinating newly discovered func - tion of Snail factors is their capacity to protect against cell death , an essential characteristic of tumour cells that might be crucial for the metastatic process . SNAI1 has recently been described as a survival factor in the response to tumour necrosis factor - α ( TNF α ) and as a potent cell - survival mediator during the emigration of neural crest cells 91 . This effect of Snail factors on cell survival was initially described in Caenorhabditis elegans where CES1 ( the Scratch homologue ; BOX 1 ) blocks the programmed cell death of specific neu - rons 141 . The aberrant upregulation of SNAI2 as a result of E2A – HLF translocation in human leukaemias is also associated with cell survival 142 . Moreover , SNAI2 is involved in the radioresistance of haematological progenitor cells in vivo 143 , 144 . Recent insights indicate that SNAI2 antagonizes p53 - mediated apoptosis in haematological precursors by repressing the p53 - medi - ated transcription of PUMA , a BH3 - only antagonist of the anti - apoptotic BCL2 protein 87 . Interestingly , this survival mechanism seems to be evolutionary con - served in C . elegans 87 , supporting the pro - survival property of all members of the Snail superfamily 8 . The pro - survival action of SNAI1 and SNAI2 has been shown in human carcinoma cells under geno - toxic stress induced by chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin 86 . Accordingly , both p53 - dependent and p53 - independent pro - apoptotic genes are directly downregulated by SNAI1 and SNAI2 , and interestingly , Figure 3 | Post - transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of Snail , bHLH and ZEB factors . a | Snail homologue 1 ( SNAI1 ) stability and nuclear translocation can be positively modulated by p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) , LIV1 or LOXL2 . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) phosphorylation promotes SNAI1 cytoplasmic export and ubiquitin - mediated proteasome degradation . The potential interconnection between the different pathways or modifications is unknown . b | SNAI2 stability and degradation is modulated by paired ( Ppa ) , but import and export mechanisms remain unknown . c | PC2 - mediated sumoylation of ZEB2 prevents its interaction with CTBP , promoting its cytoplasmic localization ; the functional consequences of this for protein stability remain to be established . d | The expression patterns of the bHLH proteins regulates their capacity to form functionally active or inactive heterodimers in specific cells or tissues . Phosphorylation by p38 kinase and MAPKAPK2 regulates the homo / heterodimerization and / or DNA binding capacity , and the p42 and p44 kinases are implicated in bHLH degradation in response to Notch signalling . R E V I E W S 422 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group the expression of TP53 was itself moderately repressed by SNAI1 and SNAI2 binding ( TABLE 1 ) . Other stud - ies have shown the participation of the SCF – KIT signalling pathway in the acquired multidrug resis - tance of malignant mesothelioma cells mediated by SNAI2 induction 145 . Moreover , the recent identifica - tion of BRCA2 as a direct target of SNAI2 in breast carcinoma cells 56 supports the implication of Snail factors in regulating the response to different geno - toxic insults . Interestingly , a pro - survival influence might not be exclusive to Snail factors . An important pro - survival function has been described for TWIST in neuroblastoma , antagonizing the pro - apoptotic function of MYC by downregulating the ARF – p53 pathway 146 . Furthermore , some studies indicate that TWIST expression confers resistance to different chemotherapeutic agents , such as vincristine and taxol , in carcinoma cells 133 , 147 , and multidrug resis - tance conferred by E47 expression has also been reported 148 . Nevertheless , whether this resistance is associated with the ability of these factors to induce EMT remains to be resolved . The recent association of aberrant SNAI1 and / or SNAI2 expression with decreased disease - free and overall patient survival in breast , ovarian , hepatocellular , SCC , colorectal cancer and lung adenocarcinoma ( TABLE 2 ) , makes the implication of Snail factors in tumour recurrence a very attractive hypothesis that might be related to their pro - survival activity , an avenue that deserves further study . Recently , it has been suggested that Snail - medi - ated tumour recurrence might be associated with the maintenance of self renewal in cancer stem - cell - like cells 149 . Indeed , this was initially proposed for SNAI2 in relation to the SCF – KIT pathway in haematological tumours 35 . Importantly , cell survival properties might also be linked to tumour invasion , EMT and stem - cell properties , as suggested by the recent description of ‘migratory cancer stem cells’ ( MSCs ) in colorectal cancer 150 . It will be interesting to see if MSCs exist in different tumour types , and the potential influence of Snail and / or bHLH factors on these cells . Table 2 | Expression of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors in human tumours Gene Cancer factor type Associated clinico - pathological features SNAI1 Breast carcinoma Lymph node metastasis 103 , 104 ; effusions 106 , 108 ; distant metastasis 70 , 105 ; tumour recurrence 107 * Ovarian carcinoma Hypoxia 163 ; distant metastasis 106 Colon carcinoma VDR downregulation 85 , 110 ; distant metastasis 112 Squamous cell carcinoma Increased MMP expression 118 ; invasion and distant metastasis 116 , 117 ; expression at the tumour – stroma interface 127 Hepatocarcinoma Invasive front 120 ; poor prognosis 119 Synovial sarcoma Spindle phenotype 124 SNAI2 Breast carcinoma Effusions 106 , 109 ; metastasis and recurrence 108 ; partial differentiation 105 Ovarian carcinoma Overall survival 106 Colon carcinoma Poor survival ( independent prognosis factor ) 113 Squamous cell carcinoma Lymph node metastasis ; invasion and poor prognosis 121 Lung adenocarcinoma and mesothelioma Invasion 122 ; overall survival 123 Melanomas * Metastasis 125 ZEB2 Ovarian carcinoma Effusions 106 , 109 Gastric tumours Histological type 114 Pancreatic tumours Differentiation grade 129 Squamous cell carcinoma Overall survival 128 ZEB1 Uterine carcinoma Poor prognosis 130 Colon carcinoma E - cadherin downregulation ( Snail - negative tumours ) 60 , 110 TWIST1 Ductal breast carcinoma Invasion and angiogenesis 131 ; poor prognosis 108 Uterine carcinoma ; prostate tumours Poor survival 136 ; metastasis 133 Gastric tumours Histological type 114 Squamous cell carcinomas Distant metastasis 134 Hepatocarcinomas Distant metastasis 135 Melanomas Poor survival 137 * Data from cell lines , tumour models or microarray data . MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; VDR , vitamin D receptor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 423 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Hypoxia SNAI2 SNAI1 ZEB1 / ZEB2 E47 / TWIST1 Ids HIF TGF β Epithelial cell Tumour cell Fibroblast Mesenchymal tumour cell Intratumoral stromal - like cells Tumour cell under transient MET Immune cell Influence of the microenvironment The influence of the microenvironment in tumour development is now well established 151 . Indeed , the full metastatic process might be envisaged as an evolutionary process in which genetically heterogeneous cell popula - tions are driven to evolve by changing environmental pressures 3 . This concept has renewed interest in the influence of the microenvironment on tumour progres - sion . Here , we shall focus only on recent data related to the influence of the microenvironment on EMT and the expression of Snail , bHLH and / or ZEB factors and their interactions . A plethora of signalling factors influence the expression of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors ( FIG . 2a ) . Although some such signals function in autocrine loops in tumour cells 32 , 34 , many others are likely to be derived from the tumour microenvironment . Among these , Wnt and TGF β signalling are being extensively studied . Indeed , recent data show that the Wnt antagonist frizzled - related protein ( FRZB ) , or a dominant - negative low density lipoprotein related protein 5 ( LRP5 ) co - receptor , induce the reversion of EMT associated with the strong downregulation of SNAI2 and TWIST 152 ( FIG . 2a ) . In conjunction with the transcriptional and post - transcriptional regulation of SNAI1 by GSK3 β 46 , 70 , 71 , these data support an active role of the microenvironment in the control of Wnt signals , the dynamic regulation of EMT mediators and epithelial plasticity . The regulation of Snail and ZEB factors by signal - ling pathways related to inflammatory and extracellular matrix components has added further insight into the participation of the microenvironment in the regulation of EMT . The upregulation of ZEB2 expression associated with E - cadherin repression in pancreatic cells grown in the presence of type I collagen is in agreement with the inverse correlation between ZEB2 and E - cadherin in pancreatic tumours 129 . The expression of SNAI1 and SNAI2 may be induced in hepatocarcinoma cells by exposure to laminin 5 through a mechanism dependent on active integrin α 3 and TGF β 40 . These data are consis - tent with the upregulation of laminin 5 and SNAI1 , and the downregulation of E - cadherin at the invasive front of hepatocarcinomas 40 , 120 . The influence of inflamma - tory components or the inflammatory - related response of the tumour microenvironment on the regulation of EMT - modulators has recently been highlighted through the induction of SNAI1 by the cyclooxygenase 2 ( COX2 ) – PGE2 pathway , and the induction of SNAI1 and ZEB through nuclear factor κ B ( NF κ B ) and some interleukins 21 , 153 . Interestingly , NF κ B can be inhibited by active GSK3 β resulting in the repression of SNAI1 expression 46 , thus potentially linking Wnt antagonist and inflammatory - derived signals in SNAI1 regulation . The complex interactions between the microenvironment and the regulation of the diverse activities of ‘EMT regulators’ are highlighted in other studies that linked vascular epithelial growth factor receptor 1 ( VEGFR1 ) Figure 4 | Interplay of different factors in cancer . Schematic of the potential interplay of CDH1 repressors and the microenvironment during tumour progression . Hypoxia - and TGF β - derived signals could promote the interplay of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors that orchestrate CDH1 repression and epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) during tumour progression . SNAI1 could be implicated in the initial migratory phenotype and considered as an early marker of EMT that sometimes contributes to the induction of other factors . By contrast , SNAI2 , ZEB1 , ZEB2 and / or TWIST could be responsible for the maintenance of migratory cell behaviour , malignancy and other tumorigenic properties . Pink cells indicate intra - tumoral stromal - like cells . R E V I E W S 424 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group overexpression with the upregulation of SNAI1 , SNAI2 , E47 and TWIST 33 , and the active participation of these factors and Ids in angiogenesis 49 , 131 , 154 . Together , these data support the mutual influence of the tumour and components of its microenvironment on the dynamic control of EMT and the angiogenic response during tumour progression . Strategy : the interplay of different factors in cancer . The data obtained in recent years indicate that CDH1 repres - sors interact during tumour progression . The localiza - tion of SNAI1 at the tumour – stroma interface and the observation that SNAI1 promotes the expression of ZEB factors in oesophageal SCC cells is evidence that SNAI1 may be implicated in the initial stages of invasion . At the same time , ZEB1 and ZEB2 could be considered to be additional predictive markers 127 , 155 . Together with func - tional studies in other malignant epithelial cells 95 , 154 , 156 , these data also support a differential and hierarchical role for these repressors during EMT in epithelial car - cinogenesis 53 , 79 , 155 , as has previously been indicated in developmental studies . Recently , a model was proposed in which SNAI1 and SNAI2 were expressed in the nuclei of primary tumour cells in ovarian carcinomas , whereas after tumour effusion , they were located and weakly expressed in the cytoplasm ( and were inactive ) , with ZEB2 upregulated 109 . These studies suggest that these repressors could be differentially and / or sequentially expressed at distinct anatomical sites during tumour progression , supporting their differential participation in ovarian tumours . Importantly , these studies also shed light on the implication of these repressors in tumour models that do not follow the classical EMT model , such as ovarian cancer , in which E - cadherin is not downregulated in ovarian carcinoma effusions . Therefore , partial E - cadherin downregulation , together with the expression of Snail or other repressors could be a metastatic strategy for some tumours at the same time as promoting cell viability . Co - expression of these factors with E - cadherin could also have an important role in specific cell migration during metastasis , as in ‘cohort migration’ 157 . This behaviour has been observed for SNAI2 in certain situations , such as during kerati - nocyte re - epithelialization 158 , and together with SNAI1 in several cancer cells and effusions 105 , 106 , 109 . Importantly , the signalling pathways that control SNAI1 and SNAI2 stability and localization ( FIG . 3 ) could also have a key role in E - cadherin maintenance after the detachment of can - cer cells from primary tumours , regardless of SNAI1 and SNAI2 expression levels . Together , these functional and clinical studies indicate that under specific situations , SNAI1 could be implicated in the initial migratory phe - notype of primary tumours and considered as an early marker of EMT ( FIG . 4 ) . By contrast , SNAI2 , ZEB1 , ZEB2 and / or TWIST could be responsible for the maintenance of migratory cell behaviour , malignancy and other tumorigenic properties . However , this model might only operate in certain tumour types owing to the specific and independent roles of the different factors during tumour progression ( such as TWIST in intravasation 16 ) , and it should be subjected to more detailed analysis . A key molecule that might promote the interplay of these repressors during EMT is TGF β ( FIG . 4 ) . Recent studies have pointed to a dual role for TGF β during EMT mediated by CDH1 repressors . On one hand , TGF β pro - motes Id1 and 2 downregulation 29 , 66 , relieving its negative action on the CDH1 repressor E47 . On the other hand , TGF β also promotes the expression of SNAI1 , SNAI2 , ZEB1 , ZEB2 and TWIST in cell - and / or tissue - depen - dent contexts 29 , 159 . These findings provide a new link between the coordinated activity of TGF β on different CDH1 repressors to induce EMT ( FIG . 4 ) . Hypoxia is also emerging as a potentially important event that coordinates the activity of CDH1 repressors . The loss of Von Hippel Lindau ( VHL ) protein in renal carcinoma cells results in the loss of CDH1 expression , indicative of the hypoxia inducible factor - dependent induction of E47 , SNAI1 and ZEB 38 , 160 , 161 . Interestingly , the potential cooperation of TGF β signalling in the effects promoted by VHL loss , indicate that TGF β and hypoxia may orchestrate the action of these repressors during EMT and tumour progression 38 . Studies in human ovarian cancer cell lines also showed that both SNAI1 and SNAI2 are associated with CDH1 repression after HIF1 expression induced by hypoxia 162 . These data support previous suggestions that SNAI1 could repress CDH1 in conditions of hypoxia , promoting tumour malignancy in ovarian carcinomas 163 . Notably , the recent observation that the LOX protein is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis 164 , and that LOXL2 promotes SNAI1 stabilization and repressor activity 72 , is supportive of a potential cooperation between hypoxia , SNAI1 and LOX , LOXL2 and LOXL3 proteins in tumour malignancy 165 . Together , these data suggest that hypoxia and TGF β - derived signals could promote the interplay of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors that orchestrate CDH1 repression and EMT during tumour progression ( FIG . 4 ) , as well as increasing the malignant , migratory and angiogenic behaviour of tumour cells . Concluding remarks The past 6 years have produced significant advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of CDH1 downregulation and tumour progression , particu - larly in relation to the role of Snail , ZEB and some bHLH factors . From the modification of the classical ‘two - hit hypothesis’ for CDH1 silencing proposed by Cheng and colleagues 104 , whereby mutational inactivation works with transcriptional repression , we have learned that additional regulatory mechanisms have a crucial role in E - cadherin regulation and tumour progression . These include post - translational modifications , protein – protein interac - tions and the effects of the tumour microenvironment . Furthermore , the recent recognition of additional func - tions and gene targets of Snail , ZEB and bHLH factors has opened new avenues to fully understand their function and potential clinical and therapeutic implications in can - cer . A full understanding of the contribution of different extracellular factors in the tumour microenvironment , together with the full development of specific reagents , will help elucidate the specific and collaborative implica - tions of the different factors that regulate the epithelial phenotype during carcinogenesis . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 425 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group 1 . Thiery , J . P . & Sleeman , J . P . Complex networks orchestrate epithelial - mesenchymal transitions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 131 – 142 ( 2006 ) . 2 . Thiery , J . P . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression . Nature Rev . Cancer 2 , 442 – 454 ( 2002 ) . The first comprehensive review to compile evidence for EMT in tumorigenesis . 3 . Gupta , G . P . & Massague , J . Cancer metastasis : building a framework . Cell 127 , 679 – 695 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Birchmeier , W . & Behrens , J . Cadherin expression in carcinomas : role in the formation of cell junctions and the prevention of invasiveness . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1198 , 11 – 26 ( 1994 ) . 5 . Peinado , H . & Cano , A . New potential therapeutic targets to combat epithelial tumor invasion . Clin . Transl . Oncol . 8 , 851 – 857 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Tarin , D . , Thompson , E . W . & Newgreen , D . F . The fallacy of epithelial mesenchymal transition in neoplasia . Cancer Res . 65 , 5996 – 6000 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Christiansen , J . J . & Rajasekaran , A . K . Reassessing epithelial to mesenchymal transition as a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis . Cancer Res . 66 , 8319 – 8326 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Barrallo - Gimeno , A . & Nieto , M . A . The Snail genes as inducers of cell movement and survival : implications in development and cancer . Development 132 , 3151 – 3161 ( 2005 ) . An excellent review of the implication of Snail factors in processes other than EMT . 9 . Batlle , E . et al . The transcription factor snail is a repressor of E - cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumour cells . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 84 – 89 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Cano , A . et al . The transcription factor snail controls epithelial - mesenchymal transitions by repressing E - cadherin expression . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 76 – 83 ( 2000 ) . Together with reference 9 , characterizes SNAI1 as the first E - cadherin repressor and EMT inducer in carcinoma cells . 11 . Bolos , V . et al . The transcription factor Slug represses E - cadherin expression and induces epithelial to mesenchymal transitions : a comparison with Snail and E47 repressors . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 499 – 511 ( 2003 ) . 12 . Hajra , K . M . , Chen , D . Y . & Fearon , E . R . The SLUG zinc - finger protein represses E - cadherin in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 62 , 1613 – 1618 ( 2002 ) . 13 . Comijn , J . et al . The two - handed E box binding zinc finger protein SIP1 downregulates E - cadherin and induces invasion . Mol . Cell 7 , 1267 – 1278 ( 2001 ) . 14 . Eger , A . et al . δ EF1 is a transcriptional repressor of E - cadherin and regulates epithelial plasticity in breast cancer cells . Oncogene 24 , 2375 – 2385 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Perez - Moreno , M . A . et al . A new role for E12 / E47 in the repression of E - cadherin expression and epithelial - mesenchymal transitions . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 27424 – 27431 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Yang , J . et al . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metastasis . Cell 117 , 927 – 939 ( 2004 ) . The first demonstration of the capability of TWIST to induce EMT and metastasis . 17 . Nieto , M . A . The snail superfamily of zinc - finger transcription factors . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 155 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 18 . De Craene , B . , van Roy , F . & Berx , G . Unraveling signalling cascades for the Snail family of transcription factors . Cell Signal . 17 , 535 – 547 ( 2005 ) . 19 . Huber , M . A . , Kraut , N . & Beug , H . Molecular requirements for epithelial - mesenchymal transition during tumor progression . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 548 – 558 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Lu , Z . , Ghosh , S . , Wang , Z . & Hunter , T . Downregulation of caveolin - 1 function by EGF leads to the loss of E - cadherin , increased transcriptional activity of β - catenin , and enhanced tumor cell invasion . Cancer Cell 4 , 499 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Barbera , M . J . et al . Regulation of Snail transcription during epithelial to mesenchymal transition of tumor cells . Oncogene 23 , 7345 – 7354 ( 2004 ) . 22 . Peinado , H . , Quintanilla , M . & Cano , A . Transforming growth factor β - 1 induces snail transcription factor in epithelial cell lines : mechanisms for epithelial mesenchymal transitions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21113 – 21123 ( 2003 ) . 23 . Timmerman , L . A . et al . Notch promotes epithelial - mesenchymal transition during cardiac development and oncogenic transformation . Genes Dev . 18 , 99 – 115 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Zavadil , J . , Cermak , L . , Soto - Nieves , N . & Bottinger , E . P . Integration of TGF - β / Smad and Jagged1 / Notch signalling in epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . EMBO J . 23 , 1155 – 1165 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Medici , D . , Hay , E . D . & Goodenough , D . A . Cooperation between snail and LEF - 1 transcription factors is essential for TGF - β 1 - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1871 – 1879 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Conacci - Sorrell , M . et al . Autoregulation of E - cadherin expression by cadherin - cadherin interactions : the roles of β - catenin signaling , Slug , and MAPK . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 847 – 857 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Sakai , D . , Suzuki , T . , Osumi , N . & Wakamatsu , Y . Cooperative action of Sox9 , Snail2 and PKA signaling in early neural crest development . Development 133 , 1323 – 1333 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Vallin , J . et al . Cloning and characterization of three Xenopus slug promoters reveal direct regulation by Lef / β - catenin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 30350 – 30358 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Thuault , S . et al . Transforming growth factor - beta employs HMGA2 to elicit epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 175 – 183 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Mann , J . R . et al . Repression of prostaglandin dehydrogenase by epidermal growth factor and snail increases prostaglandin E2 and promotes cancer progression . Cancer Res . 66 , 6649 – 6656 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Dohadwala , M . et al . Cyclooxygenase - 2 - dependent regulation of E - cadherin : prostaglandin E ( 2 ) induces transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and snail in non - small cell lung cancer . Cancer Res . 66 , 5338 – 5345 ( 2006 ) . 32 . Rosano , L . et al . Endothelin - 1 promotes epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in human ovarian cancer cells . Cancer Res . 65 , 11649 – 11657 ( 2005 ) . 33 . Yang , A . D . et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 1 activation mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic carcinoma cells . Cancer Res . 66 , 46 – 51 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Tsutsumi , S . , Yanagawa , T . , Shimura , T . , Kuwano , H . & Raz , A . Autocrine motility factor signaling enhances pancreatic cancer metastasis . Clin . Cancer Res . 10 , 7775 – 7784 ( 2004 ) . 35 . Perez - Losada , J . et al . Zinc - finger transcription factor Slug contributes to the function of the stem cell factor c - kit signaling pathway . Blood 100 , 1274 – 1286 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Wang , Z . et al . Raf 1 represses expression of the tight junction protein occludin via activation of the zinc - finger transcription factor slug . Oncogene 26 , 1222 – 1230 ( 2007 ) . 37 . Hayashida , Y . et al . Calreticulin represses E - cadherin gene expression in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells via Slug . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 32469 – 32484 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Evans , A . J . et al . VHL Promotes E2 BOX - dependent E - cadherin Transcription by HIF - mediated Regulation of SIP1 and Snail . Mol . Cell Biol . ( 2006 ) . 39 . Radisky , D . C . et al . Rac1b and reactive oxygen species mediate MMP - 3 - induced EMT and genomic instability . Nature 436 , 123 – 127 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Giannelli , G . , Bergamini , C . , Fransvea , E . , Sgarra , C . & Antonaci , S . Laminin - 5 with transforming growth factor - β 1 induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma . Gastroenterology 129 , 1375 – 1383 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Chen , M . , Chen , L . M . & Chai , K . X . Androgen regulation of prostasin gene expression is mediated by sterol - regulatory element - binding proteins and SLUG . Prostate 66 , 911 – 920 ( 2006 ) . 42 . Fujita , N . et al . MTA3 , a Mi - 2 / NuRD complex subunit , regulates an invasive growth pathway in breast cancer . Cell 113 , 207 – 219 ( 2003 ) . Demonstration of the link between MTA3 and ligated ER with the negative regulation of Snail expression in breast carcinoma cells . 43 . Dillner , N . B . & Sanders , M . M . Transcriptional activation by the zinc - finger homeodomain protein δ EF1 in estrogen signaling cascades . DNA Cell Biol . 23 , 25 – 34 ( 2004 ) . 44 . Peiro , S . et al . Snail1 transcriptional repressor binds to its own promoter and controls its expression . Nucleic Acids Res . 34 , 2077 – 2084 ( 2006 ) . 45 . Sakai , D . et al . Regulation of Slug transcription in embryonic ectoderm by β - catenin - Lef / Tcf and BMP - Smad signaling . Dev . Growth Differ . 47 , 471 – 482 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Bachelder , R . E . , Yoon , S . O . , Franci , C . , de Herreros , A . G . & Mercurio , A . M . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3 is an endogenous inhibitor of Snail transcription : implications for the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 29 – 33 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Grotegut , S . , von Schweinitz , D . , Christofori , G . & Lehembre , F . Hepatocyte growth factor induces cell scattering through MAPK / Egr - 1 - mediated upregulation of Snail . EMBO J . 25 , 3534 – 3545 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Hemavathy , K . , Ashraf , S . I . & Ip , Y . T . Snail / slug family of repressors : slowly going into the fast lane of development and cancer . Gene 257 , 1 – 12 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Perk , J . , Iavarone , A . & Benezra , R . Id family of helix - loop - helix proteins in cancer . Nature Rev . Cancer 5 , 603 – 614 ( 2005 ) . An excellent review of the implication of Id proteins in cancer . 50 . Ruzinova , M . B . & Benezra , R . Id proteins in development , cell cycle and cancer . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 410 – 418 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Postigo , A . A . Opposing functions of ZEB proteins in the regulation of the TGF β / BMP signaling pathway . EMBO J . 22 , 2443 – 2452 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Peinado , H . & Cano , A . Regulation of the E - cadherin Cell - Cell Adhesion Gene in DNA methylation , epigenetics and metastasis , 157 – 190 ( ed . Esteller , M . ) ( Springer , 2005 ) . 53 . Peinado , H . , Portillo , F . & Cano , A . Transcriptional regulation of cadherins during development and carcinogenesis . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 48 , 365 – 375 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Hemavathy , K . , Guru , S . C . , Harris , J . , Chen , J . D . & Ip , Y . T . Human Slug is a repressor that localizes to sites of active transcription . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 5087 – 5095 ( 2000 ) . 55 . Peinado , H . , Ballestar , E . , Esteller , M . & Cano , A . Snail mediates E - cadherin repression by the recruitment of the Sin3A / histone deacetylase 1 ( HDAC1 ) / HDAC2 complex . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 306 – 319 ( 2004 ) . 56 . Tripathi , M . K . et al . Regulation of BRCA2 gene expression by the SLUG repressor protein in human breast cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 17163 – 17171 ( 2005 ) . 57 . Bailey , C . K . , Misra , S . , Mittal , M . K . & Chaudhuri , G . Human SLUG does not directly bind to CtBP1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 353 , 661 – 664 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Shi , Y . et al . Coordinated histone modifications mediated by a CtBP co - repressor complex . Nature 422 , 735 – 738 ( 2003 ) . 59 . van Grunsven , L . A . et al . Interaction between Smad - interacting protein - 1 and the corepressor C - terminal binding protein is dispensable for transcriptional repression of E - cadherin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 26135 – 26145 ( 2003 ) . 60 . Pena , C . et al . The expression levels of the transcriptional regulators p300 and CtBP modulate the correlations between SNAIL , ZEB1 , E - cadherin and vitamin D receptor in human colon carcinomas . Int . J . Cancer 119 , 2098 – 2104 ( 2006 ) . 61 . Postigo , A . A . , Depp , J . L . , Taylor , J . J . & Kroll , K . L . Regulation of Smad signaling through a differential recruitment of coactivators and corepressors by ZEB proteins . EMBO J . 22 , 2453 – 2462 ( 2003 ) . 62 . Alpatov , R . et al . Nuclear speckle - associated protein Pnn / DRS binds to the transcriptional corepressor CtBP and relieves CtBP - mediated repression of the E - cadherin gene . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 10223 – 10235 ( 2004 ) . 63 . Long , J . , Zuo , D . & Park , M . Pc2 - mediated sumoylation of Smad - interacting protein 1 attenuates transcriptional repression of E - cadherin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 35477 – 35489 ( 2005 ) . 64 . Zhao , L . J . , Subramanian , T . , Zhou , Y . & Chinnadurai , G . Acetylation by p300 regulates nuclear localization and function of the transcriptional corepressor CtBP2 . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 4183 – 4189 ( 2006 ) . 65 . Zhang , Q . , Piston , D . W . & Goodman , R . H . Regulation of corepressor function by nuclear NADH . Science 295 , 1895 – 1897 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Kondo , M . et al . A role for Id in the regulation of TGF β - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transdifferentiation . Cell Death Differ . 11 , 1092 – 1101 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Dominguez , D . et al . Phosphorylation regulates the subcellular location and activity of the snail transcriptional repressor . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 5078 – 5089 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Yang , Z . et al . Pak1 phosphorylation of snail , a master regulator of epithelial - to - mesenchyme transition , modulates snail’s subcellular localization and functions . Cancer Res . 65 , 3179 – 3184 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Yamashita , S . et al . Zinc transporter LIVI controls epithelial - mesenchymal transition in zebrafish gastrula organizer . Nature 429 , 298 – 302 ( 2004 ) . 70 . Zhou , B . P . et al . Dual regulation of Snail by GSK - 3 β - mediated phosphorylation in control of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 931 – 940 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 426 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Pioneering study that showed the post - transcriptional regulation of SNAI1 subcellular localization and stability by GSK3 β kinase . 71 . Yook , J . I . et al . A Wnt - Axin2 - GSK3 β cascade regulates Snail1 activity in breast cancer cells . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 1398 – 1406 ( 2006 ) . 72 . Peinado , H . et al . A molecular role for lysyl oxidase - like 2 enzyme in snail regulation and tumor progression . EMBO J . 24 , 3446 – 3458 ( 2005 ) . Showed for the first time that LOXL2 and / or LOXL3 regulate SNAI1 protein stability and functional activity . 73 . Peinado , H . , Portillo , F . & Cano , A . Switching on - off Snail : LOXL2 versus GSK3 β . Cell Cycle 4 , 1749 – 1752 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Vernon , A . E . & Labonne , C . Slug stability is dynamically regulated during neural crest development by the F - box protein Ppa . Development 133 , 3359 – 3370 ( 2006 ) . 75 . Lluis , F . , Ballestar , E . , Suelves , M . , Esteller , M . & Munoz - Canoves , P . E47 phosphorylation by p38 MAPK promotes MyoD / E47 association and muscle - specific gene transcription . EMBO J . 24 , 974 – 984 ( 2005 ) . 76 . Neufeld , B . et al . Serine / Threonine kinases 3pK and MAPK - activated protein kinase 2 interact with the basic helix - loop - helix transcription factor E47 and repress its transcriptional activity . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 20239 – 20242 ( 2000 ) . 77 . Chu , C . & Kohtz , D . S . Identification of the E2A gene products as regulatory targets of the G1 cyclin - dependent kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 8524 – 8534 ( 2001 ) . 78 . Nie , L . , Xu , M . , Vladimirova , A . & Sun , X . H . Notch - induced E2A ubiquitination and degradation are controlled by MAP kinase activities . EMBO J . 22 , 5780 – 5792 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Moreno - Bueno , G . et al . Genetic profiling of epithelial cells expressing e - cadherin repressors reveals a distinct role for snail , slug , and e47 factors in epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Cancer Res . 66 , 9543 – 9556 ( 2006 ) . 80 . Bermejo - Rodriguez , C . et al . Mouse cDNA microarray analysis uncovers Slug targets in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Genomics 87 , 113 – 118 ( 2006 ) . 81 . Vandewalle , C . et al . SIP1 / ZEB2 induces EMT by repressing genes of different epithelial cell - cell junctions . Nucleic Acids Res . 33 , 6566 – 6578 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Boutet , A . et al . Snail activation disrupts tissue homeostasis and induces fibrosis in the adult kidney . EMBO J . 25 , 5603 – 5613 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Cicchini , C . et al . Snail controls differentiation of hepatocytes by repressing HNF4 α expression . J . Cell Physiol . 209 , 230 – 238 ( 2006 ) . 84 . De Craene , B . et al . The transcription factor snail induces tumor cell invasion through modulation of the epithelial cell differentiation program . Cancer Res . 65 , 6237 – 6244 ( 2005 ) . 85 . Palmer , H . G . et al . The transcription factor SNAIL represses vitamin D receptor expression and responsiveness in human colon cancer . Nature Med . 10 , 917 – 919 ( 2004 ) . 86 . Kajita , M . , McClinic , K . N . & Wade , P . A . Aberrant expression of the transcription factors snail and slug alters the response to genotoxic stress . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 7559 – 7566 ( 2004 ) . 87 . Wu , W . S . et al . Slug antagonizes p53 - mediated apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors by repressing puma . Cell 123 , 641 – 653 ( 2005 ) . 88 . Espineda , C . E . , Chang , J . H . , Twiss , J . , Rajasekaran , S . A . & Rajasekaran , A . K . Repression of Na , K - ATPase β 1 - subunit by the transcription factor snail in carcinoma . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 , 1364 – 1373 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Park , J . H . et al . The zinc - finger transcription factor Snail downregulates proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression in colorectal carcinoma cells . Int . J . Oncol . 26 , 1541 – 1547 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Takeuchi , T . , Adachi , Y . , Sonobe , H . , Furihata , M . & Ohtsuki , Y . A ubiquitin ligase , skeletrophin , is a negative regulator of melanoma invasion . Oncogene 25 , 7059 – 7069 ( 2006 ) . 91 . Vega , S . et al . Snail blocks the cell cycle and confers resistance to cell death . Genes Dev . 18 , 1131 – 1143 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Seki , K . et al . Mouse Snail family transcription repressors regulate chondrocyte , extracellular matrix , type II collagen , and aggrecan . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 41862 – 41870 ( 2003 ) . 93 . Turner , F . E . et al . Slug regulates integrin expression and cell proliferation in human epidermal keratinocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 21321 – 21331 ( 2006 ) . 94 . Takahashi , E . et al . Snail regulates p21 ( WAF / CIP1 ) expression in cooperation with E2A and Twist . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 325 , 1136 – 1144 ( 2004 ) . 95 . Guaita , S . et al . Snail induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in tumor cells is accompanied by MUC1 repression and ZEB1 expression . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 39209 – 39216 ( 2002 ) . 96 . Yoshimoto , A . , Saigou , Y . , Higashi , Y . & Kondoh , H . Regulation of ocular lens development by Smad - interacting protein 1 involving Foxe3 activation . Development 132 , 4437 – 4448 ( 2005 ) . 97 . Alexander , N . R . et al . N - cadherin gene expression in prostate carcinoma is modulated by integrin - dependent nuclear translocation of Twist1 . Cancer Res . 66 , 3365 – 3369 ( 2006 ) . 98 . Zheng , W . , Wang , H . , Xue , L . , Zhang , Z . & Tong , T . Regulation of cellular senescence and p16 ( INK4a ) expression by Id1 and E47 proteins in human diploid fibroblast . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 31524 – 31532 ( 2004 ) . 99 . Kumar , M . S . , Hendrix , J . A . , Johnson , A . D . & Owens , G . K . Smooth muscle α - actin gene requires two E - boxes for proper expression in vivo and is a target of class I basic helix - loop - helix proteins . Circ . Res . 92 , 840 – 847 ( 2003 ) . 100 . Taki , M . , Verschueren , K . , Yokoyama , K . , Nagayama , M . & Kamata , N . Involvement of Ets - 1 transcription factor in inducing matrix metalloproteinase - 2 expression by epithelial - mesenchymal transition in human squamous carcinoma cells . Int . J . Oncol . 28 , 487 – 496 ( 2006 ) . 101 . Jorda , M . et al . Upregulation of MMP - 9 in MDCK epithelial cell line in response to expression of the Snail transcription factor . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3371 – 3385 ( 2005 ) . 102 . Remacle , J . E . et al . New mode of DNA binding of multi - zinc finger transcription factors : δ EF1 family members bind with two hands to two target sites . EMBO J . 18 , 5073 – 5084 ( 1999 ) . 103 . Blanco , M . J . et al . Correlation of Snail expression with histological grade and lymph node status in breast carcinomas . Oncogene 21 , 3241 – 3246 ( 2002 ) . 104 . Cheng , C . W . et al . Mechanisms of inactivation of E - cadherin in breast carcinoma : modification of the two - hit hypothesis of tumor suppressor gene . Oncogene 20 , 3814 – 3823 ( 2001 ) . First indication that transcriptional repression mechanisms have a dynamic role in E - cadherin downregulation . 105 . Come , C . et al . Snail and slug play distinct roles during breast carcinoma progression . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 , 5395 – 5402 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Elloul , S . et al . Snail , Slug , and Smad - interacting protein 1 as novel parameters of disease aggressiveness in metastatic ovarian and breast carcinoma . Cancer 103 , 1631 – 1643 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Moody , S . E . et al . The transcriptional repressor Snail promotes mammary tumor recurrence . Cancer Cell 8 , 197 – 209 ( 2005 ) . First implication of SNAI1 in breast cancer recurrence . 108 . Martin , T . A . , Goyal , A . , Watkins , G . & Jiang , W . G . Expression of the transcription factors snail , slug , and twist and their clinical significance in human breast cancer . Ann . Surg . Oncol . 12 , 488 – 496 ( 2005 ) . 109 . Elloul , S . et al . Expression of E - cadherin transcriptional regulators in ovarian carcinoma . Virchows Arch . 449 , 520 – 528 ( 2006 ) . 110 . Pena , C . et al . E - cadherin and vitamin D receptor regulation by SNAIL and ZEB1 in colon cancer : clinicopathological correlations . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 , 3361 – 3370 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Gonzalez - Sancho , J . M . , Larriba , M . J . , Ordonez - Moran , P . , Palmer , H . G . & Muñoz , A . Effects of 1 α , 25 - dihydroxyvitamin D3 in human colon cancer cells . Anticancer Res . 26 , 2669 – 2681 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Roy , H . K . , Smyrk , T . C . , Koetsier , J . , Victor , T . A . & Wali , R . K . The transcriptional repressor SNAIL is overexpressed in human colon cancer . Dig . Dis . Sci . 50 , 42 – 46 ( 2005 ) . 113 . Shioiri , M . et al . Slug expression is an independent prognostic parameter for poor survival in colorectal carcinoma patients . Br . J . Cancer 94 , 1816 – 1822 ( 2006 ) . 114 . Rosivatz , E . et al . Differential expression of the epithelial - mesenchymal transition regulators snail , SIP1 , and twist in gastric cancer . Am . J . Pathol . 161 , 1881 – 1891 ( 2002 ) . 115 . Rosivatz , E . et al . Expression and nuclear localization of Snail , an E - cadherin repressor , in adenocarcinomas of the upper gastrointestinal tract . Virchows Arch . 448 , 277 – 287 ( 2006 ) . 116 . Takeno , S . et al . E - cadherin expression in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma : promoter hypermethylation , Snail overexpression , and clinicopathologic implications . Am . J . Clin . Pathol . 122 , 78 – 84 ( 2004 ) . 117 . Yang , M . H . et al . Overexpression of NBS1 induces epithelial - mesenchymal transition and co - expression of NBS1 and Snail predicts metastasis of head and neck cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 , 507 – 515 ( 2006 ) . 118 . Yokoyama , K . et al . Increased invasion and matrix metalloproteinase - 2 expression by Snail - induced mesenchymal transition in squamous cell carcinomas . Int . J . Oncol . 22 , 891 – 898 ( 2003 ) . 119 . Miyoshi , A . et al . Snail accelerates cancer invasion by upregulating MMP expression and is associated with poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma . Br . J . Cancer 92 , 252 – 258 ( 2005 ) . 120 . Sugimachi , K . et al . Transcriptional repressor snail and progression of human hepatocellular carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 9 , 2657 – 2664 ( 2003 ) . 121 . Uchikado , Y . et al . Slug expression in the E - cadherin preserved tumors is related to prognosis in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 11 , 1174 – 1180 ( 2005 ) . 122 . Shih , J . Y . et al . Transcription repressor slug promotes carcinoma invasion and predicts outcome of patients with lung adenocarcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 11 , 8070 – 8078 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Sivertsen , S . et al . Expression of Snail , Slug and SIP1 in malignant mesothelioma effusions is associated with matrix metalloproteinase , but not with cadherin expression . Lung Cancer 54 , 309 – 317 ( 2006 ) . 124 . Saito , T . et al . E - cadherin mutation and Snail overexpression as alternative mechanisms of E - cadherin inactivation in synovial sarcoma . Oncogene 23 , 8629 – 8638 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Gupta , P . B . et al . The melanocyte differentiation program predisposes to metastasis after neoplastic transformation . Nature Genet . 37 , 1047 – 1054 ( 2005 ) . 126 . Locascio , A . , Vega , S . , de Frutos , C . A . , Manzanares , M . & Nieto , M . A . Biological potential of a functional human SNAIL retrogene . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 38803 – 38809 ( 2002 ) . 127 . Franci , C . et al . Expression of Snail protein in tumor - stroma interface . Oncogene 25 , 5134 – 5144 ( 2006 ) . The first studty to show a reliable expression of SNAI1 by immunohistochemistry in human tumours . 128 . Maeda , G . et al . Expression of SIP1 in oral squamous cell carcinomas : implications for E - cadherin expression and tumor progression . Int . J . Oncol . 27 , 1535 – 1541 ( 2005 ) . 129 . Imamichi , Y . , Konig , A . , Gress , T . & Menke , A . Collagen type I - induced Smad - interacting protein 1 expression downregulates E - cadherin in pancreatic cancer . Oncogene 26 , 2381 – 2385 ( 2007 ) . 130 . Spoelstra , N . S . et al . The transcription factor ZEB1 is aberrantly expressed in aggressive uterine cancers . Cancer Res . 66 , 3893 – 3902 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Mironchik , Y . et al . Twist overexpression induces in vivo angiogenesis and correlates with chromosomal instability in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 65 , 10801 – 10809 ( 2005 ) . 132 . Sarrio , D . et al . Epigenetic and genetic alterations of APC and CDH1 genes in lobular breast cancer : relationships with abnormal E - cadherin and catenin expression and microsatellite instability . Int . J . Cancer 106 , 208 – 215 ( 2003 ) . 133 . Kwok , W . K . et al . Up - regulation of TWIST in prostate cancer and its implication as a therapeutic target . Cancer Res . 65 , 5153 – 5162 ( 2005 ) . 134 . Yuen , H . F . et al . Up - regulation of TWIST in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma is associated with neoplastic transformation and distant metastasis . J . Clin . Pathol . August 2006 ( doi : 10 . 1036 / jcp2006 . 039099 ) . 135 . Lee , T . K . et al . Twist overexpression correlates with hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through induction of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 , 5369 – 5376 ( 2006 ) . 136 . Kyo , S . et al . High Twist expression is involved in infiltrative endometrial cancer and affects patient survival . Hum . Pathol . 37 , 431 – 438 ( 2006 ) . 137 . Hoek , K . et al . Expression profiling reveals novel pathways in the transformation of melanocytes to melanomas . Cancer Res . 64 , 5270 – 5282 ( 2004 ) . 138 . Perk , J . et al . Reassessment of id1 protein expression in human mammary , prostate , and bladder cancers using a monospecific rabbit monoclonal anti - id1 antibody . Cancer Res . 66 , 10870 – 10877 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2007 | 427 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group 139 . Olmeda , D . , Jorda , M . , Peinado , H . , Fabra , A . & Cano , A . Snail silencing effectively suppresses tumour growth and invasiveness . Oncogene 26 , 1862 – 1874 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Jamora , C . et al . A signaling pathway involving TGF β 2 and Snail in hair follicle morphogenesis . PLoS Biol . 3 , e11 ( 2005 ) . 141 . Metzstein , M . M . & Horvitz , H . R . The C . elegans cell death specification gene ces - 1 encodes a snail family zinc finger protein . Mol . Cell 4 , 309 – 319 ( 1999 ) . 142 . Inukai , T . et al . SLUG , a ces - 1 - related zinc finger transcription factor gene with antiapoptotic activity , is a downstream target of the E2A - HLF oncoprotein . Mol . Cell 4 , 343 – 352 ( 1999 ) . 143 . Inoue , A . et al . Slug , a highly conserved zinc finger transcriptional repressor , protects hematopoietic progenitor cells from radiation - induced apoptosis in vivo . Cancer Cell 2 , 279 – 288 ( 2002 ) . Functional characterization of the role of SNAI2 in the survival of haematological precursor cells . 144 . Perez - Losada , J . , Sanchez - Martin , M . , Perez - Caro , M . , Perez - Mancera , P . A . & Sanchez - Garcia , I . The radioresistance biological function of the SCF / kit signaling pathway is mediated by the zinc - finger transcription factor Slug . Oncogene 22 , 4205 – 4211 ( 2003 ) . 145 . Catalano , A . , Rodilossi , S . , Rippo , M . R . , Caprari , P . & Procopio , A . Induction of stem cell factor / c - Kit / slug signal transduction in multidrug - resistant malignant mesothelioma cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 46706 – 46714 ( 2004 ) . 146 . Puisieux , A . , Valsesia - Wittmann , S . & Ansieau , S . A twist for survival and cancer progression . Br . J . Cancer . 94 , 13 – 17 ( 2006 ) . 147 . Wang , X . et al . Identification of a novel function of Twist , a bHLH protein , in the development of acquired taxol resistance in human cancer cells . Oncogene 23 , 474 – 482 ( 2004 ) . 148 . Gyorffy , A . et al . Comparative promoter analysis of doxorubicin resistance - associated genes suggests E47 as a key regulatory element . Anticancer Res . 26 , 2971 – 2976 ( 2006 ) . 149 . De Craene , B . & Berx , G . Snail in the frame of malignant tumor recurrence . Breast Cancer Res . 8 , 105 ( 2006 ) . 150 . Brabletz , T . , Jung , A . , Spaderna , S . , Hlubek , F . & Kirchner , T . Opinion : migrating cancer stem cells - an integrated concept of malignant tumour progression . Nature Rev . Cancer 5 , 744 – 749 ( 2005 ) . 151 . Nelson , C . M . & Bissell , M . J . Of extracellular matrix , scaffolds , and signaling : tissue architecture regulates development , homeostasis , and cancer . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 22 , 287 – 309 ( 2006 ) . 152 . Zi , X . et al . Expression of Frzb / secreted Frizzled - related protein 3 , a secreted Wnt antagonist , in human androgen - independent prostate cancer PC - 3 cells suppresses tumor growth and cellular invasiveness . Cancer Res . 65 , 9762 – 9770 ( 2005 ) . 153 . Chua , H . L . et al . NF - κ B represses E - cadherin expression and enhances epithelial to mesenchymal transition of mammary epithelial cells : potential involvement of ZEB - 1 and ZEB - 2 . Oncogene 26 , 711 – 724 ( 2007 ) . 154 . Peinado , H . et al . Snail and E47 repressors of E - cadherin induce distinct invasive and angiogenic properties in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 2827 – 2839 ( 2004 ) . 155 . Takkunen , M . et al . Snail - dependent and - independent epithelial - mesenchymal transition in oral squamous carcinoma cells . J . Histochem Cytochem . 54 , 1263 – 1275 ( 2006 ) . 156 . Martinez - Estrada , O . M . et al . The transcription factors Slug and Snail act as repressors of Claudin - 1 expression in epithelial cells . Biochem . J . 394 , 449 – 457 ( 2006 ) . 157 . Friedl , P . & Wolf , K . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nature Rev . Cancer 3 , 362 – 374 ( 2003 ) . 158 . Savagner , P . et al . Developmental transcription factor slug is required for effective re - epithelialization by adult keratinocytes . J . Cell Physiol . 202 , 858 – 866 ( 2005 ) . 159 . Zavadil , J . & Bottinger , E . P . TGF - β and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions . Oncogene 24 , 5764 – 5774 ( 2005 ) . 160 . Esteban , M . A . et al . Regulation of E - cadherin expression by VHL and hypoxia - inducible factor . Cancer Res . 66 , 3567 – 3575 ( 2006 ) . 161 . Krishnamachary , B . et al . Hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 - dependent repression of E - cadherin in von Hippel - Lindau tumor suppressor - null renal cell carcinoma mediated by TCF3 , ZFHX1A , and ZFHX1B . Cancer Res . 66 , 2725 – 2731 ( 2006 ) . 162 . Kurrey , N . K . , K , A . & Bapat , S . A . Snail and Slug are major determinants of ovarian cancer invasiveness at the transcription level . Gynecol . Oncol . 97 , 155 – 165 ( 2005 ) . 163 . Imai , T . et al . Hypoxia attenuates the expression of E - cadherin via up - regulation of SNAIL in ovarian carcinoma cells . Am . J . Pathol . 163 , 1437 – 1447 ( 2003 ) . 164 . Erler , J . T . et al . Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Nature 440 , 1222 – 1226 ( 2006 ) . 165 . Pouyssegur , J . , Dayan , F . & Mazure , N . M . Hypoxia signalling in cancer and approaches to enforce tumour regression . Nature 441 , 437 – 443 ( 2006 ) . This study , together with reference 164 , reflects the influence of the tumour microenvironment on the regulation of LOX proteins to promote tumour metastasis . 166 . Carver , E . A . , Jiang , R . , Lan , Y . , Oram , K . F . & Gridley , T . The mouse snail gene encodes a key regulator of the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 8184 – 8188 ( 2001 ) . 167 . Murray , S . A . & Gridley , T . Snail family genes are required for left - right asymmetry determination , but not neural crest formation , in mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10300 – 10304 ( 2006 ) . 168 . Postigo , A . A . & Dean , D . C . Differential expression and function of members of the zfh - 1 family of zinc finger / homeodomain repressors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 6391 – 6396 ( 2000 ) . 169 . Van de Putte , T . et al . Mice lacking ZFHX1B , the gene that codes for Smad - interacting protein - 1 , reveal a role for multiple neural crest cell defects in the etiology of Hirschsprung disease - mental retardation syndrome . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 72 , 465 – 470 ( 2003 ) . 170 . Massari , M . E . & Murre , C . Helix - loop - helix proteins : regulators of transcription in eucaryotic organisms . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 429 – 440 ( 2000 ) . A comprehensive review of the bHLH family of proteins . 171 . Ellenberger , T . , Fass , D . , Arnaud , M . & Harrison , S . C . Crystal structure of transcription factor E47 : E - box recognition by a basic region helix - loop - helix dimer . Genes Dev . 8 , 970 – 980 ( 1994 ) . 172 . Quong , M . W . , Massari , M . E . , Zwart , R . & Murre , C . A new transcriptional - activation motif restricted to a class of helix - loop - helix proteins is functionally conserved in both yeast and mammalian cells . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 792 – 800 ( 1993 ) . 173 . Chen , J . , Yusuf , I . , Andersen , H . M . & Fruman , D . A . FOXO transcription factors cooperate with delta EF1 to activate growth suppressive genes in B lymphocytes . J . Immunol . 176 , 2711 – 2721 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank F . Portillo , G . Moreno - Bueno , E . Cubillo and all the members of AC’s laboratory for their critical feedback and thoughtful suggestions . We apologize to those investigators whose experimental work has not been cited or cited indirectly owing to space limitations . Experimental work at AC’s laboratory was supported by grants from the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia ( MEC ) and the European Union . HP and DO are supported by postdoc - toral contracts from the Fundación Científica de la Asociación Española Contra el Cáncer and MEC , respectively . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene AMF | BRCA2 | calreticulin | β - catenin | cadherin 16 | CDH1 | CDKN1A | CDKN2A | collagen 2 α 1 | COX2 | CTBP | cyclin D2 | E2A | EGF | endothelin 1 | ETS1 | FRZB | GSK3 β | HDAC1 | HDAC2 | HDAC3 | HGF | HIF1 | HMGA2 | ID2 | IGF | KIT | LOXL2 | LOXL3 | LRP5 | MAPKAPK2 | MMP2 | MMP9 | MTA3 | MYC | NF κ B | occludin | PAI1 | PAK1 | PC2 | PCNA | PGE2 | PI3K | plakophilin 2 | PNN | RAF1 | SCF | skeletrophin | SNAI1 | SNAI2 | SP1 | SPARC | STAT3 | TCF4 | TGF β | TIMP1 | VEGF | VEGFR1 | VHL | ZEB1 | ZEB2 FURTHER INFORMATION Amparo Cano’s homepage : http : / / www . iib . uam . es / script / laboratorios . es . cgi ? id = 28 The EMT International Association : http : / / www . mtci . com . au / temtia . html The International Cancer Microenvironment Society : http : / / cancermicroenvironment . tau . ac . il / The Cadherin Resource : http : / / calcium . uhnres . utoronto . ca / cadherin / flash . htm Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S 428 | JUNE 2007 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 2007 Nature Publishing Group