The critical success factors for new service development in digital service Nopsaran Thuethongchai Ph . D . Candidate Technopreneurship and Innovation Management program Chulalongkorn University + 669 - 5956 - 5156 nopsaran @ gmail . com Assistant Professor Tatri Taiphapoon , Ph . D Faculty of Communication Arts Chulalongkorn University + 668 - 749 - 0964 Tatri . t @ chula . ac . th Achara Chandrachai Emeritus professor Chulalongkorn Business School Chulalongkorn University + 668 - 1497 - 1119 achandrachai @ gmail . com Sipat Triukose , Ph . D Research Group on Applied Computer Engineering Technology for Medicine and Healthcare Chulalongkorn University Chulalongkorn University Big Data Analytics and IoT Center ( CUBIC ) Sipat . T @ chula . ac . th ABSTRACT The critical success factors of New Service Development ( NSD ) has received overwhelming interest and played an important role in the growth of service industries . With current situation of highly competitive business environment , service provider companies are inevitably forced to adopt or develop service innovation in order to gain competitive advantages or remain in the competitive races in the service industry . Critical success factors ( CSFs ) are crucial aspects for the success of new service development . To create service innovation , project manager , project team members and authorized persons must have good understanding and plan the project execution appropriately . The current fast - changing economic condition , which focuses on digital economy , requires rapid development of new congruous services . The development of new services requires comprehensive understanding of success factors of New Service Development process . Even though there were numerous studies on suitably applying NSD process to various industries in the past , there are limited numbers of studies on this process and critical success factors these days during digital era . The contribution of this research is to propose seven critical success factors ( 7C Model ) providing guidance for a project manager or authorized persons to manage service innovation and play important role for the success of NSD process especially digital service channel . CCS Concepts • Social and professional topics ➝ Project management techniques • General and reference ➝ Design Keywords New Service Development ( NSD ) ; Service Innovation ; Critical success factors ( CSFs ) ; Digital Service 1 . INTRODUCTION Nowadays the model of providing service thru digital channel plays an essential role for conducting the business with the current circumstances where there are speedy improvement in communication , ICT is extensively used , resulting the remodeling of how customer contact the service providers . From latest research found that there are significantly high number of customers digitally contact their service providers via internet whereas the decreasing in number of those who contact service providers via traditional channel . [ 1 ] With the changes from the advancement of technology and consumer behavior are the factors which organizations have to concern while providing their digital services as the information can be effortless spread instantaneously and extensively with current technology and hi - speed internet . This causes tremendous impact on business and its activities . Findings from Deloitte Global contact center survey 2017 conducted with 450 customer service centers worldwide found that number of customer contacts thru the digital service centers have been increased to 44 % from 27 % , besides providing services to customers via online platform , the service providers are able to collect and leverage customer behavior information on the service improvement analysis for effective and satisfying customer services . Recently , numbers of organizations modify their services to digital platform such as Facebook page , Web Chat , Website and Social media , together with re - tailoring their business strategy for future revolution . One of the service strategies is service innovation introduction which is the core factor to not only drive business growth but also being competitive in the market . [ 2 ] This pushes the service providers to come up with new offers [ 3 ] . With these competitions they create new service offerings as the positive consequences . An important tool in offering new services is the development of new services ( NSD ) means process and set of official activities NDS in this paper base on the model of [ 5 ] which consists of 15 stages and executing NSD divided into 3 pillars 1 . ) Front End 2 . ) Back End Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . ICCMB 2020 , January 31 - February 2 , 2020 , Tokyo , Japan © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7677 - 8 / 20 / 01… $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3383845 . 3383874 222 and 3 . ) Commercialization is an important part of innovation and it is believed that the development of new services is not caused by an event or situation but should be caused by the systematic design and implementation process . [ 24 ] Found that half of the project numbers are failed and 80 % of success cases are subjected to be revised for this reason , the researcher has reviewed literature and document research . On issues related to understanding the CSFs of NSD is important to working structure of the process NSD and covering all elements ; strategy , planning , and service development [ 4 ] . Understand that NSD is not created by chance , the process is systematically designed and executed . [ 5 ] From most of the literature , CSFs of new service development process is focus on development process , customer involvement , knowledge within organization , technology which supports services and service technology [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] new service development process for supporting digital economy has other CSFs which will impact the success of NDS that are relevant and have a positive effect on success , including to provide clear corporate strategy at the beginning stage of NSD is essential for top management . This is to have suitable allocation for effort and resources . Setting effective goal and strategy are resulting from marketing objectives which co - relating to mission and vision of business . Another important point is knowing positioning of organization which is as high important as setting direction because this is the vital guidelines for innovator to have clear focus on mutual goals . Customer factor that discusses the consideration of real customer needs and customer participation in the service development process and interaction with customers is the critical success factors ( CSFs ) in NSD . Collection factors are identifying important information that needs to be collected for finding customer Insight and managing data efficiently to get meaningful information that can be utilized to leverage big data into analysis and an effective data management process for business advantages . Capabilities factor the importance of “enablers” which means the working team , process , technology , tools and organizational culture for facilitating the design of new service and new delivery system is considered an important part of driving the new service development process ( NSD ) . Creativity factors of staff - level and the organizational level that can create different competitive potentials and a way to creative advantage . Collaboration factor in a cross - functional team with diverse knowledge in the project and the advantage of encouraging employee and customer to participate in new service development for increase the chance for positive implementation and discontinue customer requirement mismatch . Communication factors The manage of the NSD project must ensure internal and external communication is effective to understand the development process and follow closely for the team Including decision - makers can solve problems each step of the new service development process . It also helps the services of employees and customers to deliver services more clearly . We will propose a detail about the 7C Model in the next part of this research . 2 . RESEARCH METHODOLOGY This research is to study CSFs impacting the success of NSD process which is based on literature and concepts , this research relies on methodology for documentary research which is analyzed on factors and variables , impacting on success NSD especially on development of digital service initiating from literature review , theory , and related philosophy during year 2000 to date , supplementary to that researches prior to the year of 2000 related to this study are also being included as the supplement . There are comprised of 74 researches related to the topics of this study , abstract , keywords in academic database which are Scopus and Science direct comprising of concepts , digital service theory , service innovation , new service development and other factors such as people , technology and process . Synthesizing CSFs and connecting all core factors to shape research structure and analyze the design for absolute NSD completion . 3 . RESEARCH FINDING 3 . 1 Digital Service Digital service is the central touch point between organization and its customers such as Facebook page , Chat , Website , Social media where customers can inquire for pre - purchase and after sales service , report service / product problems [ 12 ] . Looking at technology trend relating customer behavior , from we are social company research on global digital report in the year 2019 found that there will be a dominant change in proportion of accessing the internet is at 57 % or 4 , 388 , 000 , 000 of world population which is 9 . 1 % growth from previous year . From consumer behavior perspective found that the average rate of daily internet usage during the year of 2018 is at 6 . 4 9 hours , increases by 6 % comparing to the average rate of year 2017 . The change in service contacting point has been changed depending on the increasing rate of customer behavior of digital service usage and contact centers which handle customer transaction up to 70 % of the whole organization [ 13 ] . As a result , digital service channel hold valuable dataset to leverage and analyze those big data for the benefit of organization [ 14 ] . 3 . 2 Service Innovation Innovation is the key driver for business survival and success which requires systematic management [ 15 ] . In service industry , there are variety of products and services . [ 16 ] combines literatures meaning which are 1 . ) Intangibility service 2 . ) Inseparability service which service production and consumption are at the same time . 3 . ) Heterogeneity service : various services on its type and quality 4 . ) Perishability the service product in professional industry can be divided into [ 2 ] . 2part 1 . ) Intangibility which service as product transforms stage such as consulting and communication services 2 . ) Interactivity which customers are included into the interaction which has the highest growth among others . Service Innovation has to adapt according to the change on technology and leverage the database containing diversified customer behaviors . There is a proposed model of service innovation ( four dimensions ) consisting 1st dimension : The Service Concept which is the new proposition on service offering 2nd dimension : The Client Interface which is designing touch point between customers and service provider . 3rd dimension : The Service Delivery System / Organization creating connection between 1st and 2nd dimension to deliver the service . 4th dimension : Technological Options is the analysis center for applying technology to support service innovation [ 17 ] . 3 . 3 New Service Development ( NSD ) New service development means process and set of official activities consisting of new service strategy milestones , concept initiation , business development analysis , market testing , and commercialization . [ 18 ] , [ 5 ] It was identified that NSD is the key success factor for analyze the interaction of 3 strategy elements which are 1 . Designing Service 2 . Developping Service and 3 . Creating Service Innovation [ 4 ] the main difficulty found in NSD is gathering the requirements for service design execution and new service development process improvement to serve current business activities [ 19 ] factors for processing and 223 executing NSD divided into 3 pillars 1 . ) Front End 2 . ) Back End and 3 . ) Commercialization which consist of 15 stages 1 . ) Formulation of new service objective and strategy 2 . ( Idea generation 3 . ) Idea screening 4 . ) Concept Development 5 . ) Concept Testing 6 . ) Business Analysis 7 . ) Project Authorization ) 8 . ( Service Design and Testing 9 . ) Process and System10 . ) Marketing and program designing and testing ) 11 . ) Personal Training 12 . ) Service Testing and Pilot Run 13 . ) Marketing Testing 14 . ) Full - scale launch 15 . ) Post - launch evaluation . [ 5 ] Considering Idea generation , Idea screening , Concept Development , which their initial stage is essential for the reason that ground structure of NSD process is formed from them . A numbers of researches show that companies have to manage and have proactive approach of Fuzzy Front End of NSD for digital era and increase the success degree of innovation improvement . [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] 3 . 4 Critical Success Factor for New Service Development It was found that NSD in multiple organizations have difficulties in the innovation management according to the studies on factors impacting service innovation management [ 24 ] found that only 58 % succeed in new service development project or in other words half of the project numbers are failed and 80 % of success cases are subjected to be revised [ 7 ] As a result , organization should be mindful of CSFs . 3 . 4 . 1 Corporate strategy Firstly , it is recommended to determine service terms , then follow by service system and execution conditions [ 4 ] which can guarantee that service development be subdivided into 3 activities 1 . ) Service concept improvement 2 . ) Service system improvement and 3 . ) Service procedure improvement [ 25 ] service concept describes customer requirements and their satisfactory standard . Service system means steady number of necessary service resources consisting of company employees who are service provider , physical and technical environment , including structured organization to support service innovation . In other respects , customer is the “co - producer” of service design and strategy more over front - line employees play the important role in execute process transform strategy to operation plan . [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] One of the main issues found in NSD is to gather the requirements for tailoring the services and its process for the current business practices [ 19 ] . To provide clear corporate strategy at the beginning stage of NSD is essential for top management . This is to have suitable allocation for effort and resources . The allocation comprises of 3 steps which are setting objective and new service strategy , concept refining . [ 5 ] Setting effective goal and strategy are resulting from marketing objectives which co - relating to mission and vision of business . Another important point is knowing positioning of organization which is as high important as setting direction because this is the vital guidelines for innovator to have clear focus on mutual goals . In addition to that innovation culture is required to be built within organization continuously for initiating innovative idea . [ 24 ] Furthermore the critical success factor ( CSFs ) of new service development ( NSD ) brake down into strategy management , management procedure design , knowledge management , customer involvement . [ 6 ] New service strategic matrix comprises of 2 dimension Industry dimension estimates from customer segment ( existing and new customer ) and dimension of service offering dimension ( existing or new service ) in this matrix show 4 types of strategy 1 . ) Share building strategy 2 . ) Line extension strategy offering existing services for new customer segment 3 . ) Market extension strategy 4 . ) New business strategy which is the most risky option as entering into unknown territory [ 5 ] . 3 . 4 . 2 Customer Interaction with customers is the critical success factors ( CSFs ) in NSD [ 9 ] accordingly setting role for customers and front - line employees [ 26 ] in NSD process influent to organization outcome and customer involvement in service design and development represent for market requirements . customer interaction and information are strong drive for success in innovation process in the studies moreover , selection process for those customers to be involved has to be conducted carefully because the successful interaction relies on suitable strategy between company and customers [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] , [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] . [ 31 ] . Research found that interaction with customers could help decrease time consumption of NSD and to minimize uncertainty in the process , both internal and external information is mandatory . [ 32 ] 3 . 4 . 3 Collection In the setting service concept and service development management , perception on customer satisfaction and intention are always misleading . This is the trigger point for necessity of the investment in qualitative research which for more customer insight . Generally , quantitative research is not reliable source to generate new service idea . , Unavailability of physical prototype and difficulty in reproduction and market circumstance create issues when conducting research for intangible proposal . [ 19 ] With this , it is necessary to have more in depth qualitative research . One of the favorable technique to find opportunity is QFD technique ( Quality Function Deployment ) which creates customer satisfaction based on customer requirement as the objective of the design . [ 33 ] The success of new service and competitive analysis is to leverage big data into analysis and effective data management process for business advantages . [ 34 ] 3 . 4 . 4 Capabilities NSD cycle shows non – linear working pattern and shows the importance of “enablers” which means working team , process , technology , tools and organizational culture for facilitating the design of new service and new delivery system [ 35 ] similar perspective presenting in the research of “enablers” is CSFs which has positive impact on NSD cycle and helps service development team design product that match to customer requirement , these tools are served as “lubricant” which helps lubricating NSD cycle flawlessly and skilled employee play the crucial role in development [ 7 ] , [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] which similar to [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] mentioned interaction between service development team and customers in the service process . And customer interaction is the service differentiation in service sector which service provider have not to provide only service product , offering products but also have to consider the interaction between front - line employee and customers such as lack of skilled labor which is the key obstacle towards service delivery , additionally lacking of skilled labor in IT is the challenging factors impacting service innovation effectiveness [ 40 ] . There was a key highlight that sufficient employee rewarding program for whom participates in innovation development will increase the success of program [ 7 ] , [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] re Furthermo , there are 4 important attributes for new service development ( 1 ) fairness ( 2 ) accuracy ( 3 ) fact driven and ( 4 ) procedure . [ 43 ] In general , service providers are not using complicated procedure and official practices [ 5 ] , [ 44 ] but using the advantages of technology , leveraging database in accordance 224 with changes in customer behavior which trends to alternate continuously in service innovation development [ 17 ] . 3 . 4 . 5 Creativity Embedding organization employees to have a service innovation mindset . Creativity exercise as a company training course creates competitive skill and contributes the creativity organization . Creativity exercise as company training course create competitive skill and contribute the creativity to benefit the organization . It was saying that creativity is the characteristic of person who are sensitive to issue , defect , knowledge gap , and missing pieces be providing solution and testing for ensuring the results that benefit others [ 45 ] , [ 46 ] . Innovation is the execution of creativity concept , it consists of 3 elements 1 . ) Concept Selection 2 . ) Innovation development and 3 . ) Commercialization [ 47 ] Creating innovation is from 3 main elements 1 . ( Motivation to innovate 2 . ) Resource in the task domain includes all elements in organization such as human resource , capability and employee skill and database which has ability to transfer innovation . 3 . ) Skills for innovation management skill in innovation management which impact personnel creativity and other areas within organization . [ 48 ] 3 . 4 . 6 Collaboration The advantage of encouraging employee to participate in new service development is identify customer needs the participation increase the chance for positive implementation and discontinue customer requirement mismatch and more effective working practice and cross - functional teams ( CFTs ) which impact the accomplishment of NSD . [ 8 ] A research found that pressure from daily work is important for new service development , [ 41 , 49 ] and suggest that company should take cross function job rotation seriously . [ 42 ] , [ 50 ] , [ 19 ] 3 . 4 . 7 Communication Internal and external communication , using service innovation and communication training should not only limit to front - line employee but also to customers . And communication is the main factors to manage customer expectations and among development team as well . This can manage thru efficient internal communication or development team as the official media . The development process should be sponsored by top management and the management of service innovation have to assure on the effectiveness of communication for positive feedback leading to project success . [ 51 ] . The combination of all factors was synthesized is the impact of critical success factors ( CSFs ) of new service development shown in table 1 . Table 1 . The Critical success factors for new service development in digital service This research result can conclude and present framework of CSFs in NSD for designing NSD in form of digital services to effectively and successfully present service innovation . 7C model concept is the factors impact the success of NSD 7 variables are from literature review can point out that apart from NSD process , there are factors impact the success of NSD consists of 1 . ) Corporate Strategy and organizational culture which support service innovation 2 . ) Customer is to understand needs of existing customers , prospects and internal customers such as frontline employee 3 . ) Collection the useful data for service development leading to practice 4 . ) Capability such as people , new service process , service delivery system , technology , knowledge management and project management . 5 . ) Creativity supporting personal and organizational creativity 6 . ) Collaboration in new service development process both internal and external organization , cross - functional teams , training and motivation program 7 . ) Communication along new service development process with frontline employee and customers efficiently . A Proposed conceptual model of CSFs for NSD and service innovation is illustrated in Figure 1 . 225 Figure 1 . Proposed conceptual model 4 . CONCLUSIONS From the result of documentary research related to CSFs topic , 7C model explains that the development service innovation must leverage holistic management . Interrelated internal and external factors must be taken into consideration as variables for new service development ( NSD ) . This article set direction for the operational literature for organization that provides digital service with business requirements in successful service innovation process . This article also provides guidance for project manager or authorized persons to perform analysis of possibility in project’s success or failure . This provides a clear business advantage in highly - competitive digital era . It can also be applied to the managing of NSD . However , 7C Model still has limitations for which it is , yet , to be tested and evaluated using empirical research methodology in future research . 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Wessel , and C . M . Christensen , “Surviving disruption , ” Harvard Business Review , vol . 90 , no . 12 , pp . 56 - 64 , 2012 . [ 2 ] I . Miles , “Patterns of innovation in service industries , ” IBM Systems journal , vol . 47 , no . 1 , pp . 115 - 128 , 2008 . [ 3 ] F . Gómez - Gonsálvez , P . Smeyers , F . Menor , A . Morant , J . Carbonell , and F . Mulas , “Encefalomielitis aguda diseminada en la infancia . Estudio retrospectivo de siete pacientes , ” Rev Neurol , vol . 30 , no . 4 , pp . 304 - 10 , 2000 . [ 4 ] D . W . Cowell , The marketing of services : Institute of Marketing / The CAM Foundation , 1986 . [ 5 ] E . E . Scheuing , and E . M . Johnson , “A proposed model for new service development , ” Journal of Services marketing , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 25 - 34 , 1989 . [ 6 ] D . Jin , K . H . Chai , and K . C . Tan , “New service development maturity model , ” Managing Service Quality , vol . 24 , no . 1 , pp . 86 - 116 , 2014 . [ 7 ] S . Angelopoulos , F . Kitsios , and T . Papadopoulos , “New service development in e - government : Identifying critical success factors , ” Transforming Government : People , Process and Policy , vol . 4 , no . 1 , pp . 95 - 118 , 2010 . [ 8 ] B . Schneider , and D . E . Bowen , “New services design , development and implementation and the employee , ” Developing new services , pp . 82 - 101 , 1984 . [ 9 ] I . Alam , “Customer interaction in service innovation : evidence from India , ” International Journal of Emerging Markets , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 41 - 64 , 2013 . [ 10 ] U . De Brentani , “Success and failure in new industrial services , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management : AN INTERNATIONAL PUBLICATION OF THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT & MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION , vol . 6 , no . 4 , pp . 239 - 258 , 1989 . [ 11 ] C . J . Easingwood , “New product development for service companies , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management , vol . 3 , no . 4 , pp . 264 - 275 , 1986 . [ 12 ] M . Saberi , O . Khadeer Hussain , and E . Chang , “Past , present and future of contact centers : a literature review , ” Business Process Management Journal , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 574 - 597 , 2017 . [ 13 ] A . Dhesi , P . Gupta , A . Kumar , G . R . Parija , and S . Roy , " Contact center scheduling with strict resource requirements . " pp . 156 - 169 . [ 14 ] C . Lehrer , A . Wieneke , J . vom Brocke , R . Jung , and S . Seidel , “How big data analytics enables service innovation : materiality , affordance , and the individualization of service , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 424 - 460 , 2018 . [ 15 ] P . Drucker , Innovation and entrepreneurship : Routledge , 2014 . [ 16 ] V . A . Zeithaml , A . Parasuraman , and L . L . Berry , “Problems and strategies in services marketing , ” Journal of marketing , vol . 49 , no . 2 , pp . 33 - 46 , 1985 . [ 17 ] P . Den Hertog , “Co - producers of innovation : on the role of knowledge - intensive business services in innovation , ” Productivity , innovation and knowledge in services , pp . 223 - 255 , 2002 . [ 18 ] I . Alam , and C . Perry , “A customer - oriented new service development process , ” Journal of services Marketing , vol . 16 , no . 6 , pp . 515 - 534 , 2002 . [ 19 ] E . Langeard , P . Reffait , and P . Eiglier , “Developing new services , ” Creativity in Services Marketing , American Marketing Association , Chicago , IL , pp . 120 - 23 , 1986 . [ 20 ] M . M . Montoya ‐ Weiss , and T . M . O ' Driscoll , “ From experience : applying performance support technology in the fuzzy front end , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management : AN INTERNATIONAL PUBLICATION OF THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT & MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 143 - 161 , 2000 . [ 21 ] D . W . Dahl , and P . Moreau , “The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation , ” Journal of Marketing Research , vol . 39 , no . 1 , pp . 47 - 60 , 2002 . [ 22 ] A . Khurana , and S . R . Rosenthal , “Integrating the fuzzy front end of new product development , ” MIT Sloan Management Review , vol . 38 , no . 2 , pp . 103 , 1997 . [ 23 ] D . G . Reinertsen , “Taking the fuzziness out of the fuzzy front end , ” Research - Technology Management , vol . 42 , no . 6 , pp . 25 - 31 , 1999 . 226 [ 24 ] J . P . De Jong , and P . A . Vermeulen , “Organizing successful new service development : a literature review , ” Management decision , vol . 41 , no . 9 , pp . 844 - 858 , 2003 . [ 25 ] B . Edvardsson , and J . Olsson , “Key concepts for new service development , ” Service Industries Journal , vol . 16 , no . 2 , pp . 140 - 164 , 1996 . [ 26 ] H . L . Melton , and M . D . Hartline , “Customer and frontline employee influence on new service development performance , ” Journal of Service Research , vol . 13 , no . 4 , pp . 411 - 425 , 2010 . [ 27 ] J . - P . Deschamps , and P . R . Nayak , Product juggernauts : Harvard Business School Press , 1995 . [ 28 ] A . Griffin , and J . R . Hauser , “The voice of the customer , ” Marketing science , vol . 12 , no . 1 , pp . 1 - 27 , 1993 . [ 29 ] S . McKenna , “The business impact of management attitudes towards dealing with conflict : a cross - cultural assessment , ” Journal of Managerial Psychology , vol . 10 , no . 7 , pp . 22 - 27 , 1995 . [ 30 ] E . Von Hippel , “Successful Industrial Products from Customer Ideas : Presentation of a new customer - active paradigm with evidence and implications , ” Journal of marketing , vol . 42 , no . 1 , pp . 39 - 49 , 1978 . [ 31 ] I . Alam , “Removing the fuzziness from the fuzzy front - end of service innovations through customer interactions , ” Industrial marketing management , vol . 35 , no . 4 , pp . 468 - 480 , 2006 . [ 32 ] D . Zahay , and A . Griffin , “ Customer learning processes , strategy selection , and performance in business ‐ to ‐ business service firms , ” Decision Sciences , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 169 - 203 , 2004 . [ 33 ] L . - K . Chan , and M . - L . Wu , “Quality function deployment : A literature review , ” European journal of operational research , vol . 143 , no . 3 , pp . 463 - 497 , 2002 . [ 34 ] A . Labrinidis , and H . V . Jagadish , “Challenges and opportunities with big data , ” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , vol . 5 , no . 12 , pp . 2032 - 2033 , 2012 . [ 35 ] S . P . Johnson , “A critical evaluation of the new services development process : integrating service innovation and service design , ” New service development , creating memorable experiences , 2000 . [ 36 ] C . D . Ittner , and D . F . Larcker , “The performance effects of process management techniques , ” Management science , vol . 43 , no . 4 , pp . 522 - 534 , 1997 . [ 37 ] M . A . Schilling , and C . W . Hill , “Managing the new product development process : strategic imperatives , ” Academy of Management Perspectives , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 67 - 81 , 1998 . [ 38 ] E . Langeard , and P . Eiglier , “Strategic management of service development , emerging perspectives on services marketing , ” Creativity in services marketing : what’s new , what works , what’s developing . Chicago : American Marketing Association , 1983 . [ 39 ] C . H . Lovelock , “Strategies for managing demand in capacity - constrained service organisations , ” The Service Industries Journal , vol . 4 , no . 3 , pp . 12 - 30 , 1984 . [ 40 ] H . - J . S . John , " Making It Happen , " London , Collins , 1988 . [ 41 ] E . Drew , On the edge : The Clinton presidency : Simon and Schuster , 1995 . [ 42 ] F . Axel Johne , and P . Harborne , “How large commercial banks manage product innovation , ” International Journal of Bank Marketing , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 54 - 71 , 1985 . [ 43 ] G . L . Shostack , “Service design in the operating environment , ” Developing new services , pp . 27 - 43 , 1984 . [ 44 ] M . R . Bowers , “Developing new services : improving the process makes it better , ” Journal of Services marketing , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 15 - 20 , 1989 . [ 45 ] M . Csikszentmihalyi , “16 implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity , ” Handbook of creativity , vol . 313 , 1999 . [ 46 ] E . P . Torrance , “Are the Torrance tests of creative thinking biased against or in favor of “disadvantaged” groups ? , ” Gifted child quarterly , vol . 15 , no . 2 , pp . 75 - 80 , 1971 . [ 47 ] B . Von Stamm , Managing innovation , design and creativity : John Wiley & Sons , 2008 . [ 48 ] T . M . Amabile , “A model of creativity and innovation in organizations , ” Research in organizational behavior , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 123 - 167 , 1988 . [ 49 ] H . L . Melton , and M . D . Hartline , “Employee Collaboration , Learning Orientation , and New Service Development Performance , ” Journal of Service Research , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 67 - 81 , 2013 . [ 50 ] F . A . Johne , and M . P . Pavlidis , “How banks apply marketing expertise to develop new derivatives , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management : AN INTERNATIONAL PUBLICATION OF THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT & MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION , vol . 13 , no . 5 , pp . 440 - 452 , 1996 . [ 51 ] M . I . Sanchez - Hernandez , and F . J . Miranda , “Linking internal market orientation and new service performance , ” European Journal of Innovation Management , vol . 14 , no . 2 , pp . 207 - 226 , 2011 . [ 52 ] M . Ottenbacher , V . Shaw , and A . Lockwood , “An investigation of the factors affecting innovation performance in chain and independent hotels , ” Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism , vol . 6 , no . 3 - 4 , pp . 113 - 128 , 2006 . [ 53 ] A . C . R . Van Riel , J . Lemmink , and H . Ouwersloot , “High - technology service innovation success : A decision - making perspective , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management , vol . 21 , no . 5 , pp . 348 - 359 , 2004 . [ 54 ] F . Blindenbach - Driessen , and J . van den Ende , “Innovation in project - based firms : The context dependency of success factors , ” Research Policy , vol . 35 , no . 4 , pp . 545 - 561 , 2006 . [ 55 ] M . C . Ottenbacher , and R . J . Harrington , “Strategies for achieving success for innovative versus incremental new services , ” Journal of Services Marketing , vol . 24 , no . 1 , pp . 3 - 15 , 2010 . 227