© 2005 Nature Publishing Group Vol 438 | 15 December 2005 900 SPECIAL REPORT Internet encyclopaediasgo head to head O ne of the extraordinary stories of the Internet age is that of Wikipedia , a free online encyclopaedia that anyone can edit . This radical and rapidly growing publica - tion , which includes close to 4 million entries , is now a much - used resource . But it is also controversial : if anyone can edit entries , how do users know if Wikipedia is as accurate as established sources such as Encyclopaedia Britannica ? Several recent cases have highlighted the potential problems . One article was revealed as falsely suggesting that a former assistant to US Senator Robert Kennedy may have been involved in his assassination . And podcasting pioneer Adam Curry has been accused of editing the entry on podcasting to remove references to competitors’ work . Curry says he merely thought he was making the entry more accurate . However , an expert - led investigation carried out by Nature — the first to use peer review to compare Wikipedia and Britannica’s coverage of science — suggests that such high - profile examples are the exception rather than the rule . The exercise revealed numerous errors in both encyclopaedias , but among 42 entries tested , the difference in accuracy was not particularly great : the average science entry in Wikipedia con - tained around four inaccura - cies ; Britannica , about three . Considering how Wikipedia articles are written , that result might seem surprising . A solar physicist could , for example , work on the entry on the Sun , but would have the same status as a contributor without an academic background . Disputes about content are usu - ally resolved by discussion among users . But Jimmy Wales , co - founder of Wikipedia and president of the encyclopaedia’s parent organization , the Wikimedia Foundation of St Petersburg , Florida , says the finding shows the potential of Wikipedia . “I’m pleased , ” he says . “Our goal is to get to Britannica quality , or better . ” Wikipedia is growing fast . The encyclopaedia has added 3 . 7 million articles in 200 languages since it was founded in 2001 . The English ver - sion has more than 45 , 000 registered users , and added about 1 , 500 new articles every day of October 2005 . Wikipedia has become the 37th most visited website , according to Alexa , a web ranking service . But critics have raised concerns about the site’s increasing influence , ques - tioning whether mul - tiple , unpaid editors can match paid professionals for accuracy . Writing in the online magazine TCS last year , former Britannica editor Robert McHenry declared one Wikipedia entry — on US founding father Alexander Hamilton — as “what might be expected of a high - school stu - dent” . Opening up the editing process to all , regardless of expertise , means that reliability can never be ensured , he concluded . Yet Nature ’s investigation suggests that Britannica’s advantage may not be great , at least when it comes to science entries . In the study , entries were chosen from the websites of Wikipedia and Encyclopaedia Britannica on a broad range of scientific disciplines and sent to a relevant expert for peer review . Each reviewer examined the entry on a single sub - ject from the two encyclopaedias ; they were not told which article came from which ency - clopaedia . A total of 42 usable reviews were returned out of 50 sent out , and were then examined by Nature ’s news team . Only eight serious errors , such as misinter - pretations of important concepts , were Jimmy Wales’ Wikipedia comes close to Britannica in terms of the accuracy of its science entries , a Nature investigation finds . A P P H O T O / M . P R O B S T 15 . 12 News 900 - 901 NEW NS 13 / 12 / 05 1 : 56 PM Page 900 Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group THE NATURE PODCAST Listen to Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales talk about our survey and more at www . nature . com / nature / podcast NATURE | Vol 438 | 15 December 2005 NEWS 901 detected in the pairs of articles reviewed , four from each encyclopaedia . But reviewers also found many factual errors , omissions or mis - leading statements : 162 and 123 in Wikipedia and Britannica , respectively . Editors at Britannica would not discuss the findings , but say their own studies of Wiki - pedia have uncovered numerous flaws . “We have nothing against Wikipedia , ” says Tom Panelas , director of corporate communications at the company’s headquarters in Chicago . “But it is not the case that errors creep in on an occasional basis or that a couple of articles are poorly written . There are lots of articles in that condition . They need a good editor . ” Several Nature reviewers agreed with Pan - elas’ point on readability , commenting that the Wikipedia article they reviewed was poorly structured and confusing . This criticism is common among information scientists , who also point to other problems with article quality , such as undue prominence given to controversial scientific theories . But Michael Twidale , an information scientist at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , says that Wikipedia’s strongest suit is the speed at which it can updated , a factor not consid - ered by Nature ’s reviewers . “People will find it shocking to see how many errors there are in Britannica , ” Twidale adds . “Print encyclopaedias are often set up as the gold stan - dards of information quality against which the failings of faster or cheaper resources can be compared . These findings remind us that we have an 18 - carat standard , not a 24 - carat one . ” The most error - strewn article , that on Dmitry Mendeleev , co - creator of the periodic table , illustrates this . Michael Gordin , a sci - ence historian at Princeton University who wrote a 2004 book on Mendeleev , identified 19 errors in Wikipedia and 8 in Britannica . These range from minor mistakes , such as describing Mendeleev as the 14th child in his family when he was the 13th , to more significant inaccura - cies . Wikipedia , for example , incorrectly describes how Mendeleev’s work relates to that of British chemist John Dalton . “Who wrote this stuff ? ” asked another reviewer . “Do they bother to check with experts ? ” But to improve Wikipedia , Wales is not so much interested in checking articles with experts as getting them to write the articles in the first place . As well as comparing the two encyclopaedias , Nature surveyed more than 1 , 000 Nature authors and found that although more than 70 % had heard of Wikipedia and 17 % of those con - sulted it on a weekly basis , less than 10 % help to update it . The steady trickle of scientists who have contributed to articles describe the experi - ence as rewarding , if occasionally frustrating ( see ‘Challenges of being a Wikipedian’ , below ) . Greater involvement by scientists would lead to a “multiplier effect” , says Wales . Most entries are edited by enthusiasts , and the addition of a researcher can boost article quality hugely . “Experts can help write specifics in a nuanced way , ” he says . Wales also plans to intro - duce a ‘stable’ version of each entry . Once an article reaches a specific quality threshold it will be tagged as stable . Further edits will be made to a separate ‘live’ version that would replace the stable version when deemed to be a significant improvement . One method for determining that threshold , where users rate article quality , will be trialled early next year . ■ Jim Giles Additional research by Declan Butler , Jenny Hogan , Michael Hopkin , Mark Peplow and Tom Simonite . Supplementary information available online at www . nature . com / news / 2005 / 051212 / full / 438900a . html Vaughan Bell , a neuropsychologist at the Institute of Psychiatry in London , UK , has reworked Wikipedia’s entry on schizophrenia over the past two years . Around five others regularly contribute to the reworking , most of whom have not revealed whether they have academic backgrounds . Bell says that is not a problem , as disputes are settled through the discussion page linked to the entry , often by citing academic articles . “It’s about the quality of what you do , not who you are , ” he explains . While admitting it can be difficult settling arguments , Bell says he often learns something by doing so . One user posted a section on schizophrenia and violence that Bell considered little more than a “rant” about the need to lock up people with the illness . “But editing it did stimulate me to look up literature on schizophrenia and violence , ” he says . “Even people who are a pain in the arse can stimulate new thinking . ” Others , particularly those who contribute to politically sensitive entries , have found the editing process more fraught . William Connolley , a climate researcher at the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge , has fought for two years with climate - change sceptics over the entry on global warming . When Connolley was insulted by one of the sceptics and the editing became a ‘revert war’ — where editors repeatedly undo each others’ changes — the matter was referred to the encyclopaedia’s administrators . Two of Connolley’s opponents were banned from editing any climate article for six months , but it was a bumpy process . The Wikipedia editors who oversaw the case took three months to reach a decision . They also punished Connolley for repeatedly changing the sceptics’ edits , placing him on a six - month parole during which he is limited to one revert a day . Users who support Connolley have contested the decision . “It takes a long time to deal with troublemakers , ” admits Jimmy Wales , the encyclopaedia’s co - founder . “Connolley has done such amazing work and has had to deal with a fair amount of nonsense . ” J . G . Challenges of being a Wikipedian Kurt Jansson ( left ) , president of Wikimedia Deutschland , displays a list of 10 , 000 Wikipedia authors ; Wikipedia’s entry on global warming has been a source of contention for its contributors . D . I . F R A N K E / W I K I M E D I A F D N “Scientists’ involvement would lead to a multiplier effect . Experts can help write specifics in a nuanced way . ” 15 . 12 News 900 - 901 NEW NS 13 / 12 / 05 1 : 56 PM Page 901 Nature PublishingGroup © 2005