Web 2 . 0 – and Beyond PAYAL ARORA Erasmus University Rotterdam , The Netherlands Web 2 . 0 first and foremost is a metaphor coined to signify a new era of internet usage driven by user interactivity , engagement , and collaboration . This digital phenomenon is seen as a marked contrast to the internet in its initial stage where the World Wide Web served as a mass media tool that communicated information from the producer to their public in a one - way direction . Tim O’Reilly , the internet guru , is credited with being one of the first to recognize the unique characteristics of this emergent participatory architecture in 2006 ( O’Reilly & Battelle , 2009 ) . He professed that these digital structures become more effective as usage grows and his insight gained legitimacy with the rise of co - creative platforms such as Wikipedia , YouTube , and Face - book . He compared the collective contribution of different users to this platform to a global brain , where the constant streaming of thoughts shapes its inherent dynamic structure , the hyperlink - ing feature of the web resembling the process of how synapses form in the brain as associa - tions become stronger through repetition and intensity . Social network sites are seen as synonymous with Web 2 . 0 , allowing individuals to connect with other users within public or semi - public web systems . Boyd and Ellison ( 2007 ) underline the uniqueness of these platforms by empha - sizing the fact that users can make visible their relationships and networks , extend their offline relations , and organize their connectedness via these digital affordances . They emphasize the dynamism of this platform by pushing for the term “networking sites” versus “networks , ” since what makes this platform novel in computer mediated communication is its capacity to facili - tate connections between strangers . The spread of Web 2 . 0 has also given rise to new user practices in the online presentation of the self , impression The International Encyclopedia of Digital Communication and Society , First Edition . Edited by Robin Mansell and Peng Hwa Ang . © 2015 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons , Inc . DOI : 10 . 1002 / 9781118290743 . wbiedcs020 management , and friendship performance , cre - ating an important niche area of research in internet studies and related fields . At the center of the innovative Web 2 . 0 plat - form is community formation – arising out of the intrinsic need for people to create groups to connect , network , and share in common pur - suits regardless of geographic constraints – or what has popularly come to be viewed as virtual communities ( Rheingold , 1993 ) . This is as much a social as a technical revolution . The potential of these virtual communities has been wide - ranging . Several scholars have been optimistic about the digital shift , equating these informa - tion architectures with a new form of the digital commons . For instance , James Surowiecki ( 2005 ) argued that Web 2 . 0 provides the technical affor - dances to harness collective intelligence or what he terms “the wisdom of crowds . ” He argues that , contrary to common perceptions , the masses are better at solving problems , fostering innovation , coming to wise decisions , and even predicting the future than individuals . The social software of Web 2 . 0 enables massive aggregations of people across diverse contexts to come together and , therefore , it can be said to contribute to the pro - cess of democratic knowledge construction . This idea has taken root and given credence to pro - cesses such as crowdsourcing ( soliciting people to execute small tasks , often by businesses ) and crowdfunding ( the collective effort by networks to pool their resources for nonprofit and / or for - profit endeavors ) ( Howe , 2006 ) . User generated content has awakened the classic notion of the public sphere where Web 2 . 0 serves as a public domain in which all peo - ple can contribute to the shaping of the digital space . The Wikipedia project is often cited as an ideal example of such collaborative efforts and numerous studies have examined how “many minds” ( Sunstein , 2006 ) voluntarily engage and labor extensively in developing the world’s largest online encyclopedia for the common good . This digital free labor has gained much attention because it challenges the conventional dichotomy between the producer and the consumer in media 2 W EB 2 . 0 – AND B EYOND studies . These distinctions are understood to be fading , giving rise to the term “prosumer” and to the blurring of producers and consumers ( Bruns , 2007 ) . This also implies that the line between professionals / experts and amateurs in creating new media content is also being challenged , compelling us to revisit the notion of credibility , trust , and expertise in knowledge production via Web 2 . 0 . With new technology platforms and new expec - tations also come concerns . A strong dystopian argument pervades the literature asserting the impersonal nature of virtual networks . There is a fear that the immersion of individuals in virtual communities can serve as a poor substitute for the offline communities around them . Eli Pariser ( 2011 ) points out that , far from the democratic ideal of a “community” promised by new media platforms , we live in an age where our networks are being carefully curated by algorithms that are programmed to expose us to mainly like - minded people . In other words , we live in a “filter bubble , ” an invisible information architecture that appears to be objective , true , and neutral but is in fact deeply mediated by commercial and other interests , creating the illusion of a harmonious society . Mitch Parsell ( 2008 ) sug - gests that Web 2 . 0 has escalated the polarization and prejudice between social groups by enabling online communities to remain within their own private spheres of beliefs . These enclosed spaces can be viewed as echo chambers where a certain perspective can be reinforced through constant repetition , making it appear as truth . This poses a problem when it comes to knowledge production because the “wisdom” of the crowds could just as easily prove to be the ideas of false prophets , professing misleading opinions that can have serious negative repercussions in the information age . Andrew Keen ( 2008 ) , one of the more vocal scholars against the popular notion of collective intelligence , argues that wisdom is not in the crowd but in people with expertise and talent . He criticizes the romanticism of the open system of Web 2 . 0 , where the masses dictate knowledge and culture ; disputes the celebrated and much revered cult of the amateur as a signal of equality and democracy in society ; and calls for an apprecia - tion of healthy differentiation and discrimination to sustain quality in the cultural and intellectual domain . Another growing concern about Web 2 . 0 user generated content is the fear of the exploitation of individuals who freely contribute to the building of these platforms through the sharing of their ideas , networks , and personal data . With the rise of Web 2 . 0 , there has been a change from traditional media where users had to be proactive when engaging in free labor . However , internet users who engage with social networks unin - tentionally and automatically find themselves engaged in free labor ( Terranova , 2000 ) . Another conversation that has become central to this area is the notion of data privacy and consumer pro - tection . Mark Andrejevic ( 2011 ) calls attention to the growing surveillance and commercialism of personal data for profit by the private sector within Web 2 . 0 platforms . He makes the case that new media platforms create new ways to monitor and control consumer behavior and render indi - viduals vulnerable to exploitation . Web 2 . 0 and its participatory culture have , in his view , created a new online economy that requires overarching legal policy to protect the rights of privacy of the prosumers , and careful attention to be paid to notions of ownership of content . In looking at the future of Web 2 . 0 , we may well ask what might be the hallmark of the next era of digital media – Web 3 . 0 . The medium of access is fundamental to this conversation as the mobile web is transforming how we produce and consume content ( O’Reilly & Battelle , 2009 ) . The emergence of supplemental tools such as motion sensors , geopositioning systems , digital cameras , and more is giving users on the move a set of tools to augment their reality and to move seam - lessly between the online and the offline worlds . Real - time content sharing is now a given , but how this raw data will be synthesized is the new challenge . Sophisticated and yet user - friendly visualization tools are coming to the fore which communicate tremendous amounts of data in engaging and context - specific ways . We may yet encounter a sentient web whose system of intelligence can have wide - ranging impacts from the noble to the sinister . By paying attention to the popular rhetoric framing the web , we can gauge the climate of perception and expectation , and the range of cultures being enacted , on the web ( Arora , 2012 ) . We have come some distance from the wild wild West and the information highway metaphors of the web in the 1990s to W EB 2 . 0 – AND B EYOND 3 the walled garden , electronic ghetto , and the Digital Commons of today . The discourse in the media will continue to guide us with regard to the underlying and emerging sensibilities of Web 3 . 0 . SEE ALSO : Content Creation and Curation ; Semantic Web ; Social Media ; Social Media Business Models ; Social Media in Organizations References Andrejevic , M . ( 2011 ) . Surveillance and alienation in the online economy . Surveillance & Society , 8 ( 3 ) , 278 – 287 . Arora , P . ( 2012 ) . Typology of Web 2 . 0 spheres : Under - standing the cultural dimensions of social media spaces . Current Sociology , 60 ( 5 ) , 599 – 618 . Boyd , D . M . , & Ellison , N . B . ( 2007 ) . Social net - work sites : Definition , history , and scholarship . Jour - nal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 13 ( 1 ) , 210 – 230 . Bruns , A . ( 2007 ) . Blogs , Wikipedia , Second Life , and beyond : From production to produsage . New York , NY : Lang . Howe , J . ( 2006 ) . The rise of crowdsourcing . Wired , 14 ( 6 ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . wired . com / wired / archive / 14 . 06 / crowds . html Keen , A . ( 2008 ) . The cult of the amateur : How blogs , MySpace , YouTube , and the rest of today’s user - generated media are destroying our economy , our cul - ture , and our values . New York , NY : Doubleday . O’Reilly , T . , & Battelle , J . ( 2009 ) . Web squared : Web 2 . 0 five years on . Retrieved from http : / / gossgrove . com / sites / default / files / web2009 _ websquared - whitepaper . pdf Pariser , E . ( 2011 ) . The filter bubble : What the internet is hiding from you . London , UK : Penguin . Parsell , M . ( 2008 ) . Pernicious virtual communities : Identity , polarisation and the Web 2 . 0 . Ethics and Information Technology , 10 , 41 – 56 . Rheingold , H . ( 1993 ) . The virtual community : Home - steading on the electronic frontier . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Sunstein , C . R . ( 2006 ) . Infotopia : How many minds produce knowledge . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Surowiecki , J . ( 2005 ) . The wisdom of crowds . New York , NY : Anchor . Terranova , T . ( 2000 ) . Free labor : Producing culture for the digital economy . Social Text , 18 ( 2 ) , 33 – 58 . Further Reading Arora , P . ( 2014 ) . The leisure commons : A spatial history of Web 2 . 0 . Oxford , UK : Routledge . Lessig , L . ( 2006 ) . Code : Version2 . 0 . NewYork , NY : Basic Books . Payal Arora ( PhD , Columbia University ) is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Media and Communication at Erasmus University Rot - terdam . She is the author of Dot Com Mantra : Social Computing in the Central Himalayas ( 2010 ) and of The Leisure Commons : A Spatial History of Web 2 . 0 ( 2014 ) , which won the EUR Fellow - ship Award . She has consulted for the private and public sectors , including for Kellogg , World Bank , Hewlett - Packard , Shell , General Elec - tric , and Sotheby’s . She sits on several boards including those of Global Media Journal , South Asian Media , Arts & Culture Research Center ( University of North Texas ) , Global Education Greenhouse , and World Women Global Council ( New York City ) .