 Abstract — Many studies have revealed the fact of the complexity of ontology building process . Therefore there is a need for a new approach which one of that addresses the socio - technical aspects in the collaboration to reach a consensus . Meta - design approach is considered applicable as a method in the methodological model of socio - technical ontology engineering . Principles in the meta - design framework are applied in the construction phases of the ontology . A web portal is developed to support the meta - design principles requirements . To validate the methodological model semantic web applications were developed and integrated in the portal and also used as a way to show the usefulness of the ontology . The knowledge based system will be filled with data of Indonesian medicinal plants . By showing the usefulness of the developed ontology in a semantic web application , we motivate all stakeholders to participate in the development of knowledge based system of medicinal plants in Indonesia . Keywords — Socio - technical , meta - design , ontology engineering methodology , semantic web application . I . I NTRODUCTION NTOLOGY has been started to be used widely as the knowledge representation technique because of its ability to identify class or concept , property and relationship within a domain of discourse . Ontology is the key in the development of semantic web application . However , ontology development itself undergone many obstacles in its development . Previous research has revealed the fact that building ontology is a complex process that a new approach is needed with regard to collaborative work efforts toward consensus . The development of ontology is heavy and complex because it includes the development of knowledge models that involves many stakeholders and requires careful preparation to smoothen the social process . Ontology development requires consensus within the meaning of common shared concepts . Various methodologies have been developed to create ontology with the purpose to provide easy and systematic guide in building ontology efficiently . However , many of the proposed methodology only focused on the constructing process and the technical evolution of ontology . This results in the low outcome of the developed ontology from the expected benefit . And the ontologies that have been published are not based on consensus , so they are unreliable and are not reused extensively . The result of observation made by [ 19 ] states that most of the existing ontology engineering practices does not follow the principles of a methodology . To bridge the gap between social and technology , identification of common needs Mesnan Silalahi , Dana Indra Sensuse , and Indra Budi are with the Faculty of Computer Science , University of Indonesia Depok , Indonesia ( e - mail : mesnans @ yahoo . com , dana @ cs . ui . ac . id , indra @ cs . ui . ac . id ) . must be considered as a social activity and includes all stakeholders in the search for ontological agreement that will support mutual needs . Socio - technical approach may have been partially used in several existing methodologies . In this study , a methodology for ontology engineering is developed with a socio - technical approach which covers the whole life - cycle . The study includes the development of a socio - technical workbench that has functionalities in order to support the principles in the meta - design framework . This paper will describe the development of a model in the design and implementation of ontology using the meta - design framework . Meta - design is deemed an appropriate framework in an attempt to build a model of a methodology in ontology engineering with a socio - technical approach . Socio - technical approach emphasizes provision of greater opportunities for all stakeholders to participate in the development of a system . But to obtain broad participation it needs the ability to show to the stakeholders the usefulness that can be gained from these efforts . In our context the concept of meta - design is about how a system and its environment are built by the designer as well as how to involve domain experts . Changes that occur as well as the evolution of the system can be carried out by the domain experts . Meta - design aims to plan , evaluate and incorporate some changes that may occur at use - time based on evolution model . Adapting [ 8 ] , meta - design relates to domain experts involvement in the design process where they can be a meta - designers and can make changes at this stage of the evolution of the ontology . In the traditional system development , the focus would be specific solutions for the problems while on meta - design the issue is the creation of a solutions space . This solution space must be created in order to support a culture of participation [ 14 ] and the evolution of the ontology [ 10 ] . II . R ELATED W ORKS AND M OTIVATION Reference [ 18 ] conducted a study comparing tools in building ontology for environment in a human centered engineering . The functionalities are such as : a hierarchy of concepts , properties , instant concept hierarchy , ontology comments , ratings , asynchronous editing in ontology modules , a personal space , historical change , discussion , chat , content insert with integrated browser , and a web interface . These functionalities are developed in line with the growing demands in the engineering ontology . Reference [ 6 ] did some comparisons against multiple tools by taking into account functionality such as support for IBIS models in constructing arguments , ontology editing support , and the provenance link . Some of ontology engineering methodology that emphasizes the collaborative aspects such as DILIGENT [ 3 ] uses the wiki On Supporting a Meta - design Approach in Socio - Technical Ontology Engineering Mesnan Silalahi , Dana Indra Sensuse , Indra Budi O World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 2185 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , C o m pu t e r a nd I n f o r m a ti on E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li c a ti on / 10000020 technology as a web - based tool which is then integrated with the ontology editor and visualization ( such as KAON ) as a tool to facilitate comprehension of the developed ontology . This wiki based tool is primarily aimed to support broad collaboration in building ontology . Wiki is also used to support the development of an ontology engineering methodology with a human - centered approach in [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] . This tool is used to support web community - driven collaborative ontology engineering tasks and as an argumentation support tool . In our view , tool support for collaboration should include providing access to the same ontology for distributed users and the annotations from various users as a way to reach a consensus . The tools provided will also need to provide increasingly complex functionality such as supporting an efficient discussion that can accelerates the convergence to a decision [ 6 ] . As far as the authors knew , none of the existing tools have special support in building consensus . Some of the tools provide supports for rating and voting . However , it should be noted that a rating without a comment and explanation attached to it will not be useful . Another issue that arises is the need for sophisticated tool to facilitate understanding of the ontology . One of the widely used tools for the construction of ontology which closely covers the needed functionality is Protégé [ 2 ] . Protege has extension for a web based tool called WebProtege . But so far most of the existing tools only support the design and implementation of the ontology . They do not support all of the activities in the life - cycle of ontology development [ 5 ] . Our research seeks solution to support domain experts in building capabilities to become a meta - designer in the ontology building process . This can be achieved by providing tools that support human - problem interaction , support under - design for emergent behavior , enable legitimate peripheral participation , share control , promote mutual learning and support , reward and recognize contributions as well as foster reflective communities . III . S EMANTIC W EB A PPLICATION As previously described , there is a necessity of a semantic web application in order to be able to demonstrate the usefulness of the ontology that has been built as well as to evaluate the ontology . The development of ontology based knowledge querying application can be carried out using Jena programming framework [ 1 ] or Corese framework [ 4 ] . Class ( concept ) , property , and individuals ( instances ) are created using WebProtégé [ 2 ] . Jena is a Java based web semantic programming framework , aims to provide a consistent programming interface for ontology based application development [ 1 ] . Corese aimed at the rapid development of a semantic web based interface to ontology and the RDF data . In Jena , ontology models are created through the Model Factory , while in Corese it is embedded in its API called Semtags . Like Jena , Corese can also be used to setup the inference rules and to setup queries on the ontology database . Both tools support SPARQL as a Query Language that can query RDF graphs via pattern matching . The language ' s features include basic conjunctive patterns , value filters and optional patterns . Thus using SPARQL it is possible to retrieve more specific and semantically related resources . Using these technologies we can develop a semantic web application that based on the feedback of and requirements of domain experts , problems owner or the broader context of the implementation . The ability to be able to demonstrate the usefulness and to provide a solution of the current problems , will impact on the wider applicability and commitment to sustainable development . Types of applications in semantic web are such as semantic search and linked data . Semantic search seeks to improve search accuracy by understanding the contextual meaning of terms as they appear in the searchable data space to generate more relevant results . Semantic search systems consider various points including context of search , variation of words , synonyms , generalized and specialized queries , concept matching and natural language queries to provide relevant search results . Semantic search can be regarded as a set of techniques for retrieving knowledge from richly structured data sources like ontology as found on the semantic web . Such technologies enable the formal articulation of domain knowledge at a high level of expressiveness and could enable the user to specify his needs in more detail at query time . Application of semantic web linked data is a best practice efforts made in entering data to the web in an effort to enhance the current web . The basis of this application development is the establishment of a data format RDF ( Resource Description Framework ) , a framework that describes the web through a model of expressive metadata ( RDFS and OWL ) and other sources that have been addressed ( URI ) . Fig . 1 The phases of a socio - technical approach in ontology engineering IV . M ETA - D ESIGN F RAMEWORK IN S OCIO - T ECHNICAL O NTOLOGY E NGINEERING The development of semantic web has driven the ontology building in many domains . In order to ensure that the ontology will be used widely there must be a consensus within the related parties . And to reach a consensus effectively there is a need in the approach to ontology engineering methodology that take into account socio - technical aspects . The socio - technical approach is needed because of the complexity in the ontology building process . This paper tries to answer the question and key factors in the socio - technical approach along the ontology life - cycle and how to operationalize the socio - technical approach effectively in the ontology engineering design process . The socio - technical approach had been inserted into some of the existing methodologies in ontology engineering , but they have approached it partially . In our study a methodological model is proposed with a comprehensive World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 2186 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , C o m pu t e r a nd I n f o r m a ti on E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li c a ti on / 10000020 socio - technical approach . The social aspect is considered in balance with the technical aspect along the phases of the ontology building process , from the planning phase to the implementation and evaluation phase as can be seen in Fig . 1 . This will include considerations of the social aspects in the methods , techniques and tools of the proposed methodology . Operationalization of the design , implementation and evaluation phase in the socio - technical ontology engineering model is carried out with the principles of meta - design conceptual framework . The processes in the engineering of Indonesian medicinal ontology will be based on the key concepts of meta - design adapted from [ 14 ] . The objective of meta - design is to create socio - technical environments that empower stakeholders to engage in informed participation and to eventually become a designer [ 12 ] , [ 15 ] . The tools that were used to support the engineering process could be integrated from the web - based collaborative tool such as WebProtege , Semantic Media Wiki as well as the content management software such as Drupal [ 7 ] . With the Drupal CMS software we can build capabilities in supporting a collaborative annotation and communication on the building process while actively engineer the ontology . With Drupal we launched a community portal for knowledge sharing and supporting collaborative ontology editing and also to create learning environments as is required in meta - design framework [ 9 ] , [ 11 ] . The knowledge model and ontology design can also be evaluated by developing a knowledge - based system based on the database model . This system requires conversion of ontology design to relational database . The advantage of this method is the expertise which has long been established in the traditional web database application development . The data that has been published about medicinal plants in Indonesia are generally divided into three categories : ( a ) data that has been structured in a database , ( b ) data that has been structured and classified but still represented in HTML format , and ( c ) data that is still unstructured but contains in - depth description of a specific medicinal plant whereby the information will be very useful if it can be easily accessed . In general , in this study several data sources that contain structured data are converted into RDF format with reference to developed ontology of Indonesian medicinal plants . Then the data is used in the implementation of semantic search application and linked data application . Future development of a more enhanced application of intelligent system will provide the use recommendation of medicinal plant by entering data particular to the user . We envisioned to further develope the application that can provide recommendations on the suitability of species of medicinal plants that can be cultivated somewhere in the region of Indonesia , based on geographical location , climatic and soil structure of the region . The data that have been identified and collected will be used as the sources of RDF data . The results obtained are multiple pieces of data on medicinal plants of Indonesia from herbal database of University of Indonesia ( approximately 1600 species of plants ) , the simplicia database of medicinal plants from the Faculty of Pharmacy , Sanata Dharma University , and the data of Indonesian medicinal plants from the database of National Agency of Drug and Food Control ( BPOM ) , as many as 900 species . This ontology also describes the economic aspects as well as aspects of plant cultivation . The data collected was also regarding the production and economic value of some types of mass - produced Indonesian medicinal plants . The data was collected from Ministry of Agriculture . The data is then converted into the RDF format . These data will be used in semantic search application built in java architecture with interfaces using Java Server Pages ( JSP ) and in an application of linked data . The design process is described as in Fig . 2 . The first part of the design process includes the development of an appropriate work environment and then the development of initial ontology . Fig . 2 A socio - technical approach in ontology construction TABLE I K EY C ONCEPT IN THE M ETA - DESIGN F RAMEWORK AND THE D ERIVATION TO S OCIO - T ECHNICAL D ESIGN IN O NTOLOGY E NGINEERING Meta - design key concepts in [ 13 ] Derivation of a socio - technical design in ontology engineering environment Support Human - Problem Interaction ( a ) development of a knowledge repository and , ( b ) user manual , ( c ) feedback of design output ( d ) feedback on collaboration , ( e ) provision of initial design solutions Under - design for Emergent Behavior ( a ) availability of initial ontology as a seed at the start ( b ) possibility to partition large ontology , ( c ) separate verification and storage of ontology design fragments , ( d ) sharing of ontology fragments Enable Legitimate Peripheral Participation ( a ) involvement of other domain experts , ( b ) allowance of incomplete processes to be completed by others , ( c ) possibility of merging process fragments of others into a process Share Control ( a ) access permissions ( b ) preservation of privacy ( c ) concurrency awareness and control to avoid ontology editing conflicts Promote Mutual Learning and Support knowledge sharing through knowledge based system , recommendation lists , comments , blogs , FAQs and forum discussion Reward and Recognize Contributions ( a ) assign specific tasks and feedback on outcome and contributions , ( b ) visible labeling of feedback ( implicit or explicit ) on design process Foster Reflective Communities ( a ) facilities for collaboration and communication among domain - experts and other stakeholders , ( b ) functionality of social networking platforms like voting , rating , and tagging An initial ontology is built as a starting material which would be further developed collaboratively . This ontology will then be assessed in a face - to - face interaction among domain experts in a focus group discussion . An effective and rich process can be pursued through this inter - active process when it is well prepared . In addition , through a face - to - face interaction it is World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 2187 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , C o m pu t e r a nd I n f o r m a ti on E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li c a ti on / 10000020 easier to build trust among stakeholders . Ontology that has been built will be implemented in a semantic web application . For this purpose we develop a semantic web - based search application as well as an application of linked data . The semantic web search application is built using Corese framework . In general , the features that already exist in this software can be integrated with other software tools to complement the functionality necessary for the purpose of supporting meta - design principles in the context of collaborative work and the context of domain expert empowerment . Below is described the key concept within the meta - design framework and how we apply these concepts in supporting the ontology construction . Table I lists the derivation of key concepts in the meta - design framework adapted from the work in [ 8 ] . Based on these key concepts , the design process of the ontology takes into account at least some of the key features derived from the meta - design key concepts .  Support Human - Problem Interaction The focus on the problem domain and the task of a domain expert are done by making a check - list of the functionality necessary to perform the job . Functionality such as help system as well as lines of communication with systems developers are prepared .  Under - design for Emergent Behavior We start at building a simple ontology as a seed to start working collaboratively with domain experts . In the design process a tool is required that enables domain experts to modify parts of design definitions , to verify and to store these fragments of a process separately , and also to share them with others . They can also store the design locally and work further on this local design , that might suit his local need and then to share . Domain experts should be able to decompose the design problem into smaller design elements and combine them with other elements . Concerning reusing design elements , such a design modeling tool might also consider data given from other domain experts as an additional component for designing process . For these purposes the WebProtege has been installed and a training session are facilitated to Domain Experts .  Enable Legitimate Peripheral Participation We support this concept by using a web - based software tool WebProtege which has functionality to organize the participation of all stakeholders ( community of practice ) . WebProtege has collaboration features such as sharing and permissions , threaded notes and discussions , watches and email notifications [ 2 ] . Because the software is a web - based ontology editor , it can also be used in a broad context by customizing or open certain restrictions of the functionalities . In a broader scope , the community of interest can provide input in a simpler form through the features such as forum discussion that is contained in the web portal built based on Drupal . Optionally the participation of stakeholders can also be supported using the functionality commonly found in wiki - based tools such as link - based web page titles , on the fly web page creation as well as a flat structured content . This functionality can be integrated within the linked data application . Ability to configure user - interface design as well as the representation of diverse stakeholders gives any entrances to participate in the design process , for example in articulating issues in the design and in providing or seeking the proposed solution . Wiki can be configured to only allow a formal process through forms and validation mechanisms , but can also be configured for simple things like to be able to allow a textual description  Share Control In the context of constructing the ontology formally , the use of a web based ontology editor WebProtege has made these requirements supportable : ( a ) access permissions in different roles ( b ) preservation of privacy ( c ) concurrency awareness and control to avoid editing conflicts . This tool supports also the informal construction of the ontology through functionalities such as : giving access to put comments that can be used to buid argumentations .  Promote Mutual Learning and Support This can be achieved by building a system that support individuals to share their experiences and express their opinions to a problem lies in the development of ontology . The system must be pursued in order to share knowledge among domain experts , as well as in peer - group , namely the practitioners and problems owner , as well as in the wider community . For a broader learning goal a knowledge base can be developed that is published by using a wiki - based tool . Wiki technology has many usages in establishing a community - based knowledge base . With this technology we can seek definition of a concept that is not separated from the discussion and arguments building . This binding will shape the intension of the concept , since the history of a conceptualization is a valuable part of the respective definition .  Reward and Recognize Contributions To motivate domain experts to actively participating in the design process is basically done by rewarding and recognizing contributions . Rewarding and recognizing is established by labeling each ideas , comments , feedback , arguments which is visible with the name of the contributor . A statistic of participant’s input can be made in the front page of the web portal as a way for recognizing contribution .  Foster Reflective Communities In doing ontology design , the environment should include facility for collaboration and communication so that the domain experts can build a shared understanding among them and to build and sustain a community of designers . This aspect is of particular relevance for process modeling , as several stakeholders from different areas are involved into the processes . Typical functionalities of social networking platforms to support this goal are like sharing , rating , tagging , and commenting process model , that will enable collaboration and communication between stakeholders and in a broader context can be utilized for collective intelligence in order to solve complex design problems . World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 2188 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , C o m pu t e r a nd I n f o r m a ti on E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li c a ti on / 10000020 V . C ONCLUSION The aim of this paper is to show the position of the meta - design approach in constructing ontology in ontology engineering methodology with a socio - technical approach . By setting up the necessary tools in socio - technical environments as well as pay attention to the key concepts contained in the meta - design framework , we designed an ontology of Indonesian medicinal plants , which involves domain experts as well as practitioners and academics . With this approach the goal to be achieved is the creation of a socio - technical environment that inspires broad participation of all stakeholders related to the use of data , information and knowledge of Indonesian medicinal plants . Meta - design approach requires thorough preparation associated with the complexity of the work in ontology building . Therefore , some aspects of the work needs to be prepared to expedite the process of ontology design , such as the need to build the initial ontology ( seeds model ) and held several methods of collaboration and interaction within the process such as the use of web - based tools . The phase of planning and analysis has been investigated associated with building the initial ontology before the kick - off meeting with domain experts . The next phases still need to be studied further within the on - going basis of the Indonesian medicinal plants ontology development to prove the reliability of the proposed ontology engineering methodology . A CKNOWLEDGMENT We thank the Ministry of Education of Republic of Indonesia for supporting this research within the scheme of BOPTN 2014 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] “Apache Jena—A free and open source Java framework for building Semantic Web and Linked Data applications . ” http : / / jena . apache . org / [ 2 ] “Protégé—A free , open - source ontology editor and framework for building intelligent systems . ” http : / / protege . stanford . edu / [ 3 ] C . Tempich , H . S . Pinto , Y . Sure , and S . Staab . An Argumentation Ontology for Distributed , Loosely - controlled and evolvinG Engineering processes of oNTologies ( DILIGENT ) . In ESWC 2005 , pages 241 – 256 , 2005 . [ 4 ] Corese Applications , https : / / wimmics . inria . fr / node / 32 [ 5 ] Cristani , M . , Cuel , R . A Survey on Ontology Creation Methodologies . International Journal of Semantic Web and Information Systems ( IJSWIS ) , Vol . 1 , Issue 2 , pp : 49 - 69 [ 6 ] Dellschaft , Klaas , et al . " Cicero : Tracking design rationale in collaborative ontology engineering . " The Semantic Web : Research and Applications . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2008 . 782 - 786 . [ 7 ] Drupal - Open Source CMS , https : / / www . drupal . org / [ 8 ] Erol , S . and Mödritscher , F . and Neumann , G . ( 2010 ) : A Meta - Design Approach To Collaborative Process Modeling . Presented at DIS 2010 Conference / Workshop on Open Design Spaces in Aarhus , Denmark , August 2010 . Published in International Reports on Socio - Informatics . [ 9 ] Fischer , G . and E . Giaccardi ( 2006 ) : ‘Meta - design : A framework for the Future of End - User Development’ . In : H . Lieberman , F . Paterno , and V . Wulf ( eds . ) : End User Development . Springer Verlag , Chapt . 19 , pp . 427 – 457 . [ 10 ] Fischer , G . , & Ostwald , J . ( 2002 ) " Seeding , Evolutionary Growth , and Reseeding : Enriching Participatory Design with Informed Participation , " Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC’02 ) , Malmö University , Sweden , pp . 135 - 143 . [ 11 ] Fischer , G . , E . Giaccardi , Y . Ye , A . Sutcliffe , and N . Mehandjiev ‘Meta - design : A Manifesto for End - User Development’ . Communications of the ACM , 47 . 9 ( 2004 ) : 33 – 37 . [ 12 ] Fischer , Gerhard and Thomas Herrmann . " Socio - Technical Systems : A Meta - Design Perspective . " IJSKD 3 . 1 ( 2011 ) : 1 - 33 . Web . 29 Sep . 2013 . [ 13 ] Fischer , Gerhard , Kumiyo Nakakoji , and Yunwen Ye . " Meta - design : Guidelines for supporting domain experts in software development . " Software , IEEE 26 . 5 ( 2009 ) : 37 - 44 . [ 14 ] Fischer , Gerhard . " End user development and meta - design : Foundations for cultures of participation . " Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( JOEUC ) 22 . 1 ( 2010 ) : 52 - 82 . [ 15 ] Fischer , Gerhard . " Meta - design : Beyond user - centered and participatory design . " Proceedings of HCI International . 2003 . [ 16 ] Kotis , Konstantinos , and George A . Vouros . " Human - centered ontology engineering : The HCOME methodology . " Knowledge and Information Systems 10 . 1 ( 2006 ) : 109 - 131 . [ 17 ] Kotis , Konstantinos . " On supporting HCOME - 3O ontology argumentation using semantic wiki technology . " On the move to meaningful internet systems : OTM 2008 Workshops . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2008 . [ 18 ] Noy , N . F . Chugh , A . Alani , H . , 2008 . The CKC Challenge : Exploring Tools for Collaborative Knowledge Construction . IEEE Intelligent Systems , Jan - Feb 2008 . [ 19 ] P . De Leenheer , Towards community - based ontology evolution , PhD Thesis , Vrije Universiteit Brussel , Brussels , Belgium , 2009 . Mesnan Silalahi received his M . Sc in Materials Science ( TU Delft , Netherland , 1994 ) and Magister in Information Technology from University of Indonesia ( Indonesia , 2007 ) . He is now taking his Ph . D in Computer Science ( University of Indonesia ) . He works as a researcher at the Indonesian Institute of Sciences . His research interest includes Ontology Engineering , Semantic Web and Knowledge Management . Dana I . Sensuse received his B . Sc in Soil Science ( Bogor Agricultural University , Indonesia , 1985 ) , M . LIS from Dalhousie University ( Canada , 1994 ) , and Ph . D in Information Studies from University of Toronto ( Canada , 2004 ) . Now he works as a teaching staff in Faculty of Computer Science , University of Indonesia , and Head of e - Government Laboratory . His research interests include E - Government , Knowledge Management , and Information Systems . Indra Budi received the Doctoral degree in Computer Science in 2008 from University of Indonesia . Currently , he is an academic staff at the University of Indonesia . His research interest includes Information Extraction , Natural Language Processing , Named Entity Recognition and Information Retrieval . He was the first PIC of Content Development Activity , Program B Fasilkom UI , Grant from DIKTI in 2004 and involved in Program CISA Review Course in 2004 . World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 2189 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , C o m pu t e r a nd I n f o r m a ti on E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li c a ti on / 10000020