Contributions of Consumer - perceived Creativity and Beauty to Willingness - to - pay for Design Products Bo Thomas Christensen , Tore Kristensen , and Rolf Reber Journal article ( Post print version ) Cite : Contributions of Consumer - perceived Creativity and Beauty to Willingness - to - pay for Design Products . / Christensen , Bo Thomas ; Kristensen , Tore ; Reber , Rolf . In : International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , Vol . 3 , No . 3 - 4 , 2015 , p . 164 - 176 . This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation on 14 November 201 4 , available online : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / 10 . 1080 / 21650349 . 2014 . 981216 Uploaded to Research @ CBS : December 2016 Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 2 Contributions of perceived creativity and beauty to willingness - to - pay for design products . ABSTRACT Consumer perception of creativity in design products equivalent in function was measured using global single - item ratings of creativity . The measure was found to have a high level of agreement between raters and have discriminant validity to another aesthetic construct , that of beauty . In two experiments using designer lamps and wrist watches as stimuli , the present study shows how creativity and beauty both positively influence consumer willingness - to - pay for the designed product , but each explains different parts of the variance . The results show that it is essential to develop separate models of creativity and beauty evaluations in consumer psychology , in that they seem to be distinct factors , explaining different parts of the variance in their consequences on willingness to pay . Keywords : Consumer perception , perceived creativity , perceived beauty , willingness to pay , product aesthetics . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 3 Contributions of perceived creativity and beauty to willingness - to - pay for design products . The aesthetic qualities of consumer products are increasingly becoming important factors in consumer behavior and preference formation . The design of products ( such as perceived quality , and aesthetics ) has been shown to be important in determining the success of a new product ( Bruce & Whitehead , 1988 ) . Consumer products are not only differentiated by price and functionality , but equally so by experiential qualities ( Holbrook & Hirschman , 1982 ) , such as emotional appeal ( Moore & Harris , 1996 ) , humor ( Eisend , 2009 ) , and aesthetic qualities ( Holbrook , 1980 ) . The present study examines consumer perceptions of qualities of designed objects , and the consequence thereof on consumer valuation . Consumer judgments of aesthetic value in products may take several forms , two of the important ones being beauty , which is perhaps the generic sort of aesthetic excellence ( Zangwill , 2003 ) and creativity , which is a hallmark of art ( Alpeson , 2003 ) , advertising ( Sasser & Koslow , 2008 ; Smith , Chen , & Yang , 2008 ) , and product design ( Goldschmidt & Tatsa , 2005 ; Yusuf , 2009 ) . Both concepts are honorific and carry with them notions of positive value in making product judgments . Furthermore , scholars have argued that consumer judgments of both product creativity and beauty are of importance in consumer psychology because they influence preference formation and consumer choice ( Besemer & Treffinger , 1981 ) . Dahlen , Törn , and Rosengren ( 2008 ) used similar approaches to that used here and found that consumer perceived creativity of advertising led to the perception of increased brand quality and increased brand interest . Despite some past research conducted on consumer perception of creativity ( Besemer & O’Quin , 1999 ; Besemer , 1998 ; Bell , 1992 ) , it is not clear whether consumers’ perceived estimates of beauty and creativity influence consumer behavior in the same , or alternative , ways , and whether these perceptions are affected in the same way by antecedent factors . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 4 Consumer - perceived creativity should not be confused with practitioner perceived creativity ( that is , practitioner estimates of creativity in the given product domain ) , in that the two have been found to differ significantly in advertising ( West , Kover & Caruana , 2008 ) . In this article , we focus solely on the perception of creativity in products in consumption contexts , and the word ’creativity’ will thus solely be used in reference to consumer - perceived levels of creativity in consumer products . We argue that it may be possible to evaluate creativity in products that differ mainly in how they are experienced ( where functional value cannot be discerned or is unimportant ) , such as conspicuously displayed art objects . It may be possible to judge creativity as an experiential value along with other aesthetic constructs , such as beauty . This makes for a creativity construct that is based primarily on the experiential qualities of perceiving the products , rather than on the underlying benefits , usability , or relative advantage of some products over others . Such types of evaluation may be found in products where the product design or the experience of perceiving is pertinent to the evaluation of the object ( e . g . , advertising , art , design , architecture , theatre , movies etc . ) . In many of these product categories , creativity and beauty can be considered determining factors for consumers , whereby it is of utmost importance for brands to differentiate themselves from their competitors on these factors ( Keller , 2008 ) . One approach to the evaluation of creativity in products that can be identified in the literature is the use of multiple - item scale measurements of key components in the creativity construct , as carried out by laymen and / or consumers ( Horn & Salvendy , 2006 ; O’Quin & Besemer , 1989 ; 2006 ; 2011 ; Besemer & O’Quin , 1999 ) . Multi - item creativity scales assume that creativity is a construct formed of a number of components . Horn & Salvendy ( 2006 ) suggests six components in judging creativity in design : novelty ( the newness of the product ) , resolution ( the ability of the product to resolve a problem ) , emotion ( the pleasure or arousal induced by the product ) , centrality ( ability to match consumer needs ) , importance ( importance to consumer needs ) and desire ( how critical or desirable Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 5 the product is ) . O’Quin & Besemer ( 2006 ; 1989 ) proposes three components : novelty , resolution and style ( previously termed ‘elaboration and synthesis’ ) . Separating creativity into subcomponents has , however , been criticized by Amabile ( 1982 ) , who argued that definitions of creativity do not include conceptualizations that are readily translated into useful assessment criteria , let alone ultimate criteria or fixed components . Indeed , Amabile argued that it is impossible to specify such ultimate criteria , given the reliance in creativity judgments on a social and changing context . The components of creativity may vary by domain ; and it is unclear how to weigh the components in the aggregate measure . Indeed , while most scales of creativity measurements rely on additive subcomponents , research has shown that the components are by no means equally weighed in subjective measures of creativity , with , for example , the originality dimension frequently proving much more important than appropriateness ( Caroff & Besancon , 2008 ; Runco & Charles , 1993 ; Kudrowitz & Wallace , 2012 ; Christiaans , 2002 ) . For the present purposes , we are interested in aesthetic judgments of creativity ( as in the judgment of the experiential value of an advert or design ) , rather than functional or use value as is typically evaluated in the ‘appropriateness’ part of creativity , and therefore it seems valid to avoid explicitly using a ‘usefulness’ or ‘appropriateness’ component in the measure of creativity . Given our interest in measuring consumer - perceived creativity and consumer - perceived beauty in consumer products we utilized single - item measures , following past research on both creativity ( Dahlen , Törn , & Rosengren , 2008 ) , and beauty ( Hekkert , Snelders , Wieringen , 2003 ; Hassenzahl , 2004 ) . In this way , consumer’s own global understanding of creativity and beauty in products is utilized , and we avoid drawing on – for our purposes – problematic assumptions of which components ( e . g . , originality , usefulness ) to include in the measure , and how to weigh them . Past similar research approaches have revealed remarkably stable beauty judgments across raters ( Hasenzahl , 2004 ; Hekkert et al . , 2003 ) . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 6 The relationship between beauty and creativity From a consumer perception viewpoint , it can be hypothesized that an antagonism exists between creativity and beauty . Novelty is an integral part of creativity ( Mayer , 1999 ) . Indeed , in making creativity evaluations , people tend to make categorical comparisons , for example by noting original or unusual features . Therefore , creativity has been closely linked to judgments of novelty : The more novel , the more creative . Beauty , on the other hand , has been linked with the opposite end of the typicality - novelty dimension . Theories of perceptual fluency hold that typicality increases fluency , which is the ease with which input information flows through the cognitive system . Perceptual fluency , in turn , has been shown to be affectively positive ( Reber , Winkielman , & Schwarz , 1998 ; Winkielman & Cacioppo , 2001 ; see Reber , Schwarz , & Winkielman , 2004 for a review ) . Studies in consumer research have documented that variables that result in perceptual fluency , such as prototypicality and unity ( Veryzer & Hutchinson , 1998 ) or familiarity ( Janiszewski , 1993 ) influence aesthetic responses or affect . Therefore , beauty judgments have been closely linked to judgments of typicality : The more typical or familiar , the more beautiful . Constructs relating to novelty - typicality have the potential to inform us whether creativity and beauty indeed in some cases may be distinctly influenced by antecedent factors , and maybe even ( in the case of novelty - typicality ) , that they may be driven in opposite directions . For example , Purcell ( 1984 ) and Christiaans ( 2002 ) suggested that product prototypicality would indeed lead to differences in beauty and creativity evaluations . Cho and Schwarz ( 2006 ) found in their study that when participants low in Need for Cognition made beauty judgments , they liked products more when the product description was easy to read , but the same participants subsequently judged the same product as being less innovative . However , if participants had first to indicate whether a product was innovative , Cho and Schwarz found a carry - over effect in that participants judged products whose description was difficult to read as being both innovative and beautiful . Finally , in Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 7 an important study , Hekkert , Snelders & Wieringen ( 2003 ) argued that aesthetic preference for consumer products is the result of a process in which typicality and novelty are jointly taken into account , and where both factors are equally important as explanatory factors . However , typicality and novelty suppress each other’s effects ( given they are highly negatively correlated ) , and therefore the impact of novelty [ typicality ] on aesthetic preference may only be evident when suppressing the effect of typicality [ novelty ] . Consequently , in their results , Hekkert et al ( 2003 ) found no evidence of a direct effect of novelty on preference – an effect only became evident upon removal of the shared variance with typicality . Blijlevens , Mugge , Carbon & Schoomans ( 2012 ) , however , found direct effects of typicality on preference , without controlling for novelty . While Hekkert et al . ( 2003 ) argued strongly for the potential positive effect of typicality on aesthetic preference ( as also supported by fluency theory ) , it can be argued that creativity judgments should display a different pattern of results . While creativity judgments may well also be influenced by both novelty and typicality ( in addition to other factors for example relating to valuation ) , the impact of typicality on creativity should in this case be negative given that creativity may arise both as a consequence of novel features , and as a consequence of atypical category membership . The resulting pattern to be expected would be increased creativity evaluations upon lower typicality scores . Several recent empirical studies that have examined the link between perceptions of beauty , creativity and other factors by using factor analytic studies , have consistently found that beauty and creativity load on different factors . Two studies in art perception have conducted factor analyses on beauty and creativity items . Kozbelt ( 2004 ) studied originality and technical skill as components of artistic creativity ( judging 72 drawings ) , and found that whereas both creativity and beauty items loaded onto the product quality dimension in art , the creativity and beauty items loaded on different factors in the factor analytic study . Even though Kozbelt had hypothesized that beauty would be on Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 8 the originality factor , in fact beauty did not load on the same dimension as items such as ‘original , creative , imaginative , surprising , possibility of interpretation’ , etc . Hagtvedt , Hagtvedt & Patrick ( 2008 ) used five figurative paintings as stimuli , and found in the perceived attributes factor loadings that creativity and aesthetic appeal ( e . g . , beauty ) appeared to be two different factors , incidentally with the two items of ‘beauty’ and ‘creativity’ having the highest factor loadings in their respective factors . These studies present empirical evidence that creativity and beauty are two different factors , in art evaluation . However , the comparison between creativity and beauty has not been directly made in the consumer products category . In the present study we tried to test whether creativity and beauty correlate in consumer products when comparing averaged by - item responses for consumer ratings . Much past research has relied on multiple individual responses to a restricted range of products ( leading to examinations of naïve theories of the relation of the concepts ) . Our approach instead focused on by - item correlations for a large range of products leading to examinations of how product characteristics on average influence judgments like creativity and beauty ( Hasselzahl , 2008 ) , and how they in turn influence consumers’ willingness to pay for the product . The choice of by - item correlations between distinct groups of consumers was made in order to more firmly attest that consumer - perceived creativity can be used to make predictions from one group making creativity ratings , to the perceived economic value of the same object in another group . At the same time , however , this choice makes it less straightforward to conclude on how the concepts of interest here relate to each other in the individual consumer’s mind . Creativity and beauty predicts consumer behavior Whereas both creativity and beauty have been argued to be predictors of consumer behavior , it is for different theoretical reasons . Although consumer psychology models would hold that both creativity judgments and beauty judgments should predict consumers’ willingness to pay for the product , they should not explain the same variance . Consumers are not always after easy processing Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 9 – sometimes they tend to prefer novel or original instances ( Bianchi , 1998 ; Simonson & Nowles , 2000 ; Hekkert et al . , 2008 ) . The marketing literature on innovativeness has tended to focus on how different consumers have a preference for adopting products early in the product life cycle , whereas others tend to postpone adoption , or not adopt at all ( e . g . , Rogers , 1976 ) . In directing the argument towards the perception of innovativeness or originality in products , some authors have argued that consumers hold a preference for novelty in consumer products ( see e . g . , Hirschman , 1980 ) . In three studies of consumer products ( such as chairs and lamps ) , Horn & Salvendy ( 2009 ) showed that at least some of the dimensions of product creativity successfully predicted consumer attitudes ( consumer satisfaction , and their willingness to purchase ) . In such models , product differentiation and novelty of product features are at the forefront , in comparison to earlier products , and to what competitors have to offer . Categorical comparisons of the typicality of products may possess a marketing advantage , in that consumers tend to prefer products with original and unique features . Similar to perceived creativity , perceived beauty has been linked to increases in valuation in consumer behavior . Bloch , Brunel & Arnold ( 2003 ) showed consumers two different pictures of toasters equal in functionality , but differing in beauty . Consumers rated their willingness to pay for the toasters , revealing that participants were willing to pay about 55 % more for a beautiful toaster . Similar results have been obtained by Hasselzahl ( unpublished study , quoted in Hasselzahl , 2008 ) with mobile phones . The series of experiments conducted by Bloch et al . ( 2003 ) further suggested that the beauty effect on valuation was moderated by individual differences in what he called ‘centrality of visual product aesthetics’ ( CVPA ) . CVPA moderated both the overall evaluation , the purchase intention , and the willingness to pay in the above mentioned toaster study . Instead of assessing interindividual differences in order to determine whose willingness to pay is based on either perceived beauty or creativity , we address the question whether perceived beauty Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 10 and creativity simultaneously affect willingness to pay . It is possible that consumer perceptions of creativity and beauty affect willingness to pay in the same way , or alternative ways . As reviewed above , evidence exist that both creativity and beauty judgments would predict consumer’s willingness to pay for the product . However , to our knowledge , it has not yet been tested whether creativity and beauty predict the same or differing parts of the variance . It is possible that creativity and beauty would predict the same consumer behavior variance , if for example preference formation for consumer products was influenced in the same way by creativity and beauty judgments ; this would be the case if there was a strong correlation between creativity and beauty . Alternatively , if creativity and beauty judgments drew on distinct theoretical models of evaluation , and since creativity and beauty judgments have been shown empirically to load on distinct factors , they may explain different parts of the willingness to pay variance . Based on this alternative rationale , creativity and beauty judgments would both be predictors of consumers’ willingness to pay for consumer products , and would predict different parts of the variance . Finally , it is also possible that only when a consumer product is perceived to be both creative and beautiful will an effect of consumer behavior be evident . The present study The present series of experiments tested whether consumer perceptions of creativity in products equivalent in function 1 ) have a high level of agreement among consumers ; 2 ) has discriminate validity to beauty ; 3 ) predict consumer willingness to pay for the product . To anticipate the findings , the present set of experiments provides compelling evidence that in the domain of consumer products consumers clearly distinguish between creativity and beauty ; their evaluations of creativity and beauty explain different parts of the variance in their willingness to pay . In the present experimental setup , it was assumed that participants would constitute potential consumers , when placed in a consumption context and asked to make product ratings related to consumption . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 11 As in many experimental setups it is debatable whether the participants would indeed constitute consumers for these particular product categories in real life ( e . g . , the use of wristwatches in student populations is declining due to the prevalence of watch functions in cell phones ) . However , although the present sampling may not be representative for the population of consumers , we have no a priori reason to assume that the current sampling biases the specific constructs measured , or their hypothesized relations . Experiment 1 Method Subjects Ninety - three business undergraduates from Copenhagen Business School ( 34 female ; mean age 23 ) were asked to judge pictures of designer lamps . Materials In a pre - study , 10 subjects who did not participate in the main study judged pictures of 100 designer hanging lamps for complexity . The 100 pictures of lamps were downloaded from lamp traders on the internet ( e . g . , http : / / www . luksuslamper . dk ; www . lampeland . dk ; all retrieved in February 2009 ) to represent a mixture of brands and styles , see figure one for example stimuli . The pictures were converted into black and white to accommodate that some of the sample images were only available in B / W while others were in color . Based on the responses , a total of 36 lamp images were selected for the experiment for representing variety in lamp styles , variation in complexity levels , and for being in the same price range . Procedure Pictures were presented for 2 s on a 17” computer monitor using E - prime ® presentation software ( Schneider , Eschman , & Zuccolotto , 2002 ) . Prior to judging the experimental pictures the participants saw two test - images to familiarize them with the task . Each picture was preceded by a Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 12 fixation point presented for 500 ms . The order of presentation of the 36 lamp pictures was randomized . Participants rated the same series of 36 pictures of lamps three times for a total of 108 judgments . Thirty - two participants first made ( B ) beauty judgments ( ‘how beautiful is the lamp’ ) on an on - screen 10 cm long visual analogue scale ranging from 0 , ‘ugly’ to 100 , ‘beautiful’ , followed by ( W ) willingness - to - pay judgments ( ‘how much would you be willing to pay for this lamp’ ; ranging from USD 0 to USD 1100 i ) , followed by ( C ) creativity judgments ( ‘how creative is the lamp’ ; ranging from 0 , ‘uncreative’ to 100 ‘creative’ ) . For the other subjects , the ordering of judgments was reversed , with 31 subjects judging CWB , 15 judging WCB and 15 judging WBC . The three different instructions allowed us to test interrater agreement between groups with different instruction orderings Results and discussion The lamp pictures had the following by - item means : creativity ( M = 57 . 2 , SD = 12 . 2 ) , beauty ( M = 45 . 9 , SD = 12 . 1 ) , willingness to pay ( M = USD 300 . 4 , SD = USD 59 . 9 , ranging from USD 191 . 4 to USD 422 . 7 ) . Agreement across participants was computed using Intraclass correlation coefficients ; two - way , random for consistency using average measures ; ICC ( 2 , k ) ( Shrout & Fleiss , 1979 ) . Agreement across raters was substantial ( as per the benchmarks suggested by Shrout , 1998 ) on both creativity and beauty , and moderate agreement was shown for willingness to pay : Creativity ( rated first ) ICC ( 2 , 31 ) = . 917 ; beauty ( rated first ) ICC ( 2 , 32 ) = . 883 ; Willingness to pay ( rated first ) ICC ( 2 , 30 ) = . 708 . The correlation coefficient expressing inter - rater agreement between the group that rated creativity first , and the group that rated creativity subsequent to beauty ( r ( 36 ) = . 85 , p < . 001 ) and creativity subsequent to willingness to pay ( r ( 36 ) = . 91 , p < . 001 ) were satisfactory . See Table 2 for ICC and inter - rater agreement correlations between groups for all measures . Note that inter - rater Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 13 agreement was higher for perceived creativity than for beauty or willingness to pay . The by - item correlation between creativity and beauty was small and negative , r ( 36 ) = - . 35 , p < . 04 . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Table 1 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Table 1 illustrates instruction ordering effects ( small to medium correlations for beauty and willingness to pay between instruction orderings , particularly the latter illustrating a large ordering effect ) . To substantiate this , repeated measures GLM were used to examine whether instruction ordering interacted with object complexity . Significant interaction effects between instruction ordering and complexity was found for all three measures , but with the largest effect for willingness to pay ( creativity : F ( 4 , 178 ) = 3 . 48 , p < . 01 ; beauty : F ( 4 , 180 ) = 5 . 74 , p < . 001 ; WtP : F ( 4 , 182 ) = 12 . 00 , p < . 001 ) . As a consequence of this ordering effect , only the first rating by each subject was used in the below regression analyses . To test whether creativity and beauty evaluations explained different parts of consumers’ willingness - to - pay for the product , we ran a multiple regression analysis on the by - item averages with willingness - to - pay as the dependent factor , and creativity and beauty evaluations as the independent factors . Regressing willingness - to - pay ( rated first ) onto creativity ( rated first ) and beauty ( rated first ) yielded the following results : Creativity significantly predicted willingness - to - pay scores , β = . 46 , t ( 35 ) = 2 . 86 , p < . 01 , as did beauty , β = . 42 , t ( 35 ) = 2 . 62 , p < . 02 . Creativity and beauty combined explained a significant proportion of variance in willingness - to - pay , adjusted R 2 = . 21 , F ( 2 , 35 ) = 5 . 59 , p < . 01 . To illustrate the impact of creativity and beauty on willingness - to - pay , we show the ten least beautiful / creative lamps and the most beautiful / creative lamps in terms of how much on average the subjects were willing - to - pay for them ( see Table 2 ) . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 14 Table 2 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - In order to test whether subjects were inferring either creativity or beauty judgments from a perceptual evaluation of how expensive the lamps looked , we ran a further regression which included the list price of each lamp . Here , again , creativity significantly predicted willingness - to - pay scores , β = . 47 , t ( 35 ) = 2 . 89 , p < . 01 , as did beauty , β = . 46 , t ( 35 ) = 2 . 71 , p < . 02 , while list price failed to contribute to willingness - of - pay , β = . 12 , t ( 35 ) = 0 . 77 , NS , ruling out this possible confound . To estimate whether there were interaction effects between creativity and beauty ( for example , if creativity and beauty both needed to be high before WtP was affected ) , a stepwise regression was carried out , with the first step regressing WtP onto beauty and creativity , and a second step adding creativity * beauty . Adding the second step did not increase the adjusted R 2 , indicating that no significant interaction effect was present . Thus , creativity and beauty both predicted willingness - to - pay , but explained different parts of the variance . The lamp experiment showed that both creativity and beauty independently predicted willingness to pay . In order to try to generalize these findings to other consumer products , we conducted a second experiment using another consumer product category of stimuli : wrist watches . In order to test whether the finding that creativity and beauty predict WtP between consumer groups generalize within ratings in the same consumer group , we asked the same subjects to rate the watches three times . Experiment 2 Method Subjects Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 15 Forty - eight female business undergraduate students from Copenhagen Business School ( mean age 23 ) were asked to judge pictures of wrist - watches . None of the participants participated in the former study . Materials In a pre - study , ten subjects who did not participate in the main study judged pictures of 60 female wrist watches for complexity . The 60 pictures of watches were downloaded from the JC Penney website ( http : / / www . jcpenney . com ; retrieved in February 2009 ) to represent a mixture of brands and styles . In each picture the brand name and logo ( if present ) was digitally removed . Based on the responses , 30 female wrist watches were selected to represent a mixture of watch styles , for being in the same price range and for variation in complexity levels , for a total of 30 watches ii used in the experiment . Procedure Prior to judging the experimental set of watches , the participants saw three test - images of watches to familiarize them with the task . In the experiment , 16 participants first made ( B ) beauty judgments ( ‘how beautiful is the watch’ ) , followed by ( W ) willingness - to - pay judgments ( ‘how much would you be willing to pay for this watch’ ; ranging from USD 0 to USD 550 ) , followed by ( C ) creativity judgments ( ‘how creative is the watch’ ) . For the other subjects , the ordering of judgments was reversed , with 16 subjects judging CWB , 8 judging WCB and 8 judging WBC . Otherwise the procedure was identical to Experiment 1 . Results and discussion The watch pictures had the following by - item means : creativity ( M = 45 . 2 , SD = 13 . 9 ) , beauty ( M = 37 . 9 , SD = 8 . 2 ) , willingness to pay ( M = USD 116 . 8 , SD = USD 30 . 6 , ranging from USD 56 . 2 to USD 182 . 1 ) . Agreement across the 48 participants ( each rating all measures ) was substantial on all Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 16 measures : Creativity ICC ( 2 , 48 ) = . 960 ; beauty ICC ( 2 , 48 ) = . 846 ; Willingness to pay ICC ( 2 , 48 ) = . 850 . The by - item correlation between creativity and beauty evaluations was slightly positive , but insignificantly so , r ( 30 ) = . 27 ( NS ) . Repeated measures GLM used to examine whether instruction ordering interacted with complexity revealed no significant differences between instruction orderings ( F ’s < 1 . 52 ) , therefore all three ratings by each subject were used in the below regression analyses . Regressing creativity and beauty onto willingness - to - pay yielded the following results : Creativity significantly predicted willingness - to - pay scores , β = . 56 , t ( 29 ) = 7 . 22 , p < . 001 , as did beauty , β = . 60 , t ( 29 ) = 7 . 81 , p < . 001 . Creativity and beauty combined explained a significant proportion of variance in willingness - to - pay , adjusted R 2 = . 84 , F ( 2 , 29 ) = 76 . 82 , p < . 001 . In order to test whether subjects were inferring either creativity or beauty judgments from a perceptual evaluation of how expensive the watches looked , we ran a further regression which included the list price of each watch . Here , again , this possible confound could be ruled out , as creativity significantly predicted willingness - to - pay scores , β = . 56 , t ( 29 ) = 7 . 91 , p < . 001 , as did beauty , β = . 56 , t ( 29 ) = 7 . 78 , p < . 001 , and list price β = . 17 , t ( 29 ) = 2 . 46 , p < . 03 . Creativity , beauty , and list price combined again explained a significant proportion of variance in willingness - to - pay , adjusted R 2 = . 87 , F ( 2 , 29 ) = 62 . 78 , p < . 001 . Including list price in the analysis did not change the explanatory power of either creativity or beauty , but list price was an independent contributor to willingness to pay . As in study 1 , a stepwise regression adding interaction effects between creativity and beauty as a second step did not increase the adjusted R 2 . General discussion The present experiments have demonstrated that it is possible to reach a high level of agreement on consumer perceptions of creativity in products equivalent in function using single - item measures . In both experiments , satisfactory agreement was reached with 31 - 48 subjects . Furthermore , the group Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 17 average of consumer perceived creativity and beauty had significant effect on willingness - to - pay estimates carried out by another consumer group , evidencing the predictive validity of the measure . Although both beauty and creativity are honorific aesthetic judgments , consumer perceived creativity and beauty showed clear discriminate validity in the present experiments . In so far as typicality and novelty are approximately equal predictors of creativity ( as they appeared to be of beauty in the Hekkert et al . ( 2003 ) study ) , one could as a result expect a near - zero correlation between creativity and beauty judgments . Interestingly , this pattern would occur despite creativity and beauty being driven partly by the same antecedent factors of novelty and typicality , and would be caused by the opposing directionality of the typicality effect on the two constructs . What we found was that the two constructs only correlated minimally and not consistently in the same direction ( Experiment 1 showed a small negative and significant correlation , and Experiment 2 showed a small positive but insignificant correlation ) . A likely explanation for the varying correlational directionality is that the two constructs are effectively unrelated , and repeated measures in slightly different experimental designs will then necessarily display varying directionality with a tendency towards zero in larger samples . But it could also be argued that these findings seem to suggest that this may be a case of object - attribute interactivity ( Osgood , Suci , & Tannenbaum , 1957 ) , where the relation between consumer perceived creativity and beauty behave differently ( i . e . , that they mean different things in consumer’s minds ) , depending on the product categories chosen , given that different object categories ( lamps , watches ) were used across the experiments . However , we had no apriori reason to expect that specifically designer lamps would display a small significant negative relation between judged creativity and beauty as opposed to wrist watches , and therefore we maintain that the most likely explanation is that the true correlation between beauty and creativity is minimal . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 18 The subjectivity of the consumer perception measures used here is underscored by the fact that instruction ordering effects were found in experiment 1 ( i . e . , it did matter somewhat whether creativity was rated first , or subsequently to beauty or WtP , with a significant drop in agreement if creativity was not rated first ) . This may mean that different raters may have used different definitions of the concept of creativity ( cf . Rossiter , 2002 ) , as observed in earlier research on how people judge creativity ( Koslow , Sasser , & Riordan , 2003 ) . However , in experiment 2 , no ordering effects were identified in a group of females rating female watches . Given the almost identical experimental setup in experiment 1 and 2 ( apart from the rated objects ) it seems possible that this difference is caused by different product domains having distinct optimal subjectively sought levels of beauty and creativity when assessing object value , since method variance was otherwise low . Perhaps wrist watches and designer lamps do differ in subtle ways as to how consumers respond to their levels of beauty and creativity . The most significant finding here was the consistent finding that consumer perception of product creativity predicted consumers’ willingness to pay for the product . This was found consistently across experiments , where both creativity and beauty predicted consumer willingness to pay , explaining different parts of the variance . Including list price in the regression did not alter the results significantly . Perceived product creativity predicted consumer willingness to pay both across ( Experiment 1 ) and within ( Experiment 2 ) consumer groups . Furthermore , no evidence of interaction effects between consumer perceived creativity and beauty on their relation to willingness to pay was found , indicating again that these are two distinct constructs with distinct effects . The finding that perceived product creativity consistently predicted consumer willingness to pay for products equivalent in function is particularly interesting for domains where there is a de - emphasis on functional or use value , such as advertising , products consumed primarily for their experiential value , design objects etc . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 19 The present set of experiments demonstrated that judged creativity and perceived beauty contributed independently to willingness to pay . This indicates that it is necessary to treat the two concepts separately in models of product evaluation in consumer psychology , rather than subsume them under one aesthetic dimension . Our findings are especially relevant to classes of products that either are bought predominantly for their aesthetic appeal , or are assumed to be equivalent in function . Consumers do not question the assumption that lamps provide light and therefore are willing to pay for design ( Experiment 1 ) . Likewise , consumers assume that wrist watches tick with the same pace , and that they do not have to evaluate timing quality ; therefore they can consider non - functional qualities like beauty and creativity ( Experiment 2 ) . While single - item perceived consumer creativity and beauty for the present purposes proved reliable measures with predictive validity , a possible limitation to this study is the usage of single - item responses to the measure of consumer’s willingness to pay . Further research should explore whether the findings may generalize to other estimates of consumer behavior , such as willingness to pay rating scales , or real - life purchase decision paradigms , where the objects in question may actually be purchased / won by the study participants . Such an experimental setup may be used to prove the validity of the present approaches to real - life purchase contexts . Furthermore , it should be stressed , that the purposes in the present study was the examination of consumer’s own subjective perceived notion of creativity . This particular purpose led to the methodological choice of using single - item measures , but future studies should be aware that if the purpose is to measure non - subjective levels of object creativity , or measure creativity in domains with a heavy emphasis on object usability or functionality , then it may be advisable to consider multi - item creativity scales separating the construct into distinct subcomponents if appropriate components and weights can be identified for the domain in question . Our findings have deep implications for applications in Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 20 product design and market research . As the simplistic assumption is wrong that either creativity or beauty alone determine willingness to pay , designers have the obligation to consider both creativity and beauty of the product . This obligation , however , can be turned into an opportunity because creativity and beauty are only weakly related , and they explain different parts of the variance for willingness - to - pay . Therefore , they can try to maximize both dimensions independently . The implications of the present findings may be illustrated through contrast with the findings by Hekkert et al . ( 2003 ) . They found that typicality and novelty jointly predicted aesthetic preference ( beauty ) , but that typicality and novelty suppressed each other’s effects . Hekkert et al . argued that the results proved to be empirical evidence for the MAYA principle coined by Raymond Loewy . The MAYA principle is an acronym for ‘Most Advanced , Yet Acceptable’ , whereby the designer should strike a balance between the novelty and typicality of the design . The present findings extend these observations , by focusing on consumer’s willingness to pay . For willingness to pay , the present findings implicate that aesthetic appreciation is but one predictor – another distinct and equally important predictor being consumer - perceived creativity . Given that novelty is positively related to both of the mediating variables of beauty and creativity , it would seem to implicate that for WTP the MAYA principle may be skewed towards more advanced ( novel ) products with perhaps less focus on acceptable ( typical ) products . In applying the MAYA principle , designers should thus keep in mind that striking a proper balance may well depend on which outcome variable they are looking to enhance in their designs ( i . e . , aesthetic appreciation vs . consumer willingness to pay for the product ) . The main insight of this study is that both creativity and beauty contribute to willingness to pay measures , suggesting the strong need for the development of distinct theoretical models of perceived creativity and perceived beauty in consumer research and distinct practical approaches to Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 21 design that maximize the joint contribution of creativity and beauty to the willingness to buy and to pay for a product . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 22 Reference List Alpeson P . 2003 . Creativity in art , in The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics J . Levinson ( Ed . ) New York : Oxford University Press . Amabile T . 1982 . Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 : 997 - 1013 . Bell , J . A . ( 1992 ) . Creativity , TV commercial popularity , and advertising expenditures . International Journal of Advertising , 11 ( 2 ) , 165 - 173 Besemer S . & Treffinger D . J . 1981 . Analysis of creative products : Review and synthesis . Journal of Creative Behavior , 15 : 158 - 178 . Bianchi M . 1998 . The taste for novelty and novel tastes : The role of human agency in consumption , in The active consumer : Novelty and surprise in consumer choice , M . Bianchi ( Ed . ) . London : Routledge : 64 - 86 . Blijlevens , J . , Carbon , C . , Mugge , R . , & Schoormans , J . P . L . ( 2012 ) . Aesthetic appraisal of product designs : Independent effects of typicality and arousal . British Journal of Psychology , 103 ( 1 ) , 44 - 57 . Bloch P . Brunel F . F . & Arnold , T . J . 2003 . Individual differences in the centrality of visual product aesthetics : Concept and measurement . Journal of Consumer Research , 29 : 551 - 565 . Bruce M . & Whitehead M . 1988 . Putting design into the picture : The role of product design in consumer purchase behavior . Journal of the Market Research Society , 30 : 147 - 162 . Caroff X . & Besancon M . 2008 . Variability of creativity judgments . Learning and individual differences , 18 : 367 - 371 . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 23 Cho H . & Schwarz N . 2006 . If I don ' t understand it , it must be new : Processing fluency and perceived product innovativeness . Advances in Consumer Research , 33 : 319 - 320 . Christiaans H . H . C . M . 2002 . Creativity as a design criterion . Creativity Research Journal , 14 : 41 - 54 . Dahlen , M . , Törn , F . , & Rosengren , S . ( 2008 ) . Advertising creativity matters . Journal of Advertising Research 48 ( 3 ) , 392 - 403 . Eisend , M . 2009 . A Meta - analysis of Humor in Advertising . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 37 : 191 - 203 . Goldschmidt , G . , & Tatsa , D . 2005 . How good are good ideas ? Correlates of design creativity . Design Studies , 26 : 593 - 611 . Hagtvedt H . , Hagtvedt R . , & Patrick V . M . 2008 . The perception and evaluation of visual art . Empirical studies of the arts , 26 : 197 - 218 . Hasselzahl M . 2008 . Aesthetics in interactive products : Correlates and consequences of beauty , in Product experience , H . N . J . Schifferstein & P . Hekkert ( Eds . ) . Oxford : Elsevier . Hassenzahl , M . ( 2004 ) . The interplay of beauty , goodness , and usability in interactive products . Human - Computer Interaction , 19 ( 4 ) , 319 - 349 . Hekkert P . & Leder H . ( 2008 ) . Product aesthetics , in Product experience , in H . N . J . Schifferstein & P . Hekkert ( Eds . ) . Oxford : Elsevier . Hekkert , P . , Snelders , D . & van Wieringen , P . C . W . ( 2003 ) . Most advanced , yet acceptable : Typicality and novelty as joint predictors of aesthetic preference in industrial design . British Journal of Psychology , 94 , 111 - 124 . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 24 Hirschman E . C . 1980 . Innovativeness , novelty seeking , and consumer creativity . Journal of Consumer Research , 7 : 283 - 295 . Holbrook M . B . 1980 . Some preliminary notes on research in consumer esthetics , in Advances in Consumer Research , Vol . 7 , J . C . Olson ( Ed . ) . Ann Arbor : Association for Consumer Research : 104 - 108 . Holbrook M . B . & Hirschman E . C . 1982 . Experiential Aspects of Consumption : Consumer Fantasies , Feelings , and Fun . Journal of Consumer Research , 9 : 132 - 140 . Horn D . & Salvendy G . 2006 . Consumer - based assessment of product creativity : a review and reappraisal . Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufactoring , 16 : 155 - 175 . Horn D . & Salvendy G . 2009 . Measuring consumer perception of product creativity : Impact on satisfaction and purchasability . Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufactoring , 19 : 223 - 240 . Janiszewski C . 1993 . Preattentive mere exposure effects . Journal of Consumer Research , 20 : 376 - 392 . Keller K . L . ( 2008 ) . Strategic Brand Management . Building , Measuring , and Managing Brand Equity ( 3rd ed . ) . Upper Saddle River , New Jersey : Pearson Prentice Hall . Koslow , S . , Sasser , S . & Riordan , E . A . ( 2003 ) . What Is Creative to Whom and Why ? Perceptions in Advertising Agencies . Journal of Advertising Research , 43 : 96 - 110 . Kozbelt A . 2004 . Originality and technical skill as components of artistic quality . Empirical studies of the arts , 22 : 157 - 170 . Mayer R . E . 1999 . Fifty years of creativity research , in Handbook of creativity , R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press : 449 - 460 . Moore D . J . & Harris , W . D . 1996 . Affect Intensity and the Consumer ' s Attitude toward High Impact Emotional Advertising Appeals . Journal of Advertising , 25 : 37 - 50 . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 25 O ' Quin K . & Besemer S . 1989 . The development , reliability , and validity of the revised creative product semantic scale . Creativity Research Journal , 2 : 267 - 278 . O’Quin K . & Besemer S . P . 2006 . Using the Creative Product Semantic Scale as a metric for results - oriented business . Creativity and Innovation Management , 15 ( 1 ) : 34 - 44 . O’Quin , K . & Besemer , S . P . 2011 . Creative products . Encyclopedia of Creativity . Ed . Mark A . Runco and Steven R . Pritzker . 2nd ed . Vol . 1 . London : Academic Press , 273 - 281 . Osgood , C . E . , Suci , G . , & Tannenbaum , P . 1957 . The measurement of meaning . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . Purcell A . T . 1984 . The aesthetic experience and mundane reality , in Cognitive processes in the perception of art , W . R . Crozier & A . J . Chapman ( Eds . ) . Lisse , The Netherlands : Elsevier . Reber R . , Schwarz N . & Winkielman P . 2004 . Processing Fluency and Aesthetic Pleasure : Is Beauty in the Perceiver ' s Processing Experience ? Personality and Social Psychology Review , 8 : 364 - 382 . Reber R . , Winkielman P . & Schwarz N . 1998 . Effects of perceptual fluency on affective judgments . Psychological Science , 9 : 45 - 48 . Rogers E . M . 1976 . New product adoption and diffusion . Journal of Consumer Research , 2 : 290 - 301 . Rossiter J . R . 2002 . The C - OAR - SE procedure for scale development in marketing . International Journal of Research in Marketing , 19 : 305 - 335 . Sasser S . L . , & Koslow , S . ( 2008 ) . Desperately seeking advertising creativity . Journal of Advertising , 37 ( 4 ) , 5 - 19 . Schneider W . , Eschman A . & Zuccolotto A . 2002 . E - Prime user’s guide . Pittsburgh : Psychology Software Tools , Inc . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 26 Shrout P . E . & Fleiss J . L . 1979 . Intraclass Correlations : Uses in Assessing Rater Reliability . Psychological Bulletin 86 ( 2 ) : 420 – 428 . Shrout P . E . 1998 . Measurement reliability and agreement in psychiatry . Statistical Methods in Medical Research , 7 : 301 - 317 . Simonson I . & Nowles S . M . 2000 . The role of explanations and need for uniqueness in consumer decision making : Unconventional choices based on reasons . Journal of Consumer Research , 27 : 49 - 68 . Smith , R . E . , Chen , J , & Yang , X . 2008 . The impact of advertising creativity on the hierarchy - of - effects . Journal of Advertising , 37 : 47 - 61 . Veryzer R . W . & Hutchinson J . W . 1998 . The influence of unity and prototypicality on aesthetic responses to new product designs . Journal of Consumer Research , 24 : 374 - 394 . West , D . C . , Kover , A . J . , & Caruana , A . ( 2008 ) . Practitioner and customer views of advertising creativity : Same concept , different meaning ? ” Journal of Advertising , 37 ( 4 ) , 35 - 45 . Winkielman P . & Cacioppo J . T . 2001 . Mind at ease puts a smile on the face : Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation leads to positive affect . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 81 : 989 - 1000 . Yusuf , S . 2009 . From creativity to innovation . Technology in Society , 31 : 1 - 8 . Zangwill N . 2003 . Beauty , in The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics , J . Levinson ( Ed . ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 27 Author notes Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 28 Table 1 . Intraclass correlation coefficients and reliability correlations across groups in Experiment 1 . ICC B after W B after C Beauty rated first . 883 . 61 * * . 64 * * Beauty rated after W . 785 . 84 * * Beauty rated after C . 726 W after B W after C Willingness - to - Pay rated first . 708 . 37 * . 65 * * Willingness - to - Pay rated after B . 820 . 31 Willingness - to - Pay rated after C . 697 C after W C after B Creativity rated first . 917 . 91 * * . 85 * * Creativity rated after W . 930 . 88 * * Creativity rated after B . 805 Correlation between mean evaluations of beauty ( B ) , creativity ( C ) , and Willingness - to - Pay ( W ) by instruction order ( ratings done first , or subsequent to the other measures ) . * * . Correlation significant a the 0 . 01 level ( 2 - tailed ) * . Correlation significant at the 0 . 05 level ( 2 - tailed ) Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 29 Table 2 . Average willingness - to - pay for the ten least / most beautiful and ten least / most creative products in both experiments . Average willingness to pay Ten products judged as least beautiful Ten products judged as most beautiful Ten products judged as least creative Ten products judged as most creative Experiment 1 ( lamps ) USD 277 . 2 USD 336 . 7 USD 282 . 9 USD 312 . 5 Experiment 2 ( watches ) USD 88 . 9 USD 130 . 4 USD 86 . 5 USD 137 . 6 Creativity , beauty , and willingness - to - pay 30 FOOTNOTES i All reported currencies have been converted to USD for ease of comparison . ii Additionally we ran a few male subjects rating male watches only ( n = 20 ) . We excluded these subjects from the present study due to a less than acceptable ICC ( 2 , 20 ) = . 557 for willingness to pay ( a ‘fair’ level of agreement ) , probably due to the low N . For males ICC for creativity was substantial ICC ( 2 , 20 ) = . 900 and for beauty it was moderate ICC ( 2 , 20 ) = . 635 . Moreover , the regression analyses yielded the same findings ( both creativity and beauty independently and significantly predicted willingness to pay ) if we included male participants rating male watches .