161 The problem of De - sign as conjuring : Empowerment - in - use and the politics of seams . Cristiano Storni Interaction Design Center Computer Science and Information Systems Department University of Limerick - Ireland Cristiano . storni @ ul . ie ABSTRACT In this paper , I articulate a critique of design as conjuring ( design as de - sign ) and I argue that it is incompatible with the idea of user empowerment . In particular , I discuss the idea of empowerment - in - use and I highlight the role of design seams and scars in supporting it through appropriation and design - after - design . To support this argument , I draw on some recent contributions in Participatory Design ( PD ) , Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , New Media Studies , and Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) , and I discuss three illustrative case studies from the area of digital Do - it - Yourself ( DIY ) . I argue that restoring the sign in de - sign through design seams and scars can be a way to explore different forms and perhaps deeper levels of critical engagement and participation supporting empowerment . Author Keywords User empowerment , appropriation , design - after - design , DIY , seams and scars ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The argument in this work reflects PD’s traditional concerns with the politics of design ( Kensing and Bloomberg , 1996 , Beck , 2002 ) and the empowerment of users ( Ertner et al . , 2010 ) . Concerns about a shift in power relations have characterised PD since its infancy ( Greenbaum , 1993 ) . Engagement of the users in the design process became key to challenge the traditional power and authority of the design and to empower the user ( Schuler and Namioka , 1993 ) . In this work , instead of focusing on the empowerment of the potential end - user in the design process ( empowerment before use ) , I discuss the issue of user empowerment after design , which I call empowerment - in - use . Thinking of design something to empower the user after design is however problematic and presents itself as an oxymoron . On the one hand , design assumes that a designer aims to devise a solution or tool to be used by those wishing to overcome an obstacle or problem . On the other hand , empowerment suggests the ability for everyone to find a solution to a problem or a need through one’s own efforts and actions . The first term suggests the idea of the designer passing some power to the user ( through the results of their design ) . The second term supports the idea of users taking power on their own terms and initiative and represents a less obvious challenge for design . The idea of designers developing empowering devices is attractive but it seems to be incompatible with the very idea of empowerment . As I will show , empowerment assumes a user that is not limited to use , but also to appropriation , change or rejection of a design or part of it . The question in this work then becomes : what is the role of PD in empowering users after design ? To answer this question , I first discuss the paradox of design for empowerment in detail . I then introduce the notion of design as de - sign ( which I also call design as conjuring ) and I show how such a notion ( particularly apparent in current proprietary systems ) assumes a certain relationship between users and the designed artefacts that makes it difficult to talk about user appropriation , design - after - design and , ultimately , empowerment - in - use . With a focus on this relationship and the role of designed artefacts supporting empowerment - in - use , I argue for the contribution and the political dimension of design seams and scars ( typically erased in design as de - sign ) . This particular focus on the actual designed artefacts also reflects PD’s concerns about the role of physical tools in supporting user participation and empowerment ( Ehn and Siogren , 1991 , Buur , ) , the focus here being on what happens when the design process is concluded . This focus is less developed in PD , but can benefit from a series of other scholarships that , in other related fields , have looked at users engagement , participation and empowerment after design . I review some of these works in the next section before to moving on to my argument . Background : Users and Design The fields of HCI and CSCW , for instance , are not new to works that question the traditional idea of a passive end - user , and those that challenge a clear - cut separation between design and use by exploring ways to extend the design to the end - user after that design process is concluded . MacLean et al . ( 1990 ) , for instance , addressed this issue at an early stage by putting forward the notion of user - tailorable systems that would support users in situated uses . Henderson and Kyng ( 1991 ) followed this Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2256 - 0 / 14 / 10… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661436 162 development by discussing continuing design - in - use , as it would be impossible to foresee all the possible contexts of use during design . Robinson ( 1993 ) also contributed by constructing the notion of design for unanticipated use while Moran ( 2002 ) introduced the notion of Everyday Adaptive Design , arguing that everyday adaptation in the use of interactive systems should be regarded as a form of design itself . Similarly , Dourish ( 2003 ) discussed the notion of appropriation as a form of customisation that changes everyday practices at a deeper level . With a clearer concern about implications for design , scholars in these fields have generated a series of provoking concepts extending the original idea of ‘design in use’ : design for hackability ( Galloway et al . , 2004 ) , design for appropriation ( Chalmers et al . , 2004 ; Dix , 2007 ) , meta - design for end - user development ( Fisher et al . , 2004 ) , and design - after - design ( Bjögvinsson et al . , 2012 ) . A more recent concern with ‘publics’ in PD and HCI has offered interesting insights , which have particularly elaborated on Star’s notion of infrastructure , Mouffle’s idea of agonistic democracy , Dewey’s public , and Latour’s revamp of the Heideggerian notion of Thing and the idea of Making Things Public . Through these more recent scholarships , new approaches to design are being proposed : adversarial design ( DiSalvo , 2012 ) , agonistic PD ( Bjögvinsson et al . , 2012a ) , designing things ( A . Telier , 2011 ; Ehn , 2008 ) , design for the matter of concern ( Di Salvo et al . , 2014 ) , and infrastructuring ( Pipek and Wulf , 2009 , Bjögvinsson et al . , 2012b ) . Innovation and new media studies have also discussed the idea of proactive users at length , although they have not necessarily addressed the notion of empowerment or appropriation . They put forward a series of notions that resonate with theories of social shaping of technology as initially framed within Science and Technology Studies ( MacKenzie and Wajcman , 1985 ) . For instance , Eglash , et al . ( 2004 ) edited a collection on appropriating technology by drawing on the notion of vernacular science and technology . They identify different levels of appropriation going from simple reinterpretation of technology ( as a change in the semantic association ) to actual reinvention ( a change in the physical structure of a designed artefact ) . A related contribution can be found in Lie and Sorensen ( 1996 ) who addressed similar concerns with the notion of everyday domestication of technology . Recently , similar discussions have started to revolve around new participatory media supporting the emergence of new ways to re - think and broaden the notion of end - users : user - led innovation ( Von Hippel , 2005 ) , Pro - am revolution ( Leadbeater and Miller , 2004 ) , personal fabrication ( Gershenfeld , 2005 ) , or the idea of people as prod - user ( Bruns , 2008 ) , everyday innovators ( Haddon et al . , 2005 ) , prosumer ( Talpscott and Williams , 2006 ) or , indeed , empowered users ( Pierson et al . , 2011 ) . As these studies show , recent forms of social activism and emerging Do - it - Yourself ( DIY ) and Do - it - with - others ( DIWO ) movements ( with the key contribution of ICT ) have further challenged our traditional divisions by showing a variety of different forms of engagement with technology and participation in its design and use ( Buechkey et al . , 2009 ) . These new design practices show great potential and offer interesting reflections on the PD community : open - source software and hardware , Web 2 . 0 , user - generated content and crowd - sourcing platforms challenge our traditional divisions between design and use , while new media activists ( Lievrow , 2006 ) , fablabs and hackerspaces , communities of makers and digital artisans ( Kutnetzov and Paulos , 2010 ) , user - development kits , DIY technology ( Chalmers et al . , 2003 ) , and urban grassroots movements ( Kutnetzov et al . , 2011 ) open up new ways to talk about participation , power , and empowerment . In the context of this growing trend of studies , I argued that empowerment - in - use has to do with the possibility to appropriate and further design - after - design - with users having the choice of whether to take this power . I suggest how an improved accountability of designers ( away from an interpretation of design as conjuring ) could facilitate this possibility . In particular , I argue for the contribution of design seams and scars ( hidden in design as de - sign , but particularly apparent in the mentioned areas of digital DIY and DIWO ) as enablers of users’ deeper engagement with technology which would open up to appropriation , design after design , and ultimately empowerment - in - use . To build this argument I will now discuss the mentioned paradox of user empowerment in detail . The paradox of user empowerment This paradox was elegantly framed and discussed by Agre ( 1995 ) whose passage about the meaning of ‘empowerment’ deserves full quotation : ‘We can articulate precisely the ethical appeal of the word " empowerment " . Inasmuch as " empower " is a transitive verb , to " empower " someone is to perform some action upon them . The liberal ideal of individual self - determination would normally object to this kind of operation . People are supposed to be able to define themselves and to choose their own identities and desires and intentions . And this ideal is normally violated when people show up as the objects of transformative verbs . But it is the special claim of empowerment to escape this objection . The person upon whom this action is performed , having been " empowered " , is , by definition , in a position to take actions of his or her own . Indeed one might say that empowerment brings a proper , fully drawn human being into existence . Empowerment thus presents itself not as some kind of programming , but precisely as the removal of any susceptibility to programming . ’ The risk is in fact that design ( and programming ) could act as a form of colonisation . In Suchman’s words ( 1994 ) , this programming and formatting becomes the ‘normative framework’ within which users act 1 . However , as Agre continues with reference to ethnomethodology , the terms and the assumptions that are used to build this framework are not the same as the users ' . The perspective that the 1 Similarly , Ciborra and Lanzara put forward the notion of ‘Formative Context’ ( 1994 ) as a set of institutional arrangements and cognitive imageries that inform the actors ' practical and reasoning routines in organisations , and that are largely influenced by the design of information systems for organisations . 163 designer more or less implicitly assumes in his / her design might not coincide with that of those individuals who are supposed to be empowered 2 . Reflecting on empowerment therefore unavoidably leads to a political question : Who is giving power to whom ? On whose terms , and under what assumptions ? As I will discuss later , it should be clear that these questions need a complementary enquiry on users’ attitudes , expertise and social relationship because users might not want certain power ( see , for instance , Correira and Yusop 2008 ) or might be able to take it even if it is somehow denied or limited by design . In some cases , empowerment might even reside exactly in the possibility for a user to simply reject or accept a designed solution without having to find one on their own . Yet , a question about what can be done ( during design ) in order to open up the possibility of users taking power on their own initiative ( after design ) remains . To address this question and start to unravel the puzzle of user empowerment , I now provide a discussion of the notion of design that deconstructs some of its aspects . I argue that there is something intrinsically inadequate in some of the ideas about design ( design as performed by professional experts ) that makes it difficult to talk about design and empowerment without falling into a contradiction or an impasse . By mainly drawing on the work of philosopher Vilem Flusser , I show how certain embedded meanings attributed to design are problematic and responsible for this impasse or paradox . My intention here is not to provide a general definition of design or a universal characterisation of design practices but instead to put under critical scrutiny some of the meanings attached to the notion of design , and some of the aspects characterising design practices that are incompatible with the idea of empowerment - in - use . Design , Conjuring and De - sign The first move toward empowerment - in - use is to discuss the notion of design and to show that one of its particular meanings offers a potential entry point to the articulation of a critique . In discussing the word ‘design’ , Flusser ( 1999 ) lists a series of meanings of the word ( as a noun and as a verb ) such as : ' plan ' , ' intent ' , ' aim ' , ' scheme ' , ' plot ' , and ' to draft ' , ' to sketch ' , ' to fashion ' . These meanings are shared in other languages as in the Italian ‘ disegno ’ and French ‘ dessin ’ ( a drawing , but also a plan ) . Interestingly , Flusser stressed that these meanings are connected with ‘ deceit ’ , ‘ deception ’ , and ‘ cunning ’ . In discussing highly significant words connected with the notion of design , Flusser reaffirmed this interpretation and showed how the word ‘ machine ’ and ‘ mechanics ’ share the same connotation . The Greek ‘ mechos’ denotes a device designed to deceive - i . e . , a trap – of which the Trojan horse is an example . Ulysses is called ‘ polymechanios’ , 2 Science and Technology studies have offered a series of valuable notions addressing how designers inscribe their visions and predictions about the users in the things they design : Woolgar ( 1999 ) discusses how designers configure certain types of users in design ; Akrich ( 1992 ) discusses the notion of script to analyse how assumptions about users and scripted uses are embedded in the material - semiotic aspects of design . which school children translate as ' the crafty one ' 3 . Similar considerations are dedicated to the word ‘ technology ’ . The Latin equivalent of the Greek techne was in fact art , which suggests a metaphor similar to the English rogue ' s ' sleight of hand ' . Hence ‘ ars’ means something like ‘ agility ' or ' ability ' ( the ability to turn something to one ' s advantage ) and artifex - i . e . , ' artist ' - means a trickster above all . That the original artist was a conjurer can be seen from words such as ' artifice ' , ' artificial ' and even ' artillery ' . These series of considerations help us to look at design as the art of deceiving , and at the designer as the conjurer , someone who carefully and skilfully plans a plot or a machine to deceive . . To deceive what exactly ? Well , ideally to deceive the obstacles that complicate our life . As an illustration , Flusser used the example of a lever as something to cheat gravity , and ' mechanics ' is the trick of fooling heavy bodies . The Czech philosopher further notes that word design derives from the Latin ‘ signum ’ which corresponds to the English ‘ sign ’ which refers to ‘something that conveys information or instruction’ ( a mark , a trace , an indication , or a signature ) . As noted by Terzidis ( 2007 ) , the prefix de is used not in the derogatory sense of opposition or reversal , but in the constructive sense of derivation , deduction or inference ( pg . 69 ) . In this sense , design is about conveying information so that obstacles can be cheated . The idea of design as conjuring however suggests how the design trickery might include not only the obstacles of our world , but also those who attend to the ‘ magic of the conjurer ’ . Indeed , a conjurer is someone who makes something appear from nowhere as if it is magic . In this sense , a conjurer , by definition , cannot reveal what lies behind his / her tricks : to keep them secret and not accessible become key ( interestingly enough ‘ congiura ’ in Italian means ‘ conspiracy ’ , ‘ set up ’ , and ‘ plot ’ , all terms that reaffirm deception and secrecy ) . To build a machine is always to build a machination , says Latour ( 1988 ) . Contrary to the etymological outline by Terzidis ( 2007 ) , thinking of designers as conjurers insinuates the idea of interpreting de - as a privative prefix ( de - meaning to cancel , to erase , or to reverse any visible sign ) . In this sense , and indulging in a bit of speculation , we obtain an interesting interpretation of design as the act of erasing the sign from a design ( as conjurers do with their magic tricks ) . Let me try to articulate this interpretation a bit further . In a series of studies of design practices in different design fields ( Storni , 2007 , 2012 ) , I have shown that part of the work of those involved in turning ideas into concrete artefacts concerns constantly and meticulously removing / hiding work traces ( marks , transient placeholders , tricks , etc . ) , a process that is close to that of purification in science studies ( Latour , 1987 ) . In this way , the final result of a design tends to lose its connections with the context of its ideation and 3 Interestingly , Dante Alighieri includes Ulysses in the XXVI Canto ( Ditch 8 ) , where fraudulent advisors are swathed in flames . Dante includes Ulysses and Diomedes together because of their role as cheaters and deceivers in the Trojan War . 164 development . This aspect of design practices is in line with the idea of the professional designer as a conjurer because the preparation of a ‘magical trick’ is indeed an invisible work aimed at surprising and fooling the spectator ( e . g . , the end user ) . Design as de - sign implies an understanding of the user as a ( passive ) spectator of the designer’s magic tricks . With such understanding , an attempt to make an obstacle disappear in our lives ( to deceive an obstacle ) , might turn into a strategy to fool the spectators too . But in doing so the designer establishes a strong asymmetry : by removing the sign from his / her design , the designer re - affirms his / her author ity ( / ship ) toward a mass of passive users who can simply attend to what is performed on stage , unable to access or perhaps even conceive of what lies behind it . In design as de - sign the user must be kept unaware of the ‘magic’ . Critical studies of new media , especially those criticising proprietary systems , reflect this argument quite clearly ( Porter , 1997 ; Terranova , 2004 ) . Talking about Digital Right Management , Gillespie ( 2006 ) claims : Technologies are designed to obscure their workings for users who want only inputs and outputs in a user - friendly interface . He then continues that such technology : …is not only being designed to limit use , but to frustrate the agency of its users . It represents an effort to keep users outside of the technology , to urge them to be docile consumers who “use as directed , ” rather than adopting a more active , inquisitive posture towards their tools . In other words , welding a car’s hood shut makes a difference not only for what users can and cannot do , but for how users understands themselves as ‘users’ - - whether having agency with that technology is even possible , even conceivable . ( p . 652 ) In light of the marked asymmetry between design and use in such proprietary systems , my proposed metaphor gives us even further insights into what design as de - sign might mean . The material that the designer as a conjurer uses to support his / her ‘magic’ should be reliable , solid and under the exclusive control of the magician who is the only one able to access it . In design as de - sign , hiding traces of what has been assembled and fixed ( design agendas as well as parts ) becomes of key importance . Design parts and the inner workings are kept secret , so that it is extremely difficult for the user to access them . They are fastened securely and firmly , often irreversibly . The link with Gillespie’s critique of proprietary systems as authoritarian continues : Designers are obligated by licenses to build devices such that they limit the user’s interaction with the protected work [ … ] The technology then is the perfect chaperone , only permitting users to behave appropriately . ( Ibid . p . 653 ) User empowerment in such a context is highly influenced by this apriori asymmetry between the designer and the user , where the former has the capability to pass some ‘power’ to the user by enabling certain author ised uses . The afforded interaction between the users and the designed artefacts resulting from a design as de - sign reaffirms the traditional separations and enables an interaction with a system that is only superficial ( …only inputs and output in a user - friendly interface ) . In a context where hiding is used to prevent any un author ised access , it becomes difficult to talk about taking power , appropriating , and designing after design . I invite the reader to observe some of the outstanding examples of our modern design ( e . g . , from Apple to Microsoft to Sony , from IDEO to the even more elitist RCA ) or to simply fumble in a pocket or purse for his / her mobile phone or tablet . What you are likely to see is a series of extremely appealing , well - packaged and fairly usable solutions that completely lose / hide their connections with their design as well as with the gigantic infrastructures that enable them to work . Even if often promoted with the ability to empower the user and enable a myriad of possibilities , these solutions are completely sealed and accessible only by their authors : glued RAM and irreplaceable batteries , proprietary SSD or proprietary screws on cases ( such as Apple’s pentalobe screw ) , and so on . Of course , protections are often in place for safety and quality reasons . However , the concealment of the design in our modern technology often goes well beyond issues of safety and extends to all elements of design and , more concerning , to the context of use . As claimed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation ( EFF 4 ) with regard to PCs , this issue reflects : ‘a fundamental confusion regarding the difference between security - securing a PC for its owner - and " tamper - resistance " - securing a PC against its owner [ … ] The conflict is made evident by the broadcast flag mandate ' s express requirement that developers of Covered Products design their technologies to actively prevent end - user modification 5 . In a sense , all the mentioned examples reaffirm an idea of design as de - sign which is further restated by the attached business models , licences , and IP protections . In this context , a user cannot even ( try to ) repair what s / he bought and can only either comply ( use as prescribed / authorised ) or ( jail ) break / hack it ( in addition to , of course , not using it at all ) . Empowerment here is ‘at best’ the result of some power being passed from the active designers to the passive users whose access to the design is controlled and limited . Even if many might be content to just use what is offered by design as de - sign , we saw how real empowerment cannot be the effect of some power passing between individuals . Back to our discussion , the identified logic of hiding that characterises design as de - sign could be the starting point to re - conceptualise empowerment - in - use and to discuss what designers might need to explore further in order to open up to its possibility . 4 The EFF is a not - for - profit digital rights organisation whose list of litigation can be accessed here : http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / List _ of _ litigation _ involving _ the _ El ectronic _ Frontier _ Foundation ( last access Aug . 2014 ) 5 available here : https : / / w2 . eff . org / IP / broadcastflag / / eff _ fnprm _ reply . html ( last access Aug . 2014 ) 165 Toward empowerment - in - use : restoring the sign in de - sign How can design offer the user the possibility to take some power on her / his own ? The problem with design as conjuring is that removing the sign makes it difficult to restore symmetry between use and design . Indeed , in hiding certain things ( a design feature , a category , an assumed proper or ideal use ) , many other things become fixed and hidden as well : a certain idea of the user and the context of use , his / her taste and needs , what counts as success , what is meant by ‘working’ , how to account for that , what is ‘good design’ , the user / artefact relationship . These all contribute to traditional divisions and reaffirm the limited agency of the user . Moreover , without a sign , ( i . e . , with no sign ature ) , the results appear anonymous ( yet with author ised uses ) , a ‘magic from nowhere’ – where there is no design account but also no one to blame when things go wrong . I argue that this problem has to do with the visibility and accountability 6 of the work of the designer that can indeed be seen as the designer’s sign . Design for empowerment - in - use needs to enable the possibility of appropriation and design - after - design . These can only be superficial in those cases where the design solution presents itself as a black box designed by ‘experts’ and managed through even more black - boxed and invisible infrastructures . Empowerment - in - use needs a deeper level of critical engagement with the design and what lies behind it . I suggest that it needs a design where the sign of the designer is restored so that it can open to the possibility of a deeper engagement with the technology . Restoring the sign means that the designed artefact does not lose all of its connections with the conditions of its design and its assumptions . It means that what the designer decides to fix is not necessarily completely hidden , but possibly made accountable , visible and accessible to the users who – if willing and able – can be in a position to question or otherwise modify the design . In other words , design for empowerment - in - use means to enable the possibility to disagree with a ‘sign’ in design . And it is only through the visibility ( the publicity ) of the sign that one could disagree 7 . The following examples from literature ( the Canary system ) and the growing area of digital DIY ( the open source washing machine ) are interesting illustrations of the visibility of the designer’s sign . Far from the idea of design as conjuring , these designs are more open to critical engagement , reappropriation , design - after - design , and , I argue , empowerment - in - use . In fairness , it should be said that many of the examples from the area of digital DIY and DIWO ( from the myriad of projects available in online communities of hobbyists such as Instructables . com , Ponoko . com , Makezine . org , Arduino . cc , or adafruit . com , 6 It is not surprising that contributions to these debates elaborate on Ethnomethodology - where the notion of accountability was discussed at length - as well as on phenomenology ( at the very root of ethnometodology ) which takes the problem of visibility , observability and human access to the world as central . 7 This notion comes from Latour’s idea of democracy as the possibility to disagree ( Latour and Weibel2005 ) . just to mention few ) would have been equally illustrative of my argument . The Canary system The Canary system is discussed in the already mentioned Neighborhood project by DiSalvo et al . ( 2009 ) . It is described as ‘ a handheld device for monitoring a suite of environmental factors including general air quality , humidity , temperature , and sound and light levels . ’ This system is then ‘ designed with the goal of bringing sensing technologies to a broader audience and , in the process , fostering technological fluency and new understanding of the environment ’ 8 . Fig . 1 The Canary described by DiSalvo et al . ( 2009 ) . As discussed by DiSalvo , the design enables participants to easily open the box and examine the sensor board inside —to look at and touch the actual sensors , and experiment with them directly . Many design elements are available to the user’s scrutiny and critical engagement . The device is introduced through workshops whose interactive nature extends the accountability and visibility of the design beyond the physical device . This does not mean that people will necessarily continue to reappropriate this device and continue its design in use . It does not even mean that many design elements are still black - boxed ( as the Canary’s PBC ) . Its design , however , easily opens up , literally , the possibility of understanding key elements of its design , and possibly reappropriation and redesign . Even if we know little about whether invited participants in the Neighborhood project engage any further with the device , reported results about how lay - people engage with the Canary ( DiSalvo et al , 2009 ) during a series of workshops confirm the importance of a device that can be opened so its inner workings can be explored . Botanicalls Fig . 2 The Botanicalls on a plant pot . The Botanicalls is a system that enables houseplants to make phone calls ( or Tweet ) to their owner when they need to be watered ( the system also enables plants to thank the owner when they are well cared for ) . Originally developed as an Arduino based - product , the Botanicalls is composed of moisture sensors , various resistors and connectors , and a module that enables the system to 8 http : / / www . neighborhood - networks . net / technologies . html 166 contact a human via phone or tweets ( with a LAN cable or WiFi ) . This product is sold as a set of components and a highly detailed tutorial showing how to assemble them . A forum on the Botanicalls website is also available with rich discussions , suggestions , and a great variety of hacks ( such as making your plants say more by modifying lines of code , or sensing other environmental elements by changing sensors , and so on ) . These also link to the vast online resources available around the Arduino prototyping platform which is open - source and offers further possibilities for learning how to reappropriate and design - after - design . The open source washing machine The open source washing machine is another interesting project that has not received attention in literature . The open source washing machine does not refer to a single specific open source product but to a whole movement toward rethinking clothes washing practices in different contexts , and coming up with local solutions . The OS washing machine project is presented as follow : This long term project tends not only to invent different technological designs adapted to different contexts , but also to promote the building , the maintaining , and the control of the technology by the people themselves ( http : / / www . oswash . org / open - source - washingmachine ) . In this sense , the project focuses on having the users adapt different explored solutions to local resources such as available sources of energy , washing technologies , and detergents . As the whole process is about agitating dirty clothes , the project explores rotative systems , which are most commonly used in Western countries , but also vibrating systems , brushing or batting systems , bubbling , and ultrasound . Fig . 3 Two open source washing machines ; the first using a speaker to create vibrations , the second using a purposefully clumsy windmill agitating a container with water and local detergents . Restoring the sign in de - sign : on seams and scars as points of appropriation enabling design - after - design Traditional design as de - sign makes it difficult for users to understand the design behind what they use . The preparatory work , design elements and agenda ( e . g . , a business model ) of the designers usually get lost ( fixed and hidden ) in the preparation of the conjuring magic devised to please and surprise a passive user who can only use a solution as authorised . However , new growing design ambits show us a different approach to the design of technology that replaces the logic of hiding the ‘sign’ with that of using it as access . The ‘things’ designed in the new DIY and DIWO ambits need adaptation , maintenance and constant fixing . Their designs are accessible and allow reappropriation and design - after - design . Contrary to the de - sign as conjuring , here the visibility and accessibility of the ‘sign’ in design is a key concern ; it is what gives it life . I believe these emerging practices help to tackle the challenge of empowerment - in - use because they enable the re - introduction of the ‘sign’ in the design offering more opportunities to take some power on the users’ own initiative . A concern about the visibility of the design behind systems animated a debate about seamless and seamful systems in the early days of Ubicomp . In this interesting discussion , Chalmers et al . ( 2003 , 2004 ) propose the notions of ‘seams’ and ‘scars’ which echo Weiser’s first idea of seams ( 1994 ) . He noticed how certain infrastructure problems for designers could have been opportunities for appropriations for the users . He proposes to make the systems’ seams visible because they represent interesting interactional features acting as a sort of second - order interface to users who can act on the design itself . He wrote : ‘ Seamful design involves deliberately revealing seams to users’ and added : ‘ When seams show through in interaction , what is ‘infrastructure’ to system designers may be ‘interface’ to users’ ( Chalmers , 2003 ) . While traditionally understood as problematic and usually deleted in design as de - sign , I argue that these seams and scars are not just interesting design features but can be seen as political and power - related devices to restore the sign in design ( as in Winner , 1999 ) and rebalance the separations of design as conjuring . Further , on design seams , Galloway wrote ( 2007 ) : ‘ Seams and scars are points that remind us something happened in the past . They represent liminal spaces that serve as markers , not just of things joined together , but also of things than can be cut apart ’ . Seams and scars can be seen as actionable accounts of what has been fixed in a design . They represent a way to restore the sign in de - sign by making the designer’s work , the used elements and the agenda behind their arrangement more ( observable ( public ) , available ( accessible ) , and possibly reversible ( actionable ) . Seams and scars become connections , gaps , and marks supporting a rebalanced distribution of power between design and ( future ) uses . From a use perspective , seams and scars expose some aspects of the design and become points of appropriation 9 – points whereby users , if desired , can act upon design after design and take some 9 Talking about infrastructure that can be flexible enough to accommodate appropriation , Pipek and Wulf ( 2009 ) put forward the idea of points of infra - structuring which is generally in line with the idea of scars and seams that we discuss here . Point of appropriation can be also seen , by referring to Schon’s ( 1983 ) rendering of the designer as a reflective practitioner , as point of reflections further stresses the learning and sense - making elements characterising appropriation , design after design and also empowerment . 167 power on their own initiative and terms . The projects I mentioned reflect a similar care for restoring the sign in design and are illustrative of the role of seams and scars in it . The Canary system , the various solutions explored in the open source washing machine project or in the forums of the Botanicalls enable forms of inquisitive engagement that goes beyond the prescribed use . In all cases , the inner working of these devices is not hidden but available to the user through the use of design seams . Fig . 4 The Canary can easily be opened to access its internal design and components . Sensors can be identified and possibly modified . Fig . 5 The artisanal look’n’feel of the explored solutions in the open source washing machines is also not devised to hide the design . The logic of fixing and hiding is not adequate to the need of using local material and constantly maintaining and adapting to different contexts . As a results , design components and their joints and seams are entirely visible , accessible and modifiable ( sound system washing machine ( left ) , rotating bamboo photovoltaic solar washing machine ( right ) ) . Fig . 6 Absence of external casing hiding the electronics clearly shows seams as points to act upon . The set of components and the possibility to assemble the product yourself provide another level of engagement that opens up the possibility of appropriation and design - after - design , especially when linked to the information , shared scripts and discussions available online . Similarly to any other DIY and DIWO projects , shared online source - codes show seams at every space and line ( often accompanied by comments from the original writer further accounting her design ) , external casings show junctures indicating where things can be opened and dis - assembled , open source hardware shows scars at every possible juncture of their components , removable parts afford re - purposing and hacking , and so on . Designers – whether traditionally trained or not – do not remove their ‘marks’ and ‘ sign ature’ , instead making the traces of their work highly visible by posting scripts , making in - code comments , building step - by - step tutorials , making junctures visible , and opening up to communities’ comments and criticisms . In this way they reduce the traditional authority / anonymity / lack - of - accountability of the designer as conjurer , whose strength has , for a long time , lied exactly in the invisibility / secrecy of his / her ( magic ) backstage work . Due to their less polished , artisanal and rough - edged look - and - feel , these artefacts fail to hide the work behind them and offer users 10 different levels of engagement and easier opportunities to appropriate and design after design . Instead of black - boxing some power to be passed to the user , I argue that designers concerned with user empowerment could benefit from seeing seams and scars as invitations for the appropriation of the designed technology , and from carefully leaving them visible / available to the user without assuming that design , especially in its finishing touches , is about polishing , refining and clearing design traces . Le Dantec et al . ( 2010 ) offer an interesting example of the effect of an increasingly ‘fixed’ design on a community of users in their study of the Shared Message Board for the urban homeless . An early version of the Board was viewed as an invitation to appropriate the technology and define its purpose through use ( thus also defining users as proactive and empowered to have access to the design’s backstage , partaking in design decisions , and producing shared content ) . This was clearly indicated by their active participation in the development of the systems and by the fact that users equally received as well as sent messages to the Board’s members . However , as a second more polished and fixed version of the portal was released , the design started to be perceived as managed and fixed by the expert designers , and the lay users started to conform to a more traditional and passive attitude toward the system ( e . g . , users stopped personal messaging and co - production , and started to act as audiences of impersonal messages generated and categorised by the staff of ‘experts’ ) . It seems as if the more polished and fixed design , with visible seams ( signs ) removed by the professional designer , overshadowed the original sense of ownership of the users and so frustrated empowerment - in - use . This frustration with what DiSalvo at al call design closure ( 2009 ) reflects similar works also looking at the emancipatory role of designed artefacts . For instance , in discussing the contribution of ethnomethodology ( a perspective indeed concerned with accountability and the observability of things ) , Dourish and Button ( 1998 ) introduced the idea of technomethodology and artefacts that account for their functioning to users . Similarly , in discussing the contribution of feminist studies , Bardzell ( 2010 ) mentioned the quality of self - disclosure as the extent to which a designed artefact renders visible the 10 Not to mention the rich documentations of the design process almost always made available to support the design and use of those who come next . Indeed , documentation practices in these communities are far more diffused and advanced than in manufacture or academia , and represent another key element that is almost ignored and marginalised in the design community discourse . 168 way in which it affects the user as a subject . All these works resonate and support the argument in this work . Conclusions In this work , I first introduced the idea of design as conjuring . Showing how it is based on hiding the design to a passive user ( element that is particularly apparent in today’s proprietary systems ) , I show how design as de - sign is incompatible with the idea of real user empowerment . Assuming a link between the possibility to appropriate and what I called empowerment - in - use , I develop an argument about the political and power - related dimension of design seams and scars that are typically removed in design as de - sign . I argue that design seams and scars can facilitate reintroduction of the sign in design by opening up the possibility of empowerment - in - use . My suggestion is that their availability to the user should not be the by - product of a design , but an explicit focus of designers concerned with empowerment - in - use . The question of which seams should be made available and how they should be made actionable should be added in the agenda of participatory design projects , especially those that acknowledge a shift from projecting to infrastructuring ( Bjogvinsson et al . , 2012 ) . With particular reference to these later conceptualisations , seams and scars can be seen as enablers that turn a designed artefact into the infrastructure for its own re - appropriation 11 . When things can be seen ( when they are made public and accessible ) , they can then be accounted for , debated , discussed , and acted upon . I believe all these critical activities are the true prerequisites for user empowerment . Obviously there are limits to the arguments in this work . First of all , some level of concealment ( de - signing ) and black boxing is unavoidable . For instance , the sensors and electronic components of the Canary are based on technical abstraction that certainly can be seen as a form of concealment ; the PCBs in the Canary and the Botanicalls are as fixed as any other black box in proprietary systems ; some parts cannot be taken apart ( often for safety reasons ) , while others would require high skills and special tools . What I suggest here is the need to minimise the hiding characterising design as conjuring with a more explicit focus on seams and scars . The second limit is linked to the nature of empowerment . Empowerment is a heterogeneous matter that cannot be reduced to a technical feature . The user’s critical engagement and her empowerment - in - use cannot sparkle by design itself ( this would simply reproduce the paradox of empowerment that I discussed early on ) . Having visible and accessible design scars and seams does not necessarily mean that users will decide to take on one’s own power on one’s own terms and initiative . Seams and scars certainly offer an opportunity to restore the sign in 11 This point makes it difficult to accept a clear - cut distinction between ( i ) designing a practical and useful system and design as infrastructuring suggested by Ehn , 2008 ( a point that was also recently criticised in STS by LeDantec and Disalvo , 2013 , in relation to Marres’ work on the notion of attachment in the shaping of publics ) . Seams and scars can indeed act as infrastructure for appropriation and design - in - use . design , but they might appear confusing and difficult to use to an uninformed user . Their uptake from actual users depends on other elements ( such as the user’s expertise , literacy and ability to ‘read’ the offered seams ) that traditionally fall beyond the traditional design agenda and jurisdiction . A renewed focus on seams toward user’s empowerment ( and against design as conjuring ) needs to be complemented with parallel enquiries and effort on the human and social side of empowerment . Users’ will as well as ability or literacy to engage with technology at deeper levels need to be acknowledged as another priority in the agenda of the designers concerned with empowerment - in - use . Again , the DIY and DIWO domains offer interesting insights on this matter . All the cases I have described do not only show plenty of accessible seams that enable opening up their design for critical engagement and appropriation , but they also complemented those design features with social events that bring shared concerns to the surface , provoke interests and reflection , as well as enable articulation of issues and commitment to the collaborative development of solutions . In the Neighborhood project , for instance , the organisation of workshops and meetings with laypeople being introduced to the new technology and offered a forum for its discussions was key . In these workshops , building conversations and discussing issues as well as possibilities was as crucial as the visible seams for the users’ engagement . The open source washing machine is also kept alive through a series of workshops where the project is introduced and explained , and local stakeholders are involved in discussing local possibilities concerning detergents , washing technology and raw materials that could possibly be used . In this project the individualisation of potential local opinion leaders is also of key importance . Creating a new piece of technology and maintaining it also means creating an informed public and maintaining a community of individuals who can understand its design , take advantage of available seams and use them to fix , sustain or further the design . The rich online forums ( such as those discussing the Botanicalls , the Arduino and the Open Source Washing Machine ) and the almost obsessive attention to documenting the design process in DIY serve similar purposes : they further increase how users can access the design and what lies behind it , they inform and educate communities of users , and they provide them with a space to interact . Along with design seams , these elements support Barzell’s Deweyian call for a re - education of the user against the narcotisation of perception that is insinuated by design as conjuring and in what Spiekerman and Palles ( 2006 ) called paternalistic technology . In line with recent works about the construction of publics ( Marres , 2007 , DiSalvo , 2010 ) , DIY and DIWO projects reaffirm how engagement with an issue or an object of design is always a collective and heterogeneous endeavour 12 . Carefully crafting design seams and scars is of great importance to avoid the frustration of closure ( design as de - sign ) and enable user 12 LeDantec and DiSalvo ( 2013 ) for instance suggest providing scaffolding for affective attachments as the key to establishing active and engaged publics . 169 empowerment - in - use . Their design and use as well as how they can be complemented with the construction of inquisitive and engaged publics , tools and information resources offer unexplored research areas and new roles for participatory design . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I wish to thank the participants to the workshop ‘Re - thinking user centred design with new forms of user empowerment’ , at CHIItaly 2011 - Alghero . I wish to also thank the three anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on the first version of this paper . REFERENCES Agre , P . ( 1995 ) From High Tech to human tech : Empowerment , measurement , and social studies of computing . Journal of CSCW , 3 , 2 , 167 - 195 . Akrich , M . ( 1992 ) The description of technical Objects , Bijker , W . E . , Law , J . ( eds ) Shaping technology / building society , MIT Press , Cambridge Bardzell , J . ( 2010 ) Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design , Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM press Beck , E . ( 2002 ) " P for political : Participation is not enough . " Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 . 1 : 1 . Bruns , A . ( 2008 ) Blogs , Wikipedia , Second Life and beyond : from production to produsage , New Your , Peter Lang Buechley , L . , Paulos , E . , Rosner , D . and Williams A . ( 2009 ) DiY for CHI : Methods , Communities , and Values of Reuse and customization , Proc . of CHI , ACM Press Bjögvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , & Hillgren , P . ( 2012 ) . Design things and design thinking : contemporary participatory design challenges . Design Issues , 28 ( 3 ) , 101 - 116 . Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , & Hillgren , P . A . ( 2012 ) . Agonistic participatory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign , 8 ( 2 - 3 ) , 127 - 144 . Chalmers , M and MacColl , I . and Bel , M . ( 2003 ) Seamful and Seamless design in Ubiquitous computing , Proc . of Eurowerable Chalmers , M . ( 2003 ) Seamful design and Ubicomp Infrastructure , Proc . of Ubicomp , Chalmers , M . and Galani , A . ( 2004 ) Seamful interweaving : heterogeneity in the theory and design of interactive systems , Proc . of DIS 2004 , ACM press , Ciborra , C . and Lanzara , P . ( 1994 ) Formative Contexts and the information technology : Understanding the dynamics of innovation . Accounting , Management and Information technologies , 4 , 2 , 61 - 86 . Correia , A . P . , & Yusop , F . D . ( 2008 , October ) . I don ' t want to be empowered : the challenge of involving real - world clients in instructional design experiences . In Proceedings of the PDC08 , pp . 214 - 216 DiSalvo , C . , Light , A . , Hirsch , T . Christopher A . Le Dantec , Goodman , E . and Hill , K . ( 2010 ) HCI , communities and politics . Proc . in CHI 2010 , ACM Press , 3151 - 3154 . DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A . , and Louw , M . ( 2009 ) The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proc . of PDC 2008 , ACM Press , 41 - 50 . DiSalvo , C , Boehner , K . , Knouf , N . , and Sengers . P . ( 2009 ) Nourishing the Ground for Sustainable HCI : Considerations from Ecologically Engaged Art . In Proc . of CHI , ACM Press : 385 - 394 . DiSalvo , C . “Design and the Construction of Publics . ” Design Issues , 25 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 48 - 63 . Dix , A . ( 2007 ) Designing for Appropriation . In Proc . of the BCS HCI Group Conference , 2 , 27 - 30 . Dourish , P . ( 2003 ) The appropriation of interactive technologies : Some lesson from placeless documents . Journal of CSCW , 12 , 465 – 490 . Dourish , P . and Button , G . ( 1998 ) On ‘Technomethodology’ : foundational relationship between ethnomethodology and system design , in Human - Computer Interaction , 13 , 4 ( 1998 ) , 395 - 432 Eglash , R . , Croissant , J . , Di Chirio , G . , & Fouché , R . ( Eds . ) ( 2004 ) . Appropriating technology . Vernacular science and social power . University of Minnesota Press , Minneapolis . Ehn , P . ( 2008 ) Design Things : Challenges to design thinking in the tradition of participatory design ? In Proc . PDC , ACM , 92 - 101 . Ehn , P . and D . Sjögren ( 1991 ) . From System Descriptions to Scripts for Action . In Design at work . Edited by Greenbaum and Kyng . Hillsdale , New Jersey . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers : 241 - 268 Ertner , M . , Kragelund , A . M . , & Malmborg , L . ( 2010 ) . Five enunciations of empowerment in participatory design . In Proc of the PDC ( pp . 191 - 194 ) . ACM Fisher , T , Giaccardi , E . , Ye , Y . , Sutcliffe , A . G . and N . Mehandjiev . ( 2004 ) Meta - design : a manifesto for end - user development , Communication of the ACM , 47 , 9 . Flusser , V . ( 1999 ) The Shape of Thing . A philosophy of design . London , Reaktion Books . Galloway , A . , Brucker - Cohen , J . ; Gaye , L . ; Goodman , E . and Hill , D . ( 2004 ) Design for hackability . Proc of DIS2004 , ACM Press . Galloway , A . ( 2007 ) Seams and Scars , Or How to Locate Accountability in Collaborative Work . In Brickwood , C . , Ferran , B . , Garcia , D . and Putnam T . ( ed . ) , ( Un ) common Ground : Creative Encounters across Sectors and Disciplines , BIS Publishers , Amsterdam . Gershenfeld , N . ( 2005 ) FAB - The coming revolution on your desktop - From personal computer to personal fabrication . Basic Book , New York . Gillespie , T . ( 2006 ) Designed to ' Effectively frustrate ' : Copyright , technology , and the agency of users , New Media & Society , 8 , 4 , 651 - 669 . 170 Greenbaum , J . ( 1993 ) . A design of one ' s own : towards participatory design in the United States . Participatory design : Principles and practices , 27 - 37 Haddon , L . , Mante , E . , Sapio , B . , Kommonen , K . - H . , Fortunati , L . , & Kant , A . ( Eds . ) ( 2005 ) Everyday innovators : Researching the role of users in shaping ICTs . Dordrecht , the Netherlands : Springer . Henderson , A . , & Kyng , M . ( 1991 ) There’s no place like home : Continuing design in use . In J . Greenbaum & M . Kyng ( Eds . ) , Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Kensing , F . , & Blomberg , J . ( 1998 ) . Participatory design : Issues and concerns , CSCW , 7 ( 3 - 4 ) , 167 - 185 . Kutnetzov , S . , Odom , W . , Moulder , V . , DiSalvo , C . , Hirsch , T . , Wakkary , R . , and Paulos , E . ( 2011 ) HCI , politics and the city : engaging with urban grassroots movements for reflection and action . Proc . of CHI 2011 , ACM Press , 2409 - 2412 . Kutnetzov , S . and Paulos , E . ( 2010 ) Rise of the expert amateur : DIY projects , Communities , and Culture , Proc . of NordiCHI , ACM Press . Latour , B . ( 1987 ) ‘Science in action : how to follow scientists and engineers through society’ , Harvard University Press , Harvard Latour , B . ( 1988 ) ‘The princes for machines as well as for machinations’ Elliott B . , Technology and social process , Edimbourgh University Press , Edimbourgh . Latour , B . and Weibel , P . ( Eds . ) ( 2005 ) Making Things Public : Atmospheres of Democracy , Cambridge , MIT Press . Le Dantec , C . ( 2012 ) Participation and Publics : Supporting Community Engagement , Proc . Of CHI 2012 , ACM Press . Le Dantec , C . , Christensen , J . , Bailey , M . , Farrell , R . , Ellis , J . , Danis , C . , Kellogg , W . and Edwards , K . ( 2010 ) A Tale of two publics : Democratizing design at the margins , In Proc . DIS 2010 , ACM , 11 – 20 . Le Dantec , C . A . , & DiSalvo , C . ( 2013 ) . Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design . Social Studies of Science , 43 ( 2 ) , 241 - 264 . Leadbeater , C . , & Miller , P . ( 2004 ) The Pro - Am revolution . How enthusiasts are changing our economy and society . London : Demos . Lie , M and Sorensen , KH . ( 1996 ) Making Technology our own , domesticating technology into everyday life , Scandinavian University Press , Oslo . Lievrouw , L . ( 2006 ) . Oppositional and activist new media : remediation , reconfiguration , participation . Proc of PDC2006 , ACM Press : 115 - 124 . Mackenzie , D . and Wajcman , J . ( 1985 ) The social Shaping of technology , Open University Press , Buckingham and Philadelphia , MacLean , A . , Carter , K . , Lestrand , L . , & Moran , T . ( 1990 ) User - tailorable systems : Pressing the issues with buttons . Proc . of CHI , ACM Press , 175 – 182 . Moran , T . P . ( 2002 ) Everyday adaptive design . Proc . of DIS 2002 , ACM Press , 13 – 14 . Pierson , J . , Mante - Meijer , E . and Loos , E . ( Eds ) ( 2011 ) New Media Technologies and User Empowerment , Peter Lang Publishers , New York . Pipek , V . and Wulf , V . ( 2009 ) Infrastructuring : toward an integrated perspective on the design and use of IT , Journal of the AIS , 10 , 5 , 447 - 473 . Porter , D . ( 1997 ) Internet Culture , London , Routledge . Robinson , M . Design for unanticipated use . Proc . of ECSCW 1993 , ACM Press , ( 1993 ) 187 – 199 . Schön , D . ( 1983 ) The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action . London : Temple Smith . Schuler , D . , & Namioka , A . ( 1993 ) . Participatory design : Principles and practices . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . Spiekermann , S . and F . Pallas . ( 2006 ) Technology paternalism : wider implications of ubiquitous computing . Poiesis & Praxis : Int . Journal of Technology Assessment & Ethics of Science 4 , 1 , 6 - 18 . Storni , C . ( 2007 ) Design in Practice : On the construction of objects , PhD dissertation University of Trento , Sociology and Social Research Department Storni , C . ( 2012 ) Unpacking design practices : the notion of things in the making of artifacts , in Science , Technology and Human Values , 37 , 1 , pp . 88 - 123 Suchman , L . ( 1994 ) Do categories have politics ? : The language / action perspective reconsidered . In Journal of CSCW , 2 , 3 , 177 - 190 . Tapscott , D . and Williams , A . ( 2006 ) Wikonomics , Atlantic Books , London . Terranova , T . ( 2004 ) Network Culture : politics for the information age , Pluto Press . Terzidis , K . ( 2007 ) ‘The Etymology of Design : Pre - Socratic Perspective . ’ Design Issues 23 ( 4 ) : 69 - 78 . Von Hippel , E . ( 2005 ) . Democratising innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Weiser , M . ( 1994 ) Building Invisible Interfaces . Keynote talk , Proc . ACM UIST Winner , L . ( 1999 ) Do Artifacts have politics ? In MacKenzie and Waijcman ( Eds ) The social Shaping of Technology , Open University Press . Woolgar , S . ( 1999 ) Configuration of the user : The case of Usability Trials . Law . J . ( ed ) A sociology of Monsters : Essays on Power , Technology , and Domination , 57 - 99 , London , Routledge Wyatt , S . , Thomas G . , Terranova , T . , They came , they surfed , they went back to the beach . Technology , Cyberpole , Reality Oxford : Oxford University Press ( 2002 ) pp . 23 - 4