fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH published : 15 March 2022 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2022 . 846629 Edited by : Wangshuai Wang , Xi’an Jiaotong - Liverpool University , China Reviewed by : Hanna Wlodarkiewicz - Klimek , Pozna´n University of Technology , Poland M . Suresh , Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham , India * Correspondence : Chaoyong Tang tcysyz _ 521 @ 163 . com Specialty section : This article was submitted to Organizational Psychology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology Received : 31 December 2021 Accepted : 16 February 2022 Published : 15 March 2022 Citation : Tang C , Shi Y and Cai R ( 2022 ) Correlations of Resource Bricolage and Exaptation With Low - Cost Breakthrough Innovations : Moderating Effect of Organizational Agility . Front . Psychol . 13 : 846629 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2022 . 846629 Correlations of Resource Bricolage and Exaptation With Low - Cost Breakthrough Innovations : Moderating Effect of Organizational Agility Chaoyong Tang 1 * , Yongzhi Shi 2 and Ruilin Cai 3 1 School of Economics and Management , Agricultural University of Hebei , Baoding , China , 2 Modern Educational Technology Center , Agricultural University of Hebei , Baoding , China , 3 School of Business , Changshu Institute of Technology , Suzhou , China The mechanism inﬂuencing resource bricolage driving low - cost breakthrough innovations remains unclear . By introducing exaptation and organizational agility , this study creates a regulated mediation model , explores effects of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations , and analyzes the moderating effect of organizational agility and mediation effect of exaptation . The results revealed that resource bricolage exerted a signiﬁcant positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations , and exaptation played a mediation role between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . In addition , both marketing agility and operational agility positively regulated the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation . Further research revealed that the mediation effect of exaptation was positively regulated by marketing agility and operational agility , respectively . Overall , this study enriches the discussion of the impact mechanism of breakthrough innovations by resource bricolage and provides valuable enlightenment for enterprises to implement innovation - driven development strategies in the context of economic transformation . Keywords : operational agility , marketing agility , low - cost breakthrough innovations , exaptation , resource bricolage INTRODUCTION China , which is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century , faces both opportunities and challenges . China possesses a vast potential demand from the bottom of the pyramid ( BOP ) population in emerging markets , especially in the economic transition period when the phenomenon of technological homogeneity is serious ( Zhao et al . , 2019 ) . Helping manufacturing enterprises to transform their innovation models has always been challenging . Conversely , the rapid reduction of imitation barriers and monopoly proﬁts due to traditional innovation , as well as the rise of operating costs due to organizational complexity , and the reduction of organizational learning capabilities make it unsustainable . Hence , a vast gap exists between the potential demand of the BOP population and the supply of emerging markets . In this regard , how to develop high - quality and aﬀordable products through low - cost breakthrough innovation with lower ﬁnancial costs , shorter periods , and lower risks to establish their unique technology Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 1 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 2 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation position , and stand out in the ﬁerce competition is imperative ( Zhu and Chen , 2014 ) . Nevertheless , low - cost breakthrough innovations are often in the face of resource dilemmas , such as solidiﬁed resource concepts , backward management , poor conﬁguration , and inadequate supply , which decrease the success rate of breakthrough innovations ( Wang et al . , 2019 ) . Consequently , breaking out of the traditional resource management logic to promote low - cost breakthrough innovations is a crucial proposition that Chinese emerging market manufacturers urgently need to solve . As a new theory of resource management , resource bricolage can creatively use available resources , identify new attributes of resources through strategies like improvisation and restructuring , explore new uses of resources , and attain value creation of resources “from scratch” and “from less to more” through optimal allocation of resources and synergistic eﬀects , thereby providing resource guarantee for breakthrough innovations ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) . Nevertheless , the internal logic of resource bricolage to promote low - cost breakthrough innovations remains to be discussed . As the exaptation of the source of innovation , it provides the possibility to connect the relationship between the two . On the one hand , resource bricolage accentuates the deconstruction and reconstruction of available resources , including products and technology . By exploring and developing new functions of resources , resource bricolage reveals the use of resources as a method of discovering and creating opportunities ( Yu et al . , 2017 ) , which , in turn , positively aﬀects exaptation . On the other hand , exaptation can open up new industry space by transferring the existing products and technology or successful application in new ﬁelds , thereby promoting breakthrough innovations ( Ren et al . , 2019 ) . Thus , this study constructs the inﬂuence mechanism of resource bricolage – exaptation – low - cost breakthrough innovations . Nevertheless , how will the above inﬂuence mechanism be aﬀected by contingency ? As a crucial dynamic capability , organizational agility covers the characteristics of identifying the market , quick response , and ﬂexible adjustment , which can augment the foresight of the company’s strategy and the ability to make adjustments , changes , and rapid responses to future opportunities identiﬁcation , and provide capacity guarantees for resource bricolage to promote breakthrough innovations through exaptation , thereby increasing the incidence and success rate of exaptation ( Oosterhout et al . , 2006 ) . Hence , this study incorporates organizational agility into the theoretical model and further examines the boundaries of the role of resource bricolage – exaptation – low - cost breakthrough innovations . The theoretical gap and novelty of this study are primarily reﬂected in the following aspects . First , the existing studies have investigated the impact of resource bricolage on new startups innovation and breakthrough innovation ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Wang et al . , 2019 ; Zhao et al . , 2019 ) . However , unlike the perspective of new startups , low - cost breakthrough innovation of manufacturing enterprises in emerging markets also needs the support of resource bricolage ( Yu et al . , 2017 ) , but studies on the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations are relatively deﬁcient . This study supplements this limitation . Second , previous studies explored the mediating role between resource bricolage and breakthrough innovation from the viewpoints of entrepreneurial learning and dynamic capabilities ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) , but few studies examined exaptation . This study focuses on the mediating mechanism of exaptation , thereby enriching the research on the formation path of low - cost breakthrough innovations . Finally , few studies examined the regulatory mechanism of organizational agility . With organizational agility as a moderating variable , this study reveals a contextual mechanism of resource bricolage inﬂuencing low - cost breakthrough innovations and enlarges the application ﬁelds of organizational agility . THEORIES Low - Cost Breakthrough Innovations The existing problems in emerging markets are resource constraints , inadequate supply , strong demand , and weak purchasing power , making it challenging to eﬀectively balance the imbalance between supply and demand in emerging markets by obeying the traditional breakthrough innovations model . Consequently , incorporating cost - eﬀectiveness , inclusiveness , and redesign into breakthrough innovations to form low - cost breakthrough innovations paradigm has become a strategic choice for manufacturing companies to acquire competitive advantages . Zhu and Chen ( 2014 ) deﬁned low - cost breakthrough innovations as an innovation by an organization that relies on new technology and knowledge or eliminates existing technological trajectories and knowledge , and uses low - cost design , technology , and organization to satisfy new markets and customers , and to further decrease low - cost via innovative methods . Zha et al . ( 2015 ) established that low - cost breakthrough innovations denote various feasible methods adopted by enterprises to decrease low - cost , to realize new products , services or technologies , pursue new knowledge , and attempt to break the original knowledge trajectory , which can introduce new products to open up new markets and provide new services for enterprises . This study claims that low - cost breakthrough innovations imply obeying the concepts of low - cost , redesign , tolerance , and openness , by pursuing new applications of knowledge and technology systems , to fulﬁll the needs of emerging markets BOP population to support the process of sustainable development of enterprises . Low - cost breakthrough innovations not only highlight the realization of major innovations and breakthroughs in product and technology based on low - cost strategy , thereby opening up new markets and gaining lasting competitiveness , but also focus on the integration of properties , such as low - cost , design thinking , openness , and inclusiveness , based on breakthrough innovations to provide BOP population with better - quality products and services . Previous studies have mostly investigated the formation path of low - cost breakthrough innovations from the standpoints of knowledge governance ( Zhu and Chen , 2014 ) , failure learning , and intellectual capital ( Zha et al . , 2015 ) , but rarely involve issues on how to crack the resource constraints of low - cost breakthrough innovations in emerging markets . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 2 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 3 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation Resource Bricolage Bricolage is deﬁned as the process of coalescing resources at hand and acting immediately to address new problems and discover new opportunities ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ) . The core of bricolage is the re - deconstruction and integration of existing elements to create new rules and methods ( Lévi - Strauss , 1997 ) , which possesses fundamental characteristics such as available resources , resource improvisation , rapid response , action preference , and resource reconstruction . Based on the results of bricolage of human culture and mind and its application practices , this study argues that the objects of bricolage are all resources of enterprises , and bricolage is an “improvisation” to satisfy market opportunities and a crucial guiding ideology . Besides , it is a decision - making tool that aligns with the enterprise development strategies . The essence of bricolage is innovation , openness , sharing , and creation , and the bricolage are elementary elements like resource awareness , satisfactory decision - making , and resource reconstruction . Of note , bricolage aims to gain enterprise competitive advantages and sustainable development . According to the existing research , with the integration of bricolage theory into the innovation process , bricolage has become a crucial path for value creation , which is also a critical way to address the constraints of technology , personnel , and material resources and help new enterprises achieve technological innovation ( Wang et al . , 2019 ; Zhao et al . , 2019 ) . Furthermore , some studies highlighted that resource bricolage exerts a positive impact on breakthrough innovations of startups ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) . However , prior studies have seldom discussed the logic through which resource bricolage aﬀects the low - cost breakthrough mechanism and path . Exaptation As a source of innovation , exaptation originated initially in evolutionary biology , denoting the evolution of certain entities for other uses , and then replacing their original uses afterward ( Gould and Vrba , 1982 ) . Mokyr ( 2011 ) transplanted exaptation to management and interpreted the phenomenon that “a certain technology is accidentally used in another ﬁeld and becomes successful” as exaptation . The concept of exaptation comprises two main points : function transfer and accidental occurrence . Of these , function transfer covers the transfer of product functions and technologies , primarily implying products or technologies that have attained new functions and resolved new problems in a new environment . Accidental occurrence stresses that exaptation is an unpredicted result or understood as a reverse innovation mechanism that looks for questions with answers at hand , which has some degree of contingency and risk . Nevertheless , the likelihood of exaptation can be increased by adopting an innovative management model , fostering an innovative culture , augmenting industry – university – research cooperation , and enhancing learning ability . Previous studies illustrated that institutional interactions ( Garud et al . , 2018 ) , diverse knowledge reserves , cultural innovations , and organizational structures of internal and external linkage ( Andriani et al . , 2017 ) exerted a positive predictive impact on exaptation . Moreover , the new functions of exaptation stemmed from the rearrangement and recombination of the existing components into a new and complex form ( Gregory , 2008 ) , revealing the key role of bricolage decomposition and reconstruction strategy in the formation of exaptation . As an analytical tool with strategic value , exaptation accentuates the development and transfer of new functions , or seeks to apply the existing products or technologies in new ﬁelds to produce unanticipated creative results and increment of value , thereby creating a new technological trajectory , market , or industry ( Andriani and Carignani , 2014 ; Ren et al . , 2019 ) , which has positive value for breakthrough innovations . Hence , exaptation might play a crucial role in the process of resource bricolage - driven breakthrough innovations . However , the existing research lacks attention to this , and how exaptation connects the relationship between the two warrants further exploration . Organizational Agility As a high - level dynamic capability , organizational agility denotes the organization’s ability to sensitively perceive swift changes in the outside world and respond to changes timely , formulate new strategies ﬂexibly , quickly , and eﬀectively , and integrate and allocate its own resources ( Wang and Li , 2018 ) . The organizational agility comprises marketing and operational agility ( Lu and Ramamurthy , 2011 ) , among which marketing agility reﬂects an organization’s ability to satisfy customer needs through continuous monitoring and rapid enhancement of products or services , and respond quickly to changes or take advantage of changes ; whereas , operational agility reﬂects the ability to alter internal business processes within the enterprise to quickly respond to market changes . Organizational agility can not only help enterprises perceive and respond to consumer demand preferences , competitor strategies , industry developments , and changes in the macro - environment , precisely capture opportunities in environmental changes or new application prospects , and select a new trigger scenario for the realization of exaptation , but also help enterprises redesign products , technologies , and business processes ( Teece et al . , 2016 ) , develop the potential usability of the existing products and technologies to perform a new function , and then promote breakthrough innovations through exaptation . HYPOTHESES Resource Bricolage and Low - Cost Breakthrough Innovations Previous studies established a positive correlation between innovations and resource bricolage with its elementary strategy of “available resources , immediate action , and resource reconstruction” ( Garud and Karnøe , 2003 ; Baker and Nelson , 2005 ; Senyard et al . , 2014 ) . Meanwhile , enterprises with severe resource limitations can not only help promote innovation but also breakthrough innovations through strategies like identifying the heterogeneous characteristics of resources and realizing the creative restructuring of resources ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ) . Garud and Karnøe ( 2003 ) explored Danish and American wind turbine cases and reported that compared with the traditional Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 3 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 4 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation plan followed by the United States , Denmark adopted a bricolage strategy of integrated development of available resources ( including idle resources ) to advance wind turbine technology and , thus , made breakthrough progress , revealing that the application of seemingly impractical resources or universal resources through creative bricolage strategies could generate unexpected value , thereby attaining high - level innovation in a low - cost manner . Thus , how to enhance low - cost breakthrough innovations ? Resource bricolage is a feasible starting perspective of this question . On the one hand , the research on the internal attributes of resources at hand has furthered comprehensively , and new values of resource attributes are identiﬁed and reﬁned . Meanwhile , resource bricolage is committed to reorganizing functions and rearranging structures to attain a systematic reconﬁguration of resources , resulting in previously unpredicted breakthrough technology ( Garud and Karnøe , 2003 ) . On the other hand , resource bricolage has the attribute of action preference ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ) , following the “satisfaction principle , ” which underlines quick response to immediate action , without waiting for multiple investigations and resource reserve processes , thereby making full use of the limited resources at hand to accomplish innovation ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ) . Besides , its other characteristics are low time cost , low ﬁnancial cost , and inclusivity . As mentioned elsewhere ( Xi et al . , 2017 ) , it is essential to integrate and utilize available resources , explore new value attributes of resources , restructure resources , and constantly excavate and create new knowledge and new technologies in the process of bricolage - driven innovation ; the former has innovative cost eﬀectiveness , while the latter has innovative breakthroughs . Overall , resource bricolage can realize the structural re - decomposition and restructuring of available resources , which focuses more on the exploration and utilization of available resources and provides creative ideas for the realization of breakthrough innovations . Hence , the following hypothesis is proposed : H1 : Resource bricolage exerts a positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations . Mediation Effect of Exaptation The exaptation aims to transfer functions and discover new application ﬁelds of products or technologies ( Garud et al . , 2018 ) . In technological innovation , resource bricolage can realize the exploration or rearrangement of the existing technologies into a new and more complex form , thereby generating new functions , enabling enterprises to attain unexpected and innovative results ( Banerjee and Campbell , 2009 ) ; it reveals that resource bricolage is a crucial way to activate and promote exaptation . First , the accretion of diverse knowledge helps to create exaptation ( Garud et al . , 2018 ) . Enterprises can foresee unpredicted new environments and explore future opportunities by accruing knowledge . On the one hand , resource bricolage is an organizational learning process , which needs breaking conventions and examining and trying diﬀerent methods , as well as new interpretations in new contexts , and endowing resources ( technology or product ) new meaning , value , and functions . On the other hand , resource bricolage can assimilate knowledge in diﬀerent ﬁelds , excavate and reveal unused technical features and functions , and create opportunities to be applied to new application ﬁelds ( Andriani and Carignani , 2014 ) . Moreover , expanding knowledge in diﬀerent ﬁelds would help R & D personnel have a more comprehensive understanding of products and technology , increasing the likelihood of successful exaptation . Second , the technical complexity of a product is a crucial condition for promoting expansion activities . Communication and interaction are the fundamental elements of bricolage ( Lévi - Strauss , 1997 ) . In the bricolage process of experimentation and exploration , enterprises , along with exchanges and discussions among diﬀerent knowledge and skilled personnel , can promote the ﬂow and sharing of knowledge and increase the possibility of technical decomposition and combination , thereby enhancing the prospect of exaptation ( Andriani et al . , 2017 ) . Third , institutional interaction is a crucial prerequisite for the formation of exaptation ( Garud et al . , 2018 ) . At the organizational level , resource bricolage is manifested as the interaction between enterprises and various institutions , including customers , intermediaries , suppliers , competitors , and mediating service organizations , exhibiting cognition diversity , the connections of organizational resources and capabilities . Through the innovation , integration , and reconstruction of the related knowledge , resource bricolage assists in realizing the new functional applications of products and technologies . Accordingly , the following hypothesis is proposed : H2 : Resource bricolage exerts a positive impact on exaptation . The essence of exaptation is the successful application of the existing technologies under new conditions or in new ﬁelds , or the combination of knowledge in the existing technical ﬁelds to enhance absorptive capacity , create novel and valuable new products , and open up a new market or technological trajectory ( Ren et al . , 2019 ) . Andriani et al . ( 2017 ) reported that as the market distance from the original product increased , the likelihood of examining the unknown increased , while the likelihood of competition declined . Moreover , the new functions due to exaptation depend on new market scenarios or trigger mechanisms , allowing meeting previously unrealistic conditions and even discovering new demands to help companies become industry pioneers . In addition , Andriani et al . ( 2017 ) proposed that each drug in the pharmaceutical industry has 2 . 2 new types , one of which also has a strong breakthrough . Precisely , each product contains potential options that can be transformed into new markets , revealing that the combination of existing products and appropriate scenarios might induce function transfer , resulting in breakthrough innovations . Raytheon company found that the magnetron of the radar component has a new function of melting candies , which was then applied for a patent in 1947 , and launched the world’s ﬁrst microwave oven ( Osepchuk , 1984 ) , thereby opening up a new market . This case reveals the mechanism of action of exaptation driving low - cost breakthrough innovations . Exaptation is primarily based on the examination of the existing technology or product , by enhancing knowledge screening in the process of innovation and the eﬃcacy Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 4 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 5 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation of combination and utilization , which scariﬁes and excavates its potential functions , or redesigns the internal function module within products to realize function transfer , resulting in the development of a new market and driving low - cost breakthrough innovations . Conversely , compared with developing a new product , exaptation is established in the familiar technology ﬁeld , which not only possesses more economical eﬃciencies through the extraction of the potential value of the existing product or technology but also increases the resources interest rate , creates the new knowledge combination and the question solving , and promotes advanced innovation in a low - cost manner through the redevelopment and redesign of the available resources . Accordingly , the following hypothesis is proposed : H3 : Exaptation exerts a positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations . Combining H2 and H3 , this study argues that exaptation will mediate the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Hence , the following hypothesis is proposed : H4 : Exaptation has a mediation eﬀect between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . The Regulating Effect of Organizational Agility As a distinct dynamic ability of enterprises , organizational agility aids in suppressing inertial thinking , as well as break through the limitations of organizational conventions and reﬂect on strategic goals and its operational processes . Moreover , it helps to innovate organizational structure and operational capabilities , and actively promote innovative practices ( Sanchez , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2015 ) . Cai et al . ( 2019 ) illustrated that organizational agility can sense market changes , readily transmit the early warning information to enterprises , endorse the integration of resources and structures and the innovation of product and business process , to play a regulatory role in bricolage driving exaptation . This study demonstrates the adjustment mechanism between resource bricolage and exaptation from the two dimensions of marketing agility and operational agility ( Lu and Ramamurthy , 2011 ) . Under the conditions of high - marketing agility , enterprises good at resource bricolage can not only quickly capture market opportunities , develop new attributes and new functions of product and technology but are also more inclined to seek new application ﬁeld or investigate new application value for the existing product or technology , thereby promoting the exaptation process . In contrast , under the condition of low - marketing agility , enterprises are more likely to disregard the demand changes , industry , and macro - environmental dynamics , resulting in an inability to make full use of the potential advantages of the existing technology or product , and challenges to provide driving conditions for exaptation , and are thus unable to use existing solutions to explore opportunities for future beneﬁts . Second , when enterprises with high - level operational agility conduct resource bricolage , they can quickly alter the organizational structure and operating processes based on market changes , update organizational routines , innovate management models , eliminate institutionalized mindset ( Ganzaroli et al . , 2014 ) , and form an interdependent , coordinated , and open management mechanism . In addition , by rearranging the existing product or technology into a new form , they can examine new functions of the product or technology , which thus promotes the exaptation process . Conversely , enterprises with low - operational agility often rely on experiences like traditional mindset and organizational inertia that stick to the past , weakening the organizational structure renewal , business process adjustment , and innovation culture construction process , hampering the creation of ecological network chains , such as enterprises , users , and communities , as well as the eﬀective communication between resource capabilities of enterprises and external networks , thereby decreasing the likelihood of new product and technology development ( Andriani et al . , 2017 ) . Accordingly , the following hypotheses are proposed : H5a : Marketing agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation . H5b : Operational agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation . Based on these hypotheses , organizational agility ( marketing agility and operational agility ) positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation ( H5a / H5b ) , and exaptation exerts a mediation eﬀect between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations ( H4 ) . This study deduces that organizational agility ( marketing agility and operational agility ) would regulate the mediation eﬀect of exaptation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations , creating a regulated mediation model . Speciﬁcally , the higher the level of organizational agility ( marketing agility and operational agility ) , the greater the positive impact of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations by promoting exaptation . Hence , the following hypotheses are proposed : H6a : Marketing agility positively regulates the mediation eﬀect of exaptation in the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . H6b : Operational agility positively regulates the mediation eﬀect of exaptation in the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Figure 1 shows the theoretical model of this study , speciﬁcally , resource bricolage exerts a positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations , resource bricolage exerts a positive impact on exaptation , exaptation exerts a positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations , exaptation has a mediation eﬀect between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations , marketing agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation , operational agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation , marketing agility positively regulates the mediation eﬀect of exaptation in the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations , operational agility positively regulates the mediation eﬀect of exaptation in the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 5 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 6 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation FIGURE 1 | Theoretical model . RESEARCH DESIGN According to Chen et al . ( 2008 ) , it is necessary to select an appropriate research method according to the nature of the problem when conducting research design . The current commonly used research methods comprise an experimental method , questionnaire survey , secondary data , and qualitative research , which have no advantages or disadvantages . Thus , the choice of method should be based on the researcher’s understanding of the research question . This study primarily examines “the correlation among resource bricolage , exaptation , and low - cost breakthrough innovation . ” The research hypothesis is at the organizational level . As the independent variables are diﬃcult to control or manipulate , the experimental method is not an eﬀective method for this research ; owing to the lack of access to secondary data , this method is not applicable . Qualitative research requires researchers to have extensive contact with the research object , the sample size should be small , and it is hard to repeat veriﬁcation ; hence , this method is unsuitable for this study . The questionnaire survey method is fast , eﬀective , cost - eﬀective , less interfering to subjects , easy to obtain support , and , at the same time , large - scale samples can ensure suﬃcient variation of independent variables ; thus , questionnaire survey is the most suitable method for this study . Sample Data Collection This study primarily selected the emerging markets manufacturing enterprises in Shanxi province , Jiangsu province , and other regions of China as the research samples and emphasized their academic and anonymous characteristics on the front page of the questionnaire . The research objects included managers and core technical personnel owing to their deeper understanding of issues such as enterprise technology innovation strategy , marketing strategy , resource bricolage strategy , and operation management , and better ability to understand the practice of bricolage driving breakthrough innovations . First , a small - scale enterprise sample was selected to test the accuracy , logic , consistency , and reﬁnement of the questionnaire content , based on which the validity of the questionnaire was improved . Second , we used two research methods : onsite and MBA . For the former , it was primarily done by contacting the tested enterprises , negotiating time slot , location , and related research personnel , and adopting onsite or entrusted methods . For the latter , the questionnaire survey was largely arranged during class breaks , which was completed by onsite recovering . A total of 507 questionnaires were distributed , of which 420 were issued by onsite research and 348 were recovered , and 87 were issued by MBA and 73 were recovered . A total of 58 invalid questionnaires , such as incomplete answers and logical errors , were eliminated , and 363 valid questionnaires were ﬁnally obtained . The eﬀective recovery rate was 86 . 22 % . The sample proﬁle was as follows : regarding enterprise age , 5 – 10 years accounted for 5 . 79 % , 11 – 15 years for 18 . 18 % , 16 – 20 for 27 . 82 % , 21 – 30 for 35 . 26 % , and > 30 years for 12 . 95 % . Regarding enterprise scale , ≤ 100 people accounted for 1 . 10 % , 100 – 499 accounted for 13 . 22 % , 500 – 1 , 000 accounted for 26 . 72 % , 1 , 001 – 2 , 000 for 44 . 08 % , and ≥ 2 , 000 for 14 . 88 % . Regarding industry , food processing accounted for 3 . 03 % , textiles and apparel accounted for 11 . 02 % , furniture manufacturing for 19 . 56 % , pharmaceutical manufacturing for 53 . 99 % , and others for 12 . 40 % . Moreover , to avoid the problem of homology deviation , the Harman method was used for inspection , and the results revealed that the ﬁrst factor explained 32 . 226 % of the variation under the unrotated condition , which is < 50 % , indicating no signiﬁcant common deviation in the data . Variable Measurement Based on the literature review , appropriate corrections were made to determine the measurement items . The questionnaire was designed with a 5 - point Likert scale , in which 1 = “strongly disagree” and 5 = “strongly agree . ” Table 1 presents the speciﬁc measurement items of each main variable . Resource bricolage uses available resources to act immediately and refactor and innovate . As reported elsewhere ( Salunke et al . , 2013 ) , resource bricolage comprises three items . Exaptation highlights the function transfer of the enterprise’s existing product and technology , or the application of the existing technology in new ﬁelds . As reported elsewhere ( Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ) , exaptation comprises three items . Organizational agility reﬂects the agility of the enterprise’s perception and response in terms of operational adjustment and market utilization . As reported previously ( Lu and Ramamurthy , 2011 ) , organizational agility comprises two Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 6 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 7 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation TABLE 1 | Factor analysis and the results of reliability and validity . Variable Measurement item Factor load Cronbach α AVE Resource bricolage Enterprises combine resources by challenging traditional business practices 0 . 832 0 . 721 0 . 648 Enterprises combine resources by obtaining value from resources that have never been fully utilized 0 . 827 Enterprises allocate resources in a way that they can obtain innovative solutions 0 . 753 Exaptation A technology of the enterprises has been successfully applied in another ﬁeld 0 . 885 0 . 833 0 . 750 A product of the enterprises has gained new functions in the new environment 0 . 883 Enterprises have new functions through the combination of existing product functions 0 . 830 Marketing agility When the external market changes , enterprises quickly make and implement appropriate decisions . 0 . 813 0 . 677 0 . 608 Enterprises are constantly looking for methods to restructure their organizational structure to better serve the market . 0 . 796 Enterprises consider market - related dynamic changes as opportunities for development 0 . 727 Operational agility Enterprises quickly adjust production / service levels to respond to ﬂuctuations in market demand 0 . 822 0 . 679 0 . 610 Whenever the supplier’s supply is interrupted , enterprises can quickly make a reasonable decision to solve the problem 0 . 799 Enterprises are able to satisfy customer requirements for quick response 0 . 719 Low - cost breakthrough innovations Enterprises make full use of available resources to develop new products ( services ) 0 . 757 0 . 755 0 . 507 Enterprises develop new technologies and products with low - cost design 0 . 749 Enterprises have opened up new markets with new products / services 0 . 740 Enterprises fundamentally change their leading products or services in a low - cost manner 0 . 689 Enterprises are famous for their low - cost breakthrough innovations products 0 . 615 dimensions : marketing agility ( three items ) and operational agility ( three items ) . Low - cost breakthrough innovations develop and promote new products based on maximizing the use of enterprise resources to fulﬁll users’ basic demands . As reported elsewhere ( Zhu and Chen , 2014 ; Zha et al . , 2015 ) , low - cost breakthrough innovations comprise ﬁve items . Furthermore , this study drew on the practices of previous studies ( Xi et al . , 2017 ) and incorporated enterprise age , industry distribution , and enterprise size as control variables into the research model . DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS Reliability and Validity Test and Correlation Analysis First , regarding reliability , based on the internal consistency of Cronbach α value test scale , the results suggested that the Cronbach α values of resource bricolage , exaptation , marketing agility , operational agility , and low - cost breakthrough innovations were 0 . 721 , 0 . 833 , 0 . 677 , 0 . 679 , and 0 . 755 , respectively , which were all greater than or close to 0 . 7 , suggesting that the scale has good internal consistency and high reliability . Second , regarding the validity , parts of the scales denote or use relevant research results published in high - quality journals at home and abroad . Meanwhile , a “double - blind” translation was conducted in the designing process of the scale to ensure the scale’s content validity . Meanwhile , using the average variance extraction ( AVE ) as a convergence validity test tool , the AVE values of resource bricolage , exaptation , marketing agility , operational agility , and low - cost breakthrough innovations were 0 . 648 , 0 . 750 , 0 . 608 , 0 . 610 , and 0 . 507 , respectively , which are all > 50 % , suggesting that the main variables had good convergence validity . In addition , the square root value of the AVE value of each variable was higher than the corresponding correlation coeﬃcient value ( Table 2 shows the diagonal bold data ) , suggesting that the scale had good discrimination validity . Moreover , regarding the correlation of variables , resource bricolage positively correlated with low - cost breakthrough innovations based on the results of the correlation test ( Table 2 ) , and the rationality of H1 can be preliminarily judged . A positive correlation was found among resource bricolage , exaptation , and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Thus , it can be preliminarily judged that exaptation could have a mediation eﬀect between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations , suggesting the rationality of assumptions H2 , H3 , and H4 . Furthermore , a positive correlation was found among organizational agility ( marketing and operational agility ) , exaptation , and low - cost breakthrough innovations , suggesting that H5a , H5b , H6a , and H6b have certain feasibility . Hypotheses Testing Main Effect Test Table 3 shows the test results . According to Table 3 , Model 2 , resource bricolage exerts a signiﬁcant positive impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations ( β = 0 . 461 , P < 0 . 001 ) , assuming H1 Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 7 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 8 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation TABLE 2 | Mean , standard deviation , and correlation coefﬁcient . Variable 1 2 3 4 5 Resource bricolage 0 . 805 Exaptation 0 . 363 * * 0 . 866 Marketing agility 0 . 431 * * 0 . 283 * * 0 . 780 Operational agility 0 . 524 * * 0 . 253 * * 0 . 553 * * 0 . 781 Low - cost breakthrough innovations 0 . 458 * * 0 . 358 * * 0 . 436 * * 0 . 460 * * 0 . 712 Mean 4 . 322 3 . 615 4 . 071 4 . 176 4 . 145 Standard deviation 0 . 510 1 . 046 0 . 577 0 . 553 0 . 555 * * Signiﬁcant at the 0 . 01 level ; * signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level ( two - tailed test ) . holds . It demonstrates that resource bricolage is a crucial basis for driving low - cost breakthrough innovation . Through resource bricolage , the existing resources can be integrated , resource value creation is attained through strategies and reconstruction measures , and new resource generation and creation logic are provided for breakthrough innovation . Mediating Effect Test Table 3 , Model 1 demonstrates that resource bricolage contributes to exaptation ( β = 0 . 363 , P < 0 . 001 ) , assuming H2 holds . It demonstrates that bricolage is a crucial predictor of exaptation . Diverse knowledge can be accrued , and an open network that brings internal and external links creates conditions for adaptation via bricolage . Model 3 tests the correlation between exaptation and low - cost breakthrough innovations , suggesting is a positive correlation between the two ( β = 0 . 362 , P < 0 . 001 ) , assuming H3 holds . It demonstrates that the innovation generated by adaptation has the characteristics of low cost and breakthrough . According to Model 4 , when the independent variable and the mediating variable enter the regression model simultaneously , the mediating variable exaptation exerts a positive and signiﬁcant impact on low - cost breakthrough innovations ( β = 0 . 223 , P < 0 . 001 ) , whereas the impact of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations is signiﬁcant and smaller ( β = 0 . 380 , P < 0 . 001 ) , suggesting a partial mediating eﬀect , assuming hypothesis H4 holds . It shows that expansion adaptation is an important path for resource bricolage to drive low - cost breakthrough innovation . It is revealed that adaptation is a key path for resource bricolage to drive low - cost breakthrough innovation . To compensate for the possible instability of the research conclusions due to a single test method , we adopted the bias - corrected non - parametric percentage Bootstrap test to validate the mediation eﬀect of exaptation , which repeated the sampling 2 , 000 times and constructed a 95 % unbiased calibration conﬁdence interval ( CI ) . The mediating eﬀect of exaptation was 0 . 080 , and 95 % CI was [ 0 . 041 , 0 . 129 ] , excluding 0 , indicating that exaptation exerted a signiﬁcant mediation eﬀect . Besides , the direct eﬀect of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations was 0 . 373 , and 95 % CI was [ 0 . 278 , 0 . 468 ] , excluding 0 , further suggesting that exaptation has a mediation eﬀect in the process of low - cost breakthrough innovations driven by resource bricolage , assuming that H4 is further veriﬁed . Moderating Effect Test First , according to Table 3 , Models 5 and 6 , the product term of resource bricolage and marketing agility was signiﬁcant and positive ( β = 0 . 121 , P < 0 . 05 ) , suggesting that marketing agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation , assuming that H5a holds . Precisely , the higher the market agility , the stronger the ability of enterprises to capture and utilize external opportunities , which is more helpful to realize the coupling of internal knowledge and external opportunities with the function of resource bricolage , and to augment the process of adaptation . According to Table 3 , Models 7 and 8 , the product term of resource bricolage and operational agility is signiﬁcant and positive ( β = 0 . 157 , P < 0 . 01 ) , suggesting that operational agility positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation , assuming that H5b holds . Thus , the higher the operational agility is , the more conducive it is to modify business processes and innovate practices through resource bricolage , realize product recombination or TABLE 3 | Regression analysis results . Variable Exaptation Low - cost breakthrough innovations Exaptation Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Enterprise age − 0 . 076 0 . 011 0 . 043 0 . 028 − 0 . 077 − 0 . 078 − 0 . 078 − 0 . 083 Enterprise scale − 0 . 002 0 . 057 0 . 041 0 . 057 − 0 . 002 − 0 . 006 − 0 . 001 − 0 . 003 Industry distribution − 0 . 024 − 0 . 075 − 0 . 062 − 0 . 070 − 0 . 023 − 0 . 022 − 0 . 0326 − 0 . 022 Resource bricolage 0 . 363 * * * 0 . 461 * * * 0 . 380 * * * 0 . 296 * * * 0 . 328 * * * 0 . 317 * * * 0 . 353 * * * Exaptation 0 . 362 * * * 0 . 223 * * * Marketing agility 0 . 156 * * 0 . 182 * * Resource bricolage × marketing agility 0 . 121 * Operational agility 0 . 089 0 . 134 * Resource bricolage × operational agility 0 . 157 * * (cid:49) R 2 0 . 138 0 . 217 0 . 136 0 . 260 0 . 158 0 . 170 0 . 144 0 . 163 F 14 . 336 * * * 24 . 871 * * * 14 . 044 * * * 25 . 134 * * * 13 . 384 * * * 12 . 162 * * * 11 . 992 * * * 11 . 585 * * * * * * Signiﬁcant at the 0 . 001 level ; * * signiﬁcant at the 0 . 01 level ; * signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 8 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 9 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation FIGURE 2 | The moderating effect of organizational agility on the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation . TABLE 4 | Test results of the regulated mediating effect . Mediation variable Moderator Indirect effects under different conditions Regulated mediating effect Effect SD Lower limit set Upper limit Index SD Lower limit set Upper limit Exaptation Low - marketing agility 0 . 048 0 . 017 0 . 021 0 . 091 0 . 039 0 . 018 0 . 012 0 . 081 High - marketing agility 0 . 096 0 . 028 0 . 050 0 . 164 Exaptation Low - operational agility 0 . 050 0 . 017 0 . 024 0 . 095 0 . 045 0 . 022 0 . 012 0 . 099 High - operational agility 0 . 104 0 . 032 0 . 051 0 . 176 generate new functions , and accelerate the process of adaptation . Meanwhile , this study drew the moderating eﬀect diagram of organizational agility ( Figure 2 ) ; the higher the level of organizational agility , the stronger the impact of resource bricolage on the adaptation , and the slope of the straight line of high - level organizational agility is signiﬁcantly higher than that of the low - level organizational agility . Second , the Bootstrap method was used to further test the moderating eﬀect of organizational agility . Accordingly , the interaction coeﬃcient between resource bricolage and marketing agility was signiﬁcant ( β = 0 . 329 , P < 0 . 05 ; 95 % CI [ 0 . 084 , 0 . 690 ] ) , excluding 0 , where the indirect eﬀect was signiﬁcant when marketing agility was low ( r = 0 . 405 ; BootLCI [ 0 . 171 , 0 . 638 ] ) ; while at high - marketing agility , the indirect eﬀect was signiﬁcant ( r = 0 . 816 ; BootLCI [ 0 . 514 , 1 . 117 ] ) , assuming that H5a is veriﬁed further . Likewise , the interaction coeﬃcient between resource bricolage and operational agility was signiﬁcant ( β = 0 . 384 , P < 0 . 01 ; 95 % CI [ 0 . 118 , 0 . 651 ] ) , excluding 0 , where the indirect eﬀect was signiﬁcant when operational agility was low ( r = 0 . 427 ; BootLCI [ 0 . 189 , 0 . 665 ] ) ; while at high - operational agility , the indirect eﬀect was signiﬁcant ( r = 0 . 889 ; BootLCI [ 0 . 595 , 1 . 182 ] ) , assuming that H5b is veriﬁed further . Test of Regulated Mediating Effect The mediating eﬀect of exaptation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations was analyzed when the level of organizational agility was diﬀerent , where the Bootstrap method was used for 2 , 000 repeated sampling of samples and the CI was 95 % . Table 4 presents the test results . The results revealed that at the low - marketing agility level , the mediating eﬀect of exaptation was established with 95 % CI [ 0 . 021 , 0 . 091 ] , while at the high - marketing agility level , the mediating eﬀect of exaptation was established with 95 % CI [ 0 . 050 , 0 . 164 ] . Besides , the test results of the regulated mediating eﬀect showed that its index value was 0 . 039 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 012 , 0 . 081 ] ) , excluding 0 , suggesting that the regulated mediation model was established , assuming that H6a is veriﬁed . Thus , the higher the market agility , the stronger the mediating eﬀect of adaptation . Similarly , at the low - operational agility level , the mediating eﬀect of exaptation was established ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 024 , 0 . 095 ] ) , while at the high - operational agility level , the mediating eﬀect of exaptation was established ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 051 , 0 . 176 ] ) . The test results of the regulated mediating eﬀect demonstrated that its index value was 0 . 045 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 012 , 0 . 099 ] ) , excluding 0 , suggesting that the regulated mediation model was established , assuming that H6b is veriﬁed . The higher the operational agility , the stronger the mediating eﬀect of adaptation . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Conclusion Under the background of economic transformation , low - cost breakthrough innovations are essential to respond to the demand of emerging markets BOP population ; however , how to break through resource restrictions to attain low - cost breakthrough innovations is a strategic proposition fronted by emerging markets manufacturers . This study focused on the practices of low - cost breakthrough innovations in the Chinese context , investigating the impact mechanism of resource Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 9 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 10 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations and used exaptation as the mediating variable and organizational agility as the adjustment variable to build a regulated mediation model . The ﬁndings revealed that resource bricolage helps enhance low - cost breakthrough innovations , and exaptation mediates the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Besides , organizational agility ( marketing agility / operational agility ) positively regulates the correlation between resource bricolage and exaptation , which also regulates the mediation eﬀect of exaptation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations . The theoretical contributions of this study are as follows . Theoretical Contributions ( 1 ) The research context of the impact of bricolage on breakthrough innovations is augmented . Previous studies on the impact of bricolage on breakthrough innovations focused on the aspects of bricolage on dual innovations and its synergy ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) , with limited studies focusing on how bricolage aﬀects low - cost breakthrough innovations . The discovery that bricolage promotes low - cost breakthrough innovations established in this study not only echoes and extends the research conclusions about the correlation between bricolage and breakthrough innovations ( Gould and Vrba , 1982 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) but also reveals that emerging markets manufacturing enterprises urgently need a feasible path for low - cost breakthrough innovations , which relies on resources bricolage to alter the concept of resource management and breakthrough resource constraints . In addition , unlike previous studies that applied resource bricolage to the innovative practices of entrepreneurial enterprises ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Zuo and Zhou , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ) , this study associates the characteristics of emerging markets , bricolage mindset , and breakthrough innovations to draw a research conclusion on bricolage to promote low - cost breakthrough innovations , illustrating the value of bricolage in promoting low - cost breakthrough innovations and its feasibility of application in innovative practices as valued by emerging markets manufacturing enterprises . ( 2 ) The internal mechanism of the impact of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations is revealed . This study provides a new theoretical perspective for opening the “black box” of resource bricolage aﬀecting low - cost breakthrough innovations , revealing that exaptation can play a vital role in the correlation between resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations , interpreting the intrinsic mechanism of bricolage driving low - cost from a new outlook . Under the background where breakthrough innovations path supported by core competence theory is being challenged ( Liu and Wang , 2017 ; Xi et al . , 2017 ; Huang , 2018 ; Zhao et al . , 2019 ) , as a reverse innovation and strategic cognitive tool ( Ren et al . , 2019 ) , exaptation highlights the use of the existing products or technologies to investigate new functions , new applications , or opening up new ﬁelds , which open up a new technological trajectory for enterprises , thereby cultivating breakthrough innovations ( Andriani et al . , 2017 ) . Meanwhile , exaptation is also inseparable from the integration of knowledge and the promotion of reconstruction and innovation in various ﬁelds brought by resource bricolage . Hence , this study compensates for the limitations of the existing research and establishes that bricolage can also promote the practices of low - cost breakthrough innovations from new ideas . ( 3 ) The boundary conditions of the impact mechanism of resource bricolage and low - cost breakthrough innovations are discussed , elucidating that the intensity of the indirect impact of resource bricolage promoting low - cost breakthrough innovations through exaptation is regulated by organizational agility . In the context of emerging markets , Chinese manufacturing enterprises attain resource optimization matching and new function discoveries via resource bricolage . Speciﬁcally , only under high - level organizational agility ( marketing and operational agility ) can exaptation be better promoted to drive breakthrough innovations . Previous studies on the path adjustment mechanism of breakthrough innovations focused on environmental dynamics ( Xi et al . , 2017 ) , market turbulence , and other external factors ( Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ) . This study incorporates organizational agility into the theoretical model of resource bricolage – exaptation – low - cost breakthrough innovations . The ﬁndings revealed that low - cost breakthrough innovations are produced under the comprehensive inﬂuence of resource bricolage , organizational agility , and exaptation , which not only conforms to the opinion that resource - based theory about the external environment , internal capabilities , and resource matching plays a role in the practices of strategic change but also reﬂects the ways of manufacturing enterprises of emerging markets to piece and store heterogeneous and complementary knowledge to seek new external opportunities , realizing the development concept of breakthrough innovations through the complex collaboration of existing products , environments , and users ( Andriani et al . , 2017 ) . Practical Implications This study has crucial implications for the breakthrough innovations of Chinese emerging markets enterprises . First , it is important for enterprises to focus on the resource bricolage strategy and promote low - cost breakthrough innovations . Moreover , it is signiﬁcant to apply the bricolage theory to new startups , young business scenarios , large - and medium - sized manufacturing enterprises , informal enterprises , and other mature enterprises to implement bricolage strategies ( Yu et al . , 2017 ) . Emerging markets manufacturing enterprises cannot wholly rely on the bricolage strategies to spearhead organizational innovations ; instead , they should combine the favorable conditions and unfavorable factors of the supply and demand of Chinese emerging markets , and eﬀectively use strategic thinking and operating strategies of resource Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 10 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 11 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation bricolage to address the issues concerning resource constraints of manufacturing enterprises , weak consumption power , and the pursuit of high - quality and low - cost products and services , thereby helping to promote enterprises to break the ﬁxed mindset , focus on experimentation , exploration and change , and drive breakthrough innovations . Second , implementing an exaptation strategy should be stressed to provide new ideas for low - cost breakthrough innovations . As exaptation can deliver the positive impact of resource bricolage on low - cost breakthrough innovations , enterprises must focus on the critical value of exaptation and create an expansion pool from user interaction , industry – university – research interaction , intellectual capital cultivation , innovation culture construction , and innovation capability enhancement . Meanwhile , enterprises should actively participate in expansion activities and hold expansion forums ( Garud et al . , 2018 ) to promote the emergence of exaptation and provide dynamic support for low - cost breakthrough innovations . Third , the key value of organizational agility should be accentuated to provide a capability guarantee for the realization of low - cost breakthrough innovations . Of note , enterprises must quickly perceive changes in the macro - environment and industry development trends through marketing agility and seize new development opportunities to provide environmental support for resource bricolage to promote exaptation and , consequently , promote breakthrough innovations . Alternatively , they must deploy enterprise resources through operational agility , as well as augment resource optimization management , to provide internal driving conditions for the function transfer of products or technologies , and improve the positive impact of resource bricolage on exaptation and low - cost breakthrough innovations . Through the measures mentioned above , decision - making and ideas for low - cost breakthrough innovations can be provided for manufacturing enterprises in emerging markets . Limitations and Outlook This study has some limitations . First , this study obtained sample cross - sectional data through questionnaire surveys , which must be further tested in terms of the longitudinal causality among the characterizing variables . In addition , the questionnaire design plan should be improved in future research to conduct longitudinal empirical research on multiple time nodes . Second , this study did not distinguish the impact of diﬀerent bricolage types on breakthrough innovations , as diﬀerent bricolage classiﬁcations have diﬀerent speciﬁc forms and applicable ﬁelds . Hence , the impact mechanism of bricolage on breakthrough innovations could be investigated separately based on diﬀerent types of bricolage forms . Third , when discussing the mediating relationship between bricolage and breakthrough innovations , based on reverse innovation thinking , an exaptation mediating variable was used to reveal the mediating mechanism of the correlation between bricolage and breakthrough innovations . Other variables , such as absorptive capacity , compound basic view , can also be investigated in terms of their transmission mechanism of the correlation between the two , where the research on bricolage and breakthrough innovations mediating mechanism can be expanded and enriched further . Finally , restriction of research to statistical methods only . The conducted statistical analyses conﬁrmed a correlation between the variables . However , the study does not indicate to what extent the individual variables aﬀect the entire dependency mechanism and what factors constituting the individual variables are vital from the standpoint of achieving low - cost breakthrough innovations . Presumably , this is an issue that will be discussed in future publications . Simultaneously , owing to the limitations of quantitative inference , future studies can use a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods to make up for these limitations . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article / supplementary material , further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author / s . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS CT was mainly responsible for the collation of the manuscript data and the testing of research hypotheses . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING Humanities and Social Science Research Youth Fund Project of Ministry of Education ( 19YJC630153 ) , Hebei Social Science Fund Project ( HB21GL035 ) , Hebei Province Social Science Development Research Project ( 20210101001 ) , and Hebei Agricultural University Introduced Talent Research Project ( YJ2021002 ) . REFERENCES Andriani , P . , Ali , A . , and Mastrogiorgio , M . ( 2017 ) . Measuring exaptation and its impact on innovation , search , and problem solving . Organ . Sci . 28 , 320 – 338 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1116 Andriani , P . , and Carignani , G . ( 2014 ) . Modular exaptation : a missing link in the synthesisofartiﬁcialform . Res . Policy 43 , 1608 – 1620 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 04 . 009 Baker , T . , and Nelson , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Creating something from nothing : resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage . Adm . Sci . Q . 50 , 329 – 366 . doi : 10 . 2189 / asqu . 2005 . 50 . 3 . 329 Banerjee , P . M . , and Campbell , B . A . ( 2009 ) . Inventor bricolage and ﬁrm technology research and development . R D Manag . 39 , 473 – 487 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9310 . 2009 . 00572 . x Cai , Z . , Liu , H . F . , Huang , Q . , and Liang , L . ( 2019 ) . Developing organizational agility in product innovation : the roles of IT capability , KM capability , and innovative climate . R D Manag . 49 , 421 – 438 . doi : 10 . 1111 / radm . 1 2305 Chen , X . , Xu , S . , and Fan , J . ( 2008 ) . Empirical Method of Organization and Management Research . Beijing : Peking University Press . Ganzaroli , A . , DeNoni , I . , andPilotti , L . ( 2014 ) . Theroleofsocialentrepreneurship in leveraging exaptation in locked - in industrial districts : the case of idrogenet Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 11 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629 fpsyg - 13 - 846629 March 9 , 2022 Time : 14 : 32 # 12 Tang et al . Resource Bricolage and Exaptation in the industrial district of Lumezzane . Innov . Eur . J . Soc . Sci . Res . 27 , 254 – 274 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13511610 . 2014 . 904742 Garud , R . , Gehman , J . , and Giuliani , A . ( 2018 ) . Serendipity arrangements for exapting science - based innovations . Acad . Manag . Perspect . 32 , 125 – 140 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amp . 2016 . 0138 Garud , R . , and Karnøe , P . ( 2003 ) . Bricolage versus breakthrough : distributed and embedded agency in technology entrepreneurship . Res . Policy 32 , 277 – 300 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0048 - 7333 ( 02 ) 00100 - 2 Gould , S . J . , and Vrba , E . S . ( 1982 ) . Exaptatio a missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology 8 , 4 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1017 / s0094837300004310 Gregory , T . R . ( 2008 ) . The evolution of complex organs . Evol . Educ . Outreach 1 , 358 – 389 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12052 - 008 - 0076 - 1 Huang , R . ( 2018 ) . Researchontherelationshipbetweenopportunityidentiﬁcation , resource bricolage , absorptive capacity and dual innovation . Guide Sci . Educ . Lee , O . K . D . , Sambamurthy , V . , Lim , K . H . , and Wei , K . K . ( 2015 ) . How does IT ambidexterity impact organizational agility ? Inf . Syst . Res . 26 , 398 – 417 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 2015 . 0577 Lévi - Strauss , C . ( 1997 ) . La Pensee Sauvage . Beijing : Commercial Press . Liu , R . , and Wang , Y . ( 2017 ) . Empirical study on relationship among entrepreneurial bricolage , entrepreneurial learning and radical innovation of new ventures . Sci . Technol . Manag . Res . 37 , 1 – 8 . Lu , Y . , and Ramamurthy , K . R . ( 2011 ) . Understanding the link between information technology capability and organizational agility : an empirical examination . MIS Q . 35 , 931 – 954 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 41409967 Mastrogiorgio , M . , and Gilsing , V . ( 2016 ) . Innovation through exaptation and its determinants : the role of technological complexity , analogy making & patent scope . Res . Policy 45 , 1419 – 1435 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2016 . 04 . 003 Mokyr , J . ( 2011 ) . The Gifts of Athena : Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . doi : 10 . 1515 / 9781400829439 Oosterhout , M . V . , Waarts , E . , and Hillegersberg , J . V . ( 2006 ) . Change factors requiring agility and implications for IT . Eur . J . Inf . Syst . 15 , 132 – 145 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . ejis . 3000601 Osepchuk , J . M . ( 1984 ) . A history of microwave heating applications . IEEE Trans . Microw . Theory Tech . 32 , 1200 – 1224 . doi : 10 . 1109 / tmtt . 1984 . 1132831 Ren , S . , Gao , T . , andXu , H . ( 2019 ) . Exaptationasasourceofinnovation : aliterature review . Foreign Econ . Manag . 41 , 17 – 30 . Salunke , S . , Weerawardena , J . , and McColl - Kennedy , J . R . ( 2013 ) . Competing through service innovation : the role of bricolage and entrepreneurship in project - oriented ﬁrms . J . Bus . Res . 66 , 1085 – 1097 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2012 . 03 . 005 Sanchez , R . ( 2010 ) . Strategic ﬂexibility in product competition . Strateg . Manag . J . 16 , 135 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1002 / smj . 4250160921 Senyard , J . , Baker , T . , Steﬀens , P . , and Davidsson , P . ( 2014 ) . Bricolage as a path to innovativeness for resource - constrained new ﬁrms . J . Prod . Innov . Manag . 31 , 211 – 230 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jpim . 12091 Teece , D . J . , Peteraf , M . A . , and Leih , S . ( 2016 ) . Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility : risk , uncertainty and entrepreneurial management in the innovation economy . Calif . Manag . Rev . 58 , 13 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1525 / cmr . 2016 . 58 . 4 . 13 Wang , H . , Xie , P . , and Xiong , L . ( 2019 ) . Study on relationship among entrepreneurial network , resource bricolage and new venture performance . J . Manag . Sci . 32 , 50 – 66 . Wang , J . , and Li , C . ( 2018 ) . Organizational agility : a review of research on concept , diagnosis and improvement . Modernization Manage . 38 , 124 – 127 . Xi , L . , Peng , C . , and Yang , H . ( 2017 ) . Eﬀect of resource bricolage on synergy of dual innovation : moderating role of environmental dynamics . Technol . Econ . 36 , 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 4018 / ijsda . 20211001 . oa17 Yu , X . , Li , Y . , and Tao , X . ( 2017 ) . Literature review on entrepreneurial bricolage and a research agenda . Chin . J . Manag . 14 , 306 – 316 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMBPP . 2017 . 15645abstract Zha , C . , Chen , W . , Tang , C . , Shen , C . et al . ( 2015 ) . Empirical study on relationship among intellectual capital , learning from failure and low - cost innovation . Technol . Econ . 34 , 35 – 43 + 60 . Zhao , J . , Liao , W . , and Xi , X . ( 2019 ) . Relationship between entrepreneurial orientation and exploratory innovation : a multiple mediating eﬀect model . J . Manag . Sci . 32 , 37 – 53 . Zhu , X . , and Chen , W . ( 2014 ) . Knowledge governance , learning from failure , low - cost exploitative innovation and low - cost exploratory innovation . Sci . Sci . Manag . S . T . ( Monthly ) 35 , 78 – 86 . Zuo , L . , and Zhou , J . ( 2017 ) . The relationships among cognitive ﬂexibility , entrepreneurial bricolage and new ﬁrm performance : based on moderating mechanism of environmental dynamism . Forecasting 36 , 17 – 23 . Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Publisher’s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright © 2022 Tang , Shi and Cai . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 12 March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846629