© 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . Lifelong Kindergarten : Cultivating Creativity through Projects , Passion , Peers , and Play Mitchel Resnick , MIT Media Lab Published by MIT Press ( 2017 ) Excerpt from Chapter 6 : Creative Society © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . A Hundred Languages In the past few decades , there has been much talk about the transition from an Industrial Society to an Information Society . People now see information , not natural resources , as the driving force in the economy and society . Others prefer to describe our current era as a Knowledge Society , noting that information is useful only when it’s transformed into knowledge . In this book , I’ve been making the case for a different framework : the Creative Society . As the pace of change in the world continues to accelerate , people must learn how to adapt to constantly changing conditions . Success in the future—for individuals , for communities , for companies , for nations as a whole—will be based on the ability to think and act creatively . The shift to a Creative Society presents both a need and an opportunity . There is a pressing need to help young people develop as creative thinkers so that they’re prepared for life in a fast - changing world . At the same time , we can use this transition as an opportunity to promote a more humane set of values in society . One of the best ways to help young people prepare for life in a Creative Society is to make sure that they have the chance to follow their interests , to explore their ideas , to develop their voices . Those are values I would have wanted in any era , but they’re more important now than ever before . To take advantage of this opportunity , and to nurture these values , we need to pull together people from all parts of society : parents , teachers , designers , policymakers , and children . How can we do that ? One place where I’ve looked for ideas and inspiration is the small Italian city of Reggio Emilia , which has developed a network of preschools and kindergartens that provide a glimpse into the possibilities of the Creative Society . At the heart of the Reggio approach is a deep respect for the abilities of the child . The schools are designed to support and document children’s explorations and investigations . On one visit to a Reggio classroom , I saw a table full of magnifying glasses , microscopes , and webcams that children were using to examine the microstructure of lettuce and other vegetables . On another table was an incredible assortment of crayons , markers , and craft materials that children were using to draw scenes from the city—and then to build models based on their drawings . In another classroom , children were studying worms that they found in the field next to the school , and they were making a long list of things they were learning about worms . In Reggio classrooms , children and teachers are constantly documenting their work—and posting their documentation on the walls of the classroom for everyone to see . It’s part of a process that they call making learning visible . The documentation serves several purposes : It encourages children to reflect upon their work , it enables teachers to get a better understanding © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . of their students’ thinking , and it provides a way for parents ( when they visit the classroom ) to see what their children have been working on . Parents are viewed as partners and collaborators , invited to participate in all parts of the educational process . Some of the documentation is published in book form so that teachers , parents , and researchers around the world can learn from the experiences in Reggio . One book documents children’s exploration of shadows . The book is full of photographs of children creating and playing with shadows , exploring how different types of objects cast different types of shadows and how shadows change over the course of the day . It also includes children’s drawings of shadows and their explanations of how shadows work . The book has a delightful title , based on a quote from one of the children : Everything Has a Shadow Except Ants . Often , teams of children become engaged in long - term collaborative projects . On my first visit to Reggio , in 1999 , one kindergarten class was involved in a year - long project to design new curtains for the city’s opera house , located a few blocks from their school . The children spent several weeks at the opera house , studying it inside and out . They decided that their curtain design should include plants and bugs , in part because of their interest in the plants around the opera house , and in part because of their interest in the movie A Bug’s Life , which had recently been released . Working with their teachers , they explored ideas around transformation and metamorphosis : how seeds turn into plants , how caterpillars turn into butterflies . The children created hundreds of drawings of plants and bugs , scanned them into a computer , manipulated and combined the drawings , and produced large - scale copies . Toward the end of the year , they again spent several weeks at the opera house , painting their images onto the curtain . The project was an example of how Reggio children become actively involved in the life of the community . In another project , children designed and created bird fountains for the parks in Reggio . “Children are full citizens from the moment of birth , ” says Carla Rinaldi , who has led many educational initiatives at Reggio . In Reggio , it not only takes a village to raise a child , it also takes children to raise the village . Loris Malaguzzi laid the foundation for the Reggio approach , working in the Reggio schools from the 1960s to the 1990s . One of Malaguzzi’s core ideas was that children have many different ways of exploring the world and expressing themselves . In his poem “The Hundred Languages , ” Malaguzzi wrote : The child has a hundred languages a hundred hands a hundred thoughts a hundred ways of thinking of playing , of speaking . Malaguzzi was critical of the way that most schools constrain children’s imagination and creativity : The child has a hundred languages © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . ( and a hundred hundred hundred more ) but they steal ninety - nine . The school and the culture separate the head from the body . They tell the child : to think without hands to do without head to listen and not to speak to understand without joy to love and to marvel only at Easter and at Christmas . Malaguzzi developed his ideas primarily for children in preschool and kindergarten , but the Reggio approach is valid for learners of all ages . We need to support a hundred languages ( or more ) for everyone , everywhere . It’s not easy to put these ideas into practice . John Dewey , the pioneer of the progressive education movement , wrote that his approach was “simple but not easy . ” That is , Dewey’s ideas were relatively easy to describe , but difficult to implement . The same is true for the Reggio approach—and for the four P’s of creative learning . Ten Tips for Parents and Teachers There’s a common misconception that the best way to encourage children’s creativity is simply to get out of the way and let them be creative . Although it’s certainly true that children are naturally curious and inquisitive , they need support to develop their creative capacities and reach their full creative potential . Supporting children’s development is always a balancing act : how much structure , how much freedom ; when to step in , when to step back ; when to show , when to tell , when to ask , when to listen . In putting together this section , I decided to combine tips for parents and teachers , because I think the core issues for cultivating creativity are the same , whether you’re in the home or in the classroom . The key challenge is not how to “teach creativity” to children , but rather how to create a fertile environment in which their creativity will take root , grow , and flourish . I’m organizing this section around the five components of the Creative Learning Spiral ( as shown in chapter 1 ) : imagine , create , play , share , and reflect . I propose strategies for helping children imagine what they want to do , create projects through playing with tools and materials , share ideas and creations with others , and reflect on their experiences . For each of the five components , I’ll suggest two tips . That’s a total of 10 tips . Of course , these 10 tips are just a very small subset of all of the things you might ask and do to cultivate children’s creativity . View them as a representative sample , and come up with more of your own . © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . 1 . IMAGINE : Show examples to spark ideas A blank page , a blank canvas , and a blank screen can be intimidating . A collection of examples can help spark the imagination . When we run Scratch workshops , we always start by showing sample projects—to give a sense of what’s possible ( inspirational projects ) and to provide ideas on how to get started ( starter projects ) . We show a diverse range of projects , in hopes of connecting with the interests and passions of workshop participants . Of course , there’s a risk that children will simply mimic or copy the examples that they see . That’s OK as a start , but only as a start . Encourage them to change or modify the examples . Suggest that they insert their own voice or add their own personal touch . What might they do differently ? How can they add their own style , connect to their own interests ? How can they make it their own ? 2 . IMAGINE : Encourage messing around Most people assume that imagination takes place in the head , but the hands are just as important . To help children generate ideas for projects , we often encourage them to start messing around with materials . As children play with LEGO bricks or tinker with craft materials , new ideas emerge . What started as an aimless activity becomes the beginning of an extended project . We’ll sometimes organize mini hands - on activities to get children started . For example , we’ll ask children to put a few LEGO bricks together , then pass the structure to a friend to add a few more , then continue back and forth . After a few iterations , children often have new ideas for things they want to build . 3 . CREATE : Provide a wide variety of materials Children are deeply influenced by the toys , tools , and materials in the world around them . To engage children in creative activities , make sure they have access to a broad diversity of materials for drawing , building , and crafting . New technologies , like robotics kits and 3 - D printers , can expand the range of what children create , but don’t overlook traditional materials . A Computer Clubhouse coordinator was embarrassed to admit to me that her members were making their own dolls with “nylons , newspapers , and bird seed , ” without any advanced technology , but I thought their projects were great . Different materials are good for different things . LEGO bricks and popsicle sticks are good for making skeletons , felt and fabric are good for making skins , and Scratch is good for making things that move and interact . Pens and markers are good for drawing , and glue guns and duct tape are good for holding things together . The greater the diversity of materials , the greater the opportunity for creative projects . 4 . CREATE : Embrace all types of making Different children are interested in different types of making . Some enjoy making houses and castles with LEGO bricks . Some enjoy making games and animations with Scratch . Others enjoy making jewelry or soapbox race cars or desserts—or miniature golf courses . Writing a poem or a short story is a type of making , too . Children can learn about the creative design process through all of these activities . Help children find the type of making that resonates for them . Even better : Encourage children to engage in multiple types of making . That way , they’ll get an even deeper understanding of the creative design process . © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . 5 . PLAY : Emphasize process , not product Throughout this book , I’ve emphasized the importance of making things . Indeed , many of the best learning experiences happen when people are actively engaged in making things . But that doesn’t mean we should put all our attention on the things that are made . Even more important is the process through which things are made . As children work on projects , highlight the process , not just the final product . Ask children about their strategies and their sources of inspiration . Encourage experimentation by honoring failed experiments as much as successful ones . Allocate times for children to share the intermediate stages of their projects and discuss what they plan to do next and why . 6 . PLAY : Extend time for projects It takes time for children to work on creative projects , especially if they’re constantly tinkering , experimenting , and exploring new ideas ( as we hope they will ) . Trying to squeeze projects into the constraints of a standard 50 - minute school period—or even a few 50 - minute periods over the course of a week—undermines the whole idea of working on projects . It discourages risk taking and experimentation , and it puts a priority on efficiently getting to the “right” answer within the allotted time . For an incremental change , schedule double periods for projects . For a more dramatic change , set aside particular days or weeks ( or even months ) when students work on nothing but projects in school . In the meantime , support after - school programs and community centers where children have larger blocks of time to work on projects . 7 . SHARE : Play the role of matchmaker Many children want to share ideas and collaborate on projects , but they’re not sure how . You can play the role of matchmaker , helping children find others to work with , whether in the physical world or the online world . At Computer Clubhouses , the staff and mentors spend a lot of their time connecting Clubhouse members with one another . Sometimes , they bring together members with similar interests—for example , a shared interest in Japanese manga or a shared interest in 3 - D modeling . Other times , they bring together members with complementary interests—for example , connecting members with interests in art and robotics so that they can work together on interactive sculptures . In the Scratch online community , we have organized month - long Collab Camps to help Scratchers find others to work with—and also to learn strategies for collaborating effectively . 8 . SHARE : Get involved as a collaborator Parents and mentors sometimes get too involved in children’s creative projects , telling children what to do or grabbing the keyboard to show them how to fix a problem . Other parents and mentors don ' t get involved at all . There is a sweet spot in between , where adults and children form true collaborations on projects . When both sides are committed to working together , everyone has a lot to gain . A great example is Ricarose Roque’s Family Creative Learning initiative , in which parents and children work together on projects at local community centers over five sessions . By the end of the experience , parents and children have new respect for one another’s abilities , and relationships are strengthened . © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . 9 . REFLECT : Ask ( authentic ) questions It’s great for children to immerse themselves in projects , but it’s also important for them to step back to reflect on what’s happening . You can encourage children to reflect by asking them questions about their projects . I often start by asking : “How did you come up with the idea for this project ? ” It’s an authentic question : I really want to know ! The question prompts them to reflect on what motivated and inspired them . Another of my favorite questions : “What’s been most surprising to you ? ” This question pushes them away from just describing the project and toward reflecting on their experience . If something goes wrong with a project , I’ll often ask : “What did you want it to do ? ” In describing what they were trying to do , they often recognize where they went wrong , without any further input from me . 10 . REFLECT : Share your own reflections Most parents and teachers are reluctant to talk with children about their own thinking processes . Perhaps they don’t want to expose that they’re sometimes confused or unsure in their thinking . But talking with children about your own thinking process is the best gift you could give them . It’s important for children to know that thinking is hard work for everyone—for adults as well as children . And it’s useful for children to hear your strategies for working on projects and thinking through problems . By hearing your reflections , children will be more open to reflecting on their own thinking , and they’ll have a better model of how to do it . Imagine the children in your life as creative thinking apprentices ; you’re helping them learn to become creative thinkers by demonstrating and discussing how you do it . Continuing the Spiral Of course , the Creative Learning Spiral doesn’t end with a single cycle of imagining , creating , playing , sharing , and reflecting . As children move through the process , they get new ideas and continue to the next iteration of the spiral , with another cycle of imagining , creating , playing , sharing , and reflecting . With each iteration of the spiral , there are new opportunities for you to support children in their creative learning . The Path toward Lifelong Kindergarten A few years ago , a Media Lab colleague wrote to me about her daughter Lily , who was in kindergarten . “One of Lily’s classmates is repeating kindergarten for developmental reasons , ” she wrote . “Lily came home one day and said : ‘Daisy did kindergarten last year and is doing it again this year—for two whole years ! I want to do kindergarten again too ! ’” Lily’s reluctance to leave kindergarten is understandable . As she moves through the school system , she might never again have the same opportunities for creative exploration and creative expression . But it doesn’t have to be that way . In this book , I’ve presented reasons and strategies for extending the kindergarten approach , so that children like Lily can continue to engage in creative learning experiences throughout their lives . Of course , extending the kindergarten approach isn’t easy . Educational systems have proven stubbornly resistant to change . Over the past century , the fields of agriculture , medicine , and manufacturing have been fundamentally transformed by new technologies and scientific © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . advances . Not so with education . Even as new technologies have flowed into schools , the core structures and strategies of most schools have remained largely unchanged , still stuck in an assembly - line mindset , aligned with the needs and processes of the Industrial Society . To meet the needs of a Creative Society , we need to break down many structural barriers in the educational system . We need to break down barriers across disciplines , providing students with opportunities to work on projects that integrate science , art , engineering , and design . We need to break down barriers across age , allowing people of all ages to learn with and from one another . We need to break down barriers across space , connecting activities in schools , community centers , and homes . And we need to break down barriers across time , enabling children to work on interest - based projects for weeks or months or years , rather than squeezing projects into the constraints of a class period or curriculum unit . Breaking down these structural barriers will be difficult . It will require a shift in the ways people think about education and learning . People need to view education not as a way to deliver information and instruction in bite - sized pieces , but rather as a way to help children develop as creative thinkers . When I think about the transition to a Creative Society , I see myself as a short - term pessimist and a long - term optimist . I’m a short - term pessimist because I know how difficult it is to break down structural barriers and to shift people’s mindsets . These types of changes typically don’t happen overnight . At the same time , I’m a long - term optimist . There are long - term trends that will strengthen the case for Lifelong Kindergarten . As the pace of change continues to accelerate , the need for creative thinking will become more apparent . Over time , more and more people will come to understand the critical importance of helping children develop their creative capacities , and a new consensus on the goals of education will emerge . Around the world , there are hopeful signs . There are more schools , museums , libraries , and community centers providing children with opportunities for making , creating , experimenting , and exploring . And there are more parents , teachers , and policymakers recognizing the limitations of traditional approaches to learning and education—and searching for better strategies to equip children for life in a rapidly changing world . Another reason for my long - term optimism centers on children themselves . As more children experience the possibilities and joys of creativity through their participation in communities like Scratch and Computer Clubhouses , they become catalysts for change . They’re becoming frustrated with the passivity of school classrooms , and they don’t want to accept the old ways of doing things . These children , as they grow up , will continue to push for change . This is just the beginning of a long journey . The path toward Lifelong Kindergarten will be a long and winding one . It will require many years of work by many people in many places . We need to develop better technologies , activities , and strategies for engaging children in creative learning activities . We need to create more places where children can work on creative projects and develop their creative capacities . And we need to come up with better ways to document and demonstrate the power of projects , passion , peers , and play . © 2017 . Do not copy , disseminate , or distribute without express permission of the author . It’s worth the time and effort . I’ve dedicated my life to it , and I hope others will , too . It’s the only way that we can ensure that all children , from all backgrounds , will have the opportunity to become full and active participants in tomorrow’s Creative Society .