EVOLUTION OF THE STUDENTS ' CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING IN THE CASE OF A TEACHING SEQUENCE IN MECHANICS : CONCEPT OF INTERACTION Asuman Küçüközer Received : 08 . 10 . 2005 , Accepted : 17 . 12 . 2005 ABSTRACT . This study aims to better understand the construction of the meaning of physics concepts in mechanics during a teaching sequence at the upper secondary school level . In the teaching sessions , students were introduced to the concepts of interaction and force . During this teaching sequence the models called " interactions " and " laws of mechanics " are successively introduced in the framework of tasks involving a variety of material situations . The hypothesis " students ' initial knowledge on the verb " to act " is a founder notion , to the extent that its meaning plays a crucial role in constructing the concept of interaction " has been set . The research questions are : a ) Does the verb " to act " plays a founder role in the construction of the concept of interaction ? b ) What are the other notions that intervene in the structured set of knowledge that students use to construct the concept of interaction in the teaching sequence ? The results of the study show that , for the two students of the observed dyad , the notions of object and the concept of gravitation are simultaneously founder notions . Additionally , the two students of the same dyad who work together all along the sequence use different categories of knowledge and construct different meanings of the concepts . KEYWORDS . Conceptual Understanding , Mechanics , Interaction , Newton ' s Third Law , Types Of Knowledge . INTRODUCTION Reviewing the related literature , a considerable number of studies are found on students ' conceptions in Newtonian mechanics ( see bibliography of Pfundt and Duit 2000 ) . One of the main results of these empirical investigations of teaching and learning in mechanics was that few changes in conceptual understanding appear after teaching even at university level ( Viennot , 1979 ; Clement , 1982 ; McDermott , 1984 ; Halloun and Hestenes 1985 ) . Several articles focus particularly on students ' understandings of Newton ' s third law ( Terry & Jones , 1986 ; Brown , 1989 ) . The findings commonly indicate that most students have a poor understanding of Newton ' s third law and of the force concept in general . The concept of force often remains a characteristic of objects ( Terry and Jones , 1986 ) ; it is not a physical quantity characterizing interaction between systems . Many students don ' t believe that an inanimate and inert object can exert a force , for instance , they may think that a table does not exert a force on a book ( Brown , 1989 ; Minstrell , 1982 ) . Copyright © 2006 byMOMENT ISSN : 1305 - 8223 Eurasia Journal of Mathematics , Science and Technology Education Volume 2 , Number 1 , February 2006 www . ejmste . com This study aims to understand the construction of the meaning of physics concepts in mechanics during a teaching sequence at the upper secondary school level . In the teaching sessions introduce to the concepts of interaction and force . During this teaching sequence the models called " interactions " and " laws of mechanics " are successively introduced in the framework of tasks involving a variety of material situations . In this study , the author focuses mainly on the concept of interaction . In the following sections , first the theoretical framework dealing with the students ' knowledge , then the teaching sequence and the categories to analyse students ' knowledge will be discussed . THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Understanding the students ' construction of the meaning of physics concepts leads one to focus on the teaching situation and on the students ' previous knowledge . The studies of other authors ( Niedderer and Schecker , 1992 ; Richard , 1998 , etc . ) indicate that construction of meaning of concepts is produced by the interplay of the situation and the students ' previous knowledge . From a constructivist view of learning , students ' previous knowledge is of central importance in learning . This leads us to carry out research into the role of students ' initial knowledge in their construction of physics concepts using the approach of " founder notions " . The " founder notions " approach , introduced by Tiberghien and Baker ( 1999 ) , involves two different aspects : ( 1 ) the fundamental notions on the side of the knowledge to be taught ; ( 2 ) founder notions on the side of the students ' knowledge . The founder notions are supposed to constitute basic elements from which students construct new meanings to phenomena or new ways to solve problems . For these authors , these notions correspond to a set of structured knowledge . The " fundamental notions " are defined from an analysis of the knowledge to be taught . This analysis leads to consider that some pieces constitute " fundamental notions " that have to be understood by the learner in order that s / he acquires the knowledge to be taught . Consequently , it is necessary to analyse the knowledge to be taught and the students ' knowledge . These analyses are based on several theoretical choices on modelling , on semiotic registers , and in linguistics . Concerning modelling ( Tiberghien , 1994 , 2000 ) , two main categories were used " the theory / model world " and " the objects / events world " involved in the verbal ( oral and written and gestural productions ) . The following hypothesis is made : when a person or a group of people explain , interpret , or predict situation ( s ) in the material world , most of the time their productions entail observable objects or events , and / or physics parameters , and / or relations between them , which involves a modelling activity . This is why the aspects of the taught knowledge relative to 31 Küçüközer each of these two worlds are distinguished ; in particular the theoretical aspects are made explicit as such to the students . This activity involves both the world of objects and events and the world of explanatory or theoretical frameworks , as well as models derived from these explanatory or theoretical frameworks ( Tiberghien , 1994 ) . The world of objects and events refers to all observable aspects of the material world , whereas on the other hand , the world of theories and models refers to theoretical aspects and elements of the constructed model of the material situations , in terms of various principles , parameters or quantities . Concerning the semiotic registers ( Duval , 1995 ) , the learning hypothesis is that the relations between different semiotic registers of the same concept ( natural language , schemas , graphs , etc . ) favour the learner ' s construction of concepts . Concerning linguistics , the distinction used by the linguists ( for example see Ligozat , 1994 ) between the linguistic knowledge and the extra - linguistic knowledge is taken . The linguistic knowledge applies to sentences and their constituents ; it is directly linked to language itself : syntactic knowledge , semantic knowledge and pragmatic knowledge . In this study , our analysis is based on the semantic knowledge , which takes the indication on the possible meaning for each word . Consequently , to better understand the role of students ' knowledge in the construction of meaning of concepts , different types of students ' knowledge were considered : - conceptual knowledge involving " concepts " and " notions " ( which are not necessarily scientifically correct ) , - knowledge on the material world directly involving objects and events , - linguistic knowledge , - knowledge related to the way to treat - interprets situations involving the different types of reasoning ( causality , ontology ) . Teaching Sequence The literature shows how much the construction and the evolution of the meaning of the concepts depend on the teaching situations ( Brousseau , 1986 ; Duit et al . , 1998 ; Welzel and von Aufschnaiter , 1996 ) . In this framework , the students ' construction of meanings of the concepts was influenced by the interplay of many elements : physics content of the task , settings or objects and events at hand , material actions or interactions between students and between students - teacher . Each element of the situation is a resource of information for the students . During the construction , the use of all these elements depends on the student . 32 Eurasia J . Math . Sci . & Tech . Ed . / Vol . 2 No . 1 , February 2006 The teaching sequence was designed within a long - standing group in which teachers and researchers collaborate to develop " tools " for teachers . The main features of this design were to develop students ' conceptual understanding and to give the possibility to interact with each other and / or with the objects and events at hand . In generally , Newton ' s third law is introduced after Newton ' s first and second laws in teaching . For some researchers the force concept might be more effectively taught by emphasizing forces as interactions between objects ( Brown , 1989 ; Reif , 1995 , Savinainen , A . Et al . 2005 ) . For instance , Reif ( 1995 ) suggested analyzing a physical system by describing both motion and interactions . In the framework of the teaching sequence , from an analysis of the knowledge to be taught it is considered that to construct an understanding of laws of mechanics , the concept of interaction is a fundamental notion . During this teaching sequence the models called " interactions " and " laws of mechanics " are successively introduced in the framework of tasks involving a variety of material situations . From the studies on the students ' linguistics knowledge , the verb " to act " is used in the text of model in this study . As a matter of fact , Guillaud ( 1998 ) showed that , on the one hand for a majority of students ( 14 - 15 years old ) the word " interaction " is unknown , without meaning , and on the other hand the verb " to act " is known with its everyday meaning . In its everyday meaning the agent who ( or which ) acts should be a living being or a moving object . This meaning is different from the meaning given in physics ( for example a pen can act on a table ) . In the text of the model the concept of interaction is defined as the following : " in an interaction , when a system A acts on a system B , simultaneously B acts on A in an opposite sense ; the action of A on B ( written A / B ) is in opposite sense to the action of B on A ( written B / A ) " . These models involve symbolic representations : diagrams called " system - interactions " with a " set diagram " representing a system and arrows . As an example of the diagrams " system - interactions " , figure 1 illustrates the case of an object is on the table . Figure 1 . A diagram " system - interactions " of " an objetc is on the table " 33 Küçüközer Table Object Earth The double - sided arrows representing the interactions with a distinction between contact interactions ( thick double arrow ) and at distance interactions ( dotted double arrow ) . It was emphasised that both objects participate in the interaction and that the interaction is symmetrical . Research Questions Taking the concept of interaction as a fundamental notion , it is necessary to study what the founder notions that allow the learner to acquire a sufficient meaning of interaction are in order that , later in the teaching sequence , the students use this meaning of " interaction " as a founder notion to acquire the laws of mechanics . In the framework of this teaching sequence , the hypothesis that the verb " to act " is a founder notion to construct the concept of interaction has been set . The following research questions asked to guide the study : - does the verb " to act " play a founder role in the construction of the concept of interaction ? - what are the other notions which intervene in the structured set of knowledge that students use to construct the concept of interaction in the teaching sequence ? - how do these founder notions and students ' previous knowledge intervene in the student ' s construction of the meaning of the fundamental notions ? Method and Samples This study aims to understand the construction of the meaning of " in an interaction when a system A acts on a system B , simultaneously B acts on A in an opposite sense " . In order to capture , to describe the entire process in as much detail as possible and to reconstruct the students ' construction of the meaning , a case study methodology is used . The data is collected continuously all along the teaching sequence at the first year of the French upper secondary school ( 15 years old students ) . One class was observed during instruction of a mechanics unit during 4 weeks . The students were encouraged to discuss and to verbalize their thoughts . Instructional activities included teacher presentation of activities , hands - on activities , and whole - class discussions . A dyad ( F and L ) is the subject of this case study . The dyad while engaged in hands - on activities and whole - class discussions were videotaped . All written productions of this dyad were collected . Field notes were taken based on classroom observations which focused on classroom discourse and activities . The video sequences were transcribed . In this transcription observable activities ( spoken words and sentences , gestures ) are listed in chronological order for each student and teacher . 34 Eurasia J . Math . Sci . & Tech . Ed . / Vol . 2 No . 1 , February 2006 Data from multiple sources ( field notes , transcripts of classroom discourse from videotapes , transcripts of dyad discourse from videotapes , and students ' written productions ) were used in relation to each other ; this served to triangulate the data and to help enhance the credibility of the findings . For example , observation field notes and transcripts of classroom discourse used as secondary data sources provided a context for the interpretation of data . The dyad ' s transcriptions and written productions were analysed . In this analysis , it is aimed to see what previous knowledge the students use and what information they take from the situation during their construction of the meaning of the concept of interaction . Two different examples are given here . The first example comes from the first task of the teaching sequence . The following elements of the situation were taken into account by the author of this article : the experimental setting ( a stone hanging from an elastic attached to a support ) and the associated questions : " what is acting on the stone ( ? ) and on what the stone is acting ( ? ) " , actions of the students on the stone and interactions between F - L and / or F - L - teacher . To carry out this task the students use their previous knowledge , the teaching sequence does not introduce theoretical knowledge at this step . Some extracts of the dialogue are taken . They read the questions and start to discuss on the question " what is acting on the stone " . They begin to discuss : F : What does to act mean ? L : which does something ? F : which holds which ? It is observed that L starts from his knowledge on language , the meaning of " to act " is " to do something " . F starts from what he sees ( the experimental device ) , the meaning of " to act " is " to hold " . For the two students the elastic acts on the stone . They touch the stone several times and they observe the experimental setting . For F , the elastic holds the stone ; he uses the information coming from the situation . For L , the elastic acts on the stone because the elastic prevents it from falling ; he uses a linear causal reasoning involving his knowledge on the material world and the information coming from the situation . Later on , the teacher says to the whole students : T : … generally , everything can act on the stone in a visible or invisible way F : The air , the air it acts / look when you make the air ( he waves his arm ) L : There is the attraction , the attraction , there is the elastic , yes , otherwise the stone would be flying For L , the attraction acts on the stone , he uses his conceptual knowledge . For F , the air acts on the stone , he uses his knowledge on the material world . 35 Küçüközer They begin to discuss on the attraction : F : Not the attraction L : Ben yes , if there is no attraction , it ( the stone ) would be flying the stone F : Ben not the attraction , there is the heaviness of the stone / the stone is heavy at the origin . F , L use their knowledge related to the way to treat - interpret situations . L uses his conceptual knowledge and a linear causal reasoning : the earth acts on the object then the object doesn ' t fly . F focuses particularly on the property of objects . The second example comes from the second task of the teaching sequence . Before this task , teacher distributed a sheet giving the text of the model . We take the following elements of the situation : the experimental settings ( for example a pen is on the table ) , interactions between F , L and / or F , L , teacher and the physics content of the activity ( the text of the model ) . This task asks to draw diagrams the called " system - interactions " for " an object put on the table " . Here is an extract of the dialogue : L : The earth acts on the table , the earth acts on the object too / the object acts on the table F : But not the object , it doesn ' t act on the table , if there was no table the object would fall to the ground Figure 2 : The written productions of F and L for " an object is on the table " Analysis of their diagrams ( figure 2 ) and their verbal productions shows that F and L use the elements of the situation and their previous knowledge differently . For L , the earth acts on the table and on the object , he uses his conceptual knowledge of attraction , the meaning of " to act " is " to attract " . To state that the object acts on the table , he uses his conceptual knowledge and a linear causal reasoning : the earth acts on the object then the object doesn ' t fly , and it acts on the table since it is attracted by the earth , consequently the object pushes the table . The meaning of " to act " is " to push " . 36 Eurasia J . Math . Sci . & Tech . Ed . / Vol . 2 No . 1 , February 2006 Table Object Earth Table Object Earth F L For F , the object does not act on the table , the table acts on the object , because the table prevents it from falling . He uses his knowledge on the material world and the information coming from the situation . The meaning of " to act " is " to prevent from falling " . RESULTS At a global level it appears that all along the successive tasks ( 12 tasks ) , the cognitive processes of the two students F and L are very different . It seems that L constructs the meaning of " in an interaction when a system A acts on a system B , simultaneously B acts on A in an opposite sense " better than F . In particular , having a look at the evolution of the meaning of the verb " to act " , the following differences between L and F are seen . L associates it to " to do something ( x3 ) " , " to make move ( x1 ) " , " to prevent from falling ( x3 ) " , " to prevent from flying ( x3 ) " , " to attract ( x12 ) " , " to be pulled ( x1 ) " , " to tighten ( x4 ) " , " to pull ( x1 ) " , " to push ( x4 ) " , " to maintain ( x1 ) " , " to carry ( x5 ) " , " to make fly up ( x2 ) " , " to come back up ( x1 ) " , " to hold ( x1 ) " , " to make pull ( x1 ) " , " to keep ( x2 ) " . F associates it to " to hold ( x5 ) " , " to tighten ( x3 ) " , " to prevent from falling ( x1 ) " , " to maintain ( x6 ) " , " to make fly up ( x1 ) " , " to push ( x2 ) " , " to make push ( x2 ) " , " to lean ( x1 ) " , " to slow down ( x1 ) " . L associates it to 16 different meanings and he uses this verb 45 times . F associates it to 9 different meanings and he uses this verb 22 times . During the construction of the interaction concept the way they use it corresponds to different categories of knowledge . L uses his linguistic knowledge , his knowledge on the material world , his conceptual knowledge whereas F uses his knowledge on the material world mainly and his conceptual knowledge very rarely . Again , there is differences between F and L in their ways to treat - interpret situations , to comment information taken from the situation , L uses his previous knowledge with a linear causal reasoning and when it is useful , a hypothetical reasoning . He wonders what will be the effect if the causal agent is removed , that is the change of the effect ( state of the patient ) . F does not seem to use the linear causality . He comments on the information taken from the situation using his previous knowledge ( particularly his knowledge on the material world ) and taking the role of objects . When looked at the types of the elements of the situation : generally F uses material actions and / or the interaction between F - L and F - teacher as source of information but not the physics content of the activity ; L attempts to use all these sources . Concerning the physics content of the activity , F and L use much more the symbolic representations introduced in the model than the text . L chooses the systems and uses the symbolic representations more and more 37 Küçüközer efficiently . It seems that F draws the double arrows according to the didactical contract and not according to the meaning that he gives to the concepts . Reconstructing the evolution of the students ' meaning of " in an interaction when a system A acts on a system B , simultaneously B acts on A in an opposite sense " in relation to the other notions which were introduced , the analysis of the data shows that the two concepts , those of object and of gravitation also play an important role in the construction . For F and L , their initial meaning of " object " is not sufficient . From the two students ' point of view at the beginning of the teaching sequence , the elastic or the stone are objects but the Earth is not . An object has small - scale dimensions in order to be handled . Two students show an evolution of the understanding of the concept of object . F ' s difficulty in understanding the concept of gravitation leads him to another difficulty in understanding the interaction between the earth and the systems and in the distinction between contact interactions ( thick double arrow ) and at distance interactions ( dotted double arrow ) . CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION In this article , it is attempted to understand and to analyse the students ' construction of the meaning of the concept of interaction all along a teaching sequence in mechanics starting from the construction of the conceptual meaning is produced by the interplay of the situation and the students ' previous knowledge . From the approach of the " founder notions " and from the analysis , the founder notions students use to construct the concept of interaction in the teaching sequence have been attempted to determine . It is hypothesized that , in its everyday meaning , the verb " to act " was a founder notion to construct a physics meaning of the concepts of interaction . Our analysis shows that this verb " to act " is a founder notion . Finally , the linguistic aspect was important . The verb " to act " was used in a highly interactive based on dyad discussions . The students had opportunity to talk through their developing understanding , with the support of the different source of information on the situation . The verb " to act " is not the single founder notion , the notion of object , the concept of gravitation , are simultaneously founders . The better understanding of the interaction concept necessitates the understanding of the notion of object and of the concept of gravitation . Moreover , the diagram " system - interactions " had a role in their understanding of the interaction concept . The representation provides support to the construction of deeper understandings ( Ainsworth , 1999 ) . This symbolic representation provides simultaneous use of multiple representations ; students were encouraged to combine diagrammatic representations with verbal representations . However , this was not investigated in this study . 38 Eurasia J . Math . Sci . & Tech . Ed . / Vol . 2 No . 1 , February 2006 In order to understand this construction the decision to analyse each student of a dyad has been made by the author . It is shown that the cognitive processes of the two students F and L were very different . L constructs the meaning of the interaction concept better than F . The analysis of the data showed how much the use of the different physical and conceptual resources such as several categories of knowledge , the elements of the situation , influences the construction of the meaning . It is also shown that the " way of interpreting situations " prevents the students to attain the meaning of the concept of interaction . In conclusion , this study has provided further information on the finer differences between two students concerning the use of the different categories of knowledge and the elements of the situation . This information could help teachers to become more perceptive towards their students ' learning approaches . On the other hand , this study draws careful attention to use of tasks which include various types of knowledge and resources . This work put in evidence about various founder notions . Although this work came out from the point of view of the " microanalyses " of a set of situations , the results are needed to be generalized to a wider field . The author of this article believes that this kind of research , involving careful and detailed examination of both instructional design and considerations of the founder notions in specific areas of subject matters , is of considerable importance in the development of effective teaching approaches . REFERENCES Ainsworth , S . E . ( 1999 ) . A functional taxonomy of multiple representations . Computers and Education , 33 ( 2 / 3 ) , 131 - 152 . Brousseau , G . ( 1986 ) . Fondements et méthodes de la didactique des mathématiques . Recherches en Didactique des Mathématiques , 7 , 33 - 116 . Brown , D . E . ( 1989 ) . Students ' concept of force : the importance of understanding Newton ' s third law . Physics Education , 24 , 353 - 358 . Clement , J . ( 1982 ) . Students preconceptions in introductory mechanics . American journal of physics , 50 ( 1 ) , 66 - 71 . Duit R . , Roth W . R . , Komorek M . and Wilbers J . ( 1998 ) . Conceptual change cum discourse analysis to understand cognition in a unit on chaotic systems : towards an integrative perspective on learning in science . International journal of science education , 20 ( 9 ) , 1059 - 1073 . Duval , R . ( 1995 ) . Sémiosis et pensée humaine , registres sémiotiques et apprentissages intellectuels , Ed . Peter Lang . Guillaud , J . C . ( 1998 ) . Enseignement et apprentissage du concept de force en classe de troisième . Thèse , Université Joseph Fourier - Grenoble I . Halloun , I . A , Hestenes , D . ( 1985 ) . Common sense about motion . American journal of physics , 53 ( 11 ) , 1056 - 1065 . Ligozat , G . ( 1994 ) . Représentation des connaissances et linguistique , Ed . Armand Colin . 39 Küçüközer McDermott , L . C . ( 1984 ) . Research in conceptual understanding in mechanics . Physics Today , 37 , 24 - 32 . Minstrell , J . ( 1982 ) . Explaining " at rest " condition of an object . The Physics Teacher , 20 , 10 - 14 . Niedderer , H . , Schecker , H . ( 1992 ) . Towards an explicit description of cognitive systems for research in physics learning . In Duit R . , Goldberg F . and Niedderer H . ( Eds ) , Research in Physics Learning : Theoretical Issues and Empirical Studies , IPN . Pfundt , H . and Duit , R . ( 2000 ) . Bibliography : Students ' Alternative Frameworks and Science Education , Electronically distributed . Richard , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Les activités mentales : Comprendre , raisonner , trouver des solutions , Armand Colin . Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . and Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : designing and evaluating and instructional sequence for Newton ' s third law . Science Education , 89 ( 2 ) , 179 - 195 . Terry , C . and Jones , G . ( 1986 ) . Alternative frameworks : Newton ' s third law and conceptual change . European Journal of Science Education , 8 , 291 - 298 . Tiberghien , A . ( 1994 ) . Modelling as a basis for analysing teaching - learning situations . Learning and Instructions , 4 , 71 - 87 . Tiberghien , A . , Baker , M . ( 1999 ) . Etude de la mise en œuvre et de l ' élaboration des notions fondatrices dans les situations d ' enseignement : le cas de l ' enseignement des sciences et des mathématiques . Rapport Final , Equipe GRIC - COAST . Tiberghien , A . ( 2000 ) . Designing teaching situations in the secondary school . In R . Millar , J . Leach and J . Osborne ( Eds ) , Improving science education : the contribution of research . Buckingham , UK : Open University Press . 27 - 47 . Welzel , M . , von Aufschnaiter , S . ( 1996 ) . Investigations of individual learning processes - a resaerch program with it ' s theoretical framework and research design . Communication at Third Esera Summerschool 28 august - 3 September . Viennot , L . ( 1979 ) . Le raisonnement spontané en dynamique élémentair , Hermann , Paris . Asuman Küçüközer UMR GRIC , Equipe COAST , Université Lyon 2 , ENS - LSH Tel : 0 266 244 51 50 E - mail : asuman _ kucukozer @ yahoo . fr 40 Eurasia J . Math . Sci . & Tech . Ed . / Vol . 2 No . 1 , February 2006