Frontal Lobe Function and Dysfunction , H . S . Levin , H . M . Eisenberg , A . L . Benton , Eds . ( Oxford Univ . Press , NewYork , 1991 ) , pp . 217 ] . SeealsoP . R . Montague , P . Dayan , C . Person , T . J . Sejnowski , Nature 377 , 725 ( 1995 ) . This action might occur both at the cortical level and in subcortical structures such as basal ganglia . 7 . Onthebasisofaseriesofrelatedstudies [ A . Bechara , D . Tranel , H . Damasio , S . W . Anderson , A . R . Damasio , Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 21 , 1210 ( 1995 ) ; D . Tranel , A . Bechara , H . Damasio , A . R . Damasio , ibid . 22 , 1108 ( 1996 ) ] , we believe that the bias mechanism identified here is distinct from other neural mechanisms whose integrity is crucial for decision - making . Such mecha - nismsincluderesponseinhibition [ J . M . Fuster , ThePre - frontal Cortex : Anatomy , Physiology , and Neuropsy - chology of the Frontal Lobe ( Raven , New York , ed . 3 , 1996 ) ; R . Dias , T . W . Robbins , A . C . Roberts , Nature 380 , 69 ( 1996 ) ; A . Diamond , in The Development and Neural Bases of Higher Cognitive Functions , A . Dia - mond , Ed . ( NewYorkAcademyofSciences , NewYork , 1990 ) , vol . 608 , pp . 637 – 669 ] , working memory [ P . S . Goldman - Rakic , in Handbook of Physiology ; The Ner - vous System , F . Plum , Ed . ( American Physiological So - ciety , Bethesda , MD , 1987 ) , vol . 5 , pp . 373 – 401 ] , and selectiveattention [ M . I . PosnerandS . Dehaene , Trends Neurosci . 17 , 75 ( 1994 ) ] . Inotherwords , weproposean addition to mechanisms already recognized as neces - sary for proper reasoning rather than an alternative to those mechanisms . 8 . A three - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) on the antic - ipatorySCRsgeneratedbynormalparticipantsandpa - tients ( between group ) , during the pre - punishment and pre - hunch periods ( within group ) , and in association with the bad and good decks ( within group ) revealed , most importantly , a significant two - way interaction of groupwithperiod [ F ( 1 , 14 ) (cid:53) 16 . 24 , P (cid:44) 0 . 001 ] . Subse - quent Newman - Keuls tests on these SCRs revealed that , during the pre - punishment ( baseline ) period , the SCRs associated with the good or bad decks of nor - mals or patients were not significantly different . Howev - er , there was a significant increase in the magnitude of these SCRs during the pre - hunch period , relative to the pre - punishmentperiod , butonlyfornormals ( P (cid:44) 0 . 01 ) . The SCRs from normals during pre - hunch were also significantly higher than the SCRs of patients during both pre - punishment and pre - hunch ( P (cid:44) 0 . 01 ) . Be - cause all normals generated anticipatory SCRs , where - as all patients did not , Fisher’s exact test , based on the hypergeometric distribution , yielded a one - sided P (cid:44) 0 . 001 . SCRsfromnormalswhoselectedcardsfromthe bad decks during the hunch period were compared to the SCRs associated with sampling the good decks . The same comparisons of SCRs were done for the conceptual period . Although SCRs from the bad decks during the hunch or the conceptual period were gener - ally higher than those from the good decks , the differ - ence did not reach statistical significance . However , Newman - Keuls tests comparing SCRs from the hunch or the conceptual period to those from the pre - punish - ment period revealed significant differences in the case of the bad decks ( P (cid:44) 0 . 01 ) but not the good decks . This suggests that SCR activity was sustained in the case of the bad decks , but may have been subsiding in the case of the good decks . 9 . A similar ANOVA in which mean number of cards selected was used instead of SCRs revealed , most importantly , a significant three - way interaction of group with period with decks [ F ( 1 , 14 ) (cid:53) 6 . 9 , P (cid:44) 0 . 02 ] . With subsequent Newman - Keuls tests , the mostrelevantcomparisonwasthatpatientsselectedsignificantlymorecardsfromthebaddecksrelativetothegooddecksduringthepre - hunch period ( P (cid:44) 0 . 01 ) . By contrast , controls selected more from the good decks relative to the bad decks ( the difference was not statistically significant ) . During the hunch and conceptual periods , controls selected signifi - cantlymorecardsfromthegooddecksrelativetothebaddecks ( P (cid:44) 0 . 01 ) . By contrast , patients still se - lected more cards from the bad decks relative to the good decks during the conceptual period ( the differ - ence was not statistically significant ) . 10 . Supported by the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke grant PO1 NS19632 . 29 October 1996 ; accepted 30 January 1997 Single Molecule Force Spectroscopy on Polysaccharides by Atomic Force Microscopy Matthias Rief , Filipp Oesterhelt , Berthold Heymann , Hermann E . Gaub Recent developments in piconewton instrumentation allow the manipulation of single molecules and measurements of intermolecular as well as intramolecular forces . Dextran filaments linked to a gold surface were probed with the atomic force microscope tip by vertical stretching . At low forces the deformation of dextran was found to be dominated by entropic forces and can be described by the Langevin function with a 6 angstrom Kuhn length . At elevated forces the strand elongation was governed by a twist of bond angles . At higher forces the dextran filaments underwent a distinct conformational change . The polymer stiffened and the segment elasticity was dominated by the bending of bond angles . The conformational change was found to be reversible and was corroborated by molecular dynamics calculations . R ecently a series of single molecule experi - ments provided detailed insight into intermo - lecular and intramolecular forces , providing relevant information on molecular mecha - nisms ( 1 – 4 ) . In previous experiments we and others chemically linked molecular pairs such as biotin and avidin ( 3 , 5 ) , or conjugated DNA strands ( 6 ) , between the tip of an atom - ic force microscope ( AFM ) cantilever and support structures . Molecule - specific bond forces between binding pairs were measured upon separation and compared with known thermodynamic parameters ( 4 ) . Here we used this approach to probe elastic properties of single polymer strands . The experimental geometry is depicted in Fig . 1A . Dextrans ( average molecular weight 500 , 000 ) linked to a gold surface through epoxy - alkanethiols were activated with one carboxymethyl group per glucose unit on average ( 7 ) and reacted with streptavidin such that several molecules were chemically bound to each dextran fil - ament ( Sensor Chip SA5 , Pharmacia Bio - sensor AB , Uppsala , Sweden ) . The mean distance between the grafting points of two different polymer strands was about 200 Å , and the hydrated “polymer brush” extended 1000 to 2000 Å into the solution ( 7 ) . Be - cause in physiological buffer dextran be - haves like an ideal polymer , the coil overlap is expected to be low . In our experiments streptavidin served as a molecular handle for the manipulation of the polymer to be investigated . An AFM cantilever with bi - otin bound to the AFM tip , following the protocol given in ( 3 ) , was used to pull on individual dextran filaments through the biotin - streptavidin bond ( 8 ) . To minimize the number of multiple bonds , which typi - cally occur when the tip penetrates the polymer brush , we let the tip approach and retract step by step without it indenting into the sample until a binding event was registered . In this “fly fishing mode” the undesirable multiple bonds can be efficient - ly avoided ( 9 ) . Alternatively , one can “manually” disentangle an individual fila - ment from the polymer brush by slowly pulling back the tip while monitoring all multiple bonds and tangles rupturing until just one last filament is stretched ( see the first trace of Fig . 4 , discussed further below ) . This filament can then be repeatedly ma - nipulated as long as the force is kept below the force limit of the molecular handles . Several measured elongation curves of dextran strands of various lengths are shown in Fig . 1B ( 10 ) . At the given extension rate of 0 . 5 (cid:109) m / s the biotin - streptavidin bond is known to hold up to a force F of 250 (cid:54) 25 pN ( 4 ) . The measured deformation curves were modeled by entropy springs with segment elasticity ( 11 ) . Although the contour lengths L contour of the polymers varied from 0 . 4 to 1 . 6 (cid:109) m , the measured Kuhn length I K (cid:53) 6 (cid:54) 0 . 5 Å and the segment elasticity k segment (cid:53) 670 (cid:54) 100 pN / Å showed only marginal variation between the filaments . This result was re - produced for several hundred filaments that were measured with different cantilevers in different experiments ( 12 ) . The finding that the segment elasticity and Kuhn length are virtually identical for all mea - sured dextran strands confirms that pre - dominantly individual filaments are mea - sured by this method and that the deforma - tion of the couplers is negligible at polysac - charide lengths greater than 2000 Å ( 13 ) . An interpretation of the measured seg - ment elasticity is given by molecular dynam - ics ( MD ) calculations . These reveal that at low forces the main contribution of the elas - ticity stems from a twist of the C5 - C6 bond M . Rief , F . Oesterhelt , H . E . Gaub , Lehrstuhl fu¨r Ange - wandte Physik , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universita¨t , 80799 Mu¨nchen , Germany . B . Heymann , Theoretische Biophysik , Institut fu¨r Mediz - inische Optik , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universita¨t 80333 Mu¨nchen , Germany . R EPORTS http : / / www . sciencemag . org (cid:122) SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 275 (cid:122) 28 FEBRUARY 1997 1295 that results in an elongation of the filaments ( Fig . 2A ) ( 14 ) . At forces less than 1000 pN this elongation is proportional to the force and gives rise to a segment elasticity of 750 pN / Å ( Fig . 2B , black curve ) ( 15 ) . This value is in close agreement with the experimental result . At higher forces , however , our simula - tions revealed a discontinuity of the deforma - tion caused by a flip of the C5 - C6 bond . The simulation predicted a transition into a stiffer conformation with a segment elasticity of 3000 pN / Å ( Fig . 2B , black curve ) . To achieve these higher forces experi - mentally we introduced a different coupling mechanism . The loose ends of the grafted carboxymethylated dextran filaments ( no streptavidin ) were allowed to adsorb onto the AFM tip that had been made hydropho - bic by silanization ( 16 ) . Because this cou - pling protocol is based on a nonspecific interaction it is suitable only for homoge - neous single component samples , but it gives rise to bond forces of more than 1000 pN . Extension curves that were recorded with the same tip at different spots of the sample and subsequently at the same spot of the sample are shown in Fig . 3 , A and B , respectively . The traces in both figures ex - hibit the same deformation characteristics that we found at low forces for the biotin - streptavidin – coupled filaments ( 17 ) . At 300 pN all traces show a horizontal deflec - tion followed by an increase in slope , indi - cating a stiffening of the molecule as pre - dicted qualitatively by the simulations . Typically the subsequent deformation curves from the same spot show a pro - nounced similarity . This is a strong indica - tion that the AFM allows individual mole - cules to be addressed and permits repeated experiments with the identical molecule . Extension curves of 20 different carboxy - methylated dextran filaments with various contour lengths from 500 Å to 2 (cid:109) m mea - sured on different samples with different can - tilevers were normalized according to their length and plotted in Fig . 3C ( 18 ) . The su - perposition reveals that our description of the molecular deformation holds for filaments that differ in length by nearly two orders of magnitude . All elastic properties scale linearly with length , and all filaments show a transi - tion at the same force . These observations clearly show that we are indeed stretching individual molecules of different length ( 19 ) . The transition in which carboxymeth - ylated dextran is forced into the stiffer con - formation starts at F (cid:53) 250 (cid:54) 30 pN and has a range of (cid:68) F (cid:53) 100 (cid:54) 20 pN ( 20 ) . The segment elasticities are 670 pN / Å in the low force regime and 1700 pN / Å in the high force configuration . For a quantitative comparison with the MD simulations , which were carried out on native dextran , a set of single molecule force spectroscopy experiments was carried out with native dextran ( Fig . 2B , dotted line ) . The segment elasticity in the low force regime ( 800 (cid:54) 100 pN / Å ) is similar to the carboxy - methylated dextran . In the high force confor - mation the elasticity is slightly higher ( 4000 (cid:54) 1000 pN / Å ) . The force range in which the dextran undergoes the conforma - tional transition seems to be very sensitive to the carboxymethylation and is shifted from a range of 250 to 350 pN up to a range of 700 to 850 pN . The experimental and the calculated data are congruent with respect to both the elasticities and the width of the transition ( 0 . 6 Å ) ( Fig . 2B ) . However , the measured transition force is below the value predicted by theory . In view of the large differences between the experimental time scale , where the transition occurs within several hun - dredths of a second , and the computational time scale ( fractions of a nanosecond ) , this difference can be explained and corroborated by the measured ( 5 ) and calculated ( 21 , 22 ) rate dependence of the unbinding forces of molecular pairs like biotin and avidin . To confirm that the measured transition is an elastic property of the molecular system , and to exploit the potential of this technique to continuously manipulate individual mole - cules , we repeatedly stretched a carboxy - methylated dextran filament just below the rupture limit while the deformation was re - corded . A sequence of subsequent traces re - corded from an individual polymer is shown in Fig . 4 . Note that in the first extension trace a few shorter filaments adhered to the tip and eventually detached . The evident full revers - ibility of the deformation traces shows that Fig . 1 . ( A ) Schematics of molecular binding and polymer stretching . Dextran strands are chemical - ly bound to a gold surface and are picked up by an AFM tip through a bond between streptavidin ( half circles ) and biotin ( full circle ) . ( B ) Measured defor - mation curves of individual dextran filaments ( dots ) superimposed by a fit with an extended Langevin function ( solid lines ) . Fig . 2 . Molecular dynamics calculations of the dextran deformation . ( A ) Ring conformations at different extension forces . ( B ) Normalized force versus elongation curve of a five - glucose unit of dextran in water calculated by MD simulations extended by entropic contributions ( black curve ) . The grey dotted line is a superposition of 10 normalized curves ( 18 ) measured on native dextran . To correctly model the elasticity of the polymer and at the same time minimize computation time , we performed the calculations with a dextran strand consisting of five glucose units . The AFM experiment was simulated as closely as possible . ThepositionoftheO6atomofthefirstmonomerwaskeptfixedduringthesimulation . Thecantileverspring acting on the other end of the molecule was represented by subjecting O1 of the last monomer to an additional potential V spring (cid:53) k c [ Z O1 ( t ) (cid:50) z cant ( t ) ] 2 / 2 , the center of which was continuously shifted in the z direction by z cant ( t ) (cid:53) z cant ( 0 ) (cid:49) v cant t ( 20 ) , where t is time . The spring constant k c was chosen as 70 mN / m . As in the AFM experiment , the exerted force F ext was measured by Hooke’s law by observing the deflection z O1 ( t ) (cid:50) z cant ( t ) of the lever . The pulling velocity v cant was chosen as 0 . 25 Å / ps . SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 275 (cid:122) 28 FEBRUARY 1997 (cid:122) http : / / www . sciencemag . org 1296 the transition is a nondissipative process . This finding confirms our interpretation of the pla - teau in the deformation curves of the dextran and signs it as a ( at least in our time scale ) purely elastic conformational change of the polysaccharide . The full reversibility indicates that the transition has only a low activation barrier and that the experiment is carried out under equilibrium conditions . Single molecule force spectroscopy by AFM has proven to be a powerful addition to the nanoscopic piconewton toolbox . This technique that allows the controlled manipulation of individual molecules has revealed details of the molecular basis of the mechanical properties of polymers that could not be obtained otherwise . Whether this discovered discontinuous change in conformation , which is accompanied by an elongation of the molecule and followed by an increase in stiffness , has biological rele - vance remains speculation . One would , however , expect that such polymer charac - teristics significantly improve the polymer’s ductility and may be a ubiquitous natural phenomenon . REFERENCES AND NOTES _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1 . S . B . Smith , Y . Cui , C . Bustamante , Science 271 , 795 ( 1996 ) . 2 . P . Cluzel et al . , ibid . , p . 792 ; T . T . Perkins , D . E . Smith , R . G . Larson , S . Chu , ibid . 268 , 83 ( 1995 ) ; M . Radmacher , M . Fritz , H . G . Hansma , P . K . Hansma , ibid . 265 , 1577 ( 1994 ) ; J . Ka¨s , H . Strey , E . Sack - mann , Nature 368 , 226 ( 1994 ) ; J . T . Finer , R . M . Simmons , J . A . Spudich , ibid . , p . 113 ; K . Svoboda , C . F . Schmidt , B . J . Schnapp , S . M . Block , ibid . 365 , 721 ( 1993 ) ; U . Dammer et al . , Biophys . J . 70 , 2437 ( 1996 ) ; P . Hinterdorfer , W . Baumgartner , H . J . Gru - ber , K . Schilcher , H . Schindler , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 3477 ( 1996 ) . 3 . E . - L . Florin , V . T . Moy , H . E . Gaub , Science 264 , 415 ( 1994 ) . 4 . V . T . Moy , E . L . Florin , H . E . Gaub , ibid . 266 , 257 ( 1994 ) . 5 . G . U . Lee , D . A . Kidwell , R . J . Colton , Langmuir 10 , 354 ( 1994 ) . 6 . G . U . Lee , L . A . Chrisey , R . J . Colton , Science 266 , 771 ( 1994 ) . 7 . E . Stenberg , B . Persson , H . Roos , C . Urbaniczky , J . Colloid Interface Sci . 143 , 513 ( 1991 ) . 8 . Under conditions where the deformation of this molec - ular pair is less than that of the molecular couplers , the elongation of the entire system is dominated by the deformationofthecouplers . Thespecificbondbetween molecular binding pairs may thus be used as a revers - iblecouplingmechanismofalongandflexiblemoleculewhosedeformationistobeinvestigated . 9 . This mode is particularly advantageous when the density of functional groups is high or when the poly - meric material has a low density , such as in the outer layers of agarose beads used in earlier studies . On the dextran films used here the radius of the AFM tip is on the order of the mean distance of two grafted dextran coils . In this case an interaction of only a few polymer strands with the tip is likely . A noncommer - cial AFM , customized for force measurements , was used to do the experiments . Piezo nonlinearities were correctedwithastraingauge . Thespringconstantsof the cantilevers ( Digital Instruments , Santa Barbara , CA ) were calibrated by measuring their thermal exci - tation ( 23 ) . Measured values ranged from 25 to 120 mN / m . Allexperimentswerecarriedoutinphosphate - buffered saline ( 150 mM NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ) . 10 . Because the streptavidin molecules are distributed statistically along the polysaccharide chain , it is very likely that the tip does not pick up the end of the chain . Becausethedextranisonlybranchedandnot cross - linked , thefreeendisdangling , andasaresult , the apparent length of the polymer is reduced . 11 . Following Smith et al . ( 1 ) , the Langevin function was extended by a segment elasticity k segment : x (cid:126) F (cid:33) (cid:53) (cid:70) coth (cid:83) FI K k B T (cid:68) (cid:50) k B T FI K (cid:71)(cid:70) L contour (cid:49) nF k segment (cid:71) L contour is the length of the completely stretched fil - ament . The Kuhn length I K is the length of the statis - tically independent segments in the freely jointed chain model , n is the number of monomers in the filament , T is the temperature , and k B is Boltzmann’s constant . Here both n and the segment elasticity k segment are related to monomers and not to the Kuhnsegments . Inordertofitthedatabythismodel , it was assumed that the point of zero extension is where the tip meets the hard substrate . 12 . M . Rief , F . Oesterhelt , B . Heymann , H . E . Gaub , data not shown . 13 . It is very likely though , that by pulling at one end of the coiled polymer while keeping the other end fixed , we do tighten random knots . The measured scaling of the elastic properties of the polymer indicates that these knots are compact and do not contribute sig - nificantly to the elasticity of the polymer . Whether or not these knots disentangle upon expansion is not known yet . A marked contribution from the inter - chain interaction can also be excluded . In the exten - sion regime , where a measurable tension is built up in the polymer , the largest part of the extended poly - mer is far out of reach of the other poymers of the brush . 14 . Equilibration ( 300 K ) and pulling simulations were done with the program EGO ( 24 ) , which uses the CHARMM force field ( 25 ) . For modeling and minimization of the structure containing five glucose units , the program QUANTA ( Molecular Simulations , Waltham , MA ) was used . All simulations were done in water . 15 . Unlike the measured data of long dextran chains , the MD calculations of a five - glucose unit of dextran do not reflect entropic contributions in the low force re - gime below 200 pN . The calculated elasticity was therefore extended by entropic contributions in the following way : The linear segment elasticity extension k segment oftheLangevinfunction ( 11 ) wasreplacedby the calculated elasticity and normalized ( 18 ) . 16 . The cantilevers were silanized in dimethyl - dichlorosi - lane ( Sigma , Deisenhofen , Germany ) vapor and rinsed with acetone . Commercially available car - boxymethylated dextran films on gold ( Sensor Chip CM5 , Pharmacia Biosensor AB , Uppsala , Sweden ) wereusedassamplesinordertobeabletocomparetheresultstothesimilarlytreatedbutstreptavidin - functionalized dextrans used before . 17 . A fit of the low force regime results in the same Kuhn length and segment elasticity as found in Fig . 1 . 18 . The polymer extension was divided by the contour length and multiplied with the length of the mono - mer . This normalization allows the comparison be - tween the force profiles of dextran filaments of differ - ent lengths . 19 . Obviously contributions to the elastic properties due to interchain interactions do not play a measurable role in our experiment . Interchain interactions as well as nonlocal intrachain interactions like complex knots would scale nonlinearly and would not result in the observed strict linear scaling with length . 20 . When measured with the same cantilever the varia - tion of these values is (cid:44) 5 % so that the transition is now routinely used for internal force calibration . 21 . H . Grubmu¨ller , B . Heymann , P . Tavan , Science 271 , 997 ( 1995 ) . 22 . A decrease of the transition force with the pulling velocity could also be observed in our dextran simulations . 23 . E . L . Florin et al . , Biosens . Bioelectronics 10 , 895 ( 1995 ) . 24 . M . Eichinger , H . Grubmu¨ller , H . Heller , User Manual for EGO VIII , Release 2 . 0 ( Theoretische Biophysik , Institut fuer Medizinische Optik , Universita¨t Muenchen , 1995 ) . 25 . B . R . Brooks et al . , J . Comp . Chem . 4 , 187 ( 1983 ) . 26 . Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein - schaft and a Max - Planck research award . We grate - fully acknowledge helpful discussions with P . Tavan , H . Grubmu¨ller , M . Ludwig , andS . Lofasandinspiring advice from J . I . Brauman . 4 September 1996 ; accepted 5 December 1996 Fig . 3 . Measured deformation curves of car - boxymethylated dextran at higher forces ( A ) at different spots and ( B ) at the same spot . ( C ) Su - perposition of different normalized curves mea - sured on different carboxymethylated samples . 500 pN 12 , 000 10 , 000 8 , 000 6 , 000 (cid:13) Extension ( Å ) Fig . 4 . Subsequent deformation curves , forcing an individual carboxymethylated dextran filament through the conformation transition . The mea - sured deformation traces showed no visible hys - teresis in the time scale of our experiments , there - fore the curves were offset from trace to trace . R EPORTS http : / / www . sciencemag . org (cid:122) SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 275 (cid:122) 28 FEBRUARY 1997 1297