Applying iPSCs for Preserving Endangered Species and Elucidating the Evolution of Mammalian Sex Determination Arata Honda The endangered species Tokudaia osimensis has the unique chromosome constitution of 2n ¼ 25 , with an XO / XO sex chromosome configuration ( 2n ¼ 25 ; XO ) . There is urgency to preserve this species and to elucidate the regulator ( s ) that can discriminate the males and females arising from the indistinguishable sex chromosome constitution . However , it is not realistic to examine this rare animal species by sacrificing individuals . Recently , true naïve induced pluripotent stem cells were successfully generated from a female T . osimensis , and the sexual plasticity of its germ cells was elucidated . This achievement constitutes the basis of an attractive research area , including embryonic fate determination , sex determination , and factor ( s ) that can replace the Y chromosome . In this essay , concrete strategies to conserve rare animal species and to reveal their specific characteristics using other compatible and abundant animals are proposed . 1 . Introduction To preserve biodiversity , we must spare no effort to prevent the extinction of endangered species . If an animal species becomes extinct , itisquitedif ﬁ culttorewindtheevolutionalbranchthathas incidentally remained during the history of life . As an alternative candidate for conserving wildlife habitats , induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) can provide useful information based on their ability to develop into an individual and to differentiate to several typesofcells . [ 1 , 2 ] Infact , theiPSCtechnologyhasprovideddetailed characteristics of intractable diseases and effective new drugs in place of the patients . [ 3 ] If iPSCs could be derived from threatened endangeredspecies , theywouldprovideavaluablewaytosavetheir genome or cell resources and to produce germ cells without sacri ﬁ cing animals . [ 4 ] We recently established iPSCs from an endangered species , the Amami spiny rat ( Tokudaia osimensis ) . This spiny rat inhabits the island of Amami - Oshima , 700000m 2 of which are covered with forest and higher mountains located in the southern area of Japan . Amami - Oshima can be classi ﬁ ed as a subtropical rainforest with af ﬂ uent forests , lush streams , and a unique climate , which are adequate for the generation of (cid:2) 100 rare animals and plants . Although T . osimensis is thought to be a seasonal breeder , almost none of the reproductive characteristics of T . osimensis have been clari ﬁ ed . Some Japanese institu - tionsandzoosareallowedtobreedpairsof T . osimensis for natural reproduction ; however , to date , copulation and breeding have not occurred spontaneously because of dif ﬁ cul - ties in establishing and adjusting an envi - ronment that is suitable for breeding . Because of its unique sex chromosome composition , XO / XO , female T . osimensis iPSCs could contribute and survive as germ cells in adult interspeci ﬁ c ovaries and testes , which suggests the acquisition of sexual plasticity by germ cells according to their unique position in evolution [ 5 ] ( Figure1 ) . Althoughthecandidateregulator ( s ) affecting the sex determination of T . osimensis have not been elucidated , it is assumedthatoneofthebestwaystostudysexdeterminationinthisspeciesistheanalysisoftheexacttimepointatwhichthediscriminationofthesexeshasjustoccurred . If their ontogeny is incarnated in the interspeci ﬁ c foster mother , the use of iPSCs may provide an attractive research tool to explore the mechanism of sex determination that was acquired after the evolutional loss of the Y chromosome . Moreover , this is the ﬁ rst report of the derivation of interspeci ﬁ cchimerasthatcarrycellsfromanendangeredspeciesin their whole body , including germ cells . This achievement may preventthepotentialextinctionofendangered species . Importantly , competent iPSCs can differentiate into and contribute to cells or tissues as interspeci ﬁ c chimeras . Designing embryos or tissues of a rare animal species is now feasible . 2 . Effective Production of T . Osimensis Germ Cells is Indispensable but Difficult to Achieve Inmostmammals , female ( XX ) cellscannotremainasspermatidsin the testicular environment because of the presence of the second X chromosome and the absence of Y - linked genes . [ 6 – 9 ] Y - related genes play the indispensable roles of raising and maintaining spermato - genic cells in the male reproductive environment . [ 10 ] However , T . Dr . A . Honda Institute of Laboratory Animals Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine Yoshidakonoe - cho , Sakyo - ku , Kyoto 606 - 8501 , Japan E - mail : honda . arata . 7a @ kyoto - u . ac . jp Dr . A . Honda RIKEN BioResource Center Tsukuba , Ibaraki 305 - 0074 , Japan This article is commented on in the Idea to Watch article by Teruko Taketo , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bies . 201800059 DOI : 10 . 1002 / bies . 201700152 Insights & Perspectives www . bioessays - journal . com IDEAS & SPECULATIONS BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 1 of 6 ) osimensis has renounced its Y chromosome and has evolved to generatemales ( andsperm ) without Y - related genes . [ 11 ] Recently , we have shown that female ( XO ) T . osimensis cells have the potential to generate spermatids in the mouse testicular environment , which suggests the acquisition of sexual plasticity in T . osimensis germ cells via their evolution . [ 5 ] In general , mammalian sex determination is regulated by genetics . Although mouse primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) aredimorphic , thefateofXXprospermatogoniainthetestes after birth differs from that of XY prospermatogonia . [ 9 ] Several reports have demonstrated that the overexpression of the gonadal promoter WT1 - driven Y - related ( Sry and Eif2s3y ) or non - Y - related ( Sox9 and Eif2s3x ) genes in mice lacking a Y chromosome ( XO ) is necessary for the development and maintenance of spermatogenic cells . [ 10 , 12 ] In fact , SRY is absent in T . osimensis , whereas SOX9 is expressed in the testes . [ 13 ] To our knowledge , no interspeci ﬁ c chimeric pups with germline transmission have been derived using ESCs / iPSCsfromspeciesotherthanthemouseandrat [ 14 , 15 ] because ofdif ﬁ cultiesinestablishingtruenaïveESCs / iPSCs . [ 14 ] Thechimeric contribution in a xenogeneic environment other than that of the mouse and rat is very restricted . [ 16 , 17 ] Although a cohort of about 40 PGCs is ﬁ rst identi ﬁ able at 6 . 25 – 7 . 25dpc in the mouse , [ 18 ] the germline contribution of T . osimensis iPSCs as spermatocytes ( 0 . 031 % ) and oocytes ( 0 . 29 % ) in a xenogeneic environment is severely restricted . [ 5 ] In fact , germline differenti - ationhardlyoccursinthexenogeneic ( mouseand rat ) environment . [ 19 ] These may be caused by immunological and / or interspeci ﬁ c incompati - bilitybetween T . osimensis germcellsandgonadal somaticcellsoftherecipientembryos . Ifso , thein vitrodifferentiationintoPGC - likecells ( PGCLCs ) and transplantation with gonadal somatic cells into immunode ﬁ cient mice is expected to overcome these restrictions . [ 20 , 21 ] To generate T . osimensis germ cells , allogenic gonadal support - ing cells need to be prepared . Some strategies must overcome this dif ﬁ culty . T . osimensis Sertoli cells can be prepared by direct reprogramming from T . osimensis ﬁ broblasts , foradaptationtothe allogeneic support cells . [ 22 ] Very recently , germ cells were differentiated from embryonic stem cellsindependentlyintogonadalsomaticcells . [ 23 ] Moreover , the establishment of germline stem cells from T . osimensis iPSCs would lead to the mitigation of xenogeneic incompatibility . [ 24 ] These strategies would possibly overcome the dif ﬁ culties in the generation of interspeci ﬁ c germ cells . 3 . Stepwise Strategies Actualize the Production of Endangered Individuals While Elucidating the Mysteries of Developmental Curiosities 3 . 1 . T . Osimensis Germ Cells Can Be Generated via Interspecific Compensation of the Missing Counterparts One of the most interesting objectives of using T . osimensis iPSCs is the reproduction of embryonic development and rewinding of the individuals . To achieve these objectives , it is necessary to produce T . osimensis germ cells ef ﬁ ciently . As mentioned above , it is not realistic to obtain sperm and oocytes via the restricted generation of T . osimensis germ cells in interspeci ﬁ cchimeras . Toovercomethisrestriction , twocandidate strategiesexistfortheef ﬁ cientgenerationof T . osimensis germcells ( Figure 2 ) . One is the preparation of T . osimensis germ cells that contribute ef ﬁ ciently in the interspeci ﬁ c gonads , using the blastocyst complementation method . [ 19 ] Blastocyst complementa - tionhasbeendevelopedforthegenerationofalmost - wholeorgans in xenogeneic environments . [ 19 , 25 ] If we injected ESC / iPSCs into blastocysts obtained from mutant animals in which the develop - ment of a certain organ was precluded by genetic manipulation , therebyleavinganichefororgandevelopment , theES / iPS - derived cells would developmentally compensate for the defect and form themissingorgan . Nanos3 isacandidategenefordisruptioninthe application of germ cell complementation in mice . In fact , germ Figure 1 . Schematic representation of the germline contribution of T . osimensis induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) in interspecific chimeras . T . osimensis iPSCs showed sexual plasticity within their contributed gonadal environment . www . advancedsciencenews . com www . bioessays - journal . com BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 2 of 6 ) cell complementation using Nanos3 - de ﬁ cient cells has been achieved in bovines ; [ 26 ] this can be applied to the mouse and rat . Using Nanos3 - de ﬁ cient mouse or rat blastocysts as a host , T . osimensis iPSCs could contribute effectively to the gonads and differentiate into male and female germ cells . If T . osimensis germ cells effectively contribute in testes as male germ cells , the derivation of germline stem cells of T . osimensis would become a candidate strategy for the generation of T . osimensis sperm . [ 27 ] The other candidate strategy is the in vitro generation of germ cells . [ 20 , 21 ] Thisisbasedonknowledgeaboutthemechanismofgerm cellspeci ﬁ cationanddevelopmentinmice . Thisstrategyreproduces the germ cell speci ﬁ cation via the induction of ground - state ESCs / iPSCs into epiblast - like cells , and then into PGCLCs . After the induction of PGCLCs , these were transplanted together with gonadal somatic cells into the kidneys or ovaries of immunode ﬁ cient mice . This method imple - mentedtherobustcontributionofspermatogen - esis and oogenesis and led to the generation of fertile offspring . We aim to generate sperm and oocytesef ﬁ cientlyfrom T . osimensis invitro . Ifwe can produce germ cells ef ﬁ ciently , we will try to generate embryos and individuals of this endangered species . 3 . 2 . What Will Be the Developmental Fate of XX , XO , and OO Embryos ? If we can generate T . osimensis embryos from germcellsobtainedasdescribedabove , theirsex chromosome constitution is supposed to con - sist of XX , XO , and OO ( Figure 2 ) . We have muchinterestintheexistenceofXOindividualsandinthereasonwhyXXorOOhasnotbeenfoundtodate . We hypothesize that XX and OO embryos cannot develop to term . A critical contributortoXchromosomeinactivation , Xist , was detected on the X chromosome of T . osimensis . [ 28 ] Recently , sequencing of the Xist gene of T . osimensis revealed that its function should be lost , [ 29 ] which would explain why XX individuals do not exist . However , it has been dif ﬁ culttoexaminethisissuethoroughlyinthis rareanimalspecies . Therefore , weaimtoderive sperm and oocytes from T . osimensis iPSCs in vivo or in vitro and to produce preimplantation embryos using assisted reproductive technol - ogy . We have shown that T . osimensis iPSCs exhibit true naïve pluripotency . [ 5 ] It is well known that female naïve ESCs express the Xist mRNA from both X chromosomes . [ 30 ] If XX blastocysts can be obtained from the recon - structed T . osimensis embryos , Xist expression should be observed via the derivation of embryonic stem cells . However , the dif ﬁ culty of culturing preimplantation embryos in vitro varies according to species . The in vitro culture of embryos from laboratory mice has been well established and their early development is easy to trace . Conversely , the in vitro culture of preimplantation embryos from common experimental rodents , the rat and the hamster , has not been fully achieved . To trace the detailedpreimplantationdevelopmentofXXorOOembryos , anin vitrooraxenogeneicinvivoculturesystemneedstobeestablished . 3 . 3 . Gonadal Development Must Be the Key Regulator of Sex Determination in T . Osimensis Although we have elucidated the sexual plasticity of the germ cells of T . osimensis , sex determination , particularly the sex - fate determination of gonads , has not been determined . We would like to clarify the mechanism underlying sex determination in T . Figure 2 . Strategy for rewinding T . osimensis via invivo and / or invitro germ cell generationfrom T . osimensis iPSCs . T . osimensis germ cells may be generated by germ cell complementation ( in vivo ) and / or primordial germ cell - like cell formation ( in vitro ) . Gametes and preimplantation embryos can be derived by intracytoplasmic sperm injection . Developmental fate determina - tion and sexual differentiation can be analyzed instead of using irreplaceable animals . www . advancedsciencenews . com www . bioessays - journal . com BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 3 of 6 ) osimensis duringitsevolution . Toanalyzesexdiscriminationinthis species , T . osimensis embryosthatarejustabouttodifferentiateinto the primordium of testes or ovaries need to be reconstituted . The most important obstacle to this approach is the lack of appropriate foster mothers for the transplantation of reconstituted embryos . Previously , we tried to rewind T . osimensis using tetraploid complementationmethods , suchasmouseiPSCs . [ 2 ] However , this process was halted at the early postimplantation stage , not by decidual abnormalities , but by the developmental arrest of the embryos ( data not shown ) . This suggests an interactional incompatibility between xenogeneic T . osimensis embryos and themouseuterus . Oneeffectivecandidateapproachtoovercoming this problem is the use of other host animals or uterus complementation by T . osimensis iPSCs . T . osimensis have lost a gene , the sex - determining region of chromosome Y ( SRY ) , as well as the Ychromosome . [ 11 ] A previous report suggested that SOX9 expression in the testes must be regulatedbyanewsex - determininggene . EIF2S3X and EIF2S3Y are located on a single X chromosome via Y - to - X translocation . [ 11 ] EIF2S3Y expression was observed in male and female gonads . Moreover , comparativegenomichybridizationhasshownthatthere is almost no difference ( with the exception of the heterochromatic and telomeric regions ) between male and female T . osimensis . [ 31 ] Recent progress on the sequential evaluation of the Y chromosome of several mammalian species revealed that some genesremainingontheYchromosomewerenotrandomlyretained , but designated to remain persistently . [ 32 , 33 ] These reports indicated that the Y chromosome will be maintained based on critical signi ﬁ cance and meaning as an evolutional branch . Conversely , Tokudaia and Ellobius de ﬁ nitely lost their Y chromosome , but apparentlygenerateamaleYchromosomeindependently . Although the eager exploration of genetically modi ﬁ ed mice is providing steady progress in this ﬁ eld , the gene ( s ) that can completely replace the Y chromosome have not been identi ﬁ ed . [ 10 , 12 ] To pinpoint the master regulator of sex determination , the bipotential genital primordium at the precise timing of discrimination of the gonadal fate of T . osimensis embryos should be examined . To generate T . osimensis gonads in interspeci ﬁ c chimeras , an essential regulator , WT1 , will facilitate the achievement of this arduous objective . [ 34 ] If mouse WT1 and / or SF1 knockout embryos , which cannot generate the gonadal primordium , were to be generated as a host for blastocyst complementation , the genital primordium of T . osimensis woulddevelopinmidgestationalinterspeci ﬁ cchimeras ( Figure3 ) . If gonadal sex - fate determination in T . osimensis is de ﬁ ned by their genetics , the generation of gonadal somatic cell sex ( and provably individual sex ) will accompany ( or rely on ) the sex of the donor iPS cells . Although the possibility that the sex determination of T . osimensis is controlled by unknown systems , such as temperature , starvation , or epigenetics , cannot be ruled out , the detailed investigation of each sex of bipotential genital primordia will provide a key regulator for gonadal ( and individual ) fate determination . 3 . 4 . iPSC Technology as an Insurance Against Possible Extinction Numerous species are now threatened with extinction ; thus , it is crucial to preserve biodiversity . We have successfully generated oocytes and spermatids from a small piece of tissue of a wild endangered individual without any reduction in the number of animals . We demonstrated that iPSC technology is a potentially effective strategy for protecting endangered species from likely extinction . Recently , generation of iPSCs from endangered species was achieved with the orangutan , drill , and northern white rhinoceros . [ 35 , 36 ] Because all exhibited prime pluripotency , it seems dif ﬁ cult that they contributed to host embryos as a chimera . Putative naïve - state iPSCs have been established from an endangered felid species , Panthera uncia . [ 37 ] These iPSCs formed dome - shaped colonies , maintained their pluripotency in LIF medium , and formed teratomas when transplanted into SCID mice . However , true naïve - state characteristics related to developmental plasticity have not been examined using chimeric animal production . The modi ﬁ cation of primed - state iPSCs that contribute to host embryos as chimera seems to require naïve conversion or the adjustment of stem cell status to produce region speci ﬁ city . [ 38 , 39 ] If naïve - state or region - speci ﬁ c iPSCs can be generated successfully from endangered species , appropriate embryos for injection and recipient mothers for the transplan - tation of embryos from other mammalian species should be considered . As a possible strategy to produce candidate recipients , the endangered species could be paired with another compatible and abundant species . As an interesting trial , an attempt has been made to bring back the aurochs , an ancestor cattle that became extinct 400 years ago , by crossing with heritage cattle . [ 40 ] Tokudaia consists of three species : T . osimensis ( the Amami spiny rat ) , T . tokunoshimensis ( the Tokunoshima spiny rat ) , and T . muenninki ( the Okinawa spiny rat ) . All inhabit the southernmost islands of Japan : Amami - Oshima , Tokunoshima , and Okinawa , respectively . Remarkably , T . osimensis and T . tokunoshimensis both have an XO / XO sex chromosome constitution and lack the Y chromosome . The chromosome constitution of T . osimensis and T . tokunoshimensis is 2n ¼ 25 ; XO and 2n ¼ 45 ; XO , respec - tively . [ 41 , 42 ] It is assumed that after the separation of Tokunosh - ima and Amami - Oshima via isolation from their continental relatives no later than the Early Pleistocene ( 2 – 1 . 7 million years ago ) , the chromosome number of the Amami - Oshima pop - ulations might have decreased to 2n ¼ 25 . Kobayashi et al . reported a clear correspondence in the chromosomal banding pattern between the two species . They suggested that at least 10 times number of Robertsonian fusions occurred in T . osimensis chromosomes during their evolutionary process . [ 31 ] In contrast , the chromosome constitution of T . muenninki is 2n ¼ 44 with an XX / XY sex chromosome con ﬁ guration . [ 43 ] The derivation of animals of both sexes from iPSCs of all Tokudaia species can trace the evolutional discriminations present in these species . However , if endangered species are successfully brought back via the iPSC technology in the future , they must be maintained only in strictly managed environments as a precious bio - resource ; they should not be released into the wild . In general , animals generated from iPSCs tend to have exogenous genes ( Yamanaka factors and / or marker genes ) in their genomes ; thus , they are genetically modi ﬁ ed animals . Moreover , the rewinding of organisms using iPSC technology may carry the risk of causing other types of damage in the environments that have adapted after their extinction . www . advancedsciencenews . com www . bioessays - journal . com BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 4 of 6 ) 4 . Conclusion and Outlook In this essay , I argued for iPSC - based strategies for the characterization and conservation of rare animal species . First , naïve - state iPS cells need to be established from somatic cells of the desired animals . General iPSCs can be classi ﬁ ed as primed or naïve . As opposed to naïve - state cells , primed - state iPSCs hardly contribute to chimeras or differentiate into germ cells . Despite the eager demonstrations of naïve conversion from primed - state iPSCs , effective produc - tion of chimeras or germ cells from those ( partially ) naïve - converted iPSCs has not been achieved . Second , the production of interspeci ﬁ c chimeras using recipient spe - cies , which tolerate xenogeneic iPSCs , is an effective way to generate iPSC - derived germ cells , embryos , or gonads . In particular , embryos for blastocyst complementation are easily obtained via the development of a genome editing strategy in any animal species . In fact , in the case of Tokudaia , I proposed a strategy to elucidate the sex determination system via interspeci ﬁ c go - nadal complementation ( Figure 3 ) . Finally , it may be possible to rewind individuals from iPSCs ; however , a formidable obstacle needs to be overcome : the preparation of foster mothers that can accept the implantation of preimplantation embryos and support their development to term is crucial for the generation of these embryos from iPS - derived germ cells . True naïve iPSCs can differentiate into all types of cells and develop to whole individu - als . The derivation of naïve iPSCs may represent an unexplored and / or unexpected biological phenomenon without any reduc - tion in the number of animals . By combin - ing naïve - state iPSCs with bioengineering techniques , the elucidation of the sex - differentiating mechanisms of Tokudaia osimensis or the bringing back of extinct species is no longer a fantasy . These strategies will become the touchstones not only of the rewinding of endangered species but also of human regenerative medicine in the future . Acknowledgments The author thanks T . Jogahara for providing helpful suggestions . This work was supported by the Program to Disseminate Tenure Tracking System from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science , and Technology ; PRESTO of the Japan Science and Technology Agency ; the Japan Science and Technology Agency ; a Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( B ) ; a Grant - in - Aid for Challenging Explor - atory Research . Conflict of Interest The author declares no conflict of interest . Keywords endangered species , germ cells , induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) , interspecific chimera , sex determination Figure 3 . Strategy for evaluating the sex determination systems of T . osimensis . In general , gonadal somatic cells determine the gonadal ( and individual ) sex of the embryos . Recipient embryos without a gonadal primordium for interspecific blastocyst complementation are efficiently prepared via the targeted destruction of WT1 , which is the master regulator of gonadal development in mice . To elucidate the trigger of sex determination in T . osimensis , the bipotential gonadal primordium must be examined . www . advancedsciencenews . com www . bioessays - journal . com BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 5 of 6 ) Received : August 18 , 2017 Revised : February 28 , 2018 Published online : April 6 , 2018 [ 1 ] K . Takahashi , S . Yamanaka , Cell 2006 , 126 , 663 . [ 2 ] X . Y . Zhao , W . Li , Z . Lv , L . Liu , M . Tong , T . Hai , J . Hao , C . L . Guo , Q . W . Ma , L . Wang , F . Zeng , Q . Zhou , Nature 2009 , 461 , 86 . [ 3 ] Y . Shi , H . Inoue , J . C . Wu , S . Yamanaka , Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 2017 , 16 , 115 . [ 4 ] J . Saragusty , S . Diecke , M . Drukker , B . Durrant , I . Friedrich Ben - Nun , C . Galli , F . Goritz , K . Hayashi , R . Hermes , S . Holtze , S . Johnson , G . Lazzari , P . Loi , J . F . Loring , K . Okita , M . B . Renfree , S . Seet , T . Voracek , J . Stejskal , O . A . Ryder , T . B . Hildebrandt , Zoo Biol . 2016 , 35 , 280 . [ 5 ] A . Honda , N . Choijookhuu , H . Izu , Y . Kawano , M . Inokuchi , K . Honsho , A . R . Lee , H . Nabekura , H . Ohta , T . Tsukiyama , Y . Ohinata , A . Kuroiwa , Y . Hishikawa , M . Saitou , T . Jogahara , C . Koshimoto , Sci . Adv . 2017 , 3 , e1602179 . [ 6 ] A . McLaren , Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B . Biol . Sci . 1995 , 350 , 229 . [ 7 ] S . K . Bronson , O . Smithies , J . T . Mascarello , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1995 , 92 , 3120 . [ 8 ] S . J . Palmer , P . S . Burgoyne , Development 1991 , 112 , 265 . [ 9 ] A . Isotani , T . Nakanishi , S . Kobayashi , J . Lee , S . Chuma , N . Nakatsuji , F . Ishino , M . Okabe , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2005 , 102 , 4039 . [ 10 ] Y . Yamauchi , J . M . Riel , Z . Stoytcheva , M . A . Ward , Science 2014 , 343 , 69 . [ 11 ] A . Kuroiwa , Y . Ishiguchi , F . Yamada , A . Shintaro , Y . Matsuda , Chromosoma 2010 , 119 , 519 . [ 12 ] Y . Yamauchi , J . M . Riel , V . A . Ruthig , E . A . Ortega , M . J . Mitchell , M . A . Ward , Science 2016 , 351 , 514 . [ 13 ] T . Otake , A . Kuroiwa , Sci . Rep . 2016 , 6 , 32874 . [ 14 ] L . Weinberger , M . Ayyash , N . Novershtern , J . H . Hanna , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2016 , 17 , 155 . [ 15 ] A . Isotani , K . Yamagata , M . Okabe , M . Ikawa , Sci . Rep . 2016 , 6 , 24215 . [ 16 ] T . W . Theunissen , M . Friedli , Y . He , E . Planet , R . C . O ’ Neil , S . Markoulaki , J . Pontis , H . Wang , A . Iouranova , M . Imbeault , J . Duc , M . A . Cohen , K . J . Wert , R . Castanon , Z . Zhang , Y . Huang , J . R . Nery , J . Drotar , T . Lungjangwa , D . Trono , J . R . Ecker , R . Jaenisch , Cell Stem Cell 2016 , 19 , 502 . [ 17 ] A . Honda , Y . Kawano , H . Izu , N . Choijookhuu , K . Honsho , T . Nakamura , Y . Yabuta , T . Yamamoto , Y . Takashima , M . Hirose , T . Sankai , Y . Hishikawa , A . Ogura , M . Saitou , Sci . Rep . 2017 , 7 , 45285 . [ 18 ] M . Saitou , S . Kagiwada , K . Kurimoto , Development 2012 , 139 , 15 . [ 19 ] T . Kobayashi , T . Yamaguchi , S . Hamanaka , M . Kato - Itoh , Y . Yamazaki , M . Ibata , H . Sato , Y . S . Lee , J . Usui , A . S . Knisely , M . Hirabayashi , H . Nakauchi , Cell 2010 , 142 , 787 . [ 20 ] K . Hayashi , H . Ohta , K . Kurimoto , S . Aramaki , M . Saitou , Cell 2011 , 146 , 519 . [ 21 ] K . Hayashi , S . Ogushi , K . Kurimoto , S . Shimamoto , H . Ohta , M . Saitou , Science 2012 , 338 , 971 . [ 22 ] Y . Buganim , E . Itskovich , Y . C . Hu , A . W . Cheng , K . Ganz , S . Sarkar , D . Fu , G . G . Welstead , D . C . Page , R . Jaenisch , Cell Stem Cell 2012 , 11 , 373 . [ 23 ] H . Miyauchi , H . Ohta , S . Nagaoka , F . Nakaki , K . Sasaki , K . Hayashi , Y . Yabuta , T . Nakamura , T . Yamamoto , M . Saitou , EMBO J . 2017 , 36 , 3100 . [ 24 ] M . Kanatsu - Shinohara , M . Kato , T . Masanori , H . Takehashi , M . Seiji , T . Takashima , S . Chuma , N . Nakatsuji , M . Hirabayashi , T . Shinohara , Biol . Reprod . 2008 , 79 , 1121 . [ 25 ] A . Isotani , H . Hatayama , K . Kaseda , M . Ikawa , M . Okabe , Genes Cells 2011 , 16 , 397 . [ 26 ] A . Ideta , S . Yamashita , M . Seki - Soma , R . Yamaguchi , S . Chiba , H . Komaki , T . Ito , M . Konishi , Y . Aoyagi , Y . Sendai , Sci . Rep . 2016 , 6 , 24983 . [ 27 ] M . Kanatsu - Shinohara , N . Ogonuki , K . Inoue , H . Miki , A . Ogura , S . Toyokuni , T . Shinohara , Biol . Reprod . 2003 , 69 , 612 . [ 28 ] A . Kuroiwa , S . Handa , C . Nishiyama , E . Chiba , F . Yamada , S . Abe , Y . Matsuda , Chromosome Res . 2011 , 19 , 635 . [ 29 ] H . Zushi , C . Murata , S . Mizushima , C . Nishida , A . Kuroiwa , Chromosoma 2017 , 126 , 741 . [ 30 ] E . G . Schulz , J . Meisig , T . Nakamura , I . Okamoto , A . Sieber , C . Picard , M . Borensztein , M . Saitou , N . Bluthgen , E . Heard , Cell Stem Cell 2014 , 14 , 203 . [ 31 ] T . Kobayashi , F . Yamada , T . Hashimoto , S . Abe , Y . Matsuda , A . Kuroiwa , Chromosome Res . 2007 , 15 , 175 . [ 32 ] D . W . Bellott , J . F . Hughes , H . Skaletsky , L . G . Brown , T . Pyntikova , T . J . Cho , N . Koutseva , S . Zaghlul , T . Graves , S . Rock , C . Kremitzki , R . S . Fulton , S . Dugan , Y . Ding , D . Morton , Z . Khan , L . Lewis , C . Buhay , Q . Wang , J . Watt , M . Holder , S . Lee , L . Nazareth , J . Alföldi , S . Rozen , D . M . Muzny , W . C . Warren , R . A . Gibbs , R . K . Wilson , D . C . Page , Nature 2014 , 508 , 494 . [ 33 ] Y . Q . Soh , J . Alföldi , T . Pyntikova , L . G . Brown , T . Graves , P . J . Minx , R . S . Fulton , C . Kremizki , N . Koutseva , J . L . Mueller , S . Rozen , J . F . Hughes , E . Owens , J . E . Womack , W . J . Murphy , Q . Cao , P . de Jong , W . C . Warren , R . K . Wilson , H . Skaletsky , D . C . Page , Cell 2014 , 159 , 800 . [ 34 ] D . Wilhelm , C . Englert , Genes Dev . 2002 , 16 , 1839 . [ 35 ] I . F . Ben - Nun , S . C . Montague , M . L . Houck , O . Ryder , J . F . Loring , Methods Mol . Biol . 2015 , 1330 , 101 . [ 36 ] K . Ramaswamy , W . Y . Yik , X . M . Wang , E . N . Oliphant , W . Lu , D . Shibata , O . A . Ryder , J . G . Hacia , BMC Res . Notes 2015 , 8 , 577 . [ 37 ] R . Verma , M . K . Holland , P . Temple - Smith , P . J . Verma , Therioge - nology 2012 , 77 , 220 . [ 38 ] T . Tsukiyama , Y . Ohinata , PLoS ONE 2014 , 9 , e95329 . [ 39 ] J . Wu , D . Okamura , M . Li , K . Suzuki , C . Luo , L . Ma , Y . He , Z . Li , C . Benner , I . Tamura , M . N . Krause , J . R . Nery , T . Du , Z . Zhang , T . Hishida , Y . Takahashi , E . Aizawa , N . Y . Kim , J . Lajara , P . Guillen , J . M . Campistol , C . R . Esteban , P . J . Ross , A . Saghatelian , B . Ren , J . R . Ecker , J . C . Izpisua Belmonte , Nature 2015 , 521 , 316 . [ 40 ] E . Stokstad , Science 2017 , 350 , 1144 . [ 41 ] T . Honda , H . Suzuki , M . Itoh , Jap . J . Genet . 1977 , 52 , 247 . [ 42 ] T . Honda , H . Suzuki , M . Itoh , K . Hayashi , Jap . J . Genet . 1978 , 53 , 297 . [ 43 ] C . Murata , F . Yamada , N . Kawauchi , Y . Matsuda , A . Kuroiwa , Chromosome Res . 2010 , 18 , 623 . www . advancedsciencenews . com www . bioessays - journal . com BioEssays 2018 , 40 , 1700152 © 2018 WILEY Periodicals , Inc . 1700152 ( 6 of 6 )