1 Experience Spillovers across Corporate Development Activities Maurizio Zollo Strategy and Management Department INSEAD Boulevard de Constance 77305 Fontainebleau Cedex , France Tel . : ( 33 ) 1 60 72 44 74 Fax : ( 33 ) 1 60 74 55 00 maurizio . zollo @ insead . fr Jeffrey J . Reuer Fisher College of Business Ohio State University 2100 Neil Avenue Columbus , Ohio 43210 Tel . : ( 614 ) 292 - 3045 Fax : ( 614 ) 292 - 7062 reuerj @ cob . ohio - state . edu In developing this paper , we received helpful comments from Erin Anderson , Max Boisot , Nicola Dragonetti , Sid Finkelstein , Charlie Galunic , Giovanni Gavetti , Bruce Kogut , Dan Levinthal , Alessandro Lomi , Alessandro Narduzzo , Gabriel Szulanski , and Sid Winter . Any errors or omissions remain our responsibility . We also gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of Dima Leshchinskii . Research funding was provided by the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and the R & D department at INSEAD . 2 Abstract This study develops a theoretical explanation for the existence of positive , as well as negative , experience spillovers across corporate development activities . We suggest that the similarity in two activities influences both the sign and magnitude of experience spillovers . The argument is used to understand how alliance experience influences the performance of acquisitions in the US commercial banking industry . The empirical evidence indicates that the spillover effect of alliance experience on acquisition performance is a function of the decisions made in the post - acquisition phase regarding the level of integration and the replacement of top management . We also find a U - shaped relationship between alliance experience and acquisition performance , suggesting the presence of negative spillovers across corporate development activities at low experience levels . 3 1 Other important elements that are beyond the scope of the paper include the type of knowledge being transferred ( e . g . , motor or cognitive skills , declarative or procedural memory , etc . ) ; the existence and strength of rules identifying the task ( Holland , Holyoak , Nisbett , & Thagard , 1986 ) ; the existence , number , order , and type of cues or examples to refer to in the learning ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Cheng et . al , 1986 ) and transfer processes ( Reed , Erst , & Banerji , 1974 ; Hayes & Simon , 1977 ) ; and the learner’s background knowledge ( Bransford & Franks , 1976 ; Larkin , McDermott , Simon , & Simon , 1980 ) . 2 In a related vein , Holyoak ( 1985 ) theorized about the distinction between structural elements , or elements of the two activities causally or functionally tied to outcomes or goal attainment , and surface elements , or elements only loosely tied to outcomes or goal attainment . Erroneous generalizations , and therefore negative transfer effects , occur when knowledge is transferred between two activities with similar surface elements but different structural ones . 3 It is to be noted that the opposite type of error , where perceived applicability is lower than actual applicability , is also possible . In this case , opportunities to apply relevant knowledge from related experiences are foregone because of a “pessimistic” representational error . In this paper , we concentrate on the “optimistic” bias because it has been studied more extensively ( Cohen and Bacdayan , 1994 ; Gick and Hollyhock , 1985 ) and is a more serious type of error leading to actual disutilities as opposed to opportunity costs for the foregone opportunities . In any case , Figure 2 would not differ even in the case of a pessimistic bias , as the representation error should reach a maximum at intermediate levels of similarity where ambiguities are the greatest . 4 The use of the opposite notion of “dissimilarity” is due simply to ease of representation . Dissimilarity has a natural starting point at 0 ( i . e . the two tasks are identical ) and proceeds towards infinity , which facilitates its drawing in a pair of Cartesian axes . 5 Recent practitioner guidelines for developing capabilities for managing acquisitions and alliances are consistent with this focus . For instance , GE Capital’s approach to the management of acquisition processes relies on the creation of stable , specialized functions for the coordination of integration processes ( Ashkenas , DeMonaco , & Francis , 1998 ) . Similarly , Booz - Allen Hamilton’s study of alliance management recommends that firms adopt centralized alliance functions ( Harbison & Pekar , 1997 ) . 6 See the Harvard Business School case “Banc One , 1993” 7 In order to test the robustness of the results to the time window chosen , additional models were estimated using two - and four - year time windows ( results available from the authors ) . The interpretations for the direct effects did not change . Regarding experience spillovers , the interaction between alliance experience and replacement is negative in both models ( p < 0 . 05 for the two - year model and p < 0 . 001 for the four - year model ) , and the parameter estimate for the interaction between alliance experience and integration is negative , though it does not reach statistical significance . 8 This implicit shortening of the time window is consistent with Benkard’s ( 2000 ) notion of organizational forgetting , which suggests that the most recent alliances will be more relevant . Future studies in industries with more frequent alliance usage could investigate alternative time windows or weighting schemes to examine experiential learning and experience spillovers in the corporate development setting . 9 Since the sample of acquisitions occur over several years , we also re - specified the model by incorporating year effects . However , the results provided no indication that year effects explain variance in firms’ accounting and financial performance ( F = 1 . 8 , n . s . for the accounting performance model ; and F = 1 . 9 , n . s . for the financial performance model ) .