 E Elementary School Students , Information Retrieval , and the Web Valerie Nesset McGill University , Canada Andrew Large McGill University , Canada Copyright © 2009 , IGI Global , distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI IGI Global is prohibited . IntroductIon In today’s modern world , elementary school students ( aged 5 to 12 years ) use computers for a wide variety of tasks . These include communication ( e - mail , instant messaging , and chatrooms ) , entertainment ( games , video , music , etc . ) , leisure ( such as information relat - ing to hobbies and general interests ) , and information retrieval to support class - based learning . Internet access is now very widely available from home , school , and public library . A major reason for accessing the Internet is to find Web - based information relevant to classroom learning activities . Undoubtedly the Web represents an enormous and potentially rich source of multimedia information on topics within the elementary school curriculum , but accessing this information does pose a number of challenges . We identify in this article three major problem areas that currently impede effective exploitation by elementary school students of Web - based information resources : information systems are not necessarily intuitive or straightforward for children to use ; basic information literacy skills too often are inadequate ; and too little content appropriate for young users is available on the Web . The first technology to gain popularity as a means for children to retrieve information was the CD - ROM . By the early 1990s , a wide variety of multimedia in - formation resources targeted specifically at children were available in this medium . Many were children’s encyclopedias , designed to facilitate rapid retrieval of discrete information “chunks , ” and often multimedia versions of an original print title . These CD - ROMs could offer an engaging , interactive experience for the young student . Although students were willing to explore and experiment with interfaces ( Large , Be - heshti , Breuleux , & Renaud , 1994 ; Large , Beheshti , & Breuleux , 1998 ) , they were not necessarily effective at retrieving information from these CD - ROM titles ( Marchionini , 1989 ; Oliver , 1996 ) . In any event , re - gardless of its strengths and weaknesses as a classroom resource , CD - ROM technology proved transient and was quickly superseded by the expansion of the Internet and the rise of the Web . Yet the information retrieval problems revealed by CD - ROMs would continue to plague the Web . cognItIve develoPment In chIldren The past 50 years have witnessed considerable research concerning the cognitive development of children . Childhood is a time when a gap of only a few years can make an enormous difference in intellectual capability . For example , there is a huge difference in cognitive development between a 5 - year - old kindergarten student and a 12 - year - old grade - six student . Most researchers in children’s cognitive development agree that there are age differences in how children represent their world and which are central to differences in think - ing ( Bjorklund , 2000 ) . For example , Piaget , a pioneer of research into children’s cognitive development , identifies four major stages of development : the sen - sorimotor stage ( 0 to 2 years ) , the preoperational stage ( 2 to 6 years ) , the concrete operational stage ( 7 to 11 years ) , and the formal operational stage ( 11 years and older ) ( Piaget & Inhelder , 1969 ) . As children progress through the different stages , their cognitive processes and information needs change . Information processing theory also asserts that changes throughout childhood are rapid but argues that they are less demarcated than Piaget’s stages would suggest ( Kail , 2004 ) . These rapid changes have two important consequences . Firstly , research results that have been generated from one 0 Elementary School Students , Information Retrieval , and the Web age group can only be applied with caution to another age group and secondly , that solutions to information retrieval problems encountered by children may have to differ according to the child’s age . InformatIon system desIgn Many studies ( Bilal , 1998 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 ; Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2004 ) have found that young students overwhelmingly turn to a relatively small number of search engines when seeking informa - tion on the Web : mainly Google , and to a lesser extent MSN , Yahoo , and Ask . Com ( formerly , Ask Jeeves ) . All these retrieval tools , of course , were primarily designed to accommodate adult rather than young users who have very different cognitive abilities and affective responses when using information technologies as well as differ - ent information needs . Large , Beheshti , and Rahman ( 2002 ) identified four broad criteria by which Web search engines could be evaluated : goals , visual design , information architecture , and personalization . The goal of most Web search engines is to find information as efficiently as possible by keyword searching or hierarchical subject browsing ; there is no element of “fun” ( games , quizzes , etc . ) included that might provide the user with some diversion , if desired . Children themselves often point out , however , that motivation to use a search engine would be enhanced by such inclusions ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) , though there does not appear to be unanimity on this issue ( Large , Nesset , Beheshti , & Bowler , 2004 ) . Children have many interesting comments to make about their preferred design characteristics when evalu - ating search engines relating to such matters as font sizes , graphics , animation , icons , vocabulary , layout , and color ( Bilal , 2000 ; Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ; Large , Nesset , Beheshti , & Bowler , 2004 ) . In - terestingly , young users , like their elderly counterparts , prefer large fonts that can be clearly read . The inclu - sion of graphics within the interface , and especially human or animal characters , tends to be popular , but the incorporation of animation effects is more contro - versial . Children like icons but only as long as they are meaningful to the concept being represented . The vocabulary employed throughout the search engine should be appropriate for the target age group . Screens should be clearly laid out so that the information can be readily identified . Neither the search nor the results display interfaces of most Web search engines reflect these young concerns . The former tend to be criticized for their dullness and the latter for their clutter . At the heart of any Web search engine are its means of retrieving information , displaying results , and offer - ing help when needed ( its information architecture ) . A typical search engine provides keyword searching , and in many cases also the opportunity to browse hierarchically organized subject directories . Young people will avail themselves of both these approaches , but in addition may benefit from the opportunity to try other methods . For example , a team of grade - six students working with adult researchers designed a Web search engine to find information on Canadian history , and included alongside keyword searching and subject directories several other retrieval approaches : natural - language ( full sentence ) searches ; alphabeti - cal ( A - Z ) search on topics , and a scrolling timeline from which specific historical events could be located ( Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2004 ) . The same students commented on the need to keep results displays short ( no more than 10 results per screen ) as well as meaningful in that they included a short description and subject headings from which relevance decisions could accurately be made . In terms of help features , the consensus among researchers is that the students want assistance but on the other hand they seldom or never , access any help provided ( Large , Beheshti , & Moukdad , 1999 ) . The explanation for this apparent contradiction is that the kind of help currently offered by search engines is , in fact , “unhelpful . ” Young people demand context - sensitive help that is clearly focused upon their specific problem and provides a solution to it . Ideally , of course , they would like a help facil - ity that offers them the correct answer . Furthermore , given their often limited spelling and typing skills , any keyword - based information retrieval system that does not incorporate spell - checking routines is unlikely to serve well its young users . The final evaluation criterion , personalization , ap - pears to be as popular with elementary school students as it is absent from “adult” search engines . They would like the opportunity to personalize various aspects of the search engine’s interface , including graphics , color , and icon design ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) . This design criterion , of course , is related to the first criterion discussed above in that personalization is one way of enhancing the fun and motivational aspects of a search engine . 6 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / elementary - school - students - information - retrieval / 17437 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Multimedia Technologies , Business - Technology - Solution , Communications , Social Science , and Healthcare , InfoSci - Media and Communications , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Multimodal Information Integration and Fusion for Histology Image Classification Tao Meng , Mei - Ling Shyu and Lin Lin ( 2011 ) . International Journal of Multimedia Data Engineering and Management ( pp . 54 - 70 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / multimodal - information - integration - fusion - histology / 54462 ? camid = 4v1a Multimedia Digital Library as Intellectual Property H . Sasaki and Yasushi Kiyoki ( 2008 ) . Multimedia Technologies : Concepts , Methodologies , Tools , and Applications ( pp . 279 - 290 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / multimedia - digital - library - intellectual - property / 27089 ? camid = 4v1a Navigating Through Video Stories Using Clustering Sets Sheila M . Pinto - Cáceres , Jurandy Almeida , Vânia P . A . Neris , M . Cecília C . Baranauskas , Neucimar J . Leite and Ricardo da S . Torres ( 2011 ) . International Journal of Multimedia Data Engineering and Management ( pp . 1 - 20 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / navigating - through - video - stories - using / 58048 ? camid = 4v1a Evaluating Usage of Dynamic Web Site Structures Through Visualisation Stephen Sobol and Catherine Stones ( 2005 ) . Adaptable and Adaptive Hypermedia Systems ( pp . 300 - 322 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / evaluating - usage - dynamic - web - site / 4191 ? camid = 4v1a