Articles 584 | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | nAture methods in recent work with large high - symmetry viruses , single - particle electron cryomicroscopy ( cryo - em ) has achieved the determination of near - atomic - resolution structures by allowing direct fitting of atomic models into experimental density maps . however , achieving this goal with smaller particles of lower symmetry remains challenging . using a newly developed single electron – counting detector , we confirmed that electron beam – induced motion substantially degrades resolution , and we showed that the combination of rapid readout and nearly noiseless electron counting allow image blurring to be corrected to subpixel accuracy , restoring intrinsic image information to high resolution ( thon rings visible to ~ 3 Å ) . using this approach , we determined a 3 . 3 - Å - resolution structure of an ~ 700 - kda protein with d7 symmetry , the Thermoplasma acidophilum 20s proteasome , showing clear side - chain density . our method greatly enhances image quality and data acquisition efficiency—key bottlenecks in applying near - atomic - resolution cryo - em to a broad range of protein samples . Recent advancements in single - particle cryo - EM have demon - strated its capability for determining near - atomic - resolution three - dimensional ( 3D ) structures of large protein assemblies with high symmetry , such as non - enveloped viruses with 1 – 5 or , in one case , without 6 icosahedral symmetry . This resolution is sufficient to allow the path of the polypeptide chain to be directly traced in the experimental density maps , obviating the need for prior structural information . Although , in principle , such resolutions should be obtainable for smaller macromolecular complexes or for those without high symmetry 7 , in practice , obtainable resolutions have been in the 5 - to 10 - Å regime , which is sufficient for docking crystal structures but not for de novo structure determination . Owing to the sensitivity of the sample to radiation damage , single - particle cryo - EM requires averaging a large number of low - dose images of the same sample . For these images to be combined into a 3D reconstruction , it is necessary to determine microscope aberration parameters for each micrograph as well electron counting and beam - induced motion correction enable near - atomic - resolution single - particle cryo - em Xueming Li 1 , Paul Mooney 2 , Shawn Zheng 1 , 3 , Christopher R Booth 2 , Michael B Braunfeld 1 , 3 , Sander Gubbens 2 , David A Agard 1 , 3 & Yifan Cheng 1 as the precise 3D orientation and translation for each individual particle image . Although the quality of microscopes has steadily improved , two key limiting factors have been ( i ) the quality of the image - recording medium and ( ii ) the image blurring caused by either instability of the sample stage or motion induced by the illuminating electron beam . Given the low signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) , image quality can substantially limit how accurately these parameters can be determined , hence the concern about the quality of the image detector . Of paramount importance are the efficiency of recording high - resolution information and the reduction of noise introduced by the detection process . The dominant electron image – recording media are photographic film and scintillator - based charge - coupled device ( CCD ) cameras . However , neither satisfies the need for both high resolution ( film being better ) and high - throughput image acquisition ( possible only with electronic detectors ) . The new generation of complementary metal - oxide semi - conductor ( CMOS ) cameras can overcome both limiting factors . These new cameras directly detect incoming electrons in the silicon without the need for a scintillator , affording the advantages of a traditional CCD camera but with greatly improved detec - tive quantum efficiency ( DQE ) at high frequency comparable to that of photographic film 8 – 10 . Recent reports have characterized the performance of the DE - 12 camera ( Direct Electron ) 11 , 12 and shown that the resolution of 3D reconstructions calculated from data recorded by this camera reach a level that is close to the Nyquist limit 11 . Image blurring resulting from the beam striking the sample is a major limiting factor to resolution when imaging frozen hydrated biological samples 13 . In practice , beam - induced motion seems impossible to prevent 14 , 15 , and it deteriorates most images from ‘perfect’ to marginal for high - resolution cryo - EM 16 . The effect can be approximated as Gaussian blurring and quantified by analogy with the crystallographic temperature factor 17 – 19 , which predicts a greater - than - fivefold decrease in signal at a resolution of 3 Å ( ref . 13 ) . Thus , beam - induced motion is a major limiting factor for routine high - resolution single - particle cryo - EM . 1 The Keck Advanced Microscopy Laboratory , Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California , San Francisco ( UCSF ) , San Francisco , California , USA . 2 Gatan Inc . , Pleasanton , California , USA . 3 The Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) , UCSF , San Francisco , California , USA . Correspondence should be addressed to D . A . A . ( agard @ msg . ucsf . edu ) or Y . C . ( ycheng @ ucsf . edu ) . Received 27 OctObeR 2012 ; accepted 3 apRil 2013 ; published Online 5 may 2013 ; dOi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nAture methods | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | 585 Articles The high frame rate ( 10 – 40 frames per second ) of new CMOS - based direct cameras provides a means to correct for such image blurring by recording a ‘movie’ throughout the exposure . That is , a single exposure is fractionated into a number of subframes with sufficiently short duration such that the motion is frozen to an acceptable level 13 . The drawback is that although the signal decreases with fractionation , the camera readout noise on each subframe remains constant 15 . Even so , in the case of large objects such as viruses 20 , 21 or ribosomes 22 , it has been possible to use the subframes during the refinement as if they were independ - ent images , resulting in an increase in resolution . However , for smaller objects , the much lower SNR of each particle within a single subframe compromises the ability to accurately determine particle orientation . For this reason , we used a detector that mini - mizes both detection and readout noise , and we chose to correct beam - induced motion at the level of either the whole frame or large fractions of a frame . Although direct detection substantially improves detection effi - ciency , a statistically varying amount of energy is deposited for each electron event ( Landau noise ) , adding noise to the otherwise high - quality detection process . To surmount this problem , the K2 Summit direct electron - detection camera ( Gatan ) was designed to allow practical detection of individual electron events , thereby eliminating the Landau noise problem 23 , 24 . This requires a rapid frame rate and a fast electron - detection algorithm to minimize the counting of two electrons striking the same pixel in quick succession as a single event ( an error known as coincidence loss ) . The K2 camera has a fixed internal frame rate of 400 frames per second and the ability to find the centroid of the electron peak to subpixel accuracy ( super - resolution mode ) . Once detected , individual electron events are then digitally accumulated over time . Because the K2 counts the primary electrons rather than simply integrating charge , as is done in other direct detection and traditional CCD cameras , both the Landau noise and the readout noise of the detector can be effectively rejected , thereby dramati - cally improving the DQE . Here we demonstrate that the K2 operated in electron - counting mode is superior to both photographic film and traditional CCD cameras for imaging frozen hydrated samples . Most notably , the near - noiseless readout allows for accurate registration of dose - fractionated subframes collected throughout the exposure to correct for beam - induced motion . To aid in the correction , we developed an algorithm that maximizes the self - consistency of the derived image shifts . With this method , we determined an ~ 3 . 3 - Å - resolution 3D reconstruction of an archaeal 20S protea - some ( ~ 700 kDa and having dihedral D7 point group symmetry ) , which is substantially smaller in size and lower in symmetry than those of icosahedral viruses . resultsdQe and linearity of the K2 summit We determined the DQEs of the K2 Summit in both the con - ventional charge - accumulation ( linear ) mode and the super - resolution counting mode ( Fig . 1a ) . As expected , the DQE in K2 counting mode was significantly higher at all spatial frequencies than those of either the K2 in linear mode or a well - characterized scintillator - based camera 25 . The finite internal readout rate limits the maximum electron dose rate that can be tolerated for successful counting . To investi - gate this , we measured the relationship between the input electron dose rate , in electrons per pixel per second ( electrons pixel −1 s −1 ) , and the camera readout rate , in counts per pixel per second ( counts pixel −1 s −1 ) ( Fig . 1b ) . At a dose rate up to five electrons pixel −1 s −1 , the response was very close to linear , with a slope approximating the very low – dose quantum efficiency ( measured as 87 % ) . At higher dose rates , undercounting increased , with the additional coincidence loss of ~ 11 % at 10 electrons pixel −1 s −1 rising to ~ 29 % at 32 electrons pixel −1 s −1 . The measured data are well fit with a polynomial curve ( Fig . 1b ) , which was used to determine the exact dose rate used for each image . We limited the dose rate used in our data acquisition to between 8 and 10 electrons pixel −1 s −1 . motion correction with dose - fractionated imaging The optimal dose rate determined above requires a prolonged exposure time to record an image in order to achieve a targeted total dose , such as 20 – 30 electrons per Å 2 and image quality could be compromised by sample - stage drift . To overcome this problem , we broke the total exposure into a stack of subframes and then mitigated image blurring by aligning all subframes within one exposure , an approach previously proposed but not fully tested 13 . As indicated above , accurate alignment is greatly facilitated by the nearly noiseless recording made possible by single - electron detection and digital accumulation on the K2 camera . Although our initial thought was to simply correct mechanical drift during the long exposures , it became apparent 1 . 0 a 0 . 9 0 . 8 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 4 D e t e c t i on quan t u m e ff i c i en cy ( D Q E ) 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 PhysicalNyquist Gatan Ultrascan CCD camera K2 base K2 Summit super - resolution at 2 . 36 electrons pixel – 1 s – 1 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 Fraction of physical Nyquist frequency1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 . 0 0 . 1 30 25 20 15 10 5 5 10 15 MeasuredFittedQE 20 25 30 b R eadou t do s e r a t e ( c oun t s p i x e l – 1 s – 1 ) Input dose rate ( electrons pixel – 1 s – 1 ) Figure 1 | Detective quantum efficiency ( DQE ) and detector conversion efficiency ( DCE ) of the K2 Summit electron - counting camera . ( a ) DQEs of the K2 Summit camera were measured in both counting ( red , taken at 2 . 36 electrons pixel −1 s −1 ) and linear charge - accumulation modes ( blue ) and are compared with the DQE of a typical scintillator - based CCD camera , the Gatan US4000 Ultrascan ( black ) . ( b ) Dose - dependent DCEs of the K2 Summit camera in counting mode . Electron counts were measured as a function of incident electron dose rates and were fit to a polynomial curve . The straight line represents the ideal linear response with a slope of 0 . 87 , corresponding to the quantum efficiency ( QE ) of the camera . n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 586 | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | nAture methods Articles that beam - induced blurring was a major problem and that it could also be effectively compensated . We developed an algorithm to align all subframes that exploits redundant information between nonadjacent subframes to obtain robust subpixel accuracy ( Online Methods ) . To explore how well induced motion could be corrected in images of frozen hydrated protein samples having low levels of contrast , we used the recom - binant archaeal 20S proteasome from T . acidophilum as our test specimen . Its crystal structure has been determined to 3 . 4 - Å reso - lution ( Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) : 1PMA ) 26 , and our best previ - ous 3D reconstruction of the same protein was at ~ 5 . 6 Å , using photographic film 27 . We recorded images from our Tecnai Polara ( FEI ) using the K2 in super - resolution counting mode at a magnification of 31 , 000× , which corresponds to a physical pixel size of 1 . 22 Å . The beam intensity was set to about eight counts per physical pixel per sec - ond , corresponding to a dose rate of ~ 10 . 5 electrons per physical pixel per second on camera . Images were recorded as stack of 24 subframes , each of which was accumulated for 0 . 2 s , resulting in an average of ~ 1 . 7 counts per physical pixel in each subframe and a total specimen dose of ~ 35 electrons per Å 2 . We collected 553 super - resolution image stacks and used 126 , 729 particles for the final 3D reconstruction . For each image stack , we generated an uncorrected image , which is the direct sum - mation of all subframes without alignment , and a corrected image after alignment . Among the entire data set , only a few images showed no obvious signs of motion - induced image blurring or resolution loss . Even for such nearly perfect images ( Fig . 2a ) , small motion was apparent ( Fig . 2b and Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , and motion correction did slightly improve high - resolution infor - mation ( Fig . 2c ) . At a defocus of ~ 1 µ m , this image had excellent contrast ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) . Unlike the rare near - perfect images , the majority of uncorrected images showed clear motion - induced deterioration of high - resolution signal ( Fig . 2d ) . The calculated frame - displacement trace shows that the motion was large and not unidirectional ( Fig . 2e ) ; this , the speed of the motion and the fact that the Polara has a stable stage all suggest that the observed motion was mostly beam induced rather than due to mechanical instability . Motion cor - rection yielded a very symmetrical Fourier transform in which Thon rings were seen to 3 - Å resolution in all directions ( Fig . 2f ) , demonstrating that the subframe alignments were sufficiently accurate to restore high - resolution information to a degree pre - viously possible only in the rare perfect images . Only 4 out of a total of 553 images had a total accumulated motion of ~ 4 Å or less , whereas the majority had a total motion of more than 10 Å during the 5 - s exposure ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Additionally , when we used CTFFIND 28 , it was evident that cross - correlations between high - resolution Thon rings of images and simulations were substantially improved for all motion - corrected images ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Thus , motion correction allowed a large portion of images that would otherwise be discarded to be res - cued , essentially making every collected image usable . More important is the impact of motion correction on the actual 3D reconstruction ( Fig . 3 ) . We determined 3D reconstructions using both uncorrected and corrected images . With the uncor - rected data , we could obtain a map with a nominal resolution around 4 . 2 Å ( Fig . 3a ) , which was a dramatic improvement over the best resolution ever achieved for this sample on film ( 5 . 6 Å ) , demonstrating the high quality of K2 images . Correcting the beam - induced motion for all subframes with a single shift allowed us to further improve the resolution to 3 . 5 Å and resulted in a 3D density map with better high - resolution features ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . A comparison of the Fourier power spectrum calculated from these two 3D reconstructions also showed a substantial improvement in Fourier amplitude corresponding to a reduction in temperature factor of the 3D reconstruction 18 ( Fig . 3b ) . Beam - induced motion in the frozen hydrated specimen Although assuming that the entire subframe responds equivalently allows the majority of the motion to be corrected , previous work 20 has demonstrated that the motion is nonuniform . To explore Figure 2 | Motion correction restores the lost high - resolution information . ( a ) Fourier transforms of an image of frozen hydrated archaeal 20S proteasomes . Representative ‘near - perfect’ image in which Thon rings extend to nearly 3 Å . The cross - correlation ( CC ) between image Thon rings at 5 – 10 Å and simulated ideal Thon rings over the same resolution range is 0 . 192 . ( b ) The 24 individual subframes used to create a were cross - correlated , and relative positional shifts were determined as described in the text and Online Methods . On the basis of these calculations , the path of motion between the first ( large black dot with arrow ) and last subframes can be determined . ( c ) Fourier transform of a after motion correction , where the Thon ring CC is 0 . 233 . ( d ) Fourier transform of a representative imperfect image showing a predominantly unidirectional resolution cutoff at ~ 20 Å . The Thon ring CC is only 0 . 092 . ( e ) Trace of detected motion between subframes used to create d . ( f ) Fourier transform of d after motion correction , showing that resolution has been isotropically restored ; the Thon ring CC improved to 0 . 238 . The narrow white band was caused by residual fixed - pattern noise in each subframe , which was subsequently eliminated . d c 3 Å a 3 Å f 3 Å 4 b 2 0 – 2 – 4 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 Drift x ( Å ) D r i ft y ( Å ) 2 4 6 10 e 8 6 4 2 0 – 10 – 8 – 6 Drift x ( Å ) D r i ft y ( Å ) – 4 – 2 0 n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nAture methods | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | 587 Articles the ability to accurately correct more local motions , we further divided each subframe area into a number of regions and deter - mined the motion of each region ( Fig . 4 ) . For the sample and data set used here , the smallest region for which the alignment could stably be determined was about 2 , 000 pixels × 2 , 000 pixels . As expected , in many images , motions in different areas were sub - stantially different ( Fig . 4b , e ) . However , such differences typically became small after a few subframes ( Fig . 4c , f ) . Indeed , analysis of the 553 images showed that motion was fast in the beginning of the exposure and that it slowed down quickly ( Fig . 3c ) . Thus , discarding the first five subframes would result in an appreciably smaller average image motion of < 1 Å in the 0 . 2 - s accumulation used here ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . A similar observation was described previously , but the magnitude of motion in the first few subframes was considerably larger 21 . Whereas beam - induced motion is largest in the first few frames , beam - induced sample damage is at a minimum there . To ascertain the high - resolution information content across the entire exposure , we calculated 24 3D reconstructions using particle images from each single subframe out of the image stack and the same recon - struction parameters , which were based on refinement against the complete corrected images ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . The Fourier shell correlation ( FSC ) curves ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) show that the resolution initially increased , corresponding to the decreased speed of image motion , and then decreased after the 15th subframe , owing to accumulated radiation damage . 1 . 0 a 0 . 9 0 . 8 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 4 F ou r i e r s he ll c o rr e l a t i on 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 Resolution ( Å – 1 ) 4 . 2 Å 3 . 3 Å 3 . 4 Å 3 . 6 Å 4 . 6 Å 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 . 1 00 c 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 20 15 10 D r i ft s peed ( Å s – 1 ) F ou r i e r s he ll c o rr e l a t i on a t 5 Å 5 Frame number 24 22 00 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 3 10 2 b A m p li t ude 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 Resolution ( Å – 1 ) 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 Uncorrected ; contains subframes 1 – 24 Corrected by subframes ; contains subframes 1 – 24 Corrected by subregions ; contains subframes 3 – 15 Ideal map from fitted atomic model Figure 3 | Analysis of motion - induced image blurring on resolution of the 3D reconstruction . ( a ) Comparison of Fourier shell correlation ( FSC ) curves from 3D reconstructions using images without motion correction ( red ) , images corrected using the entire subframe and containing all subframes ( purple ) and images corrected by subregion and containing subframes 3 – 15 ( blue ) . Horizontal dashed lines are shown for both the FSC = 0 . 5 and 0 . 143 criteria . The FSC curve between the final map and that calculated from the fitted atomic model is shown in orange . ( b ) Comparison of rotational averages of Fourier power spectra of the different 3D reconstructions . ( c ) Average speed of motion from the entire data set of 553 images versus subframe number ( blue ) . Error bars indicate s . d . of each average . Note the roughly exponential decay of initial motion as the sample equilibrates in the electron beam . The quality of 3D reconstructions calculated using particle data taken from the indicated individual subframes was quantified by the FSC value at 5 - Å resolution ( red ) derived from supplementary Figure 5a . The same particle parameters were used for all 24 3D reconstructions . Figure 4 | Subregion motion correction . ( a ) An image of vitreous ice – embedded 20S proteasomes taken completely within a single hole of the sample grid . Black and blue squares represent two different subregions of 2 , 048 pixels × 2 , 048 pixels . ( b ) Comparison of displacement traces determined from the two subregions in a ( black and blue ) with that determined using the entire subframe ( red ) . Note that the trends of motions in the subregions are similar , although their speeds in the first few subframes are different . ( c ) Subframe displacement traces from the image in a after removal of the first five frames . The difference between two regions is substantially less than that in b . ( d ) Image of the same sample as in a but spanning both the hole and the surrounding supporting carbon film . ( e ) Comparison of displacement traces from subregions of carbon film and vitreous ice indicate that they behave differently under the electron beam . ( f ) Subframe displacement traces from the image in d after removal of the first five frames . After removal of the first five subframes , the remaining shifts are similarly reduced . a 40 nm d 40 nm b 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 – 2 – 16 – 14 – 12 – 10 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 D r i ft y ( Å ) Drift x ( Å ) OverallTop right subregion Bottom left subregion OverallTop right subregion Bottom left subregion e 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 – 2 – 12 – 10 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 2 D r i f t y ( Å ) Drift x ( Å ) OverallTop right subregion Bottom left subregion c 8 6 4 2 0 – 2 – 4 – 6 – 12 – 8 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 2 4 D r i ft y ( Å ) Drift x ( Å ) OverallTop right subregion Bottom left subregion f 8 6 4 2 0 2 – 6 – 4 – 10 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 2 4 6 D r i ft y ( Å ) Drift x ( Å ) n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 588 | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | nAture methods Articles The FSC values at 5 Å of each single - frame 3D reconstruction correlate well with the average motion speed ( Fig . 3c ) . 3d reconstruction of an archaeal 20s proteasome To obtain the best reconstruction of the T . acidophilum 20S pro - teasome , we corrected beam - induced motions using 3 × 3 sub - regions of 2 , 048 pixels × 2 , 048 pixels each and then refined the 3D reconstruction using a frequency - limited refinement proce - dure 29 ( Supplementary Fig . 6a and Online Methods ) . We further excluded the first two subframes ( deteriorated by fast motion ) and last ten subframes ( deteriorated by radiation damage ) from our calculation of the final 3D reconstruction . Our final 3D reconstruction had a nominal resolution of 3 . 3 Å ( Fig . 3a ) and was based on a total dose of ~ 17 . 5 electrons per Å 2 , although the full dose of 35 electrons per Å 2 was used for particle refinement . This nominal resolution was confirmed by the gold - standard FSC 29 ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) . This 3D reconstruction , its FSC curve and the rotational average of its Fourier power spectrum were noticeably better than those calculated from all subframes and using the entire subframe for motion correction ( Fig . 3 and Supplementary Fig . 4c ) . Although the difference in amplitude between the red and blue curves ( that is , reconstructions cal - culated with uncorrected versus optimally corrected subframes ; Fig . 3b ) is not well represented by a single exponential falloff ( B factor ) , the equivalent B - factor improvement ranges from ~ 100 Å 2 at a resolution of 10 Å to ~ 50 Å 2 at 5 Å . In the 3D density map ( Fig . 5a – c ) , the C α main chain can be traced unambigu - ously , and most side chain densities are well resolved , validating the nominal resolution estimated from the FSC curve ( Fig . 3a ) . The atomic structure including most of side chains of the 20S proteasome fits well into the final 3D density map , except for a small reverse turn loop of three residues in the β - subunit ( Met22 , Glu23 and Asn24 ) . These residues have much higher temperature factors in the 3 . 4 - Å crystal structure and can be remodeled to fit nicely into the density map ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . The overall quality of the cryo - EM 3D density map is similar to that of a 3 . 4 - Å 2 F o – F c map from the crystal structure ( Fig . 5d , e ) . The nominal resolution , as well as the overall quality of the density map , is similar to that of several recently obtained reconstruc - tions of much larger icosahedral viruses having much higher internal symmetry 2 . discussion Here we show that the combination of a single - electron counting detector and a motion - correction algorithm make high - resolution structures obtainable by cryo - EM for smaller and lower - symmetry samples than had been previously possible . Our 3 . 3 - Å structure of the T . acidophilum 20S proteasome ( Fig . 5c ) is comparable in resolution and map quality to the crystal structure ( 3 . 4 Å , Fig . 5e ) , strongly indicating the power of single - particle cryo - EM for detailed structural biology . We showed that an electron - counting camera is superior to both photographic film and linear types of digital cameras . Its benefits derive from improved DQE at high resolution ( demonstrated by the ~ 3 - Å Thon rings ; Fig . 2 ) and excellent DQE at low resolution ( allowing small proteins to be imaged at the relatively low defo - cuses favorable for high resolution ) . In this study , images of the 20S proteasome showed excellent contrast even when recorded at a defocus of ~ 1 µ m at 300 kV ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Obtaining such contrast in images recorded under similar conditions was impossible when using either photographic film 27 or a scintilla - tor - based CCD camera 30 . The other critical advantage of an electron - counting camera is the combination of essentially noiseless imaging and a high - output frame rate . Together these enable optimal collection and alignment of dose - fractionated data without the information loss inherent to any charge - accumulating camera . This not only provides a means for motion correction but also enables a better understanding and treatment of beam - induced motion , which is one of the most challenging physical problems in cryo - EM 13 – 15 . Without correction , the vast majority of images were deteriorated by beam - induced motions , and only a small fraction ( ~ 1 % ) could be characterized as close to perfect . Motion correction improved the quality of almost all images ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) , and Thon rings from a large number of corrected images could be seen at close to 3 Å ( Fig . 2 ) , which is comparable to or better than the image quality of icosahedral virus samples recorded on photographic film 2 . Ideally , beam - induced motion should be cor - rected at the individual particle level during refinement of the 3D reconstruction , as demonstrated recently 21 . However , even using a d e b c α α - subunit β - subunit EM X - ray 180 ° α β β Figure 5 | Final 3D reconstruction of the T . acidophilum archaeal 20S proteasome . ( a ) 3D density map of 20S proteasome filtered to a resolution of 3 . 3 Å . ( b ) Two different views of asymmetrical α - and β - subunits segmented from the 3D density map in a . The main chain can be traced throughout the entire map . ( c ) Two α - helices segmented from the α - and β - subunits showing clear density for the majority of side chains . ( d ) Portion of the cryo - EM density map showing clear side - chain densities . The docked atomic structure was refined to fit the density map by a molecular dynamic flexible fitting procedure . ( e ) The same portion of a 2 F o – F c map of 3 . 4 - Å crystal structure calculated using the atomic structure ( PDB : 1PMA ) . n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nAture methods | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | 589 Articles electron counting , the SNR of a single 20S proteasome particle in a single subframe is much too low to permit accurate alignment . Instead , we used subregion motion correction and rejection of the first few subframes to improve local motion correction . Potentially , the correction of beam - induced motion can be fur - ther improved . Our results indicated that the motion speed is very high in the first few subframes and that removing these subframes resulted a better 3D reconstruction . However , the specimen is least damaged by electron - beam radiation during the first frac - tions of an exposure 31 . A shorter subframe accumulation time would reduce motion blurring captured within each subframe and might thus rescue the discarded first few subframes . We tested this with a small image set in which 5 - s - exposure images were fractionated into 50 subframes that each had an average of ~ 0 . 8 counts per pixel . The beam - induced motions were correctable ( Supplementary Figs . 8 and 9 ) , but at the expense of consider - ably more computation and data storage space . It will be worth exploring combining our approach ( using finer dose - fractionated subframes ) with that described by ref . 21 ( averaging adjacent sub - frames and estimating the motion trajectory ) . The final 3D reconstruction presented here was calculated from ~ 120 , 000 particles having D7 symmetry , which is many more than theoretically predicted 7 . Although high resolution can be achieved with many fewer particles ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ) , particle alignments were from the full data set . It may be pos - sible to mitigate this effect by recording images with more subframes and a much higher total electron dose to boost the low - resolution amplitudes for better alignment while using only the early subframes for the reconstruction . With this and other improvements , it should be possible to get much closer to theoretical predictions . In conclusion , by combining an electron - counting camera with dose fractionation and correction of motion - induced image blurring , we have achieved a near - atomic resolution recon - struction of an ~ 700 kDa protein with only D7 symmetry . The motion correction greatly enhanced high - resolution data acqui - sition efficiency and should facilitate the application of near - atomic - resolution single - particle cryo - EM to a broad range of protein samples . methods Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper . Accession codes . The density map has been deposited in EMDataBank ( EMD - 5623 ) . Note : Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper . AcKnowledgments We thank K . Egami ( UCSF ) for purifying T . acidophilum 20S proteasome . We thank B . Lee for support in system optimization and DQE analysis and T . Sha for support in integrating the camera into the UCSF software environment . M . Lent was a principal architect of the camera and supported testing and troubleshooting of our prototype camera . This work is supported by the HHMI ( D . A . A . ) and US National Science Foundation grant DBI - 0960271 to D . A . A and Y . C . , which in part funded the development of the K2 camera in association with Gatan and P . Denes at Lawrence Berkeley Labs . An initial grant from the HHMI funded the first pixel prototype chip in collaboration with P . Denes . This work is also supported by the UCSF Program for Breakthrough Biomedical Research and US National Institutes of Health grants R01GM082893 , R01GM098672 and S10RR026814 to Y . C . and P50GM082250 to A . Frankel . Author contriButions X . L . , D . A . A . and Y . C . designed experiments . X . L . carried out all experiments . P . M . and C . K . B . determined DQE curves ( Fig . 1a ) . S . Z . participated in implementing the K2 and dose fractionation . S . G . was the chief architect of the K2 project and , along with P . M . , contributed significant scientific and technical insights throughout the project . All of the data in Figure 1a were collected at UCSF , and all of the other figures are based solely on experiments carried in the laboratories of Y . C . and D . A . A . M . B . B . provided technical assistance in operating the microscope . X . L . , D . A . A . and Y . C . wrote the manuscript . All authors participated in discussion and revision of the manuscript . comPeting FinAnciAl interests The authors declare competing financial interests : details are available in the online version of the paper . reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Wolf , M . , Garcea , R . L . , Grigorieff , N . & Harrison , S . C . Subunit interactions in bovine papillomavirus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 6298 – 6303 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Zhang , X . , Jin , L . , Fang , Q . , Hui , W . H . & Zhou , Z . H . 3 . 3 A cryo - EM structure of a nonenveloped virus reveals a priming mechanism for cell entry . Cell 141 , 472 – 482 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Chen , J . Z . et al . Molecular interactions in rotavirus assembly and uncoating seen by high - resolution cryo - EM . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 10644 – 10648 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Zhang , X . et al . Near - atomic resolution using electron cryomicroscopy and single - particle reconstruction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 1867 – 1872 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Zhang , R . et al . 4 . 4 Å cryo - EM structure of an enveloped alphavirus Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus . EMBO J . 30 , 3854 – 3863 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Zhang , J . et al . Mechanism of folding chamber closure in a group II chaperonin . Nature 463 , 379 – 383 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Henderson , R . The potential and limitations of neutrons , electrons and X - rays for atomic resolution microscopy of unstained biological molecules . Q . Rev . Biophys . 28 , 171 – 193 ( 1995 ) . 8 . McMullan , G . , Chen , S . , Henderson , R . & Faruqi , A . R . Detective quantum efficiency of electron area detectors in electron microscopy . Ultramicroscopy 109 , 1126 – 1143 ( 2009 ) . 9 . McMullan , G . et al . Experimental observation of the improvement in MTF from backthinning a CMOS direct electron detector . Ultramicroscopy 109 , 1144 – 1147 ( 2009 ) . 10 . McMullan , G . , Clark , A . T . , Turchetta , R . & Faruqi , A . R . Enhanced imaging in low dose electron microscopy using electron counting . Ultramicroscopy 109 , 1411 – 1416 ( 2009 ) . 11 . Bammes , B . E . , Rochat , R . H . , Jakana , J . , Chen , D . H . & Chiu , W . Direct electron detection yields cryo - EM reconstructions at resolutions beyond 3 / 4 Nyquist frequency . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 589 – 601 ( 2012 ) . 12 . Milazzo , A . C . et al . Initial evaluation of a direct detection device detector for single particle cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 176 , 404 – 408 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Henderson , R . & Glaeser , R . M . Quantitative analysis of image contrast in electron micrographs of beam - sensitive crystals . Ultramicroscopy 16 , 139 – 150 ( 1985 ) . 14 . Glaeser , R . M . , McMullan , G . , Faruqi , A . R . & Henderson , R . Images of paraffin monolayer crystals with perfect contrast : minimization of beam - induced specimen motion . Ultramicroscopy 111 , 90 – 100 ( 2011 ) . 15 . Typke , D . , Gilpin , C . J . , Downing , K . H . & Glaeser , R . M . Stroboscopic image capture : reducing the dose per frame by a factor of 30 does not prevent beam - induced specimen movement in paraffin . Ultramicroscopy 107 , 106 – 115 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Miyazawa , A . , Fujiyoshi , Y . , Stowell , M . & Unwin , N . Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at 4 . 6 Å resolution : transverse tunnels in the channel wall . J . Mol . Biol . 288 , 765 – 786 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Jensen , G . J . Alignment error envelopes for single particle analysis . J . Struct . Biol . 133 , 143 – 155 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Rosenthal , P . B . & Henderson , R . Optimal determination of particle orientation , absolute hand , and contrast loss in single - particle electron cryomicroscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 333 , 721 – 745 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Saad , A . et al . Fourier amplitude decay of electron cryomicroscopic images of single particles and effects on structure determination . J . Struct . Biol . 133 , 32 – 42 ( 2001 ) . n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 590 | VOL . 10 NO . 6 | JUNE 2013 | nAture methods Articles 20 . Brilot , A . F . et al . Beam - induced motion of vitrified specimen on holey carbon film . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 630 – 637 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Campbell , M . G . et al . Movies of ice - embedded particles enhance resolution in electron cryo - microscopy . Structure 20 , 1823 – 1828 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Bai , X . - c . , Fernandez , I . S . , McMullan , G . & Scheres , S . H . W . Ribosome structures to near - atomic resolution from thirty thousand cryo - EM particles . ELife 2 , e00461 ( 2013 ) . 23 . Battaglia , M . et al . A rad - hard CMOS active pixel sensor for electron microscopy . Nucl . Instrum . Methods Phys . Res . A 598 , 642 – 649 ( 2009 ) . 24 . Bichsel , H . Straggling in thin silicon detectors . Rev . Mod . Phys . 60 , 663 – 699 ( 1988 ) . 25 . Booth , C . R . , Jakana , J . & Chiu , W . Assessing the capabilities of a 4kx4k CCD camera for electron cryo - microscopy at 300 kV . J . Struct . Biol . 156 , 556 – 563 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Löwe , J . et al . Crystal structure of the 20S proteasome from the archaeon T . acidophilum at 3 . 4 Å resolution . Science 268 , 533 – 539 ( 1995 ) . 27 . Rabl , J . et al . Mechanism of gate opening in the 20S proteasome by the proteasomal ATPases . Mol . Cell 30 , 360 – 368 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Mindell , J . A . & Grigorieff , N . Accurate determination of local defocus and specimen tilt in electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 142 , 334 – 347 ( 2003 ) . 29 . Scheres , S . H . & Chen , S . Prevention of overfitting in cryo - EM structure determination . Nat . Methods 9 , 853 – 854 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Yu , Y . et al . Interactions of PAN’s C - termini with archaeal 20S proteasome and implications for the eukaryotic proteasome - ATPase interactions . EMBO J . 29 , 692 – 702 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Stark , H . , Zemlin , F . & Boettcher , C . Electron radiation damage to protein crystals of bacteriorhodopsin at different temperatures . Ultramicroscopy 63 , 75 – 79 ( 1996 ) . n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 nAture methods online methods Motion - correction algorithm . Assuming that a dose - fractionated image stack contains n subframes , f 1 , f 2 , … , f n , the relative shift between two adjacent subframes , f i and f i + 1 , is r i = [ x , y ] . The goal of any motion - correction algorithm is to accurately determine all r i ( i = 1 to n – 1 ) . A commonly used algorithm is to determine r i by locating the peak position in the cross - correlation map between two adjacent subframes f i and f i + 1 or between one fixed subframe and every other subframe . In these approaches , each r i is deter - mined by only a single measurement . Although this approach is computationally efficient , it has potential disadvantages : ( i ) it is difficult to estimate accuracy from a single measurement ; ( ii ) any residual fixed - noise pattern from hot or dead pixels or otherwise imperfect dark current correction will generate a strong cross - correlation peak in the center of correlation maps , which can overshadow the real peak from image alignment ; ( iii ) the previous problem is compounded by low signal - to - noise ratios ( SNRs ) that can broaden the cross - correlation peak ; or ( iv ) a small amount of image shift between adjacent subframes that can bury the true peak in the side of a false origin peak . Thus , the accuracy of a single - measurement approach is limited by unpredictable errors caused by complicated shapes and features of the cross - correlation peak . Instead we use redundant measurements for a more accurate and self - consistent determination of image shifts . A relative shift , b ij , between any two subframes , f i and f j , where j > i , is the summa - tion of shift vectors between all intervening adjacent subframes , r i ( Supplementary Fig . 11 ) r r r b i i j ij + + + = + − 1 1  b ij can be measured by locating the maximum value of the cross - correlation map , often after applying a B factor ( see below ) , between the subframes f i and f j . By determining all possible image shifts between any two subframes , we generate a set of linear equations that contains m = ( n – 1 ) n / 2 equations such as equation ( 1 ) r b r r b r r r b r r r r b r r b 1 12 1 2 13 2 3 4 25 2 3 4 5 26 1 = + = + + = + + + = + + = − … …  … j j ij        Because the number of equations is much greater than the number of unknowns r 1 , … , r n – 1 , equation ( 2 ) is an overdetermined set of linear equations . It can be rewritten in a matrix form as A r = b where A is an m × ( n – 1 ) coefficient matrix , r = [ r 1 , r 2 , … , r n – 1 ] T , b = [ b 12 , b 13 , … , b ij , . ] T ( j > i ) and superscript T indicates trans - position . A least - squares solution of r can be calculated by the generalized inverse matrix method as r b s T T = − ( ) A A A 1 ( 1 ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 4 ) The residual error of each measured shift b ij can be calculated by ∆ = − b A | | | | r b s ∆ b can be used to qualify the accuracy of xy - shift determination . In the current study , any equation with a residual error larger than a given criterion , such as 1 pixel , is removed from equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) unless removing it makes A become not full ranked . Afterwards , equation ( 4 ) is recalculated to get the final solution , r s . Finally , all subframes are shifted to the same origin by changing the phase in their Fourier transform . Summation of all corrected subframes produces an image in which motion - induced image blurring is corrected . The peak position in the cross - correlation map between two subframes can be directly determined to a precision much better than 1 pixel . In the cross - correlation map , the peak position is first identified , then an area of 16 pixels × 16 pixels around the peak is cropped out from the cross - correlation map . The Fourier transform of the cropped area is then padded to a larger area of 512 pixels × 512 pixels , which is followed by an inverse Fourier transform , allowing the position of the cross - correlation peak to be determined by Fourier interpolation to a precision of 1 / 32 of a pixel . This procedure is equivalent to but computationally more efficient than the direct interpolation in the cross - correlation map by sinc function profile fitting . Applying motion correction to images of frozen hydrated pro - tein samples . Although the method described above is applicable to motion correction of any multisubframe image stack , applying it to dose - fractionated image stacks of frozen hydrated protein samples recorded with the K2 Summit in electron - counting mode benefits from additional considerations , including minimizing fixed - pattern noise and frame exposure time , described below . Fixed - pattern noise . A critical factor that influences the accurate determination of small shifts is any residual fixed - pattern noise , which usually results from imperfect gain normalization and dark reference subtraction or any uncorrected dead or hot pixels on the camera . This pattern is identical in each subframe and gener - ates a strong and sharp peak in the origin of the cross - correlation map . Under very low – dose conditions , this peak is often stronger than the real cross - correlation peak from image alignment . We used two strategies to avoid or to reduce the influence of fixed - pattern noise . Because these problems are generally caused by individual pixels , the contribution of a fixed noise pattern to the Fourier transform is mostly beyond half the Nyquist limit . Thus , the severity of this problem can be minimized by applying a low - pass filter such as a B factor to all subframes e BH − 1 2 2 where B is the factor with units of pixel 2 and H is the spatial frequency with units of pixel −1 . A B factor of 100 – 200 pixels 2 is sufficient to reduce the intensity of the sharp correlation peak corresponding to the fixed noise pattern but not to significantly influence the shape of the real cross - correlation peak from image alignment . Applying a B factor means that only low - resolution information is used for subframe alignment ; however , motion ( 5 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 6 ) n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 nAture methods correction does restore high - resolution information in the cor - rected image ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . The second strategy is to set a minimal subframe interval between any two subframes that are used for determination of b ij in equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . This is to avoid aligning a subframe with its immediate adjacent subframes , where the image shifts between such subframes are relatively small and the cross - correlation peak is very close to the peak from the fixed noise pattern . Frame exposure time . Ideally , the subframe recording time should be kept as short as possible to minimize the uncorrectable image motion captured in each subframe . Motion within the subframe elongates the cross - correlation peak and introduces a larger error in identifying the peak position . Furthermore , fractionating the total dose into more subframes produces more equations in ( 2 ) , which have the potential to reduce statistical errors . However , a shorter subframe accumulation time also reduces the average counts per pixel and thus reduces the SNR of each subframe , which in turn weakens and broadens the cross - correlation peak . Thus , for a fixed total dose , there is of limit of how many subframes can be used while maintaining a satisfactory alignment accuracy . We have tested the algorithm described above and obtained satisfac - tory results from fractionating ten subframes in 1 s . Under this condition , the average count per pixel is ~ 0 . 8 ( Supplementary Figs . 9 and 10 ) . With this shorter exposure , the fast beam - induced motion in the first few frames can be better corrected . We implemented the algorithm described here in a program that runs on graphic processing units ( GPUs ) for fast processing . Correction of an image contains 24 subframes of 3 , 840 pixels × 3 , 840 pixels takes ~ 10 s to complete on a single GTX580 GPU . The program is included as Supplementary Software . Materials , instrumentation and data acquisition . The T . acidophilum 20S proteasome was expressed and purified from Escherichia coli according to established protocols 27 , 30 . A drop of 2 µ L of purified 20S proteasome at a concentration of ~ 0 . 9 µ M was applied to glow - discharged Quantifoil holey carbon grids ( Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH ) and plunge - frozen by using a Vitrobot Mark III ( FEI ) . Images of frozen hydrated T . acidophilum 20S proteasome were collected on a FEI TF30 Polara electron microscope ( FEI ) equipped with a field emission electron source and a Gatan K2 Summit camera . The microscope was operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV . The K2 camera has 3 , 840 physical pixels × 3 , 840 physical pixels . All counting images were recorded using super - resolution mode , resulting in 7 , 680 super - resolution pixels × 7 , 680 super - resolution pixels . Fresh hardware and software flat fielding gain and hardware dark references were carefully prepared using the Gatan Microscopy Suite ( GMS ) for each dose rate used immedi - ately before data acquisition . The pixel sizes at different magnifi - cations were calibrated by using a hexagonal ice lattice at −185 °C . All images of frozen hydrated protein samples used here were recorded at a nominal magnification of 31 , 000× , corresponding to a physical pixel size of 1 . 22 Å at the specimen level . We used UCSFImage4 to control all data acquisition . All images were recorded with a defocus in the range of 0 . 8 – 1 . 9 µ m . Grids of frozen hydrated samples were imaged at dose rate of about eight counts per physical pixel per second for 5 s with a total specimen dose of ~ 34 electrons per Å 2 . Each image was fractionated into 25 subframes , with 0 . 2 - s subframe accumulation time . The first subframe was discarded because of a slight delay in shutter opening that resulted in a partial exposure . After collect - ing 553 images , we collected 20 more images with a 5 - s exposure , but these were fractionated into 50 subframes that each had 0 . 1 - s subframe accumulation . These 20 images were not used for the 3D reconstruction but only for testing motion correction at a lower subframe dose ( Supplementary Figs . 9 and 10 ) . All images were saved as stacks of subframes in full resolution for later processing . An uncorrected data set was generated by direct summation of all subframes within one image stack . Determination of DQE . DQEs of the K2 Summit in both the linear and super - resolution – counting modes were measured by knife - edge images recorded at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV . DQE was measured as described in ref . 32 and similarly to the method described in ref . 33 . The method relies on the conversion of the fundamental definition of DQE as SSNR out / SSNR in to the form MTF 2 / ( NPS / dose ) , where SSNR is the ratio of signal and noise power spectra , MTF is the modulation transfer function and NPS is the noise power spectrum , and on the use of an image of the shadow of a post – TEM optics edge as a source of known frequency content for the MTF measurement . Because an edge image spans a range of signal levels , detector linearity has been a precondition for the use of this method . In the case of a detector that exhibits a gradual change in detector conversion efficiency ( DCE ) due to changes in coincidence loss as dose is increased , dose levels need to be used at which dose dependence is small , and all measurements need to be taken at the same dose rate to ensure consistent calibration . The dose chosen for data acquisition and used for DQE measurement , 2 . 4 electrons per physical pixel per second , was at a level for which the deviation from linearity in the DCE curve ( Fig . 1b ) is very small . This means that the error in the edge - shadow DQE method will be small . Attempts to measure DQE at ten electrons pixel −1 s −1 and higher doses lead to overes - timates caused by the nonlinearity of coincidence loss . Determination of DCE . A series of super - resolution images without specimens were recorded at incremental dose rates from 1 to 30 counts pixel −1 s −1 by adjusting the beam intensity . Multiple measurements were taken for each data point . For each counting image , a corresponding image recorded with the K2 Summit operat - ing in linear mode was also obtained at the same beam condition . During the image acquisition , the exposure time was also changed from 40 s at 1 count pixel −1 s −1 to 10 s at 30 counts pixel −1 s −1 to maintain a total dose of at least 40 electrons per pixel . The DCE curve shown in Figure 1b was obtained by plotting the averaged readout rate ( counts pixel −1 s −1 ) from the counting image against the input dose rate ( electrons pixel −1 s −1 ) , and a polynomial curve was fitted against all data points . The input dose rate was calculated from the counts of the corresponding linear image , which we calibrated at a high dose rate , as one electron generates 30 . 0 ± 0 . 5 counts . The linear - mode calibration was measured using the Gatan GIF drift tube and Keithley 6485 picammeter set to its slowest sampling rate . Once determined , the fitted polynomial curve was used to calculate actual input dose rate from the readout count rate on camera for subsequent experiments . The slope of the straight line in Figure 1b is 0 . 87 , corresponding to the quantum efficiency ( QE ) determined as the slope of tangent n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 nAture methods line of the fitted polynomial curve at the origin . Coincidence loss , which causes the camera readout to deviate from a linear rela - tionship , was calculated as the differential between the observed counts and those expected with a finite QE . Image processing . All super - resolution subframes were 2 × 2 binned for further processing . The final image pixel size is 1 . 22 Å . All binning was calculated using Fourier cropping , in which a Fourier transform from the original 7 , 680 pixel × 7 , 680 pixel image was calculated and a central 3 , 840 pixel × 3 , 840 pixel area was cropped out and followed by a reverse Fourier transform . This produced an image of 3 , 840 pixels × 3 , 840 pixels that was 2 × 2 binned from the original image . Initial defocus values of each image were determined using CTFFIND3 ( ref . 28 ) on uncorrected and 4 × 4 – binned data sets . We corrected beam - induced motion in each image using the algorithm described above . For 24 - subframe image stacks , the minimum subframe interval was set to 7 to avoid alignment between adjacent subframes , which could have very small shift and result in inaccurate subframe alignment . Thus , a total 138 com - parison were carried out for a total 24 subframes . The corrected image stacks were evaluated by using CTFFIND3 , setting the resolution range to 5 – 10 Å . The cross - correlation value before and after motion correction was used to monitor the motion - correction procedure . Side - view particles of the 20S proteasome were picked auto - matically using FindEM 34 . All picked particles were first subjected to standard procedures of multiple rounds of multireference alignment and classification implemented in SPIDER 35 . Particles within bad 2D classes were discarded . Remaining bad particles were removed by further manual inspection . The final data set contains 129 , 008 particles . GeFREALIGN 36 was used to refine and determine the 3D reconstructions with D7 symmetry following a frequency - limited refinement procedure 29 . A map calculated from the atomic structure of the archaeal 20S proteasome ( PDB code : 1PMA ) was used as the initial model . The Euler angles and in - plane shift were first determined by a global search followed by local refinement ( mode 4 in GeFREALIGN ) . The resolution of the search and refinement was limited to 15 Å , and the 3D reconstruction at each cycle was calculated to the Nyquist limit . We carried out a total of five cycles of global search , local refine - ment and 3D reconstruction . This was followed by an additional 25 cycles of local refinement ( mode 1 in GeFREALIGN ) . The resolution for the refinement was gradually increased to 5 Å . At this stage the resolution of 3D reconstruction had reached 3 . 4 Å . We continued refinement for another ten cycles with the resolu - tion of refinement gradually increased to 3 . 5 Å . A total of 126 , 729 particles were used in the final 3D reconstruction after we rejected 2 , 279 particles on the basis of a phase residual cutoff . The resolu - tions of 3D reconstructions were estimated using Fourier shell correlation curves using FSC = 0 . 143 criteria 18 , but the resolu - tions corresponding to the FSC = 0 . 5 were also given . The final 3D reconstruction , which contains only subframes 3 – 15 , has a resolution of 3 . 3 Å ( Supplementary Fig . 6a ) . In light of the recent development of using a ‘gold - standard’ FSC to estimate the resolution 29 , we repeated the entire data processing by splitting the data into two half – data sets with even - and odd - numbered particles and processed them separately . The first initial model was the same as described above , and the initial search and refinement was limited to 15 Å . The final FSC curve calculated between the two independently processed sets gave the gold - standard FSC curve , which is similar to the FSC curve obtained previously ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) , attesting to the high SNR in the reconstruction . We also calculated an FSC curve between the gold - standard map and the conventional map , which gave an FSC = 0 . 5 at 3 . 3 Å ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) . This additional test confirms the resolution we had obtained by the frequency - limited refinement procedure . All figures were prepared from the map calculated from the frequency - limited refinement method . As pointed out previously , overfitting can be pre - vented by either frequency - limited refinement or gold - standard procedures 29 , so it is not surprising that the two procedures gave the same resolution . After particle picking , we carried out subregion motion cor - rection . Each subframe was divided into 3 × 3 subregions of 2 , 048 pixels × 2 , 048 pixels with overlap , which generated nine subregions stacks . The motion correction was carried out on each subregion separately . All particles were assigned to the nearest subregion according to the distance to the centers of nine sub - regions and boxed out from the corrected image from the corre - sponding subregion . The final 3D reconstruction was calculated from the subregion motion - corrected image stack , which yielded an improved FSC . To calculate the final 3D reconstruction , we further removed the first two and the last ten subframes , using only subframes 3 – 15 of each subregion corrected image stack . The amplitude of the final 3D density map was scaled to the ideal density map from the atomic structure and low - pass filtered to the estimated resolution . Docking of atomic structure . The atomic structure of T . acidophilum 20S proteasome was first docked as a rigid body into the 3D density map by using the fit - in - map function from UCSF Chimera 37 . The atomic structure , including both the main chain and side chains , fits well into the final 3D density map , except for a small loop of four residues . The fitting was further refined by using the molecular dynamics flexible fitting ( MDFF ) procedure 38 . 32 . Mooney , P . Optimization of image collection for cellular electron microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 79 , 661 – 719 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Meyer , R . R . , Kirkland , A . I . , Dunin - Borkowski , R . E . & Hutchison , J . L . Experimental characterisation of CCD cameras for HREM at 300 kV . Ultramicroscopy 85 , 9 – 13 ( 2000 ) . 34 . Roseman , A . M . FindEM – a fast , efficient program for automatic selection of particles from electron micrographs . J . Struct . Biol . 145 , 91 – 99 ( 2004 ) . 35 . Shaikh , T . R . et al . SPIDER image processing for single - particle reconstruction of biological macromolecules from electron micrographs . Nat . Protoc . 3 , 1941 – 1974 ( 2008 ) . 36 . Li , X . , Grigorieff , N . & Cheng , Y . GPU - enabled FREALIGN : accelerating single particle 3D reconstruction and refinement in Fourier space on graphics processors . J . Struct . Biol . 172 , 407 – 412 ( 2010 ) . 37 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 ( 2004 ) . 38 . Trabuco , L . G . , Villa , E . , Mitra , K . , Frank , J . & Schulten , K . Flexible fitting of atomic structures into electron microscopy maps using molecular dynamics . Structure 16 , 673 – 683 ( 2008 ) . n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .