The role of constructivist educational software on students ’ learning regarding mechanical interaction Christina Solomonidou & Dimitrios Kolokotronis Published online : 5 April 2008 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2008 Abstract This paper mainly describes the role of the multimedia software package ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ on students ’ learning of mechanical interaction forces and Newton ’ s laws . We designed and developed this software within social constructivism on the basis of 226 students ’ initial conceptions ( categorized in six categories ) , in order to help students construct appropriate knowledge about the subject . Teaching with the software was conducted in 13 primary , lower secondary and upper secondary school classes . In the software ’ s evaluation research 226 students ( aged 11 – 16 ) and 13 teachers of the classes participated . Data analysis showed students ’ substantial learning gains with respect to their initial alternative conceptions of the six conceptual categories . Particularly , the students ’ incorrect answers to the post - test questionnaire have perceptibly decreased ( a mean of 65 % ) . In contrast , their correct answers to the questions reached high percentages , from 60 % to 90 % depending on the question and the students ’ age . Also the teachers ’ opinions and comments enhanced software ’ s evaluation . The contribution of the software ’ s specific characteristics on students ’ learning is discussed along with implications for designing constructivist science learning tools . Keywords Multimedia educational software . Constructivism . Primary and secondary school . Assessment . Action – reaction forces . Conceptual change . Newton ’ s laws 1 Introduction — background issues Newton ’ s third law describing the concept of interaction between objects is of prime importance to the construction of concepts such as objects ’ motion and equilibrium Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10639 - 008 - 9058 - 8 C . Solomonidou ( * ) : D . Kolokotronis Laboratory of Educational Technologies and Software Design , Pedagogical Department of Primary Education , University of Thessaly , Argonafton – Philellinon Street , 38221 Volos , Greece e - mail : xsolom @ pre . uth . gr D . Kolokotronis e - mail : kolokotr @ teilar . gr or change of kinetic state ( Hart 2002 ) . This law introduces graphing as well algebra calculus “ as a way of depicting and thinking motion ” ( diSessa 2000 , p . 166 ) , thus allowing to model real life situations and problems with the use of mathematical representations and formulations . It has been shown ( Viennot 1979 ; Maloney 1984 ; Brown and Clement 1987a ; Arons 1990 ; Viennot 1996 ) that many students , based on their everyday experience , develop alternative empirical conceptions , some of which have an Aristotelian ‘ flavor ’ , and strongly resist teaching . For example , students tend to think that : forces are properties of the objects , action and reaction are equal in magnitude only when the interacting objects are at rest , and in the case of objects ’ motion action is greater and ‘ conquers ’ reaction . Constructivism is viewed as a theoretical perspective about knowledge construc - tion , which may be useful to the design of constructivist learning environments ( e . g . Jonassen 1994 , 1999 ; Wilson 1998 ) . This theoretical perspective emerged from different scientific areas ( Duit and Treagust 1998 ) and especially in science education it was strengthened through research studies of students ’ prior conceptions and conceptual difficulties regarding abstract science concepts ( see e . g . Driver and Oldham 1986 ; Driver 1983 , 1988 , 1989a ; Kokkotas 2004 ) . The main idea is that human knowledge is ‘ constructed ’ , which means that it is being built over the prior knowledge that humans already possess and , in many cases , it is alternative . To change students ’ alternative views into scientific concepts ( ‘ conceptual change ’ , see for example Hewson 1982 ; Posner 1982 ; Strike et al . 1985 ; Driver 1989b ; Greca and Moreira 2000 , diSessa 2000 ) , special methods are needed , such as cognitive conflict and cognitive contradiction situations ( Dreyfus et al . 1990 ) . To promote students ’ conceptual change and evolutions , researchers and science educators try to create new , constructivist learning environments , in which students are actively involved in authentic , real - life situations and problem - based situations ( Jonassen 1994 , 1999 ; Duffy and Cunningham 1996 ; Merrill 2002 ) , and teachers act as scaffolding assistants of the students to enhance anchoring instruction ( Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt 1992 ) , intentional learning , negotiation of meaning , and metacognition ( Squires and Preece 1999 ) . Moreover , communication and collaboration among students are considered as major social factors ( Vygotsky 1978 ) facilitating and promoting substantial learning and better outcomes ( see e . g . Scott et al . 1992 ; Guzetti et al . 1993 ; Scott 1998 ) . In science education , instructional technology can be very useful ( for a review of articles , see Bell and Bell 2003 ) , particularly in the construction of knowledge by students ( see e . g . Spitulnik et al . 1998 , diSessa 2000 ) . A number of successful instructional methods and strategies have been used to facilitate knowledge construction in Newtonian mechanics ( see e . g . Halloun 1998 ; Raghavan et al . 1998 ) , especially when technologically - enhanced ( e . g . Tao and Gunstone 1999 ) . But it appears to be a substantive lack of quality educational software particularly that which could potentially support constructivist approaches ( Goldman and Krause 2001 ) . The use of computers and proper educational software ( especially multimedia simulations and microworlds ) could positively help students change their alternative ideas into scientific views ( conceptual change ) and construct scientific concepts ( see e . g . Hennessy et al . 1995a , b ; Weller 1995 , 1996 ) . Our review showed that although there is a sizable quantity of software titles on Newton ’ s laws ( e . g . Physics 186 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 Academic Software of the American Institute of Physics , see website http : / / www . webassign . net / pasnew / subject / Newtons _ laws . html ) , most of them deal with Kine - matics , Newton ’ s second law and electromagnetic forces . Apart from ‘ Freebody ’ ( see website http : / / www . webassign . com / pasnew / freebody / freebody . html ) , developed by the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington ( see website http : / / www . webassign . com / pasnew / freebody / freebody . html ) , which utilizes artificial intel - ligence to teach students appropriate processes to construct force diagrams , the rest of the existing software hardly comprises any activity involving action and reaction forces . Modeling — e . g . by a computer simulation — in the area of Newtonian dynamics is a key concept that is worth attention . According to Hestenes ( 1995 ) , dynamics goes beyond kinematics in modeling ‘ outside influences ’ on the motion of an object . Therefore , a dynamics tool must contain tools for modeling the environment and its interactions with the object . After having represented a real situation of interaction between objects with the help of Newton ’ s third law , by assigning to each object of a system all the force vectors acting by the other objects of the system , it is possible to find the resultant force vector on each object , and conclude about the object ’ s kinetic state , velocity , acceleration , etc . , by applying the first and the second Newton ’ s law of motion . So the third law is of primary significance for the understanding of the other two Newtonian laws of motion . Having in mind the learning problems concerning Newton ’ s third law and Newtonian Dynamics , as well as the lack of software supporting conceptual change in this science education area , we have designed , developed and evaluated the educational software ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ ( ‘ IbO ’ ) , within the theoretical frame of social constructivism ( see e . g . Driver 1989a , b ; Duit and Treagust 1998 ; Edelson et al . 1998 ; Jonassen 1999 ; Kanuka and Anderson 1999 ) . Our aim was to cope with primary and secondary school students ’ alternative views about Newton ’ s third law and Newtonian Dynamics in general . We thus undertook a research and development project witch consisted of three stages : First stage Initial research of the students ’ existing ideas and analysis of their alternative conceptions about interaction between objects . At this stage , a pre - test questionnaire has been used ( see Appendix I ) . Second stage Design and development of the software ‘ IbO ’ on the basis of students ’ initial conceptions detected in the first stage . Third stage A final research stage including teaching with the software in school classes and the detection of the effect or contribution of the software on students ’ learning regarding mechanical interactions ( part A ) and a research with the help of the teachers ( part B ) . After teaching with the software , a post - test questionnaire ( identical to the pre - test one ) was given to the students . Also a small number of teachers expressed their views in an open - ended questionnaire having the form of a ‘ diary ’ ( see Appendix II ) . The present paper briefly presents the first and the second stage and describes the third stage in a more detailed form . Third stage focuses on students ’ conceptual change and construction of appropriate knowledge after working with the software ‘ IbO ’ in class conditions . These sections are followed by the ‘ Discussion ’ and Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 187 ‘ Conclusions ’ sections . The main issue of this paper is the effect of ‘ IbO ’ software on students ’ learning of concepts in mechanical interactions . 2 The students ’ initial empirical conceptions ( first stage ) and the design of the software ‘ IbO ’ ( second stage ) In the first stage of our project , we conducted an initial research aiming at investigating students ’ ( 11 – 16 years old ) existing ideas about the concept of interaction between objects . At this stage , research was conducted with the help of personal clinical - type interviews ( with 10 students ) and a written pre - test questionnaires answered by 226 students . The initial research confirmed findings from previous research studies ( Viennot 1979 ; Maloney 1984 ; Brown and Clement 1987a ; Arons 1990 ; Viennot 1996 ) , and revealed another two fundamental students ’ alternative ideas ( referred as categories 5 and 6 in the following categorization ) . Altogether the students ’ answers were at about 70 % incompatible with the scientific views and were grouped in six conceptual categories , as described in the following paragraphs . More specifically , students had difficulty in conceiving that : Conceptual Category 1 ( CC1 ) interaction exists even between still objects , as they think that it exists only when the objects move or have the ability to move , Conceptual Category 2 ( CC2 ) in nature , forces necessarily appear in pairs ( they believe that the result of an interaction between two objects may be a single force ) , Conceptual Category 3 ( CC3 ) during interaction between two objects there is a pair of forces , which appear at the same time on two different objects ( at their mass center ) , and have the same magnitude and opposite direction . Many students think that the pair of forces may have different characteristics , as they commit one or more of the following errors : ( a ) ‘ magnitude ’ error ( different magnitudes of the interaction forces ) , ( b ) ‘ timing ’ error ( the interaction forces may appear at a different moment on the two objects ) , ( c ) ‘ point of application ’ error ( two interaction forces on the same object ) , ( d ) ‘ direc - tion ’ error ( interaction forces on different direction and not opposite ) , Conceptual Category 4 ( CC4 ) the interaction of every object ( near the Earth ) with the Earth ( its center ) , as they usually ignore this important interaction when they draw interaction schemes and seem to believe that interaction is a force due to the contact of two objects , Conceptual Category 5 ( CC5 ) the fact that an object starts or stops moving or changes its motion is a result of the exertion of various forces coming from respective mutual 188 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 interactions of the object with other objects of its environment . They think that the change of an object ’ s kinetic state is the result of internal forces ’ exertion on it and that friction is not opposite to the motion ’ s direction but has an irrelevant direction ( i . e . friction in a vertical direction in case of an object ’ s horizontal motion ) , and Conceptual Category 6 ( CC6 ) a pair of interaction forces of equal magnitude — and opposite direction — exists between two objects , which have quite different features . The students tend to believe that interaction exists mainly between two objects that are the ‘ same ’ or ‘ similar ’ , that is they have some characteristics in common ( i . e . size , shape , mass , velocity ) , rather than between different objects ( ‘ symmetrical rep - resentations ’ ) . The students expressed those ideas regardless of the level of instruction received . It should be noted that this subject begins to be taught ( according to a traditional , schoolbook - centered and teacher - centered method ) at the primary education level when students are 11 – 12 year olds and continues until upper secondary school when the students ’ age reaches 16 years . Nevertheless , a differentiation has been observed between younger and elder students , as younger students ( aged 11 – 13 years ) gave much fewer ( about the half ) correct answers than elder ones ( aged 14 – 16 years ) . This outcome should be attributed to the difference of instruction between those student groups as well as their difference in age - dependent comprehension ability . Additionally , a differentiation with gender has arisen , as the proportion of correct answers of boys and girls was 1 : 1 . 3 ( for a detailed description , see Solomonidou and Kolokotronis 2001 ) . As previously mentioned , we have designed and developed the educational software ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ ( ‘ IbO ’ ) on the basis of students ’ empirical ideas detected in the initial stage research . The software is an interactive multimedia package of constructivist inspiration , developed in the Laboratory of Educational Technologies and Software Design of the University of Thessaly , aiming to help students construct scientifically appropriate conceptions about Newton ’ s third law , the concept of mechanical interaction , and Newtonian dynamics . It consists of ten experiment sets which simulate situations and problems of interaction between objects being at a distance or in contact . The parts of the software are as follows . Experiment 1 an introduction to Newton ’ s third law ( three planets interact with each other ) Experiment 2 a man stands on the floor ( which objects does he interact with ? ) Experiment 3 a dog stands on the floor ( which objects does it interact with ? which pairs of forces are they acting on the dog , the floor , and the earth ? ) Experiment 4 a book lies on a table ( interaction among three objects , and the earth ) Experiment 5 a woman resting on a scale acts on it with a stick Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 189 Experiment 6 a woman resting on a scale acts with a stick on the floor and then on the ceiling Experiment 7 a man pushes a wall horizontally Experiment 8 a driver pushes his broken car to make it move forward Experiment 9 the tug - of - war game between two students in a park Experiment 10 interactions with negligible friction effects : ( a ) the tug - of - war game between two students holding skateboards , ( b ) a boy sitting on an office chair pushes a girl sitting on an office chair in front of him , and ( c ) a girl sitting on an office chair pushes a boy sitting on an office chair in front of her ( the situations in b and c are analogous to question 28 of the Force Concept Inventory , where a student sitting on an office chair pushes another student sitting on an office chair in front of him ) . The software also contains a self - evaluation part , consisting of a game , a ‘ bridging analogies ’ technique ( Bransford et al . 2000 ) ( described in a subsequent paragraph ) , and a conclusions part . These situations are authentic real - life situations and problems , which may contribute to the development of constructivist learning environments ( e . g . Lebow 1993 ; Jonassen 1994 ; Duffy and Cunningham 1996 ; Solomonidou 2006 ) . Some of the software ’ s features ( SF ) are in direct relation to one or more of the six conceptual categories of the students ’ conceptions previously mentioned . These software features are the following : SF1 ‘ IbO ’ helps students model those situations according to the method of extended figures ( first introduced by Viennot in 1979 ) as follows : the interacting objects of a system are drawn at a distance from one another regardless their distance ; all the vectors appear in pairs and the two vectors within a pair have the same color , shape and length . Additionally , the force vectors always appear in pairs and when an object is isolated ( such as the planet in experiment 1 ) no force is exerted on or by it ( Fig . 1a shows a screen of the interaction situation in experiment 2 , and Fig . 1b presents the modelization of this situation according to the extended figures method ) . These features could help students confront their alternative conceptions in CC2 , CC3 , and CC5 . SF2 The student is actively involved by being asked to predict the forces that will be exerted on each interacting object of a given situation ; in order to find which force of a pair acts on which object , s / he may engage in a ‘ vectors ’ correspondence ’ scaffolding ( Soloway et al . 1996 ) activity ( Fig . 2 shows a screen of such a scaffolding activity for the situation of a woman standing on a scale holding a stick ) . Then s / he can easily draw the force vectors on each of the interacting objects of a system . These features could mainly help the students confronting their alternative conceptions in CC1 , CC3 , CC4 and CC5 . SF3 The software finds the resultant force on each object and asks the student to predict whether the object is going to start moving or will remain still according to either the second or the first Newton ’ s laws ( Fig . 3 shows the interaction force vectors drawn for the situation of the tag - of - war game ) . This didactical method was chosen in order to enhance students ’ understanding in 190 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 all the aforementioned conceptual categories of their alternative conceptions , but mainly in CC1 and CC5 . SF4 Appropriate feedback messages appear in every case the student answers either correctly or incorrectly . Some other signs appear as well , for example in Fig . 1 ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ ( ‘ IbO ’ ) , experiment 2 . Above : a man resting on the floor ( the Earth has moved by an animation and been placed in the bottom of the screen ) . Below : modeling the situation of a man resting on the floor ( interactions between the man , the floor , and the Earth ’ s center ) Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 191 the case a student draws both vectors of a pair of forces on the same object ( point of application error ’ , CC3 ) then a large red ‘ X ’ appears over these vectors . In order to emphasize the earth ’ s presence in interaction situations , a part of the earth ’ s surface appears in the scenery by an animated bottom - up Fig . 2 ‘ IbO ’ , experiment 4 : a vectors ’ correspondence activity the woman standing on a scale situation Fig . 3 ‘ IbO ’ , experiment 9 : finding the resultant force on each interacting object in the tug - of - war game situation 192 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 movement and occupies a large part of the screen ( see Figs . 1a , b , 2 , 4 ) . This anchoring ( Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt 1992 ) situation is supposed to help students facing their alternative conceptions in CC4 . SF5 Moreover , there are many situations which concern CC6 and cope with students ’ ‘ symmetrical representations ’ ( e . g . two almost identical and interacting girls playing the tag - of - war game in experiment 9 ) . SF6 ( copying with all the conceptual categories ) : In some cases the student may face a cognitive conflict situation , as the software calls the student to create her / his own model of reality according to her / his ideas and activate this personal model and compare it either to a scientific model or to reality ( ‘ run - my - model ’ , see Raghavan and Glaser 1995 ) . For example , in experiment 3 ( a dog resting on the floor ) , experiment 4 ( a book lying on a table ) and experiment 8 ( a driver pushes his broken car trying to move it forward ) the student has to identify the interacting objects in a situation of equilibrium . When the student draws incorrectly the force vectors on an object , then this object may begin to move in an ‘ unnatural ’ way ( e . g . the table starts to ‘ fly ’ upward , see Fig . 4 ) . Those simulations represent non - realistic situations that contrast with everyday experience and could eventually lead her / him to conceptual change . Fig . 4 ‘ IbO ’ , experiment 3 : the table ‘ flies ’ upward after wrong vectors ’ drawing by a student ( ‘ run my model ’ feature ) Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 193 SF7 Furthermore , experiment 4 ( interaction between a table and a book that rests on it ) and many interaction situations included in the educational game could help students understand , through cognitive conflict processes , that even non - moving objects can interact with each other ( CC1 ) . In order to enhance understanding and confront the common phenomenological primitive ( p - prim , see diSessa 1993 , 2000 ) conception that non moving objects do not interact with each other , the software includes an example of the ‘ bridging ’ analogies technique ( Brown and Clement 1987b ) : from a particular point of the ‘ conclusions ’ section , the student may study a series of six consecutive situations of interaction between still objects . These situations are accompa - nied by a step - by - step explanation about the reasons it is inevitable for two still and not ‘ live ’ objects being in contact to exert forces on each other . The situation of interaction between still objects refers to as ‘ the target problem ’ which is studied by a bridging analogies technique ( Bransford et al . 2000 ) through an anchor , in order to help students develop an appropriate representation of mechanical interaction in the microscopic level . The ‘ anchor ’ we used is a situation in which the students accept Newtonian interactions ( e . g . a hand acts on a large spring lying vertically on a table , a book rests on the large spring lying vertically on the table , the book rests on a piece of flexible wood then on a hard sponge , and finally on the tight surface of the table ) . SF8 SF8 ( regarding CC2 ) Useful tooltips describing the corresponding force appear every time the mouse pointer is over a vector ( e . g . Force exerted on object B from object A ) . SF9 The two vectors of each pair of forces are designed to have the same length , color and shape , and different pairs have force vectors of different color , shape , and / or length . Additionally , when the student drags a vector over a particular object and before dropping it on the object , the latter is highlighted to be discriminated from the other objects in the experiment . These features could mainly help the students confronting their alternative conceptions in CC3 . SF10 ( regarding CC5 ) The analysis and study of the force vectors is made on only one axis : only horizontal or vertical . The way of drawing those force vectors is rather a symbolic and qualitative one , at least in the first experiments . Later the software proceeds to the calculation of the magnitudes of the interaction forces . For example , experiments 7 to 10 are concerned only with horizontal interaction forces and friction forces between the objects and the ground ( or floor ) . By altering the magnitude of the exerted forces and correlating the magnitudes among different pairs of forces , the student can find out that an object cannot change its kinetic state a ) without an external force exerted on it , and b ) as long as the resultant force that is exerted on it is equal to zero ( Fig . 5 ) . Also a number of activities proposed by the software ask students to communicate and collaborate . Finally , the game in the self - evaluation part serves as a vehicle to provide reflection , metacognition and self - assessment ( for a detailed description of the software ’ s design , see Kolokotronis and Solomonidou 2003 ) . 194 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 The software may be used as a complementary didactic tool to the usual teaching without computers . Some of the software ’ s activities can successfully be done with paper and pencil means , but its main feature that can not used in traditional classes is ‘ run - my - model ’ . This feature makes the computer software a unique didactic tool of constructivist inspiration . The software ‘ IbO ’ meets urgent pedagogical and didactical needs for the teaching and learning of the physics area of Newtonian third law of motion and Newtonian Dynamics in general . It differs radically from ‘ junk software ’ , in the sense of decorative and almost inutile software that does not relate to curriculum needs ( Hestenes 1995 ) . 3 Students ’ conceptual change and summative evaluation of the software — Method 3 . 1 Research aims and questions In order to investigate the learning results of the use of this educational software , an evaluation research has been conducted after 39 teaching interventions with the software in class conditions ( 13 classes×3 interventions in each class ) . This research could be characterized as an experimental research for the evaluation of the software ‘ IbO ’ ( Squires and MacDougall 1994 ) . Fig . 5 ‘ IbO ’ , experiment 7 : a quantitative process ( possibility of continuous change of the magnitudes of action – reaction forces ) Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 195 We tried to create a constructivist learning environment ( Jonassen 1994 , 1999 ; Wilson 1998 ; Solomonidou 2006 ) with the use of the software ‘ IbO ’ . The students performed most of the activities proposed by the software according to their teacher ’ s instructive guidance . The research questions in part A referred to eventual change of students ’ initial conceptions about mechanical interaction . They particularly referred to the percentage of the students ’ incorrect — and correct — answers following the six categories of students ’ alternative conceptions identified in the initial research . So , the main research question concerned teaching with the help of the constructivist - type software ‘ IbO ’ that could lead to positive learning results and learning with understanding for the great majority of the students . More specifically , in accordance and direct correspondence with the six conceptual categories , the Research Questions ( RQ ) were that , after teaching with ‘ IbO ’ , most of the students think that : RQ1 interaction exists between non - living and still objects , RQ2 interaction involves a pair of forces , RQ3 the interaction forces of a pair have the same magnitude , opposite direction , appear simultaneously at the mass center of the two interacting objects , and last for the same duration time , RQ4 interaction exists even if the objects are at a distance , and especially every object near the Earth interacts with the Earth ’ s center , RQ5 the change of an object ’ s kinetic state is the result of various forces exerted on it , which come from various interactions of the object with other objects of its environment ( especially friction forces ) , and RQ6 a pair of interacting forces may be exerted between two objects with quite different characteristics . Students ’ age and gender have been taken into account as variables for the statistical analysis of the data , aiming to detect eventual persisting differentiations similar to those detected at the initial research . Another part of the research ( part ‘ B ’ ) has been carried out with the teachers of those particular school classes who were responsible for the teaching with the software ‘ IbO ’ . The aim of this research part was to investigate teachers ’ opinions about the social conditions of teaching and students ’ active involvement in the didactical sequences , in order to proceed to the software ’ s summative evaluation . More particularly , the teachers were asked to express their views about the students ’ reactions , attitude and behavior ( such as students ’ degree of interest , collaboration and noise ) and whether these were actively involved in the constructivist learning environment with the use of ‘ IbO ’ . The research helped us assess the impact of the software ‘ IbO ’ use on both students ’ learning with understanding and teachers ’ effective teaching about mechanical interaction . 3 . 2 Sample In the evaluation research ( part A ) 226 students aged 11 – 16 years ( 111 boys , 115 girls ) participated . Those students attended 13 public school classes in the prefecture of Larissa in central Greece ( 2 classes in primary schools , 6 in lower secondary 196 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 schools , 3 in general upper secondary schools and 2 in technological upper secondary schools ) . Also , 2 primary education teachers and 11 secondary education teachers participated in part B of the evaluation research . All the teachers had some previous experience in teaching with the use of computers and educational software items . 3 . 3 Research tools and method of data analysis The educational software ‘ Interaction between Objects ’ constituted the main teaching tool . The data collection tools at the evaluation research were post - test written questionnaires answered by the students , personal interviews with a number of those students and teachers ’ answers to an open - ended questionnaire having the form of a ‘ diary ’ . More particularly : a ) A post - test written questionnaire was answered by the 226 students who participated in the teaching sequences with the software ‘ IbO ’ ( see Appendix I ) . This questionnaire was especially developed ( in Greek language ) in order to investigate students ’ personal conceptions about action and reaction forces . It has some common points with the FCI ( Force Concept Inventory ) questionnaire ( Hestenes et al . 1992 ; Halloun and Hestenes 1995 ) . For example , questionnaire ’ s question 8 about two colliding balls of different mass is analogous to FCI question 4 about two colliding cars of different mass . Also , question 7 [ a man pushes two boxes of ( i ) the same mass or ( ii ) different mass ] resembles to FCI question 25 [ a woman exerts a horizontal force on a large box ] , but the nature of the two questionnaires ’ questions is different : we asked about the equality of horizontal forces , while FCI ’ s questions concern the equality of forces in two different planes ( the woman ’ s horizontal force and the box ’ s weight ) . The questions were organized according to the six conceptual categories of students ’ primitive conceptions . It consists of nine question sets ( see Appendix I ) which were based on action – reaction situations and were similar to the experiments included in the software . More particularly , question 1 investigated RQ1 through the students ’ word associations to the word ‘ interaction ’ . This question investigated whether the students related the meaning of this word to the word ‘ force ’ or e . g . ‘ motion ’ ( to find out of their thinking corresponds to CC1 ) . The aim of question 2 was mainly to investigate RQ4 through the way the students considered interactions at a distance or by contact ( corresponds to CC4 ) . Similarly , question 4 referred to the interaction at a distance and investigated RQ4 through the way the students used to think about the interaction of an object with the Earth ’ s center ( related mainly to CC4 ) . Question 3 aimed at investigating RQ1 through tracing students ’ views about the forces between still objects ( corresponds mainly to CC1 ) . Question 5 mainly investigated RQ5 by involving the concept of friction without explicitly stating it and examined the students ’ ideas about the relation between an object ’ s motion and the force that provokes it ( corresponds mainly to CC5 ) . Question 6 investigates RQ3 through identification of the students ’ conceptions about pairs of forces between interacting objects ( number of pairs , direction , objects the forces are exerted on ) by presenting a situation of three interacting objects ( corresponds mainly to Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 197 CC3 ) . In question 7 the ‘ symmetrical representations ’ concept was negotiated ( corresponds mainly to RQ6 and CC6 ) . Question 8 investigated RQ2 and RQ3 through exploring students ’ ideas about force , momentum and kinetic energy of two balls , when a moving ball hits a still ball , supposed to be identical or different in mass ( corresponds to the CC3 ) . Another purpose was to detect students ’ ideas about the action – reaction forces in relation to the objects ’ kinetic state ( corresponds mainly to CC2 ) . Finally , the aim of question 9 was to investigate students ’ views about the force vectors between identical interacting objects ( corresponds mainly to RQ6 and CC6 ) that are either moving or still ( corresponds mainly to RQ1 and CC1 ) . The students ’ answers have been studied both qualitatively and quantitatively , with the statistical package SPSS v . 8 . Also they have been compared to the respective students ’ answers in the pre - test questionnaire . b ) Personal interviews have been conducted with 26 among the 226 students ( selected randomly ) , in order to clarify their answers to the written question - naire . Data from the interviews have been studied qualitatively . c ) The teachers completed a specific questionnaire in a form of a ‘ diary ’ during and after the teaching interventions . The aim was to record information about the behavior and the reactions of the entire class and of a small team of two to three students in each class ( see Appendix II ) . The teachers ’ notes have been analyzed using a qualitative approach because of the small sample ( Twigger et al . 1994 ) . This ‘ diary ’ was a questionnaire with 10 open - ended questions . The first seven of these questions aimed at recording the degree of interest and collaboration as well as the reactions , attitude and behaviour of a small group of two to three students in each class , during the didactical use of the software ‘ IbO ’ . The rest three questions concerned the entire class and especially the level of noise and students ’ moving around during teaching as well as whether these two factors promoted students ’ communication , collaboration and effective work during the learning process . 3 . 4 Procedure The pre - test questionnaire was distributed in January 2003 to the 226 students ( who afterwards participated in the teaching sequences and the evaluation research ) . Teaching with the software ‘ IbO ’ was carried out during February – April 2003 in the computer laboratories of the schools . Students worked in self - selecting pairs on the computers . The teachers of the classes were responsible for the teaching sequence ( they actually did all the teaching ) and were helped with the technical assistance of one of the authors ( D . K . ) . Each teacher participated in a short training ( 60 – 90 min ) procedure about a week before teaching on the use of the software ‘ IbO ’ . A special activities ’ worksheet was developed in order to help the teachers with the use of the software . This worksheet included a series of proposed activities which were also incorporated in the software . Teaching in each class lasted three 90 - min sessions ( in three consecutive days ) . In many cases during teaching , the students ’ questions offered stimuli for dialogue with their classmates , as well as with their teacher . 198 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 About a month after the experimental teaching with the software ( during May and June 2003 ) , the students answered the post - test written questionnaire , which was the same as the pre - test one . This final research was carried out in the students ’ school environment , and lasted one school hour ( 45 min ) in each class . The students answered the questionnaire carefully , with responsibility and no time restriction . Moreover , the teachers ’ ‘ diary ’ has been distributed to the teachers for study a couple of days before teaching . The teachers answered the diary ’ s questions during and after the teaching procedures . 4 Results 4 . 1 Evaluation research with the students ( part A ) In what follows , the results of the statistical analysis of the 226 students ’ answers in the post - test questionnaire are compared to these students ’ answers to the pre - test questionnaire . The presentation of the results respects the six categories of students ’ initial conceptions ( each question was related to one or more categories , depending on the content of each question ’ s option ) . All the differences between the percentage of the students ’ answers in each pre - test question ’ s option and in the correspondent post - test one presented here were significant at a 0 . 02 level ( the values of ‘ t criterion ’ resulted from the applied t - tests in each pair of values were all above 2 . 6 ) . 4 . 1 . 1 CC1 corresponding to RQ1 : Interaction , living / non living and still objects Initially many students considered that during an interaction between two objects , at least one of them is moving or has to be ‘ active ’ . To cope with those students ’ misconceptions the software design comprised specific features , such as ‘ vectors ’ correspondence scaffolding activities ( SF2 ) , finding the resultant force on each object and asking the user to predict whether the object is going to start moving or will remain still according to either the second or the first Newton ’ s laws ( SF3 ) , ‘ run - my - model ’ ( SF6 ) , ‘ bridging ’ analogies techniques ( SF7 ) , and useful tool tips appearing when the mouse pointer is over a vector thus assigning each corresponding force ( SF8 ) . The study of the students ’ answers to questions 1 , 3 , 8 and 9 showed that the percentages of students who continue to adopt views of this category have perceptibly decreased in the final research ( the average reduction in these four questions of the post - test questionnaire is about 60 % compared to the correspondent questions of the pre - test ) . In the following paragraphs the results are described in some detail . In question 1 ( which word better describes the meaning of the word interaction ? ) , the percentage of students who relate the meaning of the word ‘ interaction ’ with the word motion ( option f ) has decreased from 10 . 2 % in the pre - test questionnaire ( N = 226 ) to 2 . 5 % in the post - test one ( N = 226 ) . The correct answer ‘ force ’ ( option c ) was given by 30 . 4 % of the students in the pre - test and by 75 . 2 % of them in the post - test questionnaire . Table 1 shows all the students ’ answers in question 1 . Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 199 In question 3 ( Objects A and B are placed above a chair . Then … ) , the percentage of students who consider that still and non - living objects cannot exert a force and no force can be exerted on them ( option a ) has perceptibly decreased after teaching with the software ( post - test ) from 19 . 6 % to 1 . 5 % ( Table 2 ) . Students ’ correct answers ( option d ) were 14 . 9 % in the pre - test and 70 . 4 % in the post - test . The students ’ answers to question 8 ( collision between a moving basketball and either a motionless small tennis ball or a still identical basketball ) showed that the percentage of students who answer in action – reaction terms and not in impetus or kinetic energy terms is much greater after than before teaching with the software . In particular , the percentage of students who consider that between two different balls ( part i ) are exerted equal forces ( option a ) was very low before teaching ( 8 . 2 % ) and increased sensationally after it ( 79 . 6 % ) ( Table 3 ) . Also , the percentage of those who consider that between identical basketballs ( part ii ) are exerted equal forces ( option a ) was high before teaching ( 34 . 4 % ) and became higher ( 89 . 4 % ) after it ( Table 3 ) . Finally , in question 9 , where subjects Α and Β play the tug - of - war game and only subject A can easily move ( on a skateboard ) , the number of students who did not correctly apply Newton ’ s third law before teaching was almost three times the corresponding one after teaching . In particular , the percentage of the students who do not consider that A and B exert forces of equal magnitude on the rope ( option a ) has decreased from 40 . 4 % to 4 . 4 % after teaching ( Table 4 ) . Moreover the majority Options Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) a Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a a . Help 9 . 8 0 . 9 b . Pressure 9 . 1 1 . 8 c . Force 30 . 4 75 . 2 d . Attraction 36 . 1 17 . 8 e . Repulsion 1 . 6 1 . 3 f . Motion 10 . 2 2 . 5 g . Other 2 . 9 0 . 4 Table 1 Students ’ answers to question 1 of the pre - test and the post - test questionnaires a In each table the total sum equals 100 . 0 % in each column Options Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Object A does not exert any force and no force is exerted on it 19 . 6 1 . 5 b . Object A does not exert any force but a force is exerted on it by the Earth 14 . 6 1 . 2 c . Object B exerts a force on object A and object A exerts a force on Β 25 . 5 11 . 5 d . Earth and object B exert a force on A and A exerts forces on the Earth and object B 14 . 9 70 . 4 e . Earth and object B exert a force on object A and A exerts a force on B 22 . 0 15 . 0 f . Other 3 . 5 0 . 4 Table 2 Students ’ answers to question 3 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires 200 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 of the students ( 76 . 8 % ) seemed to adopt the Newtonian view in their answers ( option b ) and abandon their initial alternative conceptions about this category ( correct answers in the pre - test : 10 . 2 % of the students ) . 4 . 1 . 2 CC2 corresponding to RQ2 : Forces , pairs and interaction Before teaching , almost two thirds of the students could not locate the pairs of forces exerted on the interacting objects ( CC2 : forces do not necessarily appear in pairs ) . The students worked with the software ‘ IbO ’ to correct those alternative conceptions based especially on features SF1 ( modeling of real life situations according to the extended figures method ) , SF6 ( ‘ run - my - model ’ ) , and SF8 ( useful tooltips describing the corresponding force appearing every time the mouse pointer is over a vector ) . After teaching with the software , the corresponding percentage of the students who continue to hold these views decreased by almost 68 % . This resulted from the students ’ answers to question 3 — option b ( see Table 2 ) and to question 9 — option e ( see Table 4 ) both concerning the case of one force of the pair missing . Table 4 Students ’ answers to question 9 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires Α and Β are twins . Α is on a wheel - cart and Β is standing on the ground . Both of them are pulling the rope as hard as they can and finally Α is moving towards B , while Β remains still . This happens because : Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Β exerts a greater force on the rope than Α does 40 . 4 4 . 4 b . A and Β exert equal forces on the rope 10 . 2 76 . 8 c . A and Β exert equal forces on the rope , but the force that B exerts is lasting longer than the force that A exerts ( the two forces start acting simultaneously but after a while the force that A exerts ceases acting while the force that Β exerts continues to act for some additional time and then Α is moving towards Β ) 16 . 2 9 . 1 d . A and Β exert equal forces on the rope , but the force that B exerts is lasting longer than the force that A exerts ( B starts acting force earlier than A does ) 15 . 5 2 . 0 e . Only Β exerts a force on the rope 17 . 3 1 . 8 f . Other 0 . 4 5 . 9 Options Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) Part i a . Equal 8 . 2 79 . 6 b . Greater 85 . 6 19 . 9 c . Smaller 6 . 2 0 . 4 Part ii a . Equal 34 . 4 89 . 4 b . Greater 45 . 2 8 . 8 c . Smaller 20 . 4 1 . 8 Table 3 Students ’ answers to question 8 ( part i and part ii ) of the pre - and post - test questionnaires Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 201 4 . 1 . 3 CC3 corresponding to RQ3 : A pair of forces , different characteristics , ‘ magnitude ’ , ‘ timing ’ , ‘ point of application ’ and ‘ direction ’ errors Initially a number of students who drew pairs of action – reaction forces during the interaction between two objects often considered that the characteristics of these force vectors could be different . Errors have been found regarding different magnitudes , time and point of application , as well as different direction of the action – reaction forces . In order to cope with those students ’ ideas the software design included the features SF1 ( modeling of real life situations according to the extended figures method ) , SF2 ( ‘ vectors ’ correspondence scaffolding activities ) , SF4 ( appropriate feedback messages appearing in every case of correct or incorrect answer , large red ‘ X ’ appearing over action – reaction vectors placed on the same object , earth ’ s animated bottom - up movement ) , SF6 ( ‘ run - my - model ’ situations ) , and SF9 ( design of the two vectors of a pair of forces with the same length , color and shape , and of different pairs with different color , shape , and / or length , every object is discriminated by being highlighted when the user drags a vector over it ) . After their work with the software the students seemed to avoid committing their initial errors . In particular : ‘ Magnitude ’ error The study of the students ’ answers to questions 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 showed that the percentage of the students who after teaching continue to commit a ‘ magnitude ’ error has decreased by almost 67 % compared to the corresponding percentage before teaching . More particularly , in question 6 ( Two feet are simultaneously kicking a ball with equal forces from opposite direction . Which drawing does correctly represent the forces … ) , fewer students chose vectors of action – reaction forces with different magnitudes after teaching ( option d : 15 . 1 % in the pre - test , 4 . 5 % in the post - test ) . In this question , students ’ correct answers ( option b ) were 17 . 3 % in the pre - test and 69 % in the post - test ( Table 5 ) . In question 7 ( i ) ( see Table 6 ) , the percentages of students ’ answers expressing the idea that different forces may be exerted between identical boxes ( options c and d ) Two feet are simultaneously kicking a ball with equal force from opposite direction . Which drawing represents correctly the forces that are exerted between legs Α , G and the ball Β ? Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Figure ( a ) 8 . 2 3 . 5 b . Figure ( b ) 17 . 3 69 . 0 c . Figure ( c ) 33 . 9 13 . 7 d . Figure ( d ) 15 . 1 4 . 5 e . Figure ( e ) 26 . 4 4 . 0 f . Figure ( f ) 3 . 1 5 . 4 Table 5 Students ’ answers to question 6 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires 202 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 have decreased after teaching ( option c : from 16 . 9 % to 7 . 1 % and option d : from 9 . 1 % to 2 . 7 % ) . Students ’ correct answers to this question ( option b ) were 66 . 1 % in the pre - test and 88 . 5 % in the post - test . The percentages of students ’ answers to question 8 , regarding different magnitudes of the interaction forces between a large and a small object ( part i , see Table 3 — options b and c ) or answers concerning two objects playing the tug - of - war game ( question 9 , option a , see Table 4 ) are considerably lower after teaching with the software . ‘ Timing ’ error The percentage of the students ’ answers to question 9 ( options c and d ) showed that those who consider that interaction forces do not simultaneously appear or coexist has decreased by almost 65 % after teaching ( see Table 4 , options c and d : 16 . 2 % and 15 . 5 % in the pre - test respectively , and 9 . 1 % and 2 % the correspondent percentages in the post test ) . ‘ Point of application ’ error According to the students ’ answers to question 6 ( Two feet are simultaneously kicking a ball … ) , the percentage of those who place the forces ’ vectors on the object that exerts the force and not on the one that the force is exerted on ( option e ) has decreased by almost 85 % after teaching ( 26 . 4 % pre - test , 4 . 0 % post - test , see Table 5 ) . ‘ Direction ’ error The percentage of the students who draw pairs of forces that have the same magnitude but a different direction was low before teaching and became even lower after it ( see Table 5 ) , that is it has decreased by almost 60 % after teaching ( question 6 , option a : 8 . 2 % pre - test , 3 . 5 % post - test ) . In conclusion , the average reduction of the percentage of the students who fall in any of the four errors of this category was nearly 65 % . 4 . 1 . 4 CC4 corresponding to RQ4 : interaction by contact , interaction with the Earth During the research conducted before teaching ( pre - test ) it was found that many students did not include the Earth in the interactions between objects and ignored the interaction at a distance of an object with the Earth ( its centre ) . The students worked with the software to correct this inadequate conception , and especially with the software ’ s features SF2 ( ‘ vectors ’ correspondence scaffolding A man is pushing two identical wooden boxes Α and Β which are in contact , exerting a force on box Α . In case he is not able to move them , what happens between boxes Α and Β ? Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Noforcesare exertedbetweenAandB 7 . 8 1 . 8 b . AandBexertequalforcesoneachother 66 . 1 88 . 5 c . A exerts a greater force on B 16 . 9 7 . 1 d . B exerts a greater force on A 9 . 1 2 . 7 e . Other 0 . 2 0 Table 6 Students ’ answers to question 7 ( part i ) of the pre - and post - test questionnaires Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 203 activities ) , SF4 ( appropriate feedback messages appearing in every case of correct or incorrect answer , large red ‘ X ’ appearing over action – reaction vectors placed on the same object , earth ’ s animated bottom - up movement ) , and SF6 ( ‘ run - my - model ’ situations ) . During the research carried out after teaching ( post - test ) , the students ’ answers to questions 2 and 3 showed that there was almost 80 % reduction of the percentage of the students who continue to ignore this type of interaction . In particular , students ’ answers to question 2 — options b and c — show the percentages of students ’ answers that ignore the interaction at a distance with the Earth ( see Table 7 ) . The students ’ correct answers to question 2 ( option e ) were 24 . 4 % in the pre - test and 80 . 5 % in the post - test . We should note that in everyday Greek language the same word — Earth — is used both for the word ‘ Earth ’ and the word ‘ ground ’ . The common use of this term may be a source of confusion , reflected in students ’ relatively high percentage of alternative answers to question 2 — option a — both in the pre - test ( 25 . 5 % ) and the post - test ( 10 . 6 % ) questionnaire . Also Table 2 shows the students ’ answers to question 3 — option a — indicating that a number of students ignore the interaction at a distance of an object with the Earth : 19 . 6 % in the pre - test and 1 . 5 % in the post - test . Also in question 4 students ’ correct answers ( option e ) were 8 . 4 % in the pre - test and 51 . 7 % in the post - test ( see Table 8 ) , whereas their preference of options b and c , showing students ’ ignorance of interaction at a distance with the Earth , was lower after teaching . We should note that , as students ’ answers to question 4 showed , a number of them continued to ignore this type of interaction at a distance after teaching with the software ‘ IbO ’ ( option b : 13 . 6 % and option c : 13 . 6 % ) . So , it seems that this concept — and therefore the concept of field — is quite difficult for the students and needs special didactical strategies for conceptual change . 4 . 1 . 5 CC5 corresponding to RQ5 : Motion , internal forces and friction During the initial research , it was found that a significant number of students consider that an object can start moving even without the exertion of an external force and did not consider that friction provides the essential ‘ external factor ’ which can contribute to the change of an object ’ s kinetic state . You are standing in your schoolyard in the middle of the basketball ’ field . Which objects do you believe that you interact with ? Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Only with the Earth 25 . 5 10 . 6 b . With the school , your classmates and the baskets 17 . 1 1 . 8 c . With the school and your classmates 10 . 6 1 . 8 d . With the Earth and the baskets 10 . 0 2 . 2 e . With the ground and the Earth 24 . 4 80 . 5 f . With the ground , the Earth and the school 9 . 5 2 . 7 g . Other 2 . 9 0 . 4 Table 7 Students ’ answers to question 2 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires 204 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 To cope with those students ’ alternative conceptions the software ’ s design comprised the features SF1 ( modeling of real life situations according to the extended figures method ) , SF2 ( ‘ vectors ’ correspondence scaffolding activities ) , SF3 ( finding the resultant force on each object and asking the user to predict whether the object is going to start moving or will remain still according to either the second or the first Newton ’ s laws ) , and SF10 ( qualitative analysis and study of the force vectors on only one axis : horizontal or vertical , and later calculation of the magnitudes of the interaction forces ) . After teaching with the software , the percentage of those who continue to have this non - scientific perception was reduced by almost 70 % according to the students ’ answers to question 5 ( see Table 9 , options a , b and c ) . Students ’ correct answers to question 5 ( option d ) were 14 . 6 % in the pre - test and 73 . 9 % in the post - test . 4 . 1 . 6 CC6 corresponding to RQ6 : ‘ Symmetrical representations ’ Initially , a number of students considered that an interaction exists mainly between two objects , which are the ‘ same ’ or ‘ similar ’ , that is they have some characteristics in common ( size , shape , mass , velocity ) , rather than between different objects . For those students , the forces exerted between two interacting objects are not the result A parachutist falls from an airplane . During this fall he is meeting an air pocket . During his fall in the air pocket : Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Only the Earth exerts a force on him 20 . 2 10 . 8 b . No force is exerted on him 27 . 5 13 . 6 c . Onlytheairpocketexertsaforceonhim 24 . 8 13 . 6 d . He experiences a force that is exerted by the air pocket and the Earth 17 . 5 10 . 2 e . He experiences a force exerted only by the Earth and he exerts a force on the Earth 8 . 4 51 . 7 f . Other 1 . 6 0 Table 8 Students ’ answers to question 4 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires A driver is starting up his car to make it move in the street . You are looking at it from the pavement . How do you think the car is moving forward ? Because a force is exerted on it by Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Its wheels 16 . 0 5 . 8 b . Gravity 8 . 9 6 . 6 c . Its engine 59 . 9 13 . 7 d . The street 14 . 6 73 . 9 e . Other 0 . 7 0 Table 9 Students ’ answers to question 5 of the pre - and post - test questionnaires Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 205 of an interaction , but a property ( i . e . size ) or a characteristic ( i . e . velocity ) of the objects . The magnitudes of those forces are considered to be proportional to those characteristics ( the greater and faster object exerts the greater force ) . In order to cope with students ’ ‘ symmetrical representations ’ the software design comprises specific features , such as SF5 ( many situations of two almost identical and interacting objects , i . e . children playing the tag - of - war game ) , and SF6 ( ‘ run - my - model ’ situations ) . After teaching with the software , the students ’ answers to questions 7 and 8 revealed that the percentage of those who view the concept of interaction through such kind of ‘ symmetrical representations ’ has perceptibly decreased ( by 68 % ) . In particular , fewer incorrect answers were given to question 7 ( part ii ) regarding the interaction between two different boxes ( see Table 10 , options c and d ) . On the contrary , the percentage of the students ’ correct answers regarding the interaction between identical boxes ( part i — option b of question 7 : A and B exert equal forces to each other ) was high before teaching ( 66 . 1 % ) and became even higher after it ( 88 . 5 % ) ( see Table 7 ) . Also , the percentage of correct answers in the case of different boxes ( part ii , option b : A and B exert equal forces to each other ) was low before teaching ( 11 . 8 % ) and augmented considerably after it ( 75 . 2 % ) ( see Table 10 ) . The increase of the correct answers and the decrease of the incorrect ones to this question showed the beneficial effect of the teaching with the use of the software ‘ IbO ’ , regarding students ’ alternative ideas of ‘ symmetrical representations ’ . This fact was also apparent from the decrease of students ’ alternative answers to question 8 in the case the basketball strikes either a motionless small tennis ball ( part i , option b , see Table 3 ) or a motionless identical basketball ( part ii , option b , see Table 3 ) and the increase of the percentages of correct answers ( option a : equal forces between the other ball and the basketball ) in both cases . 4 . 2 Differentiations with age and gender In the initial research the students were distinguished in two age - related groups with regard to their correct answers . In a group formed by students aged 11 – 13 years the number of correct answers was very small ( about the 25 % of the total answers ) . In the second group of 14 – 16 years olds , this number was about 45 – 50 % ( for more A man is pushing two identical wooden boxes Α and Β which are in contact , exerting a force on box Α . In case he is not able to move them , what happens between boxes Α and Β ? Pre - test % ( N = 226 ) Post - test % ( N = 226 ) a . Noforcesare exertedbetweenAandB 13 . 1 3 . 5 b . AandBexertequalforcesoneachother 11 . 8 75 . 2 c . A exerts a greater force on B 15 . 7 1 . 8 d . B exerts a greater force on A 59 . 2 19 . 5 f . Other 0 . 2 0 Table 10 Students ’ answers to question 7 ( part ii ) of the pre - and post - test questionnaires 206 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 details see Solomonidou and Kolokotronis 2001 ) . After teaching , an almost linear increase of the students ’ correct answers with age was observed ( considered to be normal ) , with a small divergence from one age year to the other . This may be due to the students ’ different cognitive level as their age increases . Moreover , no significant differentiation in students ’ answers to the post - test questionnaire regarding the students ’ gender has been observed ( such as those detected in the initial research ) . 4 . 3 Evaluation research with the help of the teachers ( part B ) During this phase all the questions were open - ended questions ( see Appendix II ) . The teachers wrote their notes after observing their students . For example , a teacher of grade 3 of a secondary school mentioned ( question 3 ) : the children helped one another in specific software ’ s activities , especially when a child knew more than the other child of a group did . Another teacher of grade 6 of a primary school stated ( question 6 ) : … the students were searching a lot and made an important work which apparently satisfied them a lot . Based on the study of all the teachers ’ notes , the following conclusions were drawn ( according to the teachers ’ claims ) : ✓ The students welcomed the teaching with the use of computers and educational software with positive and enthusiastic attitude . ✓ The students ’ interest during teaching with the use of the educational software ‘ IbO ’ remained undiminished and was higher compared to traditional teaching ( without using any software ) . ✓ Teaching with the use of the software ‘ IbO ’ helped the creation of collaborative learning conditions between the members of the same group ( students who were sharing the same computer ) , as well as between members of different groups . As a consequence , all the students ( and much more the ‘ weaker ’ ones ) seemed to gain strong benefits from this kind of teaching . ✓ The students behaved polite and disciplined in the class , even if a number of them initially showed marks of anxiety about the use of educational software , as they were not familiarized with this type of teaching with computers and collaborative work in small groups . ✓ The students ’ attendance and participation during teaching with the software ‘ IbO ’ were more intense in comparison to traditional teaching . ✓ The level of noise and the students ’ movement in the classroom during teaching with the software were slightly higher compared to traditional teaching , possibly because the students felt that they had a greater degree of freedom within the new learning environment which promoted collaboration . This situation facilitated effective learning as well . 5 Discussion The evaluation research we conducted aimed to find the contribution of the educational software of constructivist inspiration ‘ Interaction between Objects ’ on Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 207 students ’ learning of concepts in mechanical interactions . A post - test questionnaire ( identical to the pre - test one ) answered by the students , personal interviews with some students of the sample , as well as an open - ended questionnaire filled in by the teachers helped us to collect data . Data analysis revealed that the software ‘ IbO ’ was attractive , easy to use , and effective as far as students ’ conceptual change and learning with understanding is concerned . In particular , the percentages of the students ’ incorrect answers to the questionnaire decreased perceptibly from 60 % to 80 % depending on the category of alternative ideas ( average of 68 . 5 % ) . In summary , the students ’ acceptable or correct answers to all the questions reached very high percentages , from 60 % to 90 % , depending on the question and students ’ age . As the results of the research in part A ( with students ) showed , there were specific software ’ s features ( SF ) that helped students change their non - scientific views regarding each conceptual category . More particularly , after their working with the software ‘ IbO ’ within a constructivist learning environment the students seemed to adopt scientific views about the subject studied , as they began to think that : 1 . interaction exists between non - living and still objects ( CC1 ) : the percentage of students who continue to think that interaction exists only between still objects has decreased in the evaluation research by almost 60 % . It seems that the software ’ s features ( SF ) SF2 , SF3 , SF6 , SF7 and SF8 contributed in the confrontation of these students ’ alternative ideas ( e . g . the ‘ bridging ’ analogies technique , the tool tips when the mouse pointer is over a vector , the cognitive conflict situations , the “ vectors ’ correspondence ” activity etc . ) , 2 . interaction involves a pair of forces ( CC2 ) : the corresponding percentage of the students who continue to believe that an interaction does not necessarily involve a pair of forces was reduced by 68 % . To deal with these students ’ views the software includes SF1 , SF6 and SF8 ( e . g . forces always appear in pairs , when an object within the software is isolated no force is exerted by or on it , use of tool tips , the cognitive conflict situations etc . ) , which seemed to facilitate this conceptual change , 3 . the interaction forces of a pair have the same magnitude , opposite direction , and appear simultaneously at the centre of the two interacting objects , and last for the same duration time ( CC3 ) : the percentage of students ’ alternative ideas of this category was reduced by a mean of 65 % . The fact that the software included SF1 , SF2 , SF4 , SF6 and SF9 ( e . g . the large red “ X ” over the vectors when both the vectors of a pair would be placed on the same object , the highlighted objects to discriminate them from the other objects , the cognitive conflict situations , the method of extended figures , etc . ) allowed to remedy these students ’ ideas , 4 . interaction exists even if the objects are at a distance , and especially every object near the Earth interacts with the Earth ’ s centre ( CC4 ) : the percentage of the students who continued to hold alternative ideas of this category was reduced by 80 % . These students ’ views were possibly confronted by the software ’ s features 208 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 SF2 , SF4 and SF6 ( e . g . the cognitive conflict situations , the ‘ vectors ’ correspondence ’ activity , the Earth ’ s size in the scenery and its way of appearance etc . ) , 5 . the change of an object ’ s kinetic state is the result of various forces exerted on it , which come from various interactions of the object with other objects of its environment ( CC5 ) : the percentage of the students who seemed to hang on alternative view of this category was reduced by 70 % . It seems that the software features SF1 , SF2 , SF3 and SF10 ( e . g . the method of extended figures , the “ vectors ’ correspondence ” activity , the observation that the force of friction is opposite to the direction of motion of an object and that the interaction of some objects with the ground offers the necessary external force to make it move , etc . ) succeeded in coping with these students ’ alternative ideas , 6 . a pair of interacting forces may be exerted between two objects with quite different characteristics ( CC6 ) : the reduction of the percentage of students holding this alternative ideas was 68 % . Software features SF5 and SF6 which have been included in order to cope with these students ’ views ( e . g . cognitive conflict situations , situations of interaction between similar or identical objects that are in contact where the students can realize , through appropriate questions , that interaction exists not because the objects are similar or have common characteristics but because these objects are in contact , etc . ) seemed to contribute to this conceptual change . Other research studies also reported students ’ conceptual change in Newtonian Dynamics after working with computer simulations and animations ( e . g . Weller 1995 , 1996 ) . Nevertheless , it should be mentioned that the percentage of students who answered incorrectly in the post - test questionnaire and still seemed to hold alternative conceptions has not been reduced to zero . This fact implies that some conceptions resist teaching , even teaching using constructivist methods and didactical tools . For example , difficulties were observed in CC4 , as the concept of interaction at a distance of an object with the Earth ’ s centre ( and consequently the concept of field ) proved to be quite difficult for the students to conceive . 6 Conclusions The concepts studied with the software ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ ( Newton ’ s third law and its applications , and Newtonian Dynamics ) are difficult ones for primary and secondary students to understand . Research studies have shown that students ’ alternative ideas about this issue are highly robust and resist instruction that contradicts them ( see e . g . Viennot 1979 , 1996 ; Maloney 1984 ; Brown and Clement 1987a ; Arons 1990 ) . Appropriate teaching tools may have positive results with regard to students ’ conceptual understanding . In the present study we investigated the impact on students ’ conceptual change of the didactical use of the multimedia educational software ‘ Interaction between Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 209 Objects ’ , which we have designed and developed within the framework of social constructivism , on the basis of students ’ alternative ideas about mechanical interaction and Newton ’ s laws . This software consists of 10 experiments and self - evaluation section . It examines situations of interactions between objects ( taken from everyday life ) at a distance or in contact . Modeling ( according to Viennot ’ s method ) includes qualitative ( which forces are exerted on which objects ) , as well as quantitative ( ability to modify the magnitude of the forces ) processes in order to give an integrated didactical approach to the concepts of force and motion . This approach aims at the safe finding of the resultant forces that are exerted on an object — or on the objects of a system — and the correlation of the resultant force with the change of the kinetic state of the object ( s ) . The software deals with interactions between solid objects , but it also explains a situation of interaction between a solid and a liquid . Besides literature data , we investigated 226 Greek students ’ ( aged 11 – 16 ) initial conceptions , which we categorized in six conceptual categories in order to inform the design and development of the software ‘ IbO ’ . Certain features of the software related strongly to one or more of the six conceptual categories of students ’ alternative ideas ( Kolokotronis and Solomonidou 2003 ) . The results of the evaluation research are considered as very encouraging with regard to the contribution of the particular software to students ’ conceptual change , and to learning and teaching in general . According to research results based on the FCI ( Force Concept Inventory ) questionnaire ( which is similar to the questionnaire used in this research ) , it is suggested that a percentage of correct answers corresponding to 60 % of questions should be considered as the intro - threshold to the Newtonian thought ( Halloun and Hestenes 1995 ) . Also , a percentage of up to 85 % should be considered as compact Newtonian thought , and complete comprehension and full possibility in applying Newton ’ s third law ( these students can be considered as ‘ little scientists ’ ) . As other studies have pointed out ( e . g . Aedo et al 1996 ; Pham 1998 ) not all the existent titles of educational software constitute useful teaching tools . Other researchers insist on the positive role of students ’ initial ideas in designing quality educational software , which can contribute to conceptual change ( e . g . Grayson and McDermott 1996 ) . Additionally , many researchers accept the importance of the students ’ and teachers ’ involvement in the evaluation process of educational software ( Squires and McDougall 1994 ; Gunn 1995 ; Tergan 1998 ) . We may conclude that the specific features of the software contributed to the students ’ observed conceptual change . The simulation of real life situations ( e . g . Brown and Clement 1987a ) of interaction between objects allowed students to manipulate a study of authentic everyday life situations . This fact constitutes an important issue of content and context dependent learning environments ( Jonassen 1999 ) . 210 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 The modeling of these situations according to the extended figures method ( Viennot 1979 ) revealed an appropriate didactic tool for the study of Newton ’ s third law . Other researchers try to find out suitable didactic methods for this topic , such as ways of Symbolic Representation of Interactions ( SRI ) ( Jiménes and Perales 2001 ) . The software ’ s ‘ run - my - model ’ feature ( Raghavan and Glaser 1995 ) is a very powerful one , which allowed students to compare the objects ’ behavior according to their primitive ideas and common sense on the one hand and to scientific models on the other ( e . g . tables or dogs do not ‘ fly ’ ) . This possibility led many students to cognitive conflict situations , which helped them to revisit many of their initial alternative conceptions . The bridging analogies technique helped students accept the existence of action – reaction forces between still objects . A bridging analogy technique was also used in instructional sequences to promote conceptual change regarding Newton ’ s third law , but without using the extended figures method , or computer simulations ( Savinainen et al . 2005 ) . Also , the impressive animated movement of the Earth on the screen , which underlined the presence of the Earth in the interacting objects , was crucial to help students become aware of the interaction of every object near its surface with the Earth ( its center ) , although the concept of interaction between objects at a distance presented many difficulties to the students . Additionally , the students ’ active involvement in constructing models of the world according to their own ideas , and in analyzing and assessing unexpected phenomena and situations contributed in the creation of real conversational , communicative and reflective environments which promoted learning with understanding . The above features constitute powerful issues of this software . The main conclusion is that a teaching intervention with the use of such constructivist educational software , which incorporates , among others , appropriate instructive methodology and cognitive conflict functions can have positive learning results and promote conceptual change , even in scientific topics that are difficult for the students to understand and apply , such as Newton ’ s third law and its applications . In addition , this kind of software assessment implies also a sort of students ’ overall assessment at the end of the teaching and learning process . The latter is not goal - free ( Jonassen 1992 ) , but it is directed toward goals ( Wilson 1997 ) , which are set by both the science curriculum ( generally ) and by our previous analysis of students ’ initial primitive conceptions ( in particular ) , and thus it is consistent to the constructivist framework . Implications of this study in teaching those topics in school should refer to the need of both the investigation of students ’ existing — alternative — conceptions about the taught knowledge , and the teachers ’ choice of appropriate methods and strategies , as the aforementioned features incorporated in the software ‘ IbO ’ , in order to help students confront their alternative conceptions and construct scientific knowledge in this difficult science domain . Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 211 Appendix Appendix I : Post - test questionnaire 1 . Which of the following words do you think better attributes the meaning of the word interaction ? a . Help b . Pressure c . Force d . Attraction e . Repulsion f . Motion g . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : 2 . You are standing in your schoolyard in the middle of the basketball’ field . Which objects do you believe that you interact with ? a . Only with the Earth b . With the school , your classmates and the baskets c . With the school and your classmates d . With the Earth and the baskets e . With the ground and the Earth f . With the ground , the Earth and the school g . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : 3 . a . Object A does not exert any force and no force is exerted on it b . Object A does not exert any force but a force is exerted on it by the Earth c . Object B exerts a force on object A and object A exerts a force on B d . Earth and object B exert a force on A and A exerts forces on the Earth and object B e . Earth and object B exert a force on object A and A exerts a force on B f . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : Objects A and B are placed on the chair . Then : GROUND A B 212 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 4 . A parachutist falls from an airplane . During this fall he is meeting an air pocket . During his fall in the air pocket : a . Only the Earth exerts a force on him b . No force is exerted on him c . Only the air pocket exerts a force on him d . He experiences a force that is exerted by the air pocket and the Earth e . He experiences a force exerted only by the Earth and he exerts a force on the Earth f . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : 5 . A driver is starting up his car to move it in the street . You are looking at it from the pavement . How do you think the car is moving forward ? Because a force is exerted on it by : a . its wheels b . gravity c . its engine d . the street e . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : 6 . Two feet are simultaneously kicking a ball with equal force from opposite direction . Which drawing represents correctly the forces that are exerted between legs A , Γ and the ball B ? a . b . c . d . e . f . Other ( Please draw on the form ) : Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 213 a . No forces are exerted between A and B b . A and B exert equal forces on each other c . A exerts a greater force on B d . B exerts a greater force on A 7 . ( i ) A man is pushing two identical wooden boxes A and B which are in contact , exerting a force on box A . In case he is not able to move them , what happens between boxes A and B ? A e . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : ( ii ) A man is pushing two wooden boxes A and B which are in contact but different this time , exerting a force on box A . In case he is not able to move them , what happens between boxes A and B ? A e . Other ( Which ) : Please justify your answer : 8 . ( i ) A basketball is rolling very fast and is striking a motionless small tennis ball . During the collision , the force that the basketball exerts on the tennis ball is : a . equal b . greater c . smaller compared to the force that the tennis ball exerts to the basketball ? ( ii ) A basketball is rolling very fast and is striking a motionless identical basketball . During the collision , the force that the moving ball exerts on the motionless one is : a . equal b . greater c . smaller compared to the force that the motionless ball exerts on the moving one ? a . No forces are exerted between A and B b . A and B exert equal forces on each other c . A exerts a greater force on B d . B exerts a greater force on A B B 214 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 Appendix II : Teachers ’ questionnaire in a form of ‘ diary ’ It would be very useful if you could record some data regarding to the behaviour and the reactions of the students , during the teaching with the use of the educational software ‘ Interactions between Objects ’ . ✓ Please write your comments about the students , with regard to the following : 1 . Which was the students ’ initial reaction when it was announced that the course of Physics would be done with the use of computers ? Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 215 2 . What was the degree of interest that the students showed regarding participation in this course : a ) at the beginning of this intervention , b ) during this intervention and c ) in comparison with traditional teaching ? 3 . To what extent did students collaborate with other students of their team ? 4 . To what extent did students collaborate with students of different teams ? 5 . Did students collaborate with you ? 6 . What was the students ’ attitude / behaviour during this teaching intervention ? Did they show politeness , aggressiveness , enthusiasm or anything else ? 7 . What was the pace with which the students were working during this teaching intervention ? ✓ Now , please write your comments with regard to the following questions , concerning the entire class : 1 . What was the level of noise during this teaching intervention compared to a traditional one ? 2 . To what extent did the students move around during this intervention ? 3 . Finally , did these two characteristics ( noise and moving around ) promote : a ) children ’ s collaboration , b ) smooth teaching , c ) effective learning ? References Aedo , I . , Catenazzi , N . , & Diaz , P . ( 1996 ) . The evaluation of a hypermedia learning environment : The CESAR experience . Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia , 5 ( 1 ) , 49 – 72 . Arons , A . ( 1990 ) . A guide to introductory physics teaching . New York : Wiley . Bell , R . , & Bell , L . ( 2003 ) . A bibliography of articles on technology in science education . Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education , 2 ( 4 ) , 427 – 447 Retrieved from http : / / www . citejournal . org / vol2 / iss4 / science / article2 . cfm . fs . Bransford , J . , Brown , A . , & Cocking , R . ( eds . ) ( 2000 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Brown , D . , & Clement , J . ( 1987a ) . Misconceptions concerning Newton ’ s law of action and reaction : The underestimated importance of the third law . In J . D . Novak ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the 2nd International Seminar on Misconceptions and Educational Strategies in Science and Mathematics ( pp . 39 – 53 ) . Ithaca : Cornell University . Brown , D . , & Clement , J . ( 1987b ) . Overcoming misconceptions in mechanics : A comparison of two example - based teaching strategies . Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Washington , DC . Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt ( 1992 ) . Emerging technologies , ISD , and learning environments : Critical perspectives . Educational Technology Research and Development , 40 ( 1 ) , 65 – 80 . diSessa , A . A . ( 1993 ) . Towards an epistemology of physics . Cognition and Instruction , 10 , 105 – 225 . diSessa , A . A . ( 2000 ) . Changing minds : Computers , learning and literacy . Cambridge , MA : MIT . Dreyfus , A . , Jungwirth , E . , & Eliovitch , R . ( 1990 ) . Applying the ‘ cognitive conflict ’ strategy for conceptual change — some implications , difficulties and problems . Science Education , 74 ( 5 ) , 555 – 569 . Driver , R . ( 1983 ) . The pupil as a scientist . Milton Keynes : Open University Press . 216 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 Driver , R . ( 1988 ) . Theory into practice II : A constructivist approach to curriculum development . In P . Fensham ( Ed . ) , Development and dilemmas in science education . London : Falmer . Driver , R . ( 1989a ) . Students ’ conceptions and the learning of science . International Journal of Science Education , 11 ( 5 ) , 481 – 490 . Driver , R . ( 1989b ) . Changing conceptions . In P . Adey ( Ed . ) , Adolescent development and school science ( pp . 79 – 99 ) . London : Falmer . Driver , R . , & Oldham , V . ( 1986 ) . A constructivist approach to curriculum development in science . Studies in Science Education , 12 , 105 – 122 . Duffy , T . M . , & Cunningham , D . J . ( 1996 ) . Constructivism : Implications for the design and delivery of instruction . In D . H . Jonassen ( Ed . ) , Educational communications and technology ( pp . 170 – 199 ) . New York : Simon and Schuster Macmillan . Duit , R . , & Treagust , D . ( 1998 ) . Learning in science : From behaviourism towards social constructivism and beyond . In B . J . Fraser & K . G . Tobin ( Eds . ) , International handbook of science education ( pp . 3 – 25 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Edelson , D . , Pea , R . , & Gomez , L . ( 1998 ) . Constructivism in the collaboratory . In B . G . Wilson ( Ed . ) , Constructivist learning environments . Case studies in instructional design ( pp . 151 – 164 , 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology . Goldman , J . D . , & Krause , J . ( 2001 ) . Interactive multimedia collaborative strategies employed by upper primary school students : A case study . Educational Practice and Theory , 23 ( 2 ) , 61 – 80 . Grayson , D . , & McDerwott , L . ( 1996 ) . Use of the computer for research on student thinking in physics . American Journal of Physics , 64 ( 5 ) , 144 – 153 . Greca , I . M . , & Moreira , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Mental models , conceptual models , and modelling . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 – 11 . Gunn , C . ( 1995 ) . Usability and beyond : Evaluating Educational effectiveness of computer - based learning . In G . Gibbs ( Ed . ) , Improving pupil learning through assessment and evaluation ( pp . 168 – 190 ) . UK : Oxford Centre for Staff Development . Guzetti , B . J . , Snyder , T . E . , Glass , G . V . , & Gamas , W . S . ( 1993 ) . Promoting conceptual change in science : A comparative meta - analysis of instructional interventions from reading education and science education . Reading Research Quarterly , 28 , 116 – 159 . Halloun , I . ( 1998 ) . Learning schematic concepts for schematic models of the real world : The Newtonian concept of force . Science Education , 82 ( 2 ) , 239 – 263 . Halloun , I . , & Hestenes , D . ( 1995 ) . Interpreting the force concept inventory : A response to the March 1995 critique by Huffman and Heller . Physics Teacher , 33 ( 8 ) , 502 – 506 . Hart , C . ( 2002 ) . Teaching Newton ’ s laws . Australian Science Teachers Journal , 48 ( 4 ) , 14 – 23 . Hennessy , S . , Twigger , D . , Driver , R . , O ’ Shea , T . , O ’ Malley , C . E . , Byard , M . , etal . ( 1995a ) . Design a computer - augmented curriculum for mechanics . International Journal of Science Education , 17 ( 1 ) , 75 – 92 . Hennessy , S . , Twigger , D . , Driver , R . , O ’ Shea , T . , O ’ Malley , C . E . , Byard , M . , et al . ( 1995b ) . A classroom intervention using a computer - augmented curriculum for mechanics . International Journal of Science Education , 17 ( 2 ) , 189 – 206 . Hestenes , D . ( 1995 ) . Modeling software for learning and doing physics . In C . Bernardini , C . Tarsitani , & M . Vincentini ( Eds . ) , Thinking Physics for Teaching ( pp . 25 – 66 ) . New York : Plenum Press Retrieved June 13 2007 from http : / / modelingnts . la . asu . edu / pdf / ModelingSoftware . pdf . Hestenes , D . , Wells , M . , & Swackhamer , G . ( 1992 ) . Force concept inventory . The Physics Teacher , 30 ( 3 ) , 141 – 158 . Hewson , M . ( 1982 ) . Students ’ existing knowledge as a factor influencing the acquisition of scientific knowledge . Ph . D . Thesis , University of Witwatersrand , Johannesburg , South Africa , cited in Kokkotas , 2004 . Jiménez , J . D . , & Perales , F . J . ( 2001 ) . Graphic representation of force in secondary education : Analysis and alternative educational proposal . Physics Education , 36 , 227 – 235 . Jonassen , D . H . ( 1992 ) . Evaluating constructivist learning . In T . M . Duffy & D . H . Jonassen ( Eds . ) , Constructivism and the technology of instruction : A conversation . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Jonassen , D . H . ( 1994 ) . Thinking technology : Towards a constructivist design model . Educational Technology , 3 ( 4 ) , 34 – 37 . Jonassen , D . H . ( 1999 ) . Designing constructivist learning environments . In C . Reigeluth ( Ed . ) , Instructional - design theories and models : A new paradigm of instructional theory ( pp . 215 – 240 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kanuka , H . , & Anderson , T . ( 1999 ) . Using constructivism in technology - mediated learning : Constructing order out of the chaos in the literature . Radical Pedagogy , 1 ( 1 ) , 1999 Retrieved from http : / / radicalpedagogy . icaap . org / content / vol1 . 1999 / issue2 / 02kanuka1 _ 2 . html . Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 217 Kokkotas , P . ( 2004 ) . Science education . Athens : edited by the author . In Greek . Kolokotronis , D . , & Solomonidou , C . ( 2003 ) . A step - by - step design and development of an integrated educational software to deal with students ’ empirical ideas about mechanical interaction . Education and Information Technologies , 8 ( 3 ) , 229 – 244 . Lebow , D . ( 1993 ) . Constructivist values for systems design : Five principles toward a new mindset . Educational Technology Research and Development , 41 , 4 – 16 . Maloney , D . P . ( 1984 ) . Rule governed approaches to physics — Newton ’ s third law . Physics Education , 19 , 37 – 42 . Merrill , D . ( 2002 ) . First principles of instruction . Educational technology research and Development , 50 ( 3 ) , 43 – 59 . Pham , B . ( 1998 ) . Quality evaluation of educational multimedia systems . Australian Journal of Educational Technology , 14 ( 2 ) , 107 – 121 . Posner , G . ( 1982 ) . A cognitive science conception of curriculum and instruction . Journal of Curriculum Studies , 14 , 343 – 351 Cited in Kokkotas 2004 . Raghavan , K . , & Glaser , R . ( 1995 ) . Model - based analysis and reasoning in science : The MARS curriculum . Science Education , 79 , 37 – 61 . Raghavan , K . , Sartoris , M . L . , & Glaser , R . ( 1998 ) . Why does it go up ? The impact of the MARS curriculum as revealed through changes in student explanations of a helium balloon . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 , 547 – 567 . Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . , & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : Designing and evaluating an instructional sequence for Newton ’ s third law . Science Education , 89 , 175 – 195 . Scott , P . ( 1998 ) . Teacher talk and meaning making in science classrooms : A Vygotskian analysis and review . Studies in Science Education , 32 , 45 – 80 . Scott , P . , Asoko , H . , & Driver , R . ( 1992 ) . Teaching for conceptual change : A review of strategies . In R . Duit , F . Goldberg , & H . Niedderer ( Eds . ) , Research in physics learning : theoretical issues and empirical studies ( pp . 310 – 329 ) . Kiel , Germany : Institute for Science Education , University of Kiel . Solomonidou , C . ( 2006 ) . New trends in educational technology : Constructivism and new learning environments . Athens : Metaihmio Editions In Greek . Solomonidou , C . , & Kolokotronis , D . ( 2001 ) . Interactions between bodies : Students ’ ( aged 11 – 16 ) empirical ideas and design of appropriate educational software . Themes in Education , 2 ( 2 – 3 ) , 175 – 210 . Soloway , E . , Jackson , S . L . , Klein , J . , Quintana , C . , Reed , J . , Spitulnik , J . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Learning theory in practice : Case studies in learner centred design . In R . Mack , L . Marks , & D . Collins ( Eds . ) , CHI ’ 96 Proceedings , ACM ( pp . 189 – 196 ) . Cited in Squires and Preece 1999 . Spitulnik , M . W . , Stratford , S . , Krajcik , J . , & Soloway , E . ( 1998 ) . Using technology to support students ’ artifact construction in science . In B . J . Fraser & K . G . Tobin ( Eds . ) , International handbook of science education ( pp . 363 – 381 ) . London : Kluwer . Squires , D . , & McDougall , A . ( 1994 ) . Choosing and using educational software : A teacher ’ s guide . London : Falmer . Squires , D . , & Preece , J . ( 1999 ) . Predicting quality in educational software : Evaluating for learning , usability and the synergy between them . Interacting with Computers , 11 , 467 – 483 . Strike , K . A . , Posner , G . J . , West , L . H . T . , & Pines , A . L . ( 1985 ) . A conceptual view of learning and understanding . In L . H . T . West & A . L . Pines ( Eds . ) , Cognitive structure and conceptual change . Orlando , FL : Academic . Tao , P . - K . , & Gunstone , R . F . ( 1999 ) . The process of conceptual change in force and motion during computer - supported physics instruction . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 ( 7 ) , 859 – 882 . Tergan , S . ( 1998 ) . Checklists for the evaluation of educational software : Critical review and prospects . Innovations in Education and Training International , 35 ( 1 ) , 9 – 20 . Twigger , D . , Byard , M . , Driver , R . , Draper , S . , O ’ Shea , T . , Hartley , R . , et al . ( 1994 ) . The conception of force and motion of students aged between 10 and 15 years : An interview study designed to guide instruction . International Journal of Science Education , 16 ( 2 ) , 215 – 219 . Viennot , L . ( 1979 ) . Spontaneous reasoning in elementary dynamics . European Journal of Science Education , 1 ( 2 ) , 205 – 221 . Viennot , L . ( 1996 ) . Raisonner en physique : La part du sens commun . Louvain la Neuve , Belgium : Editions De Boeck . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1978 ) . Mind in society : The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 218 Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 Weller , H . G . ( 1995 ) . Diagnosing and altering three Aristotelian alternative conceptions in dynamics : Microcomputer simulations of scientific models . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 32 ( 3 ) , 271 – 290 . Weller , H . G . ( 1996 ) . Assessing the impact of computer - based learning in science . Journal of Research on Computing in Education , 28 ( 4 ) , 461 – 485 . Wilson , B . G . ( 1997 ) . Reflections on constructivism and instructional design . In R . Dills & A . A . Romiszowski ( Eds . ) , Instructional development paradigms , educational technology publications . New Jersey : Englewood Cliffs Retrieved from http : / / carbon . cudenver . edu / ∼ bwilson / construct . html . Wilson , B . G . ( 1998 ) . What is constructivist learning environment ? Introduction . In B . G . Wilson ( Ed . ) , Constructivist learning environments . Case studies in instructional design ( pp . 3 – 8 , 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology . Educ Inf Technol ( 2008 ) 13 : 185 – 219 219