NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE FOR TREATMENT OF CANCER AND OTHER DISEASES Shom Goel , Dan G . Duda , Lei Xu , Lance L . Munn , Yves Boucher , Dai Fukumura , and Rakesh K . Jain Edwin L . Steele Laboratory for Tumor Biology , Department of Radiation Oncology , Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts L Goel S , Duda DG , Xu L , Munn LL , Boucher Y , Fukumura D , Jain RK . Normalization of the Vasculature for Treatment of Cancer and Other Diseases . Physiol Re v 91 : 1071 – 1121 , 2011 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00038 . 2010 . —New vessel formation ( angio - genesis ) is an essential physiological process for embryologic development , normal growth , and tissue repair . Angiogenesis is tightly regulated at the molecular level . Dysregulation of angiogenesis occurs in various pathologies and is one of the hallmarks of cancer . The imbalance of pro - and anti - angiogenic signaling within tumors creates an abnormal vascular network that is characterized by dilated , tortuous , and hyperpermeable vessels . The physiological consequences of these vascular abnormalities include temporal and spatial heterogeneity in tumor blood ﬂow and oxygenation and increased tumor interstitial ﬂuid pressure . These abnormalities and the resultant microenvironment fuel tumor progression , and also lead to a reduction in the efﬁcacy of chemotherapy , radiotherapy , and immunotherapy . With the discovery of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) as a major driver of tumor angiogenesis , efforts have focused on novel therapeutics aimed at inhibiting VEGF activity , with the goal of regressing tumors by starvation . Unfortunately , clinical trials of anti - VEGF monotherapy in patients with solid tumors have been largely negative . Intriguingly , the combination of anti - VEGF therapy with conventional chemo - therapy has improved survival in cancer patients compared with chemotherapy alone . These seemingly paradoxical results could be explained by a “normalization” of the tumor vasculature by anti - VEGF therapy . Preclinical studies have shown that anti - VEGF therapy changes tumor vasculature towards a more “mature” or “normal” phenotype . This “vascular normalization” is characterized by attenuation of hyperpermeability , increased vascular pericyte coverage , a more normal basement membrane , and a resultant reduction in tumor hypoxia and interstitial ﬂuid pressure . These in turn can lead to an improvement in the metabolic proﬁle of the tumor microenvironment , the delivery and efﬁcacy of exogenously administered therapeutics , the efﬁcacy of radiotherapy and of effector immune cells , and a reduction in number of metastatic cells shed by tumors into circulation in mice . These ﬁndings are consistent with data from clinical trials of anti - VEGF agents in patients with various solid tumors . More recently , genetic and pharmacological approaches have begun to unravel some other key regulators of vascular normalization such as proteins that regulate tissue oxygen sensing ( PHD2 ) and vessel matu - ration ( PDGFR (cid:1) , RGS5 , Ang1 / 2 , TGF - (cid:1) ) . Here , we review the pathophysiology of tumor angiogenesis , the molecular underpinnings and functional consequences of vascular normal - ization , and the implications for treatment of cancer and nonmalignant diseases . I . INTRODUCTION 1071 II . ROLE OF ABNORMAL VASCULATURE . . . 1073 III . DEVELOPMENT OF ANTI - ANGIOGENIC . . . 1077 IV . PRECLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR . . . 1079 V . CLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR VASCULAR . . . 1098 VI . THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF . . . 1102 VII . NORMALIZATION OF THE . . . 1106 VIII . NORMALIZATION OF THE LYMPHATIC . . . 1109 IX . SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVE 1109 X . AREAS OF UNCERTAINTY AND FUTURE . . . 1111 I . INTRODUCTION The establishment of a mature , organized vascular network is fundamental for tissue homeostasis . Therefore , creation of new blood vessels , angiogenesis , plays a critical role in health and development . Angiogenesis is vital for successful embryogenesis and organ growth , and is also an important requirement for wound healing and tissue repair . In such situations , angiogenesis is a tightly regulated process , as its onset and offset are carefully controlled by a host of molec - ular and mechanical factors ( 47 , 142 ) . This strict regulation Physiol Rev 91 : 1071 – 1121 , 2011 doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00038 . 2010 1071 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m results in a tissue - speciﬁc , structured , hierarchically orga - nized vascular tree that is optimally positioned to meet the needs of the organ and of the body . In contrast , many human diseases are associated with vas - cular dysfunction of some sort . When Celsus described the four cardinal features of inﬂammation – tumor , rubor , calor , and dolor – in the ﬁrst century AD , he provided a report of the phenotype associated with the microvascular dilation and hyperpermeability that is characteristic of several in - ﬂammatory diseases . In more recent times , increased atten - tion has been given to disorders characterized not only by a dysregulation of vascular function , but also associated with uncontrolled angiogenesis . In such conditions , new blood vessel development occurs in a disorganized fashion ( 143 ) . Solid cancers are the prototypic example of a disease state associated with pathological angiogenesis , which has be - come a vibrant area of research . Other common and impor - tant diseases such as inﬂammatory disorders and athero - sclerosis ( 150 ) as well as more rare conditions such as be - nign tumors and age - related macular degeneration ( 46 ) are other examples of diseases associated with an abnormal vasculature . The concept that growing tumors have a rich vascular net - work ﬁrst arose well over 100 years ago , through observa - tions by notable scientists such as Virchow ( 85 ) , and was strengthened by the seminal work of Ide ( 136 ) and later Algire ( 3 ) who conﬁrmed the importance of an abundant blood supply to tumor growth . In 1968 , the hypothesis that tumors produce a diffusible factor that promotes angiogen - esis was put forward ( 80 , 111 ) , forming the foundation for Dr . Judah Folkman’s seminal paper in 1971 in which he suggested that the identiﬁcation of key molecular players driving tumor angiogenesis could result in effective strate - gies to inhibit it , and hence “starve” a tumor to death ( 90 ) . Following this , Gullino ( 115 ) demonstrated in 1976 that cells in precancerous tissue acquire angiogenic capacity on their way to becoming cancerous , and suggested anti - angio - genesis as a strategy to prevent cancer . Over the last four decades , these ﬁndings have spurred a very signiﬁcant re - search effort , which has culminated in the introduction of several anti - angiogenic medications into modern clinical practice . With this success came also very important ques - tions related to the mechanism of action of anti - angiogenic agents in patients . Tumor angiogenesis is not simply the production of an in - creased number of blood vessels to serve a growing mass . Although the main purpose of tumor angiogenesis can be considered to maintain a cancer’s blood supply , the process occurs in an unmitigated fashion , and the resultant vascular network is highly abnormal . This stands in contradistinc - tion to wound healing , in which angiogenesis is tightly reg - ulated ( 57 , 78 ) . Indeed , this relentless drive for angiogenesis led Dvorak to elegantly describe tumors as “wounds that do not heal” ( 78 ) . This profoundly aberrant vasculature dra - matically alters the tumor microenvironment and inﬂuences heavily the ways in which cancers grow and progress , es - cape the host’s immune system , metastasize , and respond to anticancer therapies . To obtain nutrients for their growth and for dissemination to distant organs , cancer cells engulf existing blood vessels ( vascular co - option ) or form new blood vessels . The latter can take one of three forms : 1 ) new blood vessel sprouting from existing vessels ( angiogenesis ) , 2 ) recruitment of bone marrow - derived endothelial progenitor cells to form new vessels ( postnatal vasculogenesis ) , and 3 ) intussusception , when a capillary wall extends into the lumen to split a single vessel into two ( also known as splitting angiogenesis ) ( 17 , 46 , 223 ) . Two further emerging mechanisms of vessel for - mation in tumors include vasculogenic mimicry ( the trans - differentiation of cancer cells ) and mosaic vessel formation ( the incorporation of cancer cells into the vessel wall ) . All of these processes are driven by a number of molecular players ( 47 ) . Of these , a critical factor is vascular endothelial growth factor A ( VEGF - A , also known as VEGF ) . VEGF was ﬁrst discovered by Dvorak and colleagues as a “vascu - lar permeability factor” ( VPF ) in 1983 ( 259 ) , and later by Ferrara and colleagues as the angiogenic endothelial mito - gen ( named VEGF ) in 1989 ( 183 ) . At the same time , it was reported that VPF and VEGF were the same molecule ( 163 ) and that the VEGF receptor 2 ( VEGFR2 ) ( 276 ) is the main endothelial cell mediator of VEGF’s pro - angiogenic activi - ties ( 204 ) . The indispensable role for VEGF in developmen - tal angiogenesis was established after observations that VEGF haplo - insufﬁciency leads to embryonic lethality ( 45 , 86 ) . Since these landmark discoveries , a catalog of other molecular players has been established in the process of tumor angiogenesis ( 47 ) . The chronic imbalance of the pro - and anti - angiogenic signaling in tumors ( i . e . , an excess of pro - angiogenic signaling , a deﬁciency of anti - angiogenic signaling , or both ) leads to the development of the abnor - mal tumor vasculature . In this review , we describe the structural and functional abnormalities of tumor blood vessels and their implications for tumor progression and response to anti - cancer thera - pies . We then discuss the emerging concept that anti - angio - genic therapies , by restoring the imbalance between pro - and anti - angiogenic factors within tumors , can induce at least temporarily the reversion of tumor vessels towards a more normal phenotype , coined by us as “vascular normal - ization . ” We discuss the preclinical and clinical evidence pertaining to this hypothesis , and also explain how vascular normalization might enhance the beneﬁts of host anti - tu - mor immune responses and of conventional cancer treat - ments . We discuss recent reports that have begun to unravel some of the key genetic and molecular contributors to the vascular normalization process , and ﬁnally how this con - cept can offer possibilities to improve treatment of various GOEL ET AL . 1072 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m diseases associated with abnormal angiogenesis that afﬂict more than half a billion people worldwide ( 145 ) . II . ROLE OF ABNORMAL VASCULATURE IN TUMOR PROGRESSION AND TREATMENT RESISTANCE A . The Abnormal Structure of Tumor Vasculature Solid tumors can be conceptualized as “organs” in them - selves , composed of cancer cells , stromal cells , immune cells , and blood and lymphatic vessels , all embedded in a matrix . It has been recognized for decades that most tumors are highly vascular . For example , surgeons readily observed that tumors bled vigorously during surgery ( 316 ) . How - ever , this had been initially attributed to the inﬂammatory reaction within tumors , and not to the abnormalities of tumor vessels . The concept that hypervascularity in tumors might be due to angiogenesis , put forward by Ide et al . ( 136 ) and Algire et al . ( 3 ) , was later strengthened by two papers published by Folkman’s group in the 1960’s ( 91 , 92 ) . Through this work , it was demonstrated that fragments of melanoma growing in isolated , perfused thyroid tissue grow to (cid:1) 2 mm in size and then cease to enlarge . In contrast , similar fragments demonstrate rapid growth potential and hypervascularity when transplanted back into living mice . These observa - tions conﬁrmed that the establishment of a neovasculature is critical to the growth of a tumor beyond a size of 1 – 2 mm , the limit of nutrient diffusion . It was proposed that after reaching this size , tumors experience hypoxia and acidosis due to the inadequacy of nutrient supply and metabolic waste clearance by vessels ( 90 ) . Folkman and co - workers ( 104 ) hypothesized that molecular signals that drive angio - genesis must be invoked at this time to facilitate further tumor growth . This idea was most elegantly supported by experiments using the rabbit cornea angiogenesis assay ( 104 ) . After implanting small tumor fragments into the avascular cornea , a striking outgrowth of new vessels could be observed from surrounding vascular tissues towards the tumor . Moreover , this angiogenic response was not damp - ened by the concomitant application of corticosteroids , ar - guing against the prevailing notion that the angiogenesis was a purely inﬂammatory response ( 105 ) . It has now been established that hypoxia is a hallmark of solid tumors ( see below ) and that this in turn drives the production of angiogenic factors , including VEGF , within tumors . Hypoxia reduces the activity of the prolyl hydrox - ylase domain proteins ( PHD1 – 3 ) , which act as oxygen sen - sors ( 159 , 199 , 256 ) . In turn , the reduced PHD activity prevents the ubiquitination and degradation of hypoxia - inducible transcription factor ( HIF ) 1 (cid:2) and HIF2 (cid:2) ( 258 , 288 ) , which allows the transcription of HIF - driven hypoxia - related genes including VEGF . VEGF production in tumors can also be promoted by other factors including epigenetic regulation of its transcription by acidosis , inﬂammatory cytokines , growth factors , sex hormones , and chemokines and through mutations in oncogenes that lie upstream of VEGF ( 84 , 286 ) . Overexpression of VEGF and other pro - angiogenic factors leads to formation of a new vasculature that is structurally abnormal at macroscopic and microscopic levels ( 95 , 101 , 142 , 210 , 211 ) ( FIGURE 1 ) . These abnormalities are exacer - bated as a tumor continues to grow ( 101 ) . Anatomically , tumor microvessels are dilated , tortuous , and saccular with haphazard patterns of interconnection and branching ( 143 , 168 , 181 , 182 , 279 , 313 ) . Unlike the microvasculature of normal tissue , which has an organized and regular branch - ing order , tumor vasculature is characterized by pockets of increased vessel density and others of reduced vessel density ( 12 , 13 , 181 , 182 ) ( FIGURE 2 ) . There is also increased vas - cular shunting within tumors , caused by a loss of vascular diameter control , an increase in vascular reactivity , and a higher tendency for vessel growth ( 228 , 229 ) . At the cellular level , the endothelial cells ( ECs ) lining tumor vessels have an irregular , disorganized morphology . Mature , stable ECs are connected by adherens junctions including vascular endo - thelial ( VE ) - cadherin ( 65 ) . VE - cadherin is a transmembrane receptor , the extracellular domain of which binds to other VE - cadherin molecules on neighboring ECs . The intracel - lular domain of VE - cadherin attaches to the EC cytoskele - ton via the catenin family of proteins , acting as structural links but also effectors for downstream molecular signaling ( 65 ) . Downstream signaling from VEGF - VEGFR2 interac - tions promotes contraction of the EC cytoskeleton and weakening of VE - cadherin junctions , and hence a loosening of EC associations and EC migration ( 65 ) . As a conse - quence , ECs within tumors are often poorly connected or overlapping , with less VE - cadherin and a branched pheno - type with long cytoplasmic projections ( 122 , 128 ) . At times , ECs might protrude into the capillary lumen , or conversely sprout into the perivascular tumor tissue ( 122 ) . There is also an abundance of vesiculo - vacuolar organelles ( VVOs ) in tumor ECs , which have been associated with vascular permeability ; however , these do not explain the large gaps in the walls of tumor vessels ( 128 , 233 ) . Correlating with these features , human tumor - associated endothelium dem - onstrates a markedly different gene expression proﬁle to normal endothelium ( 125 ) . In addition , perivascular cells ( PVCs ) , both pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells , around tumor vessels demon - strate abnormal structural characteristics . These connective tissue cells normally surround and support the endothe - lium . Pericytes usually lie within the vessel basement mem - brane and interact closely with ECs to prevent vessel leak - age . They are normally recruited to stabilize vessels and NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1073 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m hence envelop ECs in response to activation of a number of molecular pathways : 1 ) platelet - derived growth factor B ( PDGF - B ) , secreted by ECs , facilitates pericyte recruitment to vessels through binding to the platelet - derived growth factor receptor - (cid:1) ( PDGFR (cid:1) ) on pericytes ; 2 ) angiopoietin - 1 ( Ang - 1 ) , a vascular stabilizing factor , presumably facilitates pericyte - EC connections ; 3 ) sphingosine - 1 - phosphate - 1 ( S1P1 ) and endothelial differentiation sphingolipid G pro - FIGURE 1 Top : the microvasculature of solid tumors demonstrates a number of structural abnormalities when compared with that of healthy tissues . As shown in A , endothelial cells demonstrate aberrations in shape and are often separated by wide and irregular interendothelial junctions . In addition , there are fewer pericytes , which are often loosely attached to endothelial cells and lie within a basement membrane that is either abnormally thin or thick . The widened endothelial junctions , coupled with the more tenuous vascular investment by pericytes , promote vascular hyperperme - ability and facilitate the intravasation of tu - mor cells into the circulation , such that they can disseminate to form distant me - tastases . The accompanying functional de - rangements in tumor microvessels create a hostile microenvironment that fuels tu - mor growth , metastasis , and resistance to therapies . B : preclinical and clinical data support the notion that anti - angiogenic therapies can “normalize” the tumor vascu - lature , restoring the structural and func - tional aberrations of vessels towards a more normal state . Bottom : abnormalities in perivascular cell ( PVC ) morphology in solid tumors . A : PVCs ( stained for (cid:2) SMA ) in normal pancreatic vessels provide a cir - cumferential and tight investment of arteri - oles and venules in the normal pancreas , with a more dense arrangement around the arteriole . B : double staining for PVCs and endothelial cells ( ECs , stained for CD31 ) in a smaller arteriole and venule in the pancreas shows a regular arrange - ment of PVCs around the arteriole , with more irregularly arranged and shaped PVCs around the venule . C : PVCs ( stained for desmin ) on a normal pancreatic capil - lary are arranged longitudinally along the vessel axis . D and E : PVCs in the MCa - IV mammary carcinoma show morphological abnormalities ( stained for (cid:2) SMA in D and desmin in E ) including an irregular arrange - ment and cytoplasmic projections in multi - ple directions . F : PVCs in the Lewis Lung Carcinoma ( LLC ) show loose associations with ECs . G and H : PVCs in the MCa - IV carcinoma and LLC showing occasional PVC - PVC contact and overlap . [ Scale bar in H applies to all panels . Bar lengths : 35 (cid:3) m ( A , F – H ) ; 30 (cid:3) m ( B ) ; 15 (cid:3) m ( C ) ; 80 (cid:3) m ( D and E ) . ] [ Top panel from Jain RK . N Engl J Med 360 : 2669 – 2671 , 2009 , with per - mission , copyright MMS ; bottom panel from Morikawa et al . ( 206 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1074 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tein - coupled receptor 1 ( EDG1 ) ; and 4 ) transforming growth factor - (cid:1) ( TGF - (cid:1) ) ( 47 , 142 , 147 ) . Dysregulation of these vessel maturation pathways in tumors often results in vessels with an absent or loose attachment of PVCs ( 1 , 137 , 142 , 206 , 279 ) . PVC de - tachment is an early step in the process of tumor angio - genesis and facilitates the movement of ECs into the sur - rounding matrix to form new vessels . Moreover , these PVCs are often abnormal in shape with bizarre cytoplas - mic processes , irregularly scattered around the endothe - lium ( 206 ) ( FIGURE 1 ) . Some investigators have reported empty sleeves comprised of PVCs , which are much longer than the vessels they are supposed to envelop ( 206 ) . The mechanisms for PVC detachment in tumors are multiple , but include a VEGF - mediated disruption of PDGFR - (cid:1) activity ( 110 ) , and overexpression of Ang - 2 , the endog - enous “antagonist” of Ang - 1 ( 8 ) . Moreover , detached PVCs become activated , releasing further VEGF and the basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) , setting up a vi - cious cycle of continuous angiogenesis ( 39 , 97 , 236 ) . Finally , the vascular basement membrane in tumor tissue is also abnormal : unusually thick in some tumors ( e . g . , in the brain ) , or very thin or absent in others ( 137 , 160 , 279 , 298 ) . Finally , these structural aberrations may occur heteroge - neously throughout any given tumor during growth , pro - gression , and response to therapy , adding an extra layer of complexity to understanding of the tumor microenviron - ment ( 251 ) . B . Functional , Immunological , and Therapeutic Consequences The structural abnormalities of the tumor vasculature have far - reaching consequences for tumor pathophysiology , growth , metastasis , and response to anti - cancer therapies . Just as the aberrations in cancer cells promote their survival and resistance to treatments , the genetic and epigenetic ab - normalities of the tumor microvasculature result in patho - physiological traits that are functionally advantageous for most cancers . First , the heterogeneity in vessel distribution and haphazard anatomical arrangement of the vasculature cause spatial and temporal heterogeneity in blood ﬂow ( 141 , 143 ) , with areas of hypervascularity adjacent to hypovascular ones ( 13 , 279 ) . Blood ﬂow is often redundant in closed or blind loops ( 181 , 182 ) . Second , the structural abnormalities de - scribed above lead to a marked increase in vessel leakiness . Poorly connected ECs , loosely associated PVCs , and an in - crease in VVOs all contribute to this hyperpermeable phe - notype , and hence , intravascular ﬂuids and plasma proteins can easily extravasate ( 143 ) . As a consequence , there is a protein and ﬂuid build - up in the tumor interstitium . This excess extravasation of proteins increases the extravascular oncotic pressure ( osmotic pressure of plasma proteins ) , dragging further ﬂuid into the interstitial space ( 266 , 279 ) . Furthermore , as discussed later , there is an absence of func - tional intratumoral lymphatic vessels , resulting in the im - paired clearance of extracellular ﬂuid and hence interstitial hypertension within tumors . This elevated interstitial ﬂuid FIGURE 2 Anatomical abnormalities in the vascular net - work of solid tumors , as demonstrated in colorectal carci - noma . A : vascular anatomy in a spontaneous murine colo - rectal tumor , imaged by side - view endoscopy after intrave - nous injection of FITC - dextran . In this lesion , severe vessel dilation is observed , accompanied by vascular tortuosity and leakage of ﬂuorescent tracer . Scale bar (cid:2) 200 (cid:3) m . [ From Kim et al . ( 168 ) . ] B : methylmethacrylate vascular cast of a primary human colorectal carcinoma demonstrat - ing again the intense vascular abnormalities that develop due to relentless angiogenesis . Scale bar (cid:2) 100 (cid:3) m . [ From Less et al . ( 180 ) , with permission . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1075 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m pressure ( IFP ) has been documented within murine and hu - man tumors , including breast , colorectal , and cervical can - cer as well as melanoma and glioblastoma ( 32 – 34 , 178 , 180 , 184 , 242 , 294 , 297 ) ( FIGURE 3 ) . We predicted mathe - matically and then conﬁrmed experimentally that IFP is elevated throughout a tumor , dropping precipitously to normal values in the tumor’s periphery or in the surround - ing tissue ( 18 , 19 , 32 , 146 ) . The raised intratumoral IFP reduces the hydrostatic pressure gradient between the intra - vascular and extravascular compartments such that the two essentially equilibrate . Although this in itself is not sufﬁ - cient to collapse tumor vessels , it does reduce transvascular ﬂow ( as per Starling’s equation describing ﬂuid movement across the vascular wall ; Ref . 264 ) . On the other hand , the mechanical stress from the solid mass of proliferating can - cer cells and the matrix is able to collapse tumor vessels , closing their lumen through compressive forces ( 220 ) . This combination of regional poor perfusion , raised IFP , and areas of vascular collapse produces regional hypoxia and acidosis within tumors ( 123 ) . A recent study examining murine tumors with magnetic resonance imaging has pro - vided further support for this concept , demonstrating that regions with high vascular permeability are spatiotempo - rally coincident with hypoxia and areas of poor vascular PVC coverage ( 198 ) . In addition , Vaupel and colleagues ( 129 , 130 ) measured the partial pressure of oxygen in tu - mors using electrodes and demonstrated the presence of hypoxia within several different human tumor types . The anomalous tumor vasculature and the ensuing hypoxia have several consequences for tumors beyond promotion of angiogenesis . First , because cancer cells are more resistant to hypoxia than normal cells , they undergo epigenetic changes in hypoxic conditions that promote their malignant phenotype and the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . This may result in a greater metastatic potential ( 31 , 64 , 129 , 256 , 257 ) . For example , hypoxia induces HIF1 (cid:2) - mediated production of several growth factors in cancer cells ( 121 ) and the activation of oncogenes that pro - mote invasive growth and metastasis ( 224 ) . Indeed , in - creased hypoxia correlates with metastasis and reduced sur - vival in patients ( 129 ) . Second , hypoxia and low pH also compromise the cytotoxic functions of immune cells that inﬁltrate a tumor , further enhancing the malignant pheno - FIGURE 3 Aggregate data from published ( and our own ongoing ) studies of interstitial ﬂuid pressure ( IFP ) measured in a variety of human tumors and normal tissues , demonstrating the principle that IFP is grossly elevated in human solid tumors . GOEL ET AL . 1076 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m type ( 100 ) . Third , aberrations in the tumor vasculature have great implications for tumor sensitivity to therapy . Hypoxia is a well - known mediator of cancer cell resistance to conventional radiotherapy and cytotoxics ( 273 , 303 ) . Moreover , the poor blood supply and raised intratumoral IFP ( leading to a reduction in transvascular ﬂow ) impair the delivery of systemically administered therapies to tumors such as conventional cytotoxics and monoclonal antibodies ( 140 , 279 , 293 ) . Drugs become concentrated in regions that already have sufﬁcient blood supply and fail to enter inac - cessible regions . This limited penetration of drugs may be especially true of larger therapeutics such as nanoparticles ( 10 – 100 nM ) ( 152 ) . C . Summary In summary , the abnormality of tumor vessels can contrib - ute greatly to the malignant phenotype of tumors , to metas - tasis and evasion of the immune system , and to their capac - ity to resist therapy . For these reasons , strategies designed to “normalize” vessels in tumors have instant appeal , as the ability to improve vessel structure and function may delay progression and improve delivery and efﬁcacy of cytotoxic therapies . III . DEVELOPMENT OF ANTI - ANGIOGENIC THERAPY FOR CANCER AND THE VASCULAR NORMALIZATION HYPOTHESIS A . Vascular Normalization Hypothesis Systemic antiangiogenic therapy has been developed with the rationale that inhibiting blood vessel formation would cause profound vascular regression , essentially starving tu - mors to death or rendering them “dormant” ( 90 ) . Early preclinical studies provided support for this hypothesis . In 1993 , Napoleone Ferrara’s group ( 167 ) reported a marked reduction in vascular density and signiﬁcant tumor growth delay in nude mice bearing xenografts of rhabdomyosar - coma , glioblastoma multiforme , and leiomyosarcoma after treatment with an anti - VEGF monoclonal antibody . These results were conﬁrmed in models of colorectal cancer , where anti - VEGF therapy resulted in growth delay of sub - cutaneous xenografts and an attendant reduction in metas - tasis formation ( 289 ) . Despite these promising preclinical results , the effects of anti - VEGF monotherapy in the treatment of human solid tumors have been generally underwhelming , with only modest objective response rates and a lack of meaningful survival beneﬁts in phase 3 trials ( 47 , 148 ) . In metastatic colorectal cancer , for example , an objective response rate of 3 . 3 % was observed among chemotherapy - pretreated pa - tients receiving monotherapy with bevacizumab , a mono - clonal antibody against human VEGF ( 103 ) . Similarly , a conﬁrmed response rate of 6 . 7 % was seen in metastatic breast cancer patients treated with this agent alone ( 59 ) . These data suggest that anti - VEGF therapy alone is unable to effectively induce sufﬁcient vascular regression in the clinical setting to cause signiﬁcant tumor shrinkage . As dis - cussed later , monotherapy has proven effective in certain settings ( e . g . , recurrent glioblastoma or ovarian cancer ) , but the mechanisms of anti - VEGF therapy’s efﬁcacy in these cancers may not involve tumor shrinkage . In contrast , large randomized phase 3 clinical trials of bev - acizumab therapy in combination with systemic chemother - apy have demonstrated signiﬁcant improvements in pro - gression - free survival and overall survival when compared with systemic chemotherapy alone . Multiple clinical trials in the ﬁrst - and second - line treatment of metastatic colorec - tal cancer have all conﬁrmed that the addition of bevaci - zumab to standard ﬁrst - line chemotherapy regimens signif - icantly improves patient outcomes ( 135 , 246 , 272 ) . Trials of bevacizumab with chemotherapy as ﬁrst - line treatment for metastatic non - small - cell lung cancer have yielded sim - ilar results ( 237 , 247 ) . These data are intriguing , and to - gether imply that anti - VEGF antibody therapy augments the efﬁcacy of systemic chemotherapy but has limited action as monotherapy . Taken together , there appears to be a syn - ergistic effect upon combining anti - VEGF antibody therapy with chemotherapy in some malignancies . These clinical results seem counterintuitive . Anti - VEGF therapy is designed to promote vascular regression and tu - mor starvation , yet the efﬁcacy of chemotherapy depends on efﬁcient tumor blood ﬂow and hence drug delivery . Thus vascular regression should theoretically dampen , rather than enhance , the effects of systemic chemotherapy . Indeed , some preclinical data using agents that induce profound vascular pruning support this idea ( 192 ) . In addition , tumor hypoxia induced by the antivascular effects of anti - VEGF therapy should also increase the metastatic proclivity of tumors and render them relatively chemoresistant ( 224 ) . The clinical data refute these hypotheses , however , and are further supported by the fact that no trial in patients with metastatic disease has demonstrated a signiﬁcant detriment in overall survival from the addition of bevacizumab to systemic chemotherapy ( 203 , 219 , 291 ) . In 2001 we proposed the “vascular normalization” hypoth - esis , which may resolve this paradox ( 143 , 144 ) . The hy - pothesis posits that rather than obliterating vessels , the ju - dicious use of anti - angiogenic therapy reverts the grossly abnormal structure and function of the tumor vasculature towards a more normal state . In turn , this normalizes the tumor microenvironment ( FIGURE 4 ) . Over recent years , a large number of preclinical and some clinical studies have provided evidence in support of this hypothesis , described in detail in sections IV and V . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1077 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m B . Consequences of Vascular Normalization in Tumors The normalization hypothesis suggests that by correcting the abnormalities in structure and function of tumor vessels ( rather than destroying vessels completely ) we can normal - ize the tumor microenvironment and ultimately control tu - mor progression and improve response to other therapies ( 143 , 144 ) . This may occur via different physiological mechanisms . First , increased homogeneity of functional vascular density and a more orderly arrangement of vessels could reduce heterogeneity in blood ﬂow in different re - gions within a tumor . Second , improved connections be - tween adjacent endothelial cells , an increased proportion of PVC - covered vessels , and a tighter association between PVCs and ECs would reduce vascular permeability , result - ing in a drop in intratumoral IFP . While tumor vessels may never become completely “normal , ” the effect of these changes is a more even distribution of blood ﬂow within a tumor , with a subsequent reduction in areas of hypoxia and FIGURE 4 Proposed role of vessel normalization in the response of tumors to antiangiogenic therapy . A : tumor vasculature is structurally and functionally abnormal . It is proposed that antiangiogenic therapies initially improve both the structure and the function of tumor vessels . However , sustained or aggressive antiangiogenic regimens may eventually prune away these vessels , resulting in a vasculature that is both resistant to further treatment and inadequate for the delivery of drugs or oxygen . B : dynamics of vascular normalization induced by VEGFR2 blockade . On the left is a two - photon image showing normal blood vessels in skeletal muscle ; subsequent images show human colon carcinoma vasculature in mice at day 0 and day 3 after administration of VEGR2 - speciﬁc antibody . C : diagram depicting the concomitant changes in pericyte ( red ) and basement membrane ( blue ) coverage during vascular normalization . D : these phenotypic changes in the vasculature may reﬂect changes in the balance of pro - and antiangiogenic signaling in the tissue . [ From Jain ( 143 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1078 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m acidosis ( TABLE 1 ) . In turn , one would expect amelioration of the hypoxia - mediated increase in cancer cell metastatic potential , more uniform delivery of systemically adminis - tered anti - cancer therapies within a tumor ( TABLE 2 ) , and enhanced radiosensitivity of tumors . This might serve to explain the seemingly paradoxical clinical trial data dem - onstrating synergism between anti - VEGF therapy and chemotherapy in the treatment of solid tumors . Further - more , fortiﬁed ( normalized ) vessels might impede cancer cell intravasation and extravasation , reducing metastasis ( TABLE 3 ) . C . Molecular Mechanisms of Vascular Normalization In normal tissues , the collaborative action of various proan - giogenic factors ( e . g . , VEGF , bFGF , and Ang - 2 ) is in bal - ance with the action of endogenous antiangiogenic and vas - cular stabilizing factors [ e . g . , thrombospondin - 1 ( TSP - 1 ) and Ang - 1 ] ( 142 ) . In pathological angiogenesis , an imbal - ance persists leading to the relentless development of aber - rant vessels . Moreover , the range of proangiogenic mole - cules expressed within a tumor increases with malignant progression ( 238 ) . By attempting to redress this imbalance , it is possible to normalize tumor vessels . One validated mechanism of vascular normalization is blockade of VEGF signaling . Inhibition of VEGF , a factor that promotes the survival and proliferation of ECs and increases vascular permeability , can transiently restore the balance between pro - and anti - angiogenic signaling , shifting it back towards equilibrium ( FIGURE 4 ) . The transient nature of vascular normalization after VEGF blockade is likely due to expres - sion of alternative pro - angiogenic factors by tumors . Over time , a number of other key angiogenic molecules and genes have been directly implicated in the development of an abnormal tumor vasculature and the normalization pro - cess ( see sect . IV ) . In brief , genetic evidence has demon - strated that a variety of genes including those implicated in vascular stability ( e . g . , Ang - 1 / Ang - 2 ) , oxygen sensing ( e . g . , PHD2 ) , and pericyte function ( e . g . , regulator of G protein signaling 5 , Rgs5 ) may each act as “master genes” and determine the maturation of tumor vessels ( 53 , 117 , 199 , 298 ) . In contrast to the genetic studies , pharmacologically in - duced vascular normalization is transient , characterized by a “time window” ( FIGURE 5 ) . This refers to the time period after commencement of anti - angiogenic therapy during which vessels demonstrate features of the normalization phenotype . As detailed below , studies of murine and human tumors have identiﬁed the onset of normalization , typically 1 – 2 days after commencement of therapy , followed by an eventual “closure” of the normalization window , at which point features of normalization are lost . This may relate either to excessively high or prolonged dosing of antiangio - genic therapy ( i . e . , tipping the balance past equilibrium in favor of anti - angiogenic molecules , leading to vascular pruning / regression ) , or to the development of resistance by activation of alternative proangiogenic pathways or modes of acquiring new vessels . In addition , we have proposed that vascular normalization will occur only in regions of a tumor where the imbalance between pro - and anti - angiogenic molecules has been corrected , and therefore that judicious dosing of anti - angiogenic therapies is required to induce and maintain normalization for as long as possible . Impor - tantly , it has been shown that cancer cells are more vulner - able to cytotoxic therapies speciﬁcally while the window is open , thus deﬁning its timing in a variety of situations is of critical importance . D . Summary In summary , evidence from clinical trials of anti - VEGF therapy suggests that it improves the efﬁcacy of concur - rently administered chemotherapy . This seemingly para - doxical observation can be explained through a normaliza - tion of tumor vessels by anti - angiogenic therapy , modifying the tumor microenvironment to improve the efﬁcacy of cy - totoxic treatments . An array of preclinical evidence sup - ports the concept that pharmacological inhibition of VEGF signaling transiently mitigates tumor vessel abnormalities , and is now supported by other pharmacological and genetic studies , revealing the complexity of molecular regulation of tumor vascular normalization ( FIGURE 6 ) . IV . PRECLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR VASCULAR NORMALIZATION IN CANCER Over the last decade , a large body of literature has amassed , converging to reveal the presence of vascular normalization and its relevance to tumor progression and cancer therapy ( TABLES 1 – 7 ) . We discovered normalization as a result of two indirect antiangiogenic therapies : hormone withdrawal in hormone - dependent tumors ( 151 ) , and later trastu - zumab therapy for breast cancer ( 139 ) , and as a conse - quence of direct antiangiogenic therapies , in particular anti - VEGF agents ( 279 , 298 , 313 ) . However , the concept has evolved dramatically over time . Improved knowledge of the activity of various pro - and anti - angiogenic molecules , of the molecular and genetic players in EC and pericyte biol - ogy , and the development of novel genetic models have all uncovered new contributors that directly regulate normal - ization of tumor vessels . At present , the vast majority of evidence for vascular nor - malization comes from preclinical studies . In this section , we discuss the range of pharmacological , genetic , and math - ematical studies on vascular normalization . Taken to - gether , they reveal common changes of vascular structure [ a NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1079 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 1 Studies reporting anti - angiogenic therapy - induced improvement in tumor oxygenation Anti - AngiogenicTherapy Tumor Model Effect on Oxygenation Time Window of Improved Oxygenation Antibody therapy Bevacizumab Melanoma , breast carcinoma , ovarian carcinoma 1 2 - 4 Days after start of therapy ( 73 ) Bevacizumab GBM 1 Up to 5 days ( 201 ) DC101 GBM 1 2 - 8 Days after start of therapy ( 298 ) Anti - PlGF Ab Pancreatic carcinoma No change ( 87 ) TKI therapy Sunitinib Squamous carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 4 days after start of therapy ( 16 ) Semaxanib Melanoma 1 O 2 measured 3 days after start of therapy ( 81 ) PI - 103 ( PI3K inhibitor ) Fibrosarcoma , squamous carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 10 days after start of therapy ( 231 ) Geﬁtinib ( EGFR inhibitor ) Fibrosarcoma , squamous carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 10 days after start of therapy ( 231 ) Erlotinib ( EGFR inhibitor ) Squamous carcinoma , NSCLC 1 O 2 measured 5 days after start of therapy ( 52 ) Endocrine therapy Castration ( androgen depletion ) Shionogi carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 21 days after start of therapy ( 120 ) Metronomicchemotherapy Low - dose gemcitabine Pancreatic carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 28 days after start of therapy ( 54 ) Other therapies FTIs ( Ras inhibitors ) Prostate carcinoma , bladder carcinoma , glioma , ﬁbrosarcoma , squamous carcinoma 1 O 2 increased (cid:4) 7 - 10 days ( 61 , 66 , 231 ) Nelﬁnavir ( AKT inhibitor ) Fibrosarcoma , squamous carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 10 days after start of therapy ( 231 ) TNP - 470 Breast carcinoma 1 O 2 measured 9 days after start of therapy ( 275 ) Suramin GBM 1 O 2 measured 5 - 6 wk after start of therapy ( 23 ) Thalidomide Liver carcinoma 1 O 2 increased from day 2 - 4 after start of therapy ( 255 ) Thalidomide Fibrosarcoma 1 O 2 increased from day 2 - 3 after start of therapy ( 7 ) Genetic models VEGF (cid:3) / (cid:3) ( myeloid cells ) Lung carcinoma 1 ( 265 ) nNOS (cid:3) / (cid:3) ( tumor cells ) Glioblastoma 1 ( 162 ) (cid:2) v (cid:1) 3 / (cid:2) v (cid:1) 5 Integrin - FAK - Rho knockdown ( tumor cells ) Glioblastoma 1 ( 262 ) SEMA3Aoverexpression ( transgene delivery ) Insulinoma 1 O 2 increased after 4 wk ( 194 ) Rgs5 (cid:3) / (cid:3) ( stroma ) Insulinoma 1 ( 117 ) PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) ( stroma or EC - speciﬁc ) Melanoma , pancreatic carcinoma 1 ( 199 ) GOEL ET AL . 1080 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m reduction in microvessel density ( with few exceptions , Ref . 162 ) , reduced vascular diameter , and improved PVC cov - erage ] and function ( reduced permeability , reduced tumor IFP , and improved oxygenation ) as tumor vessels revert from abnormal to a more normal phenotype . Many studies also provide translational data showing the direct beneﬁts of these alterations for cancer therapy . A . Direct Pharmacological Inhibitors of Angiogenesis Most of the studies demonstrating vascular normalization have utilized direct pharmacological inhibitors of tumor an - giogenesis , i . e . , agents that inhibit pro - angiogenic molecules . Table 1— Continued Anti - AngiogenicTherapy Tumor Model Effect on Oxygenation Time Window of Improved Oxygenation IFN - (cid:1) overexpression ( transgene delivery ) Glioblastoma , neuroblastoma 1 ( 72 ) EC , endothelial cell ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; FTI , farnesyl transferase inhibitor ; GBM , glioblastoma multiforme ; IFN , interferon ; nNOS , neuronal nitric oxide synthase ; NSCLC , non - small cell lung cancer ; PHD , prolyl hydroxylase domain protein ; PI3K , phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase ; PlGF , placental growth factor ; TKI , tyrosine kinase inhibitor ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . Refer - ence numbers are given in parentheses . As discussed in the text , in many of these models , the period of improved tumor oxygenation after anti - angiogenic therapy is transient , corresponding to a normalization “window” . Table 2 Studies reporting the impact of anti - angiogenic / vascular normalization strategies upon delivery of therapeutic compounds / systemically administered molecules into tumors Systemically Administered Molecule Normalization Strategy Tumor Model ( s ) Effect on Delivery Conventional cytotoxics Irinotecan A4 . 6 . 1 Colon carcinoma 1 ( 293 ) Topotecan , etoposide Bevacizumab Neuroblastoma 1 ( 71 ) Temozolomide Sunitinib Glioma 1 ( 317 , 318 ) * Cyclophosphamide , cisplatin TNP - 470 Lung carcinoma 1 ( 274 ) Temozolomide TNP - 470 Glioma 2 ( 192 ) Cyclophosphamide Thalidomide Liver carcinoma 1 ( 255 ) Doxorubicin PDGF - D overexpression Breast carcinoma 1 ( 190 ) Topotecan IFN - (cid:1) overexpression Neuroblastoma 1 ( 70 ) Doxorubicin Anti - TGF - (cid:1) antibody or overexpression sT (cid:1) rII Breast carcinoma 1 ( Liu et al . , unpublished data ) Nanoparticles Liposomal doxorubicin Anti - TGF - (cid:1) antibody or overexpression sT (cid:1) rII Breast carcinoma 1 ( Liu et al . , unpublished data ) Antibodies Nonspeciﬁc IgG , anti - E - cadherin Ab Axitinib Lung carcinoma , pancreatic tumor 1 ( per vessel ) ( 212 ) Viral particles Oncolytic virus Cilengitide GBM 1 ( 176 ) Other molecules BSA DC101 Breast carcinoma , colon carcinoma 1 ( 279 ) FDG Bevacizumab Rectal carcinoma 1 ( per vessel ) ( 294 , 297 ) † * Increased delivery of temozolomide noted with sunitinib 20 mg / kg , but not at 60 mg / kg . † Clinical study . BSA , bovine serum albumin ; FDG , ﬂuorodeoxyglucose ; IFN , interferon ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor . Refer - ence numbers are given in parentheses . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1081 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Of these studies , the majority have employed agents targeting the VEGF pathway . 1 . Anti - VEGF agents One strategy widely explored in preclinical studies uti - lizes speciﬁc blockers of VEGF , which prevent its binding to its receptors VEGFR1 , VEGFR2 , and neuropilin ( NRP ) - 1 and - 2 . These include anti - human VEGF antibodies ( e . g . , A4 . 6 . 1 , the murine anti - human VEGF IgG which is the precursor of bevacizumab ) , bevacizumab ( a humanized an - ti - human VEGF IgG ) , anti - murine VEGF - A antibodies , and the “VEGF - Trap” aﬂibercept ( a fusion protein binding and sequestering all isoforms of VEGF and placental growth factor , PlGF ) . A ) A 4 . 6 . 1 . Our laboratory provided the ﬁrst insights into the mechanisms of action of anti - VEGF therapy in tumors in 1996 ( 313 ) . We implanted three different human tumors [ colorectal cancer , glioblastoma multiforme ( GBM ) , and melanoma ] into severe combined immunodeﬁcient ( SCID ) mice . Tumors were xenografted under surgically fashioned transparent windows , allowing serial micro - scopic and dynamic imaging of the tumor vessels’ structure and function in real time ( 95 ) . Speciﬁcally , GBM was im - planted orthotopically under a transparent cranial window , and the other tumors were implanted subcutaneously and examined using a dorsal skinfold window system . Mice were subjected to A . 4 . 6 . 1 therapy , neutralizing human VEGF released by tumor cells . After a single bolus of A4 . 6 . 1 , a reduction in vascular diameter and tortuosity was observed , accompanied by dramatic drop in vascular per - meability to albumin . Together , these ﬁndings provided early evidence that neutralization of tumor cell - derived VEGF could reverse some of the abnormalities that are hallmarks of the tumor microvasculature . We also exam - ined the temporal kinetics of these changes . After a single dose of intravenous A4 . 6 . 1 , vascular permeability dropped within 6 h but was increased to baseline again by 5 days , implying reversibility of the normalization phenotype with discontinuing therapy . In mice subjected to continuous therapy , features of vascular normalization were eventually lost and replaced by pronounced vascular regression , pre - sumably caused by excessive neutralization of VEGF . These data provided the ﬁrst evidence of the transient nature of the pharmacologically induced normalization phenotype and hence the existence of the normalization window . Table 3 Effects of primary tumor vessel normalization on cell shedding and metastasis Tumor Model Mechanism of ( Ab ) normalization Vessel Phenotype Effect on Metastasis Normalizing vessels reduces metastasis Pancreatic carcinoma Anti - PlGF Ab Pruning of immature vessels 2 ( 87 ) Pancreatic carcinoma , lung carcinoma PHD2 haploinsufﬁciency Tighter EC junctions , 2 permeability 2 ( 199 ) Vessel abnormalities increase metastasis Pancreatic (cid:1) - cell tumor Murine pericyte deﬁciency ( PDGFB ret / ret mice ) Pericyte deﬁciency , hyperpermeability 1 ( 305 ) EC , endothelial cell ; PDGFB , platelet - derived growth factor B ; PHD , prolyl hydroxylase domain protein ; PlGF , placental growth factor . Reference numbers are given in parentheses . FIGURE 5 Preclinical and clinical studies suggest the presence of a vascular normalization “window” in response to pharmacolog - ical anti - angiogenic therapies . The vascular normalization hypoth - esis posits that a well - designed strategy should passively prune away immature , dysfunctional vessels and actively fortify those remaining , while incurring minimal damage to normal tissue vas - culature , thus improving delivery of systemically administered cy - totoxic compounds . Excessive or prolonged dosing of anti - angiogenic therapy can lead to heavy pruning of tumor vessels , but judicious dosing may restore the vasculature towards a more normal phenotype ( during the normalization window , green ) . Vas - cular normalization will occur only in regions of the tumor where the imbalance of pro - and antiangiogenic signaling has been cor - rected . [ From Jain ( 143 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1082 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIGURE 6 Factors shown to promote or inhibit the vascular normalization phenotype in tumors . This schematic depicts a tumor cell ( green ) , endothelial cell ( red ) , surrounding pericytes ( blue ) , and the extracellular matrix . Molecules that lead to characteristic vessel abnormalities are in red , and those that promote the normalization phenotype are in blue . The principal angiogenic molecule responsible for vascular abnormalities is VEGF - A . This is produced by tumor cells ( in reponse to hypoxia via the PHD2 / HIF pathway ; or due upregulation by oncogenic activation , sex hormones , inﬂammatory cytokines , etc . ) . VEGF - A may also be derived from tumor - inﬁltrating myeloid cells , pericytes , or released from the extracellular matrix , and acts primarily via VEGFR2 on ECs . In addition , VEGF - A stimulation of VEGFR2 on pericytes inhibits PDGFB - PDGFR (cid:1) mediated pericyte recruitment to ECs . In addition , PlGF may contribute to tumor vessel abnormalities ( possibly by changing the number or phenotype of macrophages ) , potentially acting through the VEGFR1 or NRP1 . Other mediators of the abnormal vessel phenotype shown include Ang - 2 ( acting on the Tie - 2 receptor ) , Rgs5 ( which inhibits PDGFR - mediated pericyte recruitment ) , and tumor cell integrins ( in the case of GBM ) . Factors that may restore tumor vessels toward a more normal phenotype include Ang - 1 ( derived primarily from perivascular cells and acting on Tie - 2 ) , SEMA3A , PDGF - B , and other factors whose mechanism of action is less clear ( eNOS , PDGF - C , PDGF - D , IFN - (cid:1) , TSP - 1 ) . Importantly , the differential effects of hypoxia in the tumor cell and endothelial cell are to potentially “abnormalize” or normalize vessels , respectively . Ang , Angiopoietin ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; eNOS , endothelial nitric oxide synthase ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; GBM , glioblas - toma multiforme ; HER2 , human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ; HIF , hypoxia inducible transcription factor ; IFN , interferon ; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; NRP , neuropilin ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PDGFR , platelet - derived growth factor receptor ; PHD , prolyl hydroxylase domain protein ; PI3K , phosphoinosi - tide - 3 - kinase ; PlGF , placental growth factor ; Rgs5 , regulator of G protein signaling 5 ; SEMA , semaphorin ; sFlt1 , soluble VEGFR1 ; TSP , thrombospondin ; VE - cadherin , vascular - endothelial cadherin ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; VEGFR , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ; (cid:2) , (cid:1) , and (cid:5) refer to alpha - , beta - , and gamma - catenin , respectively . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1083 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Since that report , two studies have explored the use of A4 . 6 . 1 further , both demonstrating vascular and mi - croenvironmental normalization in human tumor xeno - grafts and adding evidence to support its therapeutic ben - eﬁts . A4 . 6 . 1 treatment of both colorectal tumors and GBM reveals a drop in microvessel density within 24 h of therapy ( 178 , 293 ) . Despite this drop in vessel area , how - ever , there was improved vessel functionality character - ized by a reduction in tumor hypoxia , a reduction in tumor IFP ( both seen 12 days after commencing treat - ment , Ref . 178 ) , and improved tumor perfusion ( 293 ) . Of translational relevance , the increase in perfusion of colo - rectal tumors after A4 . 6 . 1 therapy led to more uniform delivery and retention of irinotecan ( a chemotherapeutic used to treat colorectal cancer ) within tumors , with a resultant improvement in tumor growth control ( 293 ) . The combination of A4 . 6 . 1 and radiation therapy also produced a synergistic beneﬁt in tumor control compared with either treatment alone , but was found to be inde - pendent of improvements in tumor oxygenation ( 178 ) . B ) BEVACIZUMAB . Bevacizumab ( Avastin ) is a humanized monoclonal antibody developed on the backbone of A4 . 6 . 1 , which neutralizes human VEGF and possesses a very weak reactivity against murine VEGF ( 312a ) . All the phase 3 trials demonstrating synergistic beneﬁt from com - bining anti - angiogenic therapy and chemotherapy have used bevacizumab . In general , the effects of bevacizumab on human tumor xenografts in mice appear to be consistent with those of A4 . 6 . 1 . Dickson et al . ( 71 ) examined the effects of bevaci - zumab therapy in mice bearing two human neuroblastoma xenografts , both in ectopic and orthotopic locations . In keeping with the A4 . 6 . 1 data , vessels were structurally more normal within 24 h of therapy , showing reductions in microvessel density and vessel length , diameter , and tortu - osity . Importantly , tumor vessels also appeared signiﬁ - cantly more mature , deﬁned by an increase in the “vascular maturation index” ( VMI , deﬁned as the percentage of ves - sels covered by PVCs ) . Functional normalization accompa - nied these structural changes , with a reduction in vascular permeability at 24 h , and a drop in tumor IFP and an im - provement in perfusion . Of clinical relevance , this im - proved functionality led to improved tumor delivery of che - motherapeutics ( topotecan and etoposide ) and a resultant increase in tumor growth delay with combination therapy . Importantly , the beneﬁt from combined treatment was schedule dependent : maximal tumor shrinkage was ob - served when bevacizumab therapy commenced 3 days be - fore chemotherapy , suggesting a speciﬁc enhancement of chemotherapy effect if administered during the normaliza - tion window . Similar reductions in tumor vessel permeabil - ity have been observed in immunodeﬁcient rats bearing hu - man breast cancer xenografts after bevacizumab therapy ( 281 ) . Conceptually similar ﬁndings have been reported in bevacizumab - treated mice bearing both human and murine melanoma , breast cancer , and ovarian cancer ( 73 ) . Intrigu - ingly , both human and murine tumors demonstrated vascu - lar maturation ( increased VMI ) and improved functionality ( reduced hypoxia ) during a window spanning from days 2 – 4 after starting treatment . In these cases , a schedule - dependent synergistic delay in tumor growth was observed with combined radiation therapy and bevacizumab , with optimal results achieved if radiation was administered 48 h after anti - VEGF therapy began . Improvements in tumor oxygenation over a similar timeframe have also been ob - served in bevacizumab - treated GBM , again resulting in a schedule - dependent improvement in tumor control when combined with radiotherapy ( 201 ) . In contrast , a recent report has documented intratumoral hypoxia in rodents bearing GBM treated with bevacizumab , but this study only examined tumors at later timepoints and did not explore temporal kinetics of such changes ( 166 ) . C ) ANTI - MOUSE VEGF ANTIBODY . Because the murine anti - mouse VEGF antibody is more useful in studying tumors growing in immunocompetent mice , it has been used to demonstrate beneﬁts of combined anti - VEGF treatment with radiotherapy ( 107 ) as well as immunotherapy ( 261 ) . Anti - VEGF therapy synergized with radiation both through vascular normalization and sensitization of cancer cells to radiation . Cytotoxic T - cell inﬁltration was also increased by normalization of the tumor vasculature . Large murine melanomas were treated with both anti - VEGF antibody and adoptive cell transfer ( ACT ) of preactivated anti - tumor immune cells ( 261 ) . Although response to monotherapy was ineffective , combined treatment improved mouse sur - vival if a single dose of anti - VEGF therapy was adminis - tered prior to ACT . D ) THE VEGF - TRAP , AFLIBERCEPT . The effects of aﬂibercept therapy on the structure of tumor vessels have been ex - amined in a spontaneous murine model of pancreatic beta - cell derived tumors ( 137 ) . Inhibition of VEGF sig - naling in established tumors led to a reduction in neovas - cular sprouts and vascular regression within 7 days , but also evidence of vascular maturation with diminution of endothelial fenestration and tightened associations be - tween ECs and PVCs . 2 . Anti - VEGFR agents Several EC receptors bind to VEGF , namely , VEGFR1 , VEGFR2 , NRP - 1 , and NRP - 2 ( 84 ) . Of these , VEGFR2 is thought to mediate most of the angiogenic properties of VEGF , and is expressed at higher levels on ECs of the tumor vasculature . The role of VEGFR1 in angiogenesis is less de - ﬁned , although it binds VEGF with much greater afﬁnity than VEGFR2 ( 127 ) . VEGFR1 is also expressed on bone marrow - derived progenitor / stem cells , and thus may be involved di - rectly in adult vasculogenesis or indirectly in tumor angiogen - GOEL ET AL . 1084 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m esis ( 88 ) . The NRP receptors act primarily as coreceptors with VEGFR2 , regulating VEGFR2 activity , but their activation may also have direct proangiogenic effects ( 222 ) . Pharmacological agents targeting the VEGF receptors can also induce normalization of the tumor vasculature . They include DC101 , a rat anti - mouse VEGFR2 monoclonal anti - body , an antibody blocking dimerization of VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 ( 282 ) , and a number of VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( TKIs ) . The TKIs speciﬁcally compete with the ATP binding site of the catalytic domain of recep - tor tyrosine kinases and have variable and often promiscu - ous spectra of inhibitory activity beyond the VEGFRs ( e . g . , PDGFRs , c - kit ) . A ) DC 101 . Speciﬁc VEGFR2 pathway blockade with DC101 is an attractive strategy for delineating the vascular effects of VEGF - VEGFR2 signaling in tumor angiogenesis . Importantly , many of the reports demonstrating normaliza - tion of the tumor vessels utilized this agent . In 2004 , our laboratory reported the effects of DC101 therapy in mice bearing lung , breast , colorectal , and GBM tumors ( 279 ) ( FIGURE 7 ) . We used intravital microscopy and dorsal skinfold chambers to determine the cardinal fea - tures of vascular normalization . Within 3 days of a DC101 injection , there was a reduction in microvessel density and vessel diameter , accompanied by an increase in PVC cover - age . Interestingly , the vascular basement membrane was also modiﬁed within this time period , and a greater propor - tion of vessels showed normal collagen IV coverage . Func - tionally , vessel permeability to albumin decreased by day 3 , accompanied by a decrease in IFP , which led to an in - crease in the transvascular hydrostatic pressure gradient . The increased bulk ﬂow , induced by the positive trans - vascular hydrostatic pressure gradient , was associated FIGURE 7 Anti - VEGFR2 therapy normalizes tumor vessels . Daily two - photon microscopic images of tumor vessels from the MCa - IV mammary carcinoma ( A – C ) and LS174T ( D and E ) colon carcinoma after DC101 therapy ( anti - VEGFR2 antibody ) . DC101 normalizes tumor vessels at the MCa - IV tumor margin ( C ) , and similar results were observed in LS174T . In control - treated mice , the caliber of most vessels does not change . In contrast , in DC101 - treated mice , many tumor vessels are pruned or reduced in size ( arrows ) , and some are less tortuous . All images are 500 (cid:3) m wide . [ From Tong et al . ( 279 ) , with permission . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1085 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m with a signiﬁcant increase in the interstitial penetration of bovine serum albumin into tumors , suggesting im - proved functionality of vessels ( FIGURE 8 ) . Consistent with other work ( 6 ) , extended anti - VEGF treatment led to vascular regression , with preferential pruning of im - mature vessels that initially lacked PVC coverage or an adequate basement membrane . Similar results have been obtained with DC101 treatment of other tumors includ - ing androgen - dependent male breast cancer , hepatocellu - lar carcinoma , colon cancer , and bladder cancer ( 120 , 157 ) . One important question pertains to the delivery of larger molecules into the tumor interstitium after vascu - lar normalization , given that a reduction in permeability to large molecules may actually reduce extravasation ( 152 ) . We have recently shown in murine models of breast cancer that DC101 - induced normalization can in - crease the delivery of smaller nanotherapeutics ( around 12 nM , the size of a monoclonal antibody ) due to a restored transmural pressure gradient , while the ﬂux of larger particles ( (cid:1) 60 nM ) is unchanged or decreased due to a reduction in vascular pore sizes that counteracts the pressure change ( Chauhan VP , Stylianopoulos T , Martin JD , Popovic Z , Kamoun WS , Bawendi MG , Fukumura D , Jain RK , unpublished data ) . In addition , synergistic gains in tumor control also oc - cur after administering radiation therapy together with DC101 for GBM and other tumors ( 174 , 298 ) . Orthotopic GBMs treated with DC101 show evidence of structural ves - sel maturation and functional normalization , accompa - nied by a window of improved oxygenation from days 2 – 8 after commencing therapy ( 298 ) . The beneﬁts of radiotherapy are best realized if it is given during this window period ( FIGURE 9 ) . Our studies using DC101 have also provided molecu - lar insights into mechanisms of vascular normalization after VEGFR2 blockade in GBM . One key mechanism is upregu - lation of tumor Ang - 1 gene expression , a key vascular mat - uration pathway which has been observed during the nor - malization window ( 298 ) . Ang - 1 is typically produced by PVCs and is known to reduce vascular permeability and promote vascular maturation and integrity through binding and activation of the Tie - 2 / TEK receptor on ECs ( 277 , 278 , FIGURE 8 Vascular normalization improves the penetration of molecules into tumors . Vessels from mice bearing MCa - IV tumors treated with control ( A ) or DC101 ( B ) were highlighted by injection with rhodamine - labeled bovine serum albumin ( BSA , red ) and later lectin ( green ) before death . Graphs show the average intensity of extravasated BSA as a function of distance from the blood vessel wall . The penetration lengths indicate that DC101 leads to a more uniform penetration of albumin from blood vessels into the tumor . C and D : MDA - MB - 231 breast carcinomas implanted orthtopically into mice either as wild - type cells ( C ) or engineered to overexpress platelet - derived growth factor - D ( PDGF - D ) . PDGF - D overexpression normalizes tumor vasculature ( not shown ) , and as a consequence improves the delivery of doxorubicin ( red ) , a standard chemotherapy used to treat breast carcinomas . Functional vessels are detected after perfusion with lectin ( green ) . [ A and B from Tong et al . ( 279 ) ; C and D from Liu et al ( 190 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1086 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 299 ) . Pharmacological blockade or genetic downregulation of the Tie - 2 or overexpression of Ang - 2 , the natural antag - onist of Ang - 1 , compromised vascular normalization after DC101 therapy in GBM ( 53 , 298 ) . Another mechanism is the reorganization of the basement membrane of GBM ves - sels , which is usually haphazard and thick . VEGFR2 block - ade restores a thinner , more closely attached basement membrane monolayer , implicating VEGF’s role in base - ment membrane abnormalities . Basement membrane thin - ning after DC101 therapy occurs through an increase in collagen IV degradation by matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) ( 298 ) , and likely contributes to the improved vas - cular function observed . Interestingly , these changes are opposite to those seen in subcutaneously implanted mam - mary tumors . In that setting , vascular basement membrane coverage is sparse or absent and increases closer to normal after DC101 treatment ( 279 ) . Together , these studies sug - gest that phenotype of the tumor vessel basement mem - brane depends on the tumor microenvironment , and that in either case , VEGFR2 blockade shifts the balance between basement membrane synthesis and degradation towards a more normal state . FIGURE 9 A combination of radiation and antiangiogenic therapies is only synergistic during a “normalization window” when tumor hypoxia is greatly diminished . A : tumor growth delay of orthotopic U87 gliomas is shown for untreated controls ( C ) , monotherapy with DC101 ( anti - VEGFR2 antibody , local radiation for three consec - utive days ) ( RT ) , and ﬁve different combination schedules where radiation was given before , during , or after DC101 therapy ( RT1 - RT5 ; see diagram for schedules ) . The dashed lines show the range of the expected additive effect ( EAE ) of DC101 and radiation . * P (cid:5) 0 . 05 , compared with RT ; (cid:4) P (cid:5) 0 . 05 , compared with EAE . B : tumor hypoxia ( pimonidazole staining , red ) was severe in control tumors , but decreased for a limited time during monotherapy with DC101 . Hypoxia reached a minimum at day 5 , and a partial relapse occurred at day 8 . * P (cid:5) 0 . 05 , compared with untreated control ; (cid:4) P (cid:5) 0 . 05 , compared with rat IgG - treated control ( day 2 ) ; # P (cid:5) 0 . 05 , compared with day 2 after initiation of DC101 therapy . C : in this model , anti - VEGFR2 therapy produces the structural and functional aspects of vascular normalization in a time - dependent fashion , with the window opening transiently from day 3 after therapy commencement until day 6 . [ From Winkler et al . ( 298 ) , with permission . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1087 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 3 . Receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors Several small - molecular - weight tyrosine kinase inhibi - tors ( TKIs ) of VEGFRs have been developed , and some are already approved for use in clinical practice ( i . e . , sunitnib , sorafenib , and pazopanib ) . They differ from antibody treat - ments in several respects . First , the TKIs directly inhibit the tyrosine kinase domain of VEGFRs but do not interfere with the binding of VEGF family members to VEGFRs . Second , they often have broad spectra of activity , inhibiting several members of the kinome simultaneously , and with differing potencies . As a result , it has often been difﬁcult to determine in what measure the clinical beneﬁt seen with these drugs relates to their antiangiogenic effects , as they inhibit other kinases active in a variety of cell types includ - ing tumor cells themselves . Nevertheless , as discussed below , preclinical work with TKIs has revealed important evidence of structural and functional changes in vessels consistent with normalization . Despite this , clinical trials testing their addition to systemic chemotherapy for solid tumors have uniformly failed ( with one exception , when a dual VEGFR2 / EGFR TKI was tested in NSCLC ) ( 123a ) , a point that distinguishes them from anti - VEGF monoclonal antibody treatments . Indeed , their clinical success has largely been in the treatment of tumors that depend on VEGF for survival , such as renal cell carci - noma . In addition , the TKIs also have a more wide - reaching toxicity proﬁle than anti - VEGF antibodies . These contrast - ing effects of anti - VEGFR TKIs may be due to several rea - sons , including their shorter half - life in circulation or their “off - target” effects ( e . g . , PDGFR blockade ) . Structural changes in the tumor vasculature after anti - angiogenic TKI therapy are in general consistent with those of antibody therapy : a decrease in micovascular density , vessel diameter , and vascular permeability ( see below ) . However , the precise molecular mechanisms are more dif - ﬁcult to establish , given the promiscuity of their target in - hibition . For example , given the importance of PDGFR (cid:1) in PVC recruitment and vessel maturation , the impact of PDGFR inhibition along with VEGFR blockade on vascular normalization remains unclear . Axitinib , an TKI of VEGFR1 , VEGFR2 , VEGFR3 , PDGFR (cid:1) , and c - kit , reduced microvessel density , decreased the number of endothelial sprouts , and increased proximity between PVCs and ECs in murine Lewis lung carcinoma ( LLC ) and in a spontaneous pancreatic insulinoma model ( 137 , 212 ) . Similar changes have been observed after treat - ing ectopic human glioma xenografts with sunitinib ( Sutent ) , an inhibitor of the VEGFRs , the PDGFRs , c - kit , ret , colony stimulating factor - 1 , and ﬂt - 3 receptors ( 317 , 318 ) , with an increase in the number of PVC - covered ves - sels . We have tested cediranib ( AZD2171 , a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGFR1 , VEGFR2 , VEGFR3 , c - kit , and the PDGFRs ) in preclinical GBM models ( FIGURE 10 ) . In mice bearing orthotopic GBM xenografts , cediranib produces structural changes similar to those observed after DC101 treatment of GBM , namely , reduced vessel diameter , base - ment membrane thinning , and a tightening of association between PVCs and ECs , ﬁrst observed after 2 days of ther - apy ( 160 ) . Finally , normalization of tumor vasculature has been reported within 4 days of commencing treatment of rats bearing a syngeneic colorectal cancer with KRN 951 , a pan - VEGFR TKI ( 270 ) , and increased vessel coverage by FIGURE 10 Anti - VEGF therapy decreases glioblastoma - induced edema , improving mouse survival . T2 - weighted magnetic resonance images ( A ) and measurement of K trans ( the vascular permeability - surface area product ) ( B ) in orthotopic glioblastomas after treat - ment with cediranib , an anti - VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor , show a clear reduction in vessel permeability and hence tumor - associated edema . In this model , cediranib therapy improves animal survival despite having no impact on the growth of primary tumors . [ From Kamoun et al . ( 160 ) . Reprinted with permission . Copyright 2008 American Society of Clinical Oncology . All rights reserved . ] GOEL ET AL . 1088 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m PVCs has been noted after treatment with TSU68 ( an inhib - itor of VEGFR2 , PDGFRs , and the ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor , FGFR ) ( 216 ) . The observations that TKIs inhibiting both VEGFRs and PDGFRs improve PVC coverage of vessels in mice are intriguing and will have to be clariﬁed in future studies . The VEGF / VEGFR2 axis directly inhibits the PDGFR (cid:1) - medi - ated recruitment of PVCs to the vessel walls , and hence , one would expect that suppression of VEGFR2 activity by a TKI should increase vessel PVC coverage ( 110 ) . However , even in VEGFR2 - suppressed conditions , the function of PDGFR (cid:1) is critical for PVC recruitment , and many of the TKIs inhibit this receptor as well . Indeed , an increase in PDGF - B - mediated PVC recruitment can lead to reduced EC proliferation and slows tumor growth , which is reversed by PDGFR inhibition ( 200 ) . In spite of the conﬂicting effects one might anticipate these agents to have on vascular mat - uration , an increase in VMI or proximity between pericytes and vessels has been the predominant observation . This might be because relatively immature , PVC - devoid vessels are preferentiallyprunedbypotentsuppressionofVEGFR2 , and the surviving vessels are the mature ones , resulting in a therapy - induced increase in PVC coverage . In addition , PDGFR - (cid:1) activation also stimulates VEGF release from PVCs ( 193 ) , and suppression of this through anti - VEGFR TKIs may play an important role in maintaining PVC proximity to ECs . Finally , tumor ECs may ectopically express PDGFRs ( 14 ) , and blockade of these receptors might potentially contrib - ute to vascular normalization . Accompanying changes in vessel function after TKI therapy have also been demonstrated , and in several cases have provided implications for therapeutic beneﬁts . A de - crease in vascular permeability to 50 nM microspheres was noted in the axitinib studies ( 212 ) . Despite this , however , and the accompanying 86 % drop in tumor vascularity , de - livery of large molecules through remaining vessels was im - proved . The tumor delivery of large molecules ( either non - speciﬁc IgG or a tumor - speciﬁc anti - E - cadherin antibody ) , quantiﬁed per vessel , increased after axitinib therapy , showing that the changes in tumor blood ﬂow accompany - ing reduced permeability and improved vessel maturity and extravasation dramatically . Similarly , sunitinib treatment of gliomas reduced tumor IFP , resulting in increased deliv - ery of chemotherapy ( temozolomide ) to tumor cells ( 317 , 318 ) . In these studies , temozolomide delivery to tumors directly correlated with the degree of PVC coverage and inversely correlated with the density of the abnormally thick collagen IV basement membrane , suggesting that sunitinib - induced normalization of these vessel characteris - tics underpins the mechanisms of enhanced chemotherapy penetration . Importantly , the improvement in drug delivery was only observed with lower doses of sunitinib and was not seen with higher doses , highlighting that importance of judicious application of anti - angiogenics when inducing vessel normalization . An excessive dose can cause excessive vascular regression and hence prevent cytotoxic entry into the tumor ( 144 ) , suggesting that in clinical trials of TKIs with chemotherapy , the failure might have resulted from using excessively high TKI doses . Finally , although suniti - nib treatment of murine squamous tumors causes pro - nounced vascular regression within 4 days of therapy com - mencement , this is still associated with an improvement in tumor oxygenation and a therapeutic synergy when com - bined with radiation , emphasizing the absolute importance of a normalized vasculature in maintaining adequate oxy - gen delivery ( 16 ) . Semaxanib ( a potent pan - VEGFR TKI ) induced improved tumor blood ﬂow , blood ﬂow velocity , and oxygenation in melanoma xenografts , and TSU68 re - duced tumor IFP ( 81 , 216 ) . Important insights into other possible clinical beneﬁts of such changes have come from studies of cediranib therapy for orthotopic GBM ( 160 ) . In addition to the structural changes of normalization de - scribed , we observed a reduction in vessel permeability , beginning after 2 days of therapy and extending until day 8 . This was manifest as a dramatic reduction in tumor - associated edema as measured both radiologically and by tissue wet - to - dry weight ratio . Although cediranib had no discernible anti - tumor effect , edema reduction alone ex - tended mouse survival twofold by decreasing intracranial hypertension , a major cause of death in GBM ( FIGURE 10 ) . The study highlights a novel mechanism , perhaps unique to the tight intracranial space , by which vascular normaliza - tion through VEGF blockade can have direct therapeutic beneﬁt . 3 . Targeting PlGF PlGF is another member of the VEGF family that has recently been implicated in tumor angiogenesis and as a regulator of the abnormal tumor vessel phenotype . Interest - ingly , although PlGF deﬁciency is not harmful for normal development or health , it plays an important role in tu - mors , inﬂammatory , and ischemic diseases through stim - ulation of EC growth , mobilization of bone marrow cells , recruitment of macrophages , and modiﬁcation of macro - phage polarization ( 48 , 243 ) through its binding to VEGFR1 and its coreceptors NRP1 and - 2 . PlGF is not signiﬁcantly expressed by normal tissues , but is found abundantly in various tumors ( 87 ) . Pharmacological blockade of PlGF has yielded con - ﬂicting results ( 11 , 87 , 284 ) . A monoclonal anti - murine PlGF antibody was shown to induce a signiﬁcant reduction in tumor growth when applied to a wide range of murine tumors including melanoma , pancreatic carcinoma , lym - phoma , and colon carcinoma ( 87 ) . This effect was related in part to a reduction in tumor angiogenesis , with EC apopto - sis and vascular pruning . Importantly , loss of ECs was more prevalent than loss of PVCs , resulting in a more mature vessel phenotype and a reduction in tumor hypoxia . In ad - dition , this antibody enhanced the tumor - inhibitory effects NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1089 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of cytotoxic chemotherapy and anti - VEGF therapy , both of which induce further elevations in PlGF themselves . In ad - dition to the direct effects on ECs , these results may also be due to a reduction in PlGF - induced recruitment of angio - genic macrophages into tumors and / or conversion of M2 - type ( pro - tumor ) macrophages to the M1 - type ( anti - tumor ) ( 243 ) . This antibody also reduced growth of both carcino - gen - and transgenically induced murine hepatocellular car - cinomas , with an accompanying increase in the structural uniformity of vessels ( 284 ) . In contrast , another group has found limited effect for different anti - PlGF antibodies on tumor growth , either as a monotherapy or in combination with anti - VEGF therapies , and the precise role of this VEGF family member in mediating the abnormal tumor vessel phenotype requires further clariﬁcation ( 11 ) . However , in both studies , blocking PlGF reduced metastasis ( 11 , 87 ) . It remains currently unknown whether this is due to reduced shedding of cancer cells into normalized vessels in the pri - mary tumor , or to a decrease in their extravasation into distant organs , or to another unknown mechanism . 4 . Agents targeting the angiopoietin - Tie - 2 axis Although VEGF has been the most widely exploited target for antiangiogenic therapy , inhibition of other fac - tors has also been tested . The angiopoietin - Tie - 2 path - way plays a key role in regulating both physiological and pathological angiogenesis ( 131 , 268 ) . Ang - 1 and Ang - 2 bind to their cognate receptor Tie - 2 on the EC surface . Ang - 1 is synthesized by PVCs , and primarily serves to maintain vascular stability , maturity , and integrity as an agonist of Tie - 2 ( 8 ) . Indeed , Ang - 1 has been shown to reduce vascular permeability ( 277 , 278 , 299 ) . In con - trast , Ang - 2 is synthesized primarily by ECs and is tradi - tionally thought to antagonize the actions of Ang - 1 ( 195 ) . It is the ratio of Ang - 1 to Ang - 2 that determines their ultimate effects . However , the Ang - Tie - 2 system is context dependent , as Ang - 2 may also act as an agonist of Tie - 2 ( 62 ) . In addition , Ang - 1 is necessary for establish - ment of a stable , normalized vasculature after VEGFR2 blockade ( 298 ) . In the absence of Ang - 1 , Ang - 2 enhances angiogenesis by destabilizing vessels . Its overexpression in tumor cells recapitulates the abnormal vessel pheno - type , with increasing vessel diameter and a reduction in vessel pericyte coverage , and compromises vascular nor - malization by anti - VEGFR2 blockade ( 53 ) . A recent study using speciﬁc pharmacological block - ade of Ang - 1 and Ang - 2 has shed new light on the role of these factors in tumor angiogenesis ( 83 ) and highlighted the requirement of Ang - 1 for vascular normalization and the contribution of Ang - 2 to vascular abnormalities . Nude mice bearing colon cancer xenografts were treated with ML4 – 3 ( a peptibody speciﬁcally neutralizing Ang - 1 ) , Li - 7 ( a peptibody speciﬁcally neutralizing Ang - 2 ) , or their com - bination . Treatment with ML4 – 3 alone did not affect tu - mor growth or vascular morphology , and vessels remained immature and disorganized as evidenced by faint , irregular deposition of VE - cadherin . Neutralization of Ang - 2 with Li - 7 normalized vessels . In particular , vessels were nar - rower and more uniform in morphology with less tortuos - ity . In addition , increased pericyte coverage was observed , and there was a tightening of association between pericytes and ECs , which showed uniform linear deposition of VE - cadherin . Finally , when tumors were subjected to combined Ang - 1 and Ang - 2 blockade , vessel density decreased but vessels remained disorganized with irregular VE - cadherin staining . These data are consistent with those seen after DC101 - treatment of GBMs ( 53 , 298 ) and provide insight - ful evidence that angiogenic factors other than VEGF play key roles in shifting tumor vessels from the abnormal to normal phenotypes . A number of reports detailing the effects of other anti - Ang - 2 strategies ( including anti - Ang2 antibodies and “CovX - Bodies” ) in solid tumors and inﬂammatory diseases have been reported ( 40 , 132 , 269 ) . Together , they show inhibition of tumor growth , reduction in tumor vessel den - sity , and remodeling of the vasculature , suggesting that tar - geting Ang - 2 may prove a valuable method to exploit the beneﬁts of vascular normalization . Recently , a dual pharmacological inhibitor of VEGF and the angiopoietins ( named the “double anti - angio - genic protein , ” DAAP ) has been developed and studied preclinically ( 171 ) . DAAP , a chimeric decoy receptor that simultaneously binds VEGF and Ang - 1 / 2 , was shown to inhibit the growth of several murine tumors , and in the case of implanted ovarian carcinoma , resulted in a nor - malization of vessels in the peritoneum , characterized by reduced vessel diameter and a more organized vascular hierarchy . These effects are likely mediated by suppres - sion of the activities of VEGF and Ang - 2 , given their propensity to promote tumor angiogenesis and the obser - vation that tumor Ang - 1 levels do not rise signiﬁcantly with tumor progression ( 171 ) . Indeed , this approach is likely to be the ﬁrst of many studies examining the strat - egy of inhibiting multiple proangiogenic factors to attain a greater degree of vessel normalization . 5 . Targeting integrins Integrins are plasma membrane receptors that mediate attachment between cells or to the extracellular matrices surrounding them . Certain integrins are expressed prefer - entially on ECs and mediate their attachment to the extra - cellular matrix . This provides essential signals for EC sur - vival and migration , and hence angiogenesis . Thus these integrins are considered as fundamental angiogenic mole - cules , and they have been targeted by novel anti - integrin therapies . The (cid:2) 6 integrin is present on ECs as a component of the (cid:2) 6 (cid:1) 1 and (cid:2) 6 (cid:1) 4 integrin complexes . These complexes bind GOEL ET AL . 1090 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m directly to laminin in the extracellular matrix , and this in - teraction guides EC migration during angiogenesis ( 67 ) . Proangiogenic factors such as VEGF and bFGF upregulate (cid:2) 6 integrin expression on ECs , further delineating its role in tumor angiogenesis ( 230 ) . Moreover , the expression of (cid:2) 6 integrin is most pronounced within actively angiogenic ves - sels within tumors . Recently , an anti - (cid:2) 6 integrin monoclo - nal antibody was found to modify tumor angiogenesis , re - producing structural features of normalization . When spontaneous pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinomas were treated with this antibody , a reduction in microvessel den - sity and vessel diameter was observed , in conjunction with a signiﬁcant increase in vascular pericyte coverage ( 230 ) . Cilengitide is a pharmacological agent that binds to (cid:2) v (cid:1) 3 and (cid:2) v (cid:1) 5 integrins and is now being tested in phase 3 clinical trials . These particular integrins are often found on tumor vessels and may also be present on tumor cells themselves ( as in GBM ) ( 67 ) . The precise role of these integrins in angiogenesis is controversial . On one hand , interactions between (cid:2) v (cid:1) 3 integrin and the FGFR and between (cid:2) v (cid:1) 5 integrin and VEGFR2 promote bFGF and VEGF - mediated angiogenesis , respectively ( 93 ) . To the contrary , mice deﬁcient in either (cid:1) 3 or (cid:1) 3 and (cid:1) 5 integrin subunits show enhanced tumor angiogenesis , and (cid:2) v - deﬁcient mice show normal vasculogenesis in many organs ( 10 , 239 ) . Although controversy exists over whether cilengitide acts as an agonist or antagonist for these integrins ( and hence whether these integrins are pro - or antiangiogenic ) , its administration to mice bear - ing ectopically implanted GBMs leads to a reduction in vascular density with increasing homogeneity of vessel shape , accompanied by improved tumor oxygenation ( 262 ) . In another study , pretreatment with cilengitide 4 days prior to oncolytic virus administration reduced vas - cular permeability , but also increased the delivery of viral particles into tumors and hence improved survival in rats with orthotopically implanted gliomas ( 176 ) . Collec - tively , these data indicate that manipulating EC integrin activity may be another way to abrogate abnormalities of the tumor vasculature . B . Indirect Pharmacological Inhibitors of Angiogenesis Unlike the agents described above , which directly target molecules implicated in angiogenesis , other pharmacologi - cal agents may indirectly affect tumor vasculature by mod - ifying the production of proangiogenic factors by cancer cells ( TABLE 4 ) . Because these agents do not speciﬁcally target ECs or pericytes and were not developed as anti - angiogenics , they are referred to as “accidental” or “indi - rect” antiangiogenics ( 165 ) . In many cases , the targets are cancer cell oncogenes that lie upstream of angiogenic factor production and hence drive tumor cell proliferation in con - cert with angiogenesis ( 139 , 286 ) . Other agents include en - docrine therapies for hormone - dependent cancers , low - dose cytotoxic chemotherapy aimed at killing vessels rather than tumor cells ( so - called “metronomic chemotherapy” ) , and several with unknown mechanisms of action . Of note , the present data regarding indirect antiangiogenic - induced normalization comes exclusively from preclinical studies . 1 . Oncogenic targets Oncogenic mutations turn normal cells into malignant cells , which proliferate uncontrollably . It is now under - stood that a mutation in a single oncogene can have myriad downstream effects , driving not only cell cycling but also tissue invasion , metastasis , and importantly sustained an - giogenesis ( 118 ) . Proangiogenic factors such as VEGF may be upregulated ( or antiangiogenic factors suppressed ) downstream of oncogenic activation . It is not surprising , therefore , that therapies designed to target speciﬁc onco - genes ( and conceived primarily to suppress cell prolifera - tion ) also have signiﬁcant effects on tumor angiogenesis . Intriguingly , this is often manifest by normalization of the vasculature , indicating that remote modulation of angio - genic factors represents a valid way to modify hazardous aspects of the tumor microenvironment . Theoretically , if improved vessel functionality were to ensue , such agents have the potential to improve efﬁcacy of systemic chemo - therapy and radiation , but also enhance their own anti - tumor cell activities ( 143 ) . Our laboratory provided the ﬁrst evidence of vascular normalization as an indirect consequence of oncogenic tar - geting due to the effects of trastuzumab , a monoclonal an - tibody against the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ( HER2 ) , which is overexpressed in (cid:1) 20 % of human breast cancers . Leptomeningeal xenografts of human HER2 - overexpressing breast cancer were treated with tras - tuzumab , and vessels monitored with intravital microscopy ( 139 ) . Although primarily designed to inhibit proliferation of HER2 - positive tumor cells , trastuzumab was noted to reduce tumor vessel diameter , tumor blood volume , and vascular permeability , consistent with the normalization phenotype . These changes were attributable to reduced ex - pression of the proangiogenic factors VEGF , plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) , and TGF - (cid:2) as well as in - creased expression of the antiangiogenic factor TSP - 1 . In - deed , HER2 signaling is known to control the expression of VEGF via HIF - 1 (cid:2) ( 165 ) and PAI - 1 ( 5 ) , may affect TGF transcripts through interaction with its coreceptor HER - 1 ( 215 ) , and may mediate TSP - 1 expression through Ras pathways ( 290 ) . In contrast to work with anti - VEGF ther - apies suggesting the necessity for Ang - 1 in maintaining vas - cular normalization ( 83 , 298 ) , Ang - 1 downregulation was observed during trastuzumab - mediated normalization . Another important oncogenic pathway that may both directly and indirectly affect the tumor vasculature is the phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) - AKT - mammalian target NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1091 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of rapamycin ( mTOR ) axis . Effector molecules in this axis have complex effects on tumor angiogenesis . First , EC spe - ciﬁc loss of certain PI3K catalytic subunits results in marked vascular hyperpermeability , implicating PI3K in the main - tenance of vascular integrity ( 314 ) . In addition , mTOR sig - naling plays a role in VEGF synthesis , through both regu - lation of HIF - 1 (cid:2) ( 134 ) and due to its own regulation by the tuberous sclerosis complex TSC1 / 2 ( 41 , 42 ) . Although PI3K - AKT lie upstream of mTOR , some of their angiogenic properties are mTOR independent ( 253 ) , including a PI3K - AKT - dependent activation of nitric oxide synthase ( NOS ) ( 98 ) , which when expressed in ECs as endothelial NOS ( eNOS ) , stimulates angiogenesis and vascular permeabi - lity ( 96 ) . Pharmacological inhibition of various components in the PI3K - AKT - mTOR axis has shed further light on its role in tumor angiogenesis , and also demonstrated that its inhi - bition can , by modulating downstream pro - and anti - angio - genic molecules , tip the balance towards equilibrium and hence normalize the vasculature . Studies examining dual inhibitors of PI3K and mTOR demonstrate their ability to exert such effects . NVPBEZ - 235 , one such agent , dramati - cally reduced vascular permeability and interstitial ﬂuid Table 4 Indirect anti - angiogenic agent - induced normalization of tumor vessels Target Agent Tumor Model Effect on Vessel Structure Effect on Vessel Function Oncogenic targets HER2 Trastuzumab HER2 (cid:4) breast carcinoma 2 Diameter 2 Permeability ( 139 ) EGFR Geﬁtinib Fibrosarcoma , squamouscarcinoma 2 Tortuosity , 1 PVC coverage 1 Tumor blood ﬂow , 1 oxygenation ( 231 ) Erlotinib Squamous carcinoma , NSCLC 2 Permeability , 1 oxygenation ( 52 ) PI3K - AKT - mTOR NVPBEZ235 Breast carcinoma 2 Permeability , 2 IFP ( 253 ) PI - 103 Fibrosarcoma , squamouscarcinoma 2 Tortuosity , 1 PVC coverage 1 Tumor perfusion , 1 oxygenation ( 231 ) Palomid - 529 Glioma 2 Tortuosity , 2 density 2 Permeability ( 307 ) Nelﬁnavir Fibrosarcoma , squamouscarcinoma 2 Irregularity , 1 PVC coverage 1 Tumor blood ﬂow , 1 oxygenation ( 231 ) Ras FTIs Prostate carcinoma , bladder carcinoma , glioma , ﬁbrosarcoma , squamouscarcinoma 2 Tortuosity , 2 diameter , 1 PVC coverage 1 Tumor blood ﬂow , 1 oxygenation ( 61 , 66 , 231 ) Endocrine targets Androgens Castration Shionogi carcinoma 2 Diameter , 2 tortuosity 2 Permeability , 2 leukocyte adhesion to endothelium , 1 oxygenation ( 120 , 151 ) Metronomic therapy Low - dose gemcitabine Pancreatic carcinoma 2 Density 1 Oxygenation ( 54 ) Other agents Thalidomide Liver carcinoma 2 Density 2 IFP , 1 oxygenation ( 7 , 255 ) Thalidomide Fibrosarcoma 2 IFP , 1 perfusion , 1 oxygenation ( 7 ) EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; HER2 , human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ; FTIs , farnesyl - transferase inhibitors ; IFP , interstitial ﬂuid pressure ; mTOR , mammalian target of rapamycin ; NSCLC , non - small cell lung cancer ; PI3K , phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase ; PVC , perivascular cell . Reference numbers are given in parentheses . GOEL ET AL . 1092 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m pressure in orthtopically implanted breast cancer ( 253 ) . PI - 103 ( another dual PI3K / mTOR inhibitor ) treatment of spontaneous and xenografted tumors normalized tumor vasculature both structurally ( by reducing vessel tortuosity and increasing pericyte coverage ) and functionally ( by im - proving tumor blood ﬂow , perfusion and oxygenation ) nor - malize vessels within 5 days of starting therapy ( 231 ) . mTOR is the catalytic subunit of two molecular complexes , TORC1 and TORC2 . Combined pharmacological inhibi - tion of TORC1 / 2 with Palomid - 529 led to a reduction in vessel density and tortuosity in ectopically implanted gli - oma xenografts ( 307 ) . However , inhibition of TORC1 alone using everolimus was not able to functionally normal - ize breast cancer vasculature in rats ( 253 ) . In the latter study , the effects of the combined PI3K - mTOR inhibitor were found to correlate with the mTOR - independent but PI3K - dependent inhibition of NOS . Finally , inhibition of AKT signaling with the protease inhibitor nelﬁnavir has also been shown to normalize vessels structurally ( reduced irregularity and improved PVC coverage ) ( 231 ) and func - tionally ( improved tumor blood ﬂow and oxygenation ) ( 226 , 231 ) , which in turn conferred an additional beneﬁt when combined with radiation therapy ( 226 ) . As expected , these changes are related to downregulation of HIF - 1 (cid:2) and hence VEGF production ( 226 ) . Ras oncogenes lie upstream of the PI3 - AKT pathway and are frequently mutated in solid tumors . By driving ac - tivity of the PI3K - AKT axis , Ras mutations can indirectly promote tumor angiogenesis ( 231 ) . Several studies have ex - amined the use of farnesyl transferase inhibitors ( FTIs ) , which target ras activation , in modulating tumor angiogen - esis . Treatment in different animal models has consistently resulted in reductions in vascular tortuosity and diameter ( 66 , 231 ) , improved vascular maturation ( 231 ) , and in - creased tumor blood ﬂow and oxygenation ( 61 , 66 , 231 ) . The EGFR is another important oncogene that is mu - tated in several common human tumors including lung , head and neck , and colorectal cancers as well as in gliomas . As with other oncogenes , EGFR activating mutations can indirectly lead to an upregulation of VEGF expression , through both HIF - 1 (cid:2) - dependent and HIF - 1 (cid:2) - independent , AKT - dependent mechanisms ( 227 ) . By inhibiting EGFR ac - tivity , geﬁtinib , a small molecule TKI of the EGFR , indi - rectly normalizes tumor vessels through downregulation of VEGF . Geﬁtinib can normalize vessel shape , PVC coverage , blood ﬂow , perfusion , and oxygenation within 5 days of starting treatment , in tumors that express the EGFR ( 231 ) . Erlotinib , another EGFR TKI , can also reduce tumor cell expression of HIF - 1 (cid:2) and VEGF in vitro , which in turn leads to reductions in vessel permeability and improve - ments in blood ﬂow and oxygenation after in vivo treatment of various xenografts ( 52 ) . Importantly , pretreatment of tumors with erlotinib led to a synergistic effect on tumor growth delay in combination with either chemotherapy or radiotherapy , emphasizing the therapeutic beneﬁts of indi - rect antiangiogenics . One study has examined EGFR inhi - bition in the treatment of high - grade gliomas , which often demonstrate the most common EGFR mutation , EGFRvIII . Pretreatment of EGFRvIII mutant gliomas with an anti - EGFRvIII monoclonal antibody , Mab806 , dramatically im - proved the efﬁcacy of subsequently administered radiother - apy , possibly due to normalization of the microenviron - ment ( 155 ) . In such studies , where normalization of vessels was not clearly demonstrated , it is possible that the syner - gistic beneﬁt from combining an oncogenic inhibitor and radiotherapy could also relate to pharmacological sensiti - zation of cancer cells to the effects of radiation . Taken together , the data from oncogene - targeted ther - apies converge to the ﬁnding that in addition to anti - tumor cell effects , these drugs often indirectly modulate the bal - ance between pro - and anti - angiogenic factors , tending to normalize the vasculature . Of interest , key studies in this ﬁeld have often shown improvements in vascular structure and function without a discernible effect on tumor growth ( 231 ) , suggesting that microenvironmental modiﬁcation may sometimes play a principal therapeutic role for such agents . Also of interest , but somewhat unexplored , has been the observation that normalization window achieved by oncogenic targeting may , at least preclinically , be of longer duration than that observed with direct anti - VEGF therapy ( 231 ) . This may theoretically relate to speciﬁc suppression of oncogene - driven , excessive VEGF expression within a tumor rather than total VEGF suppression from anti - VEGF therapy , which ultimately causes vascular regression . This has important translational implications , and future studies should investigate this hypothesis . 3 . Endocrine therapy Various human tumors are dependent on sex hor - mones for their initiation and growth , including the andro - gen - dependent prostate cancer , and estrogen and / or proges - terone - dependent breast cancers . Conceptually similar to oncogenic signaling , hormone signaling in these cancers not only drives cellular proliferation , but also a host of other malignant properties including angiogenesis . In the pros - tatic epithelium , androgen exposure leads to production of VEGF , maintaining the organ’s vascularity ( 240 ) , and also regulates Ang - 1 and Ang - 2 production . Clinically , sex hor - mone - dependent tumors are often treated with hormone withdrawal , which limits tumor growth . We have previously examined the speciﬁc effects of testosterone withdrawal on tumor angiogenesis using the androgen - dependent Shionogi carcinoma . Castration led to tumor regression and a concomitant decrease in VEGF ex - pression . Interestingly , in this model , tumor ECs underwent apoptosis before cancer cells , and pruning of tumor vessels preceded the decrease in tumor size ( 151 ) . Moreover , ves - sels began to exhibit a normal phenotype with reduced di - NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1093 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ameter , tortuosity , permeability , and leukocyte adhesion . In addition , tumor oxygenation was improved 3 wk after therapy ( 120 ) . The results indicate that sex hormone with - drawal leads to a speciﬁc , antivascular effect mediated by a reduction in VEGF expression , and that this in turn may lead to normalization of the vasculature . 4 . Metronomic chemotherapy Cytotoxic chemotherapy is aimed at killing tumor cells and is traditionally prescribed in moderate to high doses at two - to three - week intervals . This dosing schedule allows adequate time for a patient to recover from the toxicity of treatment before the next cycle is administered . In addition to killing tumor cells , however , cytotoxics may also damage the proliferating endothelium of tumor vessels . Recent ob - servations support the notion that this antivascular effect of chemotherapy is maximized when drugs are administered at lower doses on a continuous schedule , without signiﬁcant interruption , referred to as metronomic chemotherapy ( 38 , 164 ) . A number of preclinical and clinical studies have shown the safety and efﬁcacy of metronomic therapy , pri - marily attributing its beneﬁts to “anti - angiogenic” mecha - nisms . Prolonged exposure of ECs to low doses of chemother - apy in vitro leads to their upregulation of the antiangiogenic factor TSP - 1 , and the beneﬁcial antiangiogenic effects of metronomic therapy are lost in TSP - 1 - deﬁcient mice ( 28 ) . This suggests that metronomic chemotherapy may in fact , through TSP - 1 upregulation , shift the balance between pro - and anti - angiogenic factors towards a more normal pheno - type , and that it might therefore induce vascular normaliza - tion ( 143 ) . Indeed , a recent in vivo study examined the vascular effects of metronomic chemotherapy in mice bear - ing human pancreatic tumors , treated with either continu - ous low - dose gemcitabine chemotherapy or a conventional gemcitabine schedule ( 54 ) . While both schedules had signif - icant anti - tumor effects , the metronomic regimen reduced vessel density and signiﬁcantly improved tumor oxygen - ation , a presumed consequence of improved perfusion . Metronomic chemotherapy also produced signiﬁcant re - ductions in the levels of several direct or indirect pro - angiogenic factors , including epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , interleukin ( IL ) - 8 , IL - 1 (cid:2) , intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) , and vascular cell adhesion mole - cule - 1 ( VCAM - 1 ) . 5 . Other indirect anti - angiogenic agents The effects of other agents on the tumor vasculature have also produced direct and indirect evidence for induc - tion of vascular normalization . These data are discussed brieﬂy below , but the precise mechanisms of action of these drugs are yet to be clearly delineated . Some of the early seminal work examining the beneﬁts of combined anti - angiogenic and cytotoxic therapy was done by Teicher et al . and is discussed in detail later ( 273 – 275 ) . Using the antiangiogenic TNP - 470 ( which may in - duce EC cycle arrest and also induce the p53 pathway in ECs ) , they demonstrated improved oxygenation of breast tumors and a consequent improvement in the efﬁcacy of concurrently administered radiotherapy . The authors also showed enhanced delivery of cytotoxic chemotherapeutics into breast and lung tumors treated with TNP - 470 , again leading to synergistic gains in tumor control . In addition , suramin therapy ( an agent that binds to multiple receptors including EGF , TGF - (cid:1) , and PDGF ) enhanced homogeneity of vessel structure and tumor oxygenation in ectopic GBM xenografts ( 23 ) . Other agents that normalize various as - pects of tumor vessels include dexrazoxane ( potentially through upregulation of TSP - 1 ) ( 196 ) , methylselenocys - teine [ possibly through downregulation of HIF - 1 (cid:2) , induc - ible NOS ( iNOS ) , and cyclooxygenase 2 ] ( 24 , 25 ) , and tha - lidomide ( 255 ) . Thalidomide is now used clinically for mul - tiple myeloma and may exert its anti - angiogenic effects by intercalating purine motifs into the promoter of bFGF . Tha - lidomide can reduce tumor vessel density and tumor IFP , while improving perfusion and oxygenation in preclinical models . The window of improved oxygenation typically lasts from day 2 to day 4 of treatment , and synergistic effects on tumor shrinkage are observed if thalidomide ther - apy precedes radiotherapy or systemic chemotherapy by 48 h ( 7 , 255 ) . C . Genetic Models Demonstrating Vascular Normalization Some of the most elegant preclinical work examining the role of speciﬁc molecules in normalizing the tumor vascu - lature has come from studies employing genetic models . Such studies enable clean assessment of the effect of a single factor in speciﬁc cell populations , and often include induc - ible models ( in which gene expression can be switched on or off ) or conditional models ( in which gene expression is modulated in a single cell type ) . In recent years , genetic approaches have uncovered several determinants of vascu - lar normalization , which include angiogenic factors , molec - ular regulators of PVC biology , and oxygen - sensing factors . 1 . Manipulating the expression of proangiogenic factors In tumors , VEGF may be expressed by cancer or tumor stromal cells , or may be released from the surrounding ex - tracellular matrix . A number of studies have examined the speciﬁc role of VEGF derived from each cellular compart - ment and have uncovered new aspects of tumor vascular biology . Early studies utilized high - grade glioma cells con - taining a tetracycline response element in the VEGF pro - moter . In this model , tumor cell VEGF expression can be suppressed at a chosen time point by the administration of tetracycline . When VEGF expression is suppressed in gli - GOEL ET AL . 1094 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m oma cells in established tumors , a normalization window ensues , commencing 48 – 72 h after genetic manipulation ( 22 ) . The changes in vascular morphology resemble those seen after pharmacological anti - VEGF therapy , with prun - ing of immature vessels , and increased PVC coverage and vessel maturation . Other studies using VEGF (cid:3) / (cid:3) tumor cells have clari - ﬁed how VEGF speciﬁcally impedes PVC recruitment to ECs , a hallmark of the abnormal tumor vasculature ( 110 ) . When VEGF (cid:3) / (cid:3) ﬁbrosarcoma or pancreatic carcinomas were xenografted into mice , a distinct improvement in ves - sel PVC coverage was observed , contrasting with the loose association of these cells in wild - type tumors . Elegant work from these studies has revealed that VEGF induces the for - mation of VEGFR2 - PDGFR (cid:1) complexes on the surface of PVCs . These complexes prevent PDGFR (cid:1) - mediated re - cruitment of PVCs to vessels ( 110 ) . It is thus logical that the abundant VEGF within tumors should prevent adequate PVC - endothelial cell interactions , which clariﬁes the mech - anism behind anti - VEGF therapy - induced enhancement of vascular maturation . Myeloid cell inﬁltration ( e . g . , monocytes / macrophages , neutrophils ) is another hallmark of solid tumors , and these cells may also serve as a source of VEGF in tumors . Implan - tation of wild - type carcinomas growing in mice devoid spe - ciﬁcally of myeloid cell - derived VEGF also yielded a pheno - type of vascular normalization , characterized by reduced tumor vessel tortuosity , improved PVC coverage and oxy - genation , and improved chemotherapy efﬁcacy ( 265 ) . It thus appears that anti - VEGF - induced vascular normaliza - tion is a generalized phenotype , regardless of the source of VEGF . Of note , speciﬁc suppression of myeloid cell - derived VEGF was found to increase the rate of tumor growth . The increased growth could be due to the improved availability of oxygen and nutrients , but the vast majority of studies revealing improved tumor perfusion and oxygenation after VEGF inhibition have not replicated this ﬁnding . Differ - ences could relate to variations in oxygen and glucose con - sumption rates of different tumors ( 114 ) . The Ang - Tie - 2 system has also been studied using genetic approaches , and evidence supports previously estab - lished notions that EC - derived Ang - 2 is an important “ab - normalizing” factor . When Ang - 2 knockout mice are im - planted with syngeneic carcinoma or melanoma , the resul - tant tumors show various features similar to those reported with pharmacological anti - Ang - 2 therapy ( 83 , 213 ) , includ - ing a reduction in vessel diameter , an increase in tumor perfusion , and a more mature PVC proﬁle . More recently , the role of the Ang - 2 / Tie - 2 axis on cells other than ECs has been uncovered . In particular , Tie - 2 expressing monocytes ( TEMs ) are often found to inﬁltrate solid tumors , and their stimulation by tumor EC - derived Ang - 2 enhances their pro - angiogenic poten - tial ( 60 ) . Speciﬁcally , TEM exposure to Ang - 2 increases their expression of two proangiogenic enzymes , thymi - dine phosphorylase and cathepsin B , highlighting a pos - sible role for the TEM Ang - 2 / Tie - 2 axis as a novel target for anti - angiogenic therapies ( 198a ) . As described earlier , PlGF is a new emerging candidate mediating tumor vessel abnormalities , given the evidence that its pharmacological blockade normalizes tumor ves - sels , prevents an increase in tumor hypoxia , and enhances the effects of chemotherapy ( 87 , 284 ) . This evidence has recently been supported through genetic models using PlGF (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice . Carcinogen - induced models of skin cancer in these mice show evidence of a tumor growth delay and an accompanying reduction in vessel diameter . Moreover , short - interfering RNA ( siRNA ) induced genetic silencing of PlGF of established carcinogen - or transgene - induced hep - atocellular cancer improves the structural uniformity of tu - mor vessels , reducing intercapillary distances and also re - sulting in a tumor growth delay ( 284 ) . More recently , it has been suggested that the histidine - rich glycoprotein ( HRG ) , a known anti - angiogenic and immunomodulatory factor , mediates vessel normalization in tumors speciﬁcally through downregulation of PlGF expression ( 243 ) . Tumors engi - neered to overexpress HRG demonstrate a normalized ves - sel phenotype characterized structurally by reduced vessel diameter , improved EC junctions , and increased PVC cov - erage , and functionally by reduced permeability , less hyp - oxia , heightened response to chemotherapy , and reduced metastasis . Importantly , HRG overexpression reduces the expression of PlGF in tumors , and these effects of HRG are not seen in PlGF (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice , indicating that HRG cannot fur - ther normalize vessels in the absence of stromal ( and in particular bone - marrow cell derived ) PlGF ( 243 ) . More - over , the HRG - induced PlGF suppression polarizes the im - mune environment of tumors , skewing macrophages from a pro - tumor ( M2 ) to anti - tumor ( M1 ) phenotype . Genetic studies have also explored the role of integrins in tumor angiogenesis , with contrasting results . As de - scribed before , the precise role of EC (cid:2) v and (cid:1) 3 / (cid:1) 5 integrin subunits in tumor angiogenesis has been debated . Neverthe - less , genetic inhibition of integrin activity in tumor cells indirectly produced changes in tumor vasculature consis - tent with normalization . In a study of GBM , (cid:2) v (cid:1) 3 or (cid:2) v (cid:1) 5 integrin activation was found to upregulate the activity of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , with consequent stimulation of the RhoB kinase . This in turn inhibited degradation of HIF - 1 (cid:2) , promoting vascular abnormality . Genetic down - regulation of FAK , (cid:1) 3 integrin , (cid:1) 5 integrin , or RhoB using siRNA results in a marked reduction in microvessel density but also a functional normalization of the tumor vascula - ture with improved oxygenation ( 262 ) . Similar results are seen in GBMs overexpressing a dominant negative form of RhoB ( 2 ) , with an accompanying increase in tumor radio - NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1095 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m sensitivity . Finally , it is conceivable that blocking FAK in ECs resists “abnormalization” of lung vessels , preventing solid tumor metastasis to the lung ( 126 ) . Other genetic studies have highlighted the role of NOS on tumor vascular normalization . NOS exists in three iso - forms : neuronal NOS ( nNOS ) , iNOS , and eNOS . eNOS - derived nitric oxide is a known driver of angiogenesis , pro - moting the formation of stable vessels with adequate PVC coverage ( 102 , 161 , 312 ) . However , in human GBM xeno - graft models , tumor cells express nNOS and thereby inter - fere with tissue distribution of NO normally generated by eNOS which is present in ECs . As a result , blood vessels in nNOS expressing GBMs are abnormal . Speciﬁc silencing or blocking of nNOS in tumor cells restores a NO gradient such that NO is concentrated primarily around blood ves - sels , which results in a more normal vessel phenotype ( re - duced vessel tortuosity , increased microvascular density ( MVD ) and PVC coverage , reduced permeability , improved tumor oxygenation , and increased beneﬁt of radiotherapy ) ( 162 ) . iNOS is often expressed in wide variety of different type of tumors including breast cancers . Similar to nNOS in GBM , iNOS expressed by tumor cells distracts tissue NO gradients and promotes tumor vessel abnormality . In fact , speciﬁc silencing or blockade of iNOS in breast cancers reestablished perivascular NO gradients , normalized the tu - mor vasculature and oxygenation , and potentiated con - comitantly administered radiation therapy ( 280 ) . In addition , the semaphorin family protein semaphorin 3A ( SEMA3A ) has recently been discovered to act as an endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor that normalizes the tu - mor vasculature . By binding to NRP1 / 2 on ECs , SEMA3A inhibited the pro - angiogenic activity of VEGF ( 27 ) . Its ex - pression in ECs gradually declined as tumors progressed and angiogenesis became rampant . Adenoviral delivery of a SEMA3A transgene to established tumors restores SEMA3A ex - pression , resulting in a normalized vasculature with struc - tural homogeneity and maturation , improved tumor oxy - genation , and interestingly , delayed tumor growth ( 194 ) . Similarly , pharmacological blockade of SEMA3A reversed these changes . Finally , our team recently characterized PDGF - C and PDGF - D as mediators of vessel normalization . Or - thotopically implanted GBM cells engineered to overex - press PDGF - C showed evidence of vascular maturation in the resulting tumors . In particular , they displayed smaller diameters , had greater PVC coverage , and were less permeable . As a result , they were less susceptible to the anti - angiogenic effects of VEGFR2 blockade ( 68 ) . The mechanisms behind these effects are unclear but sug - gest that the PDGF - C pathway may be one of the mech - anisms of acquired resistance to anti - VEGF therapy in tumors . Similar vessel changes were observed in breast tumors overexpressing PDGF - D , resulting in improved delivery of systemically administered chemotherapy into tumors ( 190 ) ( FIGURE 8 ) . Interestingly , PDGF - D overex - pression in mammary tumors not only normalizes ves - sels , but also increases the rate of primary tumor growth ; whether these are two independent phenomena or are inter - related remains unclear . 2 . Role of signaling in PVCs for vascular normalization Pericyte recruitment is critical for the formation of a mature , stable , vascular network . Recruitment of PVCs to vessels is mediated by a number of molecules including PDGFR (cid:1) , sphingosine - 1 - phosphate - 1 , Ang - 1 , and TGF - (cid:1) ( 142 ) . As discussed previously , Ang - 1 is necessary for in - duction and maintenance of vascular normalization in tu - mors ( 83 , 298 ) , and inhibition of PDGFR (cid:1) activity by tu - mor VEGF prevents PVC recruitment , and therefore desta - bilizes vessels ( 110 ) . More recently , the regulator of G protein signaling 5 ( Rgs5 ) , a molecule involved in PVC differentiation , has been implicated as a key mediator of vascular normaliza - tion ( 117 ) . Like PDGFR (cid:1) , Rgs5 has been identiﬁed as a speciﬁc marker for PVCs in the vascular bed ( 29 ) . Although its function is not well understood , it possibly acts by inhib - iting PDGFR (cid:1) activity in fetal vessel development ( 56 ) . Of particular importance , spontaneous and grafted tumors growing in Rgs5 (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice have a normalized vasculature , characterized by reduced vessel diameter and permeability , increased structural homogeneity and coverage by mature PVCs , and improved oxygenation . Of note , vascular nor - malization led to an improvement in anti - tumor T - lympho - cyte trafﬁcking and function in the tumor - bearing Rgs5 (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice and a signiﬁcant improvement in mouse survival ( 117 ) . 3 . Role of oxygen - sensing molecules As previously discussed , solid tumors are often hy - poxic . Hypoxia mitigates the activity of the PHD family members , resulting in expression of hypoxia - responsive genes including VEGF and hence angiogenesis ( 159 ) . As expected , downregulating HIF - 1 (cid:2) expression in tu - mors ( through direct intratumoral injection of a HIF - 1 (cid:2) antisense vector ) inhibited tumor angiogenesis . Moreover , this led to a synergistic anti - tumor activity when adminis - tered with chemotherapy in hepatocellular carcinoma xenografts , suggesting an improved drug delivery to the tumors ( 188 ) . More recently , an elegant genetic study has revealed an important role for the oxygen sensor PHD2 in ECs in me - diating the abnormal phenotype of tumor vessels ( 199 ) . Although homozygous deﬁciency of PHD is embryonically GOEL ET AL . 1096 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m lethal , Carmeliet’s team developed PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) mice , which express PHD2 at half of the normal level . As such , PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) cells act as if they continuously sense lower oxy - gen tensions and are preadapted to hypoxia . As expected , HIF - 1 (cid:2) and HIF - 2 (cid:2) levels are elevated in PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) mice , with HIF - 2 (cid:2) elevation seen especially in ECs . Syngeneic tumors grown in PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) mice display features consistent with vascular normalization . Speciﬁcally , tumor vessels are structurally regular , with fewer gaps between ECs and tight intercellular junctions , due to increased expression of VE - cadherin . This increase in VE - cadherin and also in levels of soluble VEGFR1 ( sFlt1 ) appears to be directly induced by the elevated levels of HIF - 2 (cid:2) . Vessels also demonstrate im - proved PVC coverage and are surrounded by a laminin - containing basement membrane . Functional consequences of PHD2 - inhibition - driven endothelial normalization in - clude improved tumor oxygenation and reduced permeabil - ity . Importantly , although primary tumor growth is not altered in PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) mice , there is a clear reduction in tumor cell shedding from the primary , with a decrease in circulat - ing tumor cell numbers and in rates of metastasis develop - ment . Moreover , the expression of several genes promoting tumor cell survival , motility , and epithelial - to - mesenchy - mal transition ( a phenotypic shift associated with an in - crease in metastatic propensity ) is reduced in these tumors ( 199 ) . Of particular signiﬁcance , vascular normalization was also observed in tumors grown in mice harboring EC - speciﬁc PHD2 haploinsufﬁciency . This implies that hypoxia - sensing by cancer cells and ECs may have differential effects on vascular normalization . In tumor cells , hypoxia induces VEGF overexpression via PHD2 downregulation , thereby promoting abnormal angiogenesis . In contrast PHD2 inhi - bition in ECs leads to increased production of HIF - 2 (cid:2) , trig - gering VE - cadherin and sFlt1 production and promotes vascular normalization . While hypoxia may simultaneously drive these processes in solid tumors , the balance often tips toward vascular abnormality probably due to the over - whelmingly high levels of pro - angiogenic factors released by tumor cells ( 199 ) ( FIGURE 11 ) . Unfortunately , there are currently no pharmacological agents reported to inhibit PHD2 activity in ECs alone to modulate normalization of tumor vessels . 4 . Other genetic modiﬁcations leading to vascular normalization The interferons ( IFN ) - (cid:2) , - (cid:1) , and - (cid:5) have all been im - plicated as antiangiogenic molecules . In the case of IFN - (cid:1) , adenoviral transfer of an IFN - (cid:1) transgene normalized the vasculature of neuroblastoma and GBM xenografts and improved tumor oxygenation and delivery of chemothera - peutics to these tumors ( 70 , 72 ) . The mechanisms behind IFN - (cid:1) - mediated vascular normalization are not well char - acterized , but are likely mediated by a range of interferon - stimulated genes ( ISGs ) ( 271 ) . TGF - (cid:1) 1 , a multifunctional cytokine , has a complex role in angiogenesis . It is expressed in a number of cell types , including ECs and PVCs and , depending on the context and concentration , is both pro - and antiangiogenic ( 106 ) . The TGF - (cid:1) 1 - ALK1 pathway induces ECs and ﬁbroblasts to ex - press Id1 , a protein required for proliferation and migra - tion . On the other hand , the TGF - (cid:1) 1 - ALK5 pathway induces the plasminogen activator inhibitor ( PAI ) - 1 in endo - thelial cells . PAI - 1 promotes vessel maturation by preventing degradation of the provisional matrix around the nascent vessel . Thus the ratio of TGF - (cid:1) signals through ALK1 ver - sus ALK5 is likely to determine the pro - or antiangiogenic effect of TGF - (cid:1) . One molecule that may orchestrate this balance is endoglin , a TGF - (cid:1) - binding protein ( type III re - ceptor ) ( 142 ) . We have recently examined the role of TGF - (cid:1) 1 in tumor angiogenesis : breast tumors engineered to overexpress the soluble TGF - (cid:1) receptor II ( hence inhibiting TGF - (cid:1) 1 function ) possessed more mature vessels with in - creased PVC coverage . Doxorubicin chemotherapy admin - istered systemically penetrated more deeply into these tu - mors . In addition , TGF - (cid:1) inhibition had additional effects on the extracellular matrix , reducing collagen 1 levels and hence improving the delivery of nanopackaged chemother - apy through the tumor interstitium ( Liu J , Liao S , Diop - Frimpong B , Chen W , Goel S , Naxerova K , Boucher Y , Jain RK , Xu L , unpublished data ) . Similar results have been observed after systemic administration of the soluble TGF - (cid:1) receptor II protein or the anti - TBF - (cid:1) antibody 1D11 ( 245 ) . FIGURE 11 The complex role of oxygen - sensing molecules in dif - ferent cell types , and as regulators of the vessel normalization phe - notype . In tumor cells , the hypoxia - mediated abrogation of prolyl hydroxylase 2 ( PHD2 ) activity encourages the hypoxia - indicible tran - scription factor - 1 (cid:2) ( HIF - 1 (cid:2) ) - driven synthesis of VEGF and other pro - angiogenic molecules . This in turn leads to relentless angiogenesis and mediates the formation of an abnormal tumor vasculature , with its attendant functional consequences . Hypoxia in endothelial cells has the opposite effect : here , the reduced PHD2 activity and HIF upregulation ( speciﬁcally HIF - 2 (cid:2) ) promotes a normalization pheno - type , through upregulation of the soluble VEGFR1 ( sFlt1 ) which se - questers local VEGF , and VE - cadherin , which contributes to tighter interendothelial cell junctions . In most tumors , the balance between these two pathways is in favor of tumor cells , which results in an abnormal vasculature . Targeting PHD2 speciﬁcally in endothelial cells represents an attractive strategy for normalization of tumor vessels . [ From Mazzone et al . ( 199 ) , with permission . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1097 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m D . Mathematical Modeling of Vascular Normalization In addition to the evidence described above , insightful rev - elations into the causes and consequences of vascular nor - malization have come from the use of mathematical models . Such models are based on fundamental physiological laws and are derived using mathematical equations . Quantita - tive results are obtained from the solution of these equa - tions , where model parameters are estimated based on ex - isting experimental data . They have served to support the preclinical data obtained from in vivo experimentation ( 12 , 13 , 18 – 21 , 146 ) . A number of elegant theoretical and experimental studies have addressed the issues of tumor angiogenesis and struc - tural adaptation of blood vessels . Lee et al . ( 179 ) modeled a growing tumor and a dynamically evolving blood vessel network , reproducing inhomogeneous tumorlike capillary networks . This model also reproduced vessel collapse due to reduced blood ﬂow and mechanical compression . Welter and co - workers developed a model to analyze the vascular remodeling process of an arteriovenous vessel network dur - ing tumor growth and were able to reproduce complex vascular geometry with necrotic zones and “hot spots” of increased vascular density and blood ﬂow of varying size ( 292 ) . Employing a deterministic model of a tumor growing either as an isolated mass in a body cavity or embedded in a host organ , we predicted how different transport properties of the vessel wall and interstitium affect tumor IFP and inter - stitial ﬂuid velocity ( 18 – 21 , 146 , 153 ) . The results lie in harmony with preclinical data , suggesting that anti - angio - genic therapy can restore IFP gradients , increase interstitial ﬂuid convection at the center of a tumor , and reduce it at the tumor boundary , increasing exposure of cancer cells to blood - borne drugs and decreasing the ﬂow of cancer cells and growth factors across the tumor boundary into the surrpounding normal tissue . By coupling intra - and ex - travascular pressure , we showed mathematically how high permeability can lead to ﬂow stasis ( 214 ) . Another model that explicitly included blood cells , vessel branching , and focal leakage demonstrated how tumor vessel permeability leads to intravascular hemoconcentration , and a conse - quent increase in resistance to blood ﬂow through tumor vessels ( 267 ) . More recently , a three - dimensional model of the tumor vasculature speculated that reductions in perme - ability from anti - angiogenic therapy will not only reduce IFP , but could potentially result in a decrease in tumor cell shedding and metastasis ( 304 ) . We have also developed a mathematical methodology to describe how changes in the geometry of tumor vasculature with the use of anti - angiogenic treatment can improve drug delivery . This approach suggests that two simple measures of vascular geometry , readily obtainable from vascular im - ages , can link vascular structure to delivery in both tumor and normal tissues and could serve as a metric for normal - ization ( 13 ) . E . Summary As demonstrated through the multitude of pharmacological and genetic studies , a host of molecules have now been implicated in tumor vascular normalization ( FIGURE 6 ) . The vascular normalization concept , initially conceived upon studies of pharmacological blockade of VEGF , has now expanded to describe a homeostatic balance between the normal and abnormal vessel phenotypes , with their respec - tive microenvironmental and therapeutic sequelae . This balance is clearly modulated by a number of critical angio - genic factors , but also other molecules implicated in a broad range of functions including regulation of PVC biology and oxygen sensing . V . CLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR VASCULAR NORMALIZATION A . Evidence of Vascular Normalization in Primary Tumors The array of preclinical evidence supporting the vascular normalization hypothesis , coupled with clinical trial data suggesting synergism between anti - VEGF therapy and systemic chemotherapy , have prompted a number of clin - ical studies in human patients to determine if vascular normalization occurs in cancer patients ( 14 , 15 , 75 , 225 , 263 , 294 , 295 , 297 ) . Such studies are necessarily time - consuming and labor - intensive , requiring recruitment of sufﬁcient numbers of eligible patients , an extensive array of invasive and noninvasive investigations , and compre - hensive correlative science . They are often hindered by the inability to perform serial tumor biopsies in patients , preventing direct histological analysis of vascular changes after anti - angiogenic therapies . Despite these limitations , however , several landmark studies have now been reported in full and have provided strong evidence for a normalized vasculature in cancer patients treated with anti - angiogenic agents ( TABLE 5 ) . In collaboration with Willett and colleagues , we reported the ﬁrst such study in 2004 , and were able to demonstrate for the ﬁrst time the structural and functional features of vascular normalization among patients treated with anti - VEGF therapy ( 294 ) ( FIGURE 12 ) . The study established a new paradigm for translational studies of anti - angio - genic therapy , providing detailed physiological informa - tion in patients undergoing anti - cancer treatment . Our team performed a phase 1 / 2 trial examining the effects of bevacizumab in patients with locally advanced , but not metastatic , rectal adenocarcinoma ( LARC ) . Rectal carci - GOEL ET AL . 1098 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m noma was chosen given the proven beneﬁts of bevaci - zumab plus chemotherapy in this tumor type in the met - astatic setting ( 135 , 246 ) and the relative ease of access to tumor tissue via ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy . The trial was designed to evaluate the effects of bevacizumab mono - therapy on 1 ) vascular physiology : tumor perfusion , tu - mor blood volume , permeability - surface area ( P - S ) prod - uct and IFP ; and 2 ) vascular structure : microvessel den - sity and PVC coverage . To this end , patients underwent extensive investigation at the time of enrollment [ sig - moidoscopic biopsy , IFP measurements , dynamic com - puted tomography ( CT ) scanning to determine tumor blood ﬂow , and positron emission tomography ( PET ) scanning to determine tumor uptake of the radioactive tracer 18 - Fluorodeoxyglucose ( 18 - FDG ) ] . Patients then received a single dose of bevacizumab ( 5 mg / kg body wt for most patients ) and 12 days later repeated the same investigations . After this initial cycle , standard concur - rent chemoradiation was given in combination with on - going fortnightly bevacizumab . The initial report from this study described features observed in the ﬁrst 6 pa - tients , but total accrual continued to a total of 32 patients ( 296 , 297 ) . Although tumors did not shrink , vascular structure and function changed signiﬁcantly as early as day 12 after bev - acizumab monotherapy ( 294 ) . Macroscopically , tumors re - verted from hyperemic , hemorrhagic lesions to pale masses , consistent with reduced vessel density and permeability . Indeed , dynamic CT scanning revealed an almost 40 % re - duction in tumor blood ﬂow and immunohistochemistry conﬁrmed a drop to approximately half in microvascular density after bevacizumab . Moreover , a dramatic reduction in tumor IFP ( (cid:6) 50 % ) was observed after bevacizumab monotherapy , consistent with a reduction in vascular per - meability and reversion to a more normal vascular pheno - type . Histological data also showed an increase in the pro - portion of vessels covered by (cid:2) - SMA - positive PVCs after bevacizumab , in keeping with increased vessel maturity and stability ( 294 ) . Moreover , despite the reduction in tumor blood ﬂow and permeability , tumor uptake of 18 - FDG was not reduced by bevacizumab monotherapy , further sup - porting the notion that the remaining tumor vessels had an improved function after treatment . Taken together , the re - sults provided the ﬁrst convincing evidence of normaliza - tion in human tumors . Additional mechanistic insight was gained from a study we conducted in collaboration wth Batchelor , Sorensen , and colleagues in 31 patients with recurrent GBM , an aggres - sive primary brain tumor ( 14 , 15 , 263 ) ( FIGURE 13 ) . In that study , patients whose GBMs had progressed despite conventional treatment ( whole brain radiotherapy and concurrent cytotoxic chemotherapy ) were treated with cediranib , the same agent used in the previously de - scribed preclinical study of mice bearing orthotopic GBMs ( 160 ) . This important study was designed to an - swer several outstanding questions pertaining to vascular normalization in GBM patients : 1 ) What is the timing of the onset and end of the vascular normalization window Table 5 Clinical studies demonstrating vascular normalization in humans Tumor Type Anti - AngiogenicTherapy Changes in Vessel Structure Changes in Vessel Function Clinical Observations Primary tumors Rectal carcinoma ( n (cid:2) 32 ) Bevacizumab 2 Density , 1 PVC coverage 2 tumor blood ﬂow , 2 IFP , improved delivery of FDG per vessel Tumors became pale ( 294 ) Glioblastoma ( n (cid:2) 31 ) Cediranib 2 Vessel size 2 permeability 2 Tumor - associated edema , reduced patient need for corticosteroids ( 14 , 15 ) High - grade glioma ( n (cid:2) 5 ) Bevacizumab 2 Vascular arcades and glomeruloid vessels ( 89 ) Prostatecarcinoma ( n (cid:2) 10 ) Androgen ablation Pruning of immature vessels , 1 PVC coverage ( 22 ) Metastatic disease HER2 (cid:4) breast cancer brain metastases ( n (cid:2) 22 ) Lapatinib 2 Vessel tortuosity ( 43 ) FDG , ﬂuorodeoxyglucose ; HER2 , human epidermal growth factor receptor - 2 ; IFP , interstitial ﬂuid pressure . Reference numbers are given in parentheses . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1099 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m in such patients ? 2 ) Is normalization a reversible process ? 3 ) How can vascular normalization beneﬁt GBM patients clinically ? 4 ) Can normalization be measured with non - invasive imaging techniques ? Because serial tissue biop - sies cannot be obtained from recurrent GBM patients , the study used advanced “vascular” MRI techniques to as - sess changes in vessel structural and functional parame - ters over time . Cediranib treatment resulted in a consis - tent and dramatic reduction in tumor enhancement with gadolinium contrast within 24 h of therapy ( i . e . , after a single dose ) , consistent with a reduction in vascular per - meability and the start of the vascular normalization window ( 15 ) . This was consistent with the rapid onset of normalization after blockade of the VEGF / VEGFR2 pathway in preclinical models ( 160 , 298 ) . In patients , the vascular normalization “time window” persisted for at least 28 days . Interestingly , whereas the reduction in the relative tumor vessel size was reversed by day 56 of ther - apy , vascular permeability ( estimated by K trans measure - ments , the product of permeability and vessel surface area ) remained low even out to day 112 . This “uncou - pling” of the timing of different aspects of vessel normal - ization ( i . e . , vessel size and permeability ) has not been ob - served in preclinical studies , potentially due to the rapid progression of tumors and short survival time in mice . Im - portantly , the reversibility of vascular normalization was also demonstrated in this study : in patients who required “drug holidays” on account of toxicity , the normalization phenotype on MRI reversed while patients were off the drug and returned upon recommencement of therapy . A net con - sequence of the reduction in vascular permeability and ves - sel size was a marked reduction in peritumoral edema , again consistent with the preclinical data ( 160 ) . As described in detail in section VI A , this led to a reduction in the need for corticosteroid therapy ( prescribed to reduce edema ) in the majority of patients . Of translational importance , MRI and blood biomarkers of vascular normalization correlated with improved patient outcomes ( see sect . VI C ) ( 263 ) . Another small , retrospective study examined the conse - quences of anti - VEGF therapy on vascular morphology in high - grade glioma ( HGG ) patients ( 89 ) . Tumor biopsies were available from ﬁve HGG patients both before and after treatment with bevacizumab and were compared with those from four bevacizumab - naive controls . Structural changes of normalization were found in bevacizumab - FIGURE 12 Direct effects of anti - angiogenic therapy in human patients with locally advanced adenocar - cinoma of the rectum . A : 6 patients were treated with locally advanced rectal cancer underwent sigmoid - oscopy before ( top panels ) and 12 days after ( bottom panels ) a single dose of bevacizumab ( anti - human VEGF antibody ) . Tumors appear notably less hyperemic after treatment , associated with a quantiﬁable decrease in tumor blood ﬂow . B : positron emission tomography ( PET ) scanning using ﬂuoro - deoxyglucose ( FDG ) . Despite the reduction in tumor blood ﬂow , the amount of extravasated FDG is similar before ( left panel ) and after ( right panel ) bevacizumab treatment , implying improved functionality of surviving vessels . C : graphical representation of FDG uptake on PET scanning for six patients . Again , there is no difference in tumor uptake of FDG between pretreatment values and those 12 days after a single dose of bevaci - zumab . [ From Willett et al . ( 294 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1100 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m treated patients , including a loss of abnormal vascular ar - cades and glomeruloid vessels . We have recently shown similar ﬁndings in the brains of GBM patients treated with cediranib , taken at autopsy ( 69 ) . Indeed , the United States Food and Drug Administration has approved the use of bevacizumab as second - line monotherapy for GBM , based on the results of two phase II trials suggesting impressive response rates and progression - free survival , although the precise role for anti - VEGF treatment of GBM is still con - troversial ( 94 , 287 , 300 ) . Despite the paucity of correlative data , the reduction in peritumoral edema due to vascular normalization may play a major role . In addition to studies in LARC and GBM , preliminary evi - dence for vascular normalization emerged from studies of anti - VEGF therapy in advanced HCC and hormone depri - vation in patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma ( 22 , 151 , 319 ) . Sunitinib therapy in 34 advanced HCC patients led to signiﬁcant decreases in K trans , and the extent of drop in vascular permeability correlated with superior outcome . In another study , androgen ablation in prostate carcinoma led to a reduction in intratumoral VEGF levels and pruning of immature vessels with a subsequent increase in the propor - tion of vessels associated with (cid:2) - SMA - positive perivascular cells ( i . e . , an increase in VMI ) from 38 to 79 % ( 22 ) . This ﬁnding is analogous to the preclinical data on androgen withdrawal in the hormone - dependent Shionogi tumor ( 120 , 151 ) . Another area that is difﬁcult to study in human patients is the effect on anti - angiogenic therapy on drug delivery . Al - though several preclinical reports have shown improve - ments in tumor perfusion and drug delivery during the nor - malization window , challenges remain in measuring intra - tumoral drug distribution in patients . A recent report may provide some insights into this , however . Muggia et al . ( 209 ) examined the pharmacokinetics of pegylated lipo - somal doxorubicin ( PLD ) , with or without concurrent bev - acizumab therapy , in patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer . Although the number of patients analyzed to date is small , the data show a prolongation of PLD’s t 3 / 4 with an accompanying reduction in serum PLD levels with concurrent bevacizumab . This suggests that despite a reduc - tion in vascular permeability from bevacizumab , retention of PLD within the tumor may be increased on account of a reduction in IFP and improved vessel functionality . These data are consistent with the effect of vascular normalization on the uptake and retention of nanoparticles ( Chauhan et al . , unpublished data ) . FIGURE 13 Radiologic evidence of vascular normalization in a human glioblastoma patient treated with anti - VEGF therapy . Shown are representative images from a patient treated with cediranib ( an anti - VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor ) . Numbers represent days before or after commencement of therapy . Top panel : T1 - weighted magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) after administration of gadolinium contrast shows a dramatic reduction in contrast enhancement from within 24 h of starting therapy , consistent with a reduction in tumor - associated vascular permeability . In this patient , this was sustained up to at least 111 days . Middle panel : an MRI map of relative vessel size from the same patient shows decreases over time . Bottom panel : maps of K trans ( a measure of blood - brain barrier permeability ) show a substantial reduction after the ﬁrst dose . [ From Batchelor et al . ( 15 ) , with permission . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1101 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m B . Evidence of Vascular Normalization in Human Metastases The overwhelming majority of preclinical and clinical data on vascular normalization have been obtained from studies in primary tumors . However , the clinical beneﬁts of com - bined antiangiogenic therapy and chemotherapy have been established to date only in patients with metastatic cancers . Indeed , analysis of vasculature of metastases and their re - sponse to antiangiogenic treatment remains a signiﬁcant area warranting investigation . One study has provided limited radiologic evidence of nor - malization in patients with brain metastases from HER - 2 - positive breast cancer . As discussed previously , anti - HER - 2 therapies ( such as trastuzumab ) serve as indirect anti - angio - genic agents and promote normalization in HER - 2 - positive breast cancers ( 139 ) . With rigorous use of magnetic reso - nance angiography ( MRA ) techniques , Bullitt et al . ( 43 ) examined vascular changes in 22 patients with brain metas - tases from HER - 2 - positive breast cancer after treatment with lapatinib , a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of HER - 1 and HER - 2 . Given its HER - 2 inhibitory properties , it is likely that lapatinib could also normalize vessels in the same way as trastuzumab . Vessels from MRA images were examined using standard techniques to determine their “malignancy probability” ( MP ) , a surrogate measure of their tortuosity . In a minority of patients , a dramatic reduc - tion in MP was observed 2 mo after commencement of lapatinib . As discussed later , this reduction in MP might serve as a biomarker for normalization and treatment - de - rived beneﬁt . C . Summary Emerging clinical evidence has now conﬁrmed the presence of vascular normalization in human patients receiving an - tiangiogenic agents . Although the clinical data have recapit - ulated preclinical observations in some respects , certain fea - tures ( such as the timing of the vascular normalization ) are , not unexpectedly , different in humans and warrant further study . In addition , normalization has yet to be conﬁrmed in many of the common human tumors , and is the subject of ongoing investigation . Unfortunately , such clinical studies will always be hindered by the heterogeneity of patients and their tumors , and the difﬁculties in obtaining precise infor - mation in the absence of serial tissue biopsies . Moreover , despite the important insights from the clinical studies , the marked heterogeneity in individual patients’ responses to anti - angiogenic therapies remains a major challenge . For example , in the aforementioned trials in LARC , GBM , and HCC , for example , only a proportion of patients demonstrated evidence of beneﬁt from vascular normalization . Thus there is an urgent need to ﬁnd clinically relevant biomarkers that can be measured as surrogates for the occurrence of normalization , thereby enabling clini - cians to determine which patients stand to beneﬁt the most from ongoing treatment and / or avoid unnecessary treat - ment toxicity in patients who will not beneﬁt . Investigators in these and other studies have probed patient blood sam - ples and imaging results in an attempt to establish a series of noninvasive biomarkers that might serve this purpose ( 14 , 15 , 43 , 77 , 263 , 295 , 297 , 319 ) . These are discussed in detail in section VI C . VI . THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF VASCULAR NORMALIZATION Anti - angiogenic therapies have shown efﬁcacy in the man - agement of several solid tumor types . In many instances , normalization of the vasculature appears to play a key role in exerting these effects . These include 1 ) tumors where anti - angiogenic therapy may not be efﬁcacious by itself , but can increase the efﬁcacy systemic chemotherapy ( e . g . , met - astatic colorectal cancer , metastatic non - small - cell lung cancer ) ; and 2 ) tumors where monotherapy is beneﬁcial ( e . g . , GBM , HCC , and certain tumors that are heavily VEGF dependent , e . g . , renal cell carcinoma ) . The impact of vascular normalization on treatment efﬁcacy is likely con - text dependent . In this section , we focus on tumors where normalization is more likely to play an important role and discuss potential mechanisms by which normalization may prove a useful strategy in cancer therapy in the future . A . Effects of Anti - VEGF Therapy Alone 1 . Reduction in vascular permeability and edema As previously discussed , preclinical and clinical data have shown the beneﬁts for anti - angiogenic therapy in the management of GBM ( 15 , 160 , 263 , 287 , 298 ) . In murine studies , speciﬁc blockade of VEGFR2 produces normaliza - tion of the tumor vasculature ( 298 ) , and in the case of pan - VEGFR blockade with cediranib , this normalization leads to a dramatic reduction in tumor - associated edema , which in turn prolongs animal survival , even in the absence of any discernible anti - tumor effect ( 160 ) . Moreover , cedi - ranib monotherapy for GBM in a phase 2 study conﬁrmed that normalization through this agent reduces edema and cerebral mass effect , leading to a steroid - sparing effect ( 15 ) . The vasogenic edema associated with cerebral tumors is a major cause of morbidity and even mortality given the tight conﬁnement within the cranium . As a result , the use of anti - angiogenic induced vascular normalization for GBM may prove a useful strategy to reduce mass effect , avoid toxicity of corticosteroids , and potentially improve patient survival . 2 . Reduction in cell shedding from primary tumors A key component of the normalized vasculature is im - proved microvessel coverage by PVCs . The complex GOEL ET AL . 1102 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m PVC - EC interaction maintains vascular stability and matu - rity and is grossly deranged in solid tumors ( 236 ) , largely due to the inﬂuence of VEGF ( 110 ) . In addition to main - taining vessel functionality , preventing excessive vascular leak , and maintaining communication between vessels and the extracellular matrix , PVCs have also been implicated more recently in the prevention of metastasis . Mice with perturbed PVC - endothelial interactions or primary PVC deﬁciency demonstrate increases in solid tumor metastasis ( 305 ) . Moreover , a retrospective clinical report of colorec - tal cancer patients has suggested that impaired tumor vessel PVC coverage may be an independent predictor of metas - tasis and poor prognosis ( 310 ) . Although not fully ex - plored , the likely reasons for increased metastasis from pri - mary tumors containing PVC - deﬁcient vessels are the pro - motion of tumor cell intravasation though highly leaky vessels by high mechanical pressure or compressive forces , and an increase in metastatic potential in the hypoxic envi - ronment of PVC - poor tumors ( TABLE 3 ) . Conversely , a normalized vasculature has improved vascular pericyte coverage and could reduce tumor cell shedding and help prevent metastasis . Reduced hypoxia would also reduce selection pressures on cancer cells . To date , this has been best demonstrated in the study of metas - tasis in PHD2 (cid:4) / (cid:3) mice ( 199 ) . Heterozygous deﬁciency of PHD2 led to a normalized vasculature , improved tumor oxygenation , a reduced number of circulating tumor cells , and consequently reduced metastases . A reduction in tumor cell shedding has not been demonstrated to date as a con - sequence of pharmacological antiangiogenesis , and this is an area requiring further exploration in future studies . 3 . Enhancement of immune responses VEGF has a well - described immunosuppressive role , which may in turn enhance tumor growth . For example , VEGF inhibited the maturation and function of dendritic cells , antigen - presenting cells critical in anti - tumor immu - nity ( 99 , 218 ) . In addition , overexpression of VEGF activity in tumors can lead to increased inﬁltration of regulatory T cells and Gr1 (cid:4) myeloid suppressor cells , further aggravat - ing immunosuppression ( 186 , 260 ) . In some studies , VEGF also has been shown to reduce the expression of leukocyte - adhesion molecules on ECs , which may impede leukocyte entry into tumors ( 112 ) . In others , VEGF has been shown to upregulate adhesion molecules on angiogenic vessels and facilitate adhesion and rolling of natural killer cells ( 202 ) . Evidence suggests that the combination of anti - VEGF therapy plus immunotherapy can be synergistic and that anti - VEGF therapy - mediated vascular normalization in - creases inﬁltration of cytotoxic T cells into tumors in this setting ( see sect . VI B ) . Of interest , anti - VEGF mono - therapy - mediated normalization of the microenvironment can also enhance native immune function . A study utilizing an array of different anti - angiogenic compounds in tumor - bearing mice showed a consistent increase in tumor inﬁltra - tion by host leukocytes ( including cytotoxic T lymphocytes ) as a consequence of monotherapy alone ( 74 ) . This increase in leukocyte rolling and adhesion occurred despite a reduc - tion in MVD and tumor blood ﬂow , and was related to the induction of leukocyte - adhesion molecules VCAM - 1 and E - selectin on tumor endothelium . A second study gave sim - ilar results , showing that DC101 ( anti - VEGFR2 antibody ) monotherapy results in a tumor - speciﬁc increase in CD4 (cid:4) and CD8 (cid:4) T - cell inﬁltration into tumors ( 112 ) . Given these results , it is possible that anti - VEGF mono - therapy - induced normalization of vessels , might enhance anti - tumor immunity by increasing immune cell inﬁltration into tumors . Combined with the other possible beneﬁts of VEGF blockade on immune cell function , the immunologi - cal beneﬁts of anti - VEGF therapy are certainly worthy of further exploration in patients . B . Combination of Anti - VEGF Agents With Other Therapies The efﬁcacy of many conventional anti - cancer therapies depends on the tumor microenvironment . For example , sys - temically administered chemotherapeutics and anti - tumor immune cells ( after immunotherapy ) must be delivered in adequate amounts to a tumor and are most effective if the microenvironment is normoxic and of normal pH . Simi - larly , radiotherapy relies on adequate tissue oxygenation . The normalization phenotype in tumors , pharmacologi - cally induced or in genetic models , improves the efﬁcacy of such therapies by redressing microenvironmental aberra - tions induced by the abnormal vasculature ( 143 ) , including the increase in IFP , impaired vessel function , and tumor hypoxia . As discussed earlier , preclinical evidence demonstrates syn - ergistic beneﬁts from combining antiangiogenic therapies with chemotherapy , radiotherapy , and immunotherapy in the treatment of solid tumors , and this is supported by clinical data in the case of chemotherapy . Initially , when the group of Teicher demonstrated such beneﬁts ( 274 , 275 ) , they hypothesized that the combination of anti - angiogenic and cytotoxic therapies should provide maximal beneﬁt be - cause such combinations would destroy two separate com - partments within tumors : cancer cells and ECs ( 273 ) . In other words , cytotoxics would kill cancer cells directly , and antiangiogenics would cause vascular regression and hence deprivation of nutrients to cancer cells . Beyond this , data also suggested that chemotherapy and radiation therapy may also have antiangiogenic effects , directly damaging tu - mor ECs or preventing recruitment of endothelial progeni - tor cells , and hence enhancing the indirect killing of cancer cells ( 82 ) . Moreover , cancer cells may express receptors for VEGF , and thus anti - angiogenic drugs could directly inter - fere with their survival or increase their sensitivity to other NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1103 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m therapies ( 143 ) . Despite the multitude of possible mecha - nisms for synergy , there is a fundamental paradox given that chemotherapy and radiotherapy rely on adequate tu - mor perfusion . The normalization phenotype helps to ex - plain this paradox , through maturation and improved func - tionality of microvessels ( TABLE 2 ) . In the case of chemotherapy , the clinical evidence support - ing normalization as a mechanism for improved drug deliv - ery is indirect , coming from the trials showing beneﬁt from combination therapy of colorectal , lung , and breast cancer ( 135 , 205 , 237 , 246 , 247 ) . The timing of onset and offset of the vascular normalization window in these tumors has not been deﬁned in humans , and thus it is likely that the beneﬁts of combined treatment have not been realized fully . In cur - rent practice , anti - angiogenics ( such as bevacizumab ) are typically administered on the same day as chemotherapy . In keeping with preclinical data , it might be beneﬁcial to schedule anti - VEGF therapy at a currently undeﬁned time prior to chemotherapy , allowing normalization to set in . Similarly , optimal dosing of anti - angiogenics must be ex - amined further , trying to ﬁnd a balance between therapeutic inefﬁcacy and excessive vascular regression preventing ad - equate drug delivery . Randomized phase 3 clinical evidence for synergistic beneﬁt combining antiangiogenics and radiation treatment is lack - ing to date . Murine studies support the concept , showing not only synergism but also schedule dependence , as dis - cussed earlier ( 298 ) . Batchelor’s study of cediranib therapy for GBM suggested that the normalization window opens in human patients as early as 24 h after treatment commences , and lasts at least 28 days . Although the study did not pro - vide direct evidence of improved tumor oxygenation during this period , it provides rationale for testing the beneﬁts of combined anti - angiogenic therapy and radiotherapy in the management of brain tumors . A number of preclinical studies have suggested additive or synergistic effects from combining anti - angiogenic thera - pies with immunotherapy , either with active vaccination or adoptive cell transfer ( TABLE 6 ) . This may relate in part to abrogation of the immunosuppressive properties of VEGF . In several studies , however , a direct increase in the number of tumor - inﬁltrating T cells has been noted when anti - an - giogenic therapy is added to immunotherapy ( 133 , 186 , 197 , 261 ) . It is not entirely clear from these reports whether this relates to relief of immunosuppression from anti - VEGF agents resulting in an increase in total cytotoxic T cells ( and hence T cells within a tumor ) , or a speciﬁc increase in tu - mor - T cell inﬁltration related to a normalized vasculature . However , studies combining an anti - VEGF agent with adoptive cell transfer showed a schedule - dependent im - provement in efﬁcacy , with maximal beneﬁt observed if anti - VEGF therapy preceded immunotherapy by 2 days . This suggests that allowing time for the normalization win - dow to open ﬁrst might improve immune cell delivery into tumors . As discussed , deletion of the PVC gene Rgs5 leads to vascular normalization and results in increased delivery of adoptively transferred T cells and an enhanced anti - tu - mor effect ( 117 ) . It is reasonable to conclude from these ﬁndings that normalization of vessels can enhance the efﬁ - cacy of immunotherapy , independent of other effects of VEGF suppression . Of note , successful immunotherapy has remained a relatively elusive goal in clinical practice to date , Table 6 Beneﬁts of vascular normalization upon efﬁcacy of tumor immunotherapy NormalizationStrategy Immune Therapy Tumor Model Result Anti - mouse VEGF Ab ACT Melanoma 1 Immune cell inﬁltration ; 1 tumor growth delay ( 261 ) DC101 HER2 targeted vaccination HER2 expressing breast carcinoma 1 Inﬁltration CD8 (cid:4) T cells ; tumor regression ( 197 ) SU6668 Recombinant murine B7 . 2 - IgG fusion protein Breast carcinoma 1 T - cell inﬁltration ; 1 tumor growth delay ( 133 ) Adenoviral delivery of sFlt1 / sVEGFR2 GM - CSF secreting tumor cell immunotherapy Melanoma , colon carcinoma 1 Tumor inﬁltration activated CD4 (cid:4) / CD8” T cells , 2 inﬁltration Treg cells ; 1 survival ( 186 ) Rgs5 knockout ACT Insulinoma , ﬁbrosarcoma 1 Immune cell inﬁltration , 1 survival ( 117 ) ACT , adoptive cell transfer ; GM - CSF , granulocyte - macrophage colony stimulating factor ; HER2 , human epi - dermal growth factor receptor 2 ; Rgs5 , regulator of G protein signaling 5 ; sFlt1 , soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 ; Treg , regulatory T cells ; VEGFR2 , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 . Reference numbers are given in parentheses . GOEL ET AL . 1104 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m and as such , clinical data of combined antiangiogenics and immune therapies are lacking . C . Biomarkers for Anti - angiogenic Therapy The advent of anti - angiogenic therapies into clinical prac - tice has led to a search for clinical biomarkers predictive of their efﬁcacy ( 149 ) . As with any anti - cancer therapy , ther - apeutic beneﬁt is not seen equally in all patients , and it is therefore useful to establish clinically accessible predictors that determine which individuals are most likely to beneﬁt from anti - angiogenic therapy . These can take the form of physiological measurements ( e . g . , systemic blood pressure ) , genotypic determinants , levels of circulating factors in the blood , tissue markers from biopsies , or imaging parame - ters . Conﬁrmation of validated biomarkers is useful in clinical practice for a number of reasons : 1 ) determination of an individual patient’s chance of beneﬁt from a particular therapy allows for informed choices regarding appropri - ate therapy for that patient ; 2 ) knowledge that an indi - vidual patient is unlikely to derive beneﬁt from a therapy prevents their unnecessary exposure to the risks of tox - icity ; and 3 ) restricting therapy to those likely to beneﬁt reduces the ﬁnancial burden of costly drugs to health care systems . Moreover , identiﬁcation of new biomarkers can provide new insights into the mechanisms of action of antiangiogenic therapies and pathways mediating escape from therapy . To date , there are no prospectively validated biomarkers for the efﬁcacy of antiangiogenic therapies , and this re - mains one of the greatest difﬁculties facing clinicians to - day . Many biomarkers have been investigated , and some are emerging as promising candidates , but these require validation in large randomized clinical trials . There are many challenges to this task , however , including difﬁ - culty in determining appropriate criteria for response to anti - angiogenic therapies , the heterogeneity of the cancer vasculature ( both spatial and temporal heterogeneity in individual tumor masses , and heterogeneity between pri - mary tumors and metastases ) , a lack of standardization in biomarker measurement techniques , and the potential lack of generalizability of correlations from one patient cohort to the next ( 149 ) . It is also important to distinguish “prognostic” from “pre - dictive” biomarkers . A prognostic biomarker is one that provides information about a patient’s overall cancer out - come , regardless of therapy . A predictive biomarker is one that can be used to estimate the response or survival of a speciﬁc patient on a speciﬁc treatment compared with an - other treatment . The majority of biomarker data available to date comes from single - arm clinical trials , where all pa - tients were treated with a particular anti - angiogenic . In such cases , ﬁnding a correlation between a particular bio - marker level and patient outcome does not distinguish this biomarker’s role as prognostic versus predictive . Predictive biomarkers ( determining the chances of beneﬁt from a spe - ciﬁc antiangiogenic agent ) can only be validated through randomized trials , in which patients are randomly assigned to receive an antiangiogenic therapy or not . Few such trials have reported biomarker results to date . The most accurate way to observe vascular normalization in patients on anti - VEGF therapy would seemingly be by obtaining serial tumor biopsies . This is , of course , imprac - tical and hence investigators have searched for other , less invasive ways to infer normalization clinically . As discussed earlier , some clinical studies have demonstrated evidence of vascular normalization in cancer patients receiving anti - angiogenic therapy ( 14 , 15 , 75 , 263 , 294 , 297 , 319 ) . Al - though these have been exclusively single - arm trials , they have provided promising evidence that normalization cor - relates with an improved clinical outcome . So far , the evi - dence is strongest for biomarkers obtained from imaging studies , in particular , from dynamic MRI or CT scans based on vascular parameters such as blood ﬂow , blood volume , and vascular permeability . One important measure is K trans , a composite measure of vascular permeability and vessel surface area in a tumor . A fall in K trans on MRI scanning after anti - angiogenic treatment reﬂects either a drop in vas - cular permeability , vessel density , or both , and is therefore a marker for normalization of the vasculature . In the study of GBM patients treated with cediranib , the extent of fall in K trans just 24 h after commencement of therapy correlated with progression - free survival and overall survival times in patients ( 14 , 15 , 263 ) . Similar results have been reported in a trial of HCC patients receiving sunitinib monotherapy , albeit at a later timepoint ( 14 days after commencement of therapy ) ( 319 ) . The seminal trial of bevacizumab therapy in rectal cancer patients also reported a drop in tumor K trans after treatment , but this was not correlated with patient outcome ( 295 ) . In a later report , on the GBM - cediranib study , we devel - oped a composite biomarker , which we termed the “vascu - lar normalization index” ( VNI ) . Three individual markers of vascular normalization measured in patients were quan - tiﬁed : the fall in K trans , the fall in tumor microvessel volume , and the rise in plasma level of collagen IV ( a marker of vascular basement membrane thinning ) . These were then combined to form the VNI , which was shown to serve as a strong predictor of an individual patient’s progression - free and overall survival ( 263 ) . More recently , we have found that the patients whose tumor blood ﬂow increases more after cediranib therapy had the longest OS ( 82a ) . In addition to these markers showing a link between evi - dence of normalization and patient outcome , a host of other biomarkers have been examined as predictors of beneﬁt NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1105 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m from antiangiogenic therapies ( 149 ) . These have not been linked speciﬁcally to normalization , however , and are thus beyond the scope of this review . To summarize , emerging markers with the most promising evidence include the de - velopment of systemic hypertension ( a common toxicity of these agents ) ( 241 ) , VEGF / VEGFR2 genotypes ( 252 ) , cir - culating levels of various factors [ including VEGF ( 44 , 119 , 156 , 158 , 319 ) , PlGF , soluble VEGFRs , IL - 6 ( 297 , 319 ) ] , and levels of circulating endothelial or endothelial pro - genitor cells in the blood . Of these , it is biologically plau - sible that soluble VEGFR1 ( sFlt1 ) may be a promising candidate marker of vascular normalization and thera - peutic efﬁcacy . Our analysis of patients from the Willett study ( although limited by the single - arm nature of the trial ) showed an association between sFlt1 , a known en - dogenous blocker of VEGF , and both therapeutic out - come and toxicity ( 77 ) . VII . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE IN NONMALIGNANT DISEASES Although best characterized in the context of malignancy , pathological angiogenesis and abnormal vessel formation are also a feature of several nonmalignant diseases . In such cases , the abnormal vasculature can also have profound effects on disease patterns , morbidity , and clinical out - comes . As such , antiangiogenic strategies have been em - ployed in several nonmalignant diseases , often with greater success than in malignant disease ( FIGURE 14 ) . Here we discuss the use of antiangiogenic therapy as a tool to nor - malize the vasculature in nonmalignant disease . A . Age - Related Wet Macular Degeneration Age - related macular degeneration ( ARMD ) is the most common cause of irreversible central vision loss in elderly patients ( 35 , 36 ) . It occurs in two forms : dry ( atrophic ) ARMD , and wet ( exudative or neovascular ) ARMD . Al - though comprising (cid:1) 10 % of ARMD cases , 90 % of ARMD - related blindness is caused by wet ARMD . The disease is characterized by excessive choroidal angiogen - esis under the retina . The main pro - angiogenic player in wet ARMD is VEGF , which is made by cells of the retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) ( 235 ) . In this disease , local hypoxia , regional hypoperfusion , and abnormal thicken - ing of Brusch’s membrane all lead to VEGF overexpres - sion by RPE cells , driving neovascularization . The new vessels show many features resembling the tumor vascu - lature , and as a consequence localized macular edema and retinal hemorrhage may occur , leading to visual im - pairment ( 235 ) ( FIGURE 14 ) . The abnormal vasculature drives a vicious cycle , where increased pressure aggra - vates hypoxia , driving further angiogenesis . Other im - portant proangiogenic factors in the retina include bFGF and PDGF ( 36 , 235 ) . Given the critical role of VEGF and angiogenesis in wet ARMD , recent efforts have focused on anti - VEGF strat - egies as therapy ( as an alternative to laser photocoagula - tion of nascent vessels ) . The United States Food and Drug Administration has approved two such agents for treat - ment of wet ARMD based on clinical trial results : ranibi - zumab , an IgG1 - (cid:6) monoclonal antibody fragment bind - ing the VEGFA - 165 isoform , and pegaptanib , a pegy - lated aptamer that binds to VEGFA . Both agents are administered by serial intravitreal injection and have been proven to either improve visual acuity or reduce the risk of further visual loss in a substantial proportion of patients after 12 mo of therapy ( 109 , 244 ) . In the case of pegaptanib , basic research has shown a reduction in mi - crovascular leakage , leukocyte adhesion , and choroidal neovascularization after therapy , features of normaliza - tion that underpin the successful mechanisms of this ther - apy ( 113 , 138 ) . Clinical observations also conﬁrm a dra - matic reduction in vascular leakage ( as detected by ﬂuo - roscein angiography ) after treatment with anti - VEGF agents ( 36 ) ( FIGURE 14 ) . Bevacizumab has also been tested in the setting of wet ARMD and from retrospective analyses appears equally effective as ranibizumab ( 36 ) . B . Schwannomas Although the vasculature of malignant tumors is the best characterized , benign neoplasms can also harbor an imbal - ance between pro - and anti - angiogenic factors that fuels their progression . The best - studied example is the vestibu - lar schwannoma ( acoustic neuroma ) , a benign tumor of Schwann cells that line peripheral nerves . Neuroﬁbromato - sis type 2 , a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by a defect in a single allele of the NF2 gene , often presents with bilateral acoustic neuromata . These tumors grow within the cerebello - pontine angle , compressing the vestib - ular nerve causing deafness , and compressing surrounding structures including other cranial nerves and ultimately the brainstem ( 191 ) . Acoustic neuromata are known to express VEGF and the VEGF receptors , and the level of VEGF within these tu - mors correlates with tumor growth rate ( 37 , 50 , 51 , 225 ) , suggesting a key role for this proangiogenic cytokine in tumor progression . In the peripheral nervous system , VEGF activity is modulated by the semaphorins , which act via the neuropilin receptors as negative regulators of angiogenesis ( 26 , 169 , 170 ) . Murine NF2 null cells show loss of merlin ( the Nf2 gene product ) expression and , as a consequence , downregulation of semaphorins 3d , 3f , and 3g and neuropilin - 1 . This loss of inhibitory regula - tion of VEGF activity leads to an imbalance in favor of angiogenesis , and hence vascularized tumors ( 301 ) ( FIG - URE 14 ) . This appears to be the central mechanism of enhanced VEGF activity in this setting , rather than hy - poxia - driven overexpression of VEGF , and reintroduc - GOEL ET AL . 1106 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tion of merlin into Nf2 (cid:3) / (cid:3) cells redresses this phenotype ( Wong HK , Shimizu A , Kirkpatrick ND , Chan AW , Garkavtsev I , diTomaso E , Klagsbrun M , Jain RK , un - published data ) . Although vascular permeability is sup - posed to be of minor importance in the vestibular schwannoma , nerve compression by tumor can lead to signiﬁcant nerve edema and provide a rationale for as - sessment of anti - VEGF therapy in these tumors . FIGURE 14 Normalization of vessels as a strategy in benign disease . A : schematic depicting balance between pro - and antiangiogenic factors in benign schwannomas . Schwannomas ( NF2 null ) fail to produce merlin , and as such lack expression of the anti - angiogenic semaphorins . The balance is thus tipped in favor of pro - angiogenesis . This balance can be restored either by administering anti - VEGF treatment ( hence reducing the pro - angiogenic burden ) or reintroducing semaphorin 3F into tumor cells . B : vessel density in schwannomas after anti - VEGF therapy . Top panel shows no change in vessel density over time with control treatment , and bottom panel shows a prompt reduction in vessel density with anti - VEGF therapy . C : this is accompanied by vessel maturation evidenced by increased vessel PVC coverage ( CD31 staining of endothelial cells green , PDGFR (cid:1) staining of PVCs red ) . This reversal of vessel abnormalities is accompanied by a reduction in tumor growth . [ B and C from Wong et al . ( 310 ) , with permission . ] D : response to anti - VEGF therapy in a case of wet age - related macular degeneration . Top panels show fundoscopy ﬁndings ( left ) and ﬂuorescein angiography ( right ) before treatment , with areas of vessel leakage evident . Repeat images after therapy reveal resolution of vascular leakage . [ D from Rich et al . , Retina 26 : 495 – 511 , 2006 , with permission . ] E : vessel normalization in cutaneous psoriasis . Transgenic mice with a psoriatic skin phenotype were treated with control ( left panels ) , nonspeciﬁc IgG ( middle panels ) , or anti - VEGF therapy ( right panels ) . CD31 is stained red , and LYVE - 1 is stained green ( a marker of lymphatic vessels ) . VEGF therapy reduces the number and size of blood and lymphatic vessels in psoriatic lesions , correlating with a reduction in disease severity . [ E from Schonthaler et al . ( 254 ) . Copyright National Academy of Sciences . ] F : vascular normalization after thalidomide therapy for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia ( HHT ) . Endoglin ( Eng ) haploinsufﬁcient mice have a HHT - like syndrome . Thalidomide treatment ( right panel ) normalizes retinal vessels in these mice , evidence by reduced diameter and improved pericyte coverage ( red : isolectin B4 labeling vessels , green : NG2 labeling PVCs ) . Similar ﬁndings are seen in nasal biopsies of HHT patients who experience fewer nosebleeds after thalidomide therapy due to vessel maturation and fortiﬁcation . [ F from Lebrin et al . ( 177 ) , with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd . ] NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1107 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Our laboratory recently reported a preclinical study exam - ining the effects of anti - angiogenic therapy in murine mod - els of schwannoma ( 301 ) . Using both human - derived schwannoma cells and murine NF2 null cells , Wong et al . ( 301 ) developed both cerebral meningeal and sciatic nerve models of schwannoma , and subjected these tumors to treatment with either vandetanib ( a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGFR2 and EGFR , also implicated in schwannoma cell growth ) or bevacizumab . A marked re - duction in tumor vessel permeability was observed after just 24 h of treatment , with a signiﬁcant reduction in vessel surface area seen by day 6 ( 33 % reduction in central tu - mors , 50 – 60 % reduction in sciatic tumors ) . Interestingly , vandetanib reduced vessel area primarily through a reduc - tion in vessel number , whilst bevacizumab’s main effect was a reduction in vessel diameter . As the anti - VEGF treatments tipped the balance of pro - and anti - angiogenic factors to - wards normal , structural features of vascular maturation were also observed including an increase in vascular PVC coverage , but without a change in vessel basement mem - brane thickness . Both treatments also reduced tumor size signiﬁcantly , which the authors concluded was primarily through an anti - vascular effect . The results of this study suggest that anti - VEGF therapy might have a dual effect in these tumors by decreasing induction of angiogenesis , thereby slowing the rate of tumor growth , and by decreas - ing nerve edema , slowing nerve degeneration . We have also reported the results of a clinical study ex - amining bevacizumab therapy for patients with neuroﬁ - bromatosis type 2 and acoustic neuromata ( 225 ) . Down - regulation of semaphorins was observed in patient tumor specimens , and bevacizumab therapy induced a signiﬁ - cant reduction in tumor size in 60 % of patients . Impor - tantly , the intratumoral apparent diffusion coefﬁcient on MRI ( ADC , a measure of the magnitude of water diffu - sion ) correlated with the degree of tumor shrinkage , sug - gesting that patients with excess edema are most likely to beneﬁt from bevacizumab treatment . In one assessed pa - tient , MRI data also conﬁrmed a reduction in the perme - ability - surface area product and vessel diameter by (cid:1) 60 % . The results of this clinical study marry well with the preclinical data . Apart from showing the beneﬁts of anti - VEGF therapy in this setting and demonstrating as - pects of vessel normalization , the study had great clinical relevance as 57 % of assessable patients experienced an improvement in hearing acuity after therapy . Tumor shrinkage from anti - VEGF therapy is also likely to delay the need for more invasive or toxic treatments for an expanding tumor such as surgery or radiotherapy . C . Stabilization of Plaques Evidence supports the concept that angiogenesis within the vasa vasorum of the coronary arteries plays an im - portant role in the progression of and complications within coronary arterial plaques . This neovasculariza - tion , driven by intraplaque hypoxia , is characterized by a network of immature , leaky vessels with reduced PVC coverage within atherosclerotic plaques ( 154 ) , not dis - similar to abnormal tumor vessels ( 150 ) . As a conse - quence , plaque hemorrhage can occur , which accelerates plaque progression through a variety of mechanisms ( 150 ) and underlies acute plaque rupture which leads to myocardial infarction ( 173 , 285 ) . A recent study showed that vessel density is particularly high in noncalciﬁed atherosclerotic plaques , which are more prone to rupture ( 108 ) . These vessels showed increased expression of eNOS and tumor necrosis factor - (cid:2) ( TNF - (cid:2) ) . Early studies showed that angiogenesis inhibition in mice might reduce this coronary wall neovascularization and hence plaque growth ( 208 ) . It has been proposed , however , that the sustained , high doses of antiangiogenics needed to induce plaque vascular regression in humans are not prac - ticably deliverable . It might be possible that judicious use of anti - angiogenic therapy could rather be used to normalize plaque vessels , potentially minimizing the risk of plaque hemorrhage and the attendant consequences ( 150 ) . As fur - ther insights into coronary plaque vascular biology are made , attempts to normalize the plaque vasculature should be made , but are currently limited by the lack of suitable animal models to test appropriate agents , doses , and sched - ules , and real concerns of the vascular risks associated with antiangiogenic therapy . D . Other Diseases Given that hypoxia , inﬂammation , and dysregulation of the extracellular matrix can all lead to aberrant vessel morphol - ogy and function , it is not surprising that tortuosity and “abnormalization” of the vasculature have also been re - ported in a number of other nonmalignant diseases . These include skin psoriasis ( 124 ) , rheumatoid arthritis ( 249 ) , neurodegenerative diseases and neuropathic pain models ( 175 , 234 ) , hemangiomata ( 177 ) , collagen synthesis dis - eases such as Ehlers - Danlos syndrome ( 63 ) , and portal hy - pertension ( 30 ) . From a therapeutic standpoint , treatment of psoriatic mice with anti - VEGF therapy reduced vessel density and diameter , leading to a reduction in the severity of skin disease ( 254 ) ( FIGURE 14 ) , and treatment of heredi - tary hemorrhagic telangiectasia ( a disease characterized by widespread hemangioma formation ) with thalidomide nor - malizes vessels and reduces disabling episodes of epistaxis ( 177 ) ( FIGURE 14 ) . E . Normalizing Vasculature for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Although this review focuses on the molecular mechanisms of and therapeutic approaches to normalization of the na - GOEL ET AL . 1108 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tive vasculature , tissue engineering and regenerative medi - cine represent another approach to establishment of a func - tional , mature vessel network in a variety of settings ( 142 ) . Engineered tissues or organs require such a network to grow . Initial attempts to engineer vessel networks for in vivo use utilized ECs growing in a matrix under VEGF - or bFGF - stimulated conditions , which were implanted in vivo and then connected with host vessels . Such engineered ves - sels had a short lifespan , however , and subsequent efforts involved genetic modiﬁcation of these ECs ( e . g . , introduc - tion of Bcl2 to mitigate apoptosis or human telomerase reverse transcriptase to prevent senescence ) , resulting in a more differentiated vessel network in vivo ( 250 , 309 ) . Al - ternatively , vessel networks generated in vitro through co - culture of ECs with PVCs have been implanted in vivo , without genetic modiﬁcation . Such networks are able to integrate into host vasculature and remain functional for over a year ( 172 ) . Obtaining sufﬁcient numbers of ECs and PVCs to engineer a vessel network in vivo can be difﬁcult , and embryonic stem cells or common vascular progenitor cells may be used as the source of cells to aid this purpose ( 185 , 308 , 315 ) . In the case of malignancy , a recent report has demonstrated the use of adult vascular progenitor cells to normalize tu - mor vessels ( 248 ) . Murine adult bone marrow - derived mononuclear cells ( known to contribute to adult vasculo - genesis in the repair of injured vessels ) , were cultured in an endothelial growth medium and then transplanted intrave - nously into mice bearing pancreatic xenografts or sponta - neous pancreatic tumors . The resultant tumor vessels were closer to normal vessels both structurally with increased PVC coverage , and functionally with improved greater tu - mor perfusion . In addition , there was an inhibition of tumor growth . This microenvironmental normalization was asso - ciated with more far - reaching effects such as reduction in the expression genes associated with drug resistance and cancer cell “stemness . ” Such data suggest the potential of engineered vasculogenesis as a means to normalize the tu - mor vasculature . VIII . NORMALIZATION OF THE LYMPHATIC VASCULATURE We have discussed in detail the harmful consequences of and molecular mechanisms associated with the abnormal tumor blood vessel network , and possible means by which these might be at least partially reversed . It is also true that both the structure and function of the lymphatic vascula - ture is abnormal within tumors . Even in the earliest , prema - lignant stages of tumor development , lymphatic vessels be - come compressed and nonfunctional ( 116 ) . Relieving the compressive mechanical forces imposed by a proliferative cell mass can open these lymphatic vessels , but does not restore their functionality ( 220 ) , presumably due to irre - versibly damaged valves . Lymphatic vessel dysfunction within tumors , whether through structural compression , vessel occlusion by cancer cells , or impaired functional clearance of lymph , contributes to the elevated interstitial ﬂuid pressure within tumors . One malignancy in which impaired lymphatic function has dramatic clinical consequences is carcinoma of the ovary . Patients with this disease often suffer with recurrent malig - nant ascites , the buildup of ﬂuid within the peritoneal space due to the presence of disseminated peritoneal tumor . This ascites in part is caused by VEGF - induced vascular perme - ability , but is also related to impaired drainage of peritoneal ﬂuid via diaphragmatic lymphatic vessels . We recently ex - amined lymphangiogenesis in mice bearing human ovarian cancer xenografts ( 187 ) . Somewhat analogous to the aber - rations of tumor blood vessels , lymphatic vessel abnormal - ities were observed within the diaphragmatic lymphatics of tumor - bearing mice ( FIGURE 15 ) . Whilst healthy mice show an orderly arrangement of EC - lined lymphatic channels that drain lymph rapidly to regional nodes , tumor - bearing mice show excessive lymphangiogenesis ( increased lym - phatic vessel density , diameter , and tortuosity ) and dys - function characterized by a loss of lymphatic valves and sluggish clearance of ﬂuid from the peritoneum . In this study , the role of TGF - (cid:1) , a molecule with known effects on lymphangiogenesis ( 58 , 217 ) , in aberrant tumor lymphan - giogenesis was examined . Inhibition of TGF - (cid:1) either phar - macologically or by tumor cell transfection with the soluble TGF - (cid:1) receptor II gene normalized lymphatic structure and function ( FIGURE 15 ) , with an associated abolishment of ascites . The improvement in lymphatic function in this con - text may well relate to the relief of lymphatic vessel obstruc - tion due to the reduction in tumor burden that also occurs after TGF - (cid:1) inhibition . The reduction in ascites is likely due to a combination of VEGF suppression by TGF - (cid:1) blockade and the regaining of lymphatic function . Of interest , these ﬁndings are consistent with recent reports suggesting that TGF - (cid:1) blockade accelerates lymphatic regeneration during wound repair ( 9 ) . IX . SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVE The number of publications in the ﬁeld of tumor vascular biology has grown exponentially since Folkman ﬁrst hy - pothesized the importance and therapeutic potential of tar - geting tumor angiogenesis . It is now recognized that contin - ual recruitment of vessels through angiogenesis , vasculo - genesis , co - option , and intussusception is a requirement for solid tumor progression . In addition , it has become increas - ingly clear that tumor vasculature is grossly abnormal in structure and function and that these abnormalities facili - tate its progression . Moreover , these abnormalities have profound effects on response to therapy . The development of antiangiogenic therapy in oncology has represented a paradigm shift . Unlike conventional thera - NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1109 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m pies , which have been designed to directly kill proliferating malignant cells , antiangiogenic therapies have been devel - oped to target the tumor vasculature . Initial preclinical studies suggested that VEGF blockade is able to destroy tumor vessels and cause regression of primary tumors . Un - fortunately , a large number of clinical trials of antiangio - genic agents failed to show a beneﬁt in cancer patients . However , the combination of anti - VEGF therapy with cy - totoxic chemotherapy eventually showed a beneﬁt in pa - tients with metastatic disease . Thus understanding the mechanisms of action of anti - VEGF agents against the can - cer cells have hinged upon a “bench - to - bedside - and - back” approach . The vascular normalization hypothesis , which posits that anti - angiogenic therapy can restore the structure and function of vessels rather than simply killing them , may partly explain both the inability of anti - angiogenic thera - pies alone to shrink tumors ( with the exception of heavily VEGF - dependent tumors such as renal cell carcinoma ) and the synergy between anti - VEGF agents and chemotherapy . It is likely , however , that the observed effect of anti - VEGF therapy in preclinical models is a result of both normaliza - tion and vascular regression / pruning . The initial preclincal evidence for normalization has been conﬁrmed in certain clinical studies , which in turn sparked a new wave of re - search to uncover the determinants of vascular normaliza - tion . Presently , preclinical and clinical research studies on vascular normalization are running in parallel , drawing im - portant information from each other . As a result , we have FIGURE 15 Normalization of lymphatic vessels in the SKOV3ip1 mouse model of ovarian carcinoma . Images A , D , and G are from nontumor bearing mice . Images B , E , and H are from mice bearing wild - type tumors . Images C , F , and I are from mice bearing tumors engineered to overexpress the soluble TGF - (cid:1) receptor II ( sT (cid:1) RII ) , thus inhibiting TGF - (cid:1) activity . A – C : mice were injected with ﬂuorescent tracer into the peritoneum , which is subsequently taken up by peritoneal lymphatic vessels . Non - tumor - bearing mice show distinct , organized lymphatics on the peritoneal side of the diaphragm ( A ) . Tumor - bearing mice show lymphatics with increased density and branching ( B ) , abnormalities which returned towards normal with inhibition of TGF - (cid:1) activity ( C ) . D – F : images of lymphatics on the pleural side of the diaphragm again show normal lymphatics in healthy mice ( D ) , which are grossly enlarged in tumor - bearing mice ( E ) . Again , a “normalized” lymphatic network is observed in SKOV - sT (cid:1) rII mice ( F ) . G – I : ﬂuorescent beads were injected into the peritoneal cavity , and their presence in diaphragmatic lymphatics was quantiﬁed 2 h later . Functional lymphatics demonstrate rapid clearance of beads . In non - tumor - bearing mice , few beads are observed in lymphatics , suggesting normal lymphatic function and rapid bead clearance ( G ) . In tumor - bearing mice , many beads remain evident within lymphatics at the 2 - h timepoint ( H ) . Again , inhibition of TGF - (cid:1) activity normalized lymphatic drainage , as evidenced by the presence of fewer beads ( I ) . [ From Liao et al . ( 187 ) , with permission . ] GOEL ET AL . 1110 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m gained critical insights into the mechanisms of tumor vessel biology and interactions between endothelial cells , PVCs , and the basement membrane after therapy . In addition , they revealed a number of molecular and genetic determinants of vascular normalization in tumors . Consequently , a vast ar - ray of new molecular targets has opened up new therapeutic targets , allowing one to envision a time when precise ma - nipulation of the tumor vasculature to maximize individual patient outcomes could become a reality . X . AREAS OF UNCERTAINTY AND FUTURE CHALLENGES Folkman’s seminal paper proposing the beneﬁts of anti - angiogenic therapy was ﬁrst published 40 years ago . The concept of vascular normalization as a therapeutic strategy against tumors is thus relatively young , ﬁrst proposed in 2001 . Therefore , the normalization concept remains nas - cent , with several unanswered questions remaining that will undoubtedly be explored in the near future . First , a more comprehensive understanding of the regula - tion of vascular normalization is urgently needed . Many important mechanistic insights have only come to light in the last couple of years . As we learn about the individual contributions of pro - angiogenic factors , EC and PVC sig - naling pathways , and tumor and stromal cells , individual pieces of this jigsaw puzzle are exposed . The integration of these pieces into a complete picture is an unrealized goal , however , and the way in which these factors interplay in the complex tumor microenvironment must be carefully dis - sected . In many instances , a single molecule or receptor plays multiple roles in different cell types , and the develop - ment of pharmacological agents that serve to persistently normalize the tumor vasculature must be informed by each of these . Initial anti - angiogenic strategies primarily targeted VEGF and appear to only transiently normalize and subse - quently prune vessels . For this reason , we proposed that such therapies must be given judiciously to maintain a nor - malized vasculature . More modern approaches to normal - ization [ such as promoting EC quiescence ( e . g . , PHD2 knockdown ) , enhancing PVC function ( e . g . , RGS5 knock - down ) , and inhibition of other angiogenic factors ( such as PlGF and Ang2 ) ] might give rise to a more prolonged nor - malization phenotype , in the absence of dramatic vessel regression . Second , an important challenge is to clarify the impact of vascular normalization on tumor growth ( TABLE 7 ) . The preclinical data are currently conﬂicting on this issue . As discussed earlier , some preclinical studies showed tumor shrinkage in response to anti - VEGF therapy , but this probably relates to vascular regression in certain sensi - tive tumor models . In other models , the stabilization and maturation of tumor vessels has a direct anti - tumor effect ( 194 ) , which might relate to a suppression of endothelial cell proliferation by surrounding PVCs ( 200 ) . In con - trast , other models showing vascular normalization have been associated with an increased rate of tumor growth ( 265 ) , which may help therapies effective against prolif - erating cells . Finally , studies of vascular normalization by modulation of expression of oncogenes ( 231 ) or oxy - gen sensing molecules ( 199 ) can normalize vessels with - out any impact on primary tumor growth . The reasons behind these differential results remain unknown , but they may reﬂect the effect of different mechanisms of normalization or may depend on the animal models used . Theoretically , one might expect that increased delivery of oxygen and nutrients during vascular normalization would accelerate tumor growth . However , anti - angio - genic therapy may also induce vascular pruning , which should lead to tumor regression . Moreover , the impact of hypoxia resulting after excessive vascular pruning on a tumor may confer an aggressive phenotype and resistance to cytotoxic agents . Future research should decipher the role of vascular normalization in relevant preclinical tu - Table 7 Studies reporting the effect of vessel normalization on primary tumor growth Mechanism of Normalization Tumor Model Effect on primary Tumor growth PDGF - B overexpression Colon carcinoma , pancreatic carcinoma 2 ( 200 ) Exogenous SEMA3A gene delivery Squamous carcinoma , cervical carcinoma , pancreatic carcinoma 2 ( 194 ) Endothelial cell deletion of PHD2 Lung carcinoma , pancreatic carcinoma No change ( 199 ) Pharmacological inhibition of EGFR , RAS , PI3K , or AKT Fibrosarcoma , squamous carcinoma No change ( 231 ) Pharmacological inhibition of VEGFR1 - 3 Glioblastoma No change ( 160 ) VEGF deletion in myeloid cells Breast carcinoma , lung carcinoma 1 ( 265 ) PDGF - B , platelet - derived growth factor B ; PHD , prolyl hydroxylase domain protein ; SEMA3A , semaphorin 3A . Reference numbers are given in parentheses . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1111 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m mor models and lead to clinical translation of these ﬁnd - ings . Third , the effect of tumor vessel normalization on metasta - sis is also ambiguous ( TABLE 3 ) . Normalization of vessels in a primary tumor could theoretically reduce the rates of metastasis by different mechanisms : 1 ) reducing primary tumor growth ; 2 ) improving oxygenation and dampening the metastatic phenotype of some tumors ; or 3 ) reducing metastatic cell shedding in circulation by stabilization of the vessel wall ( 199 , 232 , 236 , 305 ) . Controversially , however , two recent studies suggested that anti - VEGF therapy of a primary tumor can actually increase metastasis ( 79 , 221 ) , possibly due to vascular regression and tumor hypoxia , or an effect of anti - angiogenic therapies on distant organs , “priming” them for metastasis . These results may be animal model - or tumor - speciﬁc and have not been conﬁrmed in other preclinical and clinical studies ( 4 , 219 , 291 ) . Simi - larly , concerns that short - term or “interrupted” anti - VEGF therapy may speciﬁcally increase metastasis and hence worsen outcomes ( 79 ) have also been disputed by clinical data ( 207 ) . Nonetheless , the data converge to the conclu - sion that anti - angiogenesis strategies should be carefully dosed and evaluated in metastasis models ( 4 , 283 ) . Finally , we must determine mechanisms of resistance to anti - VEGF therapy - induced vascular normalization . The normalization window is transient , and it is likely that tu - mors recruit alternative pro - angiogenic pathways in the face of therapy to escape the effects of treatment . What are these mechanisms and how can they be targeted ? Answer - ing these questions requires research into the altered angio - genic proﬁle of speciﬁc tumor types in the face of anti - VEGF therapy . Aside from the molecules discussed in this review , other possible mediators of the escape process include bFGF ( 49 , 311 ) and stromal - derived factor - 1 (cid:2) ( SDF1 (cid:2) ) ( 76 , 306 ) . It is becoming increasingly clear that combinatorial thera - pies will be needed to prevent angiogenic escape or invasion as well as to prolong the vascular normalization window . The ultimate challenge will be translating the beneﬁts of vascular normalization in the clinical setting . This goal is made very difﬁcult by the fact that animal models of tumor progression have limitations and do not always faithfully replicate the behavior of human tumors . In particular , 1 ) the fundamental effect of anti - VEGF therapy in many animal models ( i . e . , tumor growth delay or shrinkage ) is not generally seen in humans ; 2 ) cancer patients , unlike mice , present at different time points in their disease’s natural history , and their tumors show marked spatial and tempo - ral heterogeneity . 3 ) in patients , metastases may be present in several distant organs , each with its speciﬁc microenvi - ronment and vascular biology . It is now well established that systemic anti - angiogenic therapy will have variable ef - fects between patients , and also will affect different tumor lesions in the same patient in different ways . A single phar - macological agent might induce normalization in some re - gions of a tumor , and vascular regression in others . More - over , the timing of the normalization window will differ between tumors , and between metastases situated in diverse organs within the same patient . 4 ) Elegant genetic studies often rely on gene silencing in a single cell type or the timed up - and downregulation of gene expression , both difﬁcult goals to achieve in patients . As a result , the presence and timing of therapy - induced normalization must be carefully studied in a range of human tumors , and novel therapeutics are needed . This will in part be informed by preclinical work , and also by development and validation of noninva - sive biomarkers that survey the normalization phenotype . Only then will treatment be applied in a rational and judi - cious fashion with the intent of maximizing therapeutic outcomes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : R . K . Jain , Edwin L . Steele Laboratory for Tumor Biology , Massachusetts General Hospital , Cox 7 , 100 Blossom St . , Boston , MA 02114 ( e - mail : jain @ steele . mgh . harvard . edu ) . GRANTS S . Goel is supported by the Australian - American Fulbright Commission and an American Society of Clinical Oncology Young Investigator Award . This work is also supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R01 - CA115767 , P01 - CA080124 , R01 - CA085140 , and R01 - CA126642 ( all to R . K . Jain ) ; Federal Share / National Cancer Institute Proton Beam Program Income Grants ( to R . K . Jain , D . G . Duda , L . L . Munn , and D . Fukumura ) ; and Grants R01 - CA096915 ( to D . Fukumura ) and R21 - CA139168 ( to D . G . Duda ) . R . K . Jain is also a recipient of the Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Innovator Award W81XWH - 10 - 1 - 0016 and is funded by the National Foun - dation for Cancer Research ( NFCR ) as a NFCR Project Direc - tor . D . G . Duda is the recipient of the American Cancer Society Grant RSG - 11 - 073 - 01 - 346TBG . DISCLOSURES R . K . Jain has served as a paid advisor to Astellas , Dyax , Genzyme , AstraZeneca , Noxxon Pharma , and SynDevRx ; owns stock in SynDevRx ; has received honoraria from Gen - zyme ; and has received research funding from AstraZeneca , Dyax , MedImmune , and Roche . REFERENCES 1 . Abramsson A , Lindblom P , Betsholtz C . Endothelial and nonendothelial sources of PDGF - B regulate pericyte recruitment and inﬂuence vascular pattern formation in tumors . J Clin Invest 112 : 1142 – 1151 , 2003 . 2 . Ader I , Delmas C , Bonnet J , Rochaix P , Favre G , Toulas C , Cohen - Jonathan - Moyal E . Inhibition of Rho pathways induces radiosensitization and oxygenation in human glio - blastoma xenografts . Oncogene 22 : 8861 – 8869 , 2003 . GOEL ET AL . 1112 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 3 . AlgireGH , ChalkleyHW . Vascularreactionsofnormalandmalignanttissuesinvivo . I . Vascularreactionsofmicetowoundsandtonormalandneoplastictransplants . JNatl Cancer Inst 6 : 73 – 85 , 1945 . 4 . Allegra CJ , Yothers G , O’Connell MJ , Sharif S , Petrelli NJ , Colangelo LH , Atkins JN , SeayTE , FehrenbacherL , GoldbergRM , O’ReillyS , ChuL , AzarCA , LopaS , Wolmark N . Phase III trial assessing bevacizumab in stages II and III carcinoma of the colon : results of NSABP Protocol C - 08 . J Clin Oncol 29 : 11 – 16 , 2011 . 5 . Allgayer H , Babic R , Gruetzner KU , Tarabichi A , Schildberg FW , Heiss MM . c - erbB - 2 is of independent prognostic relevance in gastric cancer and is associated with the expression of tumor - associated protease systems . J Clin Oncol 18 : 2201 – 2209 , 2000 . 6 . Alon T , Hemo I , Itin A , Pe’er J , Stone J , Keshet E . Vascular endothelial growth factor acts as a survival factor for newly formed retinal vessels and has implications for retinopathy of prematurity . Nat Med 1 : 1024 – 1028 , 1995 . 7 . Ansiaux R , Baudelet C , Jordan BF , Beghein N , Sonveaux P , De Wever J , Martinive P , Gregoire V , Feron O , Gallez B . Thalidomide radiosensitizes tumors through early changes in the tumor microenvironment . Clin Cancer Res 11 : 743 – 750 , 2005 . 8 . AugustinHG , KohGY , ThurstonG , AlitaloK . Controlofvascularmorphogenesisand homeostasis through the angiopoietin - Tie system . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 165 – 177 , 2009 . 9 . AvrahamT , DaluvoyS , ZampellJ , YanA , HavivYS , RocksonSG , MehraraBJ . Blockade of transforming growth factor - beta1 accelerates lymphatic regeneration during wound repair . Am J Pathol 177 : 3202 – 3214 , 2010 . 10 . BaderBL , RayburnH , CrowleyD , HynesRO . Extensivevasculogenesis , angiogenesis , and organogenesis precede lethality in mice lacking all alpha v integrins . Cell 95 : 507 – 519 , 1998 . 11 . BaisC , WuX , YaoJ , YangS , CrawfordY , McCutcheonK , TanC , KolumamG , Vernes JM , Eastham - Anderson J , Haughney P , Kowanetz M , Hagenbeek T , Kasman I , Reslan HB , Ross J , Van Bruggen N , Carano RA , Meng YJ , Hongo JA , Stephan JP , Shibuya M , FerraraN . PlGFblockadedoesnotinhibitangiogenesisduringprimarytumorgrowth . Cell 141 : 166 – 177 , 2010 . 12 . Baish JW , Jain RK . Fractals and cancer . Cancer Res 60 : 3683 – 3688 , 2000 . 13 . BaishJW , StylianopoulosT , LanningRM , KamounWS , FukumuraD , MunnLL , JainRK . Scalingrulesfordiffusivedrugdeliveryintumorandnormaltissues . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 108 : 1799 – 1803 , 2011 . 14 . BatchelorTT , DudaDG , diTomasoE , AncukiewiczM , PlotkinSR , GerstnerE , Eichler AF , DrappatzJ , HochbergFH , BennerT , LouisDN , CohenKS , CheaH , Exarhopoulos A , Loefﬂer JS , Moses MA , Ivy P , Sorensen AG , Wen PY , Jain RK . Phase II study of cediranib , an oral pan - vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , in patients with recurrent glioblastoma . J Clin Oncol 28 : 2817 – 2823 , 2010 . 15 . Batchelor TT , Sorensen AG , di Tomaso E , Zhang WT , Duda DG , Cohen KS , Kozak KR , Cahill DP , Chen PJ , Zhu M , Ancukiewicz M , Mrugala MM , Plotkin S , Drappatz J , Louis DN , Ivy P , Scadden DT , Benner T , Loefﬂer JS , Wen PY , Jain RK . AZD2171 , a pan - VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , normalizes tumor vasculature and alle - viates edema in glioblastoma patients . Cancer Cell 11 : 83 – 95 , 2007 . 16 . BatraS , MatsumotoS , HyodoF , MitchellJ , KrishnaMC . MRIassessmentofangiogen - esisinhibitorsunitinib’sinﬂuenceontumoroxygenationtoidentifyanoptimalchemo - radiotherapeutic window . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75 : S43 , 2009 . 17 . Baum O , Suter F , Gerber B , Tschanz SA , Buergy R , Blank F , Hlushchuk R , Djonov V . VEGF - A promotes intussusceptive angiogenesis in the developing chicken chorio - allantoic membrane . Microcirculation 17 : 447 – 457 , 2010 . 18 . Baxter LT , Jain RK . Transport of ﬂuid and macromolecules in tumors . I . Role of interstitial pressure and convection . Microvasc Res 37 : 77 – 104 , 1989 . 19 . Baxter LT , Jain RK . Transport of ﬂuid and macromolecules in tumors . II . Role of heterogeneous perfusion and lymphatics . Microvasc Res 40 : 246 – 263 , 1990 . 20 . Baxter LT , Jain RK . Transport of ﬂuid and macromolecules in tumors . III . Role of binding and metabolism . Microvasc Res 41 : 5 – 23 , 1991 . 21 . Baxter LT , Jain RK . Transport of ﬂuid and macromolecules in tumors . IV . A micro - scopic model of the perivascular distribution . Microvasc Res 41 : 252 – 272 , 1991 . 22 . Benjamin LE , Golijanin D , Itin A , Pode D , Keshet E . Selective ablation of immature bloodvesselsinestablishedhumantumorsfollowsvascularendothelialgrowthfactorwithdrawal . J Clin Invest 103 : 159 – 165 , 1999 . 23 . BernsenHJ , RijkenPF , PetersJP , BakkerJH , BoermanRH , WesselingP , vanderKogel AJ . Suramin treatment of human glioma xenografts : effects on tumor vasculature and oxygenation status . J Neurooncol 44 : 129 – 136 , 1999 . 24 . Bhattacharya A , Seshadri M , Oven SD , Toth K , Vaughan MM , Rustum YM . Tumor vascular maturation and improved drug delivery induced by methylselenocysteine leads to therapeutic synergy with anticancer drugs . Clin Cancer Res 14 : 3926 – 3932 , 2008 . 25 . Bhattacharya A , Toth K , Sen A , Seshadri M , Cao S , Durrani FA , Faber E , Repasky EA , Rustum YM . Inhibition of colon cancer growth by methylselenocysteine - induced an - giogenic chemomodulation is inﬂuenced by histologic characteristics of the tumor . Clin Colorectal Cancer 8 : 155 – 162 , 2009 . 26 . Bielenberg DR , Hida Y , Shimizu A , Kaipainen A , Kreuter M , Kim CC , Klagsbrun M . Semaphorin3F , achemorepulsantforendothelialcells , inducesapoorlyvascularized , encapsulated , nonmetastatic tumor phenotype . J Clin Invest 114 : 1260 – 1271 , 2004 . 27 . Bielenberg DR , Pettaway CA , Takashima S , Klagsbrun M . Neuropilins in neoplasms : expression , regulation , and function . Exp Cell Res 312 : 584 – 593 , 2006 . 28 . BocciG , FranciaG , ManS , LawlerJ , KerbelRS . Thrombospondin1 , amediatorofthe antiangiogeniceffectsoflow - dosemetronomicchemotherapy . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 100 : 12917 – 12922 , 2003 . 29 . Bondjers C , Kalen M , Hellstrom M , Scheidl SJ , Abramsson A , Renner O , Lindahl P , ChoH , KehrlJ , BetsholtzC . Transcriptionproﬁlingofplatelet - derivedgrowthfactor - B - deﬁcient mouse embryos identiﬁes RGS5 as a novel marker for pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells . Am J Pathol 162 : 721 – 729 , 2003 . 30 . BoschJ , AbraldesJG , FernandezM , Garcia - PaganJC . Hepaticendothelialdysfunction and abnormal angiogenesis : New targets in the treatment of portal hypertension . J Hepatol 53 : 558 – 567 , 2010 . 31 . Bottaro DP , Liotta LA . Cancer : out of air is not out of action . Nature 423 : 593 – 595 , 2003 . 32 . Boucher Y , Baxter LT , Jain RK . Interstitial pressure gradients in tissue - isolated and subcutaneous tumors : implications for therapy . Cancer Res 50 : 4478 – 4484 , 1990 . 33 . Boucher Y , Kirkwood JM , Opacic D , Desantis M , Jain RK . Interstitial hypertension in superﬁcial metastatic melanomas in humans . Cancer Res 51 : 6691 – 6694 , 1991 . 34 . Boucher Y , Salehi H , Witwer B , Harsh GR , Jain RK . Interstitial ﬂuid pressure in intra - cranial tumours in patients and in rodents . Br J Cancer 75 : 829 – 836 , 1997 . 35 . Bressler NM . Antiangiogenic approaches to age - related macular degeneration today . Ophthalmology 116 : S15 – S23 , 2009 . 36 . Bressler SB . Introduction : understanding the role of angiogenesis and antiangiogenic agents in age - related macular degeneration . Ophthalmology 116 : S1 – S7 , 2009 . 37 . BriegerJ , BedavanijaA , LehrHA , MaurerJ , MannWJ . Expressionofangiogenicgrowth factors in acoustic neurinoma . Acta Otolaryngol 123 : 1040 – 1045 , 2003 . 38 . Browder T , Butterﬁeld CE , Kraling BM , Shi B , Marshall B , O’Reilly MS , Folkman J . Antiangiogenic scheduling of chemotherapy improves efﬁcacy against experimental drug - resistant cancer . Cancer Res 60 : 1878 – 1886 , 2000 . 39 . Brown E , McKee T , diTomaso E , Pluen A , Seed B , Boucher Y , Jain RK . Dynamic imaging of collagen and its modulation in tumors in vivo using second - harmonic gen - eration . Nat Med 9 : 796 – 800 , 2003 . 40 . BrownJL , CaoZA , Pinzon - OrtizM , KendrewJ , ReimerC , WenS , ZhouJQ , TabriziM , Emery S , McDermott B , Pablo L , McCoon P , Bedian V , Blakey DC . A human mono - clonal anti - ANG2 antibody leads to broad antitumor activity in combination with VEGF inhibitors and chemotherapy agents in preclinical models . Mol Cancer Ther 9 : 145 – 156 , 2010 . 41 . Brugarolas J , Lei K , Hurley RL , Manning BD , Reiling JH , Hafen E , Witters LA , Ellisen LW , Kaelin WG , Jr . Regulation of mTOR function in response to hypoxia by REDD1 and the TSC1 / TSC2 tumor suppressor complex . Genes Dev 18 : 2893 – 2904 , 2004 . 42 . Brugarolas JB , Vazquez F , Reddy A , Sellers WR , Kaelin WG , Jr . TSC2 regulates VEGF through mTOR - dependent and - independent pathways . Cancer Cell 4 : 147 – 158 , 2003 . 43 . Bullitt E , Lin NU , Smith JK , Zeng D , Winer EP , Carey LA , Lin W , Ewend MG . Blood vessel morphologic changes depicted with MR angiography during treatment of brain metastases : a feasibility study . Radiology 245 : 824 – 830 , 2007 . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1113 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 44 . Burstein HJ , Chen YH , Parker LM , Savoie J , Younger J , Kuter I , Ryan PD , Garber JE , Chen H , Campos SM , Shulman LN , Harris LN , Gelman R , Winer EP . VEGF as a marker for outcome among advanced breast cancer patients receiving anti - VEGF therapy with bevacizumab and vinorelbine chemotherapy . Clin Cancer Res 14 : 7871 – 7877 , 2008 . 45 . Carmeliet P , Ferreira V , Breier G , Pollefeyt S , Kieckens L , Gertsenstein M , Fahrig M , Vandenhoeck A , Harpal K , Eberhardt C , Declercq C , Pawling J , Moons L , Collen D , Risau W , Nagy A . Abnormal blood vessel development and lethality in embryos lacking a single VEGF allele . Nature 380 : 435 – 439 , 1996 . 46 . Carmeliet P , Jain RK . Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases . Nature 407 : 249 – 257 , 2000 . 47 . Carmeliet P , Jain RK . Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis . Nature 473 : 298 – 307 , 2011 . 48 . Carmeliet P , Moons L , Luttun A , Vincenti V , Compernolle V , De Mol M , Wu Y , Bono F , Devy L , Beck H , Scholz D , Acker T , DiPalma T , Dewerchin M , Noel A , Stalmans I , Barra A , Blacher S , Vandendriessche T , Ponten A , Eriksson U , Plate KH , Foidart JM , Schaper W , Charnock - Jones DS , Hicklin DJ , Herbert JM , Collen D , Persico MG . Synergism between vascular endothelial growth factor and placental growth factor contributes to angiogenesis and plasma extravasation in pathological conditions . Nat Med 7 : 575 – 583 , 2001 . 49 . Casanovas O , Hicklin DJ , Bergers G , Hanahan D . Drug resistance by evasion of antiangiogenictargetingofVEGFsignalinginlate - stagepancreaticislettumors . Cancer Cell 8 : 299 – 309 , 2005 . 50 . Caye - Thomasen P , Baandrup L , Jacobsen GK , Thomsen J , Stangerup SE . Immunohis - tochemicaldemonstrationofvascularendothelialgrowthfactorinvestibularschwan - nomas correlates to tumor growth rate . Laryngoscope 113 : 2129 – 2134 , 2003 . 51 . Caye - Thomasen P , Werther K , Nalla A , Bog - Hansen TC , Nielsen HJ , Stangerup SE , Thomsen J . VEGF and VEGF receptor - 1 concentration in vestibular schwannoma homogenates correlates to tumor growth rate . Otol Neurotol 26 : 98 – 101 , 2005 . 52 . Cerniglia GJ , Pore N , Tsai JH , Schultz S , Mick R , Choe R , Xing X , Durduran T , Yodh AG , EvansSM , KochCJ , HahnSM , QuonH , SehgalCM , LeeWM , MaityA . Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition modulates the microenvironment by vascular nor - malization to improve chemotherapy and radiotherapy efﬁcacy . PLoS One 4 : e6539 , 2009 . 53 . Chae SS , Kamoun WS , Farrar CT , Kirkpatrick ND , Niemeyer E , de Graaf AM , So - rensen AG , Munn LL , Jain RK , Fukumura D . Angiopoietin - 2 interferes with anti - VEGFR2 - induced vessel normalization and survival beneﬁt in mice bearing gliomas . Clin Cancer Res 16 : 3618 – 3627 , 2010 . 54 . ChamKK , BakerJH , TakharKS , FlexmanJA , WongMQ , OwenDA , YungA , Kozlow - ski P , Reinsberg SA , Chu EM , Chang CW , Buczkowski AK , Chung SW , Scudamore CH , Minchinton AI , Yapp DT , Ng SS . Metronomic gemcitabine suppresses tumour growth , improves perfusion , and reduces hypoxia in human pancreatic ductal adeno - carcinoma . Br J Cancer 103 : 52 – 60 , 2010 . 56 . Cho H , Kozasa T , Bondjers C , Betsholtz C , Kehrl JH . Pericyte - speciﬁc expression of Rgs5 : implications for PDGF and EDG receptor signaling during vascular maturation . FASEB J 17 : 440 – 442 , 2003 . 57 . Chung AS , Lee J , Ferrara N . Targeting the tumour vasculature : insights from physio - logical angiogenesis . Nat Rev Cancer 10 : 505 – 514 , 2010 . 58 . Clavin NW , Avraham T , Fernandez J , Daluvoy SV , Soares MA , Chaudhry A , Mehrara BJ . TGF - beta1 is a negative regulator of lymphatic regeneration during wound repair . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 295 : H2113 – H2127 , 2008 . 59 . Cobleigh MA , Langmuir VK , Sledge GW , Miller KD , Haney L , Novotny WF , Reimann JD , Vassel A . A phase I / II dose - escalation trial of bevacizumab in previously treated metastatic breast cancer . Semin Oncol 30 : 117 – 124 , 2003 . 60 . Coffelt SB , Tal AO , Scholz A , De Palma M , Patel S , Urbich C , Biswas SK , Murdoch C , Plate KH , Reiss Y , Lewis CE . Angiopoietin - 2 regulates gene expression in TIE2 - expressing monocytes and augments their inherent proangiogenic functions . Cancer Res 70 : 5270 – 5280 , 2010 . 61 . Cohen - JonathanE , EvansSM , KochCJ , MuschelRJ , McKennaWG , WuJ , BernhardEJ . The farnesyltransferase inhibitor L744 , 832 reduces hypoxia in tumors expressing activated H - ras . Cancer Res 61 : 2289 – 2293 , 2001 . 62 . Daly C , Pasnikowski E , Burova E , Wong V , Aldrich TH , Grifﬁths J , Ioffe E , Daly TJ , Fandl JP , Papadopoulos N , McDonald DM , Thurston G , Yancopoulos GD , Rudge JS . Angiopoietin - 2functionsasanautocrineprotectivefactorinstressedendothelialcells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 15491 – 15496 , 2006 . 63 . DeFeliceC , BianciardiG , DileoL , LatiniG , ParriniS . Abnormaloralvascularnetwork geometriccomplexityinEhlers - Danlossyndrome . OralSurgOralMedOralPatholOral Radiol Endod 98 : 429 – 434 , 2004 . 64 . DeClerck K , Elble RC . The role of hypoxia and acidosis in promoting metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy . Front Biosci 15 : 213 – 225 , 2010 . 65 . Dejana E , Tournier - Lasserve E , Weinstein BM . The control of vascular integrity by endothelial cell junctions : molecular basis and pathological implications . Dev Cell 16 : 209 – 221 , 2009 . 66 . Delmas C , End D , Rochaix P , Favre G , Toulas C , Cohen - Jonathan E . The farnesyl - transferase inhibitor R115777 reduces hypoxia and matrix metalloproteinase 2 ex - pression in human glioma xenograft . Clin Cancer Res 9 : 6062 – 6068 , 2003 . 67 . Desgrosellier JS , Cheresh DA . Integrins in cancer : biological implications and thera - peutic opportunities . Nat Rev Cancer 10 : 9 – 22 , 2010 . 68 . Di Tomaso E , London N , Fuja D , Logie J , Tyrrell JA , Kamoun W , Munn LL , Jain RK . PDGF - C induces maturation of blood vessels in a model of glioblastoma and attenu - ates the response to anti - VEGF treatment . PLoS ONE 4 : e5123 , 2009 . 69 . Di Tomaso E , Snuderl M , Kamoun WS , Duda DG , Auluck PK , Andronesi OC , Frosch MP , Wen PY , Plotkin SR , Hedley - Whyte ET , Sorensen AG , Batchelor TT , Jain RK . Glioblastomarecurrenceaftercediranibtherapyinpatients : lackof“rebound”revas - cularization as mode of escape . Cancer Res 71 : 19 – 28 , 2011 . 70 . Dickson PV , Hagedorn NL , Hamner JB , Fraga CH , Ng CY , Stewart CF , Davidoff AM . Interferon beta - mediated vessel stabilization improves delivery and efﬁcacy of sys - temicallyadministeredtopotecaninamurineneuroblastomamodel . JPediatrSurg 42 : 160 – 165 , 2007 . 71 . Dickson PV , Hamner JB , Sims TL , Fraga CH , Ng CY , Rajasekeran S , Hagedorn NL , McCarville MB , Stewart CF , Davidoff AM . Bevacizumab - induced transient remodel - ing of the vasculature in neuroblastoma xenografts results in improved delivery and efﬁcacy of systemically administered chemotherapy . Clin Cancer Res 13 : 3942 – 3950 , 2007 . 72 . Dickson PV , Hamner JB , Streck CJ , Ng CY , McCarville MB , Calabrese C , Gilbertson RJ , Stewart CF , Wilson CM , Gaber MW , Pfeffer LM , Skapek SX , Nathwani AC , Davidoff AM . Continuous delivery of IFN - beta promotes sustained maturation of intratumoral vasculature . Mol Cancer Res 5 : 531 – 542 , 2007 . 73 . DingsRP , LorenM , HeunH , McNielE , GrifﬁoenAW , MayoKH , GrifﬁnRJ . Scheduling of radiation with angiogenesis inhibitors anginex and Avastin improves therapeutic outcome via vessel normalization . Clin Cancer Res 13 : 3395 – 3402 , 2007 . 74 . Dirkx AE , oude Egbrink MG , Castermans K , van der Schaft DW , Thijssen VL , Dings RP , Kwee L , Mayo KH , Wagstaff J , Bouma - ter Steege JC , Grifﬁoen AW . Anti - angio - genesis therapy can overcome endothelial cell anergy and promote leukocyte - endo - thelium interactions and inﬁltration in tumors . FASEB J 20 : 621 – 630 , 2006 . 75 . Duda DG , Cohen KS , di Tomaso E , Au P , Klein RJ , Scadden DT , Willett CG , Jain RK . Differential CD146 expression on circulating versus tissue endothelial cells in rectal cancer patients : implications for circulating endothelial and progenitor cells as bio - markers for antiangiogenic therapy . J Clin Oncol 24 : 1449 – 1453 , 2006 . 76 . Duda DG , Kozin SV , Kirkpatrick N , Xu L , Fukumura D , Jain RK . CXCL12 ( SDF1 (cid:2) ) pathway inhibition : a new sensitizer for anti - cancer therapies ? Clin Cancer Res 17 : 2074 – 2080 , 2011 . 77 . Duda DG , Willett CG , Ancukiewicz M , di Tomaso E , Shah M , Czito BG , Bentley R , Poleski M , Lauwers GY , Carroll M , Tyler D , Mantyh C , Shellito P , Clark JW , Jain RK . Plasma soluble VEGFR - 1 is a potential dual biomarker of response and toxicity for bevacizumab with chemoradiation in locally advanced rectal cancer . Oncologist 15 : 577 – 583 , 2010 . 78 . Dvorak HF . Tumors : wounds that do not heal . Similarities between tumor stroma generation and wound healing . N Engl J Med 315 : 1650 – 1659 , 1986 . 79 . Ebos JM , Lee CR , Cruz - Munoz W , Bjarnason GA , Christensen JG , Kerbel RS . Accel - erated metastasis after short - term treatment with a potent inhibitor of tumor angio - genesis . Cancer Cell 15 : 232 – 239 , 2009 . GOEL ET AL . 1114 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 80 . Ehrmann RL , Knoth M . Choriocarcinoma : transﬁlter stimulation of vasoproliferation in the hamster cheek pouch studied by light and electron microscopy . J Natl Cancer Inst 41 : 1329 – 1341 , 1968 . 81 . Eichhorn ME , Strieth S , Luedemann S , Kleespies A , Noth U , Passon A , Brix G , Jauch KW , Bruns CJ , Dellian M . Contrast enhanced MRI and intravital ﬂuorescence micros - copy indicate improved tumor microcirculation in highly vascularized melanomas upon short - term anti - VEGFR treatment . Cancer Biol Ther 7 : 1006 – 1013 , 2008 . 82 . EllisLM , HicklinDJ . VEGF - targetedtherapy : mechanismsofanti - tumouractivity . Nat Rev Cancer 8 : 579 – 591 , 2008 . 82a . Emblem KE , Polaskova P , Jennings DL , Gerstner E , Batchelor TT , Jain RK , Sorensen AG . Increased blood ﬂow during anti - VEGF induced vascular normalization . Proceed - ingsofthe2011MeetingoftheInternationalSoceityforMagneticResonanceinMedicine , Abstr . 247 2011 . 83 . Falcon BL , Hashizume H , Koumoutsakos P , Chou J , Bready JV , Coxon A , Oliner JD , McDonald DM . Contrasting actions of selective inhibitors of angiopoietin - 1 and an - giopoietin - 2 on the normalization of tumor blood vessels . Am J Pathol 175 : 2159 – 2170 , 2009 . 84 . Ferrara N . Vascular endothelial growth factor . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 29 : 789 – 791 , 2009 . 85 . Ferrara N . VEGF and the quest for tumour angiogenesis factors . Nat Rev Cancer 2 : 795 – 803 , 2002 . 86 . Ferrara N , Carver - Moore K , Chen H , Dowd M , Lu L , O’Shea KS , Powell - Braxton L , Hillan KJ , Moore MW . Heterozygous embryonic lethality induced by targeted inacti - vation of the VEGF gene . Nature 380 : 439 – 442 , 1996 . 87 . FischerC , JonckxB , MazzoneM , ZacchignaS , LogesS , PattariniL , ChorianopoulosE , Liesenborghs L , Koch M , De Mol M , Autiero M , Wyns S , Plaisance S , Moons L , van Rooijen N , Giacca M , Stassen JM , Dewerchin M , Collen D , Carmeliet P . Anti - PlGF inhibits growth of VEGF ( R ) - inhibitor - resistant tumors without affecting healthy ves - sels . Cell 131 : 463 – 475 , 2007 . 88 . Fischer C , Mazzone M , Jonckx B , Carmeliet P . FLT1 and its ligands VEGFB and PlGF : drug targets for anti - angiogenic therapy ? Nat Rev Cancer 8 : 942 – 956 , 2008 . 89 . Fischer I , Cunliffe CH , Bollo RJ , Raza S , Monoky D , Chiriboga L , Parker EC , Golﬁnos JG , KellyPJ , KnoppEA , GruberML , ZagzagD , NarayanaA . High - gradegliomabefore and after treatment with radiation and Avastin : initial observations . Neuro - Oncology 10 : 700 – 708 , 2008 . 90 . Folkman J . Tumor angiogenesis : therapeutic implications . N Engl J Med 285 : 1182 – 1186 , 1971 . 91 . FolkmanJ , LongDM , Jr , BeckerFF . Growthandmetastasisoftumorinorganculture . Cancer 16 : 453 – 467 , 1963 . 92 . Folkman MJ , Long DM , Jr , Becker FF . Tumor growth in organ culture . Surg Forum 13 : 81 – 83 , 1962 . 93 . Friedlander M , Brooks PC , Shaffer RW , Kincaid CM , Varner JA , Cheresh DA . Deﬁni - tionoftwoangiogenicpathwaysbydistinctalphavintegrins . Science 270 : 1500 – 1502 , 1995 . 94 . Friedman HS , Prados MD , Wen PY , Mikkelsen T , Schiff D , Abrey LE , Yung WK , PaleologosN , NicholasMK , JensenR , VredenburghJ , HuangJ , ZhengM , CloughesyT . Bevacizumab alone and in combination with irinotecan in recurrent glioblastoma . J Clin Oncol 27 : 4733 – 4740 , 2009 . 95 . Fukumura D , Duda DG , Munn LL , Jain RK . Tumor microvasculature and microenvi - ronment : novel insights through intravital imaging in pre - clinical models . Microcircu - lation 17 : 206 – 225 , 2010 . 96 . Fukumura D , Gohongi T , Kadambi A , Izumi Y , Ang J , Yun CO , Buerk DG , Huang PL , Jain RK . Predominant role of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular endothelial growthfactor - inducedangiogenesisandvascularpermeability . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 98 : 2604 – 2609 , 2001 . 97 . Fukumura D , Xavier R , Sugiura T , Chen Y , Park EC , Lu N , Selig M , Nielsen G , Taksir T , Jain RK , Seed B . Tumor induction of VEGF promoter activity in stromal cells . Cell 94 : 715 – 725 , 1998 . 98 . FultonD , GrattonJP , McCabeTJ , FontanaJ , FujioY , WalshK , FrankeTF , Papapetro - poulos A , Sessa WC . Regulation of endothelium - derived nitric oxide production by the protein kinase Akt . Nature 399 : 597 – 601 , 1999 . 99 . GabrilovichDI , ChenHL , GirgisKR , CunninghamHT , MenyGM , NadafS , Kavanaugh D , Carbone DP . Production of vascular endothelial growth factor by human tumors inhibits the functional maturation of dendritic cells . Nat Med 2 : 1096 – 1103 , 1996 . 100 . Ganss R , Arnold B , Hammerling GJ . Mini - review : overcoming tumor - intrinsic resis - tance to immune effector function . Eur J Immunol 34 : 2635 – 2641 , 2004 . 101 . Gazit Y , Baish JW , Safabakhsh N , Leunig M , Baxter LT , Jain RK . Fractal characteristics of tumor vascular architecture during tumor growth and regression . Microcirculation 4 : 395 – 402 , 1997 . 102 . GerhardtH , BetsholtzC . Endothelial - pericyteinteractionsinangiogenesis . CellTissue Res 314 : 15 – 23 , 2003 . 103 . GiantonioBJ , CatalanoPJ , MeropolNJ , O’DwyerPJ , MitchellEP , AlbertsSR , Schwartz MA , Benson AB , 3rd . Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin , ﬂuorouracil , and leucovorin ( FOLFOX4 ) for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer : results from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200 . J Clin Oncol 25 : 1539 – 1544 , 2007 . 104 . Gimbrone MA , Jr , Cotran RS , Leapman SB , Folkman J . Tumor growth and neovascu - larization : an experimental model using the rabbit cornea . J Natl Cancer Inst 52 : 413 – 427 , 1974 . 105 . Gimbrone MA , Jr , Gullino PM . Neovascularization induced by intraocular xenografts of normal , preneoplastic , and neoplastic mouse mammary tissues . J Natl Cancer Inst 56 : 305 – 318 , 1976 . 106 . GohongiT , FukumuraD , BoucherY , YunCO , SoffGA , ComptonC , TodorokiT , Jain RK . Tumor - hostinteractionsinthegallbladdersuppressdistalangiogenesisandtumor growth : involvement of transforming growth factor beta1 . Nat Med 5 : 1203 – 1208 , 1999 . 107 . Gorski DH , Beckett MA , Jaskowiak NT , Calvin DP , Mauceri HJ , Salloum RM , Seetharam S , Koons A , Hari DM , Kufe DW , Weichselbaum RR . Blockage of the vascular endothelial growth factor stress response increases the antitumor effects of ionizing radiation . Cancer Res 59 : 3374 – 3378 , 1999 . 108 . Gossl M , Versari D , Hildebrandt HA , Bajanowski T , Sangiorgi G , Erbel R , Ritman EL , Lerman LO , Lerman A . Segmental heterogeneity of vasa vasorum neovascularization in human coronary atherosclerosis . JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 3 : 32 – 40 , 2010 . 109 . Gragoudas ES , Adamis AP , Cunningham ET , Jr , Feinsod M , Guyer DR . Pegaptanib for neovascular age - related macular degeneration . N Engl J Med 351 : 2805 – 2816 , 2004 . 110 . Greenberg JI , Shields DJ , Barillas SG , Acevedo LM , Murphy E , Huang J , Scheppke L , Stockmann C , Johnson RS , Angle N , Cheresh DA . A role for VEGF as a negative regulator of pericyte function and vessel maturation . Nature 456 : 809 – 813 , 2008 . 111 . Greenblatt M , Shubik P . Tumor angiogenesis : transﬁlter diffusion studies in the ham - ster by the transparent chamber technique . J Natl Cancer Inst 41 : 111 – 124 , 1968 . 112 . Grifﬁoen AW , Damen CA , Blijham GH , Groenewegen G . Tumor angiogenesis is accompanied by a decreased inﬂammatory response of tumor - associated endothe - lium . Blood 88 : 667 – 673 , 1996 . 113 . Group ES . Preclinical and phase 1A clinical evaluation of an anti - VEGF pegylated aptamer ( EYE001 ) for the treatment of exudative age - related macular degeneration . Retina 22 : 143 – 152 , 2002 . 114 . GullinoPM . BiomedicalThermology , editedbyGautherieM , AlbertE . NewYork : Liss , 1982 . 115 . Gullino PM . Angiogenesis and oncogenesis . J Natl Cancer Inst 61 : 639 – 643 , 1978 . 116 . Hagendoorn J , Tong R , Fukumura D , Lin Q , Lobo J , Padera TP , Xu L , Kucherlapati R , JainRK . Onsetofabnormalbloodandlymphaticvesselfunctionandinterstitialhyper - tension in early stages of carcinogenesis . Cancer Res 66 : 3360 – 3364 , 2006 . 117 . Hamzah J , Jugold M , Kiessling F , Rigby P , Manzur M , Marti HH , Rabie T , Kaden S , Grone HJ , Hammerling GJ , Arnold B , Ganss R . Vascular normalization in Rgs5 - deﬁ - cient tumours promotes immune destruction . Nature 453 : 410 – 414 , 2008 . 118 . Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . The hallmarks of cancer : the next generation . Cell 144 : 646 – 674 , 2011 . 119 . Hanrahan EO , Ryan AJ , Mann H , Kennedy SJ , Langmuir P , Natale RB , Herbst RS , Johnson BE , Heymach JV . Baseline vascular endothelial growth factor concentration as a potential predictive marker of beneﬁt from vandetanib in non - small cell lung cancer . Clin Cancer Res 15 : 3600 – 3609 , 2009 . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1115 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 120 . Hansen - Algenstaedt N , Stoll BR , Padera TP , Dolmans DE , Hicklin DJ , Fukumura D , JainRK . Tumoroxygenationinhormone - dependenttumorsduringvascularendothe - lialgrowthfactorreceptor - 2blockade , hormoneablation , andchemotherapy . Cancer Res 60 : 4556 – 4560 , 2000 . 121 . Harris AL . Hypoxia : a key regulatory factor in tumour growth . Nat Rev Cancer 2 : 38 – 47 , 2002 . 122 . Hashizume H , Baluk P , Morikawa S , McLean JW , Thurston G , Roberge S , Jain RK , McDonald DM . Openings between defective endothelial cells explain tumor vessel leakiness . Am J Pathol 156 : 1363 – 1380 , 2000 . 123 . Helmlinger G , Yuan F , Dellian M , Jain RK . Interstitial pH and pO 2 gradients in solid tumorsinvivo : high - resolutionmeasurementsrevealalackofcorrelation . NatMed 3 : 177 – 182 , 1997 . 123a . Herbst RS , Sun Y , Ederhardt WE , Germonpré P , Saijo N , Zhou C , Wang J , Li L , Kabbinavar F , Ichinose Y , Qin S , Zhang L , Biesma B , Heymach JV , Langmuir P , Ken - nedy SJ , Tada H , Johnson BE . Vandetanib plus docetaxel versus docetaxel as second - line treatment for patients with advanced non - small - cell lung cancer ( ZODIAC ) : a double - blind , randomised , phase 3 trial . Lancet Oncol . 11 : 619 – 626 , 2010 . 124 . Hern S , Mortimer PS . In vivo quantiﬁcation of microvessels in clinically uninvolved psoriatic skin and in normal skin . Br J Dermatol 156 : 1224 – 1229 , 2007 . 125 . Hida K , Klagsbrun M . A new perspective on tumor endothelial cells : unex - pected chromosome and centrosome abnormalities . Cancer Res 65 : 2507 – 2510 , 2005 . 126 . Hiratsuka S , Goel S , Kamoun WS , Maru Y , Fukumura D , Duda DG , Jain RK . Endothe - lial focal adhesion kinase mediates cancer cell homing to discrete regions of the lungs via E - selectin up - regulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 3725 – 3730 , 2011 . 127 . Hiratsuka S , Minowa O , Kuno J , Noda T , Shibuya M . Flt - 1 lacking the tyrosine kinase domain is sufﬁcient for normal development and angiogenesis in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 9349 – 9354 , 1998 . 128 . Hobbs SK , Monsky WL , Yuan F , Roberts WG , Grifﬁth L , Torchilin VP , Jain RK . Regu - lation of transport pathways in tumor vessels : role of tumor type and microenviron - ment . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 4607 – 4612 , 1998 . 129 . Hockel M , Schlenger K , Hockel S , Vaupel P . Hypoxic cervical cancers with low apo - ptotic index are highly aggressive . Cancer Res 59 : 4525 – 4528 , 1999 . 130 . Hockel M , Vaupel P . Tumor hypoxia : deﬁnitions and current clinical , biologic , and molecular aspects . J Natl Cancer Inst 93 : 266 – 276 , 2001 . 131 . Huang H , Bhat A , Woodnutt G , Lappe R . Targeting the ANGPT - TIE2 pathway in malignancy . Nat Rev Cancer 10 : 575 – 585 , 2010 . 132 . Huang H , Lai JY , Do J , Liu D , Li L , Del Rosario J , Doppalapudi VR , Pirie - Shepherd S , Levin N , Bradshaw C , Woodnutt G , Lappe R , Bhat A . Speciﬁcally targeting angiopoi - etin - 2inhibitsangiogenesis , tie2 - expressingmonocyteinﬁltration , andtumorgrowth . Clin Cancer Res 17 : 1001 – 1011 , 2011 . 133 . Huang X , Wong MK , Yi H , Watkins S , Laird AD , Wolf SF , Gorelik E . Combined therapyoflocalandmetastatic4T1breasttumorinmiceusingSU6668 , aninhibitorof angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases , the immunostimulator B7 . 2 - IgG fusion protein . Cancer Res 62 : 5727 – 5735 , 2002 . 134 . Hudson CC , Liu M , Chiang GG , Otterness DM , Loomis DC , Kaper F , Giaccia AJ , Abraham RT . Regulation of hypoxia - inducible factor 1alpha expression and function by the mammalian target of rapamycin . Mol Cell Biol 22 : 7004 – 7014 , 2002 . 135 . HurwitzH , FehrenbacherL , NovotnyW , CartwrightT , HainsworthJ , HeimW , Berlin J , BaronA , GrifﬁngS , HolmgrenE , FerraraN , FyfeG , RogersB , RossR , KabbinavarF . Bevacizumab plus irinotecan , ﬂuorouracil , and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer . N Engl J Med 350 : 2335 – 2342 , 2004 . 136 . Ide AG , Baker NH , Warren SL . Vascularization of the Brown - Pearce rabbit epitheli - oma transplant as seen in the transparent ear chamber . Am J Radiol 42 : 891 – 899 , 1939 . 137 . Inai T , Mancuso M , Hashizume H , Baffert F , Haskell A , Baluk P , Hu - Lowe DD , Shalinsky DR , Thurston G , Yancopoulos GD , McDonald DM . Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) signaling in cancer causes loss of endothelial fenes - trations , regressionoftumorvessels , andappearanceofbasementmembraneghosts . Am J Pathol 165 : 35 – 52 , 2004 . 138 . Ishida S , Usui T , Yamashiro K , Kaji Y , Amano S , Ogura Y , Hida T , Oguchi Y , Ambati J , Miller JW , Gragoudas ES , Ng YS , D’Amore PA , Shima DT , Adamis AP . VEGF164 - mediated inﬂammation is required for pathological , but not physiological , ischemia - induced retinal neovascularization . J Exp Med 198 : 483 – 489 , 2003 . 139 . Izumi Y , Xu L , di Tomaso E , Fukumura D , Jain RK . Tumour biology : herceptin acts as an anti - angiogenic cocktail . Nature 416 : 279 – 280 , 2002 . 140 . Jain RK . Delivery of novel therapeutic agents in tumors : physiological barriers and strategies . J Natl Cancer Inst 81 : 570 – 576 , 1989 . 141 . Jain RK . Determinants of tumor blood ﬂow : a review . Cancer Res 48 : 2641 – 2658 , 1988 . 142 . Jain RK . Molecular regulation of vessel maturation . Nature Med 9 : 685 – 693 , 2003 . 143 . Jain RK . Normalization of tumor vasculature : an emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy . Science 307 : 58 – 62 , 2005 . 144 . JainRK . Normalizingtumorvasculaturewithanti - angiogenictherapy : anewparadigm for combination therapy . Nat Med 7 : 987 – 989 , 2001 . 145 . Jain RK . Taming vessels to treat cancer . Sci Am 298 : 56 – 63 , 2008 . 146 . Jain RK , Baxter LT . Mechanisms of heterogeneous distribution of monoclonal anti - bodies and other macromolecules in tumors : signiﬁcance of elevated interstitial pres - sure . Cancer Res 48 : 7022 – 7032 , 1988 . 147 . Jain RK , Booth MF . What brings pericytes to tumor vessels ? J Clin Invest 112 : 1134 – 1136 , 2003 . 148 . Jain RK , Duda DG , Clark JW , Loefﬂer JS . Lessons from phase III clinical trials on anti - VEGF therapy for cancer . Nat Clin Pract Oncol 3 : 24 – 40 , 2006 . 149 . Jain RK , Duda DG , Willett CG , Sahani DV , Zhu AX , Loefﬂer JS , Batchelor TT , So - rensenAG . Biomarkersofresponseandresistancetoantiangiogenictherapy . NatRev Clin Oncol 6 : 327 – 338 , 2009 . 150 . Jain RK , Finn AV , Kolodgie FD , Gold HK , Virmani R . Antiangiogenic therapy for normalization of atherosclerotic plaque vasculature : a potential strategy for plaque stabilization . Nature Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med 4 : 491 – 502 , 2007 . 151 . Jain RK , Safabakhsh N , Sckell A , Chen Y , Jiang P , Benjamin L , Yuan F , Keshet E . Endothelial cell death , angiogenesis , and microvascular function after castration in an androgen - dependenttumor : roleofvascularendothelialgrowthfactor . ProcNatlAcad Sci USA 95 : 10820 – 10825 , 1998 . 152 . Jain RK , Stylianopoulos T . Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors . Nature Rev Clin Oncol 7 : 653 – 664 , 2010 . 153 . JainRK , TongRT , MunnLL . Effectofvascularnormalizationbyantiangiogenictherapy oninterstitialhypertension , peritumoredema , andlymphaticmetastasis : insightsfrom a mathematical model . Cancer Res 67 : 2729 – 2735 , 2007 . 154 . Jeziorska M , Woolley DE . Local neovascularization and cellular composition within vulnerable regions of atherosclerotic plaques of human carotid arteries . J Pathol 188 : 189 – 196 , 1999 . 155 . Johns TG , McKay MJ , Cvrljevic AN , Gan HK , Taylor C , Xu H , Smyth FE , Scott AM . MAb 806 enhances the efﬁcacy of ionizing radiation in glioma xenografts expressing thede2 – 7epidermalgrowthfactorreceptor . IntJRadiatOncolBiolPhys 78 : 572 – 578 , 2010 . 156 . JonaschE , CornP , PagliaroLC , WarnekeCL , JohnsonMM , TamboliP , NgC , Aparicio A , Ashe RG , Wright JJ , Tannir NM . Upfront , randomized , phase 2 trial of sorafenib versus sorafenib and low - dose interferon alfa in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma : clinical and biomarker analysis . Cancer 116 : 57 – 65 , 2010 . 157 . Juan TY , Rofﬂer SR , Hou HS , Huang SM , Chen KC , Leu YL , Prijovich ZM , Yu CP , Wu CC , SunGH , ChaTL . Antiangiogenesistargetingtumormicroenvironmentsynergizes glucuronide prodrug antitumor activity . Clin Cancer Res 15 : 4600 – 4611 , 2009 . 158 . Jubb AM , Hurwitz HI , Bai W , Holmgren EB , Tobin P , Guerrero AS , Kabbinavar F , Holden SN , Novotny WF , Frantz GD , Hillan KJ , Koeppen H . Impact of vascular endothelial growth factor - A expression , thrombospondin - 2 expression , and mi - crovessel density on the treatment effect of bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer . J Clin Oncol 24 : 217 – 227 , 2006 . 159 . Kaelin WG , Jr , Ratcliffe PJ . Oxygen sensing by metazoans : the central role of the HIF hydroxylase pathway . Mol Cell 30 : 393 – 402 , 2008 . GOEL ET AL . 1116 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 160 . KamounWS , LeyCD , FarrarCT , DuyvermanAM , LahdenrantaJ , LacorreDA , Batch - elor TT , di Tomaso E , Duda DG , Munn LL , Fukumura D , Sorensen AG , Jain RK . Edema control by cediranib , a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - targeted kinaseinhibitor , prolongssurvivaldespitepersistentbraintumorgrowthinmice . JClin Oncol 27 : 2542 – 2552 , 2009 . 161 . Kashiwagi S , Izumi Y , Gohongi T , Demou ZN , Xu L , Huang PL , Buerk DG , Munn LL , JainRK , FukumuraD . NOmediatesmuralcellrecruitmentandvesselmorphogenesis in murine melanomas and tissue - engineered blood vessels . J Clin Invest 115 : 1816 – 1827 , 2005 . 162 . Kashiwagi S , Tsukada K , Xu L , Miyazaki J , Kozin SV , Tyrrell JA , Sessa WC , Gerweck LE , Jain RK , Fukumura D . Perivascular nitric oxide gradients normalize tumor vascu - lature . Nat Med 14 : 255 – 257 , 2008 . 163 . Keck PJ , Hauser SD , Krivi G , Sanzo K , Warren T , Feder J , Connolly DT . Vascular permeability factor , an endothelial cell mitogen related to PDGF . Science 246 : 1309 – 1312 , 1989 . 164 . Kerbel RS , Kamen BA . The anti - angiogenic basis of metronomic chemotherapy . Nat Rev Cancer 4 : 423 – 436 , 2004 . 165 . Kerbel RS , Viloria - Petit A , Klement G , Rak J . ‘Accidental’ anti - angiogenic drugs . Anti - oncogene directed signal transduction inhibitors and conventional chemotherapeutic agents as examples . Eur J Cancer 36 : 1248 – 1257 , 2000 . 166 . Keunen O , Johansson M , Oudin A , Sanzey M , Rahim SA , Fack F , Thorsen F , Taxt T , Bartos M , Jirik R , Miletic H , Wang J , Stieber D , Stuhr L , Moen I , Rygh CB , Bjerkvig R , Niclou SP . Anti - VEGF treatment reduces blood supply and increases tumor cell inva - sion in glioblastoma . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 3749 – 3754 , 2011 . 167 . Kim KJ , Li B , Winer J , Armanini M , Gillett N , Phillips HS , Ferrara N . Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor - induced angiogenesis suppresses tumour growth in vivo . Nature 362 : 841 – 844 , 1993 . 168 . Kim P , Chung E , Yamashita H , Hung KE , Mizoguchi A , Kucherlapati R , Fukumura D , JainRK , YunSH . Invivowide - areacellularimagingbyside - viewendomicroscopy . Nat Methods 7 : 303 – 305 , 2010 . 169 . Klagsbrun M , Eichmann A . A role for axon guidance receptors and ligands in blood vesseldevelopmentandtumorangiogenesis . CytokineGrowthFactorRev 16 : 535 – 548 , 2005 . 170 . Klagsbrun M , Takashima S , Mamluk R . The role of neuropilin in vascular and tumor biology . Adv Exp Med Biol 515 : 33 – 48 , 2002 . 171 . Koh YJ , Kim HZ , Hwang SI , Lee JE , Oh N , Jung K , Kim M , Kim KE , Kim H , Lim NK , Jeon CJ , Lee GM , Jeon BH , Nam DH , Sung HK , Nagy A , Yoo OJ , Koh GY . Double antiangiogenic protein , DAAP , targeting VEGF - A and angiopoietins in tumor angio - genesis , metastasis , and vascular leakage . Cancer Cell 18 : 171 – 184 , 2010 . 172 . Koike N , Fukumura D , Gralla O , Au P , Schechner JS , Jain RK . Tissue engineering : creation of long - lasting blood vessels . Nature 428 : 138 – 139 , 2004 . 173 . Kolodgie FD , Gold HK , Burke AP , Fowler DR , Kruth HS , Weber DK , Farb A , Guer - reroLJ , HayaseM , KutysR , NarulaJ , FinnAV , VirmaniR . Intraplaquehemorrhageand progression of coronary atheroma . N Engl J Med 349 : 2316 – 2325 , 2003 . 174 . Kozin SV , Boucher Y , Hicklin DJ , Bohlen P , Jain RK , Suit HD . Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 - blocking antibody potentiates radiation - induced long - term control of human tumor xenografts . Cancer Res 61 : 39 – 44 , 2001 . 175 . Kubicek L , Kopacik R , Klusakova I , Dubovy P . Alterations in the vascular architecture of the dorsal root ganglia in a rat neuropathic pain model . Ann Anat 192 : 101 – 106 , 2010 . 176 . KurozumiK , HardcastleJ , ThakurR , YangM , ChristoforidisG , FulciG , HochbergFH , Weissleder R , Carson W , Chiocca EA , Kaur B . Effect of tumor microenvironment modulation on the efﬁcacy of oncolytic virus therapy . J Natl Cancer Inst 99 : 1768 – 1781 , 2007 . 177 . LebrinF , SrunS , RaymondK , MartinS , vandenBrinkS , FreitasC , BreantC , Mathivet T , Larrivee B , Thomas JL , Arthur HM , Westermann CJ , Disch F , Mager JJ , Snijder RJ , Eichmann A , Mummery CL . Thalidomide stimulates vessel maturation and reduces epistaxis in individuals with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia . Nat Med 16 : 420 – 428 , 2010 . 178 . LeeCG , HeijnM , diTomasoE , Griffon - EtienneG , AncukiewiczM , KoikeC , ParkKR , Ferrara N , Jain RK , Suit HD , Boucher Y . Anti - vascular endothelial growth factor treatment augments tumor radiation response under normoxic or hypoxic condi - tions . Cancer Res 60 : 5565 – 5570 , 2000 . 179 . Lee DS , Rieger H , Bartha K . Flow correlated percolation during vascular remodeling in growing tumors . Phys Rev Lett 96 : 058104 , 2006 . 180 . Less JR , Posner MC , Boucher Y , Borochovitz D , Wolmark N , Jain RK . Interstitial hypertension in human breast and colorectal tumors . Cancer Res 52 : 6371 – 6374 , 1992 . 181 . Less JR , Posner MC , Skalak TC , Wolmark N , Jain RK . Geometric resistance and microvascular network architecture of human colorectal carcinoma . Microcirculation 4 : 25 – 33 , 1997 . 182 . Less JR , Skalak TC , Sevick EM , Jain RK . Microvascular architecture in a mammary carcinoma : branching patterns and vessel dimensions . Cancer Res 51 : 265 – 273 , 1991 . 183 . Leung DW , Cachianes G , Kuang WJ , Goeddel DV , Ferrara N . Vascular endothelial growth factor is a secreted angiogenic mitogen . Science 246 : 1306 – 1309 , 1989 . 184 . Leunig M , Yuan F , Menger MD , Boucher Y , Goetz AE , Messmer K , Jain RK . Angio - genesis , microvascular architecture , microhemodynamics , and interstitial ﬂuid pres - sureduringearlygrowthofhumanadenocarcinomaLS174TinSCIDmice . CancerRes 52 : 6553 – 6560 , 1992 . 185 . Levenberg S , Golub JS , Amit M , Itskovitz - Eldor J , Langer R . Endothelial cells derived from human embryonic stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 4391 – 4396 , 2002 . 186 . Li B , Lalani AS , Harding TC , Luan B , Koprivnikar K , Huan Tu G , Prell R , VanRoey MJ , Simmons AD , Jooss K . Vascular endothelial growth factor blockade reduces intratu - moral regulatory T cells and enhances the efﬁcacy of a GM - CSF - secreting cancer immunotherapy . Clin Cancer Res 12 : 6808 – 6816 , 2006 . 187 . LiaoS , LiuJ , LinP , ShiT , JainRK , XuL . TGF - (cid:1) blockadecontrolsascitesbypreventing abnormalizationoflymphaticvesselsinorthotopichumanovariancarcinomamodels . Clin Cancer Res 17 : 1415 – 1424 , 2011 . 188 . Liu F , Wang P , Jiang X , Tan G , Qiao H , Jiang H , Krissansen GW , Sun X . Antisense hypoxia - inducible factor 1alpha gene therapy enhances the therapeutic efﬁcacy of doxorubicin to combat hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer Sci 99 : 2055 – 2061 , 2008 . 190 . Liu J , Liao S , Huang Y , Samuel R , Shi T , Naxerova K , Huang P , Kamoun W , Jain RK , FukumuraD , XuL . PDGF - Dimprovesdrugdeliveryandefﬁcacyviavascularnormal - izationbutpromoteslymphaticmetastasisbyactivatingCXCR4inbreastcancer . Clin Cancer Res 17 : 3638 – 3648 , 2011 . 191 . Lu - Emerson C and Plotkin SR . The neuroﬁbromatoses . Part 2 : NF2 and schwanno - matosis . Rev Neurol Dis 6 : E81 – E86 , 2009 . 192 . MaJ , PulferS , LiS , ChuJ , ReedK , GalloJM . Pharmacodynamic - mediatedreductionof temozolomide tumor concentrations by the angiogenesis inhibitor TNP - 470 . Cancer Res 61 : 5491 – 5498 , 2001 . 193 . MagnussonPU , LoomanC , AhgrenA , WuY , Claesson - WelshL , HeuchelRL . Platelet - derived growth factor receptor - beta constitutive activity promotes angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27 : 2142 – 2149 , 2007 . 194 . MaioneF , MollaF , MedaC , LatiniR , ZentilinL , GiaccaM , SeanoG , SeriniG , Bussolino F , Giraudo E . Semaphorin 3A is an endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor that blocks growth and normalizes the vasculature . J Clin Invest 119 : 3356 – 3372 , 2009 . 195 . MaisonpierrePC , SuriC , JonesPF , BartunkovaS , WiegandSJ , RadziejewskiC , Comp - tonD , McClainJ , AldrichTH , PapadopoulosN , DalyTJ , DavisS , SatoTN , Yancopou - losGD . Angiopoietin - 2 , anaturalantagonistforTie2thatdisruptsinvivoangiogenesis . Science 277 : 55 – 60 , 1997 . 196 . MaloneySL , SullivanDC , SuchtingS , HerbertJM , RabaiEM , NagyZ , BarkerJ , Sundar S , Bicknell R . Induction of thrombospondin - 1 partially mediates the anti - angiogenic activity of dexrazoxane . Br J Cancer 101 : 957 – 966 , 2009 . 197 . Manning EA , Ullman JG , Leatherman JM , Asquith JM , Hansen TR , Armstrong TD , Hicklin DJ , Jaffee EM , Emens LA . A vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 inhibitor enhances antitumor immunity through an immune - based mechanism . Clin Cancer Res 13 : 3951 – 3959 , 2007 . 198 . Matsumoto S , Yasui H , Batra S , Kinoshita Y , Bernardo M , Munasinghe JP , Utsumi H , ChoudhuriR , DevasahayamN , SubramanianS , MitchellJB , KrishnaMC . Simultaneous imaging of tumor oxygenation and microvascular permeability using Overhauser en - hanced MRI . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 17898 – 17903 , 2009 . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1117 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 198a . MazzieriR , PucciF , MoiD , ZonariE , RanghettiA , BertiA , PolitiLS , GentnerB , Brown JL , Naldini L , De Palma M . Targeting the ANG2 / TIE2 axis inhibits tumor growth and metastasisbyimpairingangiogenesisanddisablingreboundsofproangiogenicmyeloid cells . Cancer Cell 19 : 512 – 526 , 2011 . 199 . Mazzone M , Dettori D , Leite de Oliveira R , Loges S , Schmidt T , Jonckx B , Tian YM , Lanahan AA , Pollard P , Ruiz de Almodovar C , De Smet F , Vinckier S , Aragones J , Debackere K , Luttun A , Wyns S , Jordan B , Pisacane A , Gallez B , Lampugnani MG , Dejana E , Simons M , Ratcliffe P , Maxwell P , Carmeliet P . Heterozygous deﬁciency of PHD2 restores tumor oxygenation and inhibits metastasis via endothelial normaliza - tion . Cell 136 : 839 – 851 , 2009 . 200 . McCarty MF , Somcio RJ , Stoeltzing O , Wey J , Fan F , Liu W , Bucana C , Ellis LM . Overexpression of PDGF - BB decreases colorectal and pancreatic cancer growth by increasing tumor pericyte content . J Clin Invest 117 : 2114 – 2122 , 2007 . 201 . McGee MC , Hamner JB , Williams RF , Rosati SF , Sims TL , Ng CY , Gaber MW , Cala - brese C , Wu J , Nathwani AC , Duntsch C , Merchant TE , Davidoff AM . Improved intratumoral oxygenation through vascular normalization increases glioma sensitivity to ionizing radiation . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76 : 1537 – 1545 , 2010 . 202 . Melder RJ , Koenig GC , Witwer BP , Safabakhsh N , Munn LL , Jain RK . During angio - genesis , vascularendothelialgrowthfactorandbasicﬁbroblastgrowthfactorregulate natural killer cell adhesion to tumor endothelium . Nat Med 2 : 992 – 997 , 1996 . 203 . MilesD , HarbeckN , EscudierB , HurwitzH , SaltzL , VanCutsemE , CassidyJ , Mueller B , Sirzen F . Disease course patterns after discontinuation of bevacizumab : pooled analysis of randomized phase III trials . J Clin Oncol 29 : 83 – 88 , 2011 . 204 . Millauer B , Wizigmann - Voos S , Schnurch H , Martinez R , Moller NP , Risau W , Ullrich A . High afﬁnity VEGF binding and developmental expression suggest Flk - 1 as a major regulator of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis . Cell 72 : 835 – 846 , 1993 . 205 . Miller K , Wang M , Gralow J , Dickler M , Cobleigh M , Perez EA , Shenkier T , Cella D , Davidson NE . Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer . N Engl J Med 357 : 2666 – 2676 , 2007 . 206 . Morikawa S , Baluk P , Kaidoh T , Haskell A , Jain RK , McDonald DM . Abnormalities in pericytes on blood vessels and endothelial sprouts in tumors . Am J Pathol 160 : 985 – 1000 , 2002 . 207 . Motzer RJ , Hutson TE , Olsen MR , Hudes GR , Burke JM , Edenﬁeld WJ , Wilding G , MartellB , HariharanS , FiglinA . RandomizedphaseIImulticenterstudyoftheefﬁcacy and safety of sunitinib on the 4 / 2 versus continuous dosing schedule as ﬁrst - line therapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma : Renal EFFECT Trial . J Clin Oncol 29 : abstr LBA308 , 2011 . 208 . Moulton KS , Heller E , Konerding MA , Flynn E , Palinski W , Folkman J . Angiogenesis inhibitors endostatin or TNP - 470 reduce intimal neovascularization and plaque growth in apolipoprotein E - deﬁcient mice . Circulation 99 : 1726 – 1732 , 1999 . 209 . Muggia F , Safra T , Borgato L , Gandhi A , Mancinc G , Gabizon A , Liebes L . Phar - macokinetics ( PK ) of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin ( PLD ) given alone and with bevacizumab ( B ) inpatientswithrecurrentepithelialovariancancer ( rEOC ) . In : Amer - icanSocietyofClinicalOncologyAnnualMeeting . Chicago : Am . Soc . Clin . Oncol . , 2010 . 210 . NagyJA , ChangSH , DvorakAM , DvorakHF . Whyaretumourbloodvesselsabnormal and why is it important to know ? Br J Cancer 100 : 865 – 869 , 2009 . 211 . Nagy JA , Vasile E , Feng D , Sundberg C , Brown LF , Detmar MJ , Lawitts JA , Benjamin L , Tan X , Manseau EJ , Dvorak AM , Dvorak HF . Vascular permeability factor / vascular endothelial growth factor induces lymphangiogenesis as well as angiogenesis . J Exp Med 196 : 1497 – 1506 , 2002 . 212 . Nakahara T , Norberg SM , Shalinsky DR , Hu - Lowe DD , McDonald DM . Effect of inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling on distribution of extrava - sated antibodies in tumors . Cancer Res 66 : 1434 – 1445 , 2006 . 213 . NasarreP , ThomasM , KruseK , HelfrichI , WolterV , DeppermannC , SchadendorfD , ThurstonG , FiedlerU , AugustinHG . Host - derivedangiopoietin - 2affectsearlystages of tumor development and vessel maturation but is dispensable for later stages of tumor growth . Cancer Res 69 : 1324 – 1333 , 2009 . 214 . Netti PA , Roberge S , Boucher Y , Baxter LT , Jain RK . Effect of transvascular ﬂuid exchange on pressure - ﬂow relationship in tumors : a proposed mechanism for tumor blood ﬂow heterogeneity . Microvasc Res 52 : 27 – 46 , 1996 . 215 . Nicolini G , Miloso M , Moroni MC , Beguinot L , Scotto L . Post - transcriptional control regulates transforming growth factor alpha in the human carcinoma KB cell line . J Biol Chem 271 : 30290 – 30296 , 1996 . 216 . Ohta M , Kawabata T , Yamamoto M , Tanaka T , Kikuchi H , Hiramatsu Y , Kamiya K , Baba M , Konno H . TSU68 , an antiangiogenic receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , in - ducestumorvascularnormalizationinahumancancerxenograftnudemousemodel . Surg Today 39 : 1046 – 1053 , 2009 . 217 . Oka M , Iwata C , Suzuki HI , Kiyono K , Morishita Y , Watabe T , Komuro A , Kano MR , Miyazono K . Inhibition of endogenous TGF - beta signaling enhances lymphangiogen - esis . Blood 111 : 4571 – 4579 , 2008 . 218 . OsadaT , ChongG , TansikR , HongT , SpectorN , KumarR , HurwitzHI , DevI , Nixon AB , Lyerly HK , Clay T , Morse MA . The effect of anti - VEGF therapy on immature myeloid cell and dendritic cells in cancer patients . Cancer Immunol Immunother 57 : 1115 – 1124 , 2008 . 219 . Padera TP , Kuo AH , Hoshida T , Liao S , Lobo J , Kozak KR , Fukumura D , Jain RK . Differential response of primary tumor versus lymphatic metastasis to VEGFR - 2 and VEGFR - 3 kinase inhibitors cediranib and vandetanib . Mol Cancer Ther 7 : 2272 – 2279 , 2008 . 220 . PaderaTP , StollBR , TooredmanJB , CapenD , diTomasoE , JainRK . Pathology : cancer cells compress intratumour vessels . Nature 427 : 695 , 2004 . 221 . Paez - Ribes M , Allen E , Hudock J , Takeda T , Okuyama H , Vinals F , Inoue M , Bergers G , Hanahan D , Casanovas O . Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis . Cancer Cell 15 : 220 – 231 , 2009 . 222 . Pan Q , Chanthery Y , Liang WC , Stawicki S , Mak J , Rathore N , Tong RK , Kowalski J , YeeSF , PachecoG , RossS , ChengZ , LeCouterJ , PlowmanG , PealeF , KochAW , Wu Y , BagriA , Tessier - LavigneM , WattsRJ . Blockingneuropilin - 1functionhasanadditive effect with anti - VEGF to inhibit tumor growth . Cancer Cell 11 : 53 – 67 , 2007 . 223 . Patan S , Munn LL , Jain RK . Intussusceptive microvascular growth in a human colon adenocarcinoma xenograft : a novel mechanism of tumor angiogenesis . Microvasc Res 51 : 260 – 272 , 1996 . 224 . Pennacchietti S , Michieli P , Galluzzo M , Mazzone M , Giordano S , Comoglio PM . Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protoon - cogene . Cancer Cell 3 : 347 – 361 , 2003 . 225 . PlotkinSR , Stemmer - RachamimovAO , BarkerFG , , 2ndHalpinC , PaderaTP , Tyrrell A , Sorensen AG , Jain RK , di Tomaso E . Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 . N Engl J Med 361 : 358 – 367 , 2009 . 226 . Pore N , Gupta AK , Cerniglia GJ , Jiang Z , Bernhard EJ , Evans SM , Koch CJ , Hahn SM , MaityA . Nelﬁnavirdown - regulateshypoxia - induciblefactor1alphaandVEGFexpres - sion and increases tumor oxygenation : implications for radiotherapy . Cancer Res 66 : 9252 – 9259 , 2006 . 227 . Pore N , Jiang Z , Gupta A , Cerniglia G , Kao GD , Maity A . EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors decrease VEGF expression by both hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) - 1 - inde - pendent and HIF - 1 - dependent mechanisms . Cancer Res 66 : 3197 – 3204 , 2006 . 228 . Pries AR , Cornelissen AJ , Sloot AA , Hinkeldey M , Dreher MR , Hopfner M , Dewhirst MW , Secomb TW . Structural adaptation and heterogeneity of normal and tumor microvascular networks . PLoS Comput Biol 5 : e1000394 , 2009 . 229 . Pries AR , Hopfner M , le Noble F , Dewhirst MW , Secomb TW . The shunt problem : control of functional shunting in normal and tumour vasculature . Nat Rev Cancer 10 : 587 – 593 , 2010 . 230 . Primo L , Seano G , Roca C , Maione F , Gagliardi PA , Sessa R , Martinelli M , Giraudo E , di BlasioL , BussolinoF . Increasedexpressionofalpha6integrininendothelialcellsunveils a proangiogenic role for basement membrane . Cancer Res 70 : 5759 – 5769 , 2010 . 231 . QayumN , MuschelRJ , ImJH , BalathasanL , KochCJ , PatelS , McKennaWG , Bernhard EJ . Tumor vascular changes mediated by inhibition of oncogenic signaling . Cancer Res 69 : 6347 – 6354 , 2009 . 232 . Qin J , Chen X , Xie X , Tsai MJ , Tsai SY . COUP - TFII regulates tumor growth and metastasisbymodulatingtumorangiogenesis . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 107 : 3687 – 3692 , 2010 . 233 . Qu H , Nagy JA , Senger DR , Dvorak HF , Dvorak AM . Ultrastructural localization of vascular permeability factor / vascular endothelial growth factor ( VPF / VEGF ) to the GOEL ET AL . 1118 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m abluminal plasma membrane and vesiculovacuolar organelles of tumor microvascular endothelium . J Histochem Cytochem 43 : 381 – 389 , 1995 . 234 . Quaegebeur A , Carmeliet P . Oxygen sensing : a common crossroad in cancer and neurodegeneration . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 810 : 71 – 103 , 2010 . 235 . RajappaM , SaxenaP , KaurJ . Ocularangiogenesis : mechanismsandrecentadvancesin therapy . Adv Clin Chem 50 : 103 – 121 , 2010 . 236 . Raza A , Franklin MJ , Dudek AZ . Pericytes and vessel maturation during tumor angio - genesis and metastasis . Am J Hematol 85 : 593 – 598 , 2010 . 237 . ReckM , vonPawelJ , ZatloukalP , RamlauR , GorbounovaV , HirshV , LeighlN , Mezger J , Archer V , Moore N , Manegold C . Phase III trial of cisplatin plus gemcitabine with either placebo or bevacizumab as ﬁrst - line therapy for nonsquamous non - small - cell lung cancer : AVAil . J Clin Oncol 27 : 1227 – 1234 , 2009 . 238 . Relf M , LeJeune S , Scott PA , Fox S , Smith K , Leek R , Moghaddam A , Whitehouse R , Bicknell R , Harris AL . Expression of the angiogenic factors vascular endothelial cell growth factor , acidic and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor , tumor growth factor beta - 1 , platelet - derived endothelial cell growth factor , placenta growth factor , and pleiotro - phin in human primary breast cancer and its relation to angiogenesis . Cancer Res 57 : 963 – 969 , 1997 . 239 . Reynolds LE , Wyder L , Lively JC , Taverna D , Robinson SD , Huang X , Sheppard D , Hynes RO , Hodivala - Dilke KM . Enhanced pathological angiogenesis in mice lacking beta3 integrin or beta3 and beta5 integrins . Nat Med 8 : 27 – 34 , 2002 . 240 . Richard C , Kim G , Koikawa Y , Salm SN , Tsujimura A , Wilson EL , Moscatelli D . AndrogensmodulatethebalancebetweenVEGFandangiopoietinexpressioninpros - tate epithelial and smooth muscle cells . Prostate 50 : 83 – 91 , 2002 . 241 . RiniBI , SchillerJH , FruhaufJP , CohenEE , TaraziJC , RosbrookB , ADR , OlszankskiAJ , KimS , SpanoJ . Associationofdiastolicbloodpressure ( dBP ) (cid:6) 90mmHgwithoverall survival ( OS ) in patients treated with axitinib ( AG - 013736 ) . In : American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting . Chicago : Am . Soc . Clin . Oncol . , 2008 . 242 . Roh HD , Boucher Y , Kalnicki S , Buchsbaum R , Bloomer WD , Jain RK . Interstitial hypertension in carcinoma of uterine cervix in patients : possible correlation with tumor oxygenation and radiation response . Cancer Res 51 : 6695 – 6698 , 1991 . 243 . RolnyC , MazzoneM , TuguesS , LaouiD , JohannsonI , CouonC , SquadritoML , Segura I , Li X , Knevels E , Costa S , Vinckier S , Dresselaer T , Akeruda P , De Mol M , Salomaki H , Phillipson M , Wyns S , Larsson E , Buysschaert I , Botling J , Himmelreich U , Van Ginderachter JA , De Palma M , Dewerchin M , Claesson - Welsh L , Carmeliet P . HRG inhibitstumorgrowthandmetastasisbyinducingmacrophagepolarizationandvessel normalization through downregulation of PlGF . Cancer Cell 19 : 31 – 44 , 2011 . 244 . Rosenfeld PJ , Brown DM , Heier JS , Boyer DS , Kaiser PK , Chung CY , Kim RY . Ranibi - zumab for neovascular age - related macular degeneration . N Engl J Med 355 : 1419 – 1431 , 2006 . 245 . Salnikov AV , Roswall P , Sundberg C , Gardner H , Heldin NE , Rubin K . Inhibition of TGF - beta modulates macrophages and vessel maturation in parallel to a lowering of interstitial ﬂuid pressure in experimental carcinoma . Lab Invest 85 : 512 – 521 , 2005 . 246 . SaltzLB , ClarkeS , Diaz - RubioE , ScheithauerW , FigerA , WongR , KoskiS , Lichinitser M , YangTS , RiveraF , CoutureF , SirzenF , CassidyJ . Bevacizumabincombinationwith oxaliplatin - basedchemotherapyasﬁrst - linetherapyinmetastaticcolorectalcancer : a randomized phase III study . J Clin Oncol 26 : 2013 – 2019 , 2008 . 247 . SandlerA , GrayR , PerryMC , BrahmerJ , SchillerJH , DowlatiA , LilenbaumR , Johnson DH . Paclitaxel - carboplatin alone or with bevacizumab for non - small - cell lung cancer . N Engl J Med 355 : 2542 – 2550 , 2006 . 248 . Sasajima J , Mizukami Y , Sugiyama Y , Nakamura K , Kawamoto T , Koizumi K , Fujii R , Motomura W , Sato K , Suzuki Y , Tanno S , Fujiya M , Sasaki K , Shimizu N , Karasaki H , Kono T , Kawabe J , Ii M , Yoshiara H , Kamiyama N , Ashida T , Bardeesy N , Chung DC , Kohgo Y . Transplanting normal vascular proangiogenic cells to tumor - bearing mice triggers vascular remodeling and reduces hypoxia in tumors . Cancer Res 70 : 6283 – 6292 , 2010 . 249 . Scardina GA , Messina P . Microvascular abnormalities in patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Ann Anat 188 : 425 – 429 , 2006 . 250 . Schechner JS , Nath AK , Zheng L , Kluger MS , Hughes CC , Sierra - Honigmann MR , Lorber MI , Tellides G , Kashgarian M , Bothwell AL , Pober JS . In vivo formation of complexmicrovesselslinedbyhumanendothelialcellsinanimmunodeﬁcientmouse . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 9191 – 9196 , 2000 . 251 . SchlingemannRO , RietveldFJ , KwaspenF , vandeKerkhofPC , deWaalRM , RuiterDJ . Differential expression of markers for endothelial cells , pericytes , and basal lamina in the microvasculature of tumors and granulation tissue . Am J Pathol 138 : 1335 – 1347 , 1991 . 252 . Schneider BP , Wang M , Radovich M , Sledge GW , Badve S , Thor A , Flockhart DA , Hancock B , Davidson N , Gralow J , Dickler M , Perez EA , Cobleigh M , Shenkier T , Edgerton S , Miller KD . Association of vascular endothelial growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 genetic polymorphisms with outcome in a trial of paclitaxel compared with paclitaxel plus bevacizumab in advanced breast cancer : ECOG 2100 . J Clin Oncol 26 : 4672 – 4678 , 2008 . 253 . Schnell CR , Stauffer F , Allegrini PR , O’Reilly T , McSheehy PM , Dartois C , Stumm M , Cozens R , Littlewood - Evans A , Garcia - Echeverria C , Maira SM . Effects of the dual phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor NVP - BEZ235 onthetumorvasculature : implicationsforclinicalimaging . CancerRes 68 : 6598 – 6607 , 2008 . 254 . Schonthaler HB , Huggenberger R , Wculek SK , Detmar M , Wagner EF . Systemic anti - VEGF treatment strongly reduces skin inﬂammation in a mouse model of psori - asis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 21264 – 21269 , 2009 . 255 . Segers J , Di Fazio V , Ansiaux R , Martinive P , Feron O , Wallemacq P , Gallez B . Poten - tiation of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy using the anti - angiogenic drug thalido - mide : importanceofoptimalschedulingtoexploitthe“normalization”windowofthe tumor vasculature . Cancer Lett 244 : 129 – 135 , 2006 . 256 . Semenza GL . Deﬁning the role of hypoxia - inducible factor 1 in cancer biology and therapeutics . Oncogene 29 : 625 – 634 , 2010 . 257 . Semenza GL . HIF - 1 : upstream and downstream of cancer metabolism . Curr Opin Genet Dev 20 : 51 – 56 , 2010 . 258 . Semenza GL , Wang GL . A nuclear factor induced by hypoxia via de novo protein synthesis binds to the human erythropoietin gene enhancer at a site required for transcriptional activation . Mol Cell Biol 12 : 5447 – 5454 , 1992 . 259 . Senger DR , Galli SJ , Dvorak AM , Perruzzi CA , Harvey VS , Dvorak HF . Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeability factor that promotes accumulation of ascites ﬂuid . Science 219 : 983 – 985 , 1983 . 260 . Shojaei F , Wu X , Malik AK , Zhong C , Baldwin ME , Schanz S , Fuh G , Gerber HP , Ferrara N . Tumor refractoriness to anti - VEGF treatment is mediated by CD11b (cid:4) Gr1 (cid:4) myeloid cells . Nat Biotechnol 25 : 911 – 920 , 2007 . 261 . Shrimali RK , Yu Z , Theoret MR , Chinnasamy D , Restifo NP , Rosenberg SA . Anti - angiogenicagentscanincreaselymphocyteinﬁltrationintotumorandenhancethe effectiveness of adoptive immunotherapy of cancer . Cancer Res 70 : 6171 – 6180 , 2010 . 262 . SkuliN , MonferranS , DelmasC , FavreG , BonnetJ , ToulasC , Cohen - JonathanMoyal E . Alphavbeta3 / alphavbeta5 integrins - FAK - RhoB : a novel pathway for hypoxia regu - lation in glioblastoma . Cancer Res 69 : 3308 – 3316 , 2009 . 263 . Sorensen AG , Batchelor TT , Zhang WT , Chen PJ , Yeo P , Wang M , Jennings D , Wen PY , Lahdenranta J , Ancukiewicz M , di Tomaso E , Duda DG , Jain RK . A “vascular normalization index” as potential mechanistic biomarker to predict survival after a singledoseofcediranibinrecurrentglioblastomapatients . CancerRes 69 : 5296 – 5300 , 2009 . 264 . StarlingEH . Ontheabsorptionofﬂuidsfromtheconnectivetissuespaces . JPhysiol 19 : 312 – 326 , 1896 . 265 . Stockmann C , Doedens A , Weidemann A , Zhang N , Takeda N , Greenberg JI , Cheresh DA , Johnson RS . Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis . Nature 456 : 814 – 818 , 2008 . 266 . Stohrer M , Boucher Y , Stangassinger M , Jain RK . Oncotic pressure in solid tumors is elevated . Cancer Res 60 : 4251 – 4255 , 2000 . 267 . Sun C , Jain RK , Munn LL . Non - uniform plasma leakage affects local hematocrit and blood ﬂow : implications for inﬂammation and tumor perfusion . Ann Biomed Eng 35 : 2121 – 2129 , 2007 . 268 . Suri C , Jones PF , Patan S , Bartunkova S , Maisonpierre PC , Davis S , Sato TN , Yanco - poulos GD . Requisite role of angiopoietin - 1 , a ligand for the TIE2 receptor , during embryonic angiogenesis . Cell 87 : 1171 – 1180 , 1996 . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1119 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 269 . TabruynSP , ColtonK , MorisadaT , FuxeJ , WiegandSJ , ThurstonG , CoyleAJ , Connor J , McDonald DM . Angiopoietin - 2 - driven vascular remodeling in airway inﬂammation . Am J Pathol 177 : 3233 – 3243 , 2010 . 270 . Taguchi E , Nakamura K , Miura T , Shibuya M , Isoe T . Anti - tumor activity and tumor vessel normalization by the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine ki - nase inhibitor KRN951 in a rat peritoneal disseminated tumor model . Cancer Sci 99 : 623 – 630 , 2008 . 271 . TaylorKL , LeamanDW , GraneR , MechtiN , BordenEC , LindnerDJ . Identiﬁcationof interferon - beta - stimulatedgenesthatinhibitangiogenesisinvitro . JInterferonCytokine Res 28 : 733 – 740 , 2008 . 272 . TebbuttNC , WilsonK , GebskiVJ , CumminsMM , ZanninoD , vanHazelGA , Robinson B , BroadA , GanjuV , AcklandSP , ForgesonG , CunninghamD , SaundersMP , Stockler MR , Chua Y , Zalcberg JR , Simes RJ , Price TJ . Capecitabine , bevacizumab , and mito - mycininﬁrst - linetreatmentofmetastaticcolorectalcancer : resultsoftheAustralasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group Randomized Phase III MAX Study . J Clin Oncol 28 : 3191 – 3198 , 2010 . 273 . Teicher BA . A systems approach to cancer therapy . Antioncogenics (cid:4) standard cy - totoxics ¡ mechanism ( s ) of interaction . Cancer Metastasis Rev 15 : 247 – 272 , 1996 . 274 . Teicher BA , Dupuis NP , Robinson MF , Emi Y , Goff DA . Antiangiogenic treatment ( TNP - 470 / minocycline ) increases tissue levels of anticancer drugs in mice bearing Lewis lung carcinoma . Oncol Res 7 : 237 – 243 , 1995 . 275 . TeicherBA , HoldenSA , DupuisNP , KakejiY , IkebeM , EmiY , GoffD . Potentiationof cytotoxic therapies by TNP - 470 and minocycline in mice bearing EMT - 6 mammary carcinoma . Breast Cancer Res Treat 36 : 227 – 236 , 1995 . 276 . Terman BI , Dougher - Vermazen M , Carrion ME , Dimitrov D , Armellino DC , Gospo - darowicz D , Bohlen P . Identiﬁcation of the KDR tyrosine kinase as a receptor for vascular endothelial cell growth factor . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 187 : 1579 – 1586 , 1992 . 277 . Thurston G , Rudge JS , Ioffe E , Zhou H , Ross L , Croll SD , Glazer N , Holash J , Mc Donald DM , Yancopoulos GD . Angiopoietin - 1 protects the adult vasculature against plasma leakage . Nature Med 6 : 460 – 463 , 2000 . 278 . Thurston G , Suri C , Smith K , McClain J , Sato TN , Yancopoulos GD , McDonald DM . Leakage - resistant blood vessels in mice transgenically overexpressing angiopoietin - 1 . Science 286 : 2511 – 2514 , 1999 . 279 . TongRT , BoucherY , KozinSV , WinklerF , HicklinDJ , JainRK . Vascularnormalization byvascularendothelialgrowthfactorreceptor2blockadeinducesapressuregradient across the vasculature and improves drug penetration in tumors . Cancer Res 64 : 3731 – 3736 , 2004 . 280 . Tsukada K , Conner D , Lin Q , Kucherlapati R , Jain RK , Fukumura D . Blockade of inducible nitric oxide synthase normalizes murine breast cancer vessels . In : 100th Annual Meeting of AACR , 2009 . 281 . Turetschek K , Preda A , Novikov V , Brasch RC , Weinmann HJ , Wunderbaldinger P , Roberts TP . Tumor microvascular changes in antiangiogenic treatment : assessment by magnetic resonance contrast media of different molecular weights . J Magn Reson Imaging 20 : 138 – 144 , 2004 . 282 . Tvorogov D , Anisimov A , Zheng W , Leppanen VM , Tammela T , Laurinavicius S , HolnthonerW , HeloteraH , HolopainenT , JeltschM , KalkkinenN , LankinenH , Ojala PM , AlitaloK . Effectivesuppressionofvascularnetworkformationbycombinationof antibodies blocking VEGFR ligand binding and receptor dimerization . Cancer Cell 18 : 630 – 640 , 2010 . 283 . Van Cutsem E , Lambrechts D , Prenen H , Jain RK , Carmeliet P . Lessons from the adjuvant bevacizumab trial on colon cancer : what next ? J Clin Oncol 29 : 1 – 4 , 2011 . 284 . Van de Veire S , Stalmans I , Heindryckx F , Oura H , Tijeras - Raballand A , Schmidt T , LogesS , AlbrechtI , JonckxB , VinckierS , VanSteenkisteC , TuguesS , RolnyC , DeMol M , Dettori D , Hainaud P , Coenegrachts L , Contreres JO , Van Bergen T , Cuervo H , Xiao WH , Le Henaff C , Buysschaert I , Kharabi Masouleh B , Geerts A , Schomber T , BonninP , LambertV , HaustraeteJ , ZacchignaS , RakicJM , JimenezW , NoelA , Giacca M , Colle I , Foidart JM , Tobelem G , Morales - Ruiz M , Vilar J , Maxwell P , Vinores SA , Carmeliet G , Dewerchin M , Claesson - Welsh L , Dupuy E , Van Vlierberghe H , Chris - toforiG , MazzoneM , DetmarM , CollenD , CarmelietP . Furtherpharmacologicaland geneticevidencefortheefﬁcacyofPlGFinhibitionincancerandeyedisease . Cell 141 : 178 – 190 , 2010 . 285 . VirmaniR , KolodgieFD , BurkeAP , FinnAV , GoldHK , TulenkoTN , WrennSP , Narula J . Atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability to rupture : angiogenesis as a source of intraplaque hemorrhage . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25 : 2054 – 2061 , 2005 . 286 . Vogelstein B , Kinzler KW . Cancer genes and the pathways they control . Nat Med 10 : 789 – 799 , 2004 . 287 . Vredenburgh JJ , Desjardins A , Herndon JE , , 2nd Marcello J , Reardon DA , Quinn JA , RichJN , SathornsumeteeS , GururanganS , SampsonJ , WagnerM , BaileyL , BignerDD , Friedman AH , Friedman HS . Bevacizumab plus irinotecan in recurrent glioblastoma multiforme . J Clin Oncol 25 : 4722 – 4729 , 2007 . 288 . Wang GL , Semenza GL . Puriﬁcation and characterization of hypoxia - inducible factor 1 . J Biol Chem 270 : 1230 – 1237 , 1995 . 289 . Warren RS , Yuan H , Matli MR , Gillett NA , Ferrara N . Regulation by vascular endo - thelial growth factor of human colon cancer tumorigenesis in a mouse model of experimental liver metastasis . J Clin Invest 95 : 1789 – 1797 , 1995 . 290 . Watnick RS , Cheng YN , Rangarajan A , Ince TA , Weinberg RA . Ras modulates Myc activity to repress thrombospondin - 1 expression and increase tumor angiogenesis . Cancer Cell 3 : 219 – 231 , 2003 . 291 . Welch S , Spithoff K , Rumble RB , Maroun J . Bevacizumab combined with chemother - apy for patients with advanced colorectal cancer : a systematic review . Ann Oncol 21 : 1152 – 1162 , 2010 . 292 . WelterM , BarthaK , RiegerH . Vascularremodellingofanarterio - venousbloodvessel network during solid tumour growth . J Theor Biol 259 : 405 – 422 , 2009 . 293 . Wildiers H , Guetens G , De Boeck G , Verbeken E , Landuyt B , Landuyt W , de Bruijn EA , van Oosterom AT . Effect of antivascular endothelial growth factor treatment on the intratumoral uptake of CPT - 11 . Br J Cancer 88 : 1979 – 1986 , 2003 . 294 . Willett CG , Boucher Y , di Tomaso E , Duda DG , Munn LL , Tong RT , Chung DC , Sahani DV , Kalva SP , Kozin SV , Mino M , Cohen KS , Scadden DT , Hartford AC , Fischman AJ , Clark JW , Ryan DP , Zhu AX , Blaszkowsky LS , Chen HX , Shellito PC , Lauwers GY , Jain RK . Direct evidence that the VEGF - speciﬁc antibody bevacizumab has antivascular effects in human rectal cancer . Nat Med 10 : 145 – 147 , 2004 . 295 . WillettCG , BoucherY , DudaDG , diTomasoE , MunnLL , TongRT , KozinSV , PetitL , Jain RK , Chung DC , Sahani DV , Kalva SP , Cohen KS , Scadden DT , Fischman AJ , Clark JW , RyanDP , ZhuAX , BlaszkowskyLS , ShellitoPC , Mino - KenudsonM , LauwersGY . Surrogate markers for antiangiogenic therapy and dose - limiting toxicities for bevaci - zumab with radiation and chemotherapy : continued experience of a phase I trial in rectal cancer patients . J Clin Oncol 23 : 8136 – 8139 , 2005 . 296 . WillettCG , DudaDG , AncukiewiczM , ShahM , CzitoBG , BentleyR , PoleskiM , Fujita H , Lauwers GY , Carroll M , Tyler D , Mantyh C , Shellito P , Chung DC , Clark JW , Jain RK . A safety and survival analysis of neoadjuvant bevacizumab with standard chemo - radiation in a phase I / II study compared with standard chemoradiation in locally ad - vanced rectal cancer . Oncologist 15 : 845 – 851 , 2010 . 297 . Willett CG , Duda DG , di Tomaso E , Boucher Y , Ancukiewicz M , Sahani DV , Lahdenranta J , Chung DC , Fischman AJ , Lauwers GY , Shellito P , Czito BG , Wong TZ , Paulson E , Poleski M , Vujaskovic Z , Bentley R , Chen HX , Clark JW , Jain RK . Efﬁcacy , safety , and biomarkers of neoadjuvant bevacizumab , radiation therapy , and ﬂuorouracil in rectal cancer : a multidisciplinary phase II study . J Clin Oncol 27 : 3020 – 3026 , 2009 . 298 . Winkler F , Kozin SV , Tong RT , Chae SS , Booth MF , Garkavtsev I , Xu L , Hicklin DJ , Fukumura D , di Tomaso E , Munn LL , Jain RK . Kinetics of vascular normalization by VEGFR2 blockade governs brain tumor response to radiation : role of oxygenation , angiopoietin - 1 , and matrix metalloproteinases . Cancer Cell 6 : 553 – 563 , 2004 . 299 . Wong AL , Haroon ZA , Werner S , Dewhirst MW , Greenberg CS , Peters KG . Tie2 expressionandphosphorylationinangiogenicandquiescentadulttissues . CircRes 81 : 567 – 574 , 1997 . 300 . WongET , BremS . Tamingglioblastomabytargetingangiogenesis : 3yearslater . JClin Oncol 29 : 124 – 126 , 2011 . 301 . WongHK , LahdenrantaJ , KamounWS , ChanAW , McClatcheyAI , PlotkinSR , JainRK , diTomasoE . Anti - vascularendothelialgrowthfactortherapiesasanoveltherapeutic approach to treating neuroﬁbromatosis - related tumors . Cancer Res 70 : 3483 – 3493 , 2010 . GOEL ET AL . 1120 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 303 . Wouters BG , Brown JM . Cells at intermediate oxygen levels can be more important thanthe“hypoxicfraction”indeterminingtumorresponsetofractionatedradiother - apy . Radiat Res 147 : 541 – 550 , 1997 . 304 . WuJ , LongQ , XuS , PadhaniAR . Studyoftumorbloodperfusionanditsvariationdue to vascular normalization by anti - angiogenic therapy based on 3D angiogenic micro - vasculature . J Biomech 42 : 712 – 721 , 2009 . 305 . Xian X , Hakansson J , Stahlberg A , Lindblom P , Betsholtz C , Gerhardt H , Semb H . Pericytes limit tumor cell metastasis . J Clin Invest 116 : 642 – 651 , 2006 . 306 . Xu L , Duda DG , di Tomaso E , Ancukiewicz M , Chung DC , Lauwers GY , Samuel R , Shellito P , Czito BG , Lin PC , Poleski M , Bentley R , Clark JW , Willett CG , Jain RK . Direct evidence that bevacizumab , an anti - VEGF antibody , up - regulates SDF1alpha , CXCR4 , CXCL6 , andneuropilin1intumorsfrompatientswithrectalcancer . Cancer Res 69 : 7905 – 7910 , 2009 . 307 . XueQ , HopkinsB , PerruzziC , UdayakumarD , SherrisD , BenjaminLE . Palomid529 , a novel small - molecule drug , is a TORC1 / TORC2 inhibitor that reduces tumor growth , tumor angiogenesis , and vascular permeability . Cancer Res 68 : 9551 – 9557 , 2008 . 308 . Yamashita J , Itoh H , Hirashima M , Ogawa M , Nishikawa S , Yurugi T , Naito M , Nakao K . Flk1 - positivecellsderivedfromembryonicstemcellsserveasvascularprogenitors . Nature 408 : 92 – 96 , 2000 . 309 . Yang J , Nagavarapu U , Relloma K , Sjaastad MD , Moss WC , Passaniti A , Herron GS . Telomerized human microvasculature is functional in vivo . Nat Biotechnol 19 : 219 – 224 , 2001 . 310 . YonenagaY , MoriA , OnoderaH , YasudaS , OeH , FujimotoA , TachibanaT , Imamura M . Absence of smooth muscle actin - positive pericyte coverage of tumor vessels correlateswithhematogenousmetastasisandprognosisofcolorectalcancerpatients . Oncology 69 : 159 – 166 , 2005 . 311 . Yoshiji H , Harris SR , Thorgeirsson UP . Vascular endothelial growth factor is essential for initial but not continued in vivo growth of human breast carcinoma cells . Cancer Res 57 : 3924 – 3928 , 1997 . 312 . YuJ , deMuinckED , ZhuangZ , DrinaneM , KauserK , RubanyiGM , QianHS , MurataT , Escalante B , Sessa WC . Endothelial nitric oxide synthase is critical for ischemic re - modeling , muralcellrecruitment , andbloodﬂowreserve . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 102 : 10999 – 11004 , 2005 . 312a . Yu L , Wu X , Cheng Z , Lee CV , LeCouter J , Campa C , Fuh G , Lowman H , Ferrara N . Invest Opthalmol Vis Sci 49 : 522 – 527 , 2008 . 313 . Yuan F , Chen Y , Dellian M , Safabakhsh N , Ferrara N , Jain RK . Time - dependent vascular regression and permeability changes in established human tumor xenografts induced by an anti - vascular endothelial growth factor / vascular permeability factor antibody . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 14765 – 14770 , 1996 . 314 . YuanTL , ChoiHS , MatsuiA , BenesC , LifshitsE , LuoJ , FrangioniJV , CantleyLC . Class 1A PI3K regulates vessel integrity during development and tumorigenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 9739 – 9744 , 2008 . 315 . Yurugi - Kobayashi T , Itoh H , Yamashita J , Yamahara K , Hirai H , Kobayashi T , Ogawa M , Nishikawa S , Nakao K . Effective contribution of transplanted vascular progenitor cells derived from embryonic stem cells to adult neovascularization in proper differ - entiation stage . Blood 101 : 2675 – 2678 , 2003 . 316 . Zetter BR . The scientiﬁc contributions of M . Judah Folkman to cancer research . Nat Rev Cancer 8 : 647 – 654 , 2008 . 317 . Zhou Q , Gallo JM . Differential effect of sunitinib on the distribution of temozolomide in an orthotopic glioma model . Neuro - Oncology 11 : 301 – 310 , 2009 . 318 . Zhou Q , Guo P , Gallo JM . Impact of angiogenesis inhibition by sunitinib on tumor distribution of temozolomide . Clin Cancer Res 14 : 1540 – 1549 , 2008 . 319 . Zhu AX , Sahani DV , Duda DG , di Tomaso E , Ancukiewicz M , Catalano OA , Sindh - wani V , Blaszkowsky LS , Yoon SS , Lahdenranta J , Bhargava P , Meyerhardt J , Clark JW , Kwak EL , Hezel AF , Miksad R , Abrams TA , Enzinger PC , Fuchs CS , Ryan DP , Jain RK . Efﬁcacy , safety , and potential biomarkers of sunitinib monotherapy in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma : a phase II study . J Clin Oncol 27 : 3027 – 3035 , 2009 . NORMALIZATION OF THE VASCULATURE AND CANCER TREATMENT 1121 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 91 (cid:127) JULY 2011 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on A p r il 1 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m