This is an author - deposited version published in : http : / / oatao . univ - toulouse . fr / Eprints ID : 5910 To link to this article : DOI : 10 . 1016 / J . MEMSCI . 2008 . 09 . 049 URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . MEMSCI . 2008 . 09 . 049 To cite this version : Lebleu , Nathalie and Roques , Christine and Aimar , Pierre and Causserand , Christel ( 2009 ) Role of the cell - wall structure in the retention of bacteria by microfiltration membranes . Journal of Membrane Science , vol . 326 ( n°1 ) . pp . 178 - 185 . ISSN 0376 - 7388 (cid:3) Open Archive Toulouse Archive Ouverte ( OATAO ) OATAO is an open access repository that collects the work of Toulouse researchers and makes it freely available over the web where possible . Any correspondence concerning this service should be sent to the repository administrator : staff - oatao @ listes . diff . inp - toulouse . fr (cid:3) Role of the cell wall structure in the retention of bacteria by microﬁltration membranes Nathalie Lebleu a , Christine Roques b , Pierre Aimar a , Christel Causserand a , ∗ a Laboratoire de Génie Chimique , Université Paul Sabatier , 31062 Toulouse Cedex 9 , France b LU 49 , Adhésion Bactérienne et Formation de Bioﬁlms , Université Paul Sabatier , 31062 Toulouse Cedex 9 , France a b s t r a c t This experimental study investigates the retention of bacteria by porous membranes . The transfer of bacteria larger than the nominal pore size of microﬁltration track etched membranes has been studied for several kinds of bacterial strains . This unexpected transfer does not correlate to the hydrophobicity , neither to the surface charge of the microorganism , as suggested in previous reports . We conclude that , in our conditions , the kind of bacteria ( Gram positive or Gram negative ) is ﬁnally the most important parameter . As the distinction between those two types of bacteria is related to the cell wall structure , we provide an experimental evidence , via the action of an antibiotic , that the cell wall ﬂexibility triggers the transfer of the bacteria through artiﬁcial membranes , when the pores are smaller in size than the cell . 1 . Introduction The retention of microorganisms is one of the key advantages of using membrane ﬁltration for the production of drinking water . Ultraﬁltration and microﬁltration are known as efﬁcient processes to remove bacteria and their selectivity is dominated by a sieving effect [ 1 , 2 ] . Nevertheless , several studies report leaks of bacteria through membranes with a nominal pore size smaller than the bacteria size [ 3 – 7 ] . Assuming the presence of a small number of abnormally large pores as compared to the average pore rating [ 3 , 4 , 8 ] , is not sufﬁcient to justify those results . In most cases the diameterofsuch“defects”remainssmallerthanthecellsize . Inthis context , we may assume that the biological nature of the ﬁltered particles is likely to induce speciﬁc behaviour and so to modify the expected transfer mechanisms . Therefore , the role of the cell properties , including their surface properties or their mechani cal stiffness has been questioned in the present study , so as to understand to which extend this could explain the abnormal leaks observed through ﬁltration membranes . In cases of ﬁltration of biological particles such as viruses or bacteriophages , several authors have pointed out that , due to their physico chemical properties , electrostatic interactions may have ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 33 5 61 55 86 90 ; fax : + 33 5 61 55 61 39 . E mail address : caussera @ chimie . ups tlse . fr ( C . Causserand ) . a strong effect on the retention predicted by considering only a size exclusion mechanism . For instance , Herath et al . [ 9 ] have shown that the rejection of MS2 and Q b ( 25nm ) by microﬁltra tion membranes of 0 . 05 m m mean diameter was larger for pH values close to their isoelectric point where bacteriophages are not charged anymore and thus are more likely to aggregate and to be rejected . For bacterial cells , electrostatic interactions inﬂuence was also reported in case of deep ﬁltration on granular bed . A low ionic strength or a high negative charge of the microorganism are some times recommended to facilitate the bacteria transport through a porous medium [ 10 , 11 ] . However , in membrane processes , electro static interactions appear early at the entrance of the particles into the pore , and thus the transposition of those last results to explain the unexpected leakage is not immediate . Inaddition , thetransferofbacteriacouldbealsooriginatedfrom the mechanical properties of the bacterial cell wall . However , only a few publications can be found on the effect of these properties on bacterial behaviour during ﬁltration experiments . In this context papers already published on yeast and red blood cells have to be considered , since these are numerous , and meant to exhibit similar behaviours . The deformability of biological particles during ﬁltration experiments has already been invoked to describe the properties of ﬁltration cakes resulting from the build up of retained cells at the membrane surface . Zydney et al . [ 12 ] study the extent of cellular blockage of membranes pores and the properties of a cake composed of red blood cells which are known for being highly deformable . Thereby , thecellbediscompressiblewhichleadsthese authors to develop relationships between hydraulic permeability , porosity and compressive pressure based on experimental data obtained by ﬁltration and centrifugation and including pore block age effect . Then , they incorporate those relationships into a model for predicting the cross ﬂow permeation ﬂux , assuming that the hydraulic resistance provided by cross ﬂow ﬁltration of red blood cells was equivalent to that observed in an unstirred ﬁltration system . Numerousﬁltrationstudiesofyeastsuspensionshavebeenpub lished , inwhichthehydraulicresistanceofcelldepositsisevaluated asafunctionoftheoperatingpressure . Theyconcludethatthecom pressibility of the cells should be invoked to explain the observed discrepancy between experimental data and the data calculated using the classical Kozeny Carman model . In this context , Meireles et al . [ 13 ] propose a numerical approach for modeling the hydraulic resistance of cakes obtained by dead end ﬁltration of baker’s yeasts ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) . These authors use a simpliﬁed version of the models developed by Smith et al . [ 14 – 16 ] which take the mechanical properties of the cells obtained by compression exper iments and the osmotic equilibrium into account . Inawidersense , severalauthorshavemadetheassumptionthat , in terms of deformability , bacterial cells behave as yeasts . Then , by assuming bacteria deformation at constant volume , Hwang et al . [ 17 ] develop a model to evaluate the effects of operating condi tions on the ﬁltration performance based on Lu et al . [ 18 ] study of calcium alginate gel particles . Their simulated results are in good agreement with experimental data obtained in cross ﬂow ﬁltration of Pseudomonas species . Concerning the study of biological cell ﬁltrability through mem brane pores smaller than their size , most publications focus on red blood cells [ 19 – 21 ] . Scanning electron microscopy observations of the transfer of bovine red blood cell [ 22 ] through microﬁltration membranes of average pore diameter of 0 . 3 and 0 . 4 m m reveal a considerable deformation of the cell enabling it to penetrate in pores much smaller than it . This ability results from the high ﬂex ibility of their bilipidic membrane . However , bacteria present a more complex cell wall structure , composed not only of a lipidic bilayer but also of a cross linked polymer network responsible for mechanical strength and stiffness of their cell wall which are larger than those of red blood cells . This is well reﬂected by the Young modulus : the one of the red blood cells is in the range of 0 . 3 to 3 × 10 5 N / m 2 whereas for bacteria it is around 10 7 to 10 8 N / m 2 [ 23 ] . In such conditions , further exprimental investiga tions are necessary to evaluate if the phenomena documented for the red blood cells can be of any importance when stan dard membrane ﬁltrations are applied to suspensions of bacteria , although the assumption has already been proposed to justify bac terial leakage of Brevundimonas diminuta through microﬁltration membranes [ 22 ] . Bacteria deformability or more exactly volume reduction was observed in other cases . For instance , Mille et al . [ 24 ] investigated thebehaviourandtheviabilityof Escherichiacoli suspendedinglyc erolsolutionsofosmoticpressurerangingbetween26and133MPa . Whenabacterialcellissubmittedtoanincreaseinexternalosmotic pressure , a passive response mechanism is ﬁrst observed : transfer of water leads to a reduction in cytoplasmic volume and conse quently to a reduction in the cell volume . The cell viability is a function of the ﬁnal volume which depends on the osmotic stress magnitude . This experimental study supports strong similarities between the possible response of bacteria to a mechanical pres sure . Indeed , when submitted to compression , microorganisms are likelytoloosepartoftheirinternalliquid . Incasesofyeasts , Smithet al . [ 14 ] have shown that this volume reduction comes with the cell deformation which magnitude is determined by cell mechanical properties such as cell wall ﬂexibility . From this literature survey it appears that if the changes in shapeandsizeofbacteriaunderstresshavebeenwellconsideredto explaindeviationfromidealityinﬁltration , lessattentionhasbeeen paid so far to the consequences of this phenomenon on the leakage of bacteria through micro or ultraﬁltration membranes . The objec tives of the present paper are to show the ability of various bacteria to pass through a membrane characterized by a nominal pore size smaller than the cell size at rest and to explore the possible causes for this transfer considering operating conditions ( feed concen tration and transmembrane pressure ) and bacteria characteristics , such as size , shape , and surface charge or hydrophobicity , but also the cell wall structure and ﬂexibility . For this last purpose , we focused upon the fundamental distinction between Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria related to their cell wall structure . As an experimental evidence , the cell wall structure and ﬂexibility of a Gram positive bacteria was modiﬁed by using a biochemical treatment . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Experimental setup and procedure Filtration experiments were performed using the setup shown in Fig . 1 , which consists of a 50mL dead end ﬁltration stirred cell ( Model 8050 , Amicon ) connected to a pressurised tank contain ing the bacterial suspension . The pressure on the permeate side was atmospheric under all conditions . The transmembrane pres sure was set by a pressure reducing valve located on the feed side . The ﬁltration cell contained a microﬁltration membrane with an effective area of 1 . 34 × 10 − 3 m 2 . This setup has a small size which allows an easy disinfection and manipulations under laminar air ﬂow . Prior to the experiment , the membrane was disinfected by soak ing in a solution of sodium hypochlorite at 200ppm for 20min and then thoroughly rinsed with sterile distilled water . The ﬁltra tion cell was soaked in a more concentrated solution of sodium hypochlorite ( 1000ppm ) for 30min . All other pieces of equipment were sterilized ( 20min under 120 ◦ C ) and kept under laminar air ﬂow to prevent contamination . Each experiment was performed at room temperature in three steps . Sterile distilled water was ﬁrst ﬁltered through the mem brane at a transmembrane pressure of 1 . 5 × 10 5 Pa so as to pack the membrane . This step was stopped once the ﬂux had stabilized , after a ﬁltration period of approximately 1h . Then , the membrane permeability was determined . In the last step , the feed tank and the ﬁltration cell were emptied and ﬁlled with the bacterial sus pension to carry out the ﬁltration run . The stirring rate was kept constant over all the experiments at 300rpm . The transmembrane pressure was adjusted in the range : 0 . 2 × 10 5 to 1 . 0 × 10 5 Pa . This rangehasbeenchosentomatchthepressureusedindrinkingwater production plants using membrane processes . The permeation ﬂux J ( ms − 1 ) was measured by timed col lection using an electronic balance ( Ohaus ) with an accuracy of ± 0 . 1 × 10 − 5 ms − 1 . For each run , bacterial feed suspension and retentate were sampled at the beginning and at the end of the experiment for subsequent analysis . Permeate samples were also collected periodically during the experiment in order to monitor the evolution of bacterial concentration . After each experiment , the membrane was replaced by a new one in order to avoid cross contamination between runs . Each experiment was performed at least twice or three times depending on the scattering and the reliability of the results . Fig . 1 . Experimental setup . 2 . 2 . Membranes Polycarbonate track etched microﬁltration membranes sup plied by Millipore were used for this study . This type of membranes was chosen for their well deﬁned pore geometry and size in order to minimize the effects of a pore size distribution . Challenge tests were carried out with membranes of nominal pore size of 0 . 4 m m . In each case , as shown in Fig . 2 , the nominal pore size was smaller than the smallest dimension of the bacteria . 2 . 3 . Bacterial suspensions and concentration evaluation during ﬁltration The six bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table 1 , where the bacteria size is as given in the litterature . The choice of these bacteria is justiﬁed by the need of several strains of vari ous morphological and structural characteristics . In addition , these strains fulﬁll two important experimental criteria : they are easy to cultivate ( they need neither speciﬁc media nor speciﬁc atmosphere to be grown ) , their generation time is short which allows results after overnight incubation . Moreover , E . coli is a fecal indicator sys Fig . 2 . Electron microscope images of track etched membrane pore ( 0 . 4 m m ) and bacteria Escherichia coli ( 2 m m × 1 m m ) at the same scale . tematically checked in potable water and B . diminuta is currently used to test microﬁltration membrane efﬁciency . Stock cultures of each bacterial strain were maintained on tryp tone soy agar slants ( Biomérieux , Crapone , France ) at 4 ◦ C . For preparation of inocula , bacteria were grown aerobically on tryp tone soy agar plates at 37 ◦ C for two consecutive days . Colonies of thesecond24hcultureweresuspendedinNaClaqueoussolutionat 9g / L ( corresponding to a ionic strength of 150mmol / L ) to obtain a concentrationofabout10 8 cells / mLascontrolledbyopticaldensity at 640nm . The use of an isotonic solution for bacterial suspensions avoids osmotic shock and maintains bacteria size equilibrium . Sus pensions were then diluted down to 10 4 cells / mL and this ﬁnal suspension was used for microﬁltration breakthrough assays . This concentration was chosen due to the bacterial concentration in raw water and in order to allow a direct detection measurement . Tenfold dilution series of the retentate and feed samples were performedand1mLoftheretentate , thefeedsamplesanddilutions was put into tryptone soy agar medium maintained in surfusion . Colony forming units ( CFU ) were enumerated after overnight incu bation of the plates at 37 ◦ C , considering dilutions with counts under 300CFU . To control the permeate , the total volume was ﬁl tered through nitrocellulose ﬁlters ( Millipore ) . The ﬁlter was then placed on a tryptone soy agar plate and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 24h . The enumeration of CFU on the ﬁlter allows the determination of very small permeate concentrations . The membrane retention efﬁciency is evaluated using the log reduction value ( LRV ) according to the following relationship : LRV = log C r C p ( 1 ) where C r and C p are the bacterial retentate and permeate concen tration ( CFU / mL ) , respectively . Table 1 Morphological and structural characteristics of tested bacteria and results obtained during ﬁltration at 0 . 5bar of 10 4 CFU / mL bacterial suspensions on 0 . 4 m m track etched membranes . Bacterial strain Reference Gram Shape Size ( m m ) LRV Brevundimonas diminuta [ 34 ] CIP 103020 − Bacilli 0 . 8 × 0 . 5 5 . 5 Pseudomonas aeruginosa [ 35 ] CIP 103467 − Bacilli 1 . 6 × 0 . 8 3 . 2 Escherichia coli [ 36 ] CIP 54127 − Bacilli 2 × 1 3 . 2 Staphylococcus aureus [ 37 ] CIP 53154 + Cocci 0 . 8 > 7 Corynebacterium xerosis [ 38 ] CIP 5216 + Bacilli 2 × 1 > 7 Micrococcus luteus [ 38 ] CIP 5345 + Cocci 1 . 2 > 7 Notethatthebacterialviabilityandcultivabilitywerecontrolled over the ﬁltration test duration by evaluating the concentration of the feed suspension at the beginning and at the end of the run . Moreover , we checked the mass balances including the bacteria in the permeate , those brought by the feed and those collected on the membrane surface . To evaluate the latter , the membrane was slightly shaken with sterile glass beads of 4mm in diameter in a non ionic surface active agent ( Tween 80 at 10 % , Sigma – Aldrich ) . The bacterial concentration of the resulting suspension was deter mined by enumeration after 10 fold dilution series and inclusion in tryptone soy agar medium . 2 . 4 . Determination of bacteria hydrophobicity and zeta potential The bacteria hydrophobicity was evaluated by the Microor ganisms Adherence To Solvents ( MATS ) method proposed by Bellon Fontaine et al . [ 25 ] . Cell suspensions were prepared at 10 8 CFU / mL in Phosphate Buffered Saline ( PBS ) at 0 . 15mol / L . They were ﬁrst washed three times in the PBS solution . Then , 1 . 2mL of each cell suspension was placed into a glass test tube and 0 . 6mL of the tested solvent was added . Four different solvents supplied by Sigma – Aldrich were used : hexadecane , decane , chloroform , ethyl acetate . After the tubes were allowed to rest for 10min at 30 ◦ C , each one was vortexed for 90s and left at rest for 15min , during which time the two phases separated completely . The absorbance of the aqueous phase was then measured ( 640nm ) . The blank consisted of PBS without cells . The results are expressed as the adherence degree ( D ) whichistheproportionofthecellswhichwereexcluded from the aqueous phase , determined as follows : D = (cid:16) 1 − A A 0 (cid:17) × 100 ( 2 ) where A 0 and A are the initial and ﬁnal optical densities of the aqueous phase , respectively . The bacteria zeta potential was determined by microeletro phoresis ( Zetasizer3000 , Malvern ) . Bacterialsuspensionswerepre pared in NaCl ( 9g / L ) aqueous solution as indicated in Section 2 . 3 . Cell concentration used for those measurements was approxima tively 5 × 10 6 CFU / mL . The ionic strength and the pH of the support electrolyte were 150mmol / L and 5 . 5 , respectively . 2 . 5 . Bacterial cell wall modiﬁcation In an attempt to determine the role of the peptidoglycan layer from the cell wall structure in bacteria retention by porous mem branes , we have treated Staphylococcus aureus CIP 53154 with amoxicillin ( Sigma – Aldrich ) . Amoxicillin is an antibiotic belonging to b lactams which avoids cross linkages between the peptidogly can polymer chains ( the network responsible for the mechanical strength and stiffness of the cell wall ) . As a consequence , there is a less signiﬁcant structuring of the peptidoglycan , leading , at subinhibitory and sub lethal concentrations , to the improvement ofthebacterialcell wallelasticitywithoutalteringtheviabilityand cultivability of the microorganism [ 26 ] . In a ﬁrst instance , the Minimal Inhibitory and Bactericidal Con centrations of amoxicillin ( MIC , MBC ) were determined against the tested strain using a trypcase soy broth micromethod followed by a subculture on trypcase soy agar . Then the viability and the cul tivability of a bacterial suspension at 10 4 CFU / mL were checked by numeration on trypcase soy agar after 1h 30min to 3h of contact withamoxicillinataMIC / 2concentration ( 5ng / mL ) . Inthesecondi tionsofcontacttimeandantibioticdose , nocelllysisorcultivability loss was observed . Fig . 3 . Evolutionofthelogreductionvalue ( LRV ) duringﬁltrationat0 . 5barof E . coli on 0 . 4 m m membranes versus the suspension feed concentration ( Cf ) . Finally , for the ﬁltration assay , bacterial feed suspension at 10 4 CFU / mLwaskeptincontactwithamoxicillinat5ng / mL ( MIC / 2 ) during 1h 30min before the ﬁltration run which duration was 1h 30min . The numeration for both permeate and retentate samples were performed as described in Section 2 . 3 . As 1mL of sample was put into 19mL of tryptone soy agar medium maintained in surfu sion , this dilution stopped the action of amoxicillin , all the more that we were already working at subinhibitory and sub lethal con centrations . Viability controls of the treated cells were performed in these conditions at the beginning and at the end of each test and compared to the initial feed sample of non treated bacteria dispersions , kept as a reference . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Unexpected bacterial leakage The ﬁrst step of our study was to evidence unexpected bacterial leakage with one system “bacteria / membrane pore size” . For this purpose , we selected E . coli CIP 54127 because ( i ) this strain is one of the easiest to grow and ( ii ) it presents well known character istics , and we used a 0 . 4 m m pore diameter membrane . As shown in Fig . 2 , the membrane average pore size remains smaller than bacteria which are approximately 2 m m × 1 m m in size . The results of those preliminary experiments show that inde pendently of the operating conditions we have explored , the bacteria was detected in all the permeate samples . Thus , in spite of an unfavourable size ratio , E . coli is likely to pass through a 0 . 4 m m polycarbonate track etched membrane . We also notice that the magnitude of this unexpected transfer depends on the applied operating conditions . Therefore , next section focuses on the effect of various operating parameters on bacteria transfer . 3 . 2 . Operating conditions Since in a dead end ﬁltration regime , the microorganism concentration in the retentate is not constant all over the duration of the trial , we studied the effect of the concentration upon the bacteria rejection . A set of four independent experiments were per formedatconstanttransmembranepressure ( 0 . 5bar ) using0 . 4 m m polycarbonate track etched membranes with various E . coli feed concentrations : 6 . 6 × 10 2 , 5 . 5 × 10 4 , 1 . 4 × 10 6 and1 . 4 × 10 8 CFU / mL . The log reduction values displayed in Fig . 3 are those obtained at the very beginning of the trial in order to avoid the effect of the concentration factor in the ﬁltration cell . These results show that , beyond10 5 CFU / mL , thelogreductionvaluestronglyincreaseswith the bacterial feed concentration . A low concentration makes the bacteria transfer through the membrane easier . We may assume that aggregation phenomena are responsible for the observed improvement of the bacteria rejection at high concentration level , Fig . 4 . Evolution of the log reduction value ( LRV ) during ﬁltration of 10 4 CFU / mL E . coli suspension on 0 . 4 m m membranes versus the transmembrane pressure ( TMP ) . however this assumption remains to be conﬁrmed for instance by light scattering measurements . Moreover , another mecanism is likely to explain these experimental results . Indeed , when the feed concentration increases , the bacteria probabilty of collision is enhanced and collisions near to the entrance of the pore could lead to pore blockage due to particles bridging over the pore opening [ 27 , 28 ] . In these conditions the higher is the feed concen tration , the more the bacteria transfer through the membrane is limited . Through the examination of those results , a feed concentration of 10 4 CFU / mL is high enough to lead , when leakage are likely to occur , to bacterial permeate concentrations higher than the detec tion limit . On the other hand this concentration is low enough to assess the membrane removal efﬁciency in conditions near to the “worst case conditions” i . e . conditions leading to the maximum transfer . Indeed , the higher the feed concentration is , the more the membrane rejection will be overestimated due to the effect of the concentration upon the membrane efﬁciency . Inthedead endconﬁgurationusedforourexperiments , thebac terial concentration increases in the ﬁltration cell during the run . Thelogreductionvalueasafunctionofbacterialconcentration ( dis played in Fig . 3 ) exhibits a non linear evolution : below 10 5 CFU / mL , the log reduction value reaches a plateau value around 2 . 5 . By using an initial feed concentration near to 10 4 CFU / mL , and knowing that the ﬁnal concentration in the retentate is at most 10 5 CFU / mL , the effect of the change in retentate concentration during the exper iment ( corresponding to the area delimited by the dotted line in Fig . 3 ) should not be signiﬁcant . The experiments described below have thus been operated at a bacterial feed concentration of 10 4 CFU / mL . The increase in bacterial concentration in the retentate side during the ﬁltration is one of the reasons of the observed ﬂux decline . In spite of the very small amount of bacteria brought to the membrane surface , which is equivalent to less than one layer of microorganisms , fouling mechanisms seem to be non negligible . In these conditions , we decided to present the log reduction value results versus ﬁltered volume instead of time ﬁltration , as fouling is meant to be linked to the integral amount of bacteria brought to the membrane . To assess the effect of the transmembrane pressure , several experiments were performed on the same “bacteria / membrane pore size” system ( a feed suspension of E . coli at around 10 4 CFU / mL and 0 . 4 m m polycarbonate track etched membrane ) under various transmembrane pressures in the range 0 . 2 – 1 . 0bar ( Fig . 4 ) . In the rangebetween0 . 2and0 . 5bar , anincreaseinappliedpressureleads toadecreaseofthebaterialremovalwhereasbeyond0 . 5barthelog reduction value reaches a plateau value at 3 ( Fig . 4 ) . Consideringtheseresultsandinordertoexperimentthe“worst case conditions” , the rest of our trials was operated under a transmembrane pressure set to 0 . 5bar . To summarize , the transfer of bacteria through membrane pores ofsmallersizeismaximumforsomevaluesofmicroorganismscon centrationandtransmembranepressure . Inordertochecktowhich extend the behaviour of E . coli is speciﬁc , additional experiments involving different strains were performed on the same polycar bonate track eteched membranes . 3 . 3 . Effect of the bacteria characteristics Six different bacterial strains ( including E . coli ) were ﬁl tered under the same operating conditions ( 0 . 5bar and around 10 4 CFU / mL ) on polycarbonate track etched membrane of 0 . 4 m m pore size . Note that the ratio of the particles size to the nominal pore size was in each case unfavourable to the transfer and that a new membrane coupon was used for each experiment in order to avoid cross contamination . The results reported in Table 1 ( last column ) correspond to the experimental LRV measured after 30min of ﬁltration . Note that when no bacteria was detected in the permeate samples , the LRV is estimated to be higher than 7 . They indicate that three strains out of six are fully rejected whereas the three others leaked through the membrane to some extent . Since no bacterial lysis was observed by scanning electronic microscopy and mass balance performed by the method described in Section 2 . 3 is correct , we could not either explain these observa tions by assuming that some bacteria were disrupted ( e . g . by shear forces ) whereas others were not altered . We hence note that E . coli is not the only one to pass through membrane pores smaller than their own size but also that this unexpected transfer turns out to be selective . Indeed , one strain ( Corynebacterium xerosis ) having the same size and shape as E . coli does not leak . Considering those results and the morphological properties of bacteria , it appears clearly that the nominal cell size and shape are not the determining parameters for bacteria transfer . As a con sequence , the selectivity appears to be not directly governed by physical sieving mechanisms . Moreover , the hydrodynamic align ment near a pore entrance [ 29 ] does not either play a role in the leakage phenomenon , since the 2 m m × 1 m m E . coli leaks while the 2 m m × 1 m m C . xerosis does not . Various assumptions could be considered to explain this phe nomenon . The ﬁrst one is the presence of a small number of defects of the homoporous membrane structure such as pores doublets ( large pore resulting from two joined impacts ) . Nevertheless , this hypothesis is unsufﬁcient since the membranes exhibit different rejections depending on the bacterial strain . For instance , repro ducible results show that E . coli ( 2 m m × 1 m m ) passes through the membrane whereas C . xerosis , a bacterial strain which presents the same morphological properties ( shape and size ) is fully rejected , as S . aureus ( 0 . 8 m m ) , even in spite of its smaller size . Physico chemical properties of the microorganisms such as sur face charge and hydrophobicity are often considered to justify rejections unexplained by mechanisms based on size exclusion . However , in our cases , these properties are not either responsi ble for the observed selectivity as the effects of physico chemical propertieswhicharegenerallyacceptedincasesofvirusesandbac teriophages ﬁltration [ 9 ] , are more debatable in cases of bacteria ﬁltration . In addition , the bacterial suspensions being prepared in NaCl aqueous solution ( 9g / L ) , the high ionic strength ( 150mmol / L ) severely screens electrostatic interactions out . Inordertofurtherinvestigatetheeffectofbacteriasurfaceprop erties , wehavemeasuredtheirzetapotentialandthepercentagesof microbial adhesion to solvents . The values are displayed in Table 2 . We note an absence of correlation between such properties and the leaks through the 0 . 4 membrane . For instance , E . coli and C . Table 2 Zeta potential ( measured in NaCl 9g / L as support electrolyte where ionic strength and pH are 150mmol / L and 5 . 5 , respectively ) and MATS index of bacterial suspensions . Bacterial strain  ( mV ) Adherence degree to solvents ( % ) Chloroform Hexadecan Ethyl acetate Decan B . diminuta − 3 . 8 100 81 35 80 P . aeruginosa − 17 . 4 100 58 52 61 E . coli − 16 . 2 100 13 44 18 S . aureus − 21 . 5 99 75 29 98 C . xerosis − 16 . 5 100 100 96 11 M . luteus − 32 . 9 87 8 24 100 xerosis , the two former bacteria of same size and shape , present identical zeta potential whereas they behave differently when ﬁl teredwiththesamemembrane . Concerninghydrophobicityvalues , high percentages of adherence to hexadecan were observed for B . diminuta and S . aureus while E . coli and Micrococcus luteus show the lowest values . These variations do not correlate to the observed leakage . To conclude , the propensity of bacteria to pass through pores smaller than their own size is primarily not related to their surface physicochemical properties . In this context , the physiological behaviour of microorgan isms during ﬁltration was investigated and a transfer mechanism depending on the bacteria deformation and volume reduction was suggested . 3 . 4 . Bacteria transfer mechanisms and selectivity Since it is established that biological particles such as red blood cells or yeasts are deformable under mechanical stress , we wanted to check if similar modiﬁcations can occur during the ﬁltration of bacteria due to the applied transmembrane pressure . When approaching the entrance of a pore , bacteria are submitted to the shear and drag forces created by the permeation ﬂux and to the transmembrane pressure applied during the ﬁltration step . Such stress could lead to their volume reduction ( related to the osmotic equilibrium ) and surface deformation ( governed by the cell wall Young modulus value ) which would allow the cell to penetrate into the membrane pore . The bacteria may pass the pore with or with out disruption of the cell membrane . If the bacteria penetrating the membrane retains its integrity , this bacteria keeps its potential pathogenicity , and the permeate could then present an infectious risk towards the consumer . In these conditions , there is a constraint treshold beyond which the bacteria do not withstand higher sur face deformation or volume reduction , leading to the plateau value at 3 observed in Fig . 4 . A similar mechanism has already been proposed by Suchecka et al . [ 22 ] to explain their experimental results observed with a Gram negative bacteria ( B . diminuta ) upon a microﬁltration membrane . They theoretically analysed the penetration of a spherical cell into a cylindrical pore of smaller diameter . Their calculated results sug gest that the cell transfer to the other side of the membrane is possible by way of releasing intracellular matter into the environ nement and can be completed in a time period of the order of a few minutes . However , contrary to the model proposed by Smith et al . in case of yeasts [ 14 – 16 ] , these authors do not take the cell wall elasticity ( Young modulus ) into account although we believe that the deformation should be made more or less easier depending on this elasticity . Note that this mechanism is different from the bacteria adapta tion during growth suggested by several authors [ 30 ] . In our case , this assumption has however to be revoked considering that the ﬁltration duration is shorter than the generation time of tested microorganisms and that the suspension is exempt of nutrients . Considering all the experimental results , the most obvious cor relation is the one between the bacteria external structure and the ﬁltration behaviour . It is remarkable that the tested strains able to pass through the 0 . 4 m m membrane are the Gram negative ones whereas the rejected ones are all Gram positive . Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria are two types of bacteria which can be distinguished according to their cell wall structure . The bacterial cell wall is composed of a speciﬁc layer of a cross linked polymer , the peptidoglycan , the quantity of which is function of the type of bacteria . In Gram negative bacteria this layer thickness is around 2 to 6nm , whereas Gram positive bac teria present a thicker peptidoglycan layer is around 20 to 80nm ( cf . Fig . 5 ) [ 31 ] . Note that this thickness difference leads to vari ous cell blow out resistance : in the range of 0 . 3 – 0 . 5 and 25 – 35bar , respectively for Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria [ 6 ] . Knowing that this cross linked polymer is responsible for the cell wall mechanical strength and that its elastic properties have been demonstrated by atomic force microscopy experiments [ 32 ] , wecanassumethatthebacteriadeformationcapabilityisgoverned by the thickness of its peptidoglycan layer . Thus , the more this layer is thin , the more the cell is deformable , and likely to pass through smaller pores . Gram negative bacteria present a thin peptidoglycan layer which allows their deformation and their passage through smaller membraneporesthantheirownsizeatrest ( “deformableparticle” ) . On the other hand , the large peptidoglycan layer thickness of the Fig . 5 . Diagrammatic representation of the bacterial cell wall showing the peptidoglycan layer . Fig . 6 . Evolution of the log reduction value ( LRV ) during ﬁltration at 0 . 5bar of S . aureus treatedornotbyamoxicillinon0 . 4 m mmembranesversustheﬁlteredvolume ( Vf ) . Gram positive bacteria limits their ﬂexibility which would prevent their transfer through smaller pores ( “stiff particle” ) . Moreover , we suspect that the peptidoglycan cross linkage characteristics may have an impact on the bacteria deformabil ity . Depending on the nature and the number of the transversal bridges , peptidoglycan could be more or less elastic as noticed by Bolshakova et al . [ 23 ] . However , note that , if the role of the pepti doglycan layer thickness allows to explain the different behaviours observed in ﬁltration from a bacteria type to another one , it is difﬁ culttoassesstheroleoftheelasticityofthislayerbecauseofthelack of bacterial strains identical in each property excepted the degree of peptidoglycan cross linkage . To conﬁrm the leading part played by the peptidoglycan elastic ity in the deformation propensity of bacteria , further experiments were performed with S . aureus treated with amoxicillin . This treat ment was devoted to increase the bacterial cell wall elasticity without any shrinkage of the cell . According to Lorian [ 33 ] an increase in bacterial size would be expected for longer contact times and higher antibiotic concentration than the ones used in the present study . We have controlled by optical microscopic observa tions ( at a magniﬁcation of 1000 × ) that no signiﬁcant difference in terms of size and shape could be noticed between treated and non treated S . aureus ( results not shown here ) . The results in terms of log reduction value versus the ﬁltered volume are displayed in Fig . 6 . First of all , the increase of the log reduction value with the ﬁltered volume is resulting from the com bined effect of the concentration factor in the ﬁltration cell and of the membrane fouling which mecanisms are not developed in the present paper . Then , we note that non treated S . aureus , like Gram positive bacteria , was fully rejected . After contact with the antibiotic , one observes its transfer through membrane pores twice smaller . The results obtained during the ﬁltration of E . coli ( Gram negative ) upon the same membrane are also reported . Log reduction val ues obtained for the modiﬁed S . aureus are in the same range as those obtained for a Gram negative bacteria . Those results well illustrate the role of the stiffness of the peptigoglycan layer in the retention mechanism : the amoxicillin treatment induces a transi tion between a “stiff particle” behaviour speciﬁc to Gram positive bacteria to a “deformable particle” one speciﬁc to Gram negative strains . Those last results conﬁrm the leading part of the peptidoglycan layer in the retention of bacteria by microﬁltration membranes and therefore the proposed transfer mechanism based upon bacteria deformability . 4 . Conclusion This study pointed out that if size is an important parameter for understanding bacteria transfer through porous membranes , the bacterial cell wall mechanical properties may explain unexpected leaks through pores which can be as small as half of the smallest dimension of the bacteria at rest . This phenomenon is governed by the structural characteristics of the cell wall , namely the peptido glycan layer . The more this layer is thin and elastic , the more the bacteria is deformable , and likely to pass through pores of smaller size than bacteria size . As a consequence , bacteria of equal size can exhibit different behaviours in ﬁltration : Gram positive bacteria which present a thicker peptidoglycan layer are less deformable and so better rejected than Gram negative one . Wealsoobtainedexperimentalevidencethatthiswalldeforma bility is more determining in the transfer mechanisms than other often invoked properties such as surface zeta potential or hydrophobiciy / hydrophilicity balance . The effects of cells concentration and of pressure on the bac teria transfer when this one may exist , are as expected , but they necessarily complicate the interpretation of curves . It is possible ( and necessary in the case of membrane characterization ) to select values for these two parameters which would maximize the bacte ria transfer , in order to be in “worst case” conditions and therefore allowaconservativecharacterizationofthemembraneorthemod ule . References [ 1 ] V . Lazarova , P . Savoye , M . L . Janex , E . R . Blatchey , M . Pommepuy , Advanced wastewater disinfection technologies : state of the art and perspectives , Water Sci . Technol . 40 ( 4 – 5 ) ( 1999 ) 203 – 213 . [ 2 ] S . S . Madaeni , A . G . Fane , G . S . Grohmann , Virusremovalfromwaterandwastew ater using membranes , J . Membr . Sci . 102 ( 1995 ) 65 – 75 . [ 3 ] T . Kobayashi , M . Ono , M . Shibata , N . Fujii , Cut off performance of Escherichia coli by charged and noncharged polyacrylonitrile ultraﬁltration membranes , J . Membr . Sci . 140 ( 1998 ) 1 – 11 . [ 4 ] M . H . Shinde , S . S . Kulkarni , D . A . Musale , S . G . Joshi , Improvement of the water puriﬁcation capability of poly ( acrylonitrile ) ultraﬁltration membranes , J . Membr . Sci . 162 ( 1999 ) 9 – 22 . [ 5 ] C . Causserand , P . Aimar , C . Roques , Evaluation de la rétention bactérienne par des membranes , Récent Progrès en Génie des Procédés 89 ( 2003 ) 395 – 402 . [ 6 ] S . B . Sadr Ghayeni , S . S . Madaeni , A . G . Fane , R . P . Schneider , Aspects of microﬁl tration and reverse osmosis in municipal wastewater reuse , Desalination 106 ( 1999 ) 25 – 29 . [ 7 ] T . Suchecka , E . Biernacka , W . Piatkiewicz , Microorganisms retention on micro ﬁltration membranes , Filtr . Sep . 40 ( 2003 ) 50 – 55 . [ 8 ] T . Urase , K . Yamamoto , S . Ohgaki , Effectofporesizedistributionofultraﬁltration membranes on virus rejection in crossﬂow conditions , Water Sci . Technol . 30 ( 9 ) ( 1994 ) 199 – 208 . [ 9 ] G . Herath , K . Yamamoto , T . Urase , Removal of viruses by microﬁltration mem branes at different solution environments , Water Sci . Technol . 40 ( 1999 ) 331 – 338 . [ 10 ] W . P . Johnson , M . J . Martin , M . J . Gross , B . E . Logan , Facilitation of bacterial trans port through porous media by changes in solution and surface properties , Colloids Surf . 107 ( 1996 ) 263 – 271 . [ 11 ] M . M . Sharma , Y . I . Chang , T . F . Yen , Reversible and irreversible surface charge modiﬁcation of bacteria for facilitating transport through porous media , Col loids Surf . 16 ( 1985 ) 193 – 206 . [ 12 ] A . L . Zydney , W . M . Saltzman , C . K . Colton , Hydraulic resistance of red cell beds in an unstirred ﬁltration cell , Chem . Eng . Sci . 44 ( 1 ) ( 1989 ) 147 – 159 . [ 13 ] M . Meireles , C . Molle , M . J . Clifton , P . Aimar , The origin of high hydraulic resistance for ﬁlter cakes of deformable particles : cell bed deformation or surface layer effect ? Chem . Eng . Sci . 59 ( 2004 ) 5819 – 5829 . [ 14 ] A . E . Smith , K . E . Moxham , A . P . J . Middelberg , On uniquely determining cell wall material properties with compression experiment , Chem . Eng . Sci . 53 ( 23 ) ( 1998 ) 3913 – 3922 . [ 15 ] A . E . Smith , Z . Zhang , C . R . Thomas , Wall material properties of yeast cells . Part I : cell measurements and compression experiments , Chem . Eng . Sci . 55 ( 2000 ) 2031 – 2041 . [ 16 ] A . E . Smith , K . E . Moxham , A . P . J . Middelberg , Wall material properties of yeast cells . Part II : analysis , Chem . Eng . Sci . 55 ( 2000 ) 2043 – 2053 . [ 17 ] K . J . Hwang , Y . H . Yu , W . M . Lu , Cross ﬂowmicroﬁltrationofsubmicronmicro bial suspension , J . Membr . Sci . 194 ( 2001 ) 229 – 243 . [ 18 ] W . M . Lu , K . L . Tung , S . M . Hung , J . S . Shiau , K . J . Hwang , Compression of deformable gel particles , Powder Technol . 116 ( 2001 ) 1 – 12 . [ 19 ] R . S . Frank , M . Hochmuth , The inﬂuence of red cell mechanical properties on ﬂowthroughsinglecapillary sizedpores , J . Biomech . Eng . 110 ( 1988 ) 155 – 160 . [ 20 ] W . H . Reinhart , S . Usami , E . A . Schmalzer , M . M . Lee , S . Chien , Evaluation of red bloodcellﬁltrabilitytest : Inﬂuenceofporesize , hematocritlevel , andﬂowrate , J . Lab . Clin . Med . 104 ( 4 ) ( 1984 ) 501 – 516 . [ 21 ] T . W . Secomb , R . Hsu , Analysis of red blood cell motion through cylindrical micropores : effects of cell properties , Biophys . J . 71 ( 1996 ) 1095 – 1101 . [ 22 ] T . Suchecka , W . Piatkiewicz , T . R . Sosnowski , Is the cell retention by MF membrane absolutely safe—a hypothetical model for cell deformation in a membrane pore , J . Membr . Sci . 250 ( 2005 ) 135 – 140 . [ 23 ] A . V . Bolshakova , O . I . Kiselyova , I . V . Yaminsky , Microbial surfaces investi gated using atomic force microscopy , Biotechnol . Prog . 20 ( 2004 ) 1615 – 1622 . [ 24 ] Y . Mille , L . Beney , P . Gervais , Viabilty of Escherichia coli after combined osmotic and thermal treatment : a plasma membrane implication , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1567 ( 2002 ) 41 – 48 . [ 25 ] M . N . Bellon Fontaine , J . Rault , C . J . Van Oss , Microbial adhesion to solvents : a novel method to determine the electron donor / electron acceptor or Lewis acid base properties of microbial cells , Colloids Surf . 7 ( 1996 ) 47 – 53 . [ 26 ] J . Pelmont , Bactéries et environnement : adaptations physiologiques , Presses Universitaires de Grenoble , Grenoble , 1993 . [ 27 ] C . A . Basar , C . Aydiner , S . Kara , B . Keskinler , Removal of CrO 4 anions from waters using surfactant enhanced hybrid PAC / MF process , Sep . Purif . Technol . 48 ( 2006 ) 270 – 280 . [ 28 ] N . Roussel , T . L . H . Nguyen , P . Coussot , General probabilistic approach to the ﬁltration process , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 ( 11 ) ( 2007 ) 114502 . [ 29 ] T . Tanaka , K . I . Abe , H . Asakawa , H . Yoshida , K . Nakanishi , Filtrationcharacteris ticsandstrictureofcakeincrossﬂowﬁltrationofbacterialsuspension , J . Ferm . Bioeng . 78 ( 6 ) ( 1994 ) 455 – 461 . [ 30 ] H . Hasegawa , K . Naganuma , Y . Nakagawa , T . Matsuyama , Membrane ﬁlter ( pore size , 0 . 22 – 0 . 45 m m ; thickness , 150 m m ) passing through activity of Pseu domonas aeruginosa and other bacterial species with indigenous inﬁltration ability , FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 223 ( 2003 ) 41 – 46 . [ 31 ] H . Leclerc , J . L . Gaillard , M . Simonet , Microbiologie générale : la bactérie et le monde bactérien , Doin éditeurs , Paris , 1994 . [ 32 ] X . Yao , M . Jericho , D . Pink , T . Beveridge , Thickness and elasticity of gram negativemureinsacculimeasuredbyatomicforcemicroscopy , J . Bacteriol . 181 ( 22 ) ( 1999 ) 6865 – 6875 . [ 33 ] V . Lorian , Some effects of subinhibitory concentrations of antibiotics on bacte ria , Bull . N . Y . Acad . Med . 51 ( 9 ) ( 1975 ) 1046 – 1055 . [ 34 ] T . Benezech , Amethodforassessingthebacterialretentionabilityofhydropho bic membrane ﬁlters , Trends Food Sci . Technol . 12 ( 2001 ) 36 – 38 . [ 35 ] N . Okino , M . Tani , S . Imayama , M . Ito , Puriﬁcation and characterization of a novelceramidasesfrom Pseudomonasaeruginosa , J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 23 ) ( 1998 ) 14368 – 14373 . [ 36 ] S . A . Biondi , J . A . Quinn , H . Goldﬁne , Random motility of swimming bacteria in restricted geometries , AIChE J . 44 ( 8 ) ( 1998 ) 1923 – 1929 . [ 37 ] Centre d’expertise en analyse environnementale du Québec , Recherche et dénombrement de Staphylococcus aureus : Méthode par ﬁltration sur mem brane , MA . 700 – STA 1 . 0 , Rév 3 , Ministère du Développement Durable , de l’Environnement et des Parcs du Québec , 2006 . [ 38 ] P . H . A . Sneath , N . S . Mair , M . E . Sharpe , Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriol ogy , vol . 2 , Williams & Wilkins , Baltimore , 1986 .