The epithelium is perhaps the first tissue that emerged during phylogenesis . Modern cadherin - based epithelia appeared with the dawn of the Metazoa , 600 million years ago ; however , epithelial structures are much older , as demonstrated by the recent finding of an ancient non - cadherin - based epithelium in the pre - metazoan organism Dictyostelium discoideum 1 . The evolutionary appearance of modern epithelia reflects the require - ment of Metazoa for a tissue structure that is capable of segregating their internal medium from the outside environ ment 2 . Epithelial cells are particularly well suited for this fundamental function , owing to several attributes of the epithelial phenotype ( FIG . 1a ) : they form sheets of uniformly polarized cells that are kept together through specialized adherens junctions on the basis of calcium - dependent cell adhesion molecules ( cadherins ) ; they con - tain sealing junctions between their apical and basolateral domains ( tight junctions in vertebrates and septate junc - tions in invertebrates ) that segregate the internal medium from the outside environment ; they have segregated api - cal and basolateral plasma membrane domains with asymmetric compositions of nutrient and fluid trans - porters required to carry out their vectorial secretory and absorptive functions ; they have a polarized traffickin g machinery that is composed of secretory organelles ( the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and Golgi complex ) and endosomal compartments that are required for the gener - ation and maintenance of the asymmetric distribution of plasma membrane proteins . As the complexity of meta - zoan organisms evolved , epithelial cells became essential building blocks to generate the various organs that are required for survival and to implement their body plan 3 . Mammals have over 150 different types of epithelial cells that carry out key roles in the generation and / or func - tion of their digestive , respiratory , reproductive , neural , sensory , vascular and hormonal systems 4 . These cells are constantly replaced and arise from tissue - specific stem cells . The epithelium is the first tissue that emerges during ontogenesis , and epithelial cells have fundamental roles in embryo morphogenesis and organ development 5 . There are additional features of the epithelial phenotype that make epithelial cells especially suited for these roles . First , the polarized actin and microtubule cytoskeleton enables epithelial cells to constrict their apical surfaces ( FIG . 1b ) and thus participate in key developmental processes such as gastrulation and tubulogenesis 6 . It further enables them to expand or shrink their lateral membranes , which facili - tates the formation of columnar or squamous epithelia ( FIG . 1c ) . Second , epithelial cells can orient the mitotic spindle . This feature enables epithelial cells to divide parallel to the sheet to increase their number ( FIG . 1d ) or perpendicular to the sheet to generate different daughte r cells in the case of stem cells ( FIG . 1e ) , or to generate strati - fied epithelia from simple epithelia 7 ( FIG . 1f ) . Third , the primary cilium 8 ( FIG . 1a ) that is found on the cell surface of vertebrate epithelial cells harbours signalling pathways that have key roles in the organization of planar polarity , which is essential for many developmental processes and in epithelial cell differentiation in response to signals from mesenchymal or endothelial cells . Fourth , epithelial cells can quickly lose or acquire the epithelial phenotype , 1 Margaret Dyson Vision Research Institute , Weill Cornell Medical College , 1300 York Avenue , LC‑301 New York City , New York 10065 , USA . 2 Department of Cell & Developmental Biology , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , 465 21 st Avenue South , U 3209 MRB III , Nashville Tennessee 37232 , USA . e‑mails : boulan @ med . cornell . edu ; ian . g . macara @ vanderbilt . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3775 Phylogenesis Refers to the evolutionary history of species . Embryo development reflects the course of evolution , partially supporting Hackel’s proposal that ontogenesis recapitulates phylogenesis ; however , the more generalized form of this concept has been mostly discredited . Polarized trafficking machinery The special configuration that has been adopted by the secretory pathway and endosomes in polarized epithelia cells . Organization and execution of the epithelial polarity programme Enrique Rodriguez‑Boulan 1 and Ian G . Macara 2 Abstract | Epithelial cells require apical – basal plasma membrane polarity to carry out crucial vectorial transport functions and cytoplasmic polarity to generate different cell progenies for tissue morphogenesis . The establishment and maintenance of a polarized epithelial cell with apical , basolateral and ciliary surface domains is guided by an epithelial polarity programme ( EPP ) that is controlled by a network of protein and lipid regulators . The EPP is organized in response to extracellular cues and is executed through the establishment of an apical – basal axis , intercellular junctions , epithelial - specific cytoskeletal rearrangements and a polarized trafficking machinery . Recent studies have provided insight into the interactions of the EPP with the polarized trafficking machinery and how these regulate epithelial polarization and depolarization . REVIEWS NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 225 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Primary cilium Apical membrane Microvilli Apical sorting endosome Apical recyclingendosome Common recyclingendosome Trans - Golgi network Golgi complex Basal sorting endosome Basolateral membrane Extracellular matrix P o l a r i z e d t r a ﬃ c k i n g m a c h i n e r y Nucleus a b d e f c Multi - vesicular body Basal body Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Stratum corneum Stratum granulosum Stratum spinosum Stratum basale Microtubule Adherensjunction Septatejunction Drosophilamelanogaster Integrins Caenorhabditis elegans Combinedjunction Tight junction Adherensjunction Ontogenesis The origin and development of an organism from the fertilized egg to mature form . Primary cilium A protrusion at the free surface of most interphase vertebrate cells that disassembles during mitosis . It is based on nine pairs of microtubules that emerge from a basal body . It houses a number of signalling pathways that are important for development , such as Hedgehog . Planar polarity The polarization of epithelial cells along the plane of the epithelium ( orthogonal to the apical – basal axis ) , which directs the orientation of cell shape , division , movement and differentiation . Non - epithelial cells can also exhibit planar polarity . which is known as epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) or m esenchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) , respec - tively 9 . A process similar to EMT has been proposed to account for the dissemination of cancers , most of which , in humans , arise from epithelia 10 , 11 . Therefore , it is of fundamental importance to under - stand the molecular programmes that drive epithelial polarization and depolarization . Over the past three dec - ades , genetic and biochemical studies in Caenorhabditis elegans , Drosophila melanogaster and monolayer or three - dimensional cultures of mammalian epithelial cells have generated an extensive body of knowledge on a network of polarity proteins and lipids that provide identity to the apical and basolateral domains of epithelial cells 12 – 15 ( FIG . 2 ) . Moreover , cell biological and biochemical stud - ies in mammalian epithelial cells , such as the prototype epithelial cell line MDCK ( Madin Darby canine kidney ) , provided detailed information on the polarized traffick - ing machinery used by epithelial cells to distribute their plasma membrane proteins into apica l , baso lateral and ciliary domains 16 – 18 ( FIG . 1a ) . Here , we refer to the overall process through which the network of epithelial polarity proteins and lipids mediate the organization of a polar - ized epithelial cell as the epithelial polarity programme ( EPP ) . An important caveat is that , although there is a striking preservation of the key EPP players and mecha - nisms , there is also considerable variation in their use by different epithelial cells in different organisms , tissues and developmental contexts . In this Review , we discuss the interactions of the EPP and the polarized traffick - ing machinery and how , in turn , vesicular traffickin g contribute s to the organizatio n of the EPP . Key players mediating the EPP Multiple distinct but interacting groups of proteins con - stitute the EPP . The partitioning defective ( PAR ) proteins are ubiquitously expressed and function in many differ - ent contexts to regulate polarity , cell proliferation and differentiation , whereas the Crumbs ( CRB ) and Scribble ( SCRIB ) groups of proteins are more restricted in their distribution . The SCRIB group is restricted to epithelial cells and localizes to lateral membranes . The CRB group localizes apically or at apical junctions . These component s of the EPP are discussed in detail below . Figure 1 | Features of the polarized epithelial phenotype . A typical vertebrate epithelial cell is shown with components of the polarized vesicle sorting machinery and the apical junctional complex is depicted ( part a ) . Note that invertebrate epithelial cells ( for example , in Drosophila melanogaster ) lack primary cilia and the junctional complex is organized differently with adherens junctions located more apically than the sealing junction ( named septate junction instead of tight junction ) . In Caenorhabditis elegans , adherens junctions and sealing junctions are combined into a single structure . Epithelial cells organize into different structures through their cytoskeleton and through oriented cell division ( parts a – d ) : actin - mediated constriction of the apical domain causes furrowing ( part b ) ; reducing the size of the lateral membrane produces squamous epithelia ( part c ) ; cell division in the plane of the epithelium expands the sheet ( part d ) ; whereas divisions perpendicular to the plane may generate different cell lineages in the case of stem cells ( part e ) or may give rise to stratified epithelia ( part f ) . Dashed lines indicate cell division . The blue cell represents asymmetric partition of cytoplasmic components after stem cell division , which produces different progenitor cells . R E V I E W S 226 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Basolateral domain Apical domain CRB Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ERLI PATJ Y u r t Z 03 S m u r f N e c t i n 1 , 3 J A M A T I A M 1 P I 3 K S y n t a x i n 4 M y o s i n 2 T G F β R 1 C l a u d i n 1 M o e s i n Signalpeptide Lamininmotifs L27 L27 EGFmotifs PALS1 aPKC PAR6 SH3 HOOK GUK FERM binding domain PB1 Semi - CRIB domain PB1 Kinase Kinase Oligomerizationdomain CDC42 RAC1 aPKC - bindingdomain PAR3 PAR5 LGL DLG SCRIB PAR5 / 14 - 3 - 3 UBA PAR1 β - propeller β - propeller LASP LASP Hinge A P C SH3 HOOK GUK L27 Plasmamembrane a b CRB aPKC LGL PP1 CDC42 PTEN PAR3 Tuba PAR1 PI3K LGL DLG SCRIB PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 Annexin 2 Syntaxin 4 Apical junctional complex Apical junctionalcomplex Apical junctionalcomplex PALS1 PAR6 PAR5 PAR5 JAMs Nectins E - cadherin RAC1 TIAM1 P PAR3 P LGLP PAR3 PAR1 PAR5 PAR1 Epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . A developmental programme during which epithelial cells adopt a mesenchymal phenotype that is marked by the loss of intercellular adhesion and by increased cell migration . During EMT , markers such as epithelial cadherin ( E - cadherin ) , Crumbs and cytokeratins are downregulated , whereas mesenchymal markers such as vimentin are upregulated . MDCK ( Madin Darby canine kidney ) . A polarized epithelial cell line that is widely used for the study of polarity , membrane trafficking and cell adhesion . PAR proteins . An elegant screen for maternal embry - onic lethal mutants in C . elegans identified genes that are required for the correct partitioning of cytoplasmic components between the anterior and posterior cells of the early embryo 19 . All but one of these genes have since been found in other animals but not in plants or fungi . For example , screens in D . melanogaster embryos for defective epidermal development revealed fly homologues of par genes 13 . PAR proteins involved in epithelia l morphogenesis are the protein kinases PAR1 and PAR4 ( also known as LKB1 or STK11 in mammals ) , a p hospho - protein interactor PAR5 ( an isoform of 14 - 3 - 3 ) and two scaffold and adapter proteins that con - tain PDZ domains , PAR3 and PAR6 . In addition , atypi - cal protein kinase C ( aPKC ) and the CDC42 GTPase are also considered to be part of the group ( FIG . 2 ) . Although only single copies of the par genes exist in nematodes and flies , this gene family has expanded in vertebrates , although the reasons for this remain unknown ( for example , there are three genes that encode PAR6 , Figure 2 | The epithelial polarity programme players . a | Feedback loops between epithelial polarity programme ( EPP ) proteins . The differential localization of polarity proteins at the cell cortex is regulated through binding interactions ( dashed lines ) and phosphorylation ( solid arrows ) ; dashed arrows indicate the change to or from a phosphorylated state . The apical polarity protein Crumbs ( CRB ) recruits protein associated with Lin - 7 1 ( PALS1 ) through its carboxy - terminal PDZ - binding domain ( ERLI motif ) , which recruits partitioning defective 6 ( PAR6 ) to mediate , through aPKC and upon Tuba - induced CDC42 activation of PAR6 , the phosphorylation of PAR3 , the kinase PAR1 and lethal giant larvae homologue ( LGL ) . This results in the exclusion of these proteins ( together with other members of the Scribble ( SCRIB ) complex ( discs - large homologue ( DLG ) and SCRIB ) from the apical domain . Members of the SCRIB complex interact genetically with each other , but there is no evidence of physical interaction . Conversely , PAR1 - mediated phosphorylation events prevent basal invasion by the apical polarity determinants , such as PAR3 . Phosphorylated proteins , including PAR1 , LGL and PAR3 , bind PAR5 during relocation to their resident domain . Polarity lipids also help to generate membrane asymmetries . Specifically PTEN , recruited to the junctional area through the interaction with PAR3 , generates phosphatidylinosi - tol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , which helps to recruit CDC42 through annexin 2 . CDC42 participates in the activation of atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) through PAR6 . Basolateral PI3K , recruited to the junctional area by epithelial cadherin ( E - cadherin ) , recruits DLG and generates PtdIns - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) , which additionally contributes to basal membrane identity through the recruitment of SCRIB . LGL contributes to basal identity through interaction with syntaxin 4 , which promotes basolateral secretion . b | Modular organization of the EPP players . EPP proteins consist of several modular domains , which enable key interactions to occur among EPP players . They also enable interactions to occur between EPP players and other proteins that are necessary for polarity . APC , adenomatous polyposis coli ; CRIB , CDC42 - and RAC - interacting and - binding ; FERM , four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ; GUK , guanylate - kinase ; JAM , junctional adhesion molecule ; LASP , LIM and SH3 domain protein ; PATJ , PALS1 - associated tight - junction homologue ; PB1 , polymerase basic 1 ; PP1 , protein phosphatase 1 ; SH3 , SRC homology 3 ; TIAM1 , TGF β R1 , transforming growth factor - β receptor 1 ; T lymphoma invasion and metastasis - inducing 1 ; TUBA , tubulin - α ; UBA , u biquitin - associated ; ZO3 , zonula occludens 3 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 227 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved two genes that encode PAR3 and two genes that encode aPKC ) . Presumably the isoforms have different roles , but so far only one study has provided evidence for this hypothesis . It showed that the replacement of the zebrafish par6 gene with a different isoform did not rescu e the wild - type phenotype 20 . CRB , SCRIB and Coracle groups . Although PAR protein s function in many different contexts , for - ward genetic screens in D . melanogaster uncovered additional polarity components that are more specific for epithelial cells . These proteins are also conserved throughout Metazoa and interact both genetically and physically with the PAR proteins . One group of epi - thelial polarity proteins , known as the CRB complex , consists of CRB , stardust ( Sdt ; also known as PALS1 in vertebrates ) and PALS1 - associated tight - junction homolo gue ( PATJ ) 15 , 21 . Another group of proteins , known as the SCRIB group , contains discs - large hom - ologue ( DLG ) , lethal giant larvae ( LGL ) and SCRIB 22 . In addition , at least in D . melanogaster , other proteins that participate in the EPP have been revealed , includ - ing four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ( FERM ) domain proteins ( Moesin and Yurt ) , Coracle , Neurexin IV and Na + , K + - ATPase 23 ; together these proteins con - stitute the Coracle group of EPP proteins . The SCRIB and Coracle groups have similar roles in establishing basolateral identity but operate at different times dur - ing D . melanogaster development ( gastrulation and organogenesis , respectively ) 23 . RHO GTPases . The RHO family of GTPases com - prises over 20 members , including CDC42 , RAC1 and RHOA 24 . They are molecular switches that cycle between active ( GTP - bound ) and inactive ( GDP - bound ) conform ations . This switch , as well as the localization of GTPases within the cell , is controlled by guanine nucleo - tide exchange factors ( GEFs ) and GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) . The best studied function of GTPases is their role as organizers of the actin cytoskeleton : RHOA controls the generation of contractile forces through the regulation of actin – myosin filament assembly , whereas RAC1 and CDC42 organize actin modules at the cell periphery to generate lamellipodia and filopodia , respec - tively 25 . RHO GTPases have key functions in the organi - zation of the EPP , and some of them are independent of their actin - organizing roles 26 . Furthermore , they crosstalk to regulate the activity of each other 27 . CDC42 is an evolutionarily conserved master regulator of cell pol arity . It was originally shown to be a key organizer of polarized budding and secretion in Saccharomyces cerevisia e and has many roles in the organization and execution of the EPP 28 . RHOA generates contractil e forces that antagonize the adhesive forces that are generate d by RAC1 ( REF . 26 ) . Polarity lipids . Phosphoinositides constitute only 1 % of the total cell lipids , but they have many fundamental biological roles as precursors of lipid messengers and as membrane docking sites for effectors of signalling cas - cades 29 . There are seven phosphoinositide isoforms that differ in the location and number of phosphate groups in the inositol ring . They are spatiotemporally regu - lated by organelle - specific phosphoinositide kinases and phosphatases . Thus , individual phosphoinositides can act as unique lipid signatures for cellular organelle identity ; through their ability to recruit proteins that possess one or more of the 11 known phosphoinositide - binding modules they fine - tune the composition of the membrane – cytosol interphase . Phosphoinositides and other lipids are implicated in the generation of epithelial polarity 30 – 32 . An important advance was the uncovering of key roles for phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphat e ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) in basolateral plasma membrane iden - tity 33 and PtdIns - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) in api - cal plasma membrane identity 34 . PTEN , a phosphatase that generates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 from PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , is localized apically in fly embryonic epithelia 35 ; how - ever , it is not yet clear whether PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 have roles in establishing and maintain - ing polarity in D . melanogaster epithelia similar to those described in mammalian epithelia . A recent genome - wide screen in C . elegans revealed that the biosynthetic pathways of glycosphingo lipids are important for the generation of apical membranes in intestinal cells 36 . This is in agreement with the long - postulated role of glyco - sphingolipids and cholesterol in the formation of lipid rafts for apical transport 37 . Finally , phosphatidyl - serine has been shown to play a key part in regulating Cdc42 - mediated polarization in yeast 38 , but polarity roles for phosphatidylserin e in the EPP have not yet been reported . Organizing the EPP Feedback loops . A striking feature of the EPP proteins is their differential localization at the epithelial cell cortex . Among the core polarity proteins CRB , Na + , K + - ATPase and Neurexin are transmembrane proteins , whereas all other proteins are peripheral cytoplasmic proteins that localize at the cell cortex through interactions with membrane proteins or other polarity proteins . An excep - tion is PAR5 ( which encodes a 14 – 3 – 3 protei n ) , which is distributed throughout the cytoplasm . How are these domains formed and maintained ? One important and recurring mechanism is the mutual exclusion of proteins from one domain by those in the other . Two protein kinases have key roles in this pro - cess : aPKC and PAR1 . aPKC is recruited to the apical cortex , where it excludes basolateral proteins , whereas PAR1 is recruited to the basolateral cortex and excludes apical proteins . Strikingly , intercellular adhesion pro - teins such as epithelial cadherin ( E - cadherin ) , proteins involved in endocytosis ( such as Numb ) and proteins that control spindle orientation ( such as partner of inscuteable ( Pins ; also known as raps ) and its mam - malian homologue LGN ( also known as GPSM2 in humans ) ) are mislocalized to the apical surface when aPKC positioning is lost . This disrupts epithelial mor - phogenesis 39 , 40 . However , these mechanisms are context dependent , as , for example , the localization of Pins is independent of aPKC in neuroepithelial cells 41 and in the D . melanogaste r follicular epithelium 42 . R E V I E W S 228 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Apical – basal polarity The polarity axis along the apical ( uppermost ) and basal plasma membrane domains . In epithelial cells the two plasma membrane domains have different protein and lipid composition , which are required to carry out directional transport of nutrients and waste between the two sides of the epithelium . Exclusion of ‘trespassing’ proteins from the apical domain is driven by aPKC - dependent phosphoryla - tion . Phosphorylated residues in basolateral proteins attract PAR5 , which releases the proteins from the cell cortex 13 , 43 . Conversely , PAR1 located on the lateral membrane phosphorylates and excludes apical pro - teins from this domain . One important PAR1 target is PAR3 . PAR5 binds to phosphorylated PAR3 that is present on the lateral membrane , which triggers the dissociation of the PAR3 – PAR5 complex into the cyto - plasm , where the PAR3 is dephosphorylated 43 . In this manner , EPP proteins maintain distinct apical and basolateral domains at the cell cortex 13 , 43 . What determines aPKC and PAR1 localization ? The mechanism of PAR1 attachment to the cell corte x remains unclear , but it is excluded from the apical domain through direct phosphorylation by aPKC 44 – 46 . aPKC is attached to the apical cortex through a CRB – PAR6 – PALS1 ( protein associated with Lin - 7 1 ) com - plex ( FIG . 2a ) . PAR6 helps to recruit substrates to aPKC and to regulate the kinase activity of this protein 47 , 48 . The association of CDC42 · GTP with Par6 helps to recruit the complex to the apical domain and promotes aPKC activity . The CDC42 - specific GEFs Tuba ( also known as DNMBP ) 49 or diffuse B cell lymphoma 3 ( DBL3 ) ( REF . 50 ) generate CDC42 · GTP at the apical cortex . Studies investigating the formation of apical lumens in MDCK cysts have shown that an early event in this process is the apical concentration of PTEN , which leads to the exclusion of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , the apica l enrichment of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and the consequent recruitment of annexin and CDC42 ( REF . 34 ) . PAR3 resides at tight junctions in vertebrate epi - thelial cells and is not part of the apical complex ; howeve r , it is required for apical delivery of aPKC . PAR3 binds aPKC in two distinct modes : first , through the kinase domain of aPKC and second through an indirect association through PAR6 ( FIG . 2b ) . A mecha - nism has been proposed whereby phosphorylation of PAR3 by aPKC releases the kinase , which can then associate with the CRB – PALS1 complex through Par6 ( REF . 51 ) . A different model suggests that — at least in D . melanogaste r — the phosphorylation of Par3 trig - gers the dis sociation of Std ( PALS1 in mammals ) , which can then bind to Crb and recruit Par6 ( REF . 52 ) . However , these proposed models do not explain why PAR3 is needed for the apical localization of aPKC . Why could aPKC and PALS1 not simply diffuse to the apical surface and interact with the CRB complex , and why would aPKC not continually phosphorylate PAR3 to be released before it arrives at the apical cortex ? It is likely that PAR3 functions as a chaperone to prevent the inappropriate phosphorylation of substrates in the cytoplasm . Protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) , which is known to associate with PAR3 ( REF . 53 ) , might rapidly reverse any premature phosphorylation by aPKC to prevent cytoplasmic release . Loss of PAR3 , or expres - sion of a mutant that cannot bind aPKC , results in the mis localization of aPKC and in the inappropriate activation of signalling pathways that promote tumour invasion and metastasis 54 . Feedforward loops . CRB is a key component of the EPP . Overexpression of CRB increases the size of the apical domain , and the apical domain is frequently lost or reduced in epithelial cells that lack CRB 55 . Although the exact mechanism of how CRB functions to promote apical identity remains unclear , it has been shown that the recruitment of other EPP pro - teins such as PALS1 , PAR6 and aPKC plays a part 56 ( FIG . 2a ) . However , another potential pathway has been proposed , in which CRB inhibits a RAC1 – PI3K feed - forward loop 57 . In D . melano gaster embryos , PI3K sig - nalling is required for Rac activation , which in turn stimulates PI3K signalling . CRB at the apical surface might contribute to the attenuation of this feedback loop by inhibiting RAC activation , thereby reducing PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 production . However , the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown . Another mechanism for the establishment of apical identity involves the control of phosphoinositide produc - tion . In many epithelial cells , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is con - stitutively produced at basolateral membranes but is absent from the apical surface 34 . One reason for this asymmetric distribution is that the phosphoinositide kinase PI3K associates with the E - cadherin – β - catenin complex at adherens junctions 58 . E - cadherin is in turn recruited by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , which results in a feedfor - ward loop that amplifies and stabilizes PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 formation by PI3K . Execution of the EPP The epithelial phenotype is established very early during embryogenesis . Mammalian embryogenesis starts by zygotic cell divisions that generate a blastula epithelium through cavitation , compaction and fluid transport after the 8 – 16 - cell stage 59 ( FIG . 3A ) . During embryogenesis , cells at the primitive streak in the ecto - derm lose their epithelial phenotype and differentiate into mesenchymal cells ( EMT ) 240 . These cells are inter - nalized and form the mesoderm . They regain epithe - lial character ( MET ) at their destination , for example during kidney formation 9 , 60 ( FIG . 3B ) . Insect zygotes ( for example , of D . melanogaster ) undergo multiple nuclear divisions that generate ~ 6 , 000 nuclei , which are then compartmentalized into epithelial cells by expansion and invaginations of the plasma membrane 61 ( FIG . 3C ) . Orientation of the apical – basal axis . The establish - ment and orientation of the apical – basal polarity axis is a key event during the acquisition of the epithelial phenotype , for example during developmental MET ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Important regulators of MET are external cues that are provided by neighbouring cells , which generate cell – cell contacts and intercellular junctions . In spite of its developmental importance , our under - standing of the steps involved in the generation of the epithelial axis is based almost exclusively on studies carried out in cultured epithelial cells — for exam - ple , in three - dimensional culture of MDCK cells . In suspension culture , MDCK cells form cysts with the apica l surface facing outwards ; exposure of these cysts to collagen gels results in reorientation of polarity with R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 229 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Basement membrane The condensation of extracellular matrix components ( collagens , laminins , distroglycans , elastins and others ) that are secreted partly by epithelial cells and underlie connective tissue and vascular cells , to which epithelial cells attach through integrin receptors . Integrin Transmembrane proteins composed of two ( α - and β - ) subunits that link the actin cytoskeleton with extracellular components such as the basement membrane . Front – rear polarity A morphological characteristic of migratory cells wherein the front ( leading edge ) and the rear ( uropod ) show morphological and functional asymmetry . the lumen facing inwards 62 , 63 . Polarity reorientation depends on a pathway in which collagen - mediated activation of β1 integrins induces RAC1 , which pro - motes the assembly of a basement membrane through laminin secretion 64 , 65 . A β1 i ntegrin - specific antibody or dominant - negative RAC1 expression blocks polar - ity reorientation , which requires the activation of RHOA and its downstream effectors RHO - associated kinase 1 ( ROCK1 and myosin 2 ) 66 . External cues act together with EPP polarity proteins , lipids and RHO GTPases ( CDC42 , RAC1 and RHOA ) to generate junc - tions and to organize the molecular trafficking that is necessary to form apical and basal domains ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Single MDCK cells that are suspended in Matrigel ori - ent their lumen centrally as they divide ; studies using this model have shown that lumen formation involves the transcytosis of apical proteins at the end of mitosis from the plasma membrane to the midbody , where the lumen will form 67 , 17 ( FIG . 4a ) . A similar type of trans - cytotic process occurs in vivo in the mouse mammary gland 68 . Microtubules that are tethered to β1 integrin at the basal cortex deliver apical proteins from the basal membrane to the apical membrane ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Deletion of β1 integrin results in a disruption of microtubule polarization , which in turn disrupts cell polarity and lumen formation . Integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) mediates the integrin - dependent attachment of microtubule plus ends to the basal cortex . Whether a similar mechanism occurs in other epithelial cell types remains to be established . Conversely , the conversion of the epithelial a pical – basal polarity axis into a migration axis with front – rear polarity is a key event during EMT ( FIG . 3Bb ) . EMT is promoted by transcriptional events that often involve transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) receptors and culminate in the loss of E - cadherin 9 , 69 . As a result , epi - thelial cells transition into mesenchymal cells , which move along cytokine gradients ; their polarized motil - ity is regulated by many polarity proteins and lipids . Key events in EMT are the asymmetric activation of the RHO GTPases CDC42 and RAC1 at the front end and RHOA at the back end 26 , 70 , 71 . CDC42 acts through a Figure 3 | Execution of the epithelial polarity programme . The epithelium is the first tissue to appear during development . A | In mammalian embryos , an epithelium arises when morula cells compact to form a lumen and epithelial cadherin ( E - cadherin ) is expressed to form a blastocyst . Ba | In the bilaminar embryo , epiblast epithelial cells at the primitive streak differentiate into mesenchymal cells ( epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) ) that migrate to form the intermediate mesoderm . In turn , mesoderm cells convert into epithelial cells ( mesenchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) ) , for example during formation of the kidney . Bb | During MET , epithelial cells express epithelial signature markers such as E - cadherin ( left ) , laminin receptors ( integrins ) and Crumbs ( CRB ) complex proteins , and undergo an elaborate cytoskeletal reorganization and organelle repositioning 40 , 49 , 184 , 211 – 213 . The CRB complex , the CDC42 – partitioning defective 3 ( Par3 ) – Par6 – atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) complex and the Scribble ( SCRIB ) complex cooperate to form an immature apical junctional complex ( left plasma membrane ) , which matures into segregated tight junctions and adherens junctions ( right plasma membrane ) . Junction formation involves the delivery of E - cadherin from apical recycling endosomes ( AREs ) to form spot adherens junctions and the exocytosis of the tight junction components occludin and claudin by the basolateral sorting machinery to form tight junctions . RAC1 interacts with PAR3 through T lymphoma invasion and metastasis - induc - ing 1 ( TIAM1 ) ( see FIG . 2 ) and thus contributes to the organization of the peri - junctional actin cytoskeleton that is required for the coalescence of spot into belt adherens junctions . RHOA and myosin 2 also contribute to the formation of an actomyosin belt that increases cell adhesion 214 , 215 . At the basal pole , RAC1 stimulates the secretion of laminin that interacts with basal integrin receptors ; this contributes to the orientation of the cell along an apical – basal axis . The relocalization of the centrosome to the apical pole , the developing junctions , the polarity protein PAR1 , together with adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) , the kinesin family 17 ( KIF17 ) and end - binding 1 ( EB1 ) contribute to the reorganization of microtubules . In turn , this contributes to the polarized organization of endosomal compartments and the Golgi . EMT ( right ) is promoted by transcriptional events that often involve transforming growth factor - β receptors ( TGF β Rs ) such as TGF β R1 and culminate with the loss of E - cadherin , which results in the disassembly of adherens junctions 9 , 69 . The polarized movement of mesenchymal cells along cytokine gradients is regulated by many polarity proteins and lipids that are also part of the epithelial polarity programme ( EPP ) . At the front of the cell , activated CDC42 recruits PAR6 – aPKC , and ultimately glycogen synthase kinase - 3 β ( GSK3 β ) and APC to control the position of the nucleus and centrosome . In turn , the centrosome nucleates a centrifugal array of microtubules with peripheral plus ends that mediates : the juxtanuclear localization of the Golgi , trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and recycling endosomes 199 , 216 ; and the peripheral localization of sorting endosomes through plus end directed kinesins 217 , 218 ; and the formation of an actin - based leading edge . Microtubules facing the direction of a forward motion are stabilized by formins 219 and activate RAC1 ( activated also by aPKC ) , which in turn promotes actin polymerization and the formation of a actin - driven frontal lamellipodium through the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex 220 , 221 . RHOA is activated at the back end to control the generation of contractile forces through regulation of actomyosin filament assembly and contraction 26 . C | Blastoderm cellularization in Drosophila melanogaster . This process illustrates an alternative strategy to generate an epithelial cell . Embryonic development in flies begins with a rapid series of nuclear divisions without cytokinesis that originate a syncytial embryo with the nuclei present at the periphery . Nuclei are segregated from other nuclei by a compartmentalization process that involves the formation of membrane cleavage furrows between cells . E - cadherin , found initially in puncta at apical surface is displaced to the tip of the growing cleavage furrows and is progressively recruited more apically to form belt - like adherens junctions in a process promoted by Par3 and the actin cytoskeleton . Septate junctions form more basally , which is stimulated by the SCRIB complex . Dotted arrows represent activation ; solid arrows indicate a pathway ; dashed line indicates an interaction . ASE , apical sorting endosome ; DLG , discs - large homologue ; LGL , lethal giant larvae homologue ; mDIA , mouse diaphanous ; PALS1 , protein associated with Lin - 7 1 ; PATJ , PALS1 - associated tight - junction homologue ; PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , PtdIns - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . ▶ R E V I E W S 230 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nucleus CRE + + + + + Primary cilium Basal body Apicaldomain Microvilli Basolateraldomain Compaction Morula Blastocyst E - cadherin A Ba Mesoderm Primitive streak TGN Nucleus TGN + + + + + Nucleus and centrosome position MET • Mesenchymal markers • Front – rear polarity • Junction dissolution • Centrosomal microtubules • Actin - mediated motility Actomyosincontraction Recyclingendosome Laminin EMT + + + Lumen formation Sortingendosome Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ARE ASE Epithelial markers , apical – basal polarity , junction assembly , non - centrosomal microtubules , specialized actin organization and polarized traﬃcking machinery Laminin BSE Tightjunction Corticalmicrotubule Centralmicrotubule Adherensjunction Immatureapical junctionalcomplex Crb PI3K Occludin Actomyosin belt TGF β R1 TGF β Integrins aPKC PTEN CDC42 PAR6 PALS1 PATJ PAR3 RHOA RHOA RHOA RAC1 aPKC GSK3 β APC APC KIF17 EB1 CDC42 Microtubulesstabilizedby mDIA ARP2 / 3 actin assembly , membrane protrusion PAR6 RAC1 PI3K PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 RAC1 DLG LGL Cell movement Bb C Par3 E - cadherinpuncta Adherens junction Septate junction Claudin SCRIB SCRIB E - cadherin PAR3 downstream pathway that involves PAR3 – PAR6 – aPKC , glycogen synthase kinase - 3β ( GSK3β ) and adenom - atous polyposis coli ( APC ) , to control the rearward movement of the nucleus and the central position of the centrosome and through RAC1 to promote lamel - lipodium formation in the direction of cell migration , whereas RHOA promotes contraction and detachment of the rear end of the cell 72 , 73 . In most epithelial cells , the apical domain is formed at the opposite end of the basal domain . However , in hepatocytes the apical domain is constituted by bile canaliculi , which interrupt the lateral cortex of neigh - bouring cells . This remarkable morphogenetic vari - ation of epithelial polarity is controlled by the EPP through the PAR1 protein kinase . High PAR1 activity induces a hepatic - like localization of apical surfaces in MDCK cells 74 , for example , whereas depletion of PAR1 in hepatocytic HepG2 cells induces a columnar type of epithelial polarity 75 . Whether similar mecha - nisms control apical domain location in vivo remains , however , to be determined . Assembly of the apical junctional complex . Two impor - tant questions in epithelial biology are , first , how the EPP instructs the assembly of intercellular junctions ; and second , whether such junctions are required for apical – basal polarization . Vertebrates assemble tight junctions , adherens junctions and desmosomal junctions , each of which contains multiple adhesive proteins . E - cadherin is a key molecule in junction formation . The expression of E - cadherin in vertebrate zygotes causes compaction and marks the moment of establishment of the epithelial phenotype 59 , 76 ( FIG . 3A ) . Although there are differences in some details , sur - prising parallels have been observed between junction formation in vertebrates and invertebrates . Studies in MDCK cells have shown that adherens junction assem - bly starts with the formation of E - cadherin puncta at protrusive cell – cell contacts that are later reorganized into belt junctions by the actin cytoskeleton 77 – 79 . During cellularization of the D . melanogaster embryo , the plasma membrane invaginates through furrows to com - partmentalize the nuclei into epithelial cells 61 ( FIG . 3C ) ; R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 231 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Golgi Nucleus AMIS : E - cadherin , occludin , EXOC5 Crb d a Apical membrane initiation site c Mature cyst b Pre - apical patch aPKC LGL Kibra ASE Retromer Actin Exp Sdt Par6 Immature junction ARE Nucleus TGN RAB11a , exocyst , syntaxin 3 CRB , podocalyxin Polarized organelles , polarized cytoskeleton Fluid transport PAR3 , aPKC CRE Tight junction Adherens junction adherens junctions are not required for this process . The initial events in junction formation involve the assembly of cadherin – catenin clusters on the apical surface that are then invaginated deep in the furrows . As the surface further invaginates to form individual cells , Par3 accumulates at apical – latera l junctions and recruits the cadherin clusters , which grow into spot adherens junctions 80 . These spots are then re organized into adherens junction belts around the cells by the actin cytoskeleton , with septate junction s located more basally . CDC42 has a key role in the assembly of adheren s junctions through PAR3 – PAR6 – aPKC ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Disrupting CDC42 expression has context - dependen t effects , which reflects the multiple functions of this GTPase in actin dynamics and vesicle transport . In epithelial cells of the D . melanogaster embryo , the loss of Cdc42 primarily blocks apical recycling , but a downstream consequence is a loss of adherens junction integrity , which is consistent with a role for apical recycling endosomes ( AREs ) in E - cadherin baso lateral sorting and delivery 81 . In the develop - ing fly , however , loss of Cdc42 can cause a defect in E - cadherin endocytosis through the disruption of actin dynamics 82 , 83 . Interestingly , conditional knockout mice that lack CDC42 in the skin exhibit defects in aPKC - dependent phosphorylation of GSK3β , which results in increased degradation of β - catenin and the consequent loss of adherens junctions 84 . Whether these diverse effects can be reconciled into a general model for the regulation of E - cadherin trafficking remains to be seen . The situation is particularly complicated , because multi ple components of the EPP affect E - cadherin sta - bility and localization . The polarity protein SCRIB colocalizes with E - cadherin and stabilizes its associa - tion with p120 catenin ( also known as catenin δ1 ) , which is important in maintaining its cortical locali - zation 85 . In addition , SCRIB ensures that internalized E - cadherin is targeted to the lysosomes for degrada - tion . In the absence of SCRIB , E - cadherin is instead diverted to the retrograde pathway and accumulates in the Golgi 57 . The vertebrate EPP also plays an important part in tight junction assembly and maintenance ( FIG . 3Bb ) . The EPP first directs the formation of immature junctions , which are later segregated into separate tight junctions Figure 4 | Trafficking of epithelial polarity programme players during polarization of epithelial cells . a | Polarization of MDCK ( Madin Darby canine kidney ) cells in three - dimensional cultures . The steps that lead to the establishment of apical – basal polarity have been best characterized in MDCK cell cysts , which were generated by cell division from individual cells in collagen - rich Matrigel . Polarization starts at the two - cell stage with the accumulation of epithelial cadherin ( E - cadherin ) , occludin and exocyst components ( such as exocyst complex component 5 ( EXOC5 ) ) at the site of cell – cell contact called the apical membrane initiation site ( AMIS ) . b | The AMIS progresses into a pre - apical patch through a series of trafficking events that include transcytosis of Crumbs ( CRB ) and podocalyxin from the periphery to apical recycling endosomes ( AREs ) and their vesicular delivery to AMIS that is mediated by RAB11a , exocyst ( EXOC5 ) and the target - SNARE syntaxin 3 . Exocytosis also functions in the initial recruitment of partitioning defective 3 ( PAR3 ) and atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) ( to the pre - apical patch , where they contribute to form an immature junctional complex ) . c | The mature cyst exhibits segregated tight junctions and adherens junctions , a fully developed lumen expanded through polarized fluid transport and polarized cytoskeleton and organelles . d | Control of CRB recycling . The localization of CRB is maintained through endocytosis and recycling . In Drosophila melanogaster , Crb interacts through the four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ( FERM ) domain protein expanded ( Exp ) with the stardust ( Sdt ) – Par6 – aPKC complex . The FERM domain protein links Crb to the cortical actin cytoskeleton . A Hippo pathway protein , Kibra , can bind to Exp and inhibit aPKC activity . Kibra is in turn inhibited by a lateral polarity protein , lethal giant larvae ( Lgl ) . Lgl is phosphorylated by aPKC , which causes it to dissociate from the membrane . Endocytosis of Crb is followed by retromer - mediated retrograde transport to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , from where it can be recycled back to the apical cortex . ASE , apical sorting endosome ; BSE , basal sorting endosomes ; CRE , common recycling endosomes . R E V I E W S 232 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Apical junctional complex A belt - like structure at the border between apical and lateral domains that are formed by adherens junctions with a predominantly adhesive function and tight junctions ( septate junctions in invertebrates ) with a predominantly sealing role . Both junctions are formed by adhesive transmembrane proteins ( claudin and occludin for tight junctions and E - cadherin for adherens junctions ) and cytoplasmic ‘plaque’ proteins that link these junctions with the actin cytoskeleton . Microvilli Small plasma membrane protrusions at the surface of cells that increase the surface area and facilitate absorption and secretion . that are located more apically , and adherens junctions that are located more basally 86 ( FIG . 3Bb ) . In C . elegans , adherens and tight junctions remain together in a ‘com - bined junction’ with both adhesion and sealing proper - ties , whereas in D . melanogaster septate junctions form basally to the adherens junctions ( FIG . 1a ) . In addition to their sealing functions , tight junctions form barri - ers that separate the apical and basolateral domains of the plasma membrane and thus contribute to epithelial polarization ( the ability of septate junctions to segre - gate apical and basolateral domains , however , has not yet been demonstrated ) . However , PAR proteins and the SCRIB polarity complex have minor effects on tight junctions . For example , siRNA - mediated knockdown of either PAR3 or SCRIB delays tight junction assembly but , ultimately , normal junctions form that are indistin - guishable from wild - type junctions 85 , 87 . The key polarity proteins in this process are CRB and PALS1 ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Loss of CRB3 or PALS1 causes persistent defects in tight junction assembly and maintenance 88 , 89 ; junctions begin to form but remain incomplete and lack barrier function . Interestingly , genetic evidence from studies in D . melanogaster supports a hierarchical mechanism in which Par3 is required for the recruitment or stabiliza - tion of Crb and Std at the apical surface . However , this is clearly not the case in mammals , in which PALS1 ( and probably CRB3 ) seems to localize correctly to the apical cortex and remains functional in the absence of PAR3 . The underlying mechanism through which these polar - ity proteins stabilize tight junctions remains obscure . Tight junction transmembrane proteins such as occlu - din and possibly also claudin are delivered by the baso - lateral sorting machinery 90 , whereas CRB is probably transported by the apical machinery 17 , 91 ; therefore , a direct control of tight junction assembly by CRB is unlikely . However , it is feasible that CRB and PALS1 sta - bilize newly delivered tight junction proteins , although the underlying mechanism remains to be determined . Are junctions necessary for apical – basal polariza - tion ? During early mammalian embryonic develop - ment , the inhibition of E - cadherin activity with antibodies prevents the formation of epithelial tissue 76 . Several cell culture studies suggest that cadherin - based intercellular adhesion provides an initial cue , which is required for cell polarization 92 , 93 . Moreover , E - cadherin contains a juxtamembrane domain that enables protein retention at the lateral membrane and transcytosis of apically mis - sorted proteins to the lateral membrane — disruption of this domain causes a complete loss of polarity 94 . However , single cells such as spermato zoids polarize in the absence of such cues , and adherens junctions are dispensable for the initial polarization of D . melanogaster embryos during cellularization ( as mentioned above ) . Cells that lack tight junctions can also polarize , and it has been demonstrated that the activation of PAR4 kinase can induce the spontaneous polarization of individual intestinal epithelial cells in the absence of contacts with any other cells 95 . Thus , the evidence indicates that junctions are dispensable for apical – basal polarity , although they probably stabilize and increase the polarized state . EPP - induced cytoskeletal and organelle rearrangements . The EPP controls the striking reorganization of the cytoskeleton and organelles that characterizes the acqui - sition of the epithelial phenotype , for example during MET ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Changes in the localization and function of the centriole is a result and also a key determinant of the changes in microtubule organization 96 . In polar - ized vertebrate epithelial cells , the centriole is recruited to the apical surface , where the mother centriole nucle - ates the nine microtubule pairs that form the primary cilium . In epithelial cells , microtubules are mostly non - centrosoma l and more stable than in non - polarized cells 97 . Some microtubules that are nucleated by the basal body or by intermediate filaments under the api - cal surface 98 may be released and captured by the devel - oping apical junctional complex . In turn , these captured microtubules contribute to the development of the apical junctional complex 99 . It has been shown that E - cadherin expression has microtubule - stabilizing properties , which is consistent with the higher stability of epithelial micro - tubules 100 . Kinesin family 17 ( KIF17 ) , end - binding 1 ( EB1 ) and APC stabilize microtubules at the basal plus ends , which contributes to establishing the height of epithelial cells 101 , 102 . Taken together , all of this accounts for the characteristic apical – basal orientation of corti - cal microtubules , with basally oriented plus ends 103 , 104 . A second population of centrally located microtubules radiates apically from non - centrosomal supra - nuclear nucleation sites 105 , 106 , mainly the Golgi 107 , 108 . The epi - thelial microtubule organization mediates the typical supra - nuclear localization of the Golgi , common recy - cling endosomes ( CREs ) and AREs , and the peripheral localization of apical and basolateral sorting endosomes ; however , the details of these localization mechanisms are poorly understood 18 , 109 . The Ser / Thr kinase PAR1b is a major regulator of microtubule organization in fly epi - thelia and mammalian epithelial cells 18 , 74 , 110 , as well as in D . melanogaster eggs 111 . Inhibition of PAR1b function in MDCK cells by the expression of a dominant - negative PAR1b mutant caused the microtubule cytoskeleton to remain centrosomal , which is similar to their organi - zation in non - polarized or migrating cells even after the cells contacted neighbouring cells 74 . However , the details of how PAR1b controls centriolar function and microtubu le organization remain unknown . Acquisition of apical – basal polarity also entails an elaborate reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , which is controlled by an epithelial polarity sub programme . Actin organization differs at apical , lateral and basal membranes . CDC42 , which is recruited to the api - cal plasma membrane by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and the GEF TUBA1 , promotes actin polymerization , but the for - mation of microvilli requires the participation of several FERM domain proteins such as ezrin in mammalian epithelia and moesin in flies 112 . The polarity protein and kinase liver kinase B1 ( LKB1 ) induces the forma - tion of microvilli through mammalian STE20 - like pro - tein kinase 4 ( MST4 ) - dependent phosphorylation of ezrin 113 . This polarization depends on actin but not on microtubules 114 . However , this subprogramme is inde - pendent of other PAR proteins , and in many epithelial R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 233 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Formation of some types of endocytic vesicles at the plasma membrane , which is mediated by clathrin and clathrin adaptors such as adaptor protein 2 ( AP - 2 ) . cells MST4 is not the predominant ezrin kinase 115 . Other kinases , including lymphocyte - oriented kinase ( LOK ; also known as STK10 in humans ) and STE20 - like kinase ( SLK ) , can also phosphorylate and regulate ezrin and maintain its localization at the apical cortex 115 ; there - fore , the primary mechanism that control s microvillus formatio n remains uncertain . The organization of actin at the lateral membrane is determined to a large extent by E - cadherin and associ - ated catenins 78 , 116 . Conversely , the formation and mainte - nance of adherens junctions and tight junctions is tightly intertwined with actin dynamics 116 . Actin organization is also characteristic in the perinuclear area , where it is in part regulated by CDC42 and plays important parts in regulating vesicular trafficking from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and perinuclear endosomes 117 , 118 – 120 . Organization of the polarized trafficking machinery . As mentioned above , a major goal of the EPP is to organize the epithelial vesicle trafficking machinery to achieve a polarized apical – basal distribution of plasma membrane proteins that carry out vectorial transport functions . Mammalian epithelial cells express more than 2 , 000 solute transporters , pumps , and nutrient and signal - ling receptors ( encoded by ~ 5 % of the genome ) . These proteins are expressed in a tissue - specific manner with characteristic apical – basal polarity , which may vary in different organs dependent on specific local needs 121 . The polarity of a given plasma membrane protein arises from its intracellular sorting at the TGN and endosomal compartments during transport along biosynthetic and recycling routes 18 ( BOX 1 ) . Sorting signals and decoding mechanisms . Plasma membrane sorting through biosynthetic and recycling routes is mediated by apical and basolateral sorting signals and mechanisms . Apical sorting signals include N - glycans and O - glycans 122 , 123 in the ectodomain , special - ized transmembrane domains such as that of influenza haema gglutinin 124 , the glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol anchors 125 , 126 and determinants in the cyto plasmic domain , such as those found in rhodopsin 127 – 129 and megalin 130 , 131 . It has been proposed that glycans medi - ate apical sorting through interaction with specific lectin s , for example galectin 3 , galectin 4 and galectin 9 ( REFS 109 , 132 , 133 ) . Galectins are secreted into the apical medium through non - conventional secretion mecha - nisms ( that is , directly through the plasma membrane ) and then endocytosed into ASE , CRE and possibly the TGN , where they carry out their sorting function . Transmembrane segments and membrane anchors are thought to mediate sorting in the TGN or endosomal compartments through their affinity for specialized membrane lipid domains or rafts 37 , 109 , 134 . Lipid rafts , which are formed by cholesterol and glycosphingolipids , must undergo a clustering process to become functional sorting platforms 135 – 137 ; interaction with cytoskeletal components , on the cytosolic side , that are necessary for trafficking might be mediated by transmembrane proteins such as myelin and lymphocyte protein ( MAL ; also known as VIP17 ) 134 , 138 . Basolateral sorting signals , by contrast , are simple peptide motifs in the cytoplasmic domain of a protein . Some resemble typical endocytic signals ( for example , Tyr - ( YXXΦ , NPXY ( X indicates any amino acid and Φ a bulky hydrophobic amino acid ) ) and dileucine - based ( LL / LI ) motifs ) 139 , 140 , which reflects the fact that baso - lateral sorting is mostly a clathrin - mediated process 141 , similarly to clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Basolateral sorting is mediated by the clathrin adaptor protein 1 ( AP - 1 ) , which is present in two isoforms , AP - 1A and AP - 1B . They share three of the four subunits ( β1 , γ and σ1 ) and differ only in the medium subunit ( μ1A or μ1B , respectively ) . Tyr - based basolateral sorting sig - nals interact with pockets in the μ1Α and / or μ1Β subu - nits of AP - 1A and AP - 1B 142 , this is similar to pockets defined by crystallography studies in the μ2 subunit of AP - 2 . AP - 1A is ubiquitously expressed , whereas AP - 1B is expressed only by epithelial cells 143 , 144 . Exactly how AP - 1A and AP - 1B carry out their basolateral sorting function remains controversial 145 , 146 . It was recently sug - gested that both adaptors localize to the TGN and CRE , where they carry out similar sorting functions , differing only in their affinity for basolateral cargo proteins 147 . However , functional assays indicate that , whereas AP - 1B sorts basolateral plasma membrane proteins in both biosynthetic and recycling routes 139 , 148 – 150 , AP - 1A pref - erentially functions in the biosynthetic route 142 , 151 . Some epithelial cells lack AP - 1B ( for example , the liver , retinal pigment epithelium and the proximal tubule 152 – 154 ) and therefore rely only on AP - 1A ( and other still unknown mechanisms ) for basolateral protein sorting , as has been shown for neurons 155 . Clathrin is also involved in baso - lateral sorting of proteins that do not contain canonical endocytic sorting signals , for example transferrin recep - tor ( TfR ) ( with GDNS as a basolateral sorting motif ) 156 and cluster of differentiation 147 ( CD147 ; also known as basigin ) ( with a sorting motif based on a single Leu ) 157 . This suggests that among the ~ 20 known clathrin adap - tors 146 , adaptors other than AP - 1 may also function in polarized trafficking . Indeed , there is some evidence that AP - 3 , AP - 4 and the ADP - ribosyl hydrolase autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ; also known as LDLRAP1 ) clathrin adaptor may participate in basolat - eral sorting 139 , 158 – 160 . In addition , non - clathrin mecha - nisms may be involved in basolateral sorting ; an example is Naked 2 , which binds to motifs in the cytoplasmic domain of transforming growth factor ( TGF ) to mediate its basolateral trafficking 161 . To date , the mechanism that mediates trafficking of Na + , K + - ATPase , a key epithelial transporter that is sorted to the basolateral membrane by a clathrin - independent machinery 141 , remains unknown . Also unknown are the mechanisms that determine its apical localization in neuroepithelia such as retinal pigmen t epithelium and the choroid plexus . Vesicular trafficking to apical and basolateral domains . Apical and basolateral protein sorting in the biosynthetic , recycling and transcytotic routes is coordinated with the production and fission of different types of post - Golgi apical and basolateral carrier vesicles . Vesicular fission from the sorting compartments seems to be mediated by R E V I E W S 234 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 7 8 9 10 2 5 , 6 6 11 15 3 Tight junction Adherensjunction 4 4 17 14 12 13 16 BSE ASE ASE BSE Nucleus MVB Golgi ER Primary cilium Apical membrane a b Basolateral membrane TGN TGN MVB Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology CRE CRE ARE ARE Basement membrane Exosomes Small vesicles that are released from cells by fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane . They have multiple communication roles between cells . Microtubule motors A family of plus end and minus end directed kinesins and minus end directed dyneins that move transport vesicles and organelles along the cytoskeleton and across the viscous cytoplasm using ATP as an energy source . different mechanisms : dynamin 2 is involved in apical routes 120 , and PKD 162 and C - terminal - binding protein 1 ( CtBP1 ; also known as BARS ) have a role in basolateral routes 163 . Recent work shows that dynamin 2 mediates fission of apical transport vesicles at the level of AREs 164 . Vesicle transport through the epithelial cytoplasm is facilitated by microtubule and actin motors 18 . Although it was initially suggested that microtubule motors partici - pate in both apical and basolateral transport 165 , most of the evidence since then has implicated them in apical trafficking . For example , dynein and several kinesins ( including , KIFC3 ( REF . 166 ) , KIF5B 105 , KIF1A 167 and KIF16B 106 ) participate in several different apical trans - port routes . Interestingly the same protein , p75 neuro - trophin receptor ( also known as CD271 ) , is transported by KIF1A or KIF1Bβ in non - polarized MDCK cells 167 and by KIF5B in polarized MDCK cells 105 . Myosin 2 and myosin 6 mediate basolateral transport from the TGN 168 , 169 , whereas myosin 5 mediates apical transport from AREs to the plasma membrane 170 . RAB11a - positive Box 1 | Biosynthetic and recycling routes of epithelial cells The asymmetric plasma membrane protein distribution of epithelial cells results from various sorting events in the post - endocytic recycling and transcytotic routes , and biosynthetic trafficking routes . Recycling and transcytotic routes Fast recycling receptors , such as apical megalin ( which recovers filtrated proteins from the lumen of the kidney proximal tubule ) , basolateral low - density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ) and transferrin receptor ( TfR ) ( which provide the cell with blood nutrients ) are internalized into apical sorting endosomes ( ASEs ; in the case of megalin ) and basal sorting endosomes ( BSEs ; in the case of LDLR and TfR ) and recycled back to the plasma membrane along fast recycling routes ( see the figure , part a ; routes 1 , 3 ) or sorted and recycled along slow recycling routes ( routes 2 , 4 ) to their respective cell surface 203 – 205 . The slow apical recycling route ( route 2 ) has an additional endosomal compartment , the apical recycling endosome ( ARE ) 204 , 205 . The polymeric immunoglobulin A ( IgA ) receptor follows a transcytotic route through the BSE , common recycling endosomes ( CREs ) and AREs ( route 5 ) . The transcytotic route of TfR in MDCK ( Madin Darby canine kidney ) cells lacks the clathrin adaptor protein 1B ( AP - 1B ) , which transits through the same compartments ( route 5 ) , but may also traffic through the ASE ( route 6 ) . Proteins destined for degradation after internalization from the apical or basolateral surface reach lysosomes from the ASE or BSE , respectively ( routes 7 , 8 ) 206 . Fusion of multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) with the apical or basolateral surface apparently releases different apical and basal exosomes ( routes 9 , 10 ) , although the exosome sorting mechanisms remain unknown 207 . Solid arrows represent apical and basolateral recycling routes , dashed arrows represent transcytotic routes and dotted arrows represent routes to and from MVB . Biosynthetic routes Apical and basolateral plasma membrane proteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , transferred to the Golgi and sorted at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) into direct vesicular routes to the plasma membrane ( see the figure , part b ; route 11 ( apical ) ; route 15 ( basolateral ) ) . In addition , newly synthesized cargo proteins may traffic through endosomal compartments before reaching their respective surface domains 109 , 139 , 150 , 208 – 210 . Apical plasma membrane proteins may use AREs ( route 12 ) , CREs ( route 13 ) or ASEs ( route 14 ) as intermediate ‘stations’ for apical transport . Basolateral plasma membrane proteins may use CREs ( route 16 ) or BSEs ( route 17 ) as intermediate stations . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 235 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Exocyst A highly conserved octameric protein complex , which is part of a large group of ‘tethering factors’ , that regulates the docking and fusion of transport vesicles with the plasma membrane . SNAREs Proteins that regulate secretory vesicle fusion . Coat protein Eukaryotic cells express coatomer protein and the clathrin family of coat proteins ; they fold membranes to generate transport vesicles in cooperation with adaptors selecting specific cargo proteins that will be passengers during the transport to a different membrane . AREs are emerging as an important additional sorting compartment ( in addition to the TGN and CREs ) in polarized epithelial cells . Although the ARE has been reported to be a ‘station’ in apical traffic , a surprising finding is that some basolateral proteins , for example E - cadherin , may traffic through the ARE on their way to the plasma membrane 81 . Mutations in the gene encoding myosin 5 , a resident of AREs , are a cause of microvillus inclusion disease , which is a lethal congenital condition that is characterized by the failure to form a mature api - cal membrane and the appearance of large intracellular vacuoles that contain microvilli , mainly in enterocytes 171 . Vesicle tethering to both apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains has been shown to depend on differ - ent subunits of the exocyst complex 172 , 173 . Exocyst accu - mulates at the level of the junctional complex 172 , which is also the preferential site of fusion for basolateral trans - port vesicles 174 . Vesicle fusion to the apica l membrane is mediated by different target - SNAREs ( t - SNAREs ) and syntaxins 1 – 3 , which is compatible with the existence of various apical transport routes and by the vesicle - SNARE ( v - SNARE ) vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 ( VAMP7 ; also known as TiVAMP ) 175 , 17 . Fusion with the basolateral membrane is mediated by the t - SNARE syntaxin 4 ( REFS 175 , 176 ) and the v - SNARE VAMP3 ( also known as cellubrevin ) 17 . Disruption of the expression or polarity of these SNAREs 174 – 176 results in depolarization of plasma membrane proteins , which is congruent with the idea that SNAREs are major constituent s of the core polarity machinery of the cell . About one - quarter of the ~ 60 members of the RAB family 177 , 178 have been implicated in polarized post - Golgi trafficking at the TGN or various endosomal compartments ( TABLE 1 ) . A recent study demonstrated that RAB5 is a master regulator of endosome biogenesis in the liver 179 . Knockdown of RAB5 in adult mouse liver markedly reduced the formation of early endosomes , late endosomes and lysosomes . It also reduced low - densit y lipoprotein endocytosis and transcytotic deliver y of apical proteins to the bile canaliculi but did not affect RAB11 - positive AREs or delivery of apical proteins that use a direct route from the Golgi . These findings sug - gest that AREs are maintained by trafficking from com - partments other than early endosomes — for example , the Golgi . EPP proteins and the polarized trafficking machinery . Although evidence for any obvious links between EPP proteins and the vesicle trafficking machinery was pre - viously lacking , there is now substantial support for close integration between them . A screen in C . elegans for genes involved in membrane trafficking revealed a general requirement for EPP proteins in endocytosis 180 . Mutations in genes that encode EPP proteins reduced clathrin - mediated cargo uptake and decreased recy - cling of clathrin - independent cargo . A recent screen in C . elegan s for genes that control the subapical localiza - tion of AREs around the basal body identified par‑5 , but the downstream mechanisms involved remain unknown 181 . Studying this mechanism in vertebrate cells is difficult , as they express five different PAR5 isoforms . In D . melanogaster embryos , the disruption of Cdc42 causes accumulation of apical proteins in sorting endosomes , probably owing to effects on aPKC localiza - tion and / or activity 182 . In other tissues , however , Cdc42 controls endocytosis of adherens junctions at lateral membranes through a Par - independent pathway that probably involves actin organization . The situation in mammalian cells is less clear , but CDC42 is enriched at the Golgi , where it binds to coat protein coatomer com - plex I ( COP1 ) and has been implicated in basolateral protein sorting 117 – 119 . Interestingly , the PAR3 polarity protein can bind to the exocyst complex and might also have a role in polarized secretion 183 . However , the molec - ular mechanisms underlying these regulatory functions are still unclear . Epithelial syntaxins have been reported to bind to the polarity protein Lgl , and they are essential for polariza - tion in D . melanogaster and LIN - expressing MDCK cells in vitro 175 . Additionally , synaptotagmin - like pro - tein 2a ( SLP2a ) and SLP4a , which control exocytosis , are needed for the correct epithelial organization in three - dimensional MDCK cyst cultures 184 . Finally , RAB11a – exocyst - dependent apical transport pathways were found to reinforce the localizatio n of the apical PAR complex 67 . Table 1 | The role of RABs in polarized epithelial trafficking RAB Trafficking role Refs RAB4 Recycling from apical and basal sorting endosomes to plasma membranes 222 RAB5 Endocytosis from plasma membranes into apical and basal sorting endosomes 179 , 223 RAB6 Myosin 2 - mediated fission of VSV - G protein vesicles from the TGN in polarized and non - polarized cells 168 , 224 RAB7 Trafficking from early to late apical and basolateral endosomes 206 RAB8 Transport to the basolateral plasma membranes 225 Biosynthetic delivery of basolateral cargo through the trans - CRE route 226 Transport to the primary cilium in co - operation with AP - 1 227 , 228 Apical lumen formation in MDCK three - dimensional cysts 67 , 170 RAB10 Transport to basolateral plasma membrane 229 RAB11 Apical recycling and transcytosis at AREs 106 , 230 , 231 Biosynthetic trafficking of rhodopsin at AREs in MDCK cells 164 Apical lumen formation in MDCK three - dimensional cysts 232 Apical transcytosis of transferrin receptor in AP - 1B deficient MDCK cells 106 RAB13 Transport between the TGN and CREs 233 RAB17 Apical recycling and transcytosis 234 , 235 RAB25 Apical recycling and transcytosis at AREs 230 Apical to basal transcytosis of Fc receptor 236 RAB27 Lysosomal fusion with basolateral plasma membranes and polarized exosome secretion 237 , 239 Apical lumen formation 184 AP - 1 , adaptor protein 1 ; ARE , apical recycling endosome ; CRE , common recycling endosome ; Fc , crystallizable fragment ; MDCK , Madin Darby canine kidney ; TGN , trans - Golgi network ; VSV - G , vesicular stomatitis virus membrane glycoprotein . R E V I E W S 236 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Vesicle Plasmamembrane TMEM231 , Septin 2 ( membrane diﬀusion barrrier ) Transition ﬁbres ( diﬀusion barrier for vesicles ) SMO Nucleoporins ( diﬀusion barrrier for soluble compounds ) Y - links GLI GLI IFT particle Kinesin PTC Basal body Transition zone GLI HH HH HH Nucleus Primarycilium b a Tight junction Adherens junction CRB sorting , localization and recycling . CRB is a key organizer of apical polarity and tight junctions and is also a transmembrane protein , unlike most polarity proteins . An important question , therefore , is how this transmembrane protein is localized to the apical surface and tight junctions in mammals , or to the subapical domain in D . melanogaster . The trafficking and locali - zation of CRB and other polarity proteins have been studied during development of MDCK monolayers in two - dimensional and three - dimensional cultures 67 , 185 ( FIG . 4a – c ) . When single MDCK cells are suspended in three - dimensional basement membrane cultures that contain laminin , apical and basolateral membrane pro - teins are distributed over the entire plasma membrane . However , following entry into mitosis , CRB , podocalyxin and other apical proteins are specifically internalized and concentrated in RAB11 - positive ARE , which accumulate at the site of cytokinesis in the region of the midzone microtubules 67 . The delivery of CRB and other apical proteins to the plasma membrane at this site triggers the formation of a lumen between the two daughter cells 56 . Podocalyxin is an anti - adhesive , mammalian trans - membrane protein that is delivered very early , perhaps simultaneously with CRB , to the presumptive apical sur - face and is required for the generation of lumina . Apical transmembrane proteins are delivered by vesicles that traffic along microtubules , and syntaxin 3 is required for apical fusion . Other vesicle transport proteins , including RAB8 and the exocyst complex , also seem to be required for apical protein delivery 186 . However , it is still unclear what signals target CRB to the apical surface , because the intracellular domains that are known to bind other EPP proteins are dispensable for its localization . After having arrived at the apical plasma membrane , CRB must be stabilized to reduce the rate of endocytosis . One proposed mechanism in D . melanogaster involves a positive feedback loop through extracellular domain Crb – Crb interactions and the recruitment of the ERM domain protein expanded ( Exp ) and its binding partner , Kibra 187 ( FIG . 4d ) . The basolateral protein Lgl inhibits this stabilization , which enables mis - targeted Crb to be inter - nalized and recycled to the apical membrane . Recycling seems to require the retromer complex , which suggests that Crb needs to be transported back through the TGN 188 . However , the reason for this is not yet under - stood . Moreover , Exp and Kibra are components of the Hippo signalling pathway that controls organ size and responds to cell density , and Crb may function , at least in D . melanogaster imaginal disks , to suppress Hippo signalling and prevent tissue overgrowth 189 . Trafficking to the primary cilium . The primary cilium , which forms at the apical surface of vertebrate epithe - lial cells , represents a third distinct region of the plasma membrane that is constructed by a process called intraflagellar transport 190 ( FIG . 5a ) . As cilia lack the pro - tein synthesis machinery , all components for its assem - bly and function must be transported into and within the cilium . The cilium originates from the basal body , which is generated in post - mitotic cells from a centro - some and consists of a microtubule - based axoneme that is covered by a specialized membrane . Cilia components are transported by microtubule motor proteins ( FIG . 5a ) . Just as the apical and basolateral membranes are sepa - rated by tight junctions , the cilia membrane and apical membrane are separated by diffusion barriers that main - tain the cilium as a distinct signalling organelle 191 – 193 , 238 . A spiral array of fibres that connects the basal body to the ciliary membrane blocks vesicle access to the cilium . Septins seem to form a barrier at this level 191 . A com - plex of nine proteins , seven of which are disrupted in human ciliopathies , including a transmembrane protein , TMEM231 , function as a membrane diffusion barrier in a septin 2 - dependent manner at the transition zone 238 . Nuclear pore components are also found in this region , perhaps functioning as a diffusion barrier to the entry and exit of soluble proteins 192 ( FIG . 5a ) . The gating of entry and exit is important , because key signalling systems — particularly the Hedgehog ( HH ) pathway — are segregated in and are depend - ent on the primary cilium 193 . The HH pathway plays a key part in the differentiation of epithelial cells 193 . Figure 5 | The primary cilium and Hedgehog signalling . a | Primary cilium structure and signalling components . Multiple types of diffusion barriers separate the ciliary membrane and apical membrane to control the access to the primary cilium , which creates a distinct polarized membrane domain . At the transition zone , fibres connect the basal body to the ciliary membrane . At this level , a protein complex that contains TMEM231 functions as a membrane diffusion barrier , whereas nucleoporins similar to those found at the nuclear pore form a diffusion barrier for soluble components . Patched ( PTC ) is inactive in the primary cilium , but moves out of this organelle after binding of Hedgehog ( HH ; not shown ) . Other components of the HH signalling cascade also move in and out of the cilium in a dynamic manner ; Smoothened ( SMO ) ( which is located on intracellular vesicles ) and GLI are recruited to the tip of the cilium by a kinesin . Activation of PTC triggers the translocation of SMO to the ciliary membrane , where it activates GLI . After a series of post - translational modifications , GLI moves to the nucleus to activate the transcription of target genes . b | Transcytosis of HH . HH is produced by endothelial or mesenchymal cells that underlie epithelial cells . Following binding of HH to its receptor PTC on the surface of the primary cilium , the transcription factor GLI is activated and transported to the nucleus to activate epithelial differentiation genes . The transcytotic pathway of HH has not yet been characterized . IFT , intraflagellar transport ; TMEM231 , transmembrane 231 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 237 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Recent work has demonstrated that endothelial cells have central instructive roles in the differentiation of the epithelia in various organs ( for example , liver , lung , skin and retinal pigment epithelium ) through the HH , WNT and Notch pathways 194 – 197 . To exert its function HH , secreted by endothelial cells , must reach its trans - membrane receptor , Patched ( PTC ) , which is localized at the primary ciliu m membrane . Thus , HH must be transcytosed across the epithelial cell to reach its site of function ( FIG . 5b ) ; howeve r , the mechanism involved remains elusive . Multiple components of the EPP participate in both the formation and function of the primary cilium . For example , aPKC is required for ciliogenesis 198 , 199 but has also been implicated in regulating the function of GLI ( a mediator of the HH response ) through phospho - rylation 200 . Conversely , GLI induces aPKC expression . However , a note of caution is necessary , because many of these studies use an aPKC inhibitor — a myristoylated pseudosubstrate peptide — that has recently been dem - onstrated to be non - specific and to induce effects in the brain that are not mimicked by the knockout of aPKCζ . Nonetheless , other components of the EPP , including PAR6 , PAR3 and CRB3 , are all concentrated in primary cilia and are required for proper cilia formation 105 , 199 . PAR6 together with the polarity proteins PALS1 and PATJ , associate with nephrocystin 1 and nephrocystin 4 , which are both important for cilia function 201 . However , the functional consequences of this interaction are not yet understood . The PAR proteins also associate with kinesins that are involved in intraflagellar transport 199 . Finally , exocyst complex component 5 ( EXOC5 ; also known as SEC10 ) is required for ciliogenesis , perhaps through a role in the localization of the cation channel protein polycystin 2 ( REFS 183 , 202 ) . As PAR3 can bind to the exocyst , it seems likely that multiple components of the EPP machinery are involved in controlling mem - brane protein sorting and delivery to the primary cilia ; although the exact mechanisms are not yet fully under - stood . One important question for the future is whether the EPP machinery regulates HH signalling by affecting other proteins that are involved in the pathway , such as Ptc or Smo delivery , in addition to its effects on Gli phosphorylation . Outlook The EPP integrates numerous processes and touches on almost every aspect of cell biology . Many of the mecha - nistic details of this integration remain to be identified . One complication is that the execution of the EPP may vary markedly in different locations or physiological contexts , often using the same components but in cell - type - specific ways . For example , in D . melanogaster , Crb is only essential for apical specification during morpho - genesis when adherens junctions are rapidly expanding or turning over 15 . Moreover , basolateral polarity pro - teins such as Lgl are not essential for the maintenance of polarity in late - stage embryogenesis but are required during gastrulation . As an example from mammalian cells , the initial landmark for the apical domain in single cells grown in three - dimensional culture is the site of abscission during cytokinesis . However , this is unlikely to be true during development when single cells are probably not isolated from each other , and neighbouring cells will provide spatial information through cadherin - based adhesion . An important future goal , therefore , will be to understand how the EPP operates in specific , biologically relevant contexts . It will also be central to gain better temporal and spatia l resolution of the initial stages of epithelial polari - zation . We do not know which proteins first arrive at the presumptive membrane domains or at the tight junc - tions that form between the apical and lateral domains . We also need to learn more about the interconnected signalling between sensors , such as the primary cilium , integrins and cadherins , and the EPP . Our knowledge of the links between the effectors of the EPP , particu - larly the vesicle trafficking machinery and the polarity proteins , is also still very superficial . A comprehensive understanding of these links will surely inform our knowledge of human disease , which so often involves epithelial cells . 1 . Dickinson , D . J . , Nelson , W . J . & Weis , W . I . A polarized epithelium organized by β - and α - catenin predates cadherin and metazoan origins . Science 331 , 1336 – 1339 ( 2011 ) . An important contribution to our understanding of the evolution of epithelial tissues in animals . 2 . Cereijido , M . , Contreras , R . G . & Shoshani , L . Cell adhesion , polarity , and epithelia in the dawn of metazoans . Physiol . Rev . 84 , 1229 – 1262 ( 2004 ) . 3 . Magie , C . R . & Martindale , M . Q . Cell - cell adhesion in the cnidaria : insights into the evolution of tissue morphogenesis . Biol . Bull . 214 , 218 – 232 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Alberts , B . Cell biology : the endless frontier . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 3785 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Bryant , D . M . & Mostov , K . E . From cells to organs : building polarized tissue . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 887 – 901 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Sawyer , J . M . et al . Apical constriction : a cell shape change that can drive morphogenesis . Dev . Biol . 341 , 5 – 19 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Lechler , T . & Fuchs , E . Asymmetric cell divisions promote stratification and differentiation of mammalian skin . Nature 437 , 275 – 280 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Singla , V . & Reiter , J . F . The primary cilium as the cell’s antenna : signaling at a sensory organelle . Science 313 , 629 – 633 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Lim , J . & Thiery , J . P . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions : insights from development . Development 139 , 3471 – 3486 ( 2012 ) . 10 . McCaffrey , L . M . & Macara , I . G . Epithelial organization , cell polarity , and tumorigenesis . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 727 – 735 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Muthuswamy , S . K . & Xue , B . Cell polarity as a regulator of cancer cell behavior plasticity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 599 – 625 ( 2012 ) . 12 . Assemat , E . , Bazellieres , E . , Pallesi - Pocachard , E . , Le Bivic , A . & Massey - Harroche , D . Polarity complex proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1778 , 614 – 630 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Goldstein , B . & Macara , I . G . The PAR proteins : fundamental players in animal cell polarization . Dev . Cell 13 , 609 – 622 ( 2007 ) . 14 . St Johnston , D . & Ahringer , J . Cell polarity in eggs and epithelia : parallels and diversity . Cell 141 , 757 – 774 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Tepass , U . The apical polarity protein network in Drosophila epithelial cells : regulation of polarity , junctions , morphogenesis , cell growth , and survival . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 655 – 685 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Mellman , I . & Nelson , W . J . Coordinated protein sorting , targeting and distribution in polarized cells . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 833 – 845 ( 2008 ) . 17 . Apodaca , G . , Gallo , L . I . & Bryant , D . M . Role of membrane traffic in the generation of epithelial cell asymmetry . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 1235 – 1243 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Kreitzer , G . & Musch , A . Organization of vesicular trafficking in epithelia . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 233 – 247 ( 2005 ) . 19 . Kemphues , K . J . , Priess , J . R . , Morton , D . G . & Cheng , N . S . Identification of genes required for cytoplasmic localization in early C . elegans embryos . Cell 52 , 311 – 320 ( 1988 ) . Identification of PAR genes by an elegant screen . 20 . Munson , C . et al . Regulation of neurocoel morphogenesis by Pard6 γ b . Dev . Biol . 324 , 41 – 54 ( 2008 ) . 21 . Bilder , D . , Schober , M . & Perrimon , N . Integrated activity of PDZ protein complexes regulates epithelial polarity . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 53 – 58 ( 2003 ) . The first description of genetic interactions between different groups of polarity genes . 22 . Bilder , D . , Li , M . & Perrimon , N . Cooperative regulation of cell polarity and growth by Drosophila tumor suppressors . Science 289 , 113 – 116 ( 2000 ) . 23 . Laprise , P . et al . Yurt , Coracle , Neurexin IV and the Na + , K + - ATPase form a novel group of epithelial polarity proteins . Nature 459 , 1141 – 1145 ( 2009 ) . Describes the discovery of a new set of genes that is involved in epithelial polarity . R E V I E W S 238 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 24 . Jaffe , A . B . & Hall , A . Rho GTPases : biochemistry and biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 247 – 269 ( 2005 ) . 25 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Iden , S . & Collard , J . G . Crosstalk between small GTPases and polarity proteins in cell polarization . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 846 – 859 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Sander , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , van der Kammen , R . A . & Collard , J . G . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1009 – 1022 ( 1999 ) . 28 . Nelson , W . J . Adaptation of core mechanisms to generate cell polarity . Nature 422 , 766 – 774 ( 2003 ) . 29 . Di Paolo , G . & De Camilli , P . Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane dynamics . Nature 443 , 651 – 657 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Gassama - Diagne , A . & Payrastre , B . Phosphoinositide signaling pathways : promising role as builders of epithelial cell polarity . Int . Rev . Cell . Mol . Biol . 273 , 313 – 343 ( 2009 ) . 31 . Krahn , M . P . & Wodarz , A . Phosphoinositide lipids and cell polarity : linking the plasma membrane to the cytocortex . Essays Biochem . 53 , 15 – 27 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Shewan , A . , Eastburn , D . J . & Mostov , K . Phosphoinositides in cell architecture . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a004796 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Gassama - Diagne , A . et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate regulates the formation of the basolateral plasma membrane in epithelial cells . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 963 – 970 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Martin - Belmonte , F . et al . PTEN - mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides controls epithelial morphogenesis through Cdc42 . Cell 128 , 383 – 397 ( 2007 ) . References 33 and 34 provide evidence that phospholipids can directly alter the identity of membrane domains . 35 . von Stein , W . , Ramrath , A . , Grimm , A . , Muller - Borg , M . & Wodarz , A . Direct association of Bazooka / PAR - 3 with the lipid phosphatase PTEN reveals a link between the PAR / aPKC complex and phosphoinositide signaling . Development 132 , 1675 – 1686 ( 2005 ) . 36 . Zhang , H . et al . Apicobasal domain identities of expanding tubular membranes depend on glycosphingolipid biosynthesis . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1189 – 1201 ( 2011 ) . 37 . Simons , K . & Gerl , M . J . Revitalizing membrane rafts : new tools and insights . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 688 – 699 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Fairn , G . D . , Hermansson , M . , Somerharju , P . & Grinstein , S . Phosphatidylserine is polarized and required for proper Cdc42 localization and for development of cell polarity . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1424 – 1430 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Hao , Y . et al . Par3 controls epithelial spindle orientation by aPKC - mediated phosphorylation of apical Pins . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1809 – 1818 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Smith , C . A . et al . aPKC - mediated phosphorylation regulates asymmetric membrane localization of the cell fate determinant Numb . EMBO J . 26 , 468 – 480 ( 2007 ) . 41 . Peyre , E . et al . A lateral belt of cortical LGN and NuMA guides mitotic spindle movements and planar division in neuroepithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 193 , 141 – 154 ( 2011 ) . 42 . Bergstralh , D . T . , Lovegrove , H . E . & St Johnston , D . Discs large links spindle orientation to apical – basal polarity in Drosophila epithelia . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1707 – 1712 ( 2013 ) . 43 . Benton , R . & Johnston , D . S . Drosophila PAR - 1 and 14 - 3 - 3 inhibit bazooka / PAR - 3 to establish complementary cortical domains in polarized cells . Cell 115 , 691 – 704 ( 2003 ) . One of the first papers to describe the concept of mutual exclusion by polarity proteins in different plasma membrane territories . 44 . Hurov , J . B . , Watkins , J . L . & Piwnica - Worms , H . Atypical PKC phosphorylates PAR - 1 kinases to regulate localization and activity . Curr . Biol . 14 , 736 – 741 ( 2004 ) . 45 . Suzuki , A . et al . aPKC acts upstream of PAR - 1b in both the establishment and maintenance of mammalian epithelial polarity . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1425 – 1435 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Kusakabe , M . & Nishida , E . The polarity - inducing kinase Par - 1 controls Xenopus gastrulation in cooperation with 14 - 3 - 3 and aPKC . EMBO J . 23 , 4190 – 4201 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Yamanaka , T . et al . PAR - 6 regulates aPKC activity in a novel way and mediates cell - cell contact - induced formation of the epithelial junctional complex . Genes Cells 6 , 721 – 731 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Graybill , C . , Wee , B . , Atwood , S . X . & Prehoda , K . E . Partitioning - defective protein 6 ( Par - 6 ) activates atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) by pseudosubstrate displacement . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 21003 – 21011 ( 2012 ) . 49 . Qin , Y . , Meisen , W . H . , Hao , Y . & Macara , I . G . Tuba , a Cdc42 GEF , is required for polarized spindle orientation during epithelial cyst formation . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 661 – 669 ( 2010 ) . 50 . Zihni , C . et al . Dbl3 drives Cdc42 signaling at the apical margin to regulate junction position and apical differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 204 , 111 – 127 ( 2014 ) . 51 . Morais - de - Sa , E . Mirouse , V . & St Johnston , D . aPKC phosphorylation of Bazooka defines the apical / lateral border in Drosophila epithelial cells . Cell 141 , 509 – 523 ( 2010 ) . 52 . Krahn , M . P . , Buckers , J . , Kastrup , L . & Wodarz , A . Formation of a Bazooka - Stardust complex is essential for plasma membrane polarity in epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 751 – 760 ( 2010 ) . 53 . Traweger , A . et al . Protein phosphatase 1 regulates the phosphorylation state of the polarity scaffold Par - 3 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10402 – 10407 ( 2008 ) . 54 . McCaffrey , L . M . , Montalbano , J . , Mihai , C . & Macara , I . G . Loss of the Par3 polarity protein promotes breast tumorigenesis and metastasis . Cancer Cell 22 , 601 – 614 ( 2012 ) . Evidence that polarity proteins are important tumour growth and invasion suppressors . 55 . Wodarz , A . , Hinz , U . , Engelbert , M . & Knust , E . Expression of crumbs confers apical character on plasma membrane domains of ectodermal epithelia of Drosophila . Cell 82 , 67 – 76 ( 1995 ) . 56 . Schluter , M . A . et al . Trafficking of Crumbs3 during cytokinesis is crucial for lumen formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4652 – 4663 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Chartier , F . J . , Hardy , E . J . & Laprise , P . Crumbs controls epithelial integrity by inhibiting Rac1 and PI3K . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3393 – 3398 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Pece , S . , Chiariello , M . , Murga , C . & Gutkind , J . S . Activation of the protein kinase Akt / PKB by the formation of E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell junctions . Evidence for the association of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase with the E - cadherin adhesion complex . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 19347 – 19351 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Ziomek , C . A . & Johnson , M . H . Cell surface interaction induces polarization of mouse 8 - cell blastomeres at compaction . Cell 21 , 935 – 942 ( 1980 ) . 60 . Nelson , W . J . Remodeling epithelial cell organization : transitions between front - rear and apical – basal polarity . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , a000513 ( 2009 ) . 61 . Mazumdar , A . & Mazumdar , M . How one becomes many : blastoderm cellularization in Drosophila melanogaster . Bioessays 24 , 1012 – 1022 ( 2002 ) . 62 . Wang , A . Z . , Ojakian , G . K . & Nelson , W . J . Steps in the morphogenesis of a polarized epithelium . I . Uncoupling the roles of cell - cell and cell - substratum contact in establishing plasma membrane polarity in multicellular epithelial ( MDCK ) cysts . J . Cell Sci . 95 , 137 – 151 ( 1990 ) . 63 . Wang , A . Z . , Ojakian , G . K . & Nelson , W . J . Steps in the morphogenesis of a polarized epithelium . II . Disassembly and assembly of plasma membrane domains during reversal of epithelial cell polarity in multicellular epithelial ( MDCK ) cysts . J . Cell Sci . 95 , 153 – 165 ( 1990 ) . 64 . O’Brien , L . E . et al . Rac1 orientates epithelial apical polarity through effects on basolateral laminin assembly . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 831 – 838 ( 2001 ) . 65 . Yu , W . et al . β 1 - integrin orients epithelial polarity via Rac1 and laminin . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 433 – 445 ( 2005 ) . 66 . Yu , W . et al . Involvement of RhoA , ROCK I and myosin II in inverted orientation of epithelial polarity . EMBO Rep . 9 , 923 – 929 ( 2008 ) . 67 . Bryant , D . M . et al . A molecular network for de novo generation of the apical surface and lumen . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 1035 – 1045 ( 2010 ) . Characterization of the mechanisms involved in the establishment of the apical – basal polarity axis and lumen in MDCK cysts . 68 . Akhtar , N . & Streuli , C . H . An integrin - ILK - microtubule network orients cell polarity and lumen formation in glandular epithelium . Nature Cell Biol . 15 , 17 – 27 ( 2013 ) . 69 . Ozdamar , B . et al . Regulation of the polarity protein Par6 by TGFbeta receptors controls epithelial cell plasticity . Science 307 , 1603 – 1609 ( 2005 ) . Discovery of a key mechanism in EMT . 70 . Li , R . & Gundersen , G . G . Beyond polymer polarity : how the cytoskeleton builds a polarized cell . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 860 – 873 ( 2008 ) . 71 . Etienne - Manneville , S . Polarity proteins in migration and invasion . Oncogene 27 , 6970 – 6980 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Gomes , E . R . , Jani , S . & Gundersen , G . G . Nuclear movement regulated by Cdc42 , MRCK , myosin , and actin flow establishes MTOC polarization in migrating cells . Cell 121 , 451 – 463 ( 2005 ) . 73 . Etienne - Manneville , S . & Hall , A . Cdc42 regulates GSK - 3 β and adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity . Nature 421 , 753 – 756 ( 2003 ) . 74 . Cohen , D . , Brennwald , P . J . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Musch , A . Mammalian PAR - 1 determines epithelial lumen polarity by organizing the microtubule cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 717 – 727 ( 2004 ) . 75 . Lazaro - Dieguez , F . et al . Par1b links lumen polarity with LGN - NuMA positioning for distinct epithelial cell division phenotypes . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 251 – 264 ( 2013 ) . 76 . Vestweber , D . , Gossler , A . , Boller , K . & Kemler , R . Expression and distribution of cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin in mouse preimplantation embryos . Dev . Biol . 124 , 451 – 456 ( 1987 ) . 77 . Adams , C . L . , Nelson , W . J . & Smith , S . J . Quantitative analysis of cadherin - catenin - actin reorganization during development of cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1899 – 1911 ( 1996 ) . 78 . Drees , F . , Pokutta , S . , Yamada , S . , Nelson , W . J . & Weis , W . I . Alpha - catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin - beta - catenin and regulates actin - filament assembly . Cell 123 , 903 – 915 ( 2005 ) . 79 . Yamada , S . , Pokutta , S . , Drees , F . , Weis , W . I . & Nelson , W . J . Deconstructing the cadherin - catenin - actin complex . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 ( 2005 ) . References 78 and 79 propose an alternative to the ‘standard’ mechanism that links E - cadherin to the actin cytoskeleton . 80 . McGill , M . A . , McKinley , R . F . & Harris , T . J . Independent cadherin - catenin and Bazooka clusters interact to assemble adherens junctions . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 787 – 796 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Lock , J . G . & Stow , J . L . Rab11 in recycling endosomes regulates the sorting and basolateral transport of E - cadherin . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1744 – 1755 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Leibfried , A . , Fricke , R . , Morgan , M . J . , Bogdan , S . & Bellaiche , Y . Drosophila Cip4 and WASp define a branch of the Cdc42 - Par6 - aPKC pathway regulating E - cadherin endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1639 – 1648 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Georgiou , M . , Marinari , E . , Burden , J . & Baum , B . Cdc42 , Par6 , and aPKC regulate Arp2 / 3 - mediated endocytosis to control local adherens junction stability . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1631 – 1638 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Wu , X . et al . Cdc42 controls progenitor cell differentiation and beta - catenin turnover in skin . Genes Dev . 20 , 571 – 585 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Qin , Y . , Capaldo , C . , Gumbiner , B . M . & Macara , I . G . The mammalian Scribble polarity protein regulates epithelial cell adhesion and migration through E - cadherin . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 1061 – 1071 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Rajasekaran , A . K . , Hojo , M . , Huima , T . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Catenins and zonula occludens - 1 form a complex during early stages in the assembly of tight junctions . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 451 – 463 ( 1996 ) . 87 . Chen , X . & Macara , I . G . Par - 3 controls tight junction assembly through the Rac exchange factor Tiam1 . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 262 – 269 ( 2005 ) . Describes a role for PAR3 in tight junction assembly . 88 . Wang , Q . , Chen , X . W . & Margolis , B . PALS1 regulates E - cadherin trafficking in mammalian epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 874 – 885 ( 2007 ) . 89 . Fogg , V . C . , Liu , C . J . & Margolis , B . Multiple regions of Crumbs3 are required for tight junction formation in MCF10A cells . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2859 – 2869 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Matter , K . & Balda , M . S . Biogenesis of tight junctions : the C - terminal domain of occludin mediates basolateral targeting . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 511 – 519 ( 1998 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 239 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 91 . Roeth , J . F . , Sawyer , J . K . , Wilner , D . A . & Peifer , M . Rab11 helps maintain apical crumbs and adherens junctions in the Drosophila embryonic ectoderm . PLoS ONE 4 , e7634 ( 2009 ) . 92 . Gumbiner , B . & Simons , K . The role of uvomorulin in the formation of epithelial occluding junctions . Ciba Found . Symp . 125 , 168 – 186 ( 1987 ) . 93 . Nejsum , L . N . & Nelson , W . J . A molecular mechanism directly linking E - cadherin adhesion to initiation of epithelial cell surface polarity . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 323 – 335 ( 2007 ) . 94 . Jenkins , P . M . et al . E - cadherin polarity is determined by a multifunction motif mediating lateral membrane retention through ankyrin - G and apical – lateral transcytosis through clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 14018 – 14031 ( 2013 ) . 95 . Baas , A . F . et al . Complete polarization of single intestinal epithelial cells upon activation of LKB1 by STRAD . Cell 116 , 457 – 466 ( 2004 ) . Provides evidence that polarization can occur in the absence of cell – cell contacts . 96 . Buendia , B . , Bre , M . H . , Griffiths , G . & Karsenti , E . Cytoskeletal control of centrioles movement during the establishment of polarity in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1123 – 1135 ( 1990 ) . 97 . Bre , M . H . , Kreis , T . E . & Karsenti , E . Control of microtubule nucleation and stability in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells : the occurrence of noncentrosomal , stable detyrosinated microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1283 – 1296 ( 1987 ) . 98 . Oriolo , A . S . , Wald , F . A . , Canessa , G . & Salas , P . J . GCP6 binds to intermediate filaments : a novel function of keratins in the organization of microtubules in epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 781 – 794 ( 2007 ) . 99 . Meng , W . , Mushika , Y . , Ichii , T . & Takeichi , M . Anchorage of microtubule minus ends to adherens junctions regulates epithelial cell - cell contacts . Cell 135 , 948 – 959 ( 2008 ) . 100 . Chausovsky , A . , Bershadsky , A . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cadherin - mediated regulation of microtubule dynamics . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 797 – 804 ( 2000 ) . 101 . Jaulin , F . & Kreitzer , G . KIF17 stabilizes microtubules and contributes to epithelial morphogenesis by acting at MT plus ends with EB1 and APC . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 443 – 460 ( 2010 ) . 102 . Reilein , A . & Nelson , W . J . APC is a component of an organizing template for cortical microtubule networks . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 463 – 473 ( 2005 ) . 103 . Bacallao , R . et al . The subcellular organization of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells during the formation of a polarized epithelium . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2817 – 2832 ( 1989 ) . 104 . Gilbert , T . , Le Bivic , A . , Quaroni , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Microtubular organization and its involvement in the biogenetic pathways of plasma membrane proteins in Caco - 2 intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 275 – 288 ( 1991 ) . 105 . Jaulin , F . , Xue , X . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Kreitzer , G . Polarization - dependent selective transport to the apical membrane by KIF5B in MDCK cells . Dev . Cell 13 , 511 – 522 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Perez Bay , A . E . et al . The kinesin KIF16B mediates apical transcytosis of transferrin receptor in AP - 1B - deficient epithelia . EMBO J . 32 , 2125 – 2139 ( 2013 ) . 107 . Chabin - Brion , K . et al . The Golgi complex is a microtubule - organizing organelle . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2047 – 2060 ( 2001 ) . 108 . Efimov , A . et al . Asymmetric CLASP - dependent nucleation of noncentrosomal microtubules at the trans - Golgi network . Dev . Cell 12 , 917 – 930 ( 2007 ) . 109 . Weisz , O . A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Apical trafficking in epithelial cells : signals , clusters and motors . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 4253 – 4266 ( 2009 ) . 110 . Nance , J . PAR proteins and the establishment of cell polarity during C . elegans development . Bioessays 27 , 126 – 135 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Shulman , J . M . , Benton , R . & St Johnston , D . The Drosophila homolog of C . elegans PAR - 1 organizes the oocyte cytoskeleton and directs oskar mRNA localization to the posterior pole . Cell 101 , 377 – 388 ( 2000 ) . 112 . Tepass , U . FERM proteins in animal morphogenesis . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 19 , 357 – 367 ( 2009 ) . 113 . ten Klooster , J . P . et al . Mst4 and Ezrin induce brush borders downstream of the Lkb1 / Strad / Mo25 polarization complex . Dev . Cell 16 , 551 – 562 ( 2009 ) . 114 . Hebert , A . M . , DuBoff , B . , Casaletto , J . B . , Gladden , A . B . & McClatchey , A . I . Merlin / ERM proteins establish cortical asymmetry and centrosome position . Genes Dev . 26 , 2709 – 2723 ( 2012 ) . 115 . Viswanatha , R . , Ohouo , P . Y . , Smolka , M . B . & Bretscher , A . Local phosphocycling mediated by LOK / SLK restricts ezrin function to the apical aspect of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 969 – 984 ( 2012 ) . 116 . Nelson , W . J . , Drees , F . & Yamada , S . Interaction of cadherin with the actin cytoskeleton . Novartis Found . Symp . 269 , 159 – 168 ; discussion 168 77 , 223 – 230 ( 2005 ) . 117 . Erickson , J . W . , Zhang , C . , Kahn , R . A . , Evans , T . & Cerione , R . A . Mammalian Cdc42 is a brefeldin A - sensitive component of the Golgi apparatus . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 26850 – 26854 ( 1996 ) . 118 . Kroschewski , R . , Hall , A . & Mellman , I . Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 ( 1999 ) . 119 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . , Kreitzer , G . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . cdc42 regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans - Golgi network . EMBO J . 20 , 2171 – 2179 ( 2001 ) . 120 . Salvarezza , S . B . et al . LIM kinase 1 and cofilin regulate actin filament population required for dynamin - dependent apical carrier fission from the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 438 – 451 ( 2009 ) . 121 . Hediger , M . A . et al . The ABCs of solute carriers : physiological , pathological and therapeutic implications of human membrane transport proteinsIntroduction . Pflugers Arch . 447 , 465 – 468 ( 2004 ) . 122 . Scheiffele , P . , Peranen , J . & Simons , K . N - glycans as apical sorting signals in epithelial cells . Nature 378 , 96 – 98 ( 1995 ) . 123 . Yeaman , C . et al . The O - glycosylated stalk domain is required for apical sorting of neurotrophin receptors in polarized MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 929 – 940 ( 1997 ) . References 122 and 123 describe the role of N - and O - glycans as apical sorting signals . 124 . Scheiffele , P . , Roth , M . G . & Simons , K . Interaction of influenza virus hemagglutinin with sphingolipid - cholesterol membrane rafts via its transmembrane domain . EMBO J . 16 , 5501 – 5508 ( 1997 ) . 125 . Lisanti , M . , Caras , I . P . , Davitz , M . A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . A glycophospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2145 – 2156 ( 1989 ) . 126 . Powell , S . K . , Cunningham , B . A . , Edelman , G . M . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Transmembrane and GPI anchored forms of NCAM are targeted to opposite domains of a polarized epithelial cell . Nature 353 , 76 – 77 ( 1991 ) . 127 . Sung , C . H . & Tai , A . W . Rhodopsin trafficking and its role in retinal dystrophies . Int . Rev . Cytol . 195 , 215 – 267 ( 2000 ) . 128 . Tai , A . W . , Chuang , J . Z . , Bode , C . , Wolfrum , U . & Sung , C . H . Rhodopsin’s carboxy - terminal cytoplasmic tail acts as a membrane receptor for cytoplasmic dynein by binding to the dynein light chain Tctex - 1 . Cell 97 , 877 – 887 ( 1999 ) . 129 . Tai , A . W . , Chuang , J . Z . & Sung , C . H . Cytoplasmic dynein regulation by subunit heterogeneity and its role in apical transport . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1499 – 1509 ( 2001 ) . 130 . Takeda , T . , Yamazaki , H . & Farquhar , M . G . Identification of an apical sorting determinant in the cytoplasmic tail of megalin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 284 , C1105 – c1113 ( 2003 ) . 131 . Marzolo , M . P . et al . Differential distribution of low - density lipoprotein - receptor - related protein ( LRP ) and megalin in polarized epithelial cells is determined by their cytoplasmic domains . Traffic 4 , 273 – 288 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Stechly , L . et al . Galectin - 4 - regulated delivery of glycoproteins to the brush border membrane of enterocyte - like cells . Traffic 10 , 438 – 450 ( 2009 ) . 133 . Mishra , R . , Grzybek , M . , Niki , T . , Hirashima , M . & Simons , K . Galectin - 9 trafficking regulates apical – basal polarity in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 17633 – 17638 ( 2010 ) . References 132 and 133 Identify a role of galectins in apical trafficking , thus consolidating the concept of glycans as apical sorting signals . 134 . Puertollano , R . et al . The MAL proteolipid is necessary for normal apical transport and accurate sorting of the influenza virus hemagglutinin in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 141 – 151 ( 1999 ) . 135 . Paladino , S . et al . Protein oligomerization modulates raft partitioning and apical sorting of GPI - anchored proteins . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 699 – 709 ( 2004 ) . 136 . Hannan , L . A . , Lisanti , M . P . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Edidin , M . Correctly sorted molecules of a GPI - anchored protein are clustered and immobile when they arrive at the apical surface of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 353 – 358 ( 1993 ) . 137 . Schuck , S . & Simons , K . Polarized sorting in epithelial cells : raft clustering and the biogenesis of the apical membrane . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 5955 – 5964 ( 2004 ) . 138 . Cheong , K . H . , Zacchetti , D . , Schneeberger , E . E . & Simons , K . VIP17 / MAL , a lipid raft - associated protein , is involved in apical transport in MDCK cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6241 – 6248 ( 1999 ) . 139 . Gonzalez , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Clathrin and AP1B : key roles in basolateral trafficking through trans - endosomal routes . FEBS Lett . 583 , 3784 – 3795 ( 2009 ) . 140 . Bonifacino , J . S . & Traub , L . M . Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 395 – 447 ( 2003 ) . 141 . Deborde , S . et al . Clathrin is a key regulator of basolateral polarity . Nature 452 , 719 – 723 ( 2008 ) . Reports a major role of clathrin in basolateral trafficking . 142 . Carvajal - Gonzalez , J . M . et al . Basolateral sorting of the coxsackie and adenovirus receptor through interaction of a canonical YXXPhi motif with the clathrin adaptors AP - 1A and AP - 1B . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 3820 – 3825 ( 2012 ) . 143 . Ohno , H . et al . Mu1B , a novel adaptor medium chain expressed in polarized epithelial cells . FEBS Lett . 449 , 215 – 220 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Folsch , H . , Ohno , H . , Bonifacino , J . S . & Mellman , I . A novel clathrin adaptor complex mediates basolateral targeting in polarized epithelial cells . Cell 99 , 189 – 198 ( 1999 ) . References 143 and 144 report the discovery of the first basolateral sorting adaptor . 145 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Perez - Bay , A . , Schreiner , R . & Gravotta , D . Response : the “tail” of the twin adaptors . Dev . Cell 27 , 247 – 248 ( 2013 ) . 146 . Bonifacino , J . S . Adaptor proteins involved in polarized sorting . J . Cell Biol . 204 , 7 – 17 ( 2014 ) . 147 . Guo , X . et al . The adaptor protein - 1 mu1B subunit expands the repertoire of basolateral sorting signal recognition in epithelial cells . Dev . Cell 27 , 353 – 366 ( 2013 ) . 148 . Gan , Y . , McGraw , T . E . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . The epithelial - specific adaptor AP1B mediates post - endocytic recycling to the basolateral membrane . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 605 – 609 ( 2002 ) . 149 . Cancino , J . et al . Antibody to AP1B adaptor blocks biosynthetic and recycling routes of basolateral proteins at recycling endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4872 – 4884 ( 2007 ) . 150 . Gravotta , D . et al . AP1B sorts basolateral proteins in recycling and biosynthetic routes of MDCK cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 1564 – 1569 ( 2007 ) . 151 . Gravotta , D . et al . The clathrin adaptor AP - 1A mediates basolateral polarity . Dev . Cell 22 , 811 – 823 ( 2012 ) . 152 . Koivisto , U . M . , Hubbard , A . L . & Mellman , I . A novel cellular phenotype for familial hypercholesterolemia due to a defect in polarized targeting of LDL receptor . Cell 105 , 575 – 585 ( 2001 ) . 153 . Diaz , F . et al . Clathrin adaptor AP1B controls adenovirus infectivity of epithelial cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 11143 – 11148 ( 2009 ) . 154 . Schreiner , R . et al . The absence of a clathrin adapter confers unique polarity essential to proximal tubule function . Kidney Int . 78 , 382 – 388 ( 2010 ) . 155 . Farias , G . G . et al . Signal - mediated , AP - 1 / clathrin - dependent sorting of transmembrane receptors to the somatodendritic domain of hippocampal neurons . Neuron 75 , 810 – 823 ( 2012 ) . 156 . Odorizzi , G . & Trowbridge , I . S . Structural requirements for basolateral sorting of the human transferrin receptor in the biosynthetic and endocytic pathways of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1255 – 1264 ( 1997 ) . 157 . Deora , A . A . et al . The basolateral targeting signal of CD147 ( EMMPRIN ) consists of a single leucine and is not recognized by retinal pigment epithelium . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4148 – 4165 ( 2004 ) . 158 . Simmen , T . , Honing , S . , Icking , A . , Tikkanen , R . & Hunziker , W . AP - 4 binds basolateral signals and participates in basolateral sorting in epithelial MDCK cells . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 154 – 159 ( 2002 ) . 159 . Nishimura , N . , Plutner , H . , Hahn , K . & Balch , W . E . The delta subunit of AP - 3 is required for efficient transport of VSV - G from the trans - Golgi network to the cell surface . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6755 – 6760 ( 2002 ) . R E V I E W S 240 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 160 . Kang , R . S . & Folsch , H . ARH cooperates with AP - 1B in the exocytosis of LDLR in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 193 , 51 – 60 ( 2011 ) . 161 . Li , C . et al . Naked2 acts as a cargo recognition and targeting protein to ensure proper delivery and fusion of TGF - α containing exocytic vesicles at the lower lateral membrane of polarized MDCK cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 3081 – 3093 ( 2007 ) . 162 . Yeaman , C . et al . Protein kinase D regulates basolateral membrane protein exit from trans - Golgi network . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 106 – 112 ( 2004 ) . 163 . Bonazzi , M . et al . CtBP3 / BARS drives membrane fission in dynamin - independent transport pathways . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 570 – 580 ( 2005 ) . 164 . Thunauer , R . et al . Four - dimensional live imaging of apical biosynthetic trafficking reveals a post - Golgi sorting role of apical endosomal intermediates . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1304168111 ( 2014 ) . 165 . Lafont , F . , Burkhardt , J . K . & Simons , K . Involvement of microtubule motors in basolateral and apical transport in kidney cells . Nature 372 , 801 – 803 ( 1994 ) . 166 . Noda , Y . et al . KIFC3 , a microtubule minus end - directed motor for the apical transport of annexin XIIIb - associated Triton - insoluble membranes . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 77 – 88 ( 2001 ) . 167 . Xue , X . , Jaulin , F . , Espenel , C . & Kreitzer , G . PH - domain - dependent selective transport of p75 by kinesin - 3 family motors in non - polarized MDCK cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1732 – 1741 ( 2010 ) . References 101 and 167 show that the same apical plasma membrane protein may be carried by different kinesin motors in non - polarized and in polarized epithelial cells . 168 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Myosin II is involved in the production of constitutive transport vesicles from the TGN . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 291 – 306 ( 1997 ) . 169 . Au , J . S . , Puri , C . , Ihrke , G . , Kendrick - Jones , J . & Buss , F . Myosin VI is required for sorting of AP - 1B - dependent cargo to the basolateral domain in polarized MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 103 – 114 ( 2007 ) . 170 . Roland , J . T . et al . Rab GTPase - Myo5B complexes control membrane recycling and epithelial polarization . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 2789 – 2794 ( 2011 ) . 171 . Ruemmele , F . M . et al . Loss - of - function of MYO5B is the main cause of microvillus inclusion disease : 15 novel mutations and a CaCo - 2 RNAi cell model . Hum . Mutat . 31 , 544 – 551 ( 2010 ) . 172 . Grindstaff , K . K . et al . Sec6 / 8 complex is recruited to cell - cell contacts and specifies transport vesicle delivery to the basal - lateral membrane in epithelial cells . Cell 93 , 731 – 740 ( 1998 ) . 173 . Oztan , A . et al . Exocyst requirement for endocytic traffic directed toward the apical and basolateral poles of polarized MDCK cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 3978 – 3992 ( 2007 ) . References 172 and 173 report the involvement of the exocyst in apical and basolateral trafficking . 174 . Kreitzer , G . et al . Three - dimensional analysis of post - Golgi carrier exocytosis in epithelial cells . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 126 – 136 ( 2003 ) . 175 . Sharma , N . , Low , S . H . , Misra , S . , Pallavi , B . & Weimbs , T . Apical targeting of syntaxin 3 is essential for epithelial cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 937 – 948 ( 2006 ) . 176 . Reales , E . , Sharma , N . , Low , S . H . , Folsch , H . & Weimbs , T . Basolateral sorting of syntaxin 4 is dependent on its N - terminal domain and the AP1B clathrin adaptor , and required for the epithelial cell polarity . PLoS ONE 6 , e21181 ( 2011 ) . 177 . Zerial , M . & McBride , H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 ( 2001 ) . 178 . Hutagalung , A . H . & Novick , P . J . Role of Rab GTPases in membrane traffic and cell physiology . Physiol . Rev . 91 , 119 – 149 ( 2011 ) . 179 . Zeigerer , A . et al . Rab5 is necessary for the biogenesis of the endolysosomal system in vivo . Nature 485 , 465 – 470 ( 2012 ) . RAB5 as a master endosomal organizer . 180 . Balklava , Z . , Pant , S . , Fares , H . & Grant , B . D . Genome - wide analysis identifies a general requirement for polarity proteins in endocytic traffic . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1066 – 1073 ( 2007 ) . Screen reveals a link between polarity proteins and vesicle traffic . 181 . Winter , J . F . et al . Caenorhabditis elegans screen reveals role of PAR - 5 in RAB - 11 - recycling endosome positioning and apicobasal cell polarity . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 666 – 676 ( 2012 ) . 182 . Harris , K . P . & Tepass , U . Cdc42 and Par proteins stabilize dynamic adherens junctions in the Drosophila neuroectoderm through regulation of apical endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 1129 – 1143 ( 2008 ) . 183 . Zuo , X . , Guo , W . & Lipschutz , J . H . The exocyst protein Sec10 is necessary for primary ciliogenesis and cystogenesis in vitro . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2522 – 2529 ( 2009 ) . 184 . Galvez - Santisteban , M . et al . Synaptotagmin - like proteins control the formation of a single apical membrane domain in epithelial cells . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 838 – 849 ( 2012 ) . 185 . Meder , D . , Shevchenko , A . , Simons , K . & Fullekrug , J . Gp135 / podocalyxin and NHERF - 2 participate in the formation of a preapical domain during polarization of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 303 – 313 ( 2005 ) . 186 . Blankenship , J . T . , Fuller , M . T . & Zallen , J . A . The Drosophila homolog of the Exo84 exocyst subunit promotes apical epithelial identity . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3099 – 3110 ( 2007 ) . 187 . Fletcher , G . C . , Lucas , E . P . , Brain , R . , Tournier , A . & Thompson , B . J . Positive feedback and mutual antagonism combine to polarize Crumbs in the Drosophila follicle cell epithelium . Curr . Biol . 22 , 1116 – 1122 ( 2012 ) . 188 . Pocha , S . M . , Wassmer , T . , Niehage , C . , Hoflack , B . & Knust , E . Retromer controls epithelial cell polarity by trafficking the apical determinant Crumbs . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1111 – 1117 ( 2011 ) . 189 . Grusche , F . A . , Richardson , H . E . & Harvey , K . F . Upstream regulation of the hippo size control pathway . Curr . Biol . 20 , R574 – 582 ( 2010 ) . 190 . Pedersen , L . B . & Rosenbaum , J . L . Intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) role in ciliary assembly , resorption and signalling . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 85 , 23 – 61 ( 2008 ) . 191 . Hu , Q . et al . A septin diffusion barrier at the base of the primary cilium maintains ciliary membrane protein distribution . Science 329 , 436 – 439 ( 2010 ) . 192 . Kee , H . L . et al . A size - exclusion permeability barrier and nucleoporins characterize a ciliary pore complex that regulates transport into cilia . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 431 – 437 ( 2012 ) . References 191 and 192 identify key protein complexes that control ciliary access . 193 . Wong , S . Y . & Reiter , J . F . The primary cilium at the crossroads of mammalian hedgehog signaling . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 85 , 225 – 260 ( 2008 ) . 194 . Ding , B . S . et al . Inductive angiocrine signals from sinusoidal endothelium are required for liver regeneration . Nature 468 , 310 – 315 ( 2010 ) . 195 . Ding , B . S . et al . Endothelial - derived angiocrine signals induce and sustain regenerative lung alveolarization . Cell 147 , 539 – 553 ( 2011 ) . References 194 and 195 identify regulatory roles of endothelial cells in epithelial regeneration . 196 . Nasonkin , I . O . et al . Conditional knockdown of DNA methyltransferase 1 reveals a key role of retinal pigment epithelium integrity in photoreceptor outer segment morphogenesis . Development 140 , 1330 – 1341 ( 2013 ) . 197 . Ezratty , E . J . et al . A role for the primary cilium in Notch signaling and epidermal differentiation during skin development . Cell 145 , 1129 – 1141 ( 2011 ) . 198 . Pruliere , G . , Cosson , J . , Chevalier , S . , Sardet , C . & Chenevert , J . Atypical protein kinase C controls sea urchin ciliogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 2042 – 2053 ( 2011 ) . 199 . Fan , S . et al . Polarity proteins control ciliogenesis via kinesin motor interactions . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1451 – 1461 ( 2004 ) . 200 . Atwood , S . X . , Li , M . , Lee , A . , Tang , J . Y . & Oro , A . E . GLI activation by atypical protein kinase C iota / lambda regulates the growth of basal cell carcinomas . Nature 494 , 484 – 488 ( 2013 ) . 201 . Delous , M . et al . Nephrocystin - 1 and nephrocystin - 4 are required for epithelial morphogenesis and associate with PALS1 / PATJ and Par6 . Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 , 4711 – 4723 ( 2009 ) . 202 . Fogelgren , B . et al . The exocyst protein Sec10 interacts with Polycystin - 2 and knockdown causes PKD - phenotypes . PLoS Genet . 7 , e1001361 ( 2011 ) . 203 . Perret , E . , Lakkaraju , A . , Deborde , S . , Schreiner , R . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Evolving endosomes : how many varieties and why ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 423 – 434 ( 2005 ) . 204 . Wang , E . et al . Apical and basolateral endocytic pathways of MDCK cells meet in acidic common endosomes distinct from a nearly - neutral apical recycling endosome . Traffic 1 , 480 – 493 ( 2000 ) . 205 . Brown , P . S . et al . Definition of distinct compartments in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells for membrane - volume sorting , polarized sorting and apical recycling . Traffic 1 , 124 – 140 ( 2000 ) . 206 . Parton , R . G . , Prydz , K . , Bomsel , M . , Simons , K . & Griffiths , G . Meeting of the apical and basolateral endocytic pathways of the Madin - Darby canine kidney cell in late endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3259 – 3272 ( 1989 ) . 207 . Lakkaraju , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Itinerant exosomes : emerging roles in cell and tissue polarity . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 199 – 209 ( 2008 ) . 208 . Futter , C . E . , Connolly , C . N . , Cutler , D . F . & Hopkins , C . R . Newly synthesized transferrin receptors can be detected in the endosome before they appear on the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 10999 – 11003 ( 1995 ) . 209 . Ang , A . L . et al . Recycling endosomes can serve as intermediates during transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 531 – 543 ( 2004 ) . 210 . Cresawn , K . O . et al . Differential involvement of endocytic compartments in the biosynthetic traffic of apical proteins . EMBO J . 26 , 3737 – 3748 ( 2007 ) . 211 . Buendia , B . , Antony , C . , Verde , F . , Bornens , M . & Karsenti , E . A centrosomal antigen localized on intermediate filaments and mitotic spindle poles . J . Cell Sci . 97 , 259 – 271 ( 1990 ) . 212 . Musch , A . et al . Mammalian homolog of Drosophila tumor suppressor lethal ( 2 ) giant larvae interacts with basolateral exocytic machinery in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 158 – 168 ( 2002 ) . 213 . Lu , H . & Bilder , D . Endocytic control of epithelial polarity and proliferation in Drosophila . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 1232 – 1239 ( 2005 ) . 214 . Yamada , S . & Nelson , W . J . Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 517 – 527 ( 2007 ) . 215 . Ivanov , A . I . , Hunt , D . , Utech , M . , Nusrat , A . & Parkos , C . A . Differential roles for actin polymerization and a myosin II motor in assembly of the epithelial apical junctional complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2636 – 2650 ( 2005 ) . 216 . Burkhardt , J . K . , Echeverri , C . J . , Nilsson , T . & Vallee , R . B . Overexpression of the dynamitin ( p50 ) subunit of the dynactin complex disrupts dynein - dependent maintenance of membrane organelle distribution . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 469 – 484 ( 1997 ) . 217 . Hoepfner , S . et al . Modulation of receptor recycling and degradation by the endosomal kinesin KIF16B . Cell 121 , 437 – 450 ( 2005 ) . 218 . Delevoye , C . et al . AP - 1 and KIF13A coordinate endosomal sorting and positioning during melanosome biogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 187 , 247 – 264 ( 2009 ) . 219 . Palazzo , A . F . , Cook , T . A . , Alberts , A . S . & Gundersen , G . G . mDia mediates Rho - regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 723 – 729 ( 2001 ) . 220 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . & Hall , A . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 ( 1992 ) . 221 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Worthylake , R . A . , Liu , B . P . , Burridge , K . & Salmon , E . D . Microtubule growth activates Rac1 to promote lamellipodial protrusion in fibroblasts . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 45 – 50 ( 1999 ) . 222 . Sheff , D . R . , Daro , E . A . , Hull , M . & Mellman , I . The receptor recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early endosomes with different sorting functions . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 123 – 139 ( 1999 ) . 223 . Bucci , C . et al . Rab5a is a common component of the apical and basolateral endocytic machinery in polarized epithelial cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 5061 – 5065 ( 1994 ) . 224 . Miserey - Lenkei , S . et al . Rab and actomyosin - dependent fission of transport vesicles at the Golgi complex . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 645 – 654 ( 2010 ) . 225 . Huber , L . A . et al . Rab8 , a small GTPase involved in vesicular traffic between the TGN and the basolateral plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 35 – 45 ( 1993 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 241 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 226 . Ang , A . L . , Folsch , H . , Koivisto , U . M . , Pypaert , M . & Mellman , I . The Rab8 GTPase selectively regulates AP - 1B - dependent basolateral transport in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 339 – 350 ( 2003 ) . 227 . Kaplan , O . I . et al . The AP - 1 clathrin adaptor facilitates cilium formation and functions with RAB - 8 in C . elegans ciliary membrane transport . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3966 – 3977 ( 2010 ) . 228 . Moritz , O . L . et al . Mutant rab8 Impairs docking and fusion of rhodopsin - bearing post - Golgi membranes and causes cell death of transgenic Xenopus rods . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2341 – 2351 ( 2001 ) . 229 . Schuck , S . et al . Rab10 is involved in basolateral transport in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Traffic 8 , 47 – 60 ( 2007 ) . 230 . Casanova , J . E . et al . Association of Rab25 and Rab11a with the apical recycling system of polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 47 – 61 ( 1999 ) . 231 . Leung , S . M . , Ruiz , W . G . & Apodaca , G . Sorting of membrane and fluid at the apical pole of polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2131 – 2150 ( 2000 ) . 232 . Su , T . et al . A kinase cascade leading to Rab11 - FIP5 controls transcytosis of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 1143 – 1153 ( 2010 ) . 233 . Nokes , R . L . , Fields , I . C . , Collins , R . N . & Folsch , H . Rab13 regulates membrane trafficking between TGN and recycling endosomes in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 845 – 853 ( 2008 ) . 234 . Hunziker , W . & Peters , P . J . Rab17 localizes to recycling endosomes and regulates receptor - mediated transcytosis in epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 15734 – 15741 ( 1998 ) . 235 . Zacchi , P . et al . Rab17 regulates membrane trafficking through apical recycling endosomes in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1039 – 1053 ( 1998 ) . 236 . Tzaban , S . et al . The recycling and transcytotic pathways for IgG transport by FcRn are distinct and display an inherent polarity . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 673 – 684 ( 2009 ) . 237 . Xu , J . et al . Mechanism of polarized lysosome exocytosis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 5937 – 5943 ( 2012 ) . 238 . Chih , B . et al . A ciliopathy complex at the transition zone protects the cilia as a privileged membrane domain . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 61 – 72 ( 2011 ) . 239 . Ostrowski , M . et al . Rab27a and Rab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 19 – 30 ( 2010 ) . 240 . Mikawa , T . , Poh , A . M . , Kelly , K . A . , Ishii , Y . & Reese , D . E . Induction and patterning of the primitive streak , an organizing center of gastrulation in the amniote . Dev Dyn . 229 , 422 – 32 ( 2004 ) . Acknowledgements Research in E . R . B . ’s laboratory was supported by US National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grants EY08538 , EY022165 and GM34107 , and by the Dyson , Research to Prevent Blindness , Beckman and Starr Foundations . Research in I . G . M . ’s labora - tory was supported by NIH grants CA132898 and GM50526 , and by a grant from the Susan Komen Breast Cancer Foundation . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S 242 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved