The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / biocel Segregation of open Major Histocompatibility Class I conformers at the plasma membrane and during endosomal trafﬁcking reveals conformation - based sorting in the endosomal system Hana Mahmutefendi´c , Gordana Blagojevi´c , Maja Ili´c Tomaˇs , Natalia Kuˇci´c , Pero Luˇcin ∗ Department of Physiology and Immunology , University of Rijeka , Faculty of Medicine , Brace Branchetta 20 , 51000 Rijeka , Croatia a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 15 August 2010 Received in revised form 26 November 2010 Accepted 2 December 2010 Available online 21 December 2010 Keywords : Endocytosis Major Histocompatibility Class I proteins Open L d conformers Detergent resistant microdomains Endosomal acidiﬁcation a b s t r a c t FullyconformedMajorHistocompatibilityClassImoleculesarecomplexesofheavychainnon - covalently associated with the peptide and beta - 2 - microglobulin . Conformational change in the extracellular domain of heavy chain leads to their disassembly and formation of open conformers , a process that physiologically occurs in normal cells and results in their presence at the cell surface . In this study we characterized endosomal trafﬁcking of open conformers of a murine class I allele in order to examine whether conformational change in the extracellular domain of a membrane glycoprotein determines its endosomal sorting . Open conformers segregated from their fully conformed counterparts at the plasma membraneandinendosomesbysequestrationinlipid - organizedmembraneenvironment . Consequently , openconformersconstitutivelyinternalizedviadistinctclathrin - independentendocyticcarriersandcon - verged into “classical” early endosomes together with transferrin receptor and cholera - toxin B subunit . In early endosomes , open conformers were excluded from recycling and diverted towards late endo - somes . Due to lack of recycling , open conformers were constitutively internalized at a higher rate than full conformed proteins . Concanamycin A , methyl - (cid:2) - cyclodextrin and sphingomyelinase treatment pre - vented segregation of open conformers in vacuolar early endosomes indicating that acidic endosomal environment and membrane composition are critical for the maintenance of the sorting mechanism . In the absence of endosomal acidiﬁcation open conformers partitioned into lipid disordered membrane composition of early endosomes . Thus , our data suggest for the existence of a lipid - dependent mech - anism in the endosomal system that distinguish membrane proteins based on conformation of their extracellular domain . © 2010 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Sorting of membrane proteins is one of the fundamental phys - iological functions of membrane organelles of the secretory and the endosomal pathways . Many proteins are sorted and targeted into distinct intracellular localizations on the basis of recognition of retention or sorting signal sequences by components of sorting machinery . These sequences localize in transmembrane or cyto - plasmic region of a protein ( Le Roy and Wrana , 2005 ; Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , protein sorting could be based on con - Abbreviations : (cid:2) 2 m , (cid:2) 2 - microglobulin ; BFA , brefeldin A ; CTxB , cholera - toxin B subunit ; EE , early endosome ; EEA1 , early endosomal antigen 1 ; eL d , empty L d ; fL d , full L d ; GM 1 , ganglioside M 1 ; HC , heavy chain ; IR , internalization rate ; LBPA , lysobisphosphatidicacid ; MHC - I , majorhistocompatibilityclassI ; mAb , monoclonal antibody ; PM , plasmamembrane ; LE , lateendosome ; Tf , transferrin ; TfR , transferrin receptor . ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 385 51 406 500 ; fax : + 385 51 675 699 . E - mail addresses : pero @ uniri . hr , perol @ medri . hr ( P . Luˇcin ) . formation of the luminal domain . Sorting of unfolded , misfolded or incompletely assembled proteins is associated with the qual - ity control system that operates in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( reviewed by Arvan et al . , 2002 ; Ellgaard and Helenius , 2003 ) . It appears that the similar quality control system exists also in the Golgi ( Arvan et al . , 2002 ) . However there is very little evidence of a quality control system at the plasma membrane ( PM ) and in the endosomal system that sorts proteins based on their conforma - tional change in the extracellular domain . Substantial understanding of quality control in the secretory pathway is based on studies of the Major Histocompatibility Class I ( MHC - I ) molecules and the endogenous antigen presentation path - way ( reviewed by Wearsch and Cresswell , 2008 ) . These molecules were used as model system for studying protein folding in the ER and trafﬁcking in the secretory pathway . Many details on their assembly were resolved and there are a number of high qual - ity monoclonal antibody reagents that distinguish various folding forms ( reviewed by Hansen et al . , 2005 ) . They can be found at the cell surface as trimolecular complexes composed of 48kDa heavy 1357 - 2725 / $ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2010 . 12 . 002 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 505 chain ( HC ) , 12kDa beta - 2 microglobulin ( (cid:2) 2m ) and 8 – 10 amino - acid antigenic peptide ( reviewed in Pamer and Cresswell , 1998 ) . The complexes are assembled in the ER in a series of multistep events controlled by the quality control machinery ( reviewed by Wearsch and Cresswell , 2008 ) . Incompletely folded heavy chains and unassembled complexes are retained in the ER and routed for the degradation at the cytoplasmic proteasomes . The sorting of incompletely assembled complexes is based on interaction with molecular chaperones which retain them in the ER ( reviewed by Wearsch and Cresswell , 2008 ) . Thus , unassembled forms are not allowed to exit into the Golgi complex and to export to the cell surface . It is well - known that MHC - I molecules can be found at the cell surface in several open forms in which the peptide is either poorly associated with HCs – (cid:2) 2m , or HC – (cid:2) 2m complexes are emptied of the peptide ( Hansen et al . , 2000 ; Malik et al . , 2002 ; Arosa et al . , 2007 ) . It has also been reported that isolated HCs may be found at the PM or HCs without (cid:2) 2m loosely associated with the peptide ( Malik et al . , 2002 ; Smith et al . , 1993 ; Arosa et al . , 2007 ) . All these forms are usually referred to as open conformers or empty MHC - I molecules . However , the biogenesis of empty forms that reach the cell surface is poorly understood . Although early studies suggested that only some of MHC - I alleles that are particularly unstable dis - playemptyforms ( Hansenetal . , 2000 ; Neisigetal . , 1998 ) , itappears that all MHC - I alleles can be presented at the cell surface as open conformers ( Malik et al . , 2002 ; Arosa et al . , 2007 ) . Fully conformed MHC - I molecules are particularly stable at the cell surface and they are constantly internalized by the relatively well characterized constitutive non - clathrin endocytic mechanism that is regulated by small GTPase Arf6 ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) . In the Arf6 - associated endosomal pathway a majority of fully conformed MHC - I complexes are returned to the cell surface by recycling ( Radhakrishna and Donaldson , 1997 ; Weigert et al . , 2004 ) and thus have long half - life at the PM ( Mahmutefendi´c et al . , 2007 ) . The appearance of open conformers of MHC - I molecules at the cell surface should have similar consequences as their appearance in the ER . Thus , it can be expected that the open conformers should besubjectedtodistinctsortingprinciplesinPM – endosomalsystem since they should behave as unfolded proteins . They should be rec - ognized by a quality control system at the cell surface as unfolded proteins and redirected into the degradative route after constitu - tive endocytic uptake . In order to address this issue we analyzed endosomal trafﬁcking of full and empty forms of MHC - I molecules . In this report we present endocytic trafﬁcking of full and empty forms of murine L d molecules . The molecular basis for the exis - tence of full and various empty forms of L d molecules is well characterized , including also molecular interactions between their components which can be distinguished by well characterized monoclonal antibody reagents 30 - 5 - 7S and 64 - 3 - 7 , respectively ( reviewed by Hansen et al . , 2005 ) . Here we report that full and empty forms of MHC - I molecules segregate at the PM and in the endosomal system , and that this segregation is associated with partitioning into different membrane composition . Thus , our data provide evidence for conformation - based sorting of a same protein in the endosomal system and suggest a quality control mechanism in PM - endosomal membranes . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Cell lines Balb 3T3 ﬁbroblasts were obtained from American Type Cul - ture Collection ( ATCC ) . L - L d is a cell line that was generated by introducing the L d gene into murine Ltk − DAP - 3 ﬁbroblasts ( Lee et al . , 1988 ) . Cells were grown in DMEM , supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) of fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2mM l - glutamine , 100mg / ml of streptomycin and 100U / ml penicillin . Cell culture medium and supplements were from Gibco / Invitrogen ( USA ) . 2 . 2 . Antibodies and reagents The following monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) with reactivity to MHC - I molecules were used : 34 - 5 - 8S ( mouse IgG 2a , ATCC HB - 102 ) that reacts with HC of fully conformed ( full ) trimolecular complexes of H2 - D d , MA - 215 ( mouse IgG 2b ) that reacts with HC of full H2 - K d ( Hasenkrug et al . , 1987 ) , 30 - 5 - 7S ( mouse IgG 2a , ATCC HB - 31 ) that reacts with full H2 - L d ( Lie et al . , 1991 ) , and 64 - 3 - 7 ( mouse IgG 2b ) that reacts with (cid:3) 2 domain of free HC and distinguish peptide - empty H2 - L d molecules ( Lie et al . , 1991 ) . MAbs R17 217 . 1 . 3 ( rat IgG 2a , ATCC TIB 219 ) recognize murine transferrin receptor ( TfR ) . MAbs to Lamp1 were from Becton Dickinson & Co ( Germany ) and mAbs to early endosomal anti - gen 1 ( EEA1 ) were from Zymed Laboratories ( San Francisco , CA ) . Alexa 488 - and Alexa 555 - conjugated cholera - toxin B subunit ( CTxB ) , dextran ( MW 10 , 000 ) , transferrin ( Tf ) and secondary - antibody ( Ab ) reagents to mouse IgG 2a , mouse IgG 2b , mouse IgG 1 , rat Ig , and chicken Ig , as well as Zenon Alexa Fluor 488 mouse IgG 2a and IgG 2b labeling kit were from Molecular Probes ( Leiden , NL ) . All secondary reagents were regularly tested for cross reactivity by ﬂow cytometry ( Supp . Fig . 1 ) and during experiments with negative controls . Transferrin – biotin , propidium iodide , methyl - (cid:2) - cyclodextrin , sphingomyelinse and concanamycin A were from Sigma – Aldrich Chemie GmbH ( Germany ) . EZ - Link Sulfo - NHS - LC - Biotin was from Pierce Chemical Co ( Rockford , IL , USA ) , and streptavidin – peroxidase conjugate was from Roche Diagnostics GmbH ( Mannheim , Germany ) . 2 . 3 . Cell surface expression and ﬂow cytometry Adherent cells , collected by short trypsin treatment , were washed in culture medium and incubated at 4 ◦ C for 30 – 60min with 2 (cid:4) g / ml of primary mAbs reagents in PBS containing 10mM EDTA , Hepes pH = 7 . 2 and 0 . 1 % NaN 3 and 2 % FCS ( PBS - A ) . Unbound Abs were removed by three washes with cold PBS - A and the cells were incubated 30min at 4 ◦ C with FITC - conjugated sec - ondary Ab reagents ( 5 (cid:4) g / ml ) in PBS - A . After three washes with PBS - A , cells were analyzed by ﬂow cytometry using FACSCalibur ﬂow cytometer ( Becton Dickinson & Co , San Jose , CA , USA ) . Dead cells were excluded by propidium iodide ( 1 (cid:4) g / ml ) and total of 5000 cells was acquired . Fluorescence signal was determined as mean ﬂuorescence intensity ( MFI ) after subtraction of background ﬂuorescence ( (cid:2) MFI ) determined on the same cells by incuba - tion with nonreactive mAbs of the same isotype and appropriate ﬂuorochrome - conjugated secondary reagent . 2 . 4 . Immunoﬂuorescence and confocal analysis Cells grown on coverslips were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformalde - hyde ( PFA , 20min at r . t . ) , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Tween 20 ( 20min at 37 ◦ C ) and incubated with ﬂuorochrome - conjugated or un - conjugated primary reagents for 60min at 4 ◦ C . Unbound reagents were washed by PBS - A , and cells were either embedded or incubated for 60min at 4 ◦ C with an appropriate ﬂuorochrome - conjugated secondary reagent . After the three washes in PBS - A , cells were embedded in Mowiol ( Fluka , Germany ) - DABCO ( Sigma Chemical Co , Germany ) in PBS containing 50 % glycerol and ana - lyzed by Olympus Fluoview FV300 confocal microscope ( Olympus Optical Co . , Tokyo , Japan ) with 60xPlanApo objective and either 4 × or 8 × zoom ( z axis was 0 . 5 (cid:4) m , if not indicated otherwise ) . Images were processed by Fluoview , Version 4 . 3 FV 300 ( Olympus Optical Co . , Tokyo , Japan ) and Adobe Photoshop ( San Jose , CA , USA ) . 506 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 2 . 5 . Internalization assays Internalization of cell surface proteins was analyzed by modi - ﬁedinternalizationassay ( CoscoyandGanen , 2000 ; Naslavskyetal . , 2003 ; Mahmutefendi´c et al . , 2007 ; Eyster et al . , 2009 ) on non - adherent cells detached by scraper . Prior to the labeling cells were washed three times with PBS . Cell surface proteins were labeled with speciﬁc mAb reagents ( 2 (cid:4) g / ml ) or incubated with the irrele - vant Abs of the same isotype ( 2 (cid:4) g / ml ) at 4 ◦ C for 60min . Unbound mAbs were removed by the three washes with PBS and internal - ization was performed at 37 ◦ C for indicated time ( t = x min ) or cells were kept on ice ( control cells , t = 0min ) . To calculate the degree of internalization , the (cid:2) MFI was determined for each time point ( (cid:2) MFI t = x ) , representing proteins that remained at the cell surface . The (cid:2) MFI of the control cells which were kept on ice represents the total cell surface expression before internalization was initiated ( (cid:2) MFI t = 0 ) . The percentage of internalized cell sur - face proteins was calculated as ( 1 − ( (cid:2) MFI t = x ) / ( (cid:2) MFI t = 0 ) ) × 100 . The internalization rate ( IR ) was calculated from t 1 / 2 value which is determined by plotting the fraction of cell surface bound mAbs ( at 4 ◦ C ) that remained at the cell surface after incubation at 37 ◦ C as a function of time . First order rate constant for inter - nalization ( k i ) was calculated as ln ( 2 ) / t 1 / 2 ( Ciechanover et al . , 1983 ) . To visualize internalized proteins inside cells the internaliza - tion was performed on adherent cells grown on coverslips . Cell surface proteins were labeled with mAb reagents ( 2 (cid:4) g / ml ) at 4 ◦ C for 60min , unbound mAbs removed by the three washes with PBS andinternalizationstartedbytheadditionofpre - warmedmedium . Residualsurface - boundmAbswerestrippedbyacid ( 1min , pH2 . 2 ) , and internalized mAbs were visualized by immunoﬂuorescence and confocal analysis using appropriate ﬂuorochrome - conjugated reagent , as described above . Internalization of TfR was also followed either by Alexa 488 - or Alexa 555 - transferrin ( Tf ) . After 60min of starving in Tf - free medium , cells were exposed to ﬂuorochrome - conjugated Tf ( 25 (cid:4) g / ml ) at 4 ◦ C for 20min to enable binding of conjugated Tf to TfR . Cells were transferred to 37 ◦ C without removing Tf from medium in order to load Tf - containing intracellular compartments . Internalization of CTxB was followed as described ( Blagojevi´c etal . , 2008 ) . Alexa 488 - orAlexa 555 - CTxB ( 5 (cid:4) g / ml ) wasboundtothe cell surface at 4 ◦ C for 60min , and internalized at 37 ◦ C . Uninternal - ized CTxB was removed by the acid wash prior to the processing and confocal analysis . Fluidphaseinternalizationofﬂuorochrome - conjugateddextran ( 50 (cid:4) g / ml ) was performed at 37 ◦ C as described ( Lebrand et al . , 2002 ) . Internalized dextran was analyzed by confocal microscopy on non - permeabilized cells . 2 . 6 . Recycling assays Recycling of L d molecules and TfR was determined by the modiﬁcation of the assay as described by Weigert et al . ( 2004 ) . Brieﬂy , cell surface proteins were labeled with mAbs at 4 ◦ C for 60min and mAb - coupled complexes internalized for 60min at 37 ◦ C . Residual surface - bound mAbs were acid stripped ( 1min , pH 2 . 2 ) , and cells were incubated at 37 ◦ C with Alexa 488 - conjugated secondary Abs to capture recycled mAb - coupled complexes . To calculate the degree of recycling , the ﬂuorescence signal was determined after recycling at 37 ◦ C by ﬂow cytometry for each time point ( (cid:2) MFI rec , t = x ) subtracted by ﬂuorescence sig - nal in the absence of recycling at 4 ◦ C ( (cid:2) MFI nonrec , t = x ) . Cells incubated with non - binding Abs and with Alexa 488 - conjugated secondary Abs served as negative control . Total cell surface expres - sion , on cells that were kept on ice without internalization ( (cid:2) MFI t = 0 ) , and surface expression after 60min internalization ( (cid:2) MFI int , t = 60 ) were determined by Alexa 488 - conjugated sec - ondary Abs . Percentage of recycled proteins was calculated as ( ( (cid:2) MFI rec , t = x − (cid:2) MFI nonrec , t = x ) / ( (cid:2) MFI t = 0 − (cid:2) MFI int , t = 60 ) ) × 100 . 2 . 7 . Antibody - induced patching Antibody - induced patching was performed as described by Knorr et al . ( 2009 ) . Cells , grown on coverslips , were incubated with primary mAbs ( 2 (cid:4) g / ml ) in PBS - A for 60min on ice . Unbound mAbs were removed by several washes with PBS - A , and cells were incubated with Alexa 488 - or Alexa 555 - conjugated secondary Abs ( 5 (cid:4) g / ml ) and / or Alexa 488 - CTxB ( 50 (cid:4) g / ml ) for 45min on ice . After washing in tissue culture medium , the cells were incubated for 5min at 37 ◦ C for patching . The patch formation was stopped by several washes with cold PBS - A , and the cells were ﬁxed with 4 % PFA and processed for confocal analysis . The staining pattern of patches on sections that were tangential or orthogonal to the plane of PM was recorded and processed for colocalization analy - sis . 2 . 8 . Colocalization analysis Colocalization events were evaluated by using global statis - tic approach that performs intensity correlation coefﬁcient - based ( ICCB ) analyses . Cells were randomly selected on the same cover - slipamongthosethatwerewellspreadandshowedawell - resolved pattern . All experimental and control images were acquired using identical imaging settings . We used ImageJ software , utilizing JACoP plugin ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / plugins / track / jacop . html ) ( Bolte and Cordelières , 2006 ) to calculate Manders’ overlap coef - ﬁcients ( M1 and M2 ) . M1 is deﬁned as the ratio of the summed intensities of pixels from the green image for which the intensity in the red channel is above zero to the total intensity in the green channel and M2 is deﬁned conversely for red . The best - ﬁt lower threshold to eliminate most of the signal background was deter - mined using the threshold tool and conﬁrmed by visual inspection . Measures were made on 8 – 10 cells per experimental condition . Maximal M1 and M2 values , determined in a pilot experiment by co - localization of K d and D d molecules in IFN (cid:5) - treated Balb 3T3 cells , ranged from 0 . 85 to 0 . 90 . Minimal values , determined by co - localization analysis of EEA1 and Lamp1 , ranged from 0 . 039 to 0 . 065 . In some cases , the same sample was analyzed at different lower thresholds to determine the best ﬁt . The upper threshold was always set at 255 . 2 . 9 . TX - 100 extraction of membrane molecules in live cells Cells , grown on coverslips , were incubated with speciﬁc mAb reagents ( 2 (cid:4) g / ml ) at 4 ◦ C for 60min . After three washes with PBS , cells were chilled on ice , treated with ice - cold 1 . 0 % TX - 100 in PBS for1min , ﬁxedandprocessedforimmunoﬂuorescenceasdescribed above . Toassessthepercentageofstainedcells , ﬁeldsofwellspread cells were chosen by using the transmitted light , approx . 100 cells per coverslip were counted , and the number of ﬂuorescent cells was determined under UV light . 2 . 10 . Cell surface biotinylation Adherent cells were washed with PBS - A and suspended in the biotinylation buffer ( 10mM Na 2 B 4 O 7 × 10H 2 O , 5mM NaCl , 2mM CaCl 2 and 1mM MgCl 2 ; pH 8 . 8 ) . Biotinylation reaction was per - formed at 4 ◦ C by 0 . 15mg / ml EZ - Link Sulfo - NHS - LC - Biotin and stopped after 20min with the cold stop solution ( 50mM NH 4 Cl in PBS ) for 5min on ice . After three washings with tissue culture medium ( supplemented with 10 % FBS ) , cells were incubated at H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 507 37 ◦ C in the fresh medium . After indicated times cells were col - lected , washed in ice cold PBS - A and lysed in a buffer containing 50mM Tris – Cl , ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 150mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % NP40 , 0 . 02 % NaN 3 and 2mM PMSF . 2 . 11 . Immunoprecipitation and chemiluminescence Supernatants of cellular lysates were pre - cleared with 30 (cid:4) l of protein A - sepharose slurry ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Quan - titative immunoprecipitation of MHC - I molecules was performed with ascitic ﬂuid of appropriate mAbs ( 3 (cid:4) l / ml of cell lysate ) . ImmunecomplexeswereretrievedwithproteinA - sepharose ( 50 (cid:4) l of 50 % slurry ) and sepharose beads were washed as described ( Zeiger et al . , 1997 ) . Immune complexes were eluted at 96 ◦ C by incubation with the sample buffer and analyzed by 13 % SDS - PAGE under non - reducing conditions . After electrophoresis , polyacry - lamide gels were blotted onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride ( PVDF ) Western blotting membrane ( Roche Diagnostics GmbH ) at 60 – 70V for 1h . PVDF membranes were washed in TBS buffer ( pH 7 . 5 ) and incubated in 1 % blocking reagent ( Roche Diagnostics GmbH ) for 2h , followed with 30min of incubation with 100mU / ml of streptavidin – POD in 0 . 5 % blocking solution . After having been washed three times with a TBS - T buffer ( pH 7 . 5 ) membrane were enveloped with a plastic wrap , incubated with Super Signal ® West Dura Extended Duration Substrate ( Pierce Chemical Co ) for 1min , and exposed to BioMax ﬁlm ( Kodak ) . Signals of bands were quanti - ﬁed with a calibrated imaging densitometer ( GS - 710 ; Bio - Rad ) . Net intensity ( NI ) of bands was calculated by the subtraction of back - groundintensity × areafromsumintensity . Percentageofdegraded proteins for each time point ( t = x ) was calculated from net intensi - ties as ( NI t = x × 100 ) / NI t = 0 ) . 2 . 12 . Statistical analysis The data were analyzed using computer applications Sigma Plot Scientiﬁc Graphing System , v8 . 0 . Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation ( S . D . ) . 3 . Results For the analysis of endosomal trafﬁcking of open L d conformers ( empty L d , eL d ) we used L - L d cells , transfected L - ﬁbroblasts that constitutively express fully conformed ( full L d , fL d ) and eL d to a rel - atively high levels at the cell surface , and interferon - gamma ( IFN (cid:5) ) stimulated Balb 3T3 ﬁbroblasts that constitutively express L d at its low level but have a well - spread and abundant endosomal system ( Supp . Fig . 2 ) . 3 . 1 . Open L d conformers do not internalize with the same rate as full L d We ﬁrst determined the constitutive internalization rate ( IR ) of full and empty L d molecules . Cell surface L d molecules were labeled with mAbs and the loss of cell surface bound mAbs was monitored over a period of 10h by ﬂow cytometry . In L - L d ﬁbrob - lasts , cell surface mAb - coupled eL d were lost with t 1 / 2 of ∼ 60min , whereas mAb - coupled fL d were lost with t 1 / 2 of ∼ 5h ( Fig . 1A ) , indicating that eL d internalize much faster than fL d . The IR of eL d ( 0 . 01049 ± 0 . 00308min − 1 ) in L - L d cells was almost ﬁve fold higher and the IR of fL d ( 0 . 00231 ± 0 . 00053min − 1 ) . Similar kinetic was determined on IFN (cid:5) - treated Balb 3T3 cells ( t 1 / 2 ∼ 60min for eL d and ∼ 6h for fL d , data not shown ) . Although internalization of eL d was much faster than fL d , it was much slower than internalization Fig . 1 . Internalization and degradation rates of full and empty L d molecules . ( A ) Loss of fL d , eL d and TfR from the cell surface of L - L d cells was determined by ﬂow cytometry after binding of mAbs at 4 ◦ C and incubation at 37 ◦ C ( internalization ) . Representative of 15 independent experiments is shown . Right panel presents the data from the same experiment within the ﬁrst hour of internalization . ( B ) Degradation kinetics of fL d and eL d . Cell surface proteins of L - L d cells were biotinylated and fL d and eL d molecules immunoprecipitated from cellular extracts after 1 – 6h of chase . Percentage of degraded proteins was calculated by quantitative analysis of immunoblots . Data represent mean ± S . D . from four independent experiments . ( C ) Degradation kinetics of un - associated and mAb - associated L d molecules . IFN (cid:5) - treated L - L d cells were cell surface biotinylated and left untreated ( Ø ) or incubated with mAbs ( Ab ) at 4 ◦ C for 60min prior incubation at 37 ◦ C for 1 – 6h . L d molecules were immunoprecipitated from NP40 lysates of untreated cells ( Ø (cid:2) Ab ) or from mAb - labeled cells either by direct retrieval of L d - mAb from lysates ( Ab (cid:2) Ø ) or after the addition of mAb into lysates ( Ab (cid:2) Ab ) . ( D ) Quantitative analysis of immunoblots from C . Percentage of expression relative to time 0 ( 0h ) was calculated . 508 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 of TfR ( t 1 / 2 ∼ 8 – 10min ) , as determined by anti - TfR ( Fig . 1A ) and by Tf - biotin ( data not shown ) . Rapid internalization of mAb - bound TfRs did not lead to their complete loss from the cell surface but after 30min the steady state was established at the ∼ 30 % of con - trol level ( Fig . 1A , right panel ) and gradually declined over time to a level of ∼ 15 % after 10h ( Fig . 1A , left panel ) . This is consis - tent with the TfR recycling and its slow degradation ( Maxﬁeld and McGraw , 2004 ; Lakadamyalietal . , 2006 ) . GiventhatIRrepresentsa net result of endocytic uptake and recycling , our data indicate that either of these two components is different between eL d and fL d . In addition , IR of eL d ( and fL d ) indicates that they do not follow the clathrin - dependent endocytic route as TfR . In order to test whether the assay based on mAb coupling at the cell surface gives an accurate IR , we biotinylated cell surface pro - teins and immunoprecipitated full and empty L d molecules from cellularlysates ( Fig . 1Band1C , Ø (cid:2) Ab ) overaperiodof6 – 8hfollow - ing biotinylation . As shown in Fig . 1B and 1C , ∼ 10 % of eL d was lost from cells within the ﬁrst hour and , after that , eL d were lost from cells much faster than fL d . The estimated degradation rates of eL d ( 0 . 475 ± 0 . 065h − 1 ) and fL d ( 0 . 128 ± 0 . 022h − 1 ) corresponded with their IRs , suggesting that all constitutively internalized eL d reach lysosomes within less than 60min and are directed into degrada - tion . When biotinylated cell surface L d proteins were coupled with mAbs , as in ﬂow cytometric studies , and mAb - coupled complexes precipitated from cellular extracts ( Ab (cid:2) Ø ) the degradation kinet - ics did not change ( Fig . 1C ) , suggesting that binding of mAbs to cell surface L d does not facilitate their degradation . The addition of mAbs also into lysates ( Ab (cid:2) Ab ) did not discover additional fL d , suggesting that mAbs remain stably associated with L d molecules during endosomal trafﬁcking . However , a small fraction of mAb unassociated eL d was discovered in lysates at 4 and 6h ( Fig . 1C and D ) , which is consistent with the existence of unstable fraction of cell surface fL d that melt in acidic environment and con - vert into the empty conformation ( Smith et al . , 1993 ; Hansen et al . , 2005 ) . Altogether , these experiments demonstrate that mAbs - based internalization assay enables accurate assessment of the constitutive internalization and endosomal trafﬁcking of L d molecules . 3 . 2 . Distinct internalization pattern of open L d conformers and full L d EndosomalrouteofL d moleculeswasanalyzedbylabelingofcell surfaceproteinswithmAbsat4 ◦ C ( Fig . 2A ) andmonitoringofintra - cellular trafﬁcking of mAb - coupled proteins at 37 ◦ C ( Fig . 2B and C , Supp . Fig . 3 ) . Internalized mAb – eL d complexes were detectable in peripheral endocytic carriers after 5min in 20 % and after 10min in halfofcells ( Supp . Fig . 3 ) , atimewhen10 % cellsurfaceeL d wasinter - nalized ( see Fig . 1A ) . With time , endocytic carriers that collected internalized mAb – eL d grew in size and after 30min they localized in clearly conﬁned globular endocytic carriers ( Fig . 2B ) . These car - riers were positive for the early endosomal marker EEA1 ( Fig . 2B and D ) and TfR ( Fig . 4B ) , indicating that internalized eL d were col - lected in vacuolar early endosomes . In the perinuclear area , close to the cell center , eL d - loaded membranes segregated from EEA1 - positive membranes into the central part of an endosome ( Fig . 2B , insert ) , suggesting for their partitioning into luminal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes . After 60min , approx . 50 % if internal - ized mAb – eL d were found in perinuclear EEA1 - negative ( data not shown ) and Lamp1 - positive ( Fig . 2C and D ) endosomes , indicating for their translocation into LE . This is consistent with the observa - tion that very little of eL d ( approx . 10 % ) was degraded within the ﬁrst hour ( Fig . 1B and C ) . IncontrasttoeL d , fL d weredetectedindiscreteperipheralendo - cytic carriers , often with an elongated proﬁle , not before 10min Fig . 2 . Colocalization of internalized L d molecules with early ( EEA1 ) and late ( Lamp1 ) endosomal markers . Cell surface L d molecules of IFN (cid:5) - treated L - L d cells were labeled with mAbs at 4 ◦ C ( A ) and mAb - coupled complexes internalized at 37 ◦ C for 30 ( B ) and 60min ( C ) . mAb – fL d and mAb – eL d were visualized by non - crossreactive Alexa 555 – anti mouse IgG 2a , and Alexa 488 – or Alexa 555 – anti mouse IgG 2b , respectively . The internalized complexes were visualized after acid stripping of un - internalized mAbs from the cell surface . Early endosomes were stained with anti - EEA1andeitherAlexa 488 - orAlexa 555 - anti - chickenIg , andlateendosomeswith anti - Lamp1 and Alexa 488 - anti - rat IgG . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 10 (cid:4) M . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of colocalization based on the calculation of Mander’s coefﬁcients ( M1 and M2 ) on serial images ( 5 – 9 sections ) of 6 – 8 cells from two independent experiments . Data represent mean ± S . D . of internalization ( Supp . Fig . 3 ) . After 20min they were loaded in EEA1 - positive endosomes ( data not shown ) and after 30min fL d - loaded endosomal membranes were found to segregate in EEA1 - negative tubular extensions ( Fig . 2B , insert ) that coalesced into a juxtanuclear vesiculo - tubular structure ( Fig . 2B and C , and Supp . Fig . 3 ) . Inthesestructures , fL d co - localizedwithTfR ( Supp . Fig . H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 509 Fig . 3 . Analysis of antibody - induced patches of L d molecules at the plasma membrane . Cell surface L d molecules and TfR of IFN (cid:5) - treated Balb 3T3 cells were reacted with mAbs at 4 ◦ C , cell surface bound mAbs clustered with Alexa 488 - or Alexa 555 - conjugated secondary Abs and patches induced by brief warming ( 5min ) at 37 ◦ C . GM 1 was patched with Alexa 488 - CTxB . ( A ) Representative images of fL d and eL d patches on confocal sections that are orthogonal ( upper panel ) and tangential ( lower panel ) to the planeofPM . ( B ) Co - distributionofeL d andfL d patcheswithTfRclusters . ( C ) Co - distributionofeL d andfL d patcheswithGM1clusters . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 5 (cid:4) m . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation ofcolocalization , basedonthecalculationofMander’scoefﬁcients ( M1andM2 ) , onserialimages ( 5 – 9sectionspercell ) of6 – 8cellsfromtwoindependentexperiments . Data represent mean ± S . D . 5 ) but not with Lamp1 ( Fig . 2C ) , indicating that they are diverted fromcommonendosomesintothejuxtanuclearrecyclingcompart - ment . After 60min of internalization , very little of internalized fL d ( approx . 20 % ) co - localized with Lamp1 ( Fig . 2C and D ) . Taken together , our data suggest that internalized open L d con - formers and fully conformed L d molecules are collected in vacuolar early endosomes from which a majority of fully conformed L d is diverted into tubular sorting endosomes , including juxtanu - clear recycling endosomes , whereas open L d conformers remain in vacuolar early endosomes that mature into LE . This distinct inter - nalization pattern reﬂects distinct steady state distribution : eL d were retained in the vacuolar perinuclear structures , whereas fL d were retained in the Lamp1 - free juxtanuclear localization ( Supp . Fig . 4 ) . 3 . 3 . Open L d conformers and full L d segregate at the cell surface The distinct early postendocytic pattern suggests that eL d and fL d may segregate already at the PM . Therefore , we next analyzed their localization at the PM by the antibody - mediated cluster - ing assay ( Knorr et al . , 2009 ) . Cell surface L d were labeled with mAbs and reacted with secondary Abs at 4 ◦ C . Patch formation was induced by brief warming ( 5min ) prior ﬁxation and patches were analyzed at serial confocal sections . As shown in Fig . 3A , the overall distribution pattern of eL d and fL d patches was different , both at sections that are orthogonal ( Fig . 3A , upper panel ) and tangential ( Fig . 3A , lowerpanel ) totheplaneofPM . Quantitativecolocalization analysis revealed that ∼ 35 % of patches overlapped ( Fig . 3D ) , par - ticularly in the areas where larger patches were formed ( Fig . 3A , indicated by the arrow ) , indicating that a majority of cell surface eL d segregate into distinct membrane environment than fully con - formed MHC - I molecules . Patches of fL d largely overlapped ( ∼ 80 % ) with patches of fK d ( Fig . 3D ) , as well as patches of fK d and fD d ( data not shown ) , indicating that fully conformed MHC - I proteins segregate into the same membrane environment of the PM . Antibody - induced patches of eL d , and also fL d , did not localize in clathrin - coated pits , as demonstrated by colocalization analysis with TfR patches ( Fig . 3B ) . Less than 20 % of eL d and less than 30 % of fL d patches overlapped with TfR patches ( Fig . 3D ) . This is consis - tent with observations that MHC - I proteins do not enter into the clathrin - coated vesicles and with our conclusion that open L d con - formers are not constitutively internalized via clathrin - dependent route . The patches of GM1 , induced by CTxB , did not co - localize with TfR patches ( Fig . 3D ) and moderately co - localized ( ∼ 30 % ) with fL d patches at areas where larger patches were formed , as demon - strated at sections that were orthogonal to the plane of PM ( Fig . 3C and D ) . In contrast , ∼ 50 % of GM1 and eL d patches co - localized also in tangential sections ( Fig . 3C ) , indicating that a part of cell surface eL d have preference for similar membrane environment as GM1 . 3 . 4 . Open L d conformers and full L d do not enter into the same nascent endocytic carriers after constitutive endocytosis Segregation of eL d at the cell surface suggest also distinct mode of their endocytic uptake . To further characterize their endocytic route we co - internalized mAb - bound eL d with cargo molecules of known endocytic routes . First , we co - internalized eL d with fL d . Fully conformed MHC - I proteins are endocytosed via Arf6 - associated non - clathrin path - way that forms early endocytic carriers which do not overlap with Tf - and caveolin - loaded carriers ( Eyster et al . , 2009 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) , which is also conﬁrmed in our experimental set - tings for fL d ( Supp . Fig . 5 ) and K d ( data not shown ) . After 10min of internalization , ∼ 20 % of internalized fL d co - localized with eL d ( Fig . 4A ) , indicating that eL d do not enter via the same nascent carriers as fully conformed MHC - I proteins . Second , we co - internalized eL d with TfR , a well characterized marker of the clathrin - dependent route ( Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . After 10min of internalization , ∼ 30 % of internalized eL d co - localized with internalized TfR ( Fig . 4B ) , particularly in larger endocytic carriers , indicating that eL d do not constitutively enter together with TfR but meet in the same early acceptor endosomes . Third , we co - internalized L d with CTxB , a marker of the GEEC pathway ( Mayor and Pagano , 2007 ) . Given that GM1 expression was undetectable at the surface of L - L d cells , for these experiments we used Balb 3T3 cells , which had similar internalization patterns to that described above ( data not shown ) . Already at the earliest stages ( 10min ) ∼ 40 % of internalized eL d was found in the same endocytic carriers as CTxB whereas very little of fL d - loaded endo - cytic carriers were positive for CTxB ( Fig . 4C ) . These data indicate that at least part of cell surface eL d may use similar endocytic route 510 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 Fig . 4 . Co - internalization of eL d with fL d , transferrin receptor and cholera - toxin B subunit . Representative confocal images ( left ) and colocalization analysis ( right ) of co - internalizedeL d withfL d ( A ) , eL d withTfR ( B ) , eL d andfL d withCTxB ( C ) , andeL d withdextran ( D ) . CellsurfaceeL d , fL d andTfRofIFN (cid:5) - treatedL - L d cells ( AandB ) andBalb3T3 cells ( C ) were labeled with mAbs at 4 ◦ C . Cell surface GM 1 ( C ) was labeled with Alexa 488 - CTxB at 4 ◦ C ( 45min ) . Internalization was initiated by the addition of pre - warmed medium and cells were incubated at 37 ◦ C for indicated time . Internalized mAb – fL d complexes were visualized with Alexa 555 - anti - mouse IgG 2a and mAb – eL d either with Alexa 488 - or Alexa 555 - anti - mouse IgG 2b . MAb – TfR complexes were visualized with Alexa 488 - anti - rat IgG . For co - internalization with dextran ( D ) L - L d cells were incubated 30min at 4 ◦ C with 64 - 3 - 7 mAb complexed with Alexa 488 - Zenon , and then at 37 ◦ C in the presence of Alexa 555 - dextran ( Dex ) for indicated time . Acid stripped cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy ( z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m ) . Quantiﬁcation of colocalization was based on calculation of Mender’s coefﬁcients ( M1 and M2 ) on serial images ( 5 – 9 sections per cell ) of 6 – 8 cells from at least two independent experiments . Data represent mean ± S . D . Arrows point to the juxtanuclear area . Bars , 5 (cid:4) m . as CTxB , as suggested by colocalization of mAb - induced patches ( Fig . 3C and D ) , or that eL d is collected in the same early acceptor compartment as CTxB . Empty L d - loaded early endocytic carriers were also loaded with ﬂuid - phase marker dextran ( Fig . 4D ) , which is known to enter the cell via the GEEC pathway as CTxB ( Mayor and Pagano , 2007 ) . At later stages , dextran persisted in eL d - loaded endocytic carriers ( Fig . 4D , 40min ) indicating that eL d proceeded into the degradative route . Taken together , our data suggest that eL d are endocytosed via non - clathrin route which is distinct to that used by fL d and similar , but not identical , to routes used by ﬂuid - phase cargo and CTxB . This conclusion is supported by observation that eL d do not internalize at temperature that is permissive ( 18 ◦ C ) for the internalization of clathrin - dependent cargo and moderately internalize at temperature that is non - permissive ( 25 ◦ C ) for the internalization of dextran ( Supp . Fig . 6 ) . 3 . 5 . Open L d conformers are rerouted in vacuolar early endosomes at the juxtanuclear interface Although our data indicate that constitutive uptake of eL d do not occur via the same endocytic carriers as fL d , they meet in early endosomes and after 20min of internalization approx . 40 % of them co - localized in endosomes bearing internalized TfR and CTxB ( Fig . 4B and C ) . Internalized fL d were often found in tubular endo - cytic carriers in contrast to eL d that loaded vacuolar endosomes . Alreadyafter20minandparticularlyafter40minofinternalization , eL d and fL d concentrated in vacuolar endosomes in the perinuclear region surrounding pericentriolar area ( Fig . 4A ) . In this region , fL d progressed into eL d - free tubular endosomes as TfR and CTxB . These data indicate that eL d also segregate in during EE maturation and that the next segregation event occurs in vacuolar EEs at the jux - tanuclear interface . 3 . 6 . Open L d conformers are excluded from early endosomal recycling The absence of eL d from tubular endosomes ( Figs . 2 and 4 ) and a high internalization rate ( Fig . 1 ) suggest that they do not recycle . Thus , we used an assay based on the capture of recycled mAb - coupled complexes at the cell surface ( Weber et al . , 2004 ) in order to determine whether eL d can recycle . The efﬁciency of the recy - cling assay was conﬁrmed by the 80 % recycling efﬁciency of TfR H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 511 Fig . 5 . RecyclingofL d moleculesandtransferrinreceptor ( TfR ) inL - L d cells . ( A ) Cell surfaceL d moleculesandTfRofL - L d cellswerelabeledwithmAbsat4 ◦ Cfor45min and internalized for 60min at 37 ◦ C . Un - internalized mAbs were acid stripped and cells were exposed to FITC - conjugated secondary Abs for indicated time at 37 ◦ C . Fluorescentsignalwasquantiﬁedbyﬂowcytometry . Recyclingefﬁciencywasdeter - mined as described in Section 2 . Shown is the representative experiment out of 6 independent experiments . ( B ) Recycling of TfR and L d molecules from early endo - somes . mAb - labeled L d and TfR were internalized at 16 ◦ C ( 60min ) and recycling efﬁciency was determined at 37 ◦ C ( 16 → 37 ) or at 16 ◦ C ( 16 → 16 ) . Data represent mean value of four independent experiments ± S . D . ( Fig . 5A ) which is indistinguishable from that determined by an assay based on the loss of internalized Alexa 488 - Tf from the cells ( data not shown ) . This assay revealed that fL d recycles with the efﬁciency of 20 – 30 % ( Fig . 5A ) , although with the similar rate as TfR ( t 1 / 2 ∼ 10min , Fig . 5A ) , whereas recycled eL d were not detectable ( Fig . 5A ) , indicating that eL d do not recycle from the perinuclear endosomes . In order to test whether eL d can recycle from EEs , we performed internalizationat16 ◦ C , atemperaturenon - permissiveforrecycling ( van Dam et al . , 2002 ; Fig . 5B , 16 → 16 ) , that arrests internalized cargo in “classical” EEs , as conﬁrmed by co - localization with EEA1 andTfR ( datanotshown ) . Whencellswereshiftedto37 ◦ C , fL d recy - cled to the similar rate as TfR whereas no recycled eL d was detected ( Fig . 5B , 16 → 37 ) . These data indicate that open L d conformers are excluded from the early endosomal recycling domain . 3 . 7 . Segregation of open L d conformers in early endosomes requires activity of H + - V - ATPase Our previous data indicate that internalized eL d meet with fL d and clathrin - dependent cargo in vacuolar EEs and again segregate into the LE route . To further characterize the requirements for eL d segregation in EEs , we used concanamycin A ( ConA ) to inhibit endosomal H + - V - ATPase activity which is known to be essential for endosomal maturation ( Gu and Gruenberg , 1999 ; Kooijman et al . , 2003 ) . After 60min of co - internalization in ConA - treated cells , eL d were retained in perinuclear endosomes together with fL d ( Fig . 6A , top ) and TfR ( Fig . 6A , bottom ) . The same pattern was also observed after 2h of internalization ( data not shown ) . Perinu - clearendosomesloadedwithTfRinConA - treatedcellsalsoretained internalized dextran ( Fig . 6B , top ) , indicating that progression into the degradative route was inhibited . Additionally , EEA1 - negative ( Fig . 6B , bottom ) tubular extensions loaded with internalized fL d and TfR were often observed ( Fig . 6A and B , indicated by arrows ) , suggesting that the condition of inhibited endosomal acidiﬁca - tion is permissive for propagation into recycling tubules . This is conﬁrmed by the recycling assay , which demonstrates that the recycling of TfR ( Fig . 6C ) and fL d ( Fig . 6C and D ) was not pre - Fig . 6 . Segregation of eL d in early endosomes requires acidic endosomal pH . ( A ) Colocalization of internalized eL d with co - internalized fL d or TfR in untreated and Con - canamycinA ( ConA ) - treatedcells ( pretreatmentwith200nMfor2h ) . CellsurfaceL d andTfRwerelabeledwithmAbsat4 ◦ Candinternalized60minat37 ◦ C . Uninternalized mAbswereacidstrippedfromthecellsurfaceandserialimagesof8cellswererecorded . Representativeimagesofperinuclearareaarepresentedandcolocalizationanalysis based on the calculation of Mander’s coeffcients . Data represent mean ± S . D from three independent experiments . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 2 (cid:4) M . ( B ) Perinuclear localization pattern of co - internalized ( 60min ) Alexa 488 - transferrin ( TfR ) and Alexa 555 - dextran ( Dex ) , and internalized fL d and EEA1 in ConA - treated cells . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 2 (cid:4) M . ( C ) Recycling efﬁciency within 30min of TfR and L d molecules in ConA - treated cells . ( D ) Loss of L d molecules ( after 2h of loading with mAb - labeled ) from perinuclear localization in untreated and Con A treated L - L d cells . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 10 (cid:4) M . ( E ) Effect of ConA on the degradation of mAb - labeled L d molecules that were loaded or 2h . The loss of mAb from cells was determined after 2h of chase by ﬂow cytometry and results expressed as percentage ± S . D . of the internalized mAb – L d after 2h of pulse . Arrows point to tubular endosomes . n = nucleus . 512 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 vented but rather delayed from neutral endosomes . In contrast to untreated cells , however , in ConA - treated cells recycled eL d were detectable at the cell surface ( Fig . 6C ) , indicating that acidic pH prevent eL d entry into the recycling domain . Additionally , in the absence of endosomal acidiﬁcation , propagation of cargo that is Fig . 7 . LocalizationofL d indistinctmembraneenvironment . ( A ) Percentage ( ± S . D . ) ofBalb3T3cellsthatremainedpositiveforimmunoﬂuorescencestainingofplasma membrane and endosomal proteins after treatment with cold Triton X - 100 ( TX - 100 ) . ( B ) Confocal images of L - L d cells exposed cold TX - 100 after binding of anti - L d ( cell surface ) and after 60min internalization ( intracellular ) of mAb - bound L d ( un - internalizedmAbswereacidstrippedfromthecellsurface ) . ( C ) Relativecellsurface level of fL d , eL d and TfR after 60min of internalization in methyl - (cid:2) - cyclodextrin ( M (cid:2) CD , 7 . 5mM ) and sphingomyelinase ( SMase , 100mU / ml ) treated L - L d cells . ( D ) Effect of sphingomyelin ( SMase ) and cholesterol ( M (cid:2) CD ) depletion on the internalization of eL d in L - L d cells . Internalization of eL d was normalized to the internalization in untreated cells at the corresponding time . ( E ) Co - internalization ( 40min ) of mAb - labeled ( 60min at 4 ◦ C ) fL d and eL d in M (cid:2) CD ( 7 . 5mM , with 1h pre - treatment ) and SMase ( 100mU / ml , with 2h pre - treatment ) treated L - L d cells . z = 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Bars , 10 (cid:4) m . destined for LE route is inhibited which resulted in prolonged per - sistence of dextran ( Fig . 6B ) and internalized fL d and eL d ( Fig . 6D ) in perinuclear endosomes and reduced degradation of both fL d and eL d ( Fig . 6E ) . Thus , our data indicate that segregation fL d and eL d occursinEEsbyapH - dependentmechanismpriortheirmaturation into LE . 3 . 8 . Open L d conformers partition in distinct membrane microenvironment Distinct localization at the PM and early endosomal segrega - tion requirements suggest that eL d partition in distinct membrane composition . Thus , we tested for solubility of internalized mem - brane proteins in nonionic detergent ( Schuck et al . , 2003 ) . After the cold TX - 100 treatment internalized fL d were washed out ( Fig . 7A ) to the similar degree as internalized Lamp1 , TfR and fD d ( Fig . 7A ) , membrane proteins of known preference for lipid - disordered com - position ( Schuck et al . , 2003 ; Sobo et al . , 2007 ; Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ) . However , the cold TX - 100 treatment did not wash out inter - nalized eL d ( Fig . 7A ) as well as GPI - anchored protein Rae1 ( Fig . 7A ) , a membrane component known to reside in lipid - organized phase ( Hullin - MatsudaandKobayashi , 2007 ; Fivazetal . , 2002 ) , indicating that eL d partition in lipid - organized Tx - 100 - resistant membrane microdomains . The cold TX - 100 extraction almost completely Fig . 8 . Disruption of endosomal pH gradient changes membrane localization of eL d molecules . CellsurfacefL d ( A ) andeL d ( B ) ofuntreatedandConA - treated ( 200nM , 2h pretreatment ) L - L d cells were labeled with mAbs at 4 ◦ C and internalized at 37 ◦ C for 45min . Un - internalized mAbs from the cell surface by the acid wash and the cells either ﬁxed with PFA ( Ø ) or treated with cold TX - 100 ( 1min ) prior ﬁxation . InternalizedL d ( redﬂuorescence ) weresimultaneouslyvisualizedwithEEA1 ( green ﬂuorescence ) . Bar , 10 (cid:4) m . H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 513 washedoutmAb - coupledfL d butnotmAb - coupledeL d fromthecell surface and from intracellular compartments ( Fig . 7B ) , indicating that mAb binding did not change their microdomain distribution during endosomal trafﬁcking . In order to determine the role of lipid composition on the internalization kinetics of eL d molecules we used well character - ized chemicals that disrupt cholesterol ( methyl - (cid:2) - cyclodextrin , M (cid:2) CD ) and sphingomyelin ( sphingomyelinase , SMase ) content within membranes ( Cheng et al . , 2006 ; London , 2005 ) . Although , M (cid:2) CD did not change cell surface level ( Fig . 7C ) and mem - brane microdomain localization ( data not shown ) of eL d it slightly enhanced their uptake ( Fig . 7D ) . In contrast , pretreatment with SMaze enhanced constitutive internalization of eL d ( Fig . 7D ) which resulted in their loss from the cell surface ( Fig . 7C ) . These data suggest that eL d localize in sphingomyelin - rich membrane envi - ronment . However , both cholesterol and sphingomyelin content determine the segregation capacity of EEs , since M (cid:2) CD and SMase treatment inhibited segregation of eL d and fL d ( Fig . 7E ) . 3 . 9 . Open L d conformers partition in TX - 100 sensitive membrane composition after disruption of endosomal pH Our previous data demonstrated that eL d distribute in distinct membrane environment at the cell surface and in endosomes . When internalized for 45min , eL d were associated with EEA1 - positive endosomes and localized in TX - 100 resistant membranes ( Fig . 8 ) , indicating that they remain in the same environment also after internalization in EEs . However , in ConA - treated cells internalized eL d co - localized with fL d ( Fig . 6A ) in vacuolized EEA1 - positive endosomes ( Fig . 8 ) , in the TX - 100 soluble membrane domains ( Fig . 8 ) , indicating that acidity of endosomes is essential for their maintenance in lipid - organized membrane environment . 4 . Discussion It is herewith demonstrated that open conformers ( empty ) and fully conformed L d molecules segregate at the PM and in the endo - somalsystem . Thissegregationisassociatedwiththesequestration of open conformers into a distinct membrane environment . Parti - tioning in distinct membrane composition may represent a basis for sorting into distinct primary endocytic carriers and entry into a different endocytic route ( Lajoie and Nabi , 2007 ) and their exclu - sion from the endosomal recycling domain . The lack of endosomal recycling results in increased constitutive internalization rate of open conformers . The same sorting principle was observed on dif - ferent cell lines and also with open conformers of human MHC - I alleles ( Blagojevi´c et al . , manuscript in preparation ) . Although we were not focused on the endocytic mechanism , our data strongly indicate that open L d conformers are constitutively endocytosed via non - clathrin route . Thus , with these observations we extend the complexity and the diversity of non - clathrin internalization mechanisms . In this study we focused on L d molecules since they are less sta - blethanotherMHC - Iallelesandthencepresentasopenconformers at a higher degree ( Smith et al . , 1993 ; Hansen et al . , 2000 , 2005 ) . In addition , there are several well characterized mAb reagents that are able to distinguish assembled trimolecular complexes from unassembled HCs and HCs associated with (cid:2) 2 m devoid of the pep - tide ( Hansen et al . , 2005 ) . In view of biological properties and biochemical characteristics ( Neisig et al . , 1998 ) , human HLA - C are most similar to L d molecules . Yet , a majority of mAb reagents to non - conformed human HLA molecules recognize only unassem - bled HCs ( Hansen et al . , 2005 ) , whereas 64 - 3 - 7 reagent used for L d molecules also recognize HCs associated with (cid:2) 2 m ( Hansen et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , studies with L d can reveal that smaller unfold - ing events which result in the peptide loss are sufﬁcient to redirect trafﬁcking of L d molecules . Although consensus has not been reached about pathway of internalization of MHC proteins , a considerable number of studies demonstrate that both fully conformed MHC - I and MHC - II proteins areendocytosedviaclathrin - independentroutes . Endocyticuptake of fully conformed MHC - I occur via non - clathrin Arf - 6 - associated pathway in ﬁbroblasts ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 , 2004 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ; Eyster et al . , 2009 ; Knorr et al . , 2009 ) , whereas peptide loaded MHC - II proteins have been reported to use Arf6 - associated ( Walseng et al . , 2008 ) and Cdc42 - regulated ( Knorr et al . , 2009 ) pathway . Additionally , it has been recently reported that immature invariant - chain - associated MHC - II proteins are rapidly removed from the cell surface by the clathrin - dependent mech - anism ( Walseng et al . , 2008 ) . Although immature MHC - II can be considered as non - conformed molecules , it is well known that invariant chains stabilize and cluster MHC - II complexes ( Cresswell , 1996 ) . Empty MHC - I could be considered as physiological counter - part to the immature MHC - II with similar role of peptide loading in the endosomal compartments ( Geuze , 1998 ) . Thus , their cluster - ing and stabilization with chaperone protein ( s ) at the cell surface should not be surprising . However , our data demonstrate that , although internalization of empty L d is faster than uptake of full L d , they do not use the clathrin - dependent route but rather the constitutivenon - clathrinroute . EmptyL d werefoundinearlyendo - cytic carriers together with CTxB and dextran , two cargo molecules known to use the Cdc42 - dependent GEEC pathway ( Kalia et al . , 2006 ; Kumari and Mayor , 2007 ; Gauthier et al . , 2007 ; Mayor and Pagano , 2007 ) although eL d internalize at 25 ◦ C , a temperature that inhibits ﬂuid - phase uptake ( Supp . Fig . 6 ) . Additionally , enhanced eL d uptake after sphingolipid depletion ( Fig . 7 ) argues against Cdc42 recruitment and activation ( Mayor and Pagano , 2007 ; Cheng et al . , 2006 ) at the sites of eL d endocytosis . Therefore , further characterization of endocytic uptake of empty L d may add more diversity to non - clathrin endocytic routes . Empty L d meet with full L d and clathrin - dependent cargo in the same early acceptor compartment and proceed towards the cell center , indicating that they are not directed into dynamic EE that carry clathrin - dependent cargo destined for degradation ( i . e . LDL and EGF ) but rather proceed via static , slowly maturing , endosomal population ( Lakadamyali et al . , 2006 ) together with fL d and TfR . Thus , segregation of empty L d occurs in slowly maturing perinu - clearendosomesinaprocessthatrequiresendosomalH + - V - ATPase activity . It has been shown that transport of endocytosed cargo from early to either LEs or recycling endosomes depends on proper endosomal acidiﬁcation ( Presley et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , given that the recyclingcargoproceedsintotherecyclingroute , althoughwiththe reduced rate , we can conclude that endosomal maturation into LE is critical for sorting of open L d conformers . Several lines of evidence provided in this study indicate that open L d conformers segregate from full L d by partitioning in dif - ferent membrane composition . Antibody - mediated clustering , a method widely used to obtain information about membrane envi - ronment of a molecule ( Knorr et al . , 2009 ) , demonstrated that this partitioning occurs already at the cell surface ( Fig . 3 ) . The pattern of partitioning was also observed in endosomal mem - branes , suggesting that phase separation occurs during formation of tubules and vesicles ( London , 2005 ) . This conclusion is sup - ported by detergent - extraction experiments which demonstrated that eL d partition in TX - 100 - insoluble membrane composition in PMandinendosomalmembranes ( Fig . 7 ) , suggestingfortheirasso - ciation with cholesterol - and sphingolipid - rich lipid domains with the properties similar to the liquid - ordered phase ( Schroeder et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , the TX - 100 solubility of full L d suggests that they partition into lipid - disordered membrane composition , which is in line with other studies of MHC - I trafﬁcking ( Naslavsky et al . , 514 H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 2004 ; Knorr et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , our data demonstrate that endosomal segregation of empty L d depends on membrane envi - ronment which is sphingomyelin - rich and cholesterol - organized ( Fig . 7 ) . Partitioning into more disordered domains of recycling tubules may be required for efﬁcient recycling and membrane - bound cargo , including eL d , can be excluded from the recycling pathwaybyconstraininginthesphericalpartofsortingendosomes ( Hao et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , sequestration of empty L d in highly ordered lipidcompositionthatmakesthemnon - eligibleforentryintotubu - lar recycling domain may represent a platform for sorting in EEs . In addition , endosomal inward invaginations , which are facilitated by endosomal acidiﬁcation ( Gu and Gruenberg , 1999 ; Kooijman et al . , 2003 ) , may represent a specialized domain that enhances the segregation of some membrane components from the recycling pathway ( Hao et al . , 2004 ) . This is consistent with our observation that sequestration of eL d requires proper endosomal acidiﬁcation ( Fig . 8 ) . Disruption of the endosomal pH may result in endosomal vacuolization , fragmentation of rafts and / or increased detergent solubility . Similar preference for lipid - organized membrane com - position has been reported also for pMHC class II molecules ( Anderson et al . , 2000 ; Knorr et al . , 2009 ) . However , in contrast to pMHC - II , which recycle from endosomal compartments without reaching LE ( Pathak and Blum , 2000 ; Sinnathamby and Eisenlohr , 2003 ) , eL d do not recycle from EEs . Although the mechanistic explanation for partitioning of eL d MHC - I into different membrane composition is missing , it is attrac - tive to speculate that hetero - oligomerization of eL d is a basis for differential sorting . It is well known that MHC - I and MHC - II molecules pretend to form relatively immobile heteroclusters at the PM ( Catipovic et al . , 1994 ; Damjanovich et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , oligomerization of eL d molecules with a chaperone protein ( s ) can form heteroclusters that partition into a lipid organized phase . We have observed that cell surface eL d co - precipitate with sev - eral membrane proteins indicating for their mobilization into large heteroclusters that are able to survive in NP - 40 cellular extracts ( H . M . and P . L . unpublished data ) . Similarly , it has been shown that oligomerization of TfR redirects trafﬁcking in the endosomal sys - tem , reduces recycling efﬁciency and stimulates down - regulation ( Zaliauskiene et al . , 2000 ) . In the case of eL d conformational change occurs in the extracellular domains and even peptide loss is sufﬁ - cient to redirect eL d trafﬁcking . Thus , self association properties could be mediated through the extracellular domain , as demon - strated for TfR ( Fuchs et al . , 1998 ) . In the secretory pathway , empty MHC - I is excluded from the anterograde route by complexing with calnexin , an ER resi - dent protein with the retention motif ( reviewed by Ellgaard and Helenius , 2003 ) . Complexing with the calnexin is based on the recognition of unassembled or unfolded HCs by the quality con - trol machinery composed of calnexin , calreticulin , tapasin and Erp57 ( reviewed by Ellgaard and Helenius , 2003 ; Wearsch and Cresswell , 2008 ) . Infact , thesortingdecisionisconformation - based since the export of unassembled or misfolded MHC - I complexes is monitored . Therefore , similar conformation - based monitoring may exist also at the PM . Proteins that escape the secretory path - way quality control can reach the PM , but it has been reported that conformationally unstable PM proteins , such as empty MHC - I ( Ljunggren et al . , 1990 ) , mutant variants of cystic ﬁbrosis trans - membraneconductanceregulator ( CFTR ) ( Zaliauskieneetal . , 2000 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , (cid:3) 2 - receptors ( Wilson et al . , 2001 ) , (cid:3) - factor receptor ( Fayadat and Kopito , 2003 ) , transferrin receptor ( Fayadat and Kopito , 2003 ) , and inﬂuenza HA ( Fayadat and Kopito , 2003 ) are rapidly down - regulated from the PM and degraded . These examples suggest a conformation - based sorting capacity of EEs which involves various mechanisms . In the case of misfolded CFTR , its rerouting from the recycling route into lysosomal degra - dation is mediated by ubiquitinylation ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . Although the role of ubiquitinylation cannot be excluded in the case of empty L d , we did not observe any shift in the elec - trophoreticmobilityofimmunoprecipitatedemptyL d heavychains ( Fig . 1 ) . Resolution of endosomal trafﬁcking of MHC - I molecules is important for the understanding of exogenous antigen presenta - tion ( Grommeetal . , 1999 ) . BiogenesisofopenMHC - Iconformersat thecellsurfaceisnotclear , butitappearsthattheyarederivedfrom mature MHC - I molecules ( Santos et al . , 2004 ; Arosa et al . , 2007 ) . However , their physiological role remains to be veriﬁed . Addition - ally , endosomal segregation of fully conformed L d molecules from their open conformers points to a basic principle of protein sorting in the endosomal system . In the past , MHC - I molecules helped us to reveal a basic principle for sorting of unfolded or unassembled proteins in the ER and to characterize the quality control machin - ery that operates in the ER ( reviewed by Wearsch and Cresswell , 2008 ) . Thus , their conformational variability and the availability of reagents that precisely distinguish various forms ( reviewed by Hansen et al . , 2000 ) make MHC - I molecules a useful tool for char - acterization of protein sorting principles and quality control both at the PM and in the endosomal pathway . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Dr . Stipan Jonji´c and Ms . Iva Tijan for their critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Ministry of Science , Education and Sport of the Republic of Croatia ( grants 062006 , 062 - 0620238 - 0223 and 0062030 ) and the EMBIC project , European FP6 , NoE ( No . 512040 , LSHM - CT - 2004 - 512040 ) . We extend our thanks to Jelena Ð irli´c and Ksenija Tuli´c for their technical assistance , which is highly appreciated . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2010 . 12 . 002 . References Anderson HA , Hiltbold EM , Roche PA . Concentration of MHC class II molecules in lipid rafts facilitates antigen presentation . Nat Immunol 2000 ; 1 : 156 – 62 . ArosaFA , SantosSG , PowisSJ . Openconformers : thehiddenfaceofMHC - Imolecules . Trends Immunol 2007 ; 28 : 115 – 23 . Arvan P , Zhao X , Ramos - Castaneda J , Chang A . Secretory pathway quality control operating in Golgi , plasmalemmal , and endosomal systems . Trafﬁc 2002 ; 3 : 771 – 80 . Blagojevi´cG , Mahmutefendi´cH , Kuˇci´cN , Ili´cTomaˇsM , LuˇcinP . Endocytictrafﬁcking of cholera toxin in Balb 3T3 cells . Croat Chem Acta 2008 ; 81 : 191 – 202 . BolteS , CordelièresFP . Aguidedtourintosubcellularcolocalizationanalysisinlight microscopy . J Microsc 2006 ; 224 : 213 – 32 . Catipovic B , Talluri G , Oh J , Wei TY , Su XM , Johansen TE , et al . Analysis of the struc - tureofemptyandpeptide - loadedmajorhistocompatibilitymoleculesatthecell surface . J Exp Med 1994 ; 180 : 1753 – 61 . Chatterjee S , Smith ER , Hanada K , Stevens VL , Mayor S . GPI anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention of endocytosed proteins in the recycling endosomal compartment . EMBO J 2001 ; 20 : 1583 – 92 . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Sharma DK , Holicky EL , Hanada K , Marks DL , et al . Distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis have unique sphingolipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 3197 – 210 . Ciechanover A , Schwartz AL , Dautry - Varsat A , Lodish HF . Kinetics of internalization and recycling of transferrin and the transferrin receptor in a human hepatoma cell line . Effect of lysosomotropic agents . J Biol Chem 1983 ; 258 : 9681 – 9 . Coscoy L , Ganen D . Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus encodes two proteins that block cell surface display of MHC class I chains by enhancing their endocy - tosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000 ; 97 : 8051 – 6 . CresswellP . InvariantchainstructureandMHCclassIIfunction . Cell1996 ; 84 : 505 – 7 . Damjanovich S , Vereb G , Schaper A , Jenei A , Matko J , Starink JPP , et al . Structural hierarchy in the clustering of HLA class I molecules in the plasma membrane of human lymphoblastoid cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 1122 – 6 . Ellgaard L , Helenius A . Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003 ; 4 : 181 – 91 . Eyster CA , Higginson JD , Huebner R , Porat - Shliom N , Weigert R , Wu WW , et al . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 500 – 9 . H . Mahmutefendi´c et al . / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 43 ( 2011 ) 504 – 515 515 Fayadat L , Kopito R . Recognition of a single transmembrane degron by sequential quality control checkpoints . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 1268 – 78 . Fivaz M , Vilbois F , Thurnheer S , Pasquali C , Abrami L , Bickel PE , et al . Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 3989 – 4000 . Fuchs H , Lucken U , Tauber R , Engel A , Gessner R . Structural model of phospholipid - reconstituted human transferrin receptor derived by electron microscopy . Structure 1998 ; 6 : 1235 – 43 . GauthierNC , MonzoP , GonzalezT , DoyeA , OldaniA , GounonP , etal . Earlyendosomes associatedwithdynamicF - actinstructuresarerequiredforlatetrafﬁckingofH . pylori VacA toxin . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 177 : 343 – 54 . GeuzeHJ . TheroleofendosomesandlysosomesinMHCclassIIfunctioning . Immunol Today 1998 ; 19 : 282 – 7 . Grant BD , Donaldson JG . Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 : 598 – 608 . GrommeM , UytdehaagF , JanssenH , CalafatJ , BinnendukR , KenterM , etal . Recycling MHC class I molecules and endosomal peptide loading . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 10326 – 31 . Gu F , Gruenberg J . Biogenesis of transport intermediates in the endocytic pathway . FEBS Lett 1999 ; 452 : 61 – 6 . Hao M , Mukherjee S , Sun Y , Maxﬁeld FR . Effects of cholesterol depletion and increased lipid unsaturation on the properties of endocytic membranes . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 14171 – 8 . Hansen TH , Balendiran G , Solheim J , Ostrov D , Nathenson S . Structural features of MHCclassImoleculesthatmightfacilitatealternativepathwaysofpresentation . Immunol Today 2000 ; 21 : 83 – 8 . HansenTH , LybargerL , YuL , MitaksovV , FremontDH . Recognitionofopenconform - ers of classical MHC by chaperones and monoclonal antibodies . Immunol Rev 2005 ; 207 : 100 – 11 . Hasenkrug KJ , Cory JM , Stimpﬂing JH . Monoclonal antibodies deﬁning mouse tissue antigens encoded by the H - 2 region . Immunogenetics 1987 ; 25 : 136 – 9 . Hullin - Matsuda F , Kobayashi T . Monitoring the distribution and dynamics of sig - naling microdomains in living cells with lipid - speciﬁc probes . Cell Mol Life Sci 2007 ; 64 : 2492 – 504 . Kalia M , Kumari S , Chadda R , Hill MM , Parton RG , Mayor S . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3 (cid:6) - kinase - dependent machinery . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 3689 – 704 . Knorr R , Karacsonyi C , Lindner R . Endocytosis of MHC molecules by distinct mem - brane rafts . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 : 1584 – 94 . Kooijman EE , Chupin V , de Kruijff B , Burger KN . Modulation of membrane cur - vature by phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid . Trafﬁc 2003 ; 4 : 162 – 74 . Kumari S , Mayor S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 2007 ; 10 : 30 – 41 . Lakadamyali M , Rust MJ , Zhuang X . Ligands for clathrin - mediated endocytosis are differentially sorted into distinct populations of early endosomes . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 997 – 1009 . Lajoie P , Nabi IR . Regulation of raft - dependent endocytosis . J Cell Mol Med 2007 ; 11 : 644 – 53 . Lee DR , Rubocki RJ , Lie WR , Hansen TH . The murine MHC class I genes , H - 2Dq and H - 2Lq , are strikingly homologous to each other , H - 2L d , and two genes reported to encode tumor - speciﬁc antigens . J Exp Med 1988 ; 168 : 1719 – 39 . Lebrand C , Corti M , Goodson H , Cosson P , Cavalli V , Mayran N , et al . Late endosome motility depends on lipids via the small GTPase Rab7 . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 1289 – 300 . LeRoyC , WranaJL . Clathrin - andnon - clathrin - mediatedendocyticregulationofcell signalling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 6 : 112 – 26 . Lie W , Myers NB , Connolly JM , Gorka J , Lee DR , Hansen TH . The speciﬁc binding of peptide ligand to L d class I major histocompatibility complex molecules deter - mines their antigenic structure . J Exp Med 1991 ; 173 : 449 – 59 . Ljunggren H , Stam N , Ohlen C , Neefjes J , Hoglund P , Heemels M , et al . Empty MHC class I molecules come out in the cold . Nature 1990 ; 346 : 476 – 80 . London E . How principles of domain formation in model membranes may explain ambiguities concerning lipid raft formation in cells . Biochim Biophys Acta 2005 ; 1746 : 203 – 20 . Mahmutefendi´c H , Blagojevi´c G , Kuˇci´c N , Luˇcin P . Constitutive internalization of murine MHC class I molecules . J Cell Physiol 2007 ; 210 : 445 – 55 . Malik P , Klimovitsky P , Deng LW , Boyson JE , Strominger JL . Uniquely conformed peptide - containing beta 2 - microglobulin - free heavy chains of HLA - B2705 on the cell surface . J Immunol 2002 ; 169 : 4379 – 87 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 603 – 12 . MaxﬁeldFR , McGrawTE . Endocyticrecycling . NatRevMolCellBiol2004 ; 5 : 121 – 32 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . Characterization of a nonclathrin endo - cytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3542 – 52 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson G . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phos - phoinositides . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 417 – 31 . Neisig A , Melief CJ , Neefjes J . Reduced cell surface expression of HLA - C molecules correlateswithrestrictedpeptidebindingandstableTAPinteraction . JImmunol 1998 ; 160 : 171 – 9 . Pamer E , Cresswell P . Mechanisms of MHC class I - restricted antigen processing . Annu Rev Immunol 1998 ; 16 : 323 – 58 . Pathak S , Blum JS . Endocytic recycling is required for the presentation of an exoge - nous peptide via MHC class II molecules . Trafﬁc 2000 ; 1 : 561 – 9 . Presley JF , Mayor S , McGraw TE , Dunn KW , Maxﬁeld FR . Baﬁlomycin A1 treatment retardstransferrinreceptorrecyclingmorethanbulkmembranerecycling . JBiol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 13929 – 36 . Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 49 – 61 . SantosSG , PowisSJ , ArosaFA . Misfoldingofmajorhistocompatibilitycomplexclass I molecules in activated T cells allows cis - interactions with receptors and sig - naling molecules and is associated with tyrosine phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 53062 – 70 . Schroeder RJ , Ahmed SN , Zhu Y , London E , Brown DA . Cholesterol and sphingolipid enhancetheTritonX - 100insolubilityofglycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteinsbypromotingtheformationofdetergent - insolubleorderedmembrane domains . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 1150 – 7 . Schuck S , Honsho M , Ekroos K , Shevchenko A , Simons K . Resistance of cell mem - branes to different detergents . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 5795 – 800 . SharmaM , PampinellaF , NemesC , BenharougaM , SoJ , DuK , etal . Misfoldingdiverts CFTR from recycling to degradation : quality control at early endosomes . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 164 : 923 – 33 . SinnathambyG , EisenlohrLC . PresentationbyrecyclingMHCclassIImoleculesofan inﬂuenzahemagglutinin - derivedepitopethatisrevealedintheearlyendosome by acidiﬁcation . J Immunol 2003 ; 170 : 3504 – 13 . Smith JD , Myers NB , Gorka J , Hansen TH . Model for the in vivo assembly of nascent L d class I molecules and for the expression of unfolded L d molecules at the cell surface . J Exp Med 1993 ; 178 : 2035 – 46 . Sobo K , Le Blanc I , Luyet PP , Fivaz M , Ferguson C , Parton RG , et al . Late endosomal cholesterol accumulation leads to impaired intra - endosomal trafﬁcking . PLoS ONE 2007 ; 2 : e851 . van Dam EM , Ten Broeke T , Jansen K , Spijkers P , Stoorvogel W . Endocytosed transferrin receptors recycle via distinct dynamin and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase - dependent pathways . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 48876 – 83 . Walseng E , Bakke O , Roche PA . MHC class II - peptide complexes internalize using a clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis pathway . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 14717 – 27 . Wearsch PA , Cresswell P . The quality control of MHC class I peptide loading . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008 ; 20 : 624 – 31 . Weber M , Blair E , Simpson CV , O’Hara M , Blackburn PE , Rot A , et al . The chemokine receptorD6constitutivelytrafﬁcstoandfromthecellsurfacetointernalizeanddegradechemokines . Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 15 : 2492 – 508 . WeigertR , YeungAC , LiJ , DonaldsonJG . Rab22aregulatestherecyclingofmembrane proteinsinternalizedindependentlyofclathrin . MolBiolCell2004 ; 15 : 3758 – 70 . Wilson M , Highﬁeld H , Limbird L . The role of a conserved intertransmembrane domaininterfaceinregulating (cid:3) 2a - adrenergicreceptorconformationalstability and cell - surface turnover . Mol Pharmacol 2001 ; 59 : 929 – 38 . ZaliauskieneL , KangS , BrouilletteC , LebowitzJ , AraniR , CollawnJ . Down - regulation of cell surface receptors is modulated by polar residues within the transmem - brane domain . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2643 – 55 . Zeiger H , Thäle R , Luˇcin P , Muranyi W , Flohr T , Hengel H , et al . A mouse cytomegalovirus glycoprotein retains MHC class I complexes in the ERGIC / cis - Golgi compartments . Immunity 1997 ; 6 : 57 – 66 .