Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing cambridge . org / aie Research Article Cite this article : Hu M , McComb C , Goucher - Lambert K ( 2023 ) . Uncovering hidden patterns of design ideation using hidden Markov modeling and neuroimaging . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 37 , e8 , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0890060423000021 Received : 8 June 2022 Revised : 24 November 2022 Accepted : 16 January 2023 Key words : Concept generation ; design cognition ; HMM ; neurocognition for design Author for correspondence : Mo Hu , E - mail : mohu @ berkeley . edu © The Author ( s ) , 2023 . Published by Cambridge University Press Uncovering hidden patterns of design ideation using hidden Markov modeling and neuroimaging Mo Hu 1 , Christopher McComb 2 and Kosa Goucher - Lambert 1 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA , USA and 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA , USA Abstract The study presented in this paper applies hidden Markov modeling ( HMM ) to uncover the recurring patterns within a neural activation dataset collected while designers engaged in a design concept generation task . HMM uses a probabilistic approach that describes data ( here , fMRI neuroimaging data ) as a dynamic sequence of discrete states . Without prior assumptions on the fMRI data ’ s temporal and spatial properties , HMM enables an automatic inference on states in neurocognitive activation data that are highly likely to occur in concept generation . The states with a higher likelihood of occupancy show more activation in the brain regions from the executive control network , the default mode network , and the middle tem - poral cortex . Different activation patterns and transfers are associated with these states , linking to varying cognitive functions , for example , semantic processing , memory retrieval , executive control , and visual processing , that characterize possible transitions in cognition related to concept generation . HMM offers new insights into cognitive dynamics in design by uncover - ing the temporal and spatial patterns in neurocognition related to concept generation . Future research can explore new avenues of data analysis methods to investigate design neurocogni - tion and provide a more detailed description of cognitive dynamics in design . Introduction Design cognition has been a significant area of interest in design research . Traditional approaches to studying design cognition typically relies upon subjective and qualitative tech - niques . Researchers need to infer , or participants need to report , the internal processes in the designer ’ s mind that align with design behavior through observations , questionnaires , or inter - views ( Chiu and Shu , 2011 ; Dinar et al . , 2015 ) . Such approaches allow the research to be per - formed in - situ or in controlled experiments . However , these approaches are limited by their intrinsic subjective nature and extensive qualitative data processing requirements ( Chiu and Shu , 2011 ; Hay et al . , 2017 ) . To overcome some of these limitations and combine more quan - titative methodologies in design cognition research , an emerging research area in the design research community , often referred to as “ design neurocognition ” , is seeking to apply tech - niques from cognitive neuroscience to measure brain activity related to design and advance knowledge of design cognition ( Liu et al . , 2018 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ; Hu and Shealy , 2019 ; Gero and Milovanovic , 2020 ; Vieira et al . , 2020 ; Zhao et al . , 2020 ; Balters et al . , 2023 ; Hay et al . , 2022 ) . Functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) is one of the neuroimaging techniques used to measure design neurocognition . fMRI offers a more direct understanding on the whole - brain neurocognitive processes that correlate with design behavior and support design activity . Classical analysis of fMRI data usually focuses on a pre - specified “ event ” ( e . g . , event - based design matrix ) or time points ( e . g . , specific time window or sliding window ) . Significant assumptions are required in the pre - specification relating temporal and spatial information to uncover meaningful links between brain activity and participant behavior in response to exper - imental tasks . Additionally , this type of analysis leads to a loss of information from the entire dataset , especially the dynamics in the process . In this work , an unsupervised machine learn - ing technique , hidden Markov modeling ( HMM ) , is used to automatically infer states and their spatial and temporal patterns in underlying fMRI data related to design cognition without prior specifications on event - based design matrix or time window for fMRI data analysis . HMM is a generative model that describes data in a temporal sequence of a finite number of discrete states . Prior research in both design and neuroscience domains has demonstrated that using HMM provides valuable insights into temporal patterns in varying types of data , for example , a short - timescale sequence in design behavior data ( McComb et al . , 2016 , 2017 a , 2017 b ) , and dynamic patterns ( states ) of neural activation in large - scale resting - state fMRI data ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) . A prior study by the authors also used HMMs to extract distinct states in the fMRI data and find differences in neurocog - nitive patterns between participants with different performance levels ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) . In that prior work , participants were assigned to high - and low - performing groups based on idea fluency ( i . e . , the number of concepts gener - ated in a fixed time ) . Half of the designers with higher design flu - ency were assigned to the high - performing group , while the other half were assigned to the low - performing group . Significant dif - ferences were found between these two groups in the number of solutions generated in every 15 - second block . Differences were also observed in the state occupancy between the high - and low - performing designers ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) . However , the neural activation patterns associated with the distinct states identified in the prior work ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) are still unknown . There is a lack of under - standing of the specific brain regions involved in each neurocog - nitive pattern plus corresponding cognitive functions . The current work builds on ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) by inves - tigating the patterns of neural activity , linking them to physical locations in the brain , and inferring the cognitive functions asso - ciated with each of the 12 states discovered in prior work . The findings suggest that the states extracted from fMRI data using HMM are linked to varying brain regions and associated with dif - ferent cognitive functions that provide meaningful explanations for different performances in concept generation . Background This work employs neuroscience experiments ( i . e . , fMRI ) and a machine learning technique ( i . e . , HMM ) to explore dynamic neu - rocognitive patterns related to design concept generation . This section first introduces design research that applied fMRI to understand brain activities during design and concept generation . Then , critical brain regions and large - scale networks associated with the concept generation process are summarized . This section also discusses HMM and its application to neuroimaging data and design research . fMRI and design neurocognition A growing body of research is using neuroimaging techniques to investigate brain activities relevant to design in multiple phases , for example , design concept generation ( Fu et al . , 2019 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ; Hay et al . , 2019 ; Hu et al . , 2019 , 2021 ; Shealy et al . , 2020 ) , design decision - making ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2017 b ; Hu and Shealy , 2020 , 2022 ) , and open design or problem - solving ( Zhao et al . , 2020 ; Vieira et al . , 2022 b ) . A variety of neuroimaging techniques have been employed to measure design neurocognition , such as electroence - phalography ( EEG ) , functional near - infrared spectroscopy ( fNIRS ) , and functional magnetic resonance ( fMRI ) . EEG and fNIRS are portable in data collection but limited in spatial resolu - tion . EEG cannot pinpoint the specific brain regions where the electrical signal comes from ( Burle et al . , 2015 ) . fNIRS usually has a limited number of light sensors and a shallow penetration depth , so it is restricted to cover only the outer cortex ( Quaresima and Ferrari , 2019 ) . In contrast , fMRI provides excel - lent spatial resolution and rich information on brain activity through whole - brain scanning . However , a limited number of fMRI studies have investigated design or concept generation con - sidering the lack of mobility and high cost of operation in an fMRI experiment ( Hay et al . , 2022 ) . One of the first fMRI study related to design was performed by Goel and Grafman ( 2000 ) which explored the difference between architects with and without lesion to the prefrontal cortex , and found that the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) was necessary for ill - structured representation and computation in room space design . Another early study that adopted fMRI to investigate design was by Alexiou et al . ( 2009 ) . This study found distinguishing cognitive functions and brain networks when performing architectural room layout tasks in two forms : ( 1 ) ill - defined and open design and ( 2 ) well - defined and con - strained problem - solving . The study also identified that higher activation in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was asso - ciated more with open design than problem - solving ( Alexiou et al . , 2009 ) , which was confirmed by a recent EEG study that extended Alexiou et al . ( 2009 ) ’ s work by investigating the open design tasks at three distinct stages and found increased activation in ideation stages in alpha 2 and beta 3 band in the PFC ( Vieira et al . , 2022 b ) . Another two fMRI studies related to design decision - making include Sylcott et al . ( 2013 ) and Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2017b ) that used fMRI to understand product preference judgment when users made trade - offs between different design variables ( e . g . , form , function , and environmental impact ) and found varied brain regions associated with each of the decision attributes . Design concept generation , or design ideation , is arguably the most critical phase for injecting creative inspiration and shaping the creativity of subsequent design phases ( Cross , 2001 ; Yang , 2009 ; Hay et al . , 2019 ) . The design research community is increas - ingly interested in using neuroimaging methods to understand performance ( e . g . , quantity , quality , creativity , etc . ) and cognitive processes related to design concept generation . Ellamil et al . ( 2012 ) used fMRI to investigate the cognitive difference between creative generation and evaluation . The results found that the medial temporal lobe was central to the generation of novel ideas while evaluation mainly involved the executive regions for affective and visceroceptive evaluative process . Hay et al . ( 2019 ) compared the neurocognitive activation during concept genera - tion between open - ended and constrained design ideation tasks but found no significant difference between the two conditions . However , they did identify increased activation in the left cingu - late gyrus and right superior temporal gyrus during ideation . Fu et al . ( 2019 ) studied the neurocognitive patterns associated with design fixation in concept generation . They found increased acti - vation in areas associated with visuospatial processing ( e . g . , left middle occipital gyrus and right superior parietal lobule regions ) . Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) investigated design concept gen - eration with and without the support of inspirational stimuli ( e . g . , text - based analogies ) and identified two separate patterns of brain activation : one is associated with the successful applica - tion of inspirational stimuli to generate design solutions via insight in the temporal and parietal lobes , and the other is the currently unsuccessful and external search for insights in the pri - mary visual processing - related brain regions . Important brain regions and networks for ideation and insights Even though only a limited number of fMRI studies have been performed to understand design concept generation ( Alexiou et al . , 2009 ; Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Sylcott et al . , 2013 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2017 b ; Fu et al . , 2019 ; Hay et al . , 2019 ) , ideation ( i . e . , concept generation ) and insights are widely 2 Mo Hu et al . studied in the neuroscience literature that used fMRI ( Blumenfeld et al . , 2011 ; Benedek et al . , 2014 ; Green et al . , 2015 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Heinonen et al . , 2016 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ; Benedek and Fink , 2019 ) or design neurocognition studies that used other neu - roimaging techniques ( Shealy and Gero , 2019 ; Hu et al . , 2021 ; Vieira et al . , 2022 a , 2022 b ) . The process of generating insights and new ideas requires complex cognitive processes of attention , cognitive control , and memory ( Fink et al . , 2007 ; Benedek et al . , 2018 ; Benedek and Fink , 2019 ) . Some brain regions and large - scale brain networks have been shown to play critical roles in supporting ideation and insight . Prior research highlights activ - ity within the brain regions from the default mode network ( DMN ) and executive control network ( ECN ) as being particu - larly influential ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Heinonen et al . , 2016 ) . DMN – ECN interactions also occur during cognitive tasks that involve generating and evaluating creative ideas ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ) , and the dynamic transitions between default and control network are facilitated by the salience network ( Uddin , 2015 ; Beaty et al . , 2018 ) . DMN predominantly includes the medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ) , the posterior cingulate cortex ( PCC ) , and the medial and inferior parietal cortex . DMN activity may engage in sponta - neous and associative processes , such as self - generated and internally - directed thought during mind wandering , mental stimulation , and episodic memory retrieval ( Beaty et al . , 2020 ) . Such self - generated and internally - directed cognition contributes to concept generation by deriving useful information from long - term memory ( Beaty et al . , 2016 , 2020 ) . Prior neuroimaging stud - ies found strong activation within the DMN related to creative processing by analogy ( Beaty et al . , 2016 , 2020 ; Benedek and Fink , 2019 ) . For instance , the mPFC shows higher activation dur - ing the novel generation of words with analogies ( Green et al . , 2015 ) . Likewise , activation in the PCC is associated with creative idea generation through metaphor production ( Benedek et al . , 2014 ) . The ECN mainly comprises the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ) and the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) . The ECN has been linked to the support of internal representation , working memory , and relational integrations in creative cognition litera - ture ( Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Heinonen et al . , 2016 ) . The PFC , especially the dorsolateral PFC , is heavily involved in encoding of relational information and executive con - trol when retrieving information from working memory ( Green et al . , 2010 ; Blumenfeld et al . , 2011 ) . Working memory is neces - sary to focus attention on and maintain executive control over ele - ments related to concept generation ( De Dreu et al . , 2012 ) . A prior study found activation in the dorsolateral PFC , especially in the left hemisphere , is dominant in concept generation ( Shealy and Gero , 2019 ) . The ACC activity is also a consistent finding in creative analogical thinking tasks for executive pro - cesses of response conflict and response selection between differ - ent ideas ( Green et al . , 2015 ) . Insights also rely on memory . The temporal cortex , a brain region in charge of semantic and episodic memory , is often involved in creative insight ( Shen et al . , 2017 ) . Temporal regions , especially the medial temporal lobe , have been closely linked to the function of breaking mental sets and establishing remote and novel associations , which then can trigger insight experience ( Zhao et al . , 2013 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ) . Prior design neurocognition research also found higher activation in the temporal regions dur - ing creative ideation ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Hay et al . , 2019 ) and concept generation with inspirational stimuli ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . Other brain regions , such as the primary visual processing - related brain region in the occipital lobe , show activa - tion in creative processing as well . While it is usually connected to participants being unable to solve problems with insights ( Kounios et al . , 2006 ) , design fixation without new ideas ( Fu et al . , 2019 ) , or a continued external search without insights ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) in design cognition . Application of HMM in neuroscience research Previous research in design neurocognition ( mentioned in Sections “ fMRI and design neurocognition " and " Important brain regions and networks for ideation and insights ” ) provides valuable information related to concept generation . However , most studies followed classical fMRI data analysis methods that depend on significant assumptions . The temporal and spatial information regarding the fMRI data needs to be assumed before - hand to extract meaningful statistics linking brain activity to par - ticipant behavior in response to tasks ( e . g . , a design matrix that specifies time of event in general linear model methods ) . These analysis techniques are locked to specific time points ( e . g . , when the neural process of interest occurs ) and do not uncover connec - tions between brain regions that may be correlated in space and time . These methods might be limited when the neural process of interest ( e . g . , ideation ) is complex and not easy to pre - specify . In addition , the dynamics in the fMRI data are hard to capture when using classical methods . To catch the dynamic information in design cognition without making assumptions on the structure of the data , HMM is adopted in this work to automatically infer states in fMRI data related to design cognition without prior assumptions . HMM uses a probabilistic approach to describe the data as a dynamic sequence of discrete states with a flexible definition of distribution ( e . g . , Gaussian , Wishart , or any other family of the probability of distribution ) . HMM can model time - series fMRI data in a temporal structure of the inferred brain states , each with specific spatial activation patterns . Applying HMM to fMRI data assumes that ( 1 ) fMRI data can be reasonably modeled in a discrete number of states with Markovian dynamics . ( 2 ) At each point in time , these states are reflective in the form of prob - abilities , and only one active state is assigned based on probability . ( 3 ) The current state being occupied is only dependent on the last state , not the previous history of state activation ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 ; Vidaurre , 2021 ) . The model allows for the analysis of how likely a state being occupied at a particular time point , how much time is being spent in each state , and how certain a state is tran - sitioning to another state . Such recurrent patterns and dynamics in brain activation data throughout entire datasets can be uncov - ered using HMM . It provides a more reliable estimation of brain activation patterns and overcomes the insufficiency when a short time window is pre - specified for classical statistical analysis ( Vidaurre et al . , 2018 ) . Another benefit is that HMM enables the detection of the transient occurrence of a state and switches between the states when the visits of the states are relatively short in time , which is usually missed in classic analysis methods ( Vidaurre et al . , 2018 ) . Based on the flexibility and analysis power , HMM has been applied to fMRI data ( Anderson et al . , 2010 , 2016 ; Anderson , 2012 ; Suk et al . , 2016 ; Baldassano et al . , 2017 ; Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ; van der Meer et al . , 2020 ; Vidaurre , 2021 ) . The earliest fMRI studies that adopted HMM were by Anderson et al . ( 2010 , 2016 ) and Anderson ( 2012 ) . This study Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 3 used HMM to distinguish the period of time and mental states ( e . g . , encoding , planning , solving , and responding ) when students engaged in mathematical problem - solving ( Anderson et al . , 2016 ) . Baldassano et al . ( 2017 ) applied HMM to fMRI data and detected event boundaries during narrative perception through shift between brain activation states without stimulus annotations . HMM was also applied to decode brain states in resting - state fMRI data for clinical application ( Suk et al . , 2016 ) . Vidaurre et al . ( 2017 ) used HMM with the large datasets ( resting - state fMRI data from 820 subjects ) in the Human Connectome Project ( HCP ) to achieve richer and more robust conclusions about the dynamic nature of brain functional connectivity . Here , the results demonstrated that activation data can be well represented in discrete states which are hierarchically organized in time , and the dynamic transitions between these states are far from random . More recently , van der Meer et al . ( 2020 ) applied HMM to fMRI data collected during movie viewing . The HMM captured a sequence of well - defined functional states plus dynamic transitions that were temporally aligned to specific features of the movie in the study . In summary , previous research has demonstrated HMM as a viable approach to represent brain activation data in a variety of contexts for which information regarding recurrent patterns of activity is of interest . The goal of the current work in this paper is to uncover brain activation patterns and cognitive functions that emerge and transit between different states during design concept generation . Application of HMM in design research Another critical motivation for applying HMM to neuroimaging data on design ideation comes from prior work that has demon - strated HMM as a valuable tool for capturing patterns and sequence in design behavior data . HMM was adopted by the authors in prior work to represent and stimulate sequential pat - terns of design behaviors when designing for additive manufac - turing ( Mehta et al . , 2020 ) and solving configuration problems , including the design of truss structures or internet - connected home cooling systems ( McComb et al . , 2016 , 2017 a , 2017 b ; Brownell et al . , 2021 ) . Design is a dynamic process in a sequence of stages or activities ( Howard et al . , 2008 ; Gericke and Blessing , 2011 ; Cramer - Petersen et al . , 2019 ) . In engineering design , the capacity of designers to learn and employ sequences ( temporal patterns of activity ) has long been of interest to design researchers ( Gericke and Blessing , 2011 ; McComb et al . , 2016 , 2017 b ; Cramer - Petersen et al . , 2019 ) . Prior research explored sequence in design at different levels of abstraction ( McComb et al . , 2016 ) . The level of abstraction refers to the sequencing levels in design based on the ordering of design stages ( more abstract and generalized ) , specific tasks , or design operations ( less abstract and more detailed - specific ) . For example , the higher level of abstraction as design stages that tend to occur at the longer time - scales ( e . g . , customer needs assessment , conceptual design , detailed design ) ( Atman et al . , 2007 ; Goldschmidt and Rodgers , 2013 ) , and a lower degree of abstract at a shorter timescale as spe - cific design tasks and operations ( e . g . , adding a member , adding a joint , resizing a member , etc . , in the design of truss structures ) ( Rogers , 1996 ; Sen et al . , 2010 ; Brownell et al . , 2021 ) . Sequencing at short timescales and low abstraction directly impact design proficiency ( Brownell et al . , 2021 ) or performance ( McComb et al . , 2016 , 2017 b ) . However , this level of abstraction and timescales has not well studied in the engineering design lit - erature ( McComb et al . , 2017 a ) . The current work presented in this paper aims to fill this gap by exploring the states in neurocog - nition as imaged through fMRI . The spatial and temporal patterns are investigated from a neurocognitive aspect . The results identify and assess a short - timescale sequence of different states in neuro - cognition that has not previously been examined in engineering design research . Here , sequence refers to the temporal patterns and transitions in neurocognitive activation and functions . This intersection of neuroimaging , design concept generation , and analysis using HMM provides a novel contribution to design cog - nition literature . Methods This study investigates the patterns of neural activation and pos - sible cognitive functions associated with each of the 12 states related to design concept generation identified in prior work ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) . The fMRI datasets , data processing procedures , and HMM are introduced in Sections “ Design concept generation task and fMRI experiment " , " fMRI data collection , pre - processing , and brain parcellations " and " Hidden Markov modeling ” , respectively . Section “ Localizing the brain activation in each HMM state ” describes the method for localizing the brain activations and inferring pos - sible cognitive functions associated with each state . Design concept generation task and fMRI experiment This study used the fMRI dataset collected in a prior design by Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) in which participants engaged in concept generation tasks with or without the assistance of inspira - tional stimuli . Inspirational stimuli are examples provided to designers to enhance creativity and innovation during conceptual ideation ( Goucher - Lambert and Cagan , 2019 ) . These stimuli were sourced in prior work by extracting common and uncommon words from crowdsourced solutions using a text - mining tech - nique . Their distance to the problem ( near or far ) was determined based on word frequency and bidirectional path length textual similarity ( Goucher - Lambert and Cagan , 2019 ) . In the fMRI experiment , designers ( i . e . , engineering and design students ) completed the 12 design problems and devel - oped as many solutions as possible in an MRI scanner . For each design problem , designers were given a total of 2 min , sepa - rated into two 60 - s blocks , and asked to develop as many solu - tions as possible in each block . From the beginning of each block , all designers were presented with word sets drawn from inspirational stimuli ( inspirational stimuli condition , near , or far stimuli ) or containing words from the design problem without inspirational stimuli ( control condition ) . A total of five inspira - tional stimuli were displayed : three words displayed at the same time ( Word Set 1 ) from the beginning of the first block and the remaining two words displayed simultaneously ( Word Set 2 ) from the beginning of the second block . The purpose is to make the presentation of inspirational stimuli alternate through - out the task and provide new stimuli if participants had exhausted their use of the inspirational stimuli presented in the first block . An example problem and inspirational stimuli can be found in Figure 1 . Each of the 12 design problems had a unique set of inspirational stimuli for all three conditions ( near , far , and con - trol ) . The experiment conditions were counter - balanced to pro - vide an even distribution of problem - condition pairs for each designer . Figure 1 shows the experiment process . Only fMRI images collected during the whole session of the design concept 4 Mo Hu et al . generation periods ( highlighted in Figure 1 , without any specifica - tion on the time points of Word Set 1 or Word Set 2 ) were included in the HMM . The full details of the design problems , inspirational stimuli , and fMRI experiment can be found in Sections “ Important brain regions and networks for ideation and insights ” in Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) . fMRI data collection , pre - processing , and brain parcellations A total of 21 engineering students were recruited and completed the fMRI experiment . Figure 2 illustrates the steps for the fMRI data collection , pre - processing , and preparation for HMM train - ing . fMRI data collection and pre - processing were performed in the prior work . Detailed information on participants , fMRI equip - ment , data acquisition , and data pre - processing ( Steps A and B in Fig . 2 ) can be found in Sections “ Application of HMM in neu - roscience research " and " Application of HMM in design research ” in Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) . Data processing in the current work includes Steps C , D , and E in Figure 2 . A multi - stage process was applied to prepare the pre - processed fMRI time - series data into lower - order spatial representations for the purpose of more rapid HMM training , illustrated in Figure 2c , d . The first step was down - sampling each fMRI image from the resolution of 54 × 64 × 50 ( in a total of 172 , 800 ) voxels to 27 × 32 × 25 ( in a total of 21 , 600 ) voxels to avoid overfitting ( Anderson , 2012 ) . Then , the processing pipeline and techniques used by Smith et al . ( 2014 ) and Vidaurre et al . ( 2017 , 2018 ) were applied in this study to prepare HMM inputs . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) was used to reduce fMRI data to its dominant constituents with a dimension of 50 parameters for each subject . The last step was to perform independent compo - nent analysis ( ICA ) with pre - specified constraints ( i . e . , parcella - tion in Fig . 2d ) . The max - kurtosis ICA algorithm was applied to project the data into a 50 - dimension time - series using the 50 - parcellation template from the Human Connectome Project ( HCP ) . The whole - brain fMRI data was parcellated into the acti - vation data within 50 functional distinct areas using the pre - validated spatial maps ( Medolic _ IC ) from HCP , which include spatial information of the 50 spatially independent components in the brain ( Beckmann , 2012 ) . Previous researchers used the large - scale resting - state fMRI data in the HCP and provided this data - driven functional parcellation of human brains with high stability ( Beckmann and Smith , 2004 ; Smith et al . , 2014 , 2015 ) . A final standardization was performed to the 50 - dimension time - series fMRI data aggregated among all partic - ipants so that the training data for the following HMM have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 . Hidden Markov modeling The normalized fMRI time - series datasets from all participants were concatenated in the temporal dimension and used to train HMM to generate a group - level sequence of a finite number of states with varying patterns in neural activation . Specifically , the HMM was trained with emissions in Gaussian distribution , which was used in prior fMRI studies ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) and is appropriate for the fMRI data used in this study . Here , each state was represented by the average modes of brain activation that are emitted or enacted with some degree of var - iance in Gaussian distribution . The HMM - MAR ( Hidden Markov model – multivariate autoregressive ) toolbox ( Vidaurre et al . , 2016 ) was used to accomplish the analysis . Estimations on parameters of state distributions , progression through states , and transition probability matrix were conducted by using the HMM - MAR toolbox . A state matrix ( S 12×50 ) showing the state distribution across the 50 brain parcellations for the 12 states was calculated for further activation localization ( detailed in Section “ Localizing the brain activation in each HMM state ” ) . Fig . 1 . Design concept generation experiment pro - cess with an example problem and corresponding inspirational stimuli . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 5 The appropriate number of states for a HMM is usually deter - mined within an iterative procedure ( McComb et al . , 2017 b ; Pohle et al . , 2017 ) . A range of varying numbers of hidden states from 2 to 32 was tested for the HMM training , and log - likelihood values were compared among all the models . Here , log - likelihood is a measure of model accuracy , describing the probability that the observed data was produced by the trained model . The resulting differences in log - likelihood values between models were negligi - ble , providing no basis on which to choose the number of states . As a result , 12 was determined as the number of states and used for model training in prior work ( Goucher - Lambert and McComb , 2019 ) and the current study to align with previous lit - erature in neuroscience applying 12 - state HMM to neuroimaging data ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) . Localizing the brain activation in each HMM state The 12 HMM states from Goucher - Lambert and McComb ( 2019 ) were used in the current work for the investigation of the brain activation patterns related to concept generation . As mentioned in Section “ Hidden Markov modeling ” , each state was represented by the average mode of brain activation , so a state matrix ( S 12×50 ) with mean values of activation was calculated and used . The state matrix has 12 row vectors that stand for 12 states . Each row vector contains 50 contributing indices , which are mean values from a Gaussian distribution and represent the average contribution from the corresponding parcellation . The state matrix was used to project the activation back into a higher - dimension activation matrix with more voxel elements . The mathematics is represented in Eq . ( 1 ) . X = S × A . ( 1 ) A mixing matrix ( A 50×32 , 767 ) including the voxel compositions of the 50 parcellations was provided by the HCP ( Ugurbil and Van Essen , 2017 ) and applied to the states matrix ( S ) here for the generation of high - dimension and whole - brain activation matrix ( X 12×32 , 767 ) associated with the 12 states . Here , 32 , 767 represents the dimension length of the standard 32k surface meshes provided by the HCP mixing matrix template ( 16 - bite integers and limited to 32 , 767 in each dimension ) ( Elam et al . , 2013 ) . Then , the activation for each state ( a row vector in X ) was coded and converted into appropriate CIFTI - 2 format files . Doing so enabled the visualization of each HMM state in an acti - vation heatmap using the HCP visualization and discovery tool wb _ view ( Marcus et al . , 2013 ) . An investigation of the physical locations in the brain and pos - sible cognitive functions associated with the HCP 50 parcellations was performed to better understand the activation patterns of the HMM states . Specific Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital ( MNI ) coordinates for the center point of each parcella - tion were extracted in the wb _ view tool . The extracted MNI coor - dinates for each parcellation were localized into brain regions and Brodmann areas using the Biolmage Suite tool ( Papademetris et al . , 2006 ) . Then a meta - analytical database of fMRI studies , NeuroSynth , was used to map between the parcellation MNIs and associated cognitive functions ( Yarkoni et al . , 2011 ) . NeuroSynth operates by using combined text - mining , meta - analysis , and machine - learning techniques to generate prob - abilistic mappings between cognitive functions and neural activa - tion in the brain region with corresponding MNI coordinates ( Yarkoni et al . , 2011 ) . The cognitive functions in NeuroSynth are coded into specific psychological terms , such as working memory , retrieval , visual , or large - scale brain networks . A total of 14 , 371 fMRI studies have been used in NeuroSynth for a robust and reliable inference mapping between brain regions and cog - nitive functions ( Yarkoni et al . , 2011 ; Yakoni , 2022 ) . NeuroSynth has been used in previous research to localize brain regions of interest and identify common cognitive functions in fMRI datasets related to design ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2017 a ) . This coordinate - to - term mapping approach was used in the present work to infer cognitive functions associated with each parcellation and then each HMM state . The psychological terms with a high likelihood of associating with the activation in the MNI coordinate ( represented by a posterior probability P ( term | activation ) from Naïve Bayes Classification higher than 0 . 75 ) were selected as cognitive functions associated with the par - cellation . Eventually , for each state , the key parcellations ( i . e . , par - cellations with top 3 contributing indices to the state in the state matrix ) and their associated cognitive functions ( i . e . , psychologi - cal terms extracted from NeuroSynth ) were identified for further interpretation of the state . Results Using the methodologies outlined in Section “ Methods ” , this study investigates the patterns of neural activation that are asso - ciated with each of the states discovered by Goucher - Lamber and McComb ( 2019 ) . Cognitive functions associated with each of the HMM states were inferred based on meta - analysis from NeuroSynth . State transfers between the HMM states were also uncovered and interpreted . Fig . 2 . fMRI data pre - processing and preparing . Steps A and B were performed in the prior work . The current study processed and analyzed the fMRI data in Steps C , D , and E . 6 Mo Hu et al . Patterns of neural activation associated with the 12 states The 50 parcellations acquired from the HCP were localized to spe - cific brain regions and Brodmann areas for further interpretation . Six parcellations were removed from the summary since the acti - vation ( i . e . , z - scores ) were negligible . A summary of associated brain regions for the other 44 active parcellations can be found in Table A1 in the Appendix . In addition , possible cognitive func - tions described by the psychological terms extracted in NeuroSynth , associated with each parcellation , are also listed in Table A1 . To directly illustrate the neural activation patterns associated with each HMM state , brain activation heatmaps of the 12 states were created using the wb _ view tool and presented in Figure 3 . The activation map for each state was generated by projecting the state matrix for the 50 parcellations back to high - dimension activation within each voxel element , which is described in Section “ Localizing the brain activation in each HMM state ” . As shown in the activation heatmap , distinct locations in the brain and patterns of activation are associated with the 12 HMM states . State 4 has significantly higher activation than other states , mainly in the prefrontal cortex and motor cortex . States 1 , 7 , and 11 show negative activation in a wide range of brain regions . Other states show strong activation in either the PFC , temporal cortex , or occipital cortex . For example , States 2 , 8 , and 10 show strong acti - vation in the occipital and temporal cortex , while State 6 mainly involves activation in the PFC . When using the HMM approach , the activation pattern for each state has a linear relationship with the activation in the brain parcellations , represented in the state matrix . Figure 4 uses a color - coded state matrix to represent the contribution indices of the 44 active parcellations to each state . The 44 parcel - lations were reordered and clustered based on the cortex they are in to more clearly show the activated cortex for each state . A few parcellations include more than one cortex in the human brain , and therefore appear along the y - axis of the figure multiple times . As shown in Figure 4 , State 4 shows higher activation levels than other states , including in the prefrontal cortex , temporal cor - tex , parietal cortex , and motor cortex . Another finding is that some states show stronger activations in one or two cortexes than other brain regions . For example , States 2 and 5 are more involved in the occipital and temporal cortex ; State 6 has stronger activations in the prefrontal cortex than other regions . States 3 and 10 show their major activation in the occipital cortex . States 1 and 11 are less activated but have major activation in the occipital cortex ; State 7 also shows less activation in most Fig . 3 . Activation heatmap for the inferred 12 HMM states from the aggregated fMRI data . The states are characterized by their mean activation that projected from the 50 - dimension parcellations to whole brain space . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 7 brain regions except for activation in the occipital cortex , cingu - late cortex , and prefrontal cortex . Key parcellations for each state and possible cognitive functions To identify physical brain locations of major activation for each state and infer cognitive functions , the top 3 parcellations of the state ( ranked by the contributing indices in the state matrix ) were identified . Cognitive functions of the parcellations , coded as concise physiological terms , were extracted using a coordinate - to - term approach based on the meta - analysis from NeuroSynth ( Section “ Localizing the brain activation in each HMM state ” ) . Table 1 here lists the top 3 parcellations for each inferred state , plus their physical location in the brain , and asso - ciated cognitive functions from meta - analysis . Table 1 shows distinct patterns and physical locations of acti - vation in the 12 HMM states . The physical locations of the top 3 parcellation for each state provide a consistent mapping with the state activation heatmap in Figure 3 and the color - coded state matrix in Figure 4 . For example , State 4 shows higher activation in a wide range of brain regions . To be more specific , the major activation is in the dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex from the ECN , which is generally associated with executive con - trol of working memory ( Chatham et al . , 2011 ) , middle temporal cortex , and bilateral supplementary areas for motor tasks ( Chu and Black , 2012 ) . Another example is State 6 that mainly involves activation in the PFC . The major activated brain regions of State 6 , shown in Table 1 , are predominately in the PFC , including the dorsolateral PFC , ventromedial PFC , and inferior frontal gyrus , which are usually involved in rule - based reasoning ( Rudorf and Hare , 2014 ; O ’ Bryan et al . , 2018 ) , comprehension ( Gernsbacher and Kaschak , 2003 ) , and the executive control function from the ECN ( Chatham et al . , 2011 ) . In addition to the consistent mapping , Table 1 also filters the major activated brain regions in the states that are less active and hard to notice . For instance , State 1 shows significant activation in the occipital cortex that is critical for visual processing ( Clarke and Miklossy , 1990 ) . State 7 involves activation in the occipital , orbitofrontal , and posterior cingulate cortex from the DMN . DMN usually engages in rest state or spontaneous and associative processes ( Beaty et al . , 2020 ) . For State 2 , except for the activation in the temporal and occipital cortex , the rostrolateral PFC is also a major brain region of activation . The restrolateral PFC is generally associated with rule - based reasoning ( Hobeika et al . , 2016 ; Paniukov and Davis , 2018 ) . Regardless of the specific activation patterns , most states com - bine collection of widespread brain regions that are functionally connected within large - scale networks . The associated networks here mainly include ECN , DMN , visual network , and motor net - work . The 12 inferred states share some consistent cognitive functions related to these brain networks . For instance , semantic processing and memory retrieval are two frequent functions listed in Table 1 . Semantic processing refers to a human ’ s ability to use , manipulate , and generalize knowledge to support verbal and non - verbal behaviors ( Ralph et al . , 2017 ) . Memory retrieval Fig . 4 . Contribution indices of the parcellations to each state . The color represents the value of contribution from the parcellation to the state . The parcellations are reordered and clustered based on the cortex . 8 Mo Hu et al . is the process that involves the interactions of triggers / cues and stored memory traces ( Frankland et al . , 2019 ) . Most states , except for States 1 , 3 , and 10 , involve activations that are closely associated with either executive control of working memory or spontaneous associative processing for semantic and retrieving processes . Another shared cognitive function in multiple states here is visual processing . All states , except for States 4 , 6 , and 12 , show major activation in the primary visual processing - related brain regions . Finger tapping is also a common cognitive function in a few inferred states , including States 3 , 4 , 5 , 9 , and 10 . This func - tion from the motor network is involved because the experiment asked participants to click on a button when they generated a con - cept . A baseline correction with the fMRI data during the n - back task was used to remove the noise associated with movement in the experiment . However , there can still be activation associated with motivational or imaginary finger movement before or when designers clicked the button . Table 1 . Key parcellation to each state and possible cognitive functions State Key parcellations and brain regions ( Brodmann areas : BA ) Cognitive functions based on meta - analysis State 1 40 , 29 , 43 R lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 19 ) Sight , visual , eye movement State 2 39 , 37 , 42 L / R middle temporal gyrus ( BA 21 ) L / R rostrolateral PFC ( BA 10 ) L / R lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) Word , semantic , verb , encoding Rules , retrieval , reasoning Visual , eye movement State 3 42 , 2 , 33 L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) L supplementary area ( BA 6 ) Visual , eye movement , reading , real world Finger tapping , hand movement State 4 19 , 23 , 11 L / R supplementary area ( BA 6 ) L / R dorsolateral PFC ( BA 9 ) L / R posterior parietal cortex ( BA 7 ) L / R middle temporal gyrus ( BA 37 ) Finger tapping , motor task ECN , mnemonic , language , semantics , solving ECN , calculation , memory load Word , semantic , encoding / retrieval , intentional State 5 39 , 42 , 41 L / R middle temporal gyrus ( BA 21 ) L / R rostrolateral PFC ( BA 10 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) L supplementary area ( BA 6 ) DMN , word , semantic , verb , encoding Rules , retrieval , reasoning Visual , eye movement Motor , movement , tapping , imagery State 6 35 , 28 , 9 L ventromedial PFC ( BA 10 ) L inferior frontal gyrus ( BA 44 ) L dorsolateral PFC ( BA 46 ) L supramarginal gyrus ( BA 40 ) Beliefs , reward Semantic , verb , comprehension ECN , working memory , demands , rules Verb , sentences , language , comprehension State 7 43 , 29 , 18 R lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 19 ) L / R posterior cingulate area ( BA 31 ) L orbitofrontal cortex ( BA 10 ) Sighted , visual , eye movement DMN , episodic , retrieval , self - referential Memories , retrieval ; recollection State 8 42 , 10 , 30 L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) R Front eye field ( BA 8 ) R angular gyrus ( BA 39 ) Visual , eye movement Memory load , demand , front - parietal Attention , theory of mind , social cognition State 9 2 , 41 , 30 L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) L supplementary area ( BA 6 ) R angular gyrus ( BA 39 ) Reading , visual Motor , movement , tapping , imagery Theory of mind , social cognition State 10 25 , 3 , 41 L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) L supplementary area ( BA 6 ) Visual , eye movement , action observation Motor , movement , tapping , imagery State 11 39 , 41 , 42 L lateral occipital gyrus ( BA 18 ) L / R medial temporal gyrus ( BA 21 ) L / R orbitofrontal cortex ( BA 10 ) L supplementary area ( BA 6 ) Visual , eye movement DMN , word , semantic , verb , encoding Rules , retrieval , reasoning Motor , movement , tapping , imagery State 12 32 , 11 , 27 L / R anterior PFC ( BA 10 ) L / R dorsolateral PFC ( BA 9 ) L / R posterior parietal cortex ( BA 7 ) L / R inferior temporal gyrus ( BA 37 ) NoxiousECN , mnemonic , language , semantics , solving ECN , calculation , memory load Word , semantic , encoding retrieval , intentional DMN , default mode network ; CEN , central executive network . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 9 Likelihood of state occupancy and state transitions Among the 12 states identified in Goucher - Lambert and McComb ( 2019 ) for the aggregated fMRI data related to concept generation , seven states , the state probability matrix suggests States 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , and 11 , show a higher probability of occu - pancy than the rest states ( i . e . , States 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 , and 12 ) . These less - occupied states might represent random activation patterns less relevant to the design task . Figure 5 shows the time - varying occupancy probability of the seven states that are highly likely to occur in the process of concept generation . Among these states , States 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , and 11 , are more likely to be occupied , especially State 4 , with the highest likelihood of being occupied than other states . The dynamic pattern between the 12 states was represented using possible switches between the 12 states . Only strong transi - tions with a probability higher than 10 % were included in Figure 6a . Strong diagonal elements suggest that participants are likely to stay in a single state across several brain image acquisi - tions . Other strong off - diagonal elements show a dynamic pattern and transition between different states . These transition paths with a transition probability greater than 10 % are highlighted and included in Figure 6b . As shown in Figure 6b , the states that are least likely to be occupied ( i . e . , States 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 , and 12 ) have a high probability of transitioning to States 4 , 6 , 7 , and 2 , but not to States 1 , 3 , and 11 . As mentioned , these less - occupied states might represent random activation patterns less relevant to the design task . This transition might represent a shift from a random state back to the active states for concept generation , especially to States 2 , 4 , and 6 . These states involve activations in the lateral PFC from the ECN . The executive control functions associated with these states can inhibit cognitive processing on irrelevant information and amplify attention for internal representation of insights . Among other active states , there are some state switches with higher probability , for example , State 6 to State 4 ( 31 % ) , State 1 to State 6 ( 22 % ) , State 2 to State 11 ( 21 % ) , State 11 to State 6 ( 17 % ) , and State 7 to State 2 ( 16 % ) . These transition paths between the key states suggest possible dynamic and recurring patterns in neurocognition related to concept generation . Discussion This study used a HMM approach to uncover the spatial and tem - poral patterns in fMRI data related to design concept generation . Using this approach , 12 distinct states , with dynamic switches between each other , were automatically inferred from the data . Specific activation patterns in each state were linked to different physical locations in the brain and varying cognitive functions based on meta - analysis . Furthermore , the state transition routes and difference in state occupancy between the high - and low - performing designers can provide meaningful explanations to their different design performances . Associations and distinctions between the key states Among the 12 distinct states , several key states showed a higher likelihood of being occupied and transiting than the other states , including States 2 , 4 , 6 , and 7 . Consistent cognitive functions associated with these states are semantic processing and memory retrieval ( Burianova and Grady , 2007 ; Goldberg et al . , 2007 ) . These two cognitive functions echo the associative theory of crea - tivity ( Mednick , 1962 ) and a common view on analogical reason - ing ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ) that support the creative process . Here , analogical reasoning is the inference inspired by the source , and applied to a target ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ; Chan and Schunn , 2015 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . Semantic processing sup - ports the generation of new ideas by offering a semantic knowl - edge base of facts and concepts for screening and selection ( Mednick , 1962 ; Beaty et al . , 2020 ; Gerver et al . , 2022 ) . According to the associative theory of creativity , people who have a loosely structured semantic knowledge base are better at creative tasks because they are more capable of forming Fig . 5 . The probability of occupancy in the seven states that are more likely to be occupied in the process of concept generation . 10 Mo Hu et al . associations with remote semantic distance ( Mednick , 1962 ) . Considering the semantic nature of inspirational stimuli provided in the design task , semantic processing can play a critical role for participants to cognitively process the semantic similarity and making associations between the inspirational stimuli and the design solutions . Memory retrieval is an essential step that enables searching and recognizing a useful and relevant concept stored in designers ’ memory ( Gomes et al . , 2006 ) . Successful retrieval of memory can then be used in the subsequent generation of solu - tions to the design problem . The findings emphasize the impor - tance of semantic processing and memory retrieval to design concept generation with inspirational stimuli . More specific char - acteristics of semantic processing and memory retrieval , for instance , semantic similarity , divergent or convergent semantic processing , and memory retrieval cues , plus their correlates with ideation performance can be studied with more details in future research . Even though these states have shared cognitive functions , they involve varying physical locations of activation in the brain . Figure 7 illustrates the key brain regions ( Brodmann areas ) of acti - vation for the four major States . The differentiated activation pat - terns of these states suggest potentially different roles for semantic Fig . 6 . Strong transitions ( probability > 10 % ) between states ( a ) and transition paths with high probability between states ( b ) . Fig . 7 . Key brain regions of activation for States 6 , 4 , 7 , and 2 . The brain regions ( Brodmann areas , BA ) with the top 3 contribution indices ( shown in Table 1 ) for the states are highlighted in corresponding locations with the BA number . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 11 and retrieving processing . Considering the temporal patterns in occupancy likelihood , these states might represent difference sequences in cognition related to concept generation . State 6 might be responsible for stimuli encoding and goal defining The activation pattern of State 6 is mainly within the inferior frontal gyrus ( Brodmann area — BA 44 ) and supramarginal gyrus ( BA 40 ) , which are mainly involved in semantic and ( spe - cifically ) verb comprehension ( see Table 1 ) , and dorsolateral PFC ( BA 46 ) for rule and demand processing . Activation in the BA 44 and BA 40 is often linked to verb processing , especially for com - prehension ( Bak et al . , 2001 ; Giraud et al . , 2004 ; Sahin et al . , 2006 ; Newman et al . , 2009 ) . Dorsolateral PFC is critical for representing and maintaining information related to goals and rules to guide behavior ( Bunge et al . , 2003 ; Wallis and Miller , 2003 ) . Considering the distinct increase in the likelihood of occupancy of State 6 directly after the introduction of the inspirational stim - uli ( Word Set 1 at 0 s and Word Set 2 at 60 s ) , a possible interpre - tation of State 6 is to comprehend and encode the stimuli for goal defining . State 4 appears to be generating new concepts inspired by the stimuli In contrast , State 4 mainly shows activation from the ECN ( including the dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex ) . Activation within the ECN is heavily involved with executive con - trols of internal retrieving information from working memory and relational integration ( Curtis and D ’ Esposito , 2003 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ) . Several neuroimaging studies found significantly higher activations in the dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex in support of relational integration ( Green et al . , 2010 ; Blumenfeld et al . , 2011 ) and creative genera - tion task ( Kowatari et al . , 2009 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ) . The middle temporal gyrus ( BA 37 ) , in charge of semantic and epi - sodic memory in creative insight ( Shen et al . , 2017 ) and forma - tion of novel associations from analogy ( Hao et al . , 2013 ) is also activated in State 4 . Prior work that applied the general linear modeling ( GLM ) approach to the same fMRI data as the current study found that temporal brain activation were closely associated with insights inspired by the stimuli as well ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . A possible interpretation of State 4 is generating new concepts with the inspirational stimuli . The activation in the motor network of State 4 might be associated with motiva - tional or imaginary finger movement before designers confirmed the insights in their minds and planned to report the generation of a new concept . State 7 might switch between internal and external attention The main brain regions involved in State 7 include the inferior occipital gyrus for external visual processing ( Clarke and Miklossy , 1990 ) , orbitofrontal cortex for internal memory retriev - ing ( Young and Shapiro , 2011 ; Farovik et al . , 2015 ) , and PCC , a core backbone for DMN . The PCC is typically linked to a central role in supporting internal - directed attention for episodic mem - ory retrieving and future planning ( Buckner et al . , 2008 ) . However , there are still debates regarding the exact functions of PCC in the neuroscience literature . A comprehensive review on the role of the PCC in neuroimaging studies found its possible role associated with switching between internal and external attention ( Leech and Sharp , 2014 ) . State 7 might serve to sustain insightful thoughts by flexibly switching from the external visual process to internal retrieval of memory to generate concepts or a reverse switch from the internal controlled process to external attention to the design space . State 2 seems to contribute to solution evaluation and goal monitoring Like State 6 , a critical function for State 2 is rule - based reasoning . The specific brain region is the rostrolateral PFC . Rostrolateral PFC has been identified as a brain region in support of high - order cognitive functions in rule - based analogical reasoning ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Hobeika et al . , 2016 ) , and memory retrieval ( Westphal et al . , 2016 ) . In particular , rostrolateral PFC plays an evaluative role in rule - based reasoning ( Hobeika et al . , 2016 ; Paniukov and Davis , 2018 ) . This evaluative role seems to hold true when designers assess whether their associations are appro - priately made , or their solutions meet the demand when generat - ing concepts with the support of inspirational stimuli . State 2 might represent concepts assessments and evaluations . Additionally , higher activation in the occipital cortex is also involved in State 2 which suggests external attention to the design problem or stimuli . It should be noted that these interpretations of states were made based on reverse inference . The claims about particular cog - nitive processes were inferred from reasoning backward from the observed brain activity rather than directly testing . However , the meta - analytic framework applied in this work using NeuroSynth can potentially address possible problems of reverse inference by enabling researchers to conduct quantitative reverse inference on a large scale of studies . These interpretations of states only represent possible explanations based on the state occupancy , associated brain regions and cognitive functions . Future research should investigate this link between design cognitive processing and neurocognitive patterns more directly to examine the inter - pretations . Another possible limitation is that only group - level inference was performed using temporal concatenation for group - level analysis on states occupancy and transitions . Subject - level analysis can be reconstructed in future research to explore indi - vidual characteristics in neurocognition related to concept genera - tion . More detailed and richer descriptions on the dynamic patterns and transitions among the key states can be also explored based on individual data analysis . Performance - differentiated characteristics in state occupancy and cognitive functions States 6 , 4 , 7 , and 2 represent recurring patterns in neurocognition related to the use of the stimuli and generating new concepts . The prior research also found high - performing designers ( i . e . , designers with higher idea fluency ) showed higher occupancy probability in these states . Figure 8 shows the differences in state occupancy likelihood averaged in every 15 s between the high - and low - performing designers . High - performing designers show a higher likelihood of occupancy in States 2 , 4 , 6 , and 7 , which are mainly associated with activation in the brain regions from the large - scale networks of ECN and DMN . ECN and DMN are two brain networks widely studied in creative cognition literature ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ) . ECN and DMN , plus their coupling activation , are believed to play inevitable roles in tasks that demand creative processing , such as divergent thinking ( Heinonen et al . , 2016 ) , analogical reasoning ( Hobeika et al . , 2016 ) , creative idea generation ( Beaty et al . , 2015 ) , and art creat - ing ( Kowatari et al . , 2009 ) . 12 Mo Hu et al . On the contrary , low - performing designers showed a higher likelihood in States 1 , 3 , and 11 in the duration of concept genera - tion after introducing the stimuli . State 1 mainly shows activation in the occipital cortex , so its possible role is visual processing for external information when there is no clue or insight from inter - nal processing or participants are unable to generate new concepts under time or other constraints . State 3 also involves activation in the occipital cortex . Prior research has linked an increase in visual processing with participants being unable to solve problems with insight ( Kounios et al . , 2006 ) , design fixation without new ideas ( Fu et al . , 2019 ) , or an unsuccessful external search without insights ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . The state might represent a continued external search for inspiration when participants can - not retrieve helpful information from memory . State 11 seems to have similar activation patterns as State 2 . However , the level of activation has significantly decreased . This diminished activation pattern in State 11 might render the corresponding cognitive functions not as effective as State 2 . Other less - occupied states , including States 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 , and 12 , might represent random acti - vation patterns less relevant to the design task and are not dis - cussed here . The performance differentiated characteristics in neurocogni - tion suggest potential leverage points in design fluency and crea - tivity training . For instance , training or interventions in education can target improving neurocognitive ability in the ECN and DMN for semantic processing and memory retrieval while controlling unnecessary visual processing or eye movements . More research in design and education can take advantage of neuroimaging methods to shed light on strategies or practices that improve design performance by offering a new layer of data and insightful knowledge of hidden brain activities related to design cognition . Noticeably , the classification of high - and low - performing designers was based on idea fluency , which means high - performing designers generate new concepts more quickly and fluently . High - performing designers might be quicker to encode the stimuli and define the goal , and then retrieve information from memory and generate the targeted concepts through reason - ing . Idea fluency is a critical measure for creativity in ideation ( True , 1956 ; Mirabito and Goucher - Lambert , 2021 ) . However , a limitation is that only idea fluency was compared , while other metrics , such as novelty , quality , and feasibility , are not included in this analysis . This can be seen as a challenge posed by utilizing fMRI as a method for studying design , as capturing full design concepts ( e . g . , through think aloud protocols , or drawing / typing ) is quite challenging in the MRI environment . Future research should explore mechanisms to capture the generated concepts and explore how other creativity metrics correlate with dynamics of design neurocognition , while accounting for possible data qual - ity concerns that may emerge ( e . g . , via motion artifacts ) . Additionally , this work mainly investigates design neurocognition related to concept generation , which is believed to be a key activity in the design process shaping the creativity of subsequent design phases ( Cross , 2001 ; Yang , 2009 ; Hay et al . , 2019 ) . However , design is a complex process involving multiple stages and activ - ities , and spanning in varying time durations . There is a substan - tial need for more design research to explore behaviors and neurocognition related to different stages of design and the dynamic patterns in this process as well . Possible transition routes related to concept generation Several possible transition routes can be observed from the transi - tion matrix in Figure 6b plus the temporal sequence of occupancy for each state in Figure 5 . Three possible routines are highlighted in Figure 9 . There is a distinct increase of likelihood in States 1 , 6 , and 11 right after introducing the stimuli ( shown in Fig . 5 ) , and the transition probability is high from State 11 to State 1 ( 10 % ) , State 1 to State 6 ( 22 % ) , and State 11 to 6 ( 17 % ) ( shown in Figs . 6 , 9 ) . There seems to be a transition route ( path 1 in Fig . 9 ) , including States 11 – 1 – 6 or States 11 – 6 . Considering the activation patterns and cognitive roles of these states , this route might be associated with a process that par - ticipants catch sight of the stimuli / verbs , then pass the visual information to the prefrontal cortex for encoding the stimuli and defining the goal of the problem . After stimuli encoding and goal defining , the information will transit from State 6 to State 4 ( 31 % ) for analogical reasoning and generation of concepts . Then another transition route , a loop including State 4 – 7 – 2 – 4 , might represent a recurring process of insights . Once an insight occurs , a switch from State 4 to 7 ( 13 % ) might help designers achieve a quick shift from the internal retrieving process to external attention to the stimuli . Then , the transition from State 7 to 2 ( 16 % ) suggests the cognitive process - ing of solution evaluation and goal monitoring to initiate a new Fig . 8 . Likelihood of state occupancy difference between the high - performance and low - performance designers . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 13 round of concept generation in State 4 . This transition route ( path 2 in Fig . 9 ) may represent the successful use of the stimuli , leading to insights and generating new concepts . In addition to the transition from State 2 to 4 , the transition from State 2 to 11 also has a high probability ( 21 % , see Fig . 7 ) . Thus , there is a high probability that the transition loop State 6 – 4 – 2 intersects with the other transition path of State 11 – 1 – 6 . There can be another transition cycle including State 4 – 7 – 2 – 11 – 1 – 6 – 4 in the process of concept generation ( see path 3 in Fig . 9 ) . States 11 and 1 here represent an extended pro - cessing in the external attention system and visual - related regions . State 6 is involved for re - encoding the stimuli and redefining the goal for the problem . This transition route might happen when participants are at an impasse during problem solving . When they are not able to retrieve more useful information and new insights from internal search , they switch their attention systems and attempt to pay more attention to the external environment for insights with visual processing . They might even need to re - encode the stimuli and re - define the goals to generate other concepts . This transition route appears to be indicative of a con - tinued and less successful external search process for inspiration . Implications for future work combining HMM and design neurocognition Overall , the findings presented in this work demonstrate that HMM is a well - suited approach to recognizing the recurring pat - terns of both spatial and temporal dynamics in design neurocog - nition . HMM can capture rich information contained in the entire fMRI dataset . It also bypasses some problems and statistical limitations in classical methods for fMRI analysis . Classical methods usually rely on significant assumptions regarding the timing of activation and brain regions of interest . For example , the sliding window approach assumes a pre - specification of the timescale at which the neural activation occurs . This pre - defined temporal window limits its statistical power to detect the dynamics in neurocognition ( Hindriks et al . , 2016 ; Vidaurre et al . , 2018 ) . In contrast , there are no assumptions related to the underlying model structure when using the HMM approach . Therefore , latent patterns ( states ) can be automatically inferred in a completely unsupervised way , which makes HMMs suitable for exploratory analyses of neurocognition data relative to design . Using HMM leads to the findings that echo prior design neu - rocognition literature and show consistency regarding the highly activated brain regions associated with concept generation and insights ( Rudorf and Hare , 2014 ; Shen et al . , 2017 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ; Gerver et al . , 2022 ) . Here , the data - driven functional parcellation of human brains from a large data - set provides more stability in the HMM inputs . Additionally , the HMM methodology enriches knowledge in design neurocognition by unveiling the dynamic switches between the states with varying spatial and temporal patterns related to design concept genera - tion . Prior neuroscience studies have used a similar HMM approach to investigate resting - state fMRI data and found that the transitions between states or networks are far from random ( Baker et al . , 2014 ; Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) . The current work used HMM and captured the transient and dynamic switches between the discovered states that meaningfully charac - terized possible sequences in cognition for generating concepts . The state switches also offer insightful explanations of the dynamic neural patterns that influence performance in concept generation . A limitation of the HMM inference used in this work is the prior specification on the number of states K . The log - likelihood values with different selections of K ( e . g . , from 2 to 32 ) did not significantly change when performing the model selection . So the choice of 12 states was chosen to better align with prior neu - roimaging studies that applied HMM to fMRI data ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 ) . However , the findings ( e . g . , low occupancy likelihood in some states ) suggest that a lower number of states may present a better trade - off between richness and redundancy and should be explored in future work . In addition , other model selection methods , such as model evidence via the free energy used in Bayesian inference techniques , can be adapted to select an appro - priate number of states ( Baker et al . , 2014 ) . In summary , the results show the power of using HMM to uncover the neural patterns of design . This study unveils different states in neurocognition with dynamic spatial and temporal pat - terns and helps to construct a more insightful understanding of design neurocognition . The current work focused on the activa - tion patterns of the discovered states related to concept genera - tion . Network patterns or functional connectivity is another focus in the creative cognition research community . HMM also provides benefits to network analysis in fMRI data ( Vidaurre et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) . Future research can move from isolated activa - tion toward exploring broad patterns in neural activation net - works . The results from future research are expected to show how large - scale networks in the brain and functional connectivity contribute to design ideation . Conclusion This study used a HMM approach to uncover the spatial and tem - poral patterns in fMRI data related to design concept generation . The underlying fMRI data were collected when participants gen - erated solutions to open - ended design problems in two concur - rent blocks , each lasting 60 s . Twelve distinct states , with dynamic transitions between each other , were automatically inferred from the HMM method . Specific activation patterns Fig . 9 . Three possible transition routines with high transiting probabilities between the different states . 14 Mo Hu et al . associated with each state were identified and linked to varying brain regions and cognitive functions . The HMM states with higher likelihood of occupancy show more activation in the brain regions from the executive control network , the default mode network , and the middle temporal cortex . Multiple cog - nitive functions ( e . g . , semantic processing , memory retrieval , executive control , and visual processing ) are involved in the key states in neurocognition related to concept generation . Highly possible transitions between the states in neurocognition are iden - tified and suggest possible transitions between different cognitive processes ( e . g . , from visual processing to rule - based reasoning , from internal retrieving process to external attention ) . The func - tions of the states in neurocognition offer meaningful explana - tions on the different patterns between designers with high and low idea fluency . To summarize , this study shows the potential of HMM in identifying spatial and temporal patterns in the fMRI data related to design cognition . HMM offers a deeper understanding of the dynamics in neurocognitive processing and brings new knowledge to the design cognition community . Researchers in design neurocognition , not limited to those using fMRI but also EEG or fNIRS , can take advantage of HMM or other relevant machine learning techniques to provide a more detailed description of brain dynamics in design cognition . Financial support . This work is partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant 2145432 . Any opinions , findings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation . Conflict of interest . The authors declare none . References Alexiou K , Zamenopoulos T , Johnson JH and Gilbert SJ ( 2009 ) Exploring the neurological basis of design cognition using brain imaging : some pre - liminary results . Design Studies 30 , 623 – 647 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2009 . 05 . 002 Anderson JR ( 2012 ) Tracking problem solving by multivariate pattern analysis and Hidden Markov Model algorithms . Neuropsychologia 50 , 487 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2011 . 07 . 025 Anderson JR , Betts S , Ferris JL and Fincham JM ( 2010 ) Neural imaging to track mental states while using an intelligent tutoring system . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 , 7018 – 7023 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1000942107 Anderson JR , Pyke AA and Fincham JM ( 2016 ) Hidden stages of cognition revealed in patterns of brain activation . Psychological Science 27 , 1215 – 1226 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797616654912 Atman CJ , Adams RS , Cardella ME , Turns J , Mosborg S and Saleem J ( 2007 ) Engineering design processes : a comparison of students and expert practitioners . Journal of Engineering Education 96 , 359 – 379 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2168 - 9830 . 2007 . tb00945 . x Bak TH , O ’ Donovan DG , Xuereb JH , Boniface S and Hodges JR ( 2001 ) Selective impairment of verb processing associated with pathological changes in Brodmann areas 44 and 45 in the motor neurone disease - dementia - aphasia syndrome . Brain 124 , 103 – 120 . doi : 10 . 1093 / brain / 124 . 1 . 103 Baker AP , Brookes MJ , Rezek IA , Smith SM , Behrens T , Probert Smith PJ and Woolrich M ( 2014 ) Fast transient networks in spontaneous human brain activity . ELife 3 , e01867 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 01867 Baldassano C , Chen J , Zadbood A , Pillow JW , Hasson U and Norman KA ( 2017 ) Discovering event structure in continuous narrative perception and memory . Neuron 95 , 709 – 721 . e5 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2017 . 06 . 041 Balters S , Weinstein T , Mayseless N , Auernhammer J , Hawthorne G , Steinert M , Meinel C , Leifer L and Reiss AL ( 2023 ) Design science and neuroscience : a systematic review of the emergent field of design neurocog - nition . Design Studies 84 , 101148 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2022 . 101148 Beaty RE , Benedek M , Barry Kaufman S and Silvia PJ ( 2015 ) Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production . Scientific Reports 5 , 10964 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep10964 Beaty RE , Benedek M , Silvia PJ and Schacter DL ( 2016 ) Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20 , 87 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2015 . 10 . 004 Beaty RE , Kenett YN , Christensen AP , Rosenberg MD , Benedek M , Chen Q , Fink A , Qiu J , Kwapil TR , Kane MJ and Silvia PJ ( 2018 ) Robust pre - diction of individual creative ability from brain functional connectivity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , 1087 – 1092 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1713532115 Beaty RE , Chen Q , Christensen AP , Kenett YN , Silvia PJ , Benedek M and Schacter DL ( 2020 ) Default network contributions to episodic and semantic processing during divergent creative thinking : a representational similarity analysis . NeuroImage 209 , 116499 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2019 . 116499 Beckmann CF ( 2012 ) Modelling with independent components . NeuroImage 62 , 891 – 901 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2012 . 02 . 020 Beckmann CF and Smith SM ( 2004 ) Probabilistic independent component analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging . IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 23 , 137 – 152 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TMI . 2003 . 822821 Benedek M and Fink A ( 2019 ) Toward a neurocognitive framework of creative cognition : the role of memory , attention , and cognitive control . Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 27 , 116 – 122 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cobeha . 2018 . 11 . 002 Benedek M , Beaty R , Jauk E , Koschutnig K , Fink A , Silvia PJ , Dunst B and Neubauer AC ( 2014 ) Creating metaphors : the neural basis of figurative lan - guage production . NeuroImage 90 , 99 – 106 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2013 . 12 . 046 Benedek M , Jung RE and Vartanian O ( 2018 ) The neural bases of creativity and intelligence : common ground and differences . Neuropsychologia 118 , 1 – 3 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2018 . 09 . 006 Blumenfeld RS , Parks CM , Yonelinas AP and Ranganath C ( 2011 ) Putting the pieces together : the role of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in relational memory encoding . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 , 257 – 265 . doi : 10 . 1162 / jocn . 2010 . 21459 Brownell E , Cagan J and Kotovsky K ( 2021 ) Only as strong as the strongest link : the relative contribution of individual team member proficiency in configuration design . Journal of Mechanical Design 143 , 081402 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4049338 Buckner RL , Andrews - Hanna JR and Schacter DL ( 2008 ) The brain ’ s default network . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1124 , 1 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1196 / annals . 1440 . 011 Bunge SA , Kahn I , Wallis JD , Miller EK and Wagner AD ( 2003 ) Neural cir - cuits subserving the retrieval and maintenance of abstract rules . Journal of Neurophysiology 90 , 3419 – 3428 . doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00910 . 2002 Burianova H and Grady CL ( 2007 ) Common and unique neural activations in autobiographical , episodic , and semantic retrieval . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 19 , 1520 – 1534 . doi : 10 . 1162 / jocn . 2007 . 19 . 9 . 1520 Burle B , Spieser L , Roger C , Casini L , Hasbroucq T and Vidal F ( 2015 ) Spatial and temporal resolutions of EEG : is it really black and white ? A scalp current density view . International Journal of Psychophysiology 97 , 210 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijpsycho . 2015 . 05 . 004 Chan J and Schunn C ( 2015 ) The impact of analogies on creative concept generation : lessons from an in vivo study in engineering design . Cognitive Science 39 , 126 – 155 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12127 Chatham CH , Herd SA , Brant AM , Hazy TE , Miyake A , O ’ Reilly R and Friedman NP ( 2011 ) From an executive network to executive control : a computational model of the n - back task . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 , 3598 – 3619 . doi : 10 . 1162 / jocn _ a _ 00047 Chiu I and Shu LH ( 2011 ) Potential limitations of verbal protocols in design experiments . 287 – 296 . doi : 10 . 1115 / DETC2010 - 28675 Christoff K , Prabhakaran V , Dorfman J , Zhao Z , Kroger JK , Holyoak KJ and Gabrieli JDE ( 2001 ) Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during reasoning . NeuroImage 14 , 1136 – 1149 . doi : 10 . 1006 / nimg . 2001 . 0922 Chu RM and Black KL ( 2012 ) Current surgical management of high - grade gliomas . In Quiñones - Hinojosa A ( ed . ) , Schmidek and Sweet Operative Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 15 Neurosurgical Techniques , 6th Edn . W . B . Saunders , pp . 105 – 110 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 1 - 4160 - 6839 - 6 . 10008 - 5 Clarke S and Miklossy J ( 1990 ) Occipital cortex in man : organization of cal - losal connections , related myelo - and cytoarchitecture , and putative bound - aries of functional visual areas . Journal of Comparative Neurology 298 , 188 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cne . 902980205 Cramer - Petersen CL , Christensen BT and Ahmed - Kristensen S ( 2019 ) Empirically analysing design reasoning patterns : abductive - deductive rea - soning patterns dominate design idea generation . Design Studies 60 , 39 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2018 . 10 . 001 Cross N ( 2001 ) Chapter 5 - design cognition : results from protocol and other empirical studies of design activity . In Eastman CM McCracken WM and Newstetter WC ( eds ) , Design Knowing and Learning : Cognition in Design Education . Elsevier Science , pp . 79 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 008043868 - 9 / 50005 - X Curtis CE and D ’ Esposito M ( 2003 ) Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during working memory . Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7 , 415 – 423 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 03 ) 00197 - 9 De Dreu CKW , Nijstad BA , Baas M , Wolsink I and Roskes M ( 2012 ) Working memory benefits creative insight , musical improvisation , and ori - ginal ideation through maintained task - focused attention . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38 , 656 – 669 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167211435795 Dinar M , Shah JJ , Cagan J , Leifer L , Linsey J , Smith SM and Hernandez NV ( 2015 ) Empirical studies of designer thinking : past , present , and future . Journal of Mechanical Design 137 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4029025 Elam J , Reid E , Harwell J , Schindler J , Coalson T , Glasser M , Horton W , Curtiss Y , Dierker D , Gu P and Essen DCV ( 2013 ) Connectome Workbench Beta v0 . 7 Tutorial . Ellamil M , Dobson C , Beeman M and Christoff K ( 2012 ) Evaluative and gen - erative modes of thought during the creative process . NeuroImage 59 , 1783 – 1794 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2011 . 08 . 008 Farovik A , Place RJ , McKenzie S , Porter B , Munro CE and Eichenbaum H ( 2015 ) Orbitofrontal cortex encodes memories within value - based schemas and represents contexts that guide memory retrieval . Journal of Neuroscience 35 , 8333 – 8344 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0134 - 15 . 2015 Fink A , Benedek M , Grabner RH , Staudt B and Neubauer AC ( 2007 ) Creativity meets neuroscience : experimental tasks for the neuroscientific study of creative thinking . Methods 42 , 68 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2006 . 12 . 001 Forbus KD , Gentner D and Law K ( 1995 ) MAC / FAC : a model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science 19 , 141 – 205 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1902 _ 1 Frankland PW , Josselyn SA and Köhler S ( 2019 ) The neurobiological foun - dation of memory retrieval . Nature Neuroscience 22 , 1576 – 1585 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41593 - 019 - 0493 - 1 Fu KK , Sylcott B and Das K ( 2019 ) Using fMRI to deepen our understanding of design fixation . Design Science 5 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2019 . 21 Gericke K and Blessing L ( 2011 ) Comparisons of design methodologies and process models across disciplines : a literature review . In 18th International Conference on Engineering Design - Impacting Society Through Engineering Design , Vol . 1 , pp . 393 – 404 . Gernsbacher MA and Kaschak MP ( 2003 ) Neuroimaging studies of language production and comprehension . Annual Review of Psychology 54 , 91 – 114 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 54 . 101601 . 145128 Gero JS and Milovanovic J ( 2020 ) A framework for studying design thinking through measuring designers ’ minds , bodies and brains . Design Science 6 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2020 . 15 Gerver C , Griffin J , Dennis N and Beaty R ( 2022 ) Memory and creativity : a meta - analytic examination of the relationship between memory systems and creative cognition . doi : 10 . 31234 / osf . io / ag5q9 Gilhooly KJ , Fioratou E , Anthony SH and Wynn V ( 2007 ) Divergent think - ing : strategies and executive involvement in generating novel uses for famil - iar objects . British Journal of Psychology ( London , England : 1953 ) 98 , 611 – 625 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8295 . 2007 . tb00467 . x Giraud AL , Kell C , Thierfelder C , Sterzer P , Russ MO , Preibisch C and Kleinschmidt A ( 2004 ) Contributions of sensory input , auditory search and verbal comprehension to cortical activity during speech processing . Cerebral Cortex 14 , 247 – 255 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhg124 Goel V and Grafman J ( 2000 ) Role of the right prefrontal cortex in ill - structured planning . Cognitive Neuropsychology 17 , 415 – 436 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 026432900410775 Goldberg RF , Perfetti CA , Fiez JA and Schneider W ( 2007 ) Selective retrieval of abstract semantic knowledge in left prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neuroscience 27 , 3790 – 3798 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2381 - 06 . 2007 Goldschmidt G and Rodgers PA ( 2013 ) The design thinking approaches of three different groups of designers based on self - reports . Design Studies 34 , 454 – 471 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2013 . 01 . 004 Gomes P , Seco N , Pereira FC , Paiva P , Carreiro P , Ferreira JL and Bento C ( 2006 ) The importance of retrieval in creative design analogies . Knowledge - Based Systems 19 , 480 – 488 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2006 . 04 . 006 Gonen - Yaacovi G , de Souza L , Levy R , Urbanski M , Josse G and Volle E ( 2013 ) Rostral and caudal prefrontal contribution to creativity : a meta - analysis of functional imaging data . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7 . https : / / www . frontiersin . org / article / 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2013 . 00465 Goucher - Lambert K and Cagan J ( 2019 ) Crowdsourcing inspiration : using crowd generated inspirational stimuli to support designer ideation . Design Studies 61 , 1 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2019 . 01 . 001 Goucher - Lambert K and McComb C ( 2019 ) Using hidden markov models to uncover underlying states in neuroimaging data for a design ideation task . Proceedings of the Design Society : international Conference on Engineering Design 1 , 1873 – 1882 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsi . 2019 . 193 Goucher - Lambert K , Moss J and Cagan J ( 2017 a ) A meta - analytic approach for uncovering neural activation patterns of sustainable product preference decisions . In Gero JS ( ed . ) , Design Computing and Cognition ‘ 16 . Springer International Publishing , pp . 173 – 191 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 44989 - 0 _ 10 Goucher - Lambert K , Moss J and Cagan J ( 2017 b ) Inside the mind : using neuroimaging to understand moral product preference judgments involving sustainability . Journal of Mechanical Design 139 , 041103 – 041111 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4035859 Goucher - Lambert K , Moss J and Cagan J ( 2019 ) A neuroimaging investiga - tion of design ideation with and without inspirational stimuli — understand - ing the meaning of near and far stimuli . Design Studies 60 , 1 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2018 . 07 . 001 Green AE , Kraemer DJM , Fugelsang JA , Gray JR and Dunbar KN ( 2010 ) Connecting long distance : semantic distance in analogical reasoning mod - ulates frontopolar cortex activity . Cerebral Cortex 20 , 70 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhp081 Green AE , Cohen MS , Raab HA , Yedibalian CG and Gray JR ( 2015 ) Frontopolar activity and connectivity support dynamic conscious augmen - tation of creative state . Human Brain Mapping 36 , 923 – 934 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 22676 Hao X , Cui S , Li W , Yang W , Qiu J and Zhang Q ( 2013 ) Enhancing insight in scientific problem solving by highlighting the functional features of pro - totypes : an fMRI study . Brain Research 1534 , 46 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2013 . 08 . 041 Hay L , Duffy AHB , McTeague C , Pidgeon LM , Vuletic T and Grealy M ( 2017 ) A systematic review of protocol studies on conceptual design cogni - tion : design as search and exploration . Design Science 3 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2017 . 11 Hay L , Duffy AHB , Gilbert SJ , Lyall L , Campbell G , Coyle D and Grealy MA ( 2019 ) The neural correlates of ideation in product design engineering practitioners . Design Science 5 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2019 . 27 Hay L , Duffy AHB , Gilbert SJ and Grealy MA ( 2022 ) Functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) in design studies : methodological considera - tions , challenges , and recommendations . Design Studies 78 , 101078 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2021 . 101078 Heinonen J , Numminen J , Hlushchuk Y , Antell H , Taatila V and Suomala J ( 2016 ) Default mode and executive networks areas : association with the serial order in divergent thinking . PLoS One 11 , e0162234 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0162234 Hindriks R , Adhikari MH , Murayama Y , Ganzetti M , Mantini D , Logothetis NK and Deco G ( 2016 ) Can sliding - window correlations reveal dynamic functional connectivity in resting - state fMRI ? NeuroImage 127 , 242 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2015 . 11 . 055 Hobeika L , Diard - Detoeuf C , Garcin B , Levy R and Volle E ( 2016 ) General and specialized brain correlates for analogical reasoning : a meta - analysis of 16 Mo Hu et al . functional imaging studies . Human Brain Mapping 37 , 1953 – 1969 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 23149 Howard TJ , Culley SJ and Dekoninck E ( 2008 ) Describing the creative design process by the integration of engineering design and cognitive psychology literature . Design Studies 29 , 160 – 180 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2008 . 01 . 001 Hu M and Shealy T ( 2019 ) Application of functional near - infrared spectro - scopy to measure engineering decision - making and design cognition : litera - ture review and synthesis of methods . Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 33 , 04019034 . doi : 10 . 1061 / ( ASCE ) CP . 1943 - 5487 . 0000848 Hu M and Shealy T ( 2020 ) Overcoming status quo bias for resilient storm - water infrastructure : empirical evidence in neurocognition and decision - making . Journal of Management in Engineering 36 , 04020017 . doi : 10 . 1061 / ( ASCE ) ME . 1943 - 5479 . 0000771 Hu M and Shealy T ( 2022 ) Priming engineers to think about sustainability : cognitive and neuro - cognitive evidence to support the adoption of green stormwater design . Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2022 . 896347 Hu M , Shealy T , Grohs J and Panneton R ( 2019 ) Empirical evidence that concept mapping reduces neurocognitive effort during concept generation for sustainability . Journal of Cleaner Production 238 , 117815 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2019 . 117815 Hu M , Shealy T and Milovanovic J ( 2021 ) Cognitive differences among first - year and senior engineering students when generating design solutions with and without additional dimensions of sustainability . Design Science 7 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2021 . 3 Kounios J , Frymiare JL , Bowden EM , Fleck JI , Subramaniam K , Parrish TB and Jung - Beeman M ( 2006 ) The prepared mind : neural activity prior to problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by sudden insight . Psychological Science 17 , 882 – 890 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2006 . 01798 . x Kowatari Y , Lee SH , Yamamura H , Nagamori Y , Levy P , Yamane S and Yamamoto M ( 2009 ) Neural networks involved in artistic creativity . Human Brain Mapping 30 , 1678 – 1690 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20633 Leech R and Sharp DJ ( 2014 ) The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in cog - nition and disease . Brain 137 , 12 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1093 / brain / awt162 Liu L , Li Y , Xiong Y , Cao J and Yuan P ( 2018 ) An EEG study of the relation - ship between design problem statements and cognitive behaviors during conceptual design . AI EDAM 32 , 351 – 362 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060417000683 Marcus DS , Harms MP , Snyder AZ , Jenkinson M , Wilson JA , Glasser MF , Barch DM , Archie KA , Burgess GC , Ramaratnam M , Hodge M , Horton W , Herrick R , Olsen T , McKay M , House M , Hileman M , Reid E , Harwell J and Van Essen DC ( 2013 ) Human connectome project informatics : qual - ity control , database services , and data visualization . NeuroImage 80 , 202 – 219 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2013 . 05 . 077 McComb C , Cagan J and Kotovsky K ( 2016 ) Utilizing Markov chains to understand operation sequencing in design tasks . In Design Computing and Cognition ‘ 16 . McComb C , Cagan J and Kotovsky K ( 2017 a ) Capturing human sequence - learning abilities in configuration design tasks through Markov chains . Journal of Mechanical Design 139 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037185 McComb C , Cagan J and Kotovsky K ( 2017 b ) Mining process heuristics from designer action data via hidden Markov models . Journal of Mechanical Design 139 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037308 Mednick S ( 1962 ) The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review 69 , 220 – 232 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0048850 Mehta P , Malviya M , McComb C , Manogharan G and Berdanier CGP ( 2020 ) Mining design heuristics for additive manufacturing via eye - tracking methods and hidden markov modeling . Journal of Mechanical Design 142 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4048410 Mirabito Y and Goucher - Lambert K ( 2021 ) Factors impacting highly innova - tive designs : idea fluency , timing , and order . Journal of Mechanical Design 144 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4051683 Newman SD , Lee D and Ratliff KL ( 2009 ) Off - line sentence processing : what is involved in answering a comprehension probe ? Human Brain Mapping 30 , 2499 – 2511 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20684 O ’ Bryan SR , Walden E , Serra MJ and Davis T ( 2018 ) Rule activation and ventromedial prefrontal engagement support accurate stopping in self - paced learning . NeuroImage 172 , 415 – 426 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2018 . 01 . 084 Paniukov D and Davis T ( 2018 ) The evaluative role of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex in rule - based category learning . NeuroImage 166 , 19 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2017 . 10 . 057 Papademetris X , Jackowski MP , Rajeevan N , DiStasio M , Okuda H , Constable RT and Staib LH ( 2006 ) Bioimage suite : an integrated medical image analysis suite : an update . The Insight Journal 2006 , 209 . https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / PMC4213804 / Pohle J , Langrock R , van Beest FM and Schmidt NM ( 2017 ) Selecting the number of states in hidden Markov models : pragmatic solutions illustrated using animal movement . Journal of Agricultural , Biological , and Environmental Statistics 22 , 270 – 293 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 26448341 Quaresima V and Ferrari M ( 2019 ) Functional near - infrared spectroscopy ( fNIRS ) for assessing cerebral cortex function during human behavior in natural / social situations : a concise review . Organizational Research Methods 22 , 46 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1094428116658959 Ralph MAL , Jefferies E , Patterson K and Rogers TT ( 2017 ) The neural and computational bases of semantic cognition . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18 , 42 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn . 2016 . 150 Rogers J ( 1996 ) DeMAID / GA - an enhanced design manager ’ s aid for intel - ligent decomposition . In 6th Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization . American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics . doi : 10 . 2514 / 6 . 1996 - 4157 Rudorf S and Hare TA ( 2014 ) Interactions between dorsolateral and ventro - medial prefrontal cortex underlie context - dependent stimulus valuation in goal - directed choice . Journal of Neuroscience 34 , 15988 – 15996 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3192 - 14 . 2014 Sahin NT , Pinker S and Halgren E ( 2006 ) Abstract grammatical processing of nouns and verbs in Broca ’ s area : evidence from fMRI . Cortex 42 , 540 – 562 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 9452 ( 08 ) 70394 - 0 Sen C , Ameri F and Summers JD ( 2010 ) An entropic method for sequencing discrete design decisions . Journal of Mechanical Design 132 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4002387 Shealy T and Gero J ( 2019 ) The neurocognition of three engineering concept generation techniques . Proceedings of the Design Society : International Conference on Engineering Design 1 , 1833 – 1842 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsi . 2019 . 189 Shealy T , Gero J , Hu M and Milovanovic J ( 2020 ) Concept generation tech - niques change patterns of brain activation during engineering design . Design Science 6 , E31A . Ternary hybrid EEG - NIRS brain - computer inter - face for the classification of brain activation patterns during mental arith - metic , motor imagery , and Idle State . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2020 . 30 Shen W , Yuan Y , Liu C and Luo J ( 2017 ) The roles of the temporal lobe in creative insight : an integrated review . Thinking & Reasoning 23 , 321 – 375 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2017 . 1308885 Shen W , Tong Y , Li F , Yuan Y , Hommel B , Liu C and Luo J ( 2018 ) Tracking the neurodynamics of insight : a meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies . Biological Psychology 138 , 189 – 198 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biopsycho . 2018 . 08 . 018 Smith SM , Hyvärinen A , Varoquaux G , Miller KL and Beckmann CF ( 2014 ) Group - PCA for very large fMRI datasets . NeuroImage 101 , 738 – 749 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2014 . 07 . 051 Smith SM , Nichols TE , Vidaurre D , Winkler AM , Behrens TEJ , Glasser MF , Ugurbil K , Barch DM , Van Essen DC and Miller KL ( 2015 ) A positive - negative mode of population covariation links brain connectivity , demo - graphics and behavior . Nature Neuroscience 18 , 1565 – 1567 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 4125 Suk H - I , Wee C - Y , Lee S - W and Shen D ( 2016 ) State - space model with deep learning for functional dynamics estimation in resting - state fMRI . NeuroImage 129 , 292 – 307 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2016 . 01 . 005 Sylcott B , Cagan J and Tabibnia G ( 2013 ) Understanding consumer tradeoffs between form and function through metaconjoint and cognitive neu - roscience analyses . Journal of Mechanical Design 135 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4024975 True GH ( 1956 ) Creativity as a Function of Idea Fluency , Practicability , and Specific Training ( PhD ) . Iowa , USA : The University of Iowa . Uddin LQ ( 2015 ) Salience processing and insular cortical function and dys - function . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16 , 55 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn3857 Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 17 Ugurbil K and Van Essen DC ( 2017 ) HCP Extensively processed fMRI data . https : / / www . humanconnectome . org / study / hcp - young - adult / document / extensively - processed - fmri - data - documentation van der Meer JN , Breakspear M , Chang LJ , Sonkusare S and Cocchi L ( 2020 ) Movie viewing elicits rich and reliable brain state dynamics . Nature Communications 11 , 5004 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 18717 - w Vidaurre D ( 2021 ) A new model for simultaneous dimensionality reduction and time - varying functional connectivity estimation . PLOS Computational Biology 17 , e1008580 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1008580 Vidaurre D , Quinn AJ , Baker AP , Dupret D , Tejero - Cantero A and Woolrich MW ( 2016 ) Spectrally resolved fast transient brain states in elec - trophysiological data . NeuroImage 126 , 81 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2015 . 11 . 047 Vidaurre D , Smith SM and Woolrich MW ( 2017 ) Brain network dynamics are hierarchically organized in time . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 , 12827 – 12832 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1705120114 Vidaurre D , Abeysuriya R , Becker R , Quinn AJ , Alfaro - Almagro F , Smith SM and Woolrich MW ( 2018 ) Discovering dynamic brain networks from big data in rest and task . NeuroImage 180 , 646 – 656 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2017 . 06 . 077 Vieira S , Gero JS , Delmoral J , Gattol V , Fernandes C , Parente M and Fernandes AA ( 2020 ) The neurophysiological activations of mechanical engineers and industrial designers while designing and problem - solving . Design Science 6 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2020 . 26 Vieira S , Benedek M , Gero J , Li S and Cascini G ( 2022 a ) Brain activity in constrained and open design : the effect of gender on frequency bands . AI EDAM 36 , e6 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060421000202 Vieira S , Benedek M , Gero J , Li S and Cascini G ( 2022 b ) Design spaces and EEG frequency band power in constrained and open design . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 0 , 1 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 21650349 . 2022 . 2048697 Wallis JD and Miller EK ( 2003 ) From rule to response : neuronal processes in the premotor and prefrontal Cortex . Journal of Neurophysiology 90 , 1790 – 1806 . doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00086 . 2003 Westphal AJ , Reggente N , Ito KL and Rissman J ( 2016 ) Shared and distinct contributions of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex to analogical reasoning and episodic memory retrieval . Human Brain Mapping 37 , 896 – 912 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . v37 . 3 Yakoni T ( 2022 ) Neurosynth . https : / / neurosynth . org / Yang MC ( 2009 ) Observations on concept generation and sketching in engi - neering design . Research in Engineering Design 20 , 1 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 008 - 0055 - 0 Yarkoni T , Poldrack RA , Nichols TE , Van Essen DC and Wager TD ( 2011 ) Large - scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data . Nature Methods 8 , 665 – 670 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1635 Young JJ and Shapiro ML ( 2011 ) The orbitofrontal cortex and response selec - tion . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1239 , 25 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2011 . 06279 . x Zhao Q , Zhou Z , Xu H , Chen S , Xu F , Fan W and Han L ( 2013 ) Dynamic neural network of insight : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study on solving Chinese ‘ Chengyu ’ riddles . PLoS One 8 , e59351 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0059351 Zhao M , Jia W , Yang D , Nguyen P , Nguyen TA and Zeng Y ( 2020 ) A tEEG framework for studying designer ’ s cognitive and affective states . Design Science 6 . doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2020 . 28 Mo Hu is a postdoctoral scholar of Mechanical Engineering at the University of California , Berkeley . She received her BS degree ( 2014 ) in civil engineering from Tongji University , Shanghai , and obtained her MS ( 2017 ) and PhD ( 2021 ) in construction engineering and management from Virginia Tech . Her research mainly focuses on design neurocognition , , sustainable decision making , computational modeling , and neuro - informed nudging interventions . Christopher McComb is an Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University . Previously , he was an assistant professor in the School of Engineering Design , Technology , and Professional Programs at Penn State . He served as a director of Penn State ’ s Center for Research in Design and Innovation and led its Technology and Human Research in Engineering Design Group . He received dual BS degrees in civil and mechanical engineering from California State University - Fresno . He later attended Carnegie Mellon University as an NSF Graduate Research Fellow , where he obtained his MS and PhD in mechanical engineering . His research interests include human social systems in design and engineering ; machine learning for engineering design ; human – AI collaboration and teaming ; and STEM education . Kosa Goucher - Lambert is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of California , Berkeley . He is an Affiliate Faculty member in the Jacobs Institute of Design Innovation and the Berkeley Institute of Design . Kosa received his BA ( 2011 ) in Physics from Occidental College , and his MS ( 2014 ) and PhD ( 2017 ) in Mechanical Engineering from Carnegie Mellon University . His primary research interests focus on under - standing decision - making processes in engineering design using a combina - tion of mathematical analyses , computational modeling , human cognitive studies , and neuroimaging approaches . Kosa was a recipient of the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship , 2014 ASME IDETC Design Theory and Methodology Best Paper Award , 2015 , 2017 , and 2019 International Conference on Engineering Design Reviewers Favorite Award , and 2019 Excellence in Design Science Award . 18 Mo Hu et al . Appendix See Table A1 . Table A1 . HCP Parcellations , physical locations and cognitive functions Parcellation MNI coordinates of central points Brain regions ; Brodmann area Cognitive functions based on meta - analysis 1 ( – 2 , – 88 , 32 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 ( – 2 , – 68 , 2 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Memory encoding , experience , Word pairs ; Lingual , visual 2 ( – 22 , – 100 , – 4 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Reading , visual word , face , videos 3 ( – 16 , – 96 , 20 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Visual , eye movement 4 ( – 42 , – 80 , – 6 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 Visual , object , face 5 ( – 40 , 46 , – 2 ) L anterior prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 ( – 16 , 36 , 48 ) L front eye field ; BA 8 Rules , reasoning , item , retrieval , semantic ; Remembering , experience , thinking , semantic , mentalizing , retrieval 6 ( – 6 , – 64 , 52 ) L / R superior parietal lobule ; BA 7 ( – 40 , – 76 , 30 ) L / R angular gyrus ; BA 39 Calculation , planning , working memory , memory load , execution ; Memory retrieval , default , episodic , task , difficulty , retrieved 7 ( 52 , – 48 , 44 ) R supramarginal gyrus ; BA 40 ( 58 , – 46 , – 8 ) R inferior temporal gyrus ; BA 37 ( 40 , 40 , 16 ) R anterior prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 Emotion regulation , monitoring , competing ; Memory encoding , character ( language ) , memory ; Working memory , detecting , memory load , memory task , painful 8 ( – 40 , – 80 , 24 ) L / R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 ( – 16 , – 68 , 52 ) L / R superior parietal lobule ; BA 7 Visual motion , episodic , memory tasks ; Spatial , eye , visual , task , attention 9 ( – 40 , 36 , 20 ) L dorsolateral PFC ; BA 46 ( – 60 , – 36 , 36 ) L supramarginal gyrus ; BA 40 ECN , working memory , demands , rules ; Verbs , sentences , language , comprehension 10 ( 40 , 20 , 44 ) R front eye field ; BA 8 ( 50 , – 60 , 34 ) R angular gyrus ; BA 39 Cognitive , task ; Dorsal attention , attention 11 ( – 40 , 26 , 24 ) L / R dorsolateral PFC ; BA 9 ( – 56 , – 52 , – 10 ) L / R inferior temporal gyrus ; BA 37 ( – 28 , – 56 , 48 ) L / R intraparietal sulcus ; BA 7 ECN , memory , working memory , retrieval , encoding ; Word , semantic , retrieval ; ECN , word , working memory , attention 12 ( – 12 , 52 , 36 ) L / R dorsolateral PFC ; BA 9 ( – 6 , 60 , 16 ) L anterior PFC ; BA 10 Social cognition , theory mind ; Self - referential , emotion , personality traits 13 ( – 24 , – 60 , 56 ) L / R intraparietal sulcus ; BA 7 ( – 20 , – 82 , 40 ) L / R intraparietal sulcus ; BA 7 Visual , eye ; Visual , reaching 14 ( – 60 , – 28 , 32 ) L / R supramarginal gyrus ; BA 40 Motor , action observation , painful , verb 15 ( – 40 , 12 , 48 ) L supplementary area ; BA6 ( – 52 , 2 , – 20 ) L temporopolar area ; BA 38 Episodic , mind , memories , regulating , retrieval , reasoning , judgments ; Comprehension , sentences , language . Semantic , verbs , theory of mind ( Continued ) Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 19 Table A1 . ( Continued . ) Parcellation MNI coordinates of central points Brain regions ; Brodmann area Cognitive functions based on meta - analysis 16 ( – 10 , – 90 , 0 ) L / R primary visual cortex ; BA 17 Visual , imagery , object , motion 17 ( – 20 , 52 , 24 ) L anterior PFC ; BA 10 ( – 52 , – 52 , 36 ) L angular gyrus ; BA 39 Emotion regulation , belief ; Memory retrieval , theory of mind 18 ( – 20 , 60 , 4 ) L anterior PFC ; BA 10 ( – 4 , – 68 , 36 ) L dorsal posterior cingulate area ; BA 31 Memories , recollection retrieval ; DMN , recognition memory , episodic , memory retrieval 19 ( 60 , 4 , 16 ) R supplementary area ; BA 6 Finger movement , execution , chosen , motor ; tapping 20 ( – 44 , – 66 , 28 ) L angular gyrus ; BA 39 Semantic , episodic memory , retrieval , memories , mind 21 ( – 40 , 48 , 0 ) L / R anterior prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 ( – 40 , 20 , 28 ) L / R dorsolateral PFC ; BA 9 Judgment , retrieval , memory retrieval , rules , reasoning , DMN , memory ; Retrieval , semantic , language , word , characters 22 ( – 42 , – 72 , 4 ) L / R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 Motion , visual , visual motion 23 ( – 56 , – 2 , 28 ) L / R supplementary area ; BA 6 Finger tapping , hand , movement 24 ( – 22 , – 96 , 4 ) R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Early visual , face , words 25 ( – 28 , – 92 , 0 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Visual , action observation 26 ( – 16 , 52 , 32 ) L dorsolateral PFC ; BA 9 ( – 52 , 22 , 12 ) L inferior frontal gyrus ; BA 45 Theory of mind , episodic memory , mental states ; Sentence , semantic , comprehension , words , verb 27 ( – 36 , 48 , 16 ) L / R anterior prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 Working memory , recall , semantic memory , retrieval 28 ( – 52 , 18 , 16 ) L inferior frontal gyrus ; BA 44 Semantic , verb , comprehension 29 ( 25 , – 83 , 27 ) R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 Motion , visual , eye movement 30 ( 50 , – 48 , 18 ) R angular gyrus ; BA 39 Theory mind , empathy , social cognition 31 ( – 60 , – 32 , 24 ) L / R supramarginal gyrus ; BA 40 Foot , pain , body 32 ( – 28 , 42 , 26 ) L anterior prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 Nociceptive 33 ( – 48 , – 24 , 56 ) L supplementary area ; BA 6 Finger tapping , hand , movement 34 ( 52 , – 24 , 52 ) R primary somatosensory cortex ; BA 1 Finger tapping , hand 35 ( – 4 , 64 , – 12 ) L ventromedial prefrontal cortex ; BA 10 Beliefs , metabolism , reward 36 ( – 4 , – 26 , 64 ) L / R primary motor cortex ; BA 4 Foot , movement , limb 37 ( 8 , – 92 , – 8 ) L / R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Visual , force , real world 38 ( – 58 , 2 , – 4 ) L / R superior temporal gyrus ; BA 22 Language , comprehension ( Continued ) 20 Mo Hu et al . Table A1 . ( Continued . ) Parcellation MNI coordinates of central points Brain regions ; Brodmann area Cognitive functions based on meta - analysis 39 ( – 56 , – 48 , – 12 ) L / R middle temporal gyrus ; BA 21 L / R rostrolateral PFC ; BA 10 Word , semantic , verb , encoding ; Rules , retrieval , reasoning 40 ( – 14 , – 86 , 36 ) R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 Sighted , visual 41 ( – 4 , 0 , 65 ) L supplementary area ; BA 6 Motor , movement , tapping , imagery 42 ( – 8 , – 92 , – 8 ) L lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 18 Visual , eye movement 43 ( 44 , – 80 , – 4 ) R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 Visual , face , object , viewing 44 ( 44 , – 80 , 0 ) L / R lateral occipital gyrus ; BA 19 ( – 20 , 20 , 52 ) L / R supplementary area ; BA 6 Visual , object , motion ; Familiarity , decision task DMN , default mode network ; CEN , central executive network . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 21