Executive Functioning as a Predictor of Children’s Mathematics Ability : Inhibition , Switching , and Working Memory Rebecca Bull Department of Psychology University of Aberdeen , Scotland Gaia Scerif Institute of Child Health University College London Children’s mathematical skills were considered in relation to executive functions . Using multiple measures—including the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task ( WCST ) , dual - task performance , Stroop task , and counting span—it was found that mathemati - cal ability was significantly correlated with all measures of executive functioning , with theexceptionofdual - taskperformance . Furthermore , regressionanalysesrevealedthat each executive function measure predicted unique variance in mathematics ability . These results are discussed in terms of a central executive with diverse functions ( Shallice & Burgess , 1996 ) and with recent evidence from Miyake , et al . ( 2000 ) show - ing the unity and diversity among executive functions . It is proposed that the particular difficulties for children of lower mathematical ability are lack of inhibition and poor working memory , which result in problems with switching and evaluation of new strat - egies for dealing with a particular task . The practical and theoretical implications of these results are discussed , along with suggestions for task changes and longitudinal studies that would clarify theoretical and developmental issues related to executive functioning . DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROPSYCHOLOGY , 19 ( 3 ) , 273 – 293 Copyright © 2001 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Requests for reprints should be sent to Rebecca Bull , Department of Psychology , William Guild Building , University of Aberdeen , Aberdeen , Scotland AB24 2UB . E - mail : r . bull @ abdn . ac . uk The consideration of executive functioning in relation to children’s skills has be - come a relatively common occurrence in recent years . Numerous populations have been studied , including children with learning disabilities , language and comprehension problems , mathematical difficulties , autism , attention deficit hy - peractivity disorder ( ADHD ) , and behavioral problems ( e . g . , Adams , Bourke , & Willis , 1998 ; Bull , Johnston , & Roy , 1999 ; Cornoldi , Barbieri , Gaiani , & Zocchi , 1999 ; Gathercole & Pickering , 2000a , 2000b ; Hughes & Richards , 1998 ; Lehto , 1995 ; Lorsbach , Wilson , & Reimer , 1996 ; McLean & Hitch , 1999 ; Ozonoff & Jensen , 1999 ; Russell , Jarrold , & Henry , 1996 ; Swanson , 1993 , 1999 ; Swanson , Ashbaker , & Lee , 1996 ) . These studies have found that execu - tive functioning is a good predictor of performance , with some studies showing this result even after controlling for other potential explanatory factors such as long - term memory retrieval , phonological processing , and speed of information processing . Indeed , Ozonoff and Jensen ( 1999 ) discuss the establishment of “ex - ecutive profiles” for various developmental disorders . For example , children with autism typically show problems on executive tasks requiring flexibility and planning , but they perform normally on tasks involving inhibition . Children with ADHD show the opposite pattern of results , having difficulty on inhibition tasks , but not on tasks requiring flexibility . However , many of these studies are relatively vague in what they assume the executive to be , treating it as a unitary system , rather than trying to theoretically understand how difficulties found on executive tasks might arise and what they might mean . Also , there have been few attempts to use these results to further our understanding of what has been a very under - researched area within working memory compared , for example , with articulatory and visual - spatial functions of the original model proposed by Baddeley and Hitch ( 1974 ) . The articulatory loop and visual - spatial sketch pad are believed to be slave systems to the central execu - tive . The articulatory loop is a time - based store used for the storage and rehearsal of verbal information . The visual - spatial sketch pad is assumed to have two sub - systems . One of the subsystems is a passive visual component retaining material such as color and shape ; the other is a spatial system responsible for retaining dy - namic information about movement and spatial relations between objects ( Logie , 1991 ; Quinn & McConnell , 1996 ) . An increasing number of studies have targeted the constructs hidden under - neath the umbrella term “central executive” , using converging research ap - proaches : neurobiological ( for a review , see Robbins , 1996 ) , cognitive ( Baddeley , 1996 ) , neuropsychological ( Burgess & Shallice , 1996 ) , and developmental ( Karmiloff - Smith , 1998 ) . Baddeley ( 1996 , 1998 ) sets the scene for beginning to understand how the central executive may be fractionated by using a variety of ex - ecutive tasks to tap a number of functions that are generally agreed to be under the control of executive processes . These include the ability to coordinate the func - tions of the articulatory loop and visual - spatial sketch pad , possibly indicative of 274 BULL AND SCERIF the ability to keep information updated in working memory . This is typically mea - sured by dual - task performance , such as performing a span task and visual - spatial task simultaneously ( Adams et al . , 1998 ; Baddeley & Della Sala , 1996 ; Baddeley , Della Sala , Papagno , & Spinnler , 1997 ; Della Sala , Baddeley , Papagno , & Spinnler , 1995 ) . The ability to inhibit irrelevant information from entering working memory is also thought to be a component of executive functioning measured by tasks such as random generation ( e . g . , Baddeley , Emslie , Kolodny , & Duncan , 1998 ) , trail mak - ing ( seeLezak , 1995 ) , andtheStrooptask ( Stroop , 1935 ) . Anumberofstagesarein - volved in the process leading from perceptual identification of the stimulus and response output in any Stroop task ( Luo , 1999 ) . Interference and hence slower per - formanceontheincongruentconditionofthetaskmaybeduetoreducedattentionalfocustowardtherelevantdimension ( Pansky & Algom , 1999 ) , increased automaticityoftheirrelevantdimension , ortothefasterspeedofprocessingoftheir - relevant dimension ( for a review of these latter interpretations of interference , see MacLeod , 1991 ) . Alternatively , higher interference may be due to difficulties with inhibition of the irrelevant dimension to select the correct response . As Salthouse and Meinz ( 1995 ) point out , greater interference may occur because of more effec - tive automatic activation of the irrelevant dimension . Facilitation in the congruent condition should reveal any benefits of automatic activation . Anotherfunctionoftenascribedtothecentralexecutiveistheabilitytoswitchbe - tweentasksorstrategiesasmeasuredbycomplextasks , suchastheWCST ( Heaton , Chelune , Talley , Kay , & Curtiss , 1993 ) . However , there is much more interplay be - tween processes for successful performance on this task . Also involved are evalua - tions of this strategy according to feedback , as well as online maintenance of the relevantdimensionbeingused . Thisbroadrecruitmentofdifferentprocessesissup - ported by recent imaging studies , suggesting that a number of cortical areas are re - cruited when performing this task ( Berman , et al . , 1995 ) , as well as other tasks of executive function ( Collette et al . , 1999 ) . However , Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) found that performance on this task was best predicted by the ability to shift between strategies rather than by updating in working memory or inhibition . Another feature of the central executive is the capacity for the temporary activa - tion of long - term memory , whereby the executive is able to encode and retrieve in - formation both from the slave systems and from temporarily activated components of long - term memory . This skill is measured through such tasks as the reading span taskofDanemanandCarpenter ( 1980 ) andthecountingspantaskofCase , Kurland , and Goldberg ( 1982 ) . These tasks require the simultaneous processing and storage of information and do appear to allow the use of elaborate strategies to aid perfor - mance ( Towse & Hitch , 1995 ; Towse , Hitch , & Hutton , 1998 ) . Itis , asyet , unknownwhetherfunctionssuchasselectiveattention , dual - taskper - formance , and the activation of long - term information , are performed by separate cognitive systems that can be selectively impaired , or whether they are subsystems EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 275 ofasingleexecutivecontroller ( Baddeley , 1996 ) , possiblywithdissociablecompo - nents ( Robbins , 1996 ; Shallice & Burgess , 1996 ) . Baddeley ( 1996 ) acknowledges thatmanyoftheearlynotionsofthecentralexecutivewerebasedontheSupervisoryActivatingSystem ( SAS ) proposed by Norman & Shallice ( 1980 ; also see Shallice , 1982 ) . This model involves a number of sources of action control . One is for well - learned habitual patterns that are triggered automatically for carrying out rou - tine tasks ; another is an attentional controller capable of overriding habitual re - sponse patterns when a new schema ( or an adapted existing schema ) needs to be initiated for dealing with novel situations . Shallice and Burgess ( 1996 ) elaborate somewhat on this earlier model and describe three stages of establishing a new tem - porary schema . Stage 1 involves generation of a strategy , which the authors suggest may be spontaneous or may arise through some kind of problem - solving process . Theyalsosuggestthatthisstrategygenerationmaybeaidedbytheformationandre - alizationofintentionsandbyretrievalofrelatedinformationfromepisodicmemorythatwouldhelptodealwiththenovelsituation . Stage2involvesthemaintenanceof thistemporarilyactivatedschemainworkingmemory . Finally , stage3monitorsthe effectiveness of the new schema for rejection or alteration of that schema . Support for the idea that there may be some diversity between executive func - tions also comes from Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) . Using confirmatory factor analysis , it was found that three target functions—inhibition , shifting between mental sets and strategies , andupdatinginformationinworkingmemory—weredistinguishable , al - though not completely independent . Miyake et al . went on to suggest that unity amongst executive functions may be accounted for by inhibition , as all executive functionsinvolvesomeinhibitoryprocessestofunctionproperly ( e . g . , ignoringpre - vious incoming information in a working memory task , changing to a new mental set , etc . ) . Itisinterestingtonotethattheauthorsalsofoundnoconclusiveevidenceto link dual - task performance to any of the functions they targeted , despite its frequent use as an executive measure ( e . g . , Baddeley , 1996 ) . Further support for the notion that inhibition may be a unifying function in executive processes also comes from the hybrid model of executive functions proposed by Barkley ( 1997 ) . Barkley’s modelproposesthatbehavioralinhibitionpermitstheproficientperformanceofex - ecutive functions ( e . g . , working memory and self - regulation ) , which , in turn , influ - ences the capacity to produce goal - directed behavior in novel situations . Extensive testing of a group of participants who have previously been found to perform poorly on measures of executive functioning would provide evidence to support or refute the fractionation of executive functioning . The study reported here will involve children who are under - and overachieving in mathematics per - formance . Bull et al . ( 1999 ) found that children with poorer mathematical and ba - sic arithmetical skills showed poorer performance of executive functioning ( as measured by the WCST ) ; however , their difficulty with this task was restricted to perseverative responding . Children of lower mathematical ability were signifi - cantly more likely to have difficulty shifting from one sorting set to another , hence 276 BULL AND SCERIF making more perseverative responses . Rourke ( 1993 ) has reported similar results , when analysing the types of errors made by children with specific arithmetic diffi - culties . One type of error was difficulty switching between psychological sets ( e . g . , from addition to subtraction procedures ) . Bull et al . ( 1999 ) interpreted these findings as a problem with executive functioning , specifically inhibition . How - ever , at this point , little more can be said about whether this represented a “gen - eral” executive problem ( where children would show poorer performance on a whole range of executive measures ) or whether this was a specific problem ( with only one aspect of executive functioning ) . Of course , being able to answer this question would also tell us more about whether it is possible to conceptualize per - formance on these tasks in terms of distinguishable functions ( e . g . , inhibition , up - dating , and shifting ) that may then be selectively impaired . Furthermore , although Shallice and Burgess ( 1996 ) and Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) have investigated fraction - ation exclusively in adult populations , this study addresses the issue of fraction - ation of executive functions in children . Tasks were used that map onto the main functions of the central executive as proposed by Baddeley ( 1996 ) , and which also have some correspondence to the functions targeted by Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) . These include the WCST , which is be - lieved to involve a selection of executive functions , but found by Miyake et al . to be best predicted by shifting ability . The Stroop task was used as a measure of inhi - bition ; the counting span , a measure of memory updating ; and dual - task perfor - mance , a measure of ability to coordinate the functions of the articulatory loop and the visual - spatial sketch pad . The purpose of this study was twofold . First , we attempted to understand more fully how functions ascribed to the central executive are involved in the develop - ment of children’s mathematical skills . Second , our study is a continuation of pre - vious studies by Baddeley ( 1996 ) , Shallice & Burgess ( 1996 ) , and Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) , which attempt to determine whether executive functioning should be theo - retically viewed as a relatively distinct set of functions that may be selectively im - paired and whether this model can be extended into childhood . METHOD Participants Parentalconsentwasobtainedfor105childrentoparticipateinthestudy . However , due to absences across the testing sessions , complete data are only available for 93 children ; only data from these 93 children are included in the analysis . All children were in Primary 3 classes ( mean age = 7 years , 4 months ; SD = 3 . 8 months ; and age ranges , from 6 years , 9 months , to 8 years , 3 months ) from six schools in the Midlothian , Angus , and Kinross regions of Scotland . This sample consisted of 50 EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 277 boys and 43 girls ( all of White European origin ) ; they attended a variety of schools , which ranged from small rural schools to large schools in urban areas representa - tive of lower and middle class areas . Children were initially screened for mathematics , reading , and general intelli - gence . Mathematics ability was assessed using the Group Mathematics Test ( GMT ; Young , 1970 ) . In this task , children were required to answer questions ( read by an experimenter ) that were related to a picture of the test sheet . They were also required to complete both single - and multidigit addition and subtraction problems . Reading ability was assessed using the British Ability Scales ( BAS ) word - reading test ( Elliott , Murray , & Pearson , 1979 ) , and , in this case , children were required to read single words that became progressively more difficult , with testing being discontinued after 10 successive reading failures . Finally , an esti - mate of general intelligence was obtained by using the vocabulary and block de - sign subtests of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children – Revised ( WISC – R ) ( Wechsler , 1977 ) . These two subtests were chosen because they have high correla - tions with full scale IQ over a wide range and have a consistently high reliability ( Sattler , 1982 ) . Tasks and Procedures Children were then seen individually in 3 sessions , each of which was 20 to 30 min in length . All children completed the tasks in the same order . Testing was carried out in a small room away from the classroom area . Executive function tasks were completed in the following order : session 1 , WCST ; session 2 , Stroop task and counting span ; and session 3 , dual - task . WCST – Revised and Expanded ( Heaton et al . , 1993 ) . In the WCST , threedimensions ( color , shape , andnumber ) areusedfortheclassificationofaseries of cards . Four key cards are placed in front of the child , each with a different shape ( triangle , star , cross , orcircle ) , differentnumbersofshapes ( one , two , three , orfour ) , and different colors ( red , green , yellow , or blue ) . The children are asked if they can seethethreewaysinwhichthecardsaredifferent , whichappearstomakethedistinc - tion more salient to the child ( rather than being told how they differ by the experi - menter ) . Thechildisinstructedtopickupthefirstcardandmatchittooneofthekey cards by color , shape , or number . If the child matches the card by the correct sorting criteria ( inthefirstinstance , color ) , theexperimentersay“that’sright” , andthechild shouldcontinuesortingsubsequentcardsbythesamedimension . Ifthematchingdi - mension was incorrect , the experimenter responds “that’s wrong” , and the child shouldmatchthenextcardbyadifferentdimension , inanattempttoidentifythecor - rectone . Whenthechildhasmaintainedthecorrectsortingdimensionfor10consec - 278 BULL AND SCERIF utivetrials , theexperimenterchangesthematchingcriteriawithoutexplicitlytelling thechild . Itisthechild’stasktousethefeedbackgivenbytheexperimentertodeter - minethatapreviousmatchingcriteriathatwascorrectisnowincorrectandthatadif - ferent matching criteria needs to be used . This procedure continues until the child completes six category changes or runs out of cards ( total = 128 trials ) . Results ob - tained from the task pinpointed specific problems : initial conceptualization of the task ( measured as the number of trials taken to successfully complete the first cate - gory ) , failure to maintain set ( occurs when the child makes five or more correct re - sponses and then makes an error ) , and ability to switch sorting criteria ( measured as the percentage of trials on which the child makes a response that would have been correct using the previous sorting criteria , but is now incorrect ) . This includes cor - rectresponsesthathappentomatchonthissortingdimension , but , whenconsidered in conjunction with immediately surrounding nonambiguous errors , are , in fact , perseverative responses to the previous sorting criteria . Stroop Task ( see Salthouse & Meinz , 1995 ) . Two different versions of the Stroop task were designed . The stimulus materials in each consisted of one page with two columns of 10 stimuli each . The characters were presented in 20 - point new Gothic font ( all capital letters for the color condition ) . In the color condition , children were asked to name the colors ( i . e . , red , blue , green , yellow ) of the items . For the number version of the task , children were asked to name the quantity of items ( one , two , three , or four ) . For both tasks , children were asked to respond as quickly as possible ; they were timed with a stopwatch . The experimenter asked the children to correct any errors made . There were 3 conditions for each of the tasks . The first was a baseline condition , consisting of crosses ( XXX ) , where children were required to name the color or quantity of the Xs . The second was a congruent condition where , for example , the word RED was printed in red , or the quantity cor - responded to the printed number ( e . g . , 333 ) . The third was an incongruent condi - tion where , for example , the word RED was printed in green ink ( the task being to name the color , not the word ) , or the quantity and the printed number did not corre - spond ( e . g . , 222—again , the task being to name the quantity , not the printed num - ber . Conditions were counterbalanced by task ( color and quantity ) , and type of con - dition ( baseline , congruent , and incongruent ) . The total time to correctly name all of the items in each condition was measured . For each variant of the Stroop task , two scores were calculated . The first was an interference score , obtained by sub - tracting time required to complete the baseline condition from time required to complete the incongruent condition . The second , a facilitation score , was calcu - lated by subtracting the time required to complete the congruent condition from the time required to complete the baseline condition . Hence , for both measures , a higher positive difference indicated greater interference in the incongruent condi - tion or greater facilitation in the congruent condition . EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 279 Dual - task performance ( Baddeley et al . , 1997 ) . This task was used to assess the ability to coordinate the functioning of the articulatory loop and the visuo - spatial sketch pad and to allow a comparison to single - task performance on measures of digit span and visual tracking . First , a baseline digit span was acquired . Children were presented with lists of digits read aloud by the experimenter , at a rate of one digit per second , starting from a span of three . The children were required to give immediate ordered recall . Two lists at each span length were given . If , at a par - ticular span length , the child recalled both lists correctly , the span length was then increased by one digit . Span was taken as the maximum length at which the child performed both lists without error . Second , the single - task digit span condition was carried out . The child was pre - sentedcontinuouslywithlistsofdigits , attheirownspans , foraperiodof2min . The number of lists presented in 2 min varied , as this was dependent on the child’s span ; therefore , performance was measured by the percentage of correct sequences . Next , the single - task tracking condition was carried out . Children were required to cross out 1 cm 2 boxes linked to form a path that was laid out on an A4 sheet of pa - per . Each sheet contained 80 boxes . Children were shown the starting point of the chainandaskedtoplaceacrossineachsuccessiveboxasquicklyaspossibleforape - riod of 2 min . The total number of crossed - out boxes was taken as the score . Finally , the dual - task condition , where children were presented ( for 2 min ) with lists of sequences at their own span ( while simultaneously being required to per - form the tracking task ) , was carried out . Again , performance was measured as the percentage of completely correct sequences recalled and the number of boxes crossed out . The scoring procedure followed that presented by Baddeley et al . ( 1997 ) . A mu score was calculated using the following formula : (cid:1) (cid:2) mu pm pt (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:11) (cid:12) 1 2 100 where pm corresponds to the proportional loss of span performance under dual - task conditions ( pm equals the percentage of correct digit recall under single - task condi - tions minus the percentage of correct digit recall under dual - task conditions ) . The proportion of single - task tracking lost in the dual - task condition is represented by pt ; it is calculated as the number of boxes crossed in single task – number of boxes crossed in dual task divided by the number of boxes crossed in a single - task condi - tion . A higher negative mu score represents a larger decrement in performance un - der dual - task conditions , compared to performance in the single - task condition . A positive mu score represents no decrement in performance . Counting span . Stimuli for the counting span test consisted of plain white cards . On each card were between one and nine green spots and one and nine red 280 BULL AND SCERIF spots ; each spot had a radius of 8 mm . Red spots were presented as distractor items , in line with the task description provided by Case et al . ( 1982 ) . Children were in - structed to count the number of green spots on the card presented . After an initial practice session , children were presented with two cards that were facedown on the table . The experimenter then turned the first card over ; after the child counted the green spots , this card was turned over and the next card was turned face up . After counting , this card was turned over . The experimenter pointed to the first card and then the second , asking the child to recall the number of spots counted on each card . Administration of the test continued until the child made errors on both attempts at a particular span length . Span was taken as the maximum number of counts recalled in the correct serial order . RESULTS Correlational Analyses First , a correlational analysis was conducted to discover which of the measures of executivefunctioningweresignificantlycorrelatedtomathematicsability . Because of the high correlation between mathematics ability and reading ability ( r = . 61 , p < . 001 ) and IQ ( r = . 68 , p < . 001 ) , partial correlation coefficients were also calculated controlling for reading ability and IQ . The following measures were included in the correlational analysis : percentage of perseverative responses , number of trials to complete the first category , and failure to maintain set ( from the WCST ) ; maximum span length recalled correctly in serial order ( from the counting span task ) ; interfer - ence and facilitation scores for both the color - word and number - quantity variants ( from the Stroop task ) ; and a mu score , taking into account decrement in perfor - mance under dual - task conditions ( from the dual task ; see Table 1 ) . The correlational analyses reveal that a number of executive function measures correlate significantly with mathematics ability . In support of previous research ( Bulletal . , 1999 ) , theWCSTpercentageofperseverativeresponsesisagainfoundto be negatively correlated to mathematics ability—that is , children of higher mathe - matics ability made a lower percentage of perseverative responses . Counting span was also found to have a significant positive correlation with mathematics abil - ity—that is , higher mathematics ability is related to a higher working memory span . Thefinalmeasurerelatedtomathematicsabilityisinterferenceinthenumber – quan - tity Stroop task , which indicates that higher mathematics ability is associated with a lower amount of interference for irrelevant information . These relationships to mathematicsabilityremainedsignificantaftercontrollingforreadingabilityandIQ . Many of the executive function measures were also found to be significantly correlated with one another . The amount of interference on the number – quantity Stroop task was found to be positively correlated with the percentage of EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 281 perseverative errors on the WCST , suggesting an underlying commonality , per - haps in the necessity to inhibit a learned strategy . Counting span is negatively cor - related with amount of interference on the Stroop task , suggesting that children who show less interference on the Stroop task ( i . e . , those who are better able to in - hibit the irrelevant information ) have a higher working memory span . Facilitation on the number – quantity Stroop task is also found to be significantly positively cor - related with performance on the dual task . This suggests that children who gained more facilitation from the irrelevant dimension in the Stroop task ( i . e . , number in - formation ) showed less decrement in performance under dual - task conditions . Fixed - Order Multiple Regression Analyses Specific links between predictor variables and mathematics ability were further testedinfixed - ordermultipleregressionanalysestoassesstheamountofvariancein mathematicsabilitypredictedbyeachofthesignificantlyrelatedmeasureofexecu - tivefunctioning ( WCSTperseverativeresponses , Stroopinterference , andcounting span , referred to as perseveration , inhibition efficiency , and working memory , re - spectively ) . The outcomes of the regression analyses are summarized in Table 2 . ModelsA 1 , B 1 , andC 1 showtheamountofvarianceinmathematicsabilitypredicted by each executive function measure . Working memory span , perseveration , and in - hibition efficiency were each found to predict a significant amount of variance in 282 BULL AND SCERIF TABLE 1 Correlation Coefficients Between Executive Function Measures and Mathematics Ability ( Below Principle Diagonal ) and Partial Correlation Coefficients Controlling for Reading Ability and IQ ( Above Principle Diagonal ) Executive Function Measures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 Mathematics — – . 22 * ns ns . 26 * ns ns – . 27 * * ns ns 2 WCST % perseverative responses – . 43 * * — . 21 * – . 29 * * ns ns ns . 41 * * ns ns 3 WCST trials to complete 1st category ns . 25 * — ns ns ns ns ns ns ns 4 WCST failure to maintain set ns – . 23 * ns — ns ns ns ns ns ns 5 Counting span . 44 * * ns ns ns — ns ns ns ns ns 6 Interference ( color – word ) ns ns ns ns ns — ns . 27 * ns ns 7 Facilitation ( color – word ) ns ns ns ns ns ns — ns . 22 * . 21 * 8 Interference ( number – quantity ) – . 46 * * . 51 * * ns ns – . 21 * . 28 * * ns — – . 28 * * ns 9 Facilitation ( number – quantity ) ns ns ns ns ns ns . 22 * – . 26 * — ns 10 Dual task ns ns ns ns ns ns . 22 * ns ns — Note . For correlations , df = 91 , except for correlations to dual task where df = 90 . For partial correlations , df = 89 , except for correlations to dual task where df = 88 . WCST = Wisconsin Card Sorting Task . * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . mathematics ability ( 19 % , 19 % , and 21 % , respectively ) . Models A 2 , B 2 , and C 2 , show how much variance is shared with reading and IQ and how muchvariance is uniquetoeachexecutivefunctionmeasure . Theseanalysesshowthatalargeproportion ofthevarianceforeachexecutivefunctionmeasureissharedwiththevariancepredictedbyIQandreadingability ( workingmemoryspan = 16 % , perseveration = 17 % , andinhi - bitionefficiency = 18 % ) . Therefore , eachexecutivefunctionmeasureisonlycontribut - ing a small amount of unique variance to predicting mathematics ability , but these re - mained significant contributions over and above variance predicted by reading ability and IQ ; working memory span accounted for 3 % of additional variance in model A 2 , perseveration accounted for 2 % additional variance in model B 2 , and inhibition effi - ciency accounted for 3 % additional variance in model C 2 . Further regression analyses were conducted to examine the amount of unique variance predicted by each executive function measure after accounting for the variance predicted by the other executive function measures . Models A 3 to C 3 show that each executive function measure is predicting a significant amount of unique variance in mathematics ability , suggesting that the tests are relatively in - dependent ( working memory = 10 % , perseveration = 4 % , inhibition efficiency = EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 283 TABLE 2 Multiple Regression Analyses Predicting Mathematics Ability ( Group Mathematics Test ) Model Order of Entry Into Regression Equation R 2 R 2 Change F A 1 1 . Working memory span . 19 . 19 21 . 22 * * * A 2 1 . Reading and IQ . 56 . 56 56 . 20 * * * 2 . Working memory span . 59 . 03 6 . 48 * A 3 1 . Perseveration and inhibition efficiency . 27 . 27 16 . 46 * * * 2 . Working memory span . 37 . 10 14 . 45 * * * A 4 1 . Reading , IQ , perseveration , and inhibition efficiency . 60 . 60 32 . 27 * * * 2 . Working memory span . 62 . 02 5 . 57 * B 1 1 . Perseveration . 19 . 19 21 . 06 * * * B 2 1 . Reading and IQ . 56 . 56 56 . 20 * * * 2 . Perseveration . 58 . 02 4 . 54 * B 3 1 . Inhibition efficiency and working memory span . 33 . 33 22 . 50 * * * 2 . Perseveration . 37 . 04 5 . 28 * B 4 1 . Reading , IQ , inhibition efficiency and working memory span . 61 . 61 34 . 95 * * * 2 . Perseveration . 62 . 01 1 . 22 C 1 1 . Inhibition . 21 . 21 24 . 84 * * * C 2 1 . Reading and IQ . 56 . 56 56 . 20 * * * 2 . Inhibition efficiency . 59 . 03 7 . 12 * * C 3 1 . Perseveration and and working memory span . 31 . 31 20 . 56 * * * 2 . Inhibition efficiency . 37 . 06 8 . 07 * * C 4 1 . Reading , IQ , perseveration and working memory span . 60 . 60 33 . 51 * * * 2 . Inhibition efficiency . 62 . 02 3 . 51 ( = . 06 ) * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . * * * p < . 001 . 6 % ) . However , after accounting for the variance of reading , IQ , and the two re - maining measures of executive function ( models A 4 to C 4 ) , it is again revealed that much of the predicted variance is shared with reading and IQ . Only working mem - ory span contributed a significant amount of unique variance to predicting mathe - matics ability after taking into account the variance predicted by reading , IQ , perseveration , and inhibition efficiency ( Model A 4 ) . Perseveration and inhibition efficiency both failed to predict a significant amount of unique variance . Perseveration , a measure of a child’s ability to inhibit a learned strategy , was found to have a strong correlation with inhibition efficiency ( r = . 41 , p < . 01 ) . The inhibi - tion efficiency measure ( from the Stroop task ) is a measure of a child’s ability to inhibit an automatic response to the stimuli , but , given the blocked presentation of the stimuli in the three different conditions , it is also a measure , once again , of the child’s ability to inhibit a learned response for dealing with the previous part of the task . The shared requirements of these tasks clearly limits the amount of unique variance that each task is able to predict when entered at a later stage of the regres - sion equation , after the related task has already been entered . DISCUSSION This study began with two major goals . First , the authors attempted to elucidate the difficulties with executive functioning by children with lower mathematical skills . Second , the authors evaluated the notion that executive functions represent rela - tively diverse processes that may be selectively impaired . From Bull et al . ( 1999 ) , it is known that children of lower mathematical ability showed problems with one form of executive functioning , poor inhibition of prepotent responding . Little was known as to whether these children would show a whole range of difficulties on other measures of executive functioning or whether they would show quite specific difficulties . These issues were examined using a recent theoretical model ( Shallice & Burgess , 1996 ) and task analyses from Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) . With regard to the first goal , it has been shown that children of lower mathemat - ical ability do indeed show difficulties on tasks that measure the ability to inhibit both prepotent information ( Stroop interference ) and learned strategies ( WCST preseverative responses ) ; these children also have difficulty maintaining informa - tion in working memory . To understand how these functions may influence mathe - matics performance , each will be considered in turn . The discussion of each task will also be related to the theoretical models described earlier . Results from the WCST clearly show that the main difficulty for children of lower mathematical ability is with inhibiting a learned strategy and switching to a new strategy . These difficulties may correspond to stages 1 and 3 ( strategy genera - tion and evaluation ) of the Shallice and Burgess ( 1996 ) model . It appears that strat - egy generation is not initially a problem because there is no significant correlation 284 BULL AND SCERIF between trials to complete the first category and mathematics ability . The diffi - culty only becomes apparent once an established strategy must be inhibited in fa - vor of a new strategy . The results also show that children of lower mathematical ability are able to maintain a strategy in memory once that strategy has been estab - lished . These findings suggest that , although the task is supposedly measuring cen - tral executive functioning per se , there are , in fact , components of the task that may map onto the dissociable processes suggested by the Shallice and Burgess model . This supports the notion of diverse executive functions , some functioning nor - mally and others functioning deficiently . The correlation between the numerical Stroop interference and mathematics ability is intriguing . The slower performance of lower ability mathematicians on the incongruent condition in the numerical variant of the task may be due to re - duced attentional focus toward the numerosity dimension or to differences in the speed of counting or subitizing ( Koontz & Berch , 1996 ; Pansky & Algom , 1999 ) . If this is the case , we expect speed of performance on the baseline condition to be faster for those children of higher mathematical ability . Indeed this was found to be the case ( r = – . 29 , p < . 01 ) . However , to some extent this has been controlled for by taking baseline performance into account when calculating interference and fa - cilitation scores ; therefore , any remaining differences must be accounted for by an alternative explanation . One explanation could be that children who show greater interference do so because of greater automaticity of the number identity dimen - sion ( Salthouse & Meinz , 1995 ) . Facilitation should reveal any benefits of auto - matic activation . There was no significant correlation to indicate that mathematics ability was related to the amount of facilitation . Furthermore , the significant nega - tive correlation between interference and facilitation indicates that a higher amount of interference was associated with a lower degree of facilitation , therefore ruling out the possibility that greater interference was due to more automatic acti - vation of the irrelevant dimension . A remaining viable explanation for these re - sults is poorer inhibition of prepotent responses , with more irrelevant information gaining access to working memory for children of lower mathematical ability . In - deed the correlational analysis did reveal that greater interference was related to lower working memory span . This supports previous findings that have examined children’s reading and learning difficulties ( Gernsbacher , 1993 ; Lorsbach et al , 1996 ) . These studies have shown that less - skilled readers have no difficulty acti - vating relevant information , but they do have difficulty suppressing activation of irrelevant information ( De Beni , Palladino , Pazzaglia , & Cornoldi , 1998 ) . Hasher and Zacks ( 1988 ) reported that breakdown of inhibitory mechanisms not only al - lows irrelevant information to enter working memory , but that it also allows this information to remain active for a longer period of time , hence having a detrimen - tal effect on performance . Although this interpretation adequately explains the findings from the num - ber – quantity Stroop task , it does not explain why we did not find a significant cor - EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 285 relation between mathematics ability and amount of interference on the color – word Stroop task . In line with previous research ( for a review , see MacLeod , 1991 ) , there was a high degree of interference from the irrelevant word dimension in the incongruent condition ( average interference was 17 . 19 s and 11 . 34 s for the color – word and number – quantity conditions , respectively ) . The facilitation scores in the two variants of the Stroop task are significantly correlated , which supports that they are measuring the same ability . However , there is no significant correla - tion between interference scores in the task variants . Therefore , it may be appro - priate to suggest that there is a domain - specific problem with inhibition of numerical information ( see Swanson , 1993 ) or a reduced domain - specific working memory capacity ( Dark & Benbow , 1994 ) . However , before such a statement can be justified , it is necessary to ensure that future research include more varied stim - uli in the tasks alongside the numerical stimuli , as presented in the tasks here . The Stroop task may be considered in much more detail to understand further stages 1 and 3 of the Shallice and Burgess model—that is , strategy generation and strategy evaluation . In this study , children were given the same instructions for each condition of the task ( e . g . , name the color , not the word ) , so that , essentially , they were being instructed to use the same schema across conditions . The child is then able to evaluate its effectiveness and possibly adopt a more appropriate strat - egy—for example , word or number reading in the congruent condition . Explicitly manipulating the instructions given to the children could be useful in determining whether providing appropriate strategies decreases the interference effect . If higher interference in the low - ability groups is due to a problem with strategy gen - eration , then instructing all children to use an efficient strategy could reduce indi - vidual differences . Providing a range of more or less efficient strategies for coping with the task may give an indication of the effectiveness of the monitoring process in the two ability groups . Stimulus presentation may also affect the results . In this study , each separate condition was presented on a different card ; therefore , those children who noticed matching information in the congruent condition might have realized that they could simply read the numbers or words for the whole card . If stimuli from all con - ditions were presented in a random order , one at a time , a continual strategy could not be used . Furthermore , it would be possible to record accuracy and response time for each single presentation . This would allow the separation of variance re - lated to loss of instruction information from working memory , as measured by the number of errors ( stage 2 , maintenance ) , from variance related to strategy genera - tion and evaluation , as measured by interference effects for correct responses only ( stages 1 and 3 ) . Furthermore , blocked stimuli could be used ( e . g . , five congruent stimuli followed by incongruent stimuli ) , when it is more likely that a temporary schema may be put into action . Preliminary results from a study comparing blocked versus random presentation of stimuli in the Stroop task reveal that chil - dren of lower mathematical ability do show greater interference in the blocked pre - 286 BULL AND SCERIF sentation than children of higher mathematical ability . However , when stimuli were randomly presented , and hence there is no necessity to inhibit a learned strat - egy , there were no differences in the amount of interference between children of high and low mathematics ability ( Bull , Murphy , & McFarland , 2000 ) . This clearly suggests that future studies should consider different inhibition require - ments ( e . g . , inhibition of more automatic information vs . inhibition of learned strategies ) when assessing how they may be related to other cognitive skills . There was no significant correlation between mathematics ability and perfor - mance on the dual task . There was little change in performance on either the digit recall while performing the tracking task or on the tracking task while performing the digit recall . This might suggest that there are no differences between children with regard to the ability to focus attention on more than one task at a time , a result that conflicts with findings obtained with younger children ( Adams et al , 1998 ) . Therefore , the validity of the dual task as a measure of executive functioning must be considered . Phillips ( 1997 ) lists a number of requirements for a task to be considered a true measure of executive functioning . A task should be novel in both content and form ( so as to tap goal identification and strategy planning ) ; it should be effortful , in that it may require online monitoring or inhibition ; and it should have some element of maintenance in working memory . A novel task requires that a new temporary schema be set up to deal with that task , so as to inhibit some prepotent response that may have already been activated ( strategy generation in terms of the Shallice & Burgess model ) . The dual task used in this study is , in no obvious respect , a truly novel task . It simply requires digit recall and placing crosses in boxes following a path , which children may relate to puzzles involving joining dots . It would seem that , in terms of the Shallice and Burgess model , the only process required here is one of maintenance of instructions for the task and recall of the digits . Indeed , a number of researchers now suggest that any dual task must involve some element of inhibition in the primary task ( De Beni et al . , 1998 ; Roberts & Pennington , 1996 ) . Future studies should ensure that the dual task is more effortful . For exam - ple , the tracking task could be made more demanding by having children put a cross in a box , but to put a tick if they reach a circle along the path , requiring inhibi - tion of the previous response . Future studies should also analyze errors made in following the path on the tracking task , rather than only measuring the number of crossed - out boxes . This could be easily attained by asking children to follow the path with a colored pen . Alternatively , the tracking task might be replaced by a more novel measure . For example , the Ruff Figural Fluency test ( Ruff , Light , & Evans , 1987 ) has been shown to be a valid measure of executive functioning by Phillips ( 1997 ) . This task requires generation of novel figures . It is novel because the task does not rely on long - term retrieval of automatic strategy , it is effortful be - cause it requires online monitoring and inhibition of previously drawn figures , and it requires the maintenance of task instructions in memory . EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 287 There was a significant correlation between mathematics ability and counting span , with children of higher mathematics ability achieving a higher counting span . Counting span clearly involves some element of maintenance of information in working memory , which may be dependent on inhibiting previous information held in working memory and the use of rehearsal strategies to aid recall . In terms of the Shallice & Burgess ( 1996 ) model , this might be referred to as spontaneous strategy use , another component process of strategy generation , distinct from problem solving . Although no systematic measure was taken of which children used strategies , anecdotal evidence clearly suggests that some children used very obvious rehearsal strategies , whereas others did not . Furthermore , different strate - gies were used , even with the initial counting of numbers . Some children counted sequentially , others counted two dots at a time , and others reported the use of spa - tial arrangements of the dots . Previous research that has examined performance on similar span measures ( reading and listening span ) found that performance is very much dependent on the use of strategies ( Carpenter & Just , 1989 ) . Observation of correlation coefficients among tests also reveals that children who showed greater interference on the Stroop task had a lower working memory span . Our results are therefore supportive of previous studies showing that performance on a listening span task involves more than just processing capacity , with inhibitory processes and strategy generation playing an important role in group differences ( Cataldo & Cornoldi , 1998 ; Cornoldi et al . , 1999 ; Cornoldi , De Beni , & Pazzaglia , 1996 ; De Beni , Palladino , & Pazzaglia , 1995 ; De Beni et al . , 1998 ; Pazzaglia , Cornoldi , & De Beni , 1995 ) . In terms of understanding how diverse these executive functions are , it appears that the results are generally supportive of the ideas proposed by Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) ; their model may be usefully applied to children . Results from the regres - sion analyses reveal that there are independent and unique contributions from inhi - bition efficiency , working memory span , and perseveration in predicting mathematics performance , although much of this predicted variance was also shared with the variance predicted by reading ability and IQ . However , the signifi - cant correlation coefficients between the different measures suggest that there may indeed be some unity . This unity amongst executive functions may be accounted for by inhibition , as all executive functions involve some inhibitory processes to function properly ( e . g . , ignoring previous incoming information in a working memory task , changing to a new mental set , etc . ) ( Miyake et al . , 2000 ) . This may also offer support for the model proposed by Barkley ( 1997 ) , in which behavioral inhibition permits the proficient performance of executive functions ( such as working memory and self - regulation ) , which , in turn , influences the capacity to produce goal - directed behavior in novel situations . It is clearly important that larger batteries of tests be administered for each of the functions targeted by Miyake et al . ( 2000 ) and that the findings be generalized to include stimuli that are not numerical . Using the techniques employed by 288 BULL AND SCERIF Miyake et al . , it will be possible to understand the unity and diversity of these exec - utive functions in children and to discover whether certain executive functions de - velop at different critical periods . Espy ( 1997 ) made such a suggestion with regard to different critical periods for the development of inhibition and shifting skills , al - though it has not yet been systematically examined . Theresultsmayalsohaveimplicationsformodelsofnonverballearningdisabili - ties . Rourke ( 1993 ) identifiessubgroupsofchildrenwithlearningdifficultiesand , in particular , hereferstoagroupofchildrenwithspecificarithmeticdifficultiesashav - ing nonverbal learning disabilities . This group shows a pattern of neuropsychological weaknesses consistent with difficulties in executive function - ing . For example , children exhibited poor performance on visual - spatial organiza - tional tasks , psychomotor and tactile - perceptual tasks , nonverbal problem solving , and concept formation . Furthermore , these children encountered increasing diffi - cultieswithtasksthatbecamemorenovelandcomplex . Rourke ( 1993 ) discussesthe types of errors made by children with specific arithmetic disabilities . In addition to errors in spatial organization , reading visual detail , procedural errors , and memory , these children were also found to have difficulties shifting psychological sets ( chil - drencontinuedtouse apracticedprocedure—e . g . , addition , toanewoperation , such as subtraction ) . These children also exhibited difficulties judging the reasonable - nessofanswersandgeneratingreasonableplansofactionwhentherequirementsforataskwereonlyslightlydifferentfromproceduresalreadymasteredbythechild . Rourke and Conway ( 1997 ) also pointed out that early neuropsychological assessment can reveal patterns of assets and deficits that may be predictive of later academic performance , including arithmetic . In line with this , the findings from this study are now being considered with regard to children’s uses of counting strategies . This is being done by examining children’s varied uses of counting strategies in simple arithmetic and perseveration of ineffective strategy use ( Bull & Scerif , 2001 ) . It might also be the case that , at different levels of skill acquisition , executive functioning becomes more or less important . For ex - ample , once children are able to retrieve well - practiced strategies or arithmetic facts directly from long - term memory , there may be less need for the establish - ment of temporary new schemas , and so executive processes may not play such an important role once a skill becomes more automatic . This underscores the need for longitudinal studies that target developmental changes and constancy in strategy use and executive functioning . Longitudinal studies would allow us to determine whether an early delay in executive functioning results in a develop - mental lag in learning skills , such as mathematics . If this is found to be the case , consideration should also be given to methods by which such difficulties may be circumvented—for example , through raising a child’s awareness of his or her own behavior and the monitoring of those behaviours , or through changes to teaching materials that might , for example , restrict the amount of irrelevant in - formation presented or the number of task changes required . EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 289 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funding for this study was provided by the Nuffield Foundation ( NUF – URB99 ) . We thank the children and staff of all participating schools : Blairingone Pri - mary School , Kinross ; Cornbank , Cuiken , Loanhead , and Paradykes Primary Schools ; Midlothian and Monikie Primary School , Angus . We also thank three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on a previous draft of this article , and to John Crawford for statistical advice . REFERENCES Adams , A . - M . , Bourke , L . , & Willis , C . ( 1998 , September ) . Workingmemory : Implicationsforindivid - ualdifferencesinlanguagedevelopment . PostersessionpresentedattheannualmeetingoftheBrit - ish Psychological Society Developmental Section , Lancaster , England . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1996 ) . Exploring the central executive . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy , 49A , 5 – 28 . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1998 ) . The central executive : A concept and some misconceptions . Journal of the In - ternational Neuropsychological Society , 4 , 523 – 526 . Baddeley , A . D . , & DellaSala , S . ( 1996 ) . Workingmemoryandexecutivecontrol . PhilosophicalTrans - actions of the Royal Society of London , 351 , 1397 – 1404 . Baddeley , A . D . , Della Sala , S . , Papagno , C . , & Spinnler , H . ( 1997 ) . Dual - task performance in dysexecutive and nondysexecutive patients with a frontal lesion . Neuropsychology , 11 , 187 – 194 . Baddeley , A . D . , Emslie , H . , Kolodny , J . , & Duncan , J . ( 1998 ) . Random generation and the executive control of working memory . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 51A , 819 – 852 . Baddeley , A . D . , & Hitch , G . J . ( 1974 ) . Working memory . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : advances in research and theory ( Vol . 8 , pp . 47 – 90 ) . New York : Aca - demic Press . Barkley , R . A . ( 1997 ) . Behavioural inhibition , sustained attention , and executive functions : Con - structing a unifying theory of ADHD . Psychological Bulletin , 121 , 65 – 94 . Berman , K . F . , Ostrem , J . L . , Randolph , C . , Gold , T . , Goldberg , T . E . , Coppola , R . , Carson , R . E . , Herscovitch , P . , & Weinberger , D . R . ( 1995 ) . Physiological activation of a cortical network during performance on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test : A positron emission tomography study . Neuropsychologia , 33 , 1027 – 1046 . Bull , R . , Johnston , R . S . , & Roy , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Exploring the roles of the visual - spatial sketch pad and central executive in children’s arithmetical skills : Views from cognition and developmental neuropsychology . Developmental Neuropsychology , 15 , 421 – 442 . Bull , R . , Murphy , S . L . , & McFarland , S . E . ( 2000 , September ) . Assessing inhibition using two pre - sentationformatsoftheStrooptask : Linkstointellectualdevelopment . Postersessionpresented at the annual meeting of the British Psychological Society Developmental Section , Bristol , England . Bull , R . , & Scerif , G . ( 2001 ) . Strategygenerationandevaluationinchildren’ssolutionsofsimplearith - metic problems : The role of executive processes . Burgess , P . W . , & Shallice , T . ( 1996 ) . Responsesuppression , initiationandstrategyusefollowingfron - tal lobe lesions . Neuropsychologia , 34 , 263 – 276 . Carpenter , P . A . , & Just , M . A . ( 1989 ) . The role of working memory in language comprehension . In D . Klahr & K . Kotovsky ( Eds . ) , Complexinformationprocessing : TheimpactofHerbertA . Simon ( pp . 31 – 68 ) . Hillside , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . 290 BULL AND SCERIF Case , R . , Kurland , M . , & Goldberg , J . ( 1982 ) . Operation efficiency and the growth of short - term mem - ory span . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 33 , 386 – 404 . Cataldo , M . G . , & Cornoldi , C . ( 1998 ) . Self - monitoring in poor and good reading comprehenders and their strategy use . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 16 , 155 – 165 . Collette , F . , Salmon , E . , VanderLinden , M . , Chicherio , C . , Belleville , S . , Degueldre , C . , Delfiore , G . , & Franck , G . ( 1999 ) . Regional brain activity during tasks devoted to the central executive of working memory . Cognitive Brain Research , 7 , 411 – 417 . Cornoldi , C . , Barbieri , A . , Gaiani , C . , & Zocchi , S . ( 1999 ) . Strategicmemorydeficitsinattentiondeficit disorder with hyperactivity participants ( ADHD ) : The role of executive processes . Developmental Neuropsychology , 15 , 53 – 71 . Cornoldi , C . , De Beni , R . , & Pazzaglia , F . ( 1996 ) . Profiles of reading comprehension difficulties : An analysis of single cases . In C . Cornoldi & J . Oakhill , ( Eds . ) , Reading comprehension difficulties : Processes and intervention ( 113 – 136 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Daneman , M . , & Carpenter , P . A . ( 1980 ) . Individualdifferencesinworkingmemoryandreading . Jour - nal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour , 19 , 450 – 466 . Dark , V . J . , & Benbow , C . P . ( 1994 ) . Typeofstimulusmediatestherelationshipbetweenworkingmem - ory performance and type of precocity . Intelligence , 19 , 337 – 357 . DeBeni , R . , Palladino , P . , & Pazzaglia , F . ( 1995 ) . Influenzanellamemoriadilavoroedelleabilita’cog - nitive e sintattiche nella difficolta’ di comprensione della lettura [ Working memory and metacognitive and syntactic abilities implied in specific reading comprehension disabilities ] . Giornale Italiano di Psicologia , 22 , 615 – 640 . De Beni , R . , Palladino , P . , Pazzaglia , F . , & Cornoldi , C . ( 1998 ) . Increases in intrusion errors and work - ing memory deficit of poor comprehenders . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 51A , 305 – 320 . DellaSala , S . , Baddeley , A . , Papagno , C . , & Spinnler , H . ( 1995 ) . Dual - taskparadigm : Ameanstoexam - inethecentralexecutive . InK . J . GrafmanandF . Boller ( Eds . ) , Structureandfunctionsofthehuman prefrontal cortex ( pp . 161 – 190 ) . New York : Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences . Elliott , C . D . , Murray , D . J . , & Pearson , L . S . ( 1979 ) . British Ability Scales . Windsor , England : NFER - Nelson . Espy , K . A . ( 1997 ) . Theshapeschool : Assessingexecutivefunctioninpreschoolchildren . Developmen - tal Neuropsychology , 13 , 495 – 499 . Gathercole , S . E . , & Pickering , S . J . ( 2000a ) . Working memory deficits in children with low achieve - ments in the national curriculum at 7 years of age . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 70 , 177 – 194 . Gathercole , S . E . , & Pickering , S . J . ( 2000b ) . Assessmentofworkingmemoryinsix - andseven - yearold children . Journal of Educational Psychology , 92 , 377 – 390 . Gernsbacher , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Less skilled readers have less efficient suppression mechanisms . Psycho - logical Science , 4 , 294 – 298 . Hasher , L . , & Zacks , R . T . ( 1988 ) . Working , comprehension , andaging : Areviewandanewview . InG . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , Thepsychologyoflearningandmotivation ( Vol . 22 , pp . 193 – 225 ) . SanDiego , CA : Academic Press . Heaton , R . K . , Chelune , G . J . , Talley , J . L . , Kay , G . G . , & Curtiss , G . ( 1993 ) . Wisconsin Card Sorting Test Manual : Revised and Expanded . New York : Psychological Assessment Resources . Hughes , C . , & Richards , S . ( 1998 , September ) . Executivedysfunctioninhard - to - managepreschoolers : Longitudinal findings . Poster session presented at the annual meeting of the British Psychological Society Developmental Section , Lancaster , England . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1998 ) . Development itself is the key to understanding developmental disorders . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 2 , 389 – 398 . Koontz , K . L . , & Berch , D . B . ( 1996 ) . Identifying simple numerical stimuli : Processing inefficiencies exhibited by arithmetic learning disabled children . Mathematical Cognition , 2 , 1 – 23 . EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 291 Lehto , J . ( 1995 ) . Working memory and school achievement in the Ninth Form . Educational Psychol - ogy , 15 , 271 – 281 . Lezak , M . D . ( 1995 ) . Neuropsychological assessment ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Logie , R . H . ( 1991 ) . Visuo - spatial working memory : Visual working memory or visual buffer ? In C . Cornoldi & M . McDaniel ( Eds . ) , Imagery and cognition ( pp . 77 – 102 ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Lorsbach , T . C . , Wilson , S . , & Reimer , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Memoryforrelevantandirrelevantinformation : Ev - idencefordeficientinhibitoryprocessesinlanguage / learningdisabledchildren . ContemporaryEd - ucational Psychology , 21 , 447 – 466 . Luo , C . R . ( 1999 ) . SemanticcompetitionasthebasisofStroopinterference : Evidencefromcolourword matching tasks . Psychological Science , 10 , 35 – 40 . MacLeod , C . M . ( 1991 ) . HalfacenturyofresearchontheStroopeffect : Anintegrativereview . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 109 , 163 – 203 . McLean , J . F . , & Hitch , G . J . ( 1999 ) . Workingmemoryimpairmentsinchildrenwithspecificarithmetic learning difficulties . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 74 , 240 – 260 . Miyake , A . , Friedman , N . P . , Emerson , M . J . , Witzki , A . H . , Howerter , A . , & Wager , T . D . ( 2000 ) . The unityanddiversityofexecutivefunctionsandtheircontributionstocomplexfrontallobetasks : Ala - tent variable analysis . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 49 – 100 . Norman , D . A . , & Shallice , T . ( 1980 ) . Attention to action : Willed and automatic control of behaviour . University of Salifornia at San Diego , CHIP Report 99 . Ozonoff , S . , & Jensen , J . ( 1999 ) . Brief report : Specific executive function profiles in three neurodevelopmental disorders . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , 29 ( 2 ) , 171 – 177 . Pansky , A . , & Algom , D . ( 1999 ) . Stroop and Garner effects in comparative judgements of numerals : The role of attention . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 25 , 39 – 58 . Pazzaglia , F . , Cornoldi , C . , & DeBeni , R . ( 1995 ) . Knowledgeaboutreadingandselfevaluationinread - ing disabled children . Advances in Learning and Behavioural Disabilities , 9 , 91 – 117 . Phillips , L . ( 1997 ) . Do “frontal tests” measure executive function ? Issues of assessment and evidence from fluency tests . In P . M . A . Rabbitt ( Ed . ) , Methodology of Frontal and Executive Functions ( pp . 191 – 214 ) . Hove , England : Psychology Press . Quinn , J . G . , & McConnell , J . ( 1996 ) . Irrelevantpicturesinvisualworkingmemory . QuarterlyJournal of Experimental Psychology , 49A , 200 – 215 . Robbins , T . W . ( 1996 ) . Dissociating executive functions of the prefrontal cortex . Philosophical Trans - actions of the Royal Society of London , 351B , 1463 – 1471 . Roberts , R . J . , & Pennington , B . F . ( 1996 ) . Aninteractiveframeworkforexaminingprefrontalcognitive processes . Developmental Neuropsychology , 12 , 105 – 126 . Rourke , B . P . ( 1993 ) . Arithmeticdisabilities , specificandotherwise : Aneuropsychologicalperspective . Journal of Learning Disabilities , 26 , 214 – 226 . Rourke , B . P . , & Conway , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Disabilitiesofarithmeticandmathematicalreasoning : Perspec - tives from neurology and neuropsychology . Journal of Learning Disabilities , 30 , 34 – 46 . Ruff , R . M . , Light , R . H . , & Evans , R . W . ( 1987 ) . The Ruff figural fluency test : A normative study . De - velopmental Neuropsychology , 3 , 37 – 51 . Russell , J . , Jarrold , C . , & Henry , L . ( 1996 ) . Workingmemoryinchildrenwithautismandwithmoderate learning difficulties . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 37 , 673 – 686 . Salthouse , T . A . , & Meinz , E . J . ( 1995 ) . Aging , inhibition , workingmemory , andspeed . JournalofGer - ontology , 50B , 297 – 306 . Sattler , J . M . ( 1982 ) . Assessmentofchildren’sintelligenceandspecialabilities . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Shallice , T . ( 1982 ) . Specific impairments of planning . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London , B298 , 199 – 209 . Shallice , T . , & Burgess , P . ( 1996 ) . The domain of supervisory processes and temporal organisation of behaviour . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London , 131 , 1405 – 1412 . 292 BULL AND SCERIF Stroop , J . R . ( 1935 ) . Studiesofinterferenceinserialverbalreactions . JournalofExperimentalPsychol - ogy , 18 , 643 – 662 . Swanson , H . L . ( 1993 ) . Working memory in learning disability subgroups . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 56 , 87 – 114 . Swanson , H . L . ( 1999 ) . Reading comprehension and working memory in learning - disabled readers : Is the phonological loop more important than the executive system ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 72 , 1 – 31 . Swanson , H . L . , Ashbaker , M . H . , & Lee , C . ( 1996 ) . Learning disabled readers working memory as a function of processing demands . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 61 , 242 – 275 . Towse , J . N . , & Hitch , G . J . ( 1995 ) . Is there a relationship between task demands and storage space in testsofworkingmemorycapacity ? QuarterlyJournalofExperimentalPsychology , 48A , 108 – 124 . Towse , J . N . , Hitch , G . J . , & Hutton , U . ( 1998 ) . Areevaluationofworkingmemorycapacityinchildren . Journal of Memory and Language , 39 , 195 – 217 . Wechsler , D . ( 1977 ) . Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children – Revised . Windsor , England : NFER - Nelson . Young , D . ( 1970 ) . Group Mathematics Test . Kent : Hodder and Stoughton . EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING 293