Analogical Reasoning and Prefrontal Cortex : Evidence for Separable Retrieval and Integration Mechanisms Silvia A . Bunge 1 , Carter Wendelken 1 , David Badre 2 and Anthony D . Wagner 3 1 Department of Psychology and Center for Mind and Brain , University of California at Davis , Davis , CA , USA , 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA and 3 Department of Psychology and Neurosciences Program , Stan - ford University , Stanford , CA , USA The present study examined the contributions of prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) subregions to two component processes underlying verbal analogical reasoning : semantic retrieval and integration . Event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging data were acquired while subjects performed propositional analogy and semantic decision tasks . On each trial , subjects viewed a pair of words ( pair 1 ) , followed by an instructional cue and a second word pair ( pair 2 ) . On analogy trials , subjects evaluated whether pair 2 was semantically analogous to pair 1 . On semantic trials , subjects indicated whether the pair 2 words were semantically related to each other . Thus , analogy — but not semantic — trials required integration across multiple retrieved relations . To identify regions involved in semantic retrieval , we manipulated the associative strength of pair 1 words in both tasks . Anterior left inferior PFC ( aLIPC ) was modulated by associative strength , consistent with a role in controlled semantic retrieval . Left frontopolar cortex was insensitive to associative strength , but was more sensitive to integration demands than was aLIPC , consistent with a role in integrating the products of semantic retrieval to evaluate whether distinct representations are analogous . Right dorsolateral PFC exhibited a proﬁle consistent with a role in response selection rather than retrieval or integration . These ﬁndings indicate that verbal analogical reasoning depends on multiple , PFC - mediated computations . Keywords : analogies , anterior prefrontal , frontopolar cortex , inferior frontal , semantic memory Introduction Analogical reasoning , or the ability to ﬁnd correspondences between the structures of distinct mental representations ( Gentner , 1983 ; Hummel and Holyoak , 1997 ) , is central to our ability for learning and abstract thought ( e . g . Holyoak and Thagard , 1995 ) . The ability to form an analogy between distinct sets of mental representations allows us to glean general principles from speciﬁc examples , as well as to establish links between previously unconnected information . From an early age , we learn new words and concepts by analogy to ones previously learned ( e . g . Gentner , 1983 ) . As adults , we use analogies to concrete entities as currency for discussing ab - stract ideas . For example , we think of time through reference to space ( Boroditsky , 2000 ) , geneticists refer to DNA as a ‘blueprint’ for building an organism and physicists think of the probability density distribution of an electron as a ‘cloud’ . Thus , analogical reasoning is rightly considered a key component of higher cognitive function . Theorists have built computational models in an effort to understand the cognitive processes underlying the representa - tion of and reasoning about complex relational structures ( Gentner , 1989 , Hummel and Holyoak , 1997 ) . These putative processes include both the retrieval of associations from long - term memory and integration ( referred to as ‘mapping’ or ‘transfer’ ) across sets of representations ( Hummel and Holyoak , 1997 ) . Note that ‘integration’ here does not refer to the binding of different features of a single stimulus , as in Prabhakaran et al . ( 2000 ) . For example , in Jani and Levine’s ( 2000 ) proposed neural network model of reasoning about propositional analo - gies ( e . g . ‘BRAIN is to THOUGHT as STOMACH is to ? ’ ) , reasoning was hypothesized to initially require the retrieval and maintenance of the relation between the ﬁrst pair of words and , subsequently , the transfer of this relation to the third word . A large body of neuropsychological evidence ( e . g . Luria , 1966 ; Stuss and Benson , 1984 ; Shallice and Burgess , 1991 ; Duncan et al . , 1995 ; Waltz et al . , 1999 ) and an emerging neuroimaging literature ( e . g . Baker et al . , 1996 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ; Osherson et al . , 1998 ; for reviews , see Cabeza and Nyberg , 2000 ; Christoff and Gabrieli , 2002 ) have implicated prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) in reasoning and problem - solving . For example , Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) showed that frontotemporal dementia patients with prefrontal , but not anterior temporal , damage have difﬁ - culty integrating across multiple relations on the Raven’s Pro - gressive Matrices ( RPM ; a visuospatial analogy task ; Raven , 1941 ) . Several brain imaging studies have used the RPM or RPM - like visual analogy tasks to examine the neural systems that support relational integration ( Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ; Wharton et al . , 2000 ; Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ) . On one - relational RPM problems , subjects must process vertical or horizontal changes ( or spatial relations ) across ﬁgures in a 3 3 3 matrix to infer the missing ﬁgure at the bottom right of the matrix . On two - relational RPM problems , by contrast , subjects must jointly consider changes in the vertical and horizontal dimensions to correctly choose the missing ﬁgure . Thus , two - relational ( but not one - relational ) problems require subjects to integrate across several spatial relations . In an event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) study , bilateral frontopolar cortex ( FPC ) and right dorsolateral PFC ( DLPFC ) were shown to be sensitive to the number of relations ( 0 , 1 or 2 ) across which subjects had to integrate ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ) . Because the response latencies varied substantially across levels of relational complexity ( being nearly 3 s longer during 2 versus 0 relational problems ) , Christoff and colleagues covaried out reaction times ( RTs ) and found that only left FPC remained sensitive to relational complexity . Other results further suggest that FPC activation cannot be explained as resulting from longer RTs ( Braver and Bongiolatti , 2002 ) . On this basis , they argued that , in the visuospatial domain , left FPC plays a key role in relational integration or in the simultaneous processing of Cerebral Cortex V 15 N 3 (cid:1) Oxford University Press 2004 ; all rights reserved Cerebral Cortex March 2005 ; 15 : 239 - - 249 doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhh126 Advance Access publication July 6 , 2004 multiple relations . They further suggested that left FPC is aided by right FPC and DLPFC , but that activation in these regions was not speciﬁc to relational integration . Using event - related fMRI , Kroger et al . ( 2002 ) independently manipulated relational complexity and distractor demands in a RPM - like task and observed that bilateral DLPFC activation , extending into FPC in the left hemisphere , increased with relational complexity . Consistent with Christoff et al . ( 2001 ) , they further noted that the most anterior extent of the left DLPFC / FPC activation [ Brodmann area ( BA ) 10 , 46 , 9 ] was ( i ) speciﬁcally sensitive to relational complexity , being recruited primarily at the highest levels of complexity ; and ( ii ) insensitive to the number of distractors . Based on this pattern , Kroger et al . ( 2002 ) argued that this region is selectively engaged by tasks that require explicit representation and manipulation of re - lational knowledge . The aim of the present study was to explore the neural substrates underlying analogical reasoning using a simple propo - sitional analogy task . In an effort to extend previous ﬁndings , we operationalized relational integration in a different manner from previous studies , and examined this cognitive process in the semantic rather than the visuospatial domain . In this task , subjects had to evaluate whether an analogous relation existed between two pairs of words ( Fig . 1 ) . Consistent with extant computational models ( Hummel and Holyoak , 1997 ; Jani and Levine , 2000 ) , we posited that analogical reasoning would require several , separable processes . Within the context of the present propositional analogy task , in which subjects had to evaluate an analogy as valid or invalid , these processes include ( i ) controlled retrieval of the semantic relation between each pair of words ; and ( ii ) integration across the retrieved semantic relations . Although previous neuroimaging studies have sug - gested that distinct subregions within PFC might make differ - ential contributions to analogical reasoning ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ) , we sought to provide strong evidence for dissociations between subregions of PFC that mediate the retrieval of semantic knowledge and the integration of this knowledge . To this end , we included factors that varied semantic retrieval and integration demands . In order to identify regions involved in analogical reasoning , we compared event - related fMRI activa - tion during performance of an analogy task with that during performance of a semantic decision task ( Fig . 1 ) . Subjects viewed a pair of words ( pair 1 ) , followed by an instructional cue that signaled which task should be performed , and then a second pair of words ( pair 2 ) . On analogy trials , subjects pressed one of two buttons to indicate whether pair 2 was semantically analogous to pair 1 . On semantic decision ( seman - tic ) trials , subjects indicated whether the two words in pair 2 were semantically related to one another . Thus , while both conditions required retrieval of semantic relations between words , the analogy condition required the additional operation of integrating the retrieved relations to evaluate whether an analogy could be drawn between them . That is , similar to the two - relational RPM problems discussed above , on analogy trials subjects must jointly consider two relations ( in this case semantic rather than spatial relations ) in order to arrive at the correct response . To identify regions involved in controlled semantic retrieval , on both analogy and semantic trials we varied the strength of the semantic association between the words in pair 1 . Reliance on controlled semantic retrieval has been hypothesized to vary with the strength of association between words when making a Relatedness decision ; weaker word - - word associations pre - sumably demand increased controlled retrieval ( Wagner et al . , 2001b ; Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . Retrieval of the pair 1 relation is required for accurate performance of the analogy but not the semantic task , and previous ﬁndings suggest that subjects may not engage in deep semantic elaboration on verbal items unless required to do so ( Bjork , 1975 ) . However , we anticipated that subjects would retrieve the semantic relation between pair 1 words during both tasks , because subjects did not know whether they would need to use this relational knowledge until after the offset of pair 1 , when the instructional cue indicated which task they were to perform . To the extent that subjects retrieve the semantic relation of pair 1 words — even on semantic trials , when knowledge about the semantic relation is ultimately not required for successful task performance — activation in regions involved in controlled semantic retrieval should vary with the associative strength of pair 1 words during both analogy and semantic trials . On the basis of neuroimaging ﬁndings from studies of semantic memory ( for reviews , see Fiez , 1997 ; Poldrack et al . , 1999 ; Martin and Chao , 2001 ; Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) , we predicted that anterior left inferior prefrontal cortex ( aLIPC ) would be involved primarily in the controlled retrieval of knowledge about the semantic relations between words ( Wagner et al . , 2001b ) . In contrast , we predicted that FPC and / or DLPFC would be involved primarily in integrating between retrieved semantic relations and would not mediate semantic retrieval per se . Speciﬁcally , one might expect involvement of DLPFC in comparing semantic relations between word pairs and evaluating whether the relations match , because this region is thought to play a role in monitoring and manipulating repre - sentations held in working memory ( Owen et al . , 1996b ; Petrides , 1996 ; D’Esposito et al . , 1999 ; Postle et al . , 2000 ; Wagner et al . , 2001a ) . Consistent with this perspective , DLPFC has been hypothesized to mediate reasoning by supporting analogical mappings ( e . g . Holyoak and Kroger , 1995 ) . Alterna - tively , one might expect that FPC would play a predominant Figure 1 . Shown here is the trial structure for the analogy and semantic tasks . For both tasks , subjects were instructed to determine how the words in pair 1 are related to one another . On analogy trials , cued by a ‘ ¼ ’ , they were then instructed to evaluate whether the words in pair 2 are related to one another along the same dimension as the words in pair 1 . On semantic trials , cued by a ‘ x ’ , subjects were then instructed to determine whether the words in pair 2 are related to one another along any dimension . 240 Analogical Reasoning and PFC d Bunge et al . role in semantic integration . As noted above , this region appears to be particularly sensitive to relational integration demands in visuospatial reasoning tasks ( Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ) . Further , in the episodic memory literature , FPC and DLPFC have been implicated in post - retrieval processes such as monitoring and evaluation ( for reviews , see Rugg and Wilding , 2000 ; Fletcher and Henson , 2001 ) . This conceptualization of FPC function is broadly consistent with a role in post - retrieval integration and evaluation of a potential analogical mapping . Materials and Methods Subjects Twenty right - handed native English - speaking volunteers ( 14 males ; aged 19 - - 34 years , mean = 23 ) received a $ 50 remuneration for their participation . Four additional subjects were scanned , but excluded due to poor performance ( exclusion criterion : < 65 % accuracy on the analogy or semantic task ) . A second , unrelated experimental paradigm was also conducted during the scanning session . This second paradigm , which tested subjects’ ability to remember pairs of non - verbal stimuli , has been reported elsewhere ( Bunge et al . , 2004 ) . Informed consent was obtained in a manner approved by the Human Studies Committee of the Massachusetts General Hospital and the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects at MIT . Task Design On each experimental trial ( Fig . 1 ) , subjects viewed a pair of words ( pair 1 ) for 3 . 3 s , followed by a blank screen for 50 ms . An instructional cue that indicated which task should be performed ( = for analogy trials , x for semantic trials ) was then presented for 500 ms , followed by a blank screen for 50 ms . A second pair of words ( pair 2 ) was then presented for 3 . 5 s , followed by a ﬁxation period of 600 ms . Additional periods of visual ﬁxation lasting between 1 and 9 s , jittered in increments of 2 s , were interspersed between trials as determined by a design optimization algorithm ( Dale , 1999 ) . Subjects were required to make a yes / no response during the presentation of pair 2 by pressing one of two buttons with their left hand . On analogy trials , subjects indicated whether pair 2 was semantically analogous to pair 1 . On semantic trials , subjects indicated whether the two words in pair 2 were semantically related . On analogy trials , the relation between the words in pair 2 was analogous to that between the words in pair 1 for half of the trials ( related - analogy ) and was not analogous for the other half ( unrelated - analogy ) . On semantic trials , the words in pair 2 were related to one another for half of the trials ( related - semantic ) and were not related to one another for the other half ( unrelated - semantic ) . On semantic trials , the relation between pair 2 words was never analogous to that between pair 1 words so as to discourage subjects from attempting to form analogies in this condition . In order to assess controlled retrieval demands — independent of the task manipulation ( analogy versus Semantic ) — we manipulated the level of associative strength ( high , medium or low ) between pair 1 words as described below . Materials Propositional analogy problems were drawn and modiﬁed from practice books for the Scholastic Assessment Test ( Macmillan General Reference , 1997 ; College Entrance Examination Board , 2000 ; Research and Educa - tion Association , 2000 ) . For each multiple choice problem , the sample word pair ( pair 1 ) and either the analogically related or one of the analogically unrelated pairs ( pair 2 ) were selected . Associative Strength Manipulation To vary demands on controlled semantic retrieval , we classiﬁed trials based on the strength of semantic association between the words in pair 1 . A pilot behavioral study was conducted to measure the semantic Relatedness between the words in each pair drawn from the analogy problems . Two groups of 10 subjects made responses on the basis of distinct sets of word pairs . Ten subjects viewed each word pair on a computer screen and pressed the space bar as soon as they were able to articulate the semantic relation between the two words . It was assumed that the strength of association would differ across pairs and that this difference would be reﬂected in response times ( RTs ) to retrieve the nature of the relation . That is , weaker word - - word associations should yield longer RTs . Accordingly , for each subject , the word pairs were ranked by response latency ; average rank , computed across subjects , was calculated for each word pair . The pair 1 stimuli were split into three groups according to average rank ( high , medium and low associative strength pairs ) . These groups did not signiﬁcantly differ in mean word frequency , number of syllables , or word length . Two stimulus sets , consisting of the same pairs of words , were created for counterbalancing purposes . Half of the subjects were tested on one set , and half on the other . Each set consisted of 120 analogy trials and 120 semantic trials . Problems assigned to the analogy condition in the ﬁrst set were assigned to the semantic condition in the second set , and vice versa . Analogy and semantic trials did not signiﬁcantly differ in mean word frequency , number of syllables or word length . Scan Session Prior to scanning , subjects received practice on the non - verbal associative learning task ( not reported here ) , and then received instructions for and had an opportunity to practice the analogy and semantic tasks featured in the present study . Once in the scanner , subjects participated in a 7 min scan testing memory for the non - verbal paired associates , and then advanced to the presently reported scans that indexed neural activation during performance of the analogy and semantic tasks . Data Acquisition Visual stimuli were projected onto a screen that was viewed through a mirror . Subjects performed 240 experimental trials over the course of four 10 min event - related fMRI scans . The design crossed Task ( analogy / semantic ) 3 Associative Strength of the pair 1 words ( high / medium / low ) , and included 40 trials in each of the resulting six conditions . The trials from a condition were distributed evenly across the scans . Each of the six conditions consisted of an equivalent number of related ( i . e . related - analogy or related - semantic ) and unrelated ( i . e . unrelated - analogy or unrelated - semantic ) trials . The order of trial types within each scan was determined using a sequencing program that maximized design efﬁciency ( Dale , 1999 ) . Scanning was performed on a 1 . 5 T Siemens system using a standard whole - head coil . Functional data were acquired using a gradient - echo echo - planar pulse sequence ( T R = 2 s , T E = 40 ms , 21 axial slices , 3 . 125 3 3 . 125 3 5 mm , 1 mm inter - slice gap , 300 vols per run ) . Prior to each scan , four volumes were discarded to allow for T1 - equilibration effects . High - resolution T1 - weighted ( MP - RAGE ) anatomical images were collected . Head motion was restricted using a pillow and foam inserts that surrounded the head . fMRI Data Analysis Data were preprocessed using SPM99 ( Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology , London , UK ) . Images were corrected for differ - ences in timing of slice acquisition , followed by rigid body motion correction ( using sinc interpolation ) . Structural and functional volumes were spatially normalized to T1 and EPI templates , respectively . The normalization algorithm used a 12 - parameter afﬁne transformation together with a nonlinear transformation involving cosine basis func - tions , and resampled the volumes to 3 mm cubic voxels . Templates were based on the MNI305 stereotactic space ( Cocosco et al . , 1997 ) , an approximation of Talairach space ( Talairach and Tourneaux , 1988 ) . Functional volumes were spatially smoothed with an 8 mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian kernel . Statistical analyses were performed using the general linear model in SPM99 . The fMRI time series data were modeled by a series of 8 s epochs ( corresponding to the trial duration ) convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function ( HRF ) . The resulting functions were used as covariates in a general linear model , along with a basis set of cosine functions that high - pass ﬁltered the data and a covariate for session effects . The least squares parameter estimates of height of the HRF for each condition were used in pairwise contrasts , and the Cerebral Cortex March 2005 , V 15 N 3 241 resulting contrast images computed on a subject - by - subject basis were submitted to group analyses . Incorrectly performed analogy and semantic trials were modeled separately from correctly performed trials , and were not included in the statistical analyses . At the group level , contrasts between conditions were computed by performing one - sample t - tests on the contrast images , treating subjects as a random effect . The primary analysis focused on regions that , a priori , we anticipated would be sensitive to semantic retrieval and integration demands—speciﬁcally , left ventrolateral , dorsolateral , and frontopolar subregions in PFC . Task - related responses ( analogy versus semantic ) in these a priori predicted regions are reported if they consisted of at least 5 contiguous voxels that exceeded an uncorrected threshold of P < 0 . 001 ( see Table 1 ) . The Associative Strength effect ( low versus high ) that was a priori predicted in aLIPC did not meet the P < 0 . 001 threshold , but is reported at P < 0 . 005 with a 5 - voxel extent threshold ( Table 1 ) . In addition to voxel - based characterization of these regions , subsequent region - of - interest ( ROI ) analyses were conducted , as described below . Finally , exploratory analyses , conducted to examine possible effects beyond the a priori predicted regions , adopted a threshold of P < 0 . 05 , corrected for multiple comparisons ( random ﬁeld theory correction ; Worsley et al , 1992 ) . Theoretical interest was primarily focused on regions demonstrating above - baseline differential responses for the analogy and semantic conditions . Accordingly , voxel - based contrasts comparing analogy and semantic conditions were masked to exclude voxels that were deactivated , relative to ﬁxation , during performance of the condition associated with lower activation ( using an uncorrected threshold of P < 0 . 05 for the contrast with ﬁxation ) . Contrasts examining the effects of Associative Strength were masked to exclude voxels that were deactivated , relative to ﬁxation , across conditions ( P < 0 . 05 , uncor - rected ) . The ROI analyses were performed using a toolbox for use with SPM ( written by Russell Poldrack ; http : / / sourceforge . net / projects / spm - tool - box / ) . The purpose of these ROI analyses was to further characterize the sensitivity of targeted brain regions to Associative Strength ( high / medium / low ) and analogical or semantic Relatedness ( related / unre - lated ) . Unless otherwise noted , ROIs were deﬁned from the contrast of all conditions relative to the ﬁxation baseline . ROIs included all signiﬁcant voxels ( at P < 0 . 001 ) within an 8 mm radius of each maximum ; no two ROIs contained the same voxel . Signal within an ROI was calculated for each subject by selectively averaging the data with respect to peristimulus time for trials in each condition . Statistics were performed on the integrated percent signal change , summed over peristimulus times 4 - - 16 s . Results Performance Data Repeated - measures analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) , with factors of Task ( analogy / semantic ) , Associative Strength ( high / me - dium / low ) and Relatedness ( analogically or semantically re - lated / unrelated ) , were conducted on the accuracy data and on RTs from correctly performed trials ( Fig . 2 ) . Subjects were more accurate and responded more quickly on semantic than on analogy trials [ accuracy , 86 versus 72 % ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 39 . 1 , P < 0 . 0001 ; RT = 1918 versus 2344 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 123 . 1 , P < 0 . 0001 ] . Associative Strength affected accuracy [ F ( 2 , 38 ) = 12 . 7 , P < 0 . 0001 ] , such that subjects were more accurate on high than low strength trials [ 82 versus 76 % ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 24 . 2 , P < 0 . 0001 ] , and on medium than low strength trials [ 80 versus 76 % ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 11 . 5 , P < 0 . 002 ] . Associative Strength also affected response latencies [ F ( 2 , 38 ) = 6 . 4 , P < 0 . 005 ] , such that subjects were faster on high than low strength trials [ 2066 versus 2178 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 11 . 8 , P < 0 . 002 ] and high than medium strength trials [ 2066 versus 2149 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 6 . 5 , P < 0 . 02 ] . Thus , high and low strength trials reliably differed in terms of both accuracy and RTs , and high versus medium and medium versus low strength trials differed in terms of one but not both behavioral measures . Thus , in subsequent behavioral and fMRI analyses , the Associa - tive Strength effect was measured by a comparison of High and Low strength trials . Associative Strength differentially affected accuracy on anal - ogy and semantic trials [ Task 3 Associative Strength : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 5 . 2 , P < 0 . 05 ] . Subjects were more accurate on high than low strength trials for both tasks , but this Associative Strength effect was stronger for analogy than semantic trials [ analogy : 77 versus 69 % , F ( 1 , 19 ) = 33 . 6 , P < 0 . 0001 ; semantic : 86 versus 82 % , F ( 1 , 19 ) = 6 . 7 , P < 0 . 02 ] . A trend towards a Task 3 Associative Strength interaction was also observed for RTs [ F ( 1 , 19 ) = 3 . 9 , P = 0 . 06 ] . Subjects were reliably faster on high than low strength trials in the analogy condition , but not in the semantic condition [ analogy : 2253 versus 2418 ms , F ( 1 , 19 ) = 18 . 8 , P < 0 . 0004 ; semantic : 1880 versus 1938 ms , F ( 1 , 19 ) = 2 . 3 , P > 0 . 10 ] . Thus , the Associative Strength manipulation affected perfor - mance more for analogy than semantic trials . This result was to be expected , because we manipulated Associative Strength only for pair 1 words . On semantic trials , unlike the analogy trials , subjects need only consider the pair 2 words in order to respond . Thus , the fact that subjects were more accurate on High than Low strength semantic trials was unexpected . How - ever , this ﬁnding could be explained by subjects taking longer to process and / or disengage from lower associative strength pair 1 words prior to attending to pair 2 words . According to this account , on trials for which accessing the association between pair 1 words demanded greater controlled retrieval , there was subsequent slowing and less accurate performance during the processing of pair 2 . Critically , the ﬁnding that Associative Strengthaffectedperformanceonbothtasks—albeitindifferentways—stronglysupportstheclaimthatsubjectsretrievedthe semantic relation between pair 1 words on the analogy and the semantic tasks . This conclusion was further supported by the outcomes of the fMRI analysis ( see below ) . ‘Relatedness’ was operationalized differently in the semantic and the analogy tasks , referring to global Relatedness of two Table 1 A priori predicted regions exhibiting an effect of Task , Associative Strength or Relatedness Region of activation ~ BA MNI coordinates Z - score x y z Effects of Task Analogy [ semantic Frontopolar L10 / 11 (cid:1) 42 48 (cid:1) 15 3 . 84 aLIPC L45 (cid:1) 48 36 0 4 . 02 L45 (cid:1) 36 27 3 3 . 75 L47 (cid:1) 51 42 (cid:1) 6 3 . 59 pLIPC L44 (cid:1) 48 15 15 3 . 70 Analogy [ semantic — related trials only aLIPC L45 (cid:1) 36 27 3 3 . 27 L45 / 46 (cid:1) 54 36 9 3 . 59 pLIPC L44 (cid:1) 54 6 24 3 . 44 Semantic [ analogy None Effects of Associative Strength ( P \ 0 . 005 ) Low [ high aLIPC L45 (cid:1) 57 24 6 2 . 89 High [ low None Effects of Relatedness Unrelated - analogy [ related - analogy DLPFC ( middle frontal cortex ) R9 51 18 39 4 . 32 ALIPC L47 (cid:1) 45 24 0 4 . 14 242 Analogical Reasoning and PFC d Bunge et al . words in the semantic task and to the validity of an analogy between word pairs in the analogy task . Performance did not reliably differ between related - semantic and unrelated - semantic trials [ accuracy , 83 versus 89 % ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 3 . 0 , P > 0 . 10 ; RT = 1874 versus 1962 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 2 . 3 , P > 0 . 10 ] . By contrast , and of central interest , subjects performed related - analogy trials more accurately [ 87 versus 57 % ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 60 . 3 , P < 0 . 0001 ] and more quickly [ 2057 versus 2630 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 99 . 1 , P < 0 . 0001 ] relative to unrelated - analogy trials . This effect suggests that it was more difﬁcult to reject an invalid analogy than to endorse a valid one . An analysis of RTs for incorrectly performed trials extends this ﬁnding by revealing that subjects were consistently slower to reject analogies than to accept them , regardless of whether their answer was correct [ endorse versus reject , correct trials : 2015 versus 2648 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 74 . 0 , P < 0 . 0001 ; incorrect trials : 2454 versus 2748 ms ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 16 . 0 , P < 0 . 0009 ] . To minimize the effects of differential accuracy across conditions , all fMRI analyses were restricted to trials on which performance was correct . fMRI Data Voxel - based and ROI analyses focused on the effects of Task , Associative Strength and Relatedness in the a priori predicted prefrontal regions . Exploratory analyses , conducted to deter - mine whether any additional regions warranted consideration , failed to reveal additional activations . Task Effects : Analogy versus Semantic Decisions Voxel - based analyses revealed a substantial overlap in the regions activated by the analogy and semantic tasks relative to baseline , although some regions demonstrated above baseline activation restricted to one of the two tasks ( Fig . 3 A ) . Direct comparisons between tasks revealed that anterior and posterior left inferior PFC [ aLIPC : ~ BA 47 , 45 ; pLIPC : ~ BA 44 , 45 ( ~ BA = approximate Brodmann area ) ] and left frontopolar cortex ( FPC ) ( ~ BA 10 ) were more active during analogy than during semantic trials ( Fig . 3 B , Table 1 ) . When the task contrast was restricted to the related trials , greater activation was again observed during analogy than during semantic trials in aLIPC and pLIPC ( Table 1 ) . Left FPC ( – 42 , 48 , – 12 ) activation was additionally observed for this limited dataset at a liberal statistical threshold ( P < 0 . 01 uncorrected ) . Associative Strength Manipulation Consistent with our predictions , activation in aLIPC ( ~ BA 45 ) was greater during Low than High associative strength trials ( P < 0 . 005 uncorrected ; Table 1 , Fig . 3 B ) . As noted below , this conclusion was further strengthened by subsequent ROI analyses . Thus , as semantic retrieval demands increased with decreasing associative strength between the words in pair 1 , a region thought to mediate controlled semantic re - trieval — i . e . aLIPC — was differentially engaged ( Wagner et al . , 2001b ) . Relatedness Effects on Analogy Trials On the basis of the ﬁnding that subjects were less accurate and took longer to reject analogies than to endorse them , we hypothesized that the demands placed on processes required for analogical reasoning were likely to be greatest for trials on which there was no valid relation between the word pairs . Speciﬁcally , when subjects initially fail to establish an analogical mapping , they are likely to attempt to reﬁne the relation between the ﬁrst word pair and then re - evaluate the mapping between word pairs . Thus , further semantic retrieval and in - tegration processing is likely to be required during unrelated - analogy trials . Accordingly , we predicted greater activation in PFC regions associated with retrieval or integration during per - formance of unrelated - analogy relative to related - analogy trials . A mapwise comparison of unrelated - analogy versus related - analogy trials revealed activation in two a priori predicted regions : right DLPFC ( middle frontal gyrus ; ~ BA 9 ) and aLIPC ( ~ BA 47 ; Table 1 ) . The pattern of activation in right DLPFC , and its relation to the patterns observed in FPC and aLIPC , was further examined through ROI analyses ( see below ) . Prefrontal ROIs : aLIPC and left FPC The mapwise comparisons suggest that aLIPC was particularly modulated by the Associative Strength manipulation , whereas FPC was speciﬁcally sensitive to the task manipulation . Addi - tional analyses were performed to further characterize the activation of these prefrontal ROIs for the purpose of directly contrasting the relative involvement of PFC subregions in semantic retrieval and / or integration . Unbiased ROIs in aLIPC and left FPC were functionally deﬁned from the contrast of all conditions relative to the ﬁxation baseline . ANOVAs were performed on measures of integrated percent signal change in each ROI , with factors of Task , Associative Strength ( high / medium / low ) and Relatedness . Consistent with the mapwise comparisons , ROI analyses showed that ( i ) left FPC and aLIPC were engaged more strongly by analogy than by semantic trials [ FPC : 1 . 7 versus 0 . 6 ; Figure 2 . Group - averaged behavioral performance is plotted separately for Task and Associative Strength manipulations . Error bars depict within - subject SE . Cerebral Cortex March 2005 , V 15 N 3 243 F ( 1 , 19 ) = 22 . 5 , P < 0 . 0001 ; aLIPC : 1 . 4 versus 0 . 8 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 16 . 9 , P < 0 . 0006 ] ; and ( ii ) aLIPC , but not FPC , was modulated by Associative Strength [ aLIPC : F ( 2 , 38 ) = 6 . 5 , P < 0 . 004 ; FPC : F ( 2 , 38 ) = 1 . 6 , P > 0 . 20 ] . Planned comparisons revealed that aLIPC was engaged more strongly by low than high trials [ 1 . 3 versus 0 . 7 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 10 . 2 , P < 0 . 003 ] and by medium than high trials [ 1 . 3 versus 0 . 7 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 9 . 2 , P < 0 . 005 ] . In contrast , FPC activation did not reliably differ between the three levels of Associative Strength ( all P > 0 . 05 ) . These outcomes suggest that FPC and aLIPC demonstrate dissociable patterns of activation , raising the possibility that they make differential contributions to analogical reasoning . Consistent with this impression , an ANOVA with factors of ROI ( aLIPC / FPC ) , Task , Associative Strength ( high / low ) and Relatedness revealed a functional double - dissociation between these two regions . FPC was more sensitive to the Task manipu - lation than was aLIPC [ ROI 3 Task : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 5 . 6 , P < 0 . 029 ; see also Fig . 4 ] . In contrast , aLIPC was more sensitive to varying Associative Strength than was FPC [ ROI 3 Associative Strength : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 4 . 2 , P = . 05 ; see also Fig . 4 ] . These results are consistent with our hypothesis that aLIPC is particularly important for the controlled retrieval of semantic relations , whereas FPC is particularly important for integrating between retrieved relations . As noted above , we predicted that PFC subregions would be sensitive to Relatedness on analogy but not semantic trials . Indeed , the proﬁle of activation in FPC was consistent with this prediction [ Task 3 Relatedness : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 11 . 6 , P < 0 . 003 ] . FPC was more active on unrelated than related - analogy trials [ 2 . 1 versus 1 . 3 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 31 . 3 , P < 0 . 001 ] , but did not differ Figure 3 . Group - averaged activations for contrasts of interest are displayed . ( A ) Coronal slices through a canonical brain display regions activated by analogy and semantic trials relative to ﬁxation . Areas of overlap between the two contrast maps appear yellow . ( B ) Shown here on a rendered canonical brain are regions activated to a greater extent by analogy relative to semantic trials , by low relative to high Associative Strength trials , and by unrelated - relative to related - analogy trials . 244 Analogical Reasoning and PFC d Bunge et al . between unrelated and related - semantic trials ( 0 . 7 versus 0 . 6 ; F < 1 ; see Fig . 4 ) . Anterior LIPC ( ~ BA 45 ) was also more active on unrelated than related - analogy trials [ 1 . 7 versus 1 . 1 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 11 . 4 , P < 0 . 004 ; see Fig . 4 ] , but the Task 3 Relatedness in - teraction was not signiﬁcant [ F ( 1 , 19 ) = 1 . 9 , P > 0 . 15 ] . These results show that both FPC and aLIPC were engaged most strongly on analogy trials for which there was no obvious relationship between the word pairs . For FPC , this enhanced activation was speciﬁc to analogy trials , rather than being related more generally to the requirement to reject an incorrect response on both analogy and semantic trials . Prefrontal ROIs : DLPFC The preceding analyses provide strong evidence for functionally distinct roles of aLIPC and left FPC in analogical reasoning . In a ﬁnal set of ROI analyses focusing on PFC subregions , we assessed the activation pattern in right DLPFC and its relation to that in aLIPC and FPC . As observed in the whole - brain contrasts , right DLPFC was more strongly activated on unrelated - than related - analogy trials . An ROI analysis revealed that activation in this region did not differ between unrelated - and related - semantic trials ( F < 1 ) . Moreover , activation did not differ between related - analogy and related - semantic trials ( F < 1 ) , and thus — unlike FPC and aLIPC — the main effect of Task was not signiﬁcant [ 0 . 6 versus 0 . 2 ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 3 . 3 , P > 0 . 05 ] . Additionally , unlike aLIPC , right DLPFC was not modulated by Associative Strength ( F < 1 ) . Cross - region analyses revealed that right DLPFC was func - tionally dissociable from both aLIPC and FPC . An ANOVA with factors of ROI ( DLPFC / aLIPC ) , Task , Associative Strength ( high / low ) and Relatedness demonstrated an ROI 3 Associative Strength interaction [ F ( 2 , 38 ) = 8 . 2 , P < 0 . 01 ] , such that aLIPC was engaged more strongly by low than high trials [ F ( 1 , 19 ) = 13 . 8 , P < 0 . 002 ] , whereas DLPFC was not modulated by Asso - ciative Strength ( F < 1 ) . A similar ANOVA comparing DLPFC and FPC revealed an ROI 3 Task interaction [ F ( 1 , 19 ) = 15 . 9 , P < 0 . 001 ] , such that FPC was more strongly modulated by Task ( analogy > semantic ) than was DLPFC [ FPC : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 69 . 1 , P < 0 . 0001 ; DLPFC : F ( 1 , 19 ) = 7 . 8 , P < 0 . 02 ] . As seen previously , DLPFC was not consistently modulated by Task , in that it did not differentiate between analogy - related and semantic - related trials . Thus , right DLPFC differed from aLIPC in that it was insensitive to Associative Strength , and differed from FPC in that it was not consistently sensitive to integration demands . Consideration of Response Latency Differences between Conditions As noted above , differences in RTs were observed between conditions in the present experiment ( e . g . analogy versus semantic trials , unrelated - analogy versus related - analogy trials ) . We believe that such RT differences are often meaningful , in that they can reﬂect differential engagement of speciﬁc cogni - tive processes across conditions . However , one potential con - cern is the possibility that RT differences are process - general , Figure 4 . Shown here is the activation proﬁle of three ROIs in PFC . ( A ) The ROIs in aLIPC ( centered on coordinates of (cid:1) 57 , 27 , 12 ) , left FPC ( (cid:1) 45 , 45 , (cid:1) 6 ) and right DLPFC ( 51 , 18 , 39 ) are plotted here on a canonical brain . ( B ) These bar graphs display the Task effects for the three ROIs . The effect of task was greater in FPC than in aLIPC , and was not signiﬁcant in DLPFC . ( C ) These bar graphs depict the Associative Strength effects for the three ROIs . Only aLIPC was signiﬁcantly modulated by Associative Strength . * P \ 0 . 05 , * * P \ 0 . 001 , * * * P \ 0 . 0001 . Cerebral Cortex March 2005 , V 15 N 3 245 reﬂecting global time on task rather than the engagement of speciﬁc processes . To address this concern , we reanalyzed the individual subjects’ fMRI data , including RT for each trial as a nuisance variable . Importantly , the results reported above for aLIPC , FPC and DLPFC were replicated in this additional analysis . Thus , the differential engagement of FPC and aLIPC for analogy than semantic trials was not simply related to an increase in time on task . Similarly , the differential recruitment of DLPFC for unrelated - analogy than other trial types was not simply accounted for by the fact that this condition was associated with the longest RTs . Discussion The objectives of the present study were to ( i ) extend prior neuroimaging studies of visuospatial reasoning by considering the neural correlates of reasoning in the semantic domain ; and ( ii ) specify the role of PFC subregions in analogical reasoning , directly testing the hypothesis that distinct subregions sub - serve retrieval and integration computations . By varying re - trieval and integration demands in an event - related design , the present results revealed that aLIPC , left FPC and right DLPFC were correlated with distinct aspects of reasoning demands and thus appear to make unique contributions to the ability to reason analogically . Anterior LIPC was differentially sensitive to semantic retrieval demands , consistent with a role in retrieving relevant semantic knowledge about and associations between stimuli . In contrast , left FPC was insensitive to semantic retrieval demands , but was differentially sensitive to integration demands . This proﬁle suggests that FPC oper - ates subsequent to semantic retrieval for the purpose of integrating across multiple retrieved relations . Finally , right DLPFC was insensitive to retrieval and integration demands , instead exhibiting a pattern consistent with a role in response selection . Left FPC and Representational Integration In the present study , left FPC was engaged by the need to integrate across two semantic relations . Unlike aLIPC , however , FPC was insensitive to the associative strength manipulation , suggesting that this region is not important for semantic re - trieval per se . This ﬁnding is consistent with our prior sugges - tion that FPC is involved in the subsequent processing of information retrieved from long - term stores via ventrolateral PFC retrieval mechanisms ( Bunge et al . , 2004 ) . Taken together with the ﬁnding that FPC is sensitive to the number of visuospatial relations that must be considered simultaneously ( Wharton et al . , 2000 ; Christoff et al . , 2001 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ) , the present results suggest that FPC plays a domain - general role in integrating across multiple relations in the service of analog - ical reasoning . Although the present ﬁndings support a role for FPC in relational integration , the involvement of FPC across a variety of task demands suggests that FPC function may be more general ( Braver and Bongiolatti , 2002 ; Christoff and Gabrieli , 2002 ) . FPC is engaged not only during performance of problem - solving or reasoning tasks , but also episodic memory retrieval tasks in which subjects must evaluate the products of retrieval in order to make a response ( for reviews , see Tulving et al . , 1994 ; Cabeza and Nyberg , 2000 ; Fletcher and Henson , 2001 ) . On this basis , FPC has been hypothesized to be in - volved in the active processing of self - generated information — i . e . information that must be inferred rather than perceived ( Christoff and Gabrieli , 2002 ) . Such active computations might include the manipulation or evaluation of retrieved informa - tion and the integration of this knowledge with decision criteria . An alternative , but related , hypothesis is that FPC is engaged when ‘cognitive branching’ is required — i . e . when subjects must maintain a primary task goal while simulta - neously attending to a subgoal ( Koechlin et al . , 1999 ; see also Badre and Wagner , 2004 ) . Support for this hypothesis comes from a continuous performance task ( CPT ) that included a condition that bears interesting similarities to the analogy task in the present study ( Braver and Bongiolatti , 2002 ) . To test this hypothesis , Braver and Bongiolatti elegantly manipu - lated both semantic retrieval demands and subgoal processing demands in a blocked - design continuous performance task ( AX - CPT ) . In the subgoal task , subjects had to press a button to indicate when any abstract word was presented on the screen directly following any concrete word . This condition was compared with ( i ) a control condition in which a speciﬁc abstract word ( FATE ) was presented after a speciﬁc concrete word ( LIME ) ; and ( ii ) a semantic classiﬁcation task in which subjects judged each word as abstract or concrete . Bilateral FPC ( but more strongly on the right ) was selectively engaged in the subgoal task , in which — as in the analogy condition of the present study — subjects had to retrieve two pieces of semantic information and then integrate them . On the basis of ﬁndings from the CPT task , it was proposed that FPC might be engaged when the results of subgoal processing must be integrated with information stored in working memory ( Braver and Bongiolatti , 2002 ) . This perspective elaborates on the hypothesis that FPC mediates the processing of self - generated information ( i . e . working with the products of subgoal processing ) . The present observation of greater FPC activation during analogical reasoning relative to semantic retrieval is consistent with the hypothesis that FPC mediates integration of the products of a cognitive operation , such as semantic retrieval , in the context of information currently held in mind . That is , during the analogy condition , subjects had to evaluate whether newly retrieved or synthesized information could be integrated with previously retrieved representations currently being main - tained in working memory . Moreover , FPC was most strongly recruited when subjects had to reject an invalid analogy , the condition under which demands on integration should be highest . Laterality of FPC Activation In the present study , as in the few preceding imaging studies of reasoning , activation was observed in left but not right FPC ( Goel et al . , 1997 ; Wharton et al . , 2000 ; Kroger et al . , 2002 ) . By contrast , episodic retrieval tasks sometimes engage right FPC more so than left FPC ( Tulving et al . , 1994 ; Nyberg et al . , 1996 ; Cabeza and Nyberg , 2000 ) . This observation — together with the ﬁnding that left FPC was more strongly implicated in relational integration in a RPM - like task — led to the suggestion that right FPC may be preferentially involved in the evaluation of self - generated information , whereas left FPC may be involved in manipulating self - generated information for the purpose of further abstracting new information ( Christoff and Gabrieli , 2002 ) . We suggest , instead , that the observed laterality effects 246 Analogical Reasoning and PFC d Bunge et al . can be reconciled by considering the type of memory processes invoked by subjects during performance of episodic memory tasks . Memory judgements that require attempts to recollect speciﬁc details about an episode tend to engage left FPC ( Nolde et al . , 1998 ; Henson et al . , 1999 ; Ranganath et al . , 2000 ; Dobbins et al . , 2002 , 2003 ; Kahn et al . , 2004 ) , and this is the case irrespective of whether the to - be - retrieved episodic details are conceptual or perceptual ( I . G . Dobbins and A . D . Wagner , in preparation ) . By contrast , judgements that can be based on assessments of stimulus familiarity tend to engage right or bilateral FPC ( Wagner et al . , 1998 ; Henson et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Dobbins et al . , 2003 ) . Taken together with the present ﬁndings , these data raise the possibility that left FPC is engaged when subjects must attempt to integrate the products of a retrieval attempt for speciﬁc detailed information — be it from semantic or episodic memory — with the current contents of working memory . ALIPC and Controlled Semantic Retrieval The present results revealed that the anterior extent of left inferior prefrontal cortex ( ~ BA 47 , 45 ) , unlike other PFC subregions , was reliably sensitive to the Associative Strength between the words in pair 1 during both analogy and semantic decision trials . Speciﬁcally , aLIPC exhibited greater activation for weakly than for strongly associated word pairs , consistent with prior studies ( Fletcher et al . , 2000 ; Wagner et al . , 2001b ) . This ﬁnding provides further evidence that aLIPC computations are engaged during semantic processing conditions to the extent that controlled retrieval of semantic knowledge is re - quired ( Fiez , 1997 ; Gabrieli et al . , 1998 ; Poldrack et al . , 1999 ; Wagner et al . , 2001b ) . When pre - existing associative relations are sufﬁciently strong that target knowledge may readily come to mind via bottom - up , automatic retrieval mechanisms , de - mands on aLIPC processes are minimized relative to when these associations are weak and thus require a top - down control signal to further guide knowledge recovery ( Raichle et al . , 1994 ; Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . In addition to demonstrating a main effect of Associative Strength , aLIPC was also differentially engaged by analogy relative to semantic trials , although the effect of Task was not as strong as in FPC . This pattern can be accommodated by the controlled retrieval perspective , as semantic retrieval demands likely varied across analogy and semantic trials . On semantic trials , subjects had to make a global Relatedness judgement about pair 2 ( i . e . are the words in pair 2 related along any dimension ? ) . In contrast , on analogy trials , subjects had to engage in controlled retrieval to determine whether the words in pair 2 were related along the same dimension as those in pair 1 . This latter task demand likely required retrieval of more speciﬁc semantic knowledge , and was less amendable to solution through bottom - up , automatically retrieved know - ledge . Thus , aLIPC appears to be important for semantic analogical reasoning because it contributes to retrieving the conceptual relations between stimuli . Right DLPFC and Response Selection Several theorists ( e . g . Holyoak and Kroger , 1995 ; Waltz et al . , 1999 ) have hypothesized that analogical mapping relies on DLPFC . Interestingly , DLPFC was not globally modulated by integration demands in the present study . DLPFC activation has been observed together with FPC activation in other analogical reasoning studies ( Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ; Wharton et al . , 2000 ; Christoff et al . , 2001 ) , but it has been argued that activation in this region is not related speciﬁcally to relational integration ( Christoff and Gabrieli , 2002 ) . Our results revealed that right DLPFC was differentially engaged during the condition that required rejection of an invalid analogy ( i . e . unrelated - analogy ) . Given the behavioral ﬁnding that subjects tended to endorse invalid analogies more often ( and more quickly ) than they rejected valid ones , this pattern of results is consistent with the possibility that DLPFC is recruited — at a stage subsequent to semantic retrieval and relational integration — for the purpose of overriding a bias to endorse invalid analogies . This interpretation , although admit - tedly post hoc , is consistent with a posited role for DLPFC in response selection ( e . g . Rowe et al . , 2000 ; Bunge et al . , 2002b ; Hazeltine et al . , 2003 ) . It has been previously shown that DLPFC is recruited when there is a need to override prepotent responses or to resolve response competition ( e . g . Casey et al . , 1997 ; Garavan et al . , 1999 ; MacDonald et al . , 2000 ; Liddle et al . , 2001 ; Bunge et al . , 2002a , b ) , with right DLPFC in particular appearing to play a general role in response selection across different stimulus materials ( Hazeltine et al . , 2003 ; for review , see Jonides et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , mid - DLPFC re - sponse selection mechanisms have been reported to dissociate from FPC subgoaling / integration mechanisms ( Badre and Wagner , 2004 ) , a pattern that is consistent with the present dissociative outcome . Thus , the present ﬁndings complement prior reports in suggesting the DLPFC does not mediate in - tegration per se , but rather may be engaged during reason - ing under situations that require overcoming a prepotent response bias . Conclusion Representational integration — which can be described as the process of jointly considering , comparing , or linking separate mental representations — is likely to be a fundamental building - block for high - level cognitive function , enabling one to ( i ) evaluate whether the products of long - term memory retrieval are consistent with previously retrieved information or with a speciﬁc goal ( e . g . during analogical reasoning or episodic memory retrieval ) ; ( ii ) consider whether multiple constraints are simultaneously satisﬁed ( e . g . during deductive reasoning ; Goel et al . , 1998 ; Waltz et al . , 1999 ) ; or ( iii ) predict the consequence of a series of future actions ( e . g . while performing a prospective task like the Tower of London ; Owen et al . , 1996a ; Rowe et al . , 2001 ; see Kroger et al . , 2002 ) . The present ﬁndings suggest that the most rostral portion of PFC contributes to high - level cognition by enabling domain - general integration of newly retrieved information with other representations currently held in mind . Beyond integration , a number of other cognitive operations are required for successful analogical reasoning , including the retrieval of relations between representations and the selection of a contextually appropriate response . These processes differ - entially tax distinct subregions of PFC , lending credence to the suggestion that interaction between multiple PFC regions is central to high - level cognition . Moreover , the present ﬁndings suggest that the cognitive consequences of damage to PFC should at least partially depend on the speciﬁc locus of the deﬁcit , with distinct deﬁcits in high - level cognition likely to follow insult to frontopolar , dorsolateral , and ventrolateral PFC Cerebral Cortex March 2005 , V 15 N 3 247 structures . Future research with targeted transcranial magnetic stimulation ( e . g . Mottaghy et al . , 2002 ) or consideration of select lesion populations ( e . g . Thompson - Schill et al . , 1998 ) may provide further evidence for the multi - component nature of analogical reasoning . Notes Supported by the National Science Foundation ( 0133126 ) and McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience . The authors thank B . Burrows , R . Insler and B . Weber for assistance with data collection and / or analysis . Address correspondence to Silvia A . Bunge , Center for Mind and Brain , University of California , 202 Cousteau Place , Suite 201 , Davis , CA 95616 , USA . Sabunge @ ucdavis . edu . References Badre D , Wagner AD ( 2002 ) semantic retrieval , mnemonic control , and prefrontal cortex . Behav Cogn Neurosci Rev 1 : 206 - - 218 . Badre D , Wagner AD ( 2004 ) . Selection , integration , and conﬂict monitoring : assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal cognitive control mechanisms . Neuron 41 : 473 - - 487 . Baker SC , Rogers RD , Owen AM , Frith CD , Dolan RJ , Frackowiak RSJ , Robbins TW ( 1996 ) Neural systems engaged by planning : a PET study of the Tower of London task . Neuropsychologia 34 : 515 - - 526 . Bjork RA ( 1975 ) Short - term storage : the ordered output of a central processor . In : Cognitive theory ( Restle F , Shiffrin RM , Castellan NJ , Lindeman HR , Pisoni DB , eds ) , vol . 1 , pp . 151 - - 171 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Boroditsky L . ( 2000 ) Metaphoric structuring : understanding time through spatial metaphors . Cognition 75 : 1 - - 28 . Braver TS , Bongiolatti SR ( 2002 ) The role of frontopolar cortex in subgoal processing during working memory . Neuroimage 15 : 523 - - 536 . Bunge SA , Dudukovic NM , Thomason ME , Vaidya CJ , Gabrieli JD ( 2002a ) Immature frontal lobe contributions to cognitive control in children : evidence from fMRI . Neuron 33 : 301 - - 311 . Bunge SA , Hazeltine E , Scanlon MD , Rosen AC , Gabrieli JD ( 2002b ) Dissociable contributions of prefrontal and parietal cortices to response selection . Neuroimage 17 : 1562 - - 1571 . Bunge SA , Burrows B , Wagner AD ( 2004 ) Prefrontal and hippocampal contributions to visual associative retrieval . Brain Cogn ( in press ) . Bunge SA , Kahn I , Wallis JD , Miller EK , Wagner AD ( 2003 ) Neural circuits subserving the retrieval and maintenance of abstract rules . J Neuro - physiol 90 : 3419 - - 3428 . Cabeza R , Nyberg L . ( 2000 ) Imaging cognition . II . An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies . J Cogn Neurosci 12 : 1 - - 47 . Casey BJ , Trainor RJ , Orendi JL , Nystrom LE , Giedd JN , Castellanos FX , Haxby J , Forman SD , Dahl RE , Rapoport JC ( 1997 ) A developmental functional MRI study of prefrontal activation during performance of a Go - - No - Go task . J Cogn Neurosci 9 : 835 - - 847 . Christoff K , Gabrieli JDE ( 2002 ) The frontopolar cortex and human cognition : evidence for a rostrocaudal hierarchical organization within the human prefrontal cortex . Psychobiology 28 : 168 - - 186 . Christoff K , Prabhakaran V , Dorfman J , Zhao Z , Kroger JK , Holyoak KJ , Gabrieli JD ( 2001 ) Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during reasoning . Neuroimage 14 : 1136 - - 1149 . Cocosco CA , Kollokian V , Kwan RK - S , Evans AC ( 1997 ) BrainWeb : online interface to a 3D MRI simulated brain database . Neuroimage 5 : S425 . College Entrance Examination Board ( 2000 ) 10 Real SATs , 2nd edn . New York : College Entrance Examination Board . D’Esposito M , Postle BR , Ballard D , Lease J ( 1999 ) Maintenance versus manipulation of information held in working memory : an event - related fMRI study . Brain Cogn 41 : 66 - - 86 . Dale AM ( 1999 ) Optimal experimental design for event - related fMRI . Hum Brain Mapp 8 : 109 - - 114 . Dobbins IG , Foley H , Schacter DL , Wagner AD ( 2002 ) Executive control during episodic retrieval : multiple prefrontal processes subserve source memory . Neuron 35 : 989 - - 996 . Dobbins IG , Rice HJ , Wagner AD , Schacter DL ( 2003 ) Memory orientation and success : separable neurocognitive components un - derlying episodic recognition . Neuropsychologia 41 : 318 - - 333 . Duncan J , Burgess P , Emslie H ( 1995 ) Fluid intelligence after frontal lobe lesions . Neuropsychologia 33 : 261 - - 268 . Fiez J ( 1997 ) Phonology , semantics , and the role of the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Human Brain Mapping 5 : 79 - - 83 . Fletcher PC , Henson RN ( 2001 ) Frontal lobes and human memory : insights from functional neuroimaging . Brain 124 : 849 - - 881 . Fletcher PC , Shallice T , Dolan RJ ( 2000 ) ‘Sculpting the response space’ — an account of left prefrontal activation at encoding . Neuroimage 12 : 404 - - 417 . Gabrieli JD , Poldrack RA , Desmond JE ( 1998 ) The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and memory . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 906 - - 913 . Garavan H , Ross TJ , Stein EA ( 1999 ) Right hemispheric dominance of inhibitory control : an event - related functional MRI study . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 8301 - - 8306 . Gentner D ( 1983 ) Structure - mapping : a theoretical framework for analogy . Cogn Sci 7 : 155 - - 170 . Gentner D ( 1989 ) Mechanisms of analogical learning . In : Similarity and analogical reasoning ( Ortony SVA , ed . ) , pp . 199 - - 241 . London : Cambridge University Press . Goel V , Gold B , Kapur S , Houle S ( 1997 ) The seats of reason ? An imaging study of deductive and inductive reasoning . Neuroreport 8 : 1305 - - 1310 . Goel VV , Gold B , Kapur S , Houle S ( 1998 ) Neuroanatomical correlates of human reasoning . J Cogn Neurosci 10 : 293 - - 302 . Hazeltine E , Bunge SA , Scanlon MD , Rosen AC , Gabrieli JD ( 2003 ) Material - dependent and material - independent selection processes in the frontal lobes : an event - related fMRI investigation of response competition . Neuropsychologia 41 : 1208 - - 1217 . Henson RNA , Rugg MD , Shallice T , Josephs O , Dolan RJ ( 1999 ) Recollection and familiarity in recognition memory : An event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging study . J Neurosci 19 : 3962 - - 3972 . Henson RN , Rugg MD , Shallice T , Dolan RJ ( 2000 ) Conﬁdence in recognition memory for words : dissociating right prefrontal roles in episodic retrieval . J Cogn Neurosci 12 : 913 - - 923 . Holyoak KJ , Kroger JK ( 1995 ) Forms of reasoning : insight into prefrontal functions ? Ann N Y Acad Sci 769 : 253 - - 263 . Holyoak KJ , Thagard P ( 1995 ) Mental leaps : analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hummel JE , Holyoak KJ ( 1997 ) Distributed representations of structure : a theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychol Rev 104 : 427 - - 466 . Jani NG , Levine DS ( 2000 ) A neural network theory of proportional analogy - making . Neural Netw 13 : 149 - - 183 . Jonides J , Badre D , Curtis CE , Thompson - Schill SL , Smith EE ( 2002 ) Mechanisms of conﬂict resolution in prefrontal cortex . In : The frontal lobes ( Knight RT , Stuss DT , eds ) , pp . 188 - - 196 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Kahn I , Davachi L , Wagner AD ( 2004 ) Functional - - neuroanatomic correlates of recollection : implications for models of recognition memory . J Neurosci 24 : 4172 - - 4180 . Koechlin E , Basso G , Pietrini P , Panzer S , Grafman J ( 1999 ) The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human cognition . Nature 399 : 148 - - 151 . Kroger JK , Sabb FW , Fales CL , Bookheimer SY , Cohen MS , Holyoak KJ ( 2002 ) Recruitment of anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning : a parametric study of relational complexity . Cereb Cortex 12 : 477 - - 485 . Liddle PF , Kiehl KA , Smith AM ( 2001 ) Event - related fMRI study of response inhibition . Hum Brain Mapp 12 : 100 - - 109 . Luria AR ( 1966 ) Higher cortical functions in man . New York : Basic Books . MacDonald AW , Cohen JD , Stenger VA , Carter CS ( 2000 ) Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control . Science 288 : 1835 - - 1838 . Macmillan General Reference ( 1997 ) . SAT verbal workbook , 6th edn . New York : Arco Publishing . Martin A , Chao LL ( 2001 ) semantic memory and the brain : structure and processes . Curr Opin Neurobiol 11 : 194 - - 201 . 248 Analogical Reasoning and PFC d Bunge et al . Mottaghy FM , Doring T , Muller - Gartner HW , Topper R , Krause BJ ( 2002 ) Bilateral parieto - frontal network for verbal working memory : an interference approach using repetitive transcranial magnetic stim - ulation ( rTMS ) . Eur J Neurosci 16 : 1627 - - 1632 . Nolde SF , Johnson MK , D’Esposito M ( 1998 ) Left prefrontal activation during episodic remembering : an event - related fMRI study . Neuro - report 9 : 3509 - - 3514 . Nyberg L , Cabeza R , Tulving E ( 1996 ) PET studies of encoding and retrieval : the HERA model . PsychonomBull Rev 3 : 135 - - 148 . Osherson D , Perani D , Cappa S , Schnur T , Grassi F , Fazio F ( 1998 ) Distinct brain loci in deductive versus probabilistic reasoning . Neuropsychologia 36 : 369 - - 376 . Owen AM , Doyon J , Petrides M , Evans AC ( 1996a ) Planning and spatial working memory : a positron emission tomography study in humans . Eur J Neurosci 8 : 353 - - 364 . Owen AM , Evans AC , Petrides M ( 1996b ) Evidence for a two - stage model of spatial working memory processing within the lateral frontal cortex : a positron emission tomography study . Cereb Cortex 6 : 31 - - 38 . Petrides M ( 1996 ) Specialized systems for the processing of mnemonic information within the primate frontal cortex . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 351 : 1455 - - 1461 [ discussion 1461 - - 1462 ] . Poldrack RA , Wagner AD , Prull MW , Desmond JE , Glover GH , Gabrieli JD ( 1999 ) Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage 10 : 15 - - 35 . Postle BR , Berger JS , Taich AM , D’Esposito M ( 2000 ) Activity in human frontal cortex associated with spatial working memory and saccadic behavior . J Cogn Neurosci 12 ( Suppl 2 ) : 2 - - 14 . Prabhakaran V , Smith JAL , Desmond JE , Glover GH , Gabrieli JDE ( 1997 ) Neural substrates of ﬂuid reasoning : an fMRI study of neocortical activation during performance of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test . Cogn Psychol 33 : 43 - - 63 . Prabhakaran V , Narayanan K , Zhao Z , Gabrieli JD ( 2000 ) Integration of diverse information in working memory within the frontal lobe . Nat Neurosci 3 : 85 - - 90 . Raichle ME , Fiez JA , Videen TO , MacLeod AM , Pardo JV , Fox PT , Petersen SE ( 1994 ) Practice - related changes in human functional anatomy during nonmotor learning . Cereb Cortex 4 : 8 - - 26 . Ranganath C , Johnson MK , D’Esposito M ( 2000 ) Left anterior prefrontal activation increases with demands to recall speciﬁc perceptual information . J Neurosci 20 : RC108 . Raven JC ( 1941 ) Standardization of progressive matrices . Br J Med Psychol 19 : 137 - - 150 . Research and Education Association ( 2000 ) The very best coaching and study course for the SAT 1 : Reasoning test . Piscatawy , NJ : Research and Education Association . Rowe JB , Toni I , Josephs O , Frackowiak RS , Passingham RE ( 2000 ) The prefrontal cortex : response selection or maintenance within work - ing memory ? Science 288 : 1656 - - 1660 . Rowe JB , Owen AM , Johnsrude IS , Passingham RE ( 2001 ) Imaging the mental components of a planning task . Neuropsychologia 39 : 315 - - 327 . Rugg MD , Wilding EL ( 2000 ) Retrieval processing and episodic memory . Trends Cogn Sci 4 : 108 - - 115 . Shallice T , Burgess PW ( 1991 ) Deﬁcits in strategy application following frontal lobe damage in man . Brain 114 : 727 - - 741 . Stuss DT , Benson DF ( 1984 ) Neuropsychological studies of the frontal lobes . Psychol Bull 95 : 3 - - 28 . Talairach J , Tourneaux P ( 1988 ) Co - planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain . Stuttgart : Thieme . Thompson - Schill SL , Swick D , Farah MJ , D’Esposito M , Kan IP , Knight RT ( 1998 ) Verb generation in patients with focal frontal lesions : a neuropsychological test of neuroimaging ﬁndings . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 15855 - - 15860 . Tulving E , Kapur S , Craik FIM , Moscovitch M , Houle S ( 1994 ) Hemispheric encoding / retrieval asymetry in episodic memory : positron emission tomography ﬁndings . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 2016 - - 2020 . Wagner AD , Desmond JE , Glover GH , Gabrieli JDE ( 1998 ) Prefrontal cortex and recognition memory : fMRI evidence for context - dependent retrieval processes . Brain 121 : 1985 - - 2002 . Wagner AD , Maril A , Bjork RA , Schacter DL ( 2001a ) Prefrontal contribu - tions to executive control : fMRI evidence for functional distinctions within lateral prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage 14 : 1337 - - 1347 . Wagner AD , Pare - Blagoev EJ , Clark J , Poldrack RA ( 2001b ) Recovering meaning : left prefrontal cortex guides controlled semantic retrieval . Neuron 31 : 329 - - 338 . Waltz JA , Knowlton BJ , Holyoak KJ , Boone KB , Mishkin FS , de Menenzes Santos M , Thomas CR , Miller B ( 1999 ) A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal cortex . Psychol Sci 10 : 119 - - 125 . Wharton CM , Grafman J , Flitman SS , Hansen EK , Brauner J , Marks A , Honda M ( 2000 ) Toward neuroanatomical models of analogy : a positron emission tomography study of analogical mapping . Cogn Psychol 40 : 173 - - 197 . Worsley KJ , Marrett S , Neelin P , Evans AC ( 1992 ) A three - dimensional statistical analysis for CBF activation studies in the brain . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 12 : 900 - - 918 . Cerebral Cortex March 2005 , V 15 N 3 249