Comparison and Categorization in the Development of Relational Similarity Laura Kotovsky and Dedre Centner University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign KOTOVSKY , LAURA , and CENTNER , DEDHE . Comparison and Categorization in the Development of Relational Similarity . CHILD DEVELOPMENT , 1996 , 67 , 2797 - 2822 . 4 experiments investigated the development of children ' s ability to recognize perceptual relational commonalities such as symmetry or monotonicity . In Experiment 1 , 6 - and 8 - year - olds were able to recognize higher - order relational similarity across different dimensions ( e . g . , size / saturation ) and across different polarities ( e . g . , increase / decrease ) , whereas 4 - year - olds could recognize higher - order relational matches only when they were supported by lower - order commonalities ( e . g . , size / size but not size / saturation matches ) . Further experiments tested how the processes of comparison and cate - gorization affected 4 - year - olds ' ability to recognize relational similarity . The results of the experi - ments supported the hypothesis that comparison and categorization processes lead to changes in children ' s representations of relational structure , enabling them to recognize more abstract commonalities . A computational model lent further support to the claims . The ability to grasp relational similarity is fundamental to abstract thought . It under - lies our appreciation of patterns of symmetry and mathematical structure and other subtle and elegant in variances . It allows us to makes analogies and apply inferences be - tween superficially unlike domains . More important for cognitive development , the ability to perceive relational commonalities is fundamental to learning beyond the basic level . To understand relational categories such as predator or force —or even tool , weapon , or contract —the child must be able to process relational commonalities . Thus the issue of when and how chil - dren become able to process relational simi - larity commands attention . The research on this issue has found considerable evidence suggesting a developmental change in chil - dren ' s ability to recognize relational similar - ity and use it in analogy and metaphor ( e . g . , Billow , 1975 ; Centner , 1988 ; Piaget , Mon - tangero , & Billeter , 1977 ; Winner , Rosen - stiel , & Gardner , 1976 ) . Accounts of this change can be divided into two camps : those who postulate a global change in children ' s cognitive processing and those who propose that changes in knowledge representation are sufficient to cause the relational shift . Piaget and his colleagues argued for the global change explanation : specifically , that children achieve competence in relational similarity around the formal operations stage , at about 11 or 12 years of age ( e . g . , Piaget et al . , 1977 ) . This timing now seems unlikely in light of the growing body of re - search demonstrating early competence in relational similarity tasks . For example , Centner ( 1977a ) asked children and adults to carry out a mapping between two familiar domains , the human body and a tree . When asked , " If a tree had a knee where would it be ? " 4 - year - olds were as accurate as adults at pointing to the correct area of a picture . They were able to preserve the spatial rela - tions among body parts , even when the task was made difficult by turning the pictures upside down or by adding misleading local details . Brown ( 1989 ) found that 2 - year - olds could transfer a solution to a reaching prob - lem by choosing a tool based on its function - ally relevant properties ( i . e . , possessing a Laura Kotovsky , Department of Psychology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Charnpaign ; Dedre Centner , Department of Psychology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign ( now at the Department of Psychology , Northwestern University ) . This work was supported by NSF grant no . BNS - 9096259 . The computational simulation was supported by ONR , contract no . N00014 - 89 - J - 1272 . The authors would like to thank Mary Jo Rattermann , Judy DeLoache , Renee Baillargeon , and David Uttal for their insightful comments . We also thank Art Markrnan for his comments and assistance with the computational simulation . Last , we wish to express our grati - tude to the parents and children who participated in the research . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dedre Centner , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 - 2710 . [ Child Development , 1996 , 67 , 2797 - 2822 . © 1996 by the Society for Research in Child Development , Inc . Al ! rights reserved , 0009 - 3920 / 96 / 6706 - 0042801 . 00 ] 2798 Child Development hooked end ) . Finally , recent research using looking - time paradigms has suggested that even young infants are sensitive to identity relations ( Tyrrell , Stauffer , & Snowman , 1991 ) . These kinds of results have led most researchers to adopt the knowledge - change view , that whether children can recognize relational similarity in a domain depends chiefly on their knowledge of that domain ( Brown , 1989 ; Brown & DeLoache , 1978 ; Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ; Carey , 1985 , 1991 ; Chen & Daehler , 1989 ; Chi , 1981 ; Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ; Crisafi & Brown , 1986 ; Gentner , 1977a , 1977b , 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Goswami , 1991 , 1992 ; Goswami & Brown , 1989 ; Or - tony , Reynolds , & Arter , 1978 ; Vosniadou , 1987 , 1989 ) . However , showing that relational com - petence develops before the formal opera - tions stage does not in itself prove the knowledge - change position . It remains pos - sible that there is a global change in pro - cessing that occurs earlier than Piaget had proposed . Halford ( 1987 , 1993 ) and his col - leagues have taken this position , arguing that the relational shift occurs at around 4 years of age as the result of a maturational increase in processing capacity . Halford pro - poses that the degree of processing capacity required to carry out a match increases from objects to binary relations and finally to sys - tems involving ternary relations . As evi - dence that processing capacity sufficient to process complex relational comparisons de - velops at around 4 years of age ( Halford , 1987 , 1992 , 1993 ) , Halford and his col - leagues have shown gains at around this age in transitivity and class inclusion tasks . They have simulated this progression in the STAR model , a distributed connectionist system using tensor products ( Halford et al . , 1995 ) . The current studies provide a test of these claims . In this article we test a specific version of the knowledge - change hypothesis : Gent - ner ' s ( 1988 ) relational shift hypothesis , later amplified into what Gentner and Ratter - mann ( 1991 ) called the " career of similarity " hypothesis ( see also Gentner & Medina , 1996 ) . This account posits that within any given domain ( a ) overall similarity is the ear - liest and most naturally responded to ( e . g . , Rovee - Collier & Fagen , 1981 ) , and ( b ) the order in which partial matches come to be noticed is , first , matching objects , then matching relations , and finally matching higher - order relations . 1 Our assumption is that this sequence is epistemological , not maturational : Children come to perceive similarity between objects ( e . g . , the likeness between a red apple and a red ball ) before they perceive similarity among relations ( e . g . , the similarity between an apple falling from a tree and a spoon falling from a table ) ; and appreciation of such lower - order rela - tional similarity in turn precedes apprecia - tion of higher - order relational similarity ( similarity in relations between relations : e . g . , the similarity between a squirrel swish - ing its tail and causing an apple to fall from a tree , and a toddler waving her arm and causing a cup to fall off the table ) . 2 Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) re - viewed a large body of research that sup - ports the relational shift hypothesis in that ( a ) the ability to perceive relational similar - ity appears later than the ability to perceive object similarity , and ( b ) this relational in - sight appears at different ages in different domains ( e . g . , Billow , 1975 ; Brown et al . , 1986 ; Bryant & Trabasso , 1971 ; Chipman & Mendelson , 1979 ; DeLoache , 1989 , in press ; Gentner , 1977a , 1977b , 1988 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Goswami , 1989 ; Pears & Bry - ant , 1989 ; Rattermann , Gentner , & De - Loache , 1989 ; Smith , 1984 ; Uttal & De - Loache , 1995 ; Uttal , Schreiber , & DeLoache , 1995 ) . In particular , when rela - tional similarity is pitted against object simi - larity , younger children are more influenced by object matches , and less able to attend to 1 The relational shift is not a shift away from object similarity ; even adults find it easier to process overall similarity ( that includes object matches as well as relational matches ) than to process pure analogy , and there is evidence that object matches are processed before relational matches ( Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Markman & Gentner , 1996 ) . 2 These levels of similarity are more precisely defined using a propositional representation . Attributes are defined as predicates taking one argument ( e . g . , BIG [ a ] ) , and relations as predi - cates taking two or more arguments ( e . g . , BIGGER [ a , b ] ; Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ; Palmer , 1975 ) . The difference between first - order and higher - order relations is that first - order relations take objects or functions as arguments , and higher - order relations take propositions as arguments . That is , a higher - order relation is a relation between relations . Using this representation , object similarity involves a match at the level of attributes , lower - order relational similarity involves a match at the level of first - order relations , and higher - order relational smilarity involves a match at the level of higher - order relations . Kotovsky and Gentner 2799 relational matches , than are older children ( Gentner , 1988 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Mark - man , & Kotovsky , 1995 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ) . In this research we will test a more specific hypothesis : Within a domain the recognition of lower - order relational similar - ity precedes the recognition of higher - order relational similarity . We also test a second prediction of the relational shift hypothesis and other knowledge - based theories : namely , that increasing children ' s knowl - edge of domain relations should lead to greater sensitivity to relational similarity in the domain . This prediction was partially ad - dressed in an experiment by Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) . They examined the effects of domain knowledge on analogy in preschool children using a picture - selection task , and found that children who could correctly complete a causal sequence tended to per - form well on an analogy that utilized the same causal relation . A similar result was ob - tained by Gentner , Rattermann , and Camp - bell ( 1996 ) . However , although this finding is sup - portive of knowledge effects , it is not defini - tive . For example , it could be that high - ability children performed well on both the causal task and the analogy task . What is needed is a demonstration that providing children with knowledge about the domain can improve their performance on a rela - tional similarity task . The chief goal of this research is to provide such a direct test : We ask whether learning the relations in a do - main improves children ' s performance on a relational similarity task . A further goal is to propose and test a learning mechanism by which children can learn about domain rela - tions from experience . This mechanism , which we call progressive alignment , is a crucial aspect of our proposal . In the pro - gressive alignment mechanism , experienc - ing concrete similarity prepares children to perceive more abstract similarity without di - rect instruction . We elaborate on this mecha - nism later in the article . Our final goal is to test the role of relational language in pro - moting relational learning ( Gentner & Me - dina , 1996 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotov - sky , 1995 ) . In choosing the domain for these studies we had two criteria in mind : ( a ) The domain should be familiar to preschool children , but at the same time , in order to permit a test of the knowledge - change hypothesis , there should be higher - order relations that pre - schoolers initially fail to perceive in similar - ity comparisons ; and ( b ) the domain should be such that the similarity among higher - order relations can be manipulated indepen - dently from the similarity among objects and first - order relations . This requirement of separable kinds of similarity poses a meth - odological challenge . In natural experience , different levels of similarity are typically correlated ( e . g . , what looks like a tiger also has the causal powers of a tiger ) , and this correlation is often carried into experimental materials . For example , in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) study of causal analogies , the correct completion of the a : b : : c : ? d analogy ( i . e . , the term " d " such that the c , d causal chain matched the a , b causal chain ) often shared object - level similarity with the " c " term ( e . g . , tree : burnt tree stump : : pile of leaves : ? burnt pile of leaves ) . A replication of this study separating object similarity and relational similarity produced many fewer correct responses ( Gentner et al . , 1996 ) . Us - ing materials in which multiple levels of similarity are present may lead to an inflated view of children ' s ability . With these considerations in mind , we chose perceptual patterns as the stimuli for this research , because ( a ) they permit inde - pendent manipulation of different aspects of the materials to address the problems of cor - related attributional and relational similarity and ( b ) they are familiar to children when presented in simple concrete depictions , but can prove challenging in more complex in - carnations ( e . g . , Bryant , 1974 ; Chipman & Mendelson , 1979 ; DeLoache , 1989 ; Go - swami , 1989 ; Halford , 1987 , 1992 ; Ratter - mann et al . , 1989 ; Smith , 1984 , 1989 , 1993 ) . In particular , Smith ( 1984 ) showed a rela - tional shift in children ' s ability to copy sim - ple dimensional relations , and Chipman and Mendelson ( 1979 ) showed a developmental increase in attention to symmetry in judging the complexity of perceptual stimuli . Adults and older children , but not 5 - year - olds , judged patterns as less complex when they were horizontally symmetric , consistent with symmetry ' s serving as a higher - order organizing pattern . Thus , perceptual rela - tions created from geometric forms met both of our criteria for stimuli design . We used a triads choice task throughout the research . The child was shown three ge - ometric figures , a standard and two choices , and was asked which of the choices the stan - dard went with best . In each triad , the stan - dard and the relational choice shared a higher - order relation , either symmetry or monotonicity ( e . g . , oOo and xXx ; see Fig . 2800 Child Development Same - Polarity Opposite - Polarity Same - Dimension Standard Relational Choice Non - relational Choice Relational Choice Non - relational Choice Cross - Dimension Standard Relational Choice Non - relational Choice Relational Choice Non - relational Choice FIG . 1 . —Samples of Same - polarity , Opposite - polarity , Same - dimension , and Cross - dimension stimuli types . 1 ) . The elements that made up the standard were of different shapes and colors from the ones that made up the relational choice , so that its object - level similarity to the standard was low . The nonrelational choice , or foil , was created simply by rearranging the ele - ments of the relational choice so as to break the higher - order relation , for example , oOo becomes ooO ( see Fig . 1 ) . This ensured that the foil and the relational choice were equally similar to the standard in their ( low ) level of object matches . Thus this test is a pure test of children ' s appreciation of rela - tional similarity , since the advantage of the relational choice over the foil lies only in its relational commonalities with the standard . We wanted to gauge children ' s ability to appreciate abstract higher - order relational similarity , as opposed to similarity based on first - order relational matches , or on both first - order and higher - order matches . There - fore , we varied the degree of first - order rela - tional similarity that the relational choice shared with the standard ( while keeping higher - order relational similarity constant ) . Two aspects of lower - order relational simi - larity were manipulated : dimension and po - larity ( see Fig . 1 ) . Dimension concerns whether the dimension of change ( over which the higher - order relation held ) was the same in the standard and relational choice ( i . e . , whether the match was size - change to size - change or size - change to satu - ration - change ) . Polarity concerns whether the direction of change was the same ( xXx / oOo ) or different ( xXx / OoO ) in the standard and relational choice . Varying polarity and dimension orthogonally led to four triad types varying in degree of match from most concrete to most abstract : for example , for the higher - order relation of symmetry , these are ( 1 ) Same - dimension , Same - polarity ( xXx / oOo ) , ( 2 ) Same - dimension , Different - polarity ( xXx / OoO ) , ( 3 ) Different - dimension , Same - polarity ( xXx / 121 ) , and ( 4 ) Different - dimension , Different - polarity—only the higher - order relation matches ( xXx / 212 ) . For adults , the higher - order relation match is sufficient . Even for case 4 ( the bottom right cell of Fig . 1 ) , adults virtually always choose the relational choice . Our first question was whether young children would perceive commonality based only on a shared higher - order relation . The purpose of the first experiment was to test the predictions of the relational shift hypothesis and to establish a baseline of children ' s similarity processing against Kotovsky and Centner 2801 which to test our further hypotheses con - cerning mechanisms of learning . The pre - dictions were that ( a ) at all ages ( barring ceil - ing effects ) , children would select the relational choice more reliably the more supporting commonalities there were ( i . e . , the more literally similar the relational choice was to the standard ) ; ( b ) there would be a relational shift , such that older children would be better able to recognize higher - order commonalities in the absence of sup - porting lower - order commonalities . Experiment 1 METHOD Participants Children were tested in Champaign - Urbana day - care centers , day camps , and public schools . There were 24 4 - year - olds ( mean age 4 - 7 , range = 4 - 1 to 5 - 2 ) , 24 6 - year - olds ( mean age 6 - 5 , range = 6 - 1 to 7 - 2 ) , and 24 8 - year - olds ( mean age 8 - 6 , range = 7 - 11 to 9 - 7 ) . An additional three 4 - year - olds were tested but eliminated due to failure to meet the criterion for training and filler trials ( see Procedure ) . All groups had equal numbers of males and females . The majority of the children in all of the experiments were white and from middle - class families . Sys - tematic data on race and SES were not col - lected in these studies . Materials and Design The design was a completely random - ized factorial mixed design with four be - tween - subjects factors : age ( 4 , 6 , or 8 years ) , polarity ( same or opposite ) , sex ( male or fe - male ) , and order of presentation of stimuli ( A or B ) ; and three within - subject factors : dimension ( same or different ) , higher - order relation ( symmetry or monotonic - increase ) , and dimension of standard ( size or satura - tion ) . Each child received 22 triads : 16 test triads , 2 training triads , and 4 filler triads . Test triads . —The test triads consisted of a standard and two choices , a relational choice and a nonrelational choice . The stan - dard and the relational choice always em - bodied the same higher - order relation , either symmetry or monotonicity . The non - relational choice was created by permuting the objects that made up the relational choice . Each child received half monotonic - ity and half symmetry trials . There were two key manipulations of the similarity between the standard and the relational choice : polarity ( direction of change same or opposite ) and dimension ( di - mension of change : same dimension or cross - dimension ) , which were varied orthog - onally to yield four match types , ranging from most concrete ( Same - dim / Same - pol ) to least concrete ( Cross - dim / Opposite - pol ) with two intermediate match types ( Cross - dim / Same - pol and Same - dim / Opposite - pol ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . The stimuli were constructed on 10 . 2 x 15 . 2 cm index cards . The size - change stimuli were made up of two shapes , circles and squares of constant coloring ( the squares were black and the circles had brick pat - terning as shown in Fig . 1 ) . Each shape oc - curred in three sizes . The squares used to depict monotonicity were 1 . 6 cm , 2 . 5 cm , and 3 . 8 cm . The squares used to depict sym - metry were 1 . 6 cm and 3 . 8 cm . The circles used to depict monotonicity were 1 . 0 cm , 1 . 6 cm , and 2 . 8 cm . The circles used to depict symmetry were 1 . 0 and 2 . 8 cm . The saturation - change stimuli were con - structed using Chromarama colored paper . They were made of squares and circles of constant size ( the squares were 3 . 8 cm and the circles were 2 . 5 cm ) . There were two colors , red and blue . Each color occurred in three saturations ( produced by the addition of white ) . The reds used to depict monoto - nicity were numbers 6141 , 6145 , and 6149 . The reds used to depict symmetry were numbers 6141 and 6149 . The blues used to depict monotonicity were numbers 6321 , 6325 , and 6329 . The blues used to depict symmetry were numbers 6321 and 6329 . Training triads . —Children received two training triads designed to demonstrate easily the matching game ; the child matched identical animals . For example , in one of the training triads the child had to indicate that an elephant " goes with " an identical ele - phant and not with a butterfly . Filler triads . —There were four filler tri - ads depicting simple geometric figures that shared object - level as well as lower - order - relational and higher - order - relational simi - larity . These were designed to be very easy , both to boost the child ' s confidence and to check whether the child was on task . For example , in one filler triad the child had to indicate that three large ovals " go with " three small ovals and not with two ovals and a square . Procedure After the two training triads , the 16 test triads were presented in one of the two semirandom orders ( random except for the 2802 Child Development stipulation that there be no more than two of the same triad type consecutively ) . Each figure in a triad was presented on a separate index card . The cards were presented on a game board with four slots for index cards ( see Fig . 2 ) . The experimenter placed the two choice cards in the two top slots and put the standard card in front of the child , ask - ing , " Do you know where that one [ the stan - dard ] goes best ? " Children could indicate their choice either by pointing to one of the two alternatives or by putting the standard card in the slot under their choice . No feed - back was given on the test trials . The four filler trials were spaced evenly through the study . During these trials the children were given general encourage - ment , such as " I like how you are playing this game . You look at all the pictures care - fully and choose the best match . " To be sure that children were on task we eliminated children who made more than one incorrect response on the training and filler trials . Preliminary Analyses Preliminary analyses including the fac - tors of sex and order of presentation of the stimuli revealed no significant main effects and no significant interactions involving these factors . The data were therefore col - lapsed across these factors in subsequent analyses . RESULTS The results are shown in Table 1 . As predicted , there was a relational shift : 4 - year - olds responded relationally on 53 % of the test triads , 6 - year - olds on 78 % , and 8 - year - olds on 90 % . Also as predicted , chil - dren chose more relationally when first - order as well as higher - order relations matched . A 3 x 2 x 2 ( age x polarity x dimension ) ANOVA with dimension as a within - subject factor revealed a main effect of age , F ( 2 , 66 ) = 55 . 08 , p < . 0005 , and main effects of polarity , F ( l , 66 ) = 7 . 67 , p < . 01 , and dimension , F ( l , 66 ) = 16 . 01 , p < . 0005 . Children chose the relational choice more often on Same - polarity triads , M = 78 % , than on Opposite - polarity triads , M = 70 % ( see Fig . 3 ) , and more often on Same - dimension triads , M = 79 % , than on Cross - dimension triads , M = 69 % ( see Fig . 4 ) . This was true at all ages . There were no reliable interactions involving age . As predicted , even the 8 - year - olds were more likely to choose relationally when the higher - order match was supported by common first - order relations . Consistent with the prediction that higher - order similarity emerges later than first - order similarity , the 4 - year - olds showed above - chance levels of relational responding only when there was maximum lower - order relational support for the higher - order com - monality : that is , in the Same - dim / Same - pol condition : M = 68 % , chance = 50 % ; f ( ll ) = 3 . 4 , p < . 01 ; all other ts < 0 . 82 , all ps > . 20 . ( This failure to choose relationally was not due to lack of understanding of the task , as most of the 4 - year - olds chose the similar item on all four filler triads . ) In contrast , the 6 - and 8 - year - olds responded reliably above chance in all conditions , all ts > 3 . 92 , all ps < . 01 ( see Table 1 ) . Further analyses including the factors of higher - order relation ( symmetry or monoto - nicity ) and dimension of standard ( size or saturation ) revealed a significant interaction between the dimension of the standard and age , F ( 2 , 69 ) = 3 . 09 , p = . 05 . Bonferroni comparisons using a family alpha of p < . 01 revealed that the 6 - year - olds performed FIG . 2 . —Stimulus presentation Kotovsky and Gentner 2803 TABLE 1 MEAN PROPORTION OF RELATIONAL RESPONSES BY AGE AND CONDITION IN EXPERIMENT 1 Age Same - Polarity Opposite - polarity 4 - year - olds : Same - dimension . . . . Cross - dimension 6 - year - olds : Same - dimension Cross - dimension 8 - year - olds : Same - dimension Cross - dimension . 68 . 49 . 90 . 75 . 96 . 90 . 49 . 48 . 77 . 72 . 93 . 80 more relationally when the standard de - picted a change in saturation ( M = 81 % ) than when the standard depicted a change in size ( M = 76 % ) . The opposite pattern was obtained with the 8 - year - olds ( saturation , M = 86 % ; size , M = 93 % ) . There was no difference in the 4 - year - olds responses to saturation ( M = 53 % ) versus size ( M = 54 % ) . No other main effects or interactions were significant . DISCUSSION The data from the triads task are consis - tent with the relational shift hypothesis : ( a ) at all ages , children were better able to rec - ognize higher - order commonalities when they were supported by lower - order com - monalities , and ( b ) only the older children ( 6 - and 8 - year - olds ) were able to recognize higher - order commonalities in the absence of supporting lower - order commonalities . Four - year - olds required lower - order rela - tional support to see the match . Children ' s active processing of the simi - larity matches was revealed in their sponta - neous comments during the task . Even on the Same - dimensional triads , 6 - year - olds sometimes articulated their choices , as in these remarks on symmetry : " Big little big , that ' s the pattern . " and " I figured it out , this is one different color in the middle . " On Cross - dimensional matches , children some - 1 . 0 g 0 . 8H ' 6 6 To 0 . 6H £ 0 . 4H JO 0 0 . 2 - 0 . 0 - chance 4yrs 6yrs Age 8yrs FIG . 3 . —Performance of children in Experiment 1 on Same - and Opposite - polarity trials 2804 Child Development 1 . 0 - 8 0 . 8H o o ? 0 . 6H o 1 otr o " •E 0 . 4 - O 0 . 2 - 2 Q . 0 . 0 chance 4yrs . 8yrs . 6yrs . Age FIG . 4 . —Performance of children in Experiment 1 on Same - and Cross - dimension trials times named the correspondences , as in this 6 - year - old ' s comment on symmetry : " This is a big one , this is pink . This is a small one , this is red . " Another strategy was to map across a relational system from a more famil - iar domain : " A dark one and a big one make daddies . The other one [ the rejected alterna - tive ] has two twins and a daddy on the side " ( see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . The emerging appreciation of relational com - monality can be seen in this comment by an 8 - year - old , who after struggling with her first several Cross - dimension matches , then ex - citedly articulated a startlingly apt descrip - tion of relational similarity : " It ' s exactly the same , but different ! " She proceeded to choose relationally for all the remaining triads . These results extend and refine the findings on the relational shift . It appears that the perception of pure higher - order re - lational commonality indeed emerges later than the perception of matches supported by both higher - order and lower - order relations . With this foundation , we now move to our second goal , namely , to determine whether this gain in relational sensitivity is due to changes in knowledge representation ( Brown , 1989 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) or to changes in general processing ability ( Case , 1987 ; Halford , 1987 , 1993 ) . In the remainder of this article , we test the core prediction of the knowl - edge - change hypothesis : that providing chil - dren with insight into the domain relations should increase their ability to perceive higher - order similarity . This experience could take the form of direct instruction in relational categories ( as investigated in Ex - periment 3 ) , but we also wished to explore the possibility of experiential learning of do - main relations . Specifically , we wished to in - vestigate a particular experiential learning mechanism , that of progressive alignment . According to this hypothesis , repeated com - parisons involving overall concrete similar - ity can facilitate noticing higher - order rela - tional commonalities , and thus promote the subsequent recognition of pure higher - order relational similarity . The first assumption of the Progressive Alignment hypothesis is that the similarity comparison process is one of alignment and mapping between representational struc - tures , as in the structure - mapping process for analogy ( Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ) . We fur - ther assume that structural alignment is eas - ier the more commonalities are present , pro - vided that they form a structurally consistent system ( Gentner , 1989 ; Gentner , Ratter - mann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ) . Further , we assume that one result of carrying out a similarity com - parison is to highlight the relational struc - ture , making it more salient ( Forbus & Gent - ner , 1986 ; Gentner & Wolff , in press ) . A second innovative aspect of the Progressive Alignment hypothesis is the assumption that the process of carrying out a similarity com - parison may lead to a change in the repre - sentation , and that this change will tend to increase the uniformity of the two represen - tations ( Gentner et al . , in press ; Gentner & Markman , 1995 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Wolff , in press ) . Thus the process of comparison and alignment acts both to make relational commonalities more salient and to make the representations slightly more uniform . Thus , experience comparing literally similar pairs that share a given higher - order relation ( e . g . , symmetry ) promotes the ability to recognize this higher - order commonality in more abstract ( e . g . , cross - dimensional ) comparisons . This claim that experience with concrete similar - ity promotes the development of abstract similarity differs sharply from the standard view of category learning , dating back to be - haviorist research , which assumes that the learning process ends when learners find categories that are sufficiently abstract to subsume the training stimuli . Some aspects of this proposal are al - ready well attested . Many researchers have suggested that one result of a comparison is to highlight common elements and thus pro - mote common abstractions ( Brown et al . , 1986 ; Elio & Anderson , 1981 ; Forbus & Gentner , 1986 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Hayes - Roth & McDermott , 1978 ; Medin & Ross , 1989 ; Ross , 1989 ; Thorndike , 1903 ) . For example , when Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) asked participants to write out the common - alities between two analogous passages , the common schema became more accessible in a subsequent memory task . However , the ex - tant psychological research has concentrated chiefly on directed schema extraction from explicit comparisons . Our proposal goes fur - ther in suggesting that the mere process of carrying out a similarity comparison , even without explicating the resulting common frame , can increase the salience of the com - mon structure . For example , Markman and Gentner ( 1993 ) gave adult participants a dif - ficult mapping task in which there were competing mappings between two scenes . Participants were more likely to choose a structurally consistent relational mapping over a competing mapping that was based on a superficial but striking object match if they had previously rated the similarity of Kotovsky and Centner 2805 the two scenes . This is evidence that the process of carrying out a similarity compari - son involves an alignment of relational struc - ture . Our goal in this research was to test the strong claim that experience with concrete similarity promotes recognition of abstract relational similarity . A follow - up study to Experiment 1 pro - vided some encouragement for this possibil - ity . We asked whether children would show positive transfer effects if they experienced concrete similarity comparisons followed by abstract relational similarity ( when both in - volve the same relational structure ) . To test this , we brought back ( within 1 week , mean delay = 2 days ) the children who had partic - ipated in Experiment 1 and gave them the task again , but in the alternate polarity con - dition . Thus , one - half of the children were presented with the more abstract Opposite - polarity triads after experiencing the more concrete Same - polarity triads . The predic - tion was that these children would perform more relationally on the Opposite - polarity triads than those who had received the Op - posite - polarity triads wth no prior concrete experience . We focused on the 4 - year - olds , who in Experiment 1 had shown no ability to rec - ognize abstract higher - order relational simi - larity in the absence of supporting lower - order relational similarity . In the follow - up experiment , on the Same - dimension trials the 4 - year - olds showed the predicted im - provement : M = 49 % for Opposite - polarity - first and M = 60 % for Opposite - polarity - second , t ( 22 ) = 1 . 84 , p < . 05 , one - tailed . This did not appear to be a general practice effect in that there was no such improve - ment on the Same - polarity trials : M = 68 % for Same - polarity - first and M = 53 % for Same - polarity - second . This pattern is con - sistent with the possibility that preschoolers ' ability to extract pure higher - order relational similarity was improved by prior experience with similarity matches in which the same higher - order commonality was supported by concrete lower - order commonalities . Al - though the improvement was slight , it occurred without feedback and with a relatively small number of concrete trials presented some days before the abstract trials . Our goal in Experiment 2 was to test the Progressive Alignment hypothesis more systematically . We focused on 4 - year - olds , since they seemed to show little or no initial 2806 Child Development recognition of pure higher - order relations . We reasoned that if experience with con - crete similarity promotes recognition of ab - stract relational similarity , then experience with Same - dimensional triads should facili - tate performance on Cross - dimensional tri - ads . To test this prediction , we gave children the same triads as in Experiment 1 , but blocked them so that the eight Same - dimension triads preceded the eight Cross - dimension triads , instead of mixing the triads as in Experiment 1 . According to the Progressive Alignment hypothesis , this should lead to improved performance on the Cross - dimensional triads . However , a fur - ther control is necessary here , for there is a possible alternate explanation of the pre - dicted result ( of improved performance on the abstract triads ) . Such an improvement could simply come about through some gen - eral benefit of practice on easy triads , rather than specifically through the alignment and highlighting of common relational structure . To rule out this explanation , a control group was run . Like the experimental group , the control group received eight Same - dimension triads followed by eight Cross - dimension triads . However , the make - up of the Same - dimension triads was varied be - tween the groups . Whereas the experimental group received four size - change and four saturation - change triads , the control group received eight size - change triads . Thus the control group should experience any bene - fits deriving from easy practice triads , but only the experimental group is given the opportunity to align concrete similarity matches along both dimensions . If , as claimed by the Progressive Alignment hy - pothesis , alignment of concrete matches helps highlight relational structure and paves the way for abstract matches , then the experimental group should outperform the control group ( as well as the children in Ex - periment 1 ) on the Cross - dimension triads . More specifically , we predicted that those 4 - year - olds who successfully align the rela - tional structures in a block of Same - dimension trials involving size and a block of Same - dimension trials involving satura - tion should be best able to respond to the relational similarity on a subsequent block of Cross - dimension trials . Thus , we pre - dicted a positive relation between perfor - mance on Same - dimension trials and perfor - mance on Cross - dimension trials in the experimental condition of Experiment 2 and no such relation in the control condition or in Experiment 1 . Experiment 2 METHOD Participants The participants were 24 4 - year - olds , 13 boys and 11 girls , mean age 4 - 6 ( range = 4 - 2 to 5 - 0 ) . Six boys and six girls were assigned to the experimental condition ( mean age 4 - 6 , range = 4 - 2 to 4 - 9 ) and seven boys and five girls were assigned to the control condition ( mean age 4 - 6 , range = 4 - 2 to 5 - 0 ) . Partici - pants in this and the remaining experiments were recruited from the Champaign - Urbana community and tested individually in a labo - ratory at the Beckman Institute at the Uni - versity of Illinois . Materials The stimuli in the experimental condi - tion were the Same - polarity stimuli from Ex - periment I : 3 eight Same - dimension triads , eight Cross - dimension triads , and six train - ing and filler triads . The stimuli in the con - trol condition were the same as those used in the experimental condition , except that in the Same - dimension trial block , instead of four Same - dimension size triads and four Same - dimension saturation triads , children received eight Same - dimension size triads . The new size triads were created by re - versing the polarity in the original Same - dimension size triads . 4 Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1 , except that in the experimen - 3 The dimension manipulation has certain advantages over the polarity manipulation . In the monotonicity triads , the same and different polarities are mirror images ( e . g . , 1 - 2 - 3 , 3 - 2 - 1 ) , so a child could conceivably follow a rule such as " read both directions when looking for a match . " This is not the case for dimension . There is no simple transformation between size and color , so in order to perform relationally on the Cross - dimension match the child must rely on abstract relational structure . The remaining experiments all utilize dimension as the varying aspect , holding to Same - polarity . 4 Polarity was not manipulated as an experimental factor . All of the triads in the experiment were Same - polarity . That is , the polarity was the same in the standard and the relational choice . However , children received monotonicity from left to right in some triads and monotonicity from right to left in others . Kotovsky and Centner 2807 tal condition the triads were presented in the fixed order shown in Table 2 , and in the size - only control condition the triads were presented in the same fixed order except that the Same - dimension - color triads were re - placed with Same - dimension - size triads . These fixed orders were created by first blocking by dimension so that the Same - dimension trials came before the Cross - dimension trials and then choosing an order that seemed to facilitate alignment of struc - ture . The idea was to maintain the same higher - order relational match between suc - cessive trials , along with other commonali - ties where possible . For example , a sample Same - dimension sequence might be sym - metry in size , then symmetry in color , then monotonicity in color , then monotonicity in size , and so on . The Cross - dimension triads were also sequenced by higher - order rela - tions . As in Experiment 1 , no feedback was given in either condition . RESULTS As predicted , children in the experi - mental condition who performed well on the Same - dimension trials also performed well on the Cross - dimension trials . The chil - dren who scored above the median score ( 62 % , range = 38 % - 100 % ) on the Same - dimension trials responded relationally to 80 % of the Cross - dimension trials , as com - pared to 46 % for the children who scored at or below the median on the Same - dimension trials . A chi - square analysis using a median split on both the Same - dimension and the Cross - dimension ( Mdn = 62 % , range = 25 % - 88 % ) trials supported the association between these two variables , x 2 U ) = 12 . 03 , p < . 005 . As Table 3 shows , the relation is TABLE 3 NUMBER OF CHILDREN PERFORMING ABOVE AND BELOW THE MEDIANS ON THE SAME - DIMENSION AND CROSS - DIMENSION TRIALS IN EXPERIMENTS 2 AND 1 CROSS - DIMENSION SAME - DIMENSION Experiment 2 : Experimental condition : BelowAbove Control condition : BelowAbove Experiment 1 : Below , Above . . . Below 70 23 54 Above 05 34 12 quite strong . All 12 of the children in the experimental condition fell into the two pre - dicted cells ( above - above and below - below ) . That is , children who were above the me - dian on the Same - dimension triads were above the median on Cross - dimension tri - ads , and those below the median on Same - dimension triads were below the median on Cross - dimension triads . In contrast to the experimental condi - tion , the size - only control condition showed no reliable relation between performance on the Same - and Cross - dimension trials , x 2 ( l ) = 0 . 01 , p > . 50 ( see Table 3 ) . Children who scored above the median on the Same - dimension trials ( Mdn = 100 % , range = 25 % - 100 % ) responded relationally to 52 % of the Cross - dimension trials , as compared to 50 % relational responding for children who scored at or below the median . Thus it TABLE 2 ORDER OF TRIADS IN THE EXPERIMENTAL CONDITION OF EXPERIMENT 2 Dimension samesamesamesamecrosscrosscrosscross Dimensionof Standard sizesizecolorcolorsizecolorsizecolor High - Order Relation monotonic - increase symmetrysymmetrymonotonic - increase symmetrysymmetrymonotonic - increase monotonic - increase NOTE . —The children received two of each of the eight triad types . 2808 Child Development does not appear that the improvement in the experimental group is due simply to practice with easy triads . A further test of the Progressive Align - ment predictions is to compare the experi - mental group , which received the eight con - crete Same - dimensional matches before the eight Cross - dimensional matches , with the subjects in Experiment 1 , who received the same 16 triads in mixed order . An analysis of the results of Experiment 1 revealed that performance on the Same - dimension trials did not predict performance on the Cross - dimension trials . The children who scored above the median ( 62 % , range = 38 % - 88 % ) on the Same - dimension trials responded relationally to only 48 % of the Cross - dimension trials . This was no better than the 50 % relational responses on Cross - dimensional trials produced by the children who scored at or below the median on the Same - dimension trials ( see Table 3 ) . A chi - square analysis failed to indicate any rela - tion between Same - dimension and Cross - dimension performance , X 2 ( l ) = 0 . 44 , p > . 15 . To compare all three of these groups , we performed a 3 x 2 ANOVA including condition ( experimental , control , or Experi - ment 1 ) and Same - dimension - performance ( above or below median ) as between - subjects factors , and percentage correct on the Cross - dimension trials as the dependent variable . The analysis revealed reliable main effects of both condition , F ( 2 , 30 ) = 3 . 34 , p < . 05 , and Same - dimension - perfor - mance , F ( l , 30 ) = 5 . 17 , p < . 04 , and a reli - able interaction between condition and Same - dimension - performance , F ( 2 , 30 ) = 5 . 35 , p < . 02 . Inspection of the means ( re - ported again here for convenience ) revealed a marked contrast . The children in the ex - perimental condition in Experiment 2 who performed above the median on the Same - dimension trials responded most relationally to the Cross - dimension trials ( M = 80 % ) . The other five groups showed uniformly low relational responding on the Cross - dimension trials ( Ms ranged from 46 % to 52 % ) . Three pairwise Bonferroni contrasts compared the above - and below - median groups in each condition . As predicted , only in the experimental condition in Experiment 2 , where Same - and Cross - dimension were blocked and both size and saturation trials were presented in the Same - dimension block , did Same - dimension performance predict Cross - dimension performance . A fi - nal contrast found a reliable difference be - tween the above - median group in the exper - imental condition in Experiment 2 and the other five groups . The family alpha for the contrasts was p < . 01 . DISCUSSION The results of the experimental condi - tion in Experiment 2 are consistent with the claim that repeated experience with con - crete triads led to an increase in the chil - dren ' s ability to recognize higher - order rela - tional similarity . This pattern of results is not likely to have been produced by simple task practice effects , as discussed above . It also seems unlikely that the pattern could have resulted from individual differences . If the association between Same - dimension and Cross - dimension trials in the experimental condition were due to the fact that certain talented children simply performed well across the board ( perhaps because they en - tered the task already attuned to relational similarity ) , then we should have been such an association in the control condition and in Experiment 1 , but as described above , this was not the case : In neither case did performance on concrete trials predict per - formance on abstract trials . A further argu - ment against the individual differences explanation comes from examining perfor - mance on the Same - dimension trials . The median score for the experimental condi - tion of Experiment 2 was no higher than that for Experiment 1 ( 62 % in both ) , and was considerably lower than that for the size - only control condition ( 100 % ) . Thus , it is not the case that the children in the experimen - tal condition were simply " smarter " from the start . Individual differences do not ap - pear to account for the pattern of results . Together these results suggest that only the children who successfully aligned and extracted the relational structure of both di - mensions prior to the Cross - dimension trials were able to perform relationally on these trials . Children who received Same - and Cross - dimension trials mixed together , or re - ceived only size / size trials prior to the Cross - dimension trials , were unable to rec - ognize the higher - order match on the Cross - dimension trials . The results are not consis - tent with explanations based on individual differences and / or practice effects . Although the number of participants in this experi - ment was not large ( N = 24 ) , the pattern of results is intriguing . It suggests that the pro - cess of carrying out concrete similarity com - parisons on both dimensions—the process of aligning , highlighting , and re - repre - Kotovsky and Gentner 2809 senting the relational structure—pro - duced a felicitous condition for the exper - iential detection of higher - order common - alities . A key claim of the knowledge - change view is that learning about domain relations facilitates the recognition of relational simi - larity . If this is true , then we should still see this facilitation if children are taught the do - main relations by another means . One par - ticularly interesting route is the use of rela - tional language . We conjected that providing labels for the higher - order relations might increase the salience of the common rela - tional structure of the stimuli . Giving chil - dren labels has proven effective in improv - ing performance of children in a variety of tasks . There is a vast amount of research demonstrating that noun labels can call at - tention to object categories , overriding com - peting associations ( e . g . , Gelman & Mark - man , 1987 ; Markman , 1989 ; Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Waxman & Gelman , 1986 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . Gentner ( 1982 , in press ) has speculated that such effects may be stronger for relational terms than for nominal terms . There is evidence that naming relational cat - egories can make them more salient . For ex - ample , Rattermann and Gentner ( 1996 ) have shown that labeling three objects of increas - ing size " baby , " " mommy , " and " daddy " improves children ' s performance in an ana - logical mapping task where the relation they must attend to is " monotonic increase " ( see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner et al . , 1995 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1996 ) . In Experiment 3 , we investigated whether learning labels for higher - order re - lational categories would improve children ' s ability to perceive relational similarity . We taught a group of 4 - year - olds to label and categorize the higher - order relations of sym - metry and monotonicity and then tested them in the triads task . To maximize the chance of children learning the correct map - ping of the relational label , we used a rich training technique . First , we introduced the children to a " picky penguin " ( Waxman & Gelman , 1986 ) and labeled the relational structure . For example , for symmetry we said , " This is a very picky penguin and he only likes things that are even . " We then presented the children with figures that were either symmetrical or nonsymmetrical ( e . g . , the relational and the nonrelational choices from Experiment 1 ; see Fig . 1 ) . We asked the children what the picture was called ( labeling ) and whether the penguin that only likes even things would like the picture ( categorization ) . Then we gave the children feedback as to whether they had categorized correctly . If the children were correct we continued with the next trial . If they were wrong we gave them an explana - tion ( e . g . , we pointed out the symmetrical pattern and explained why the figure was even ) . Because we wanted to separate the pos - sible benefits of gaining relational knowl - edge from those of comparison and align - ment , one training technique we did not utilize was to invite comparison of the fig - ures ; instead we presented the items one at a time . After this training , children were pre - sented with the eight Cross - dimension tri - ads from Experiment 2 . The question was whether training on the higher - order rela - tions would lead to increased relational per - formance on the Cross - dimension compari - sons . The plan was to compare performance on the categorizing and labeling training to performance on the Cross - dimension triads task . Experiment 3 METHOD Participants and Materials The participants were 12 4 - year - olds , six boys and six girls ( mean age 4 - 6 , range = 4 - 1 to 5 - 0 ) . The stimuli were the 16 triads used in Experiment 2 . Each figure from the eight Same - dimension triads was presented one at a time , creating 24 training items , 12 for symmetry and 12 for monotonicity . Be - cause the stimuli were formed from the tri - ads , each of the two sets of 12 contained eight examples of the higher - order relation ( e . g . , xXx ) and four distractor patterns ( e . g . , xxX ) . We also used a toy penguin and walrus and two plastic baskets as part of the training task . ProcedureTraining : Labeling and categoriz - ing . —The child was seated at a table in front of the toy penguin and the two baskets , one near the penguin and one on the other side of the table . The experimenter told the child that the penguin was very picky and only liked things that were " even . " The child was told to put the even things in the picky penguin ' s basket and the things that were not even in the other basket . Then chil - dren were given the 12 symmetry training cards one at a time and asked , " Do you know 2810 Child Development what this is ? " The experimenter reminded the child that the picky penguin only liked things that were even and asked whether the picky penguin would like the card on the table . The child then put the card in one of the baskets . If the choice was correct , the experimenter said , " That ' s right , that one was even " ; if incorrect , the experimenter re - trieved the card and explained in detail why the answer was wrong ( e . g . , " No , that one is not even . See , that one has two little ones together and to be even , it would have to have two the same on the outside and a dif - ferent one in the middle . In this one , the different one is on the side . This is some - thing else , so let ' s put it in the other basket " ) . This procedure was repeated for each of the figures from the Same - dimension - sym - metry triads . Then the penguin was taken away and the child was introduced to a picky walrus who only liked things that were " more and more . " The same procedure was then repeated for the 12 monotonicity cards , using the label " more and more . " Test : Cross - dimension triads . —After the categorization training , the child was told that it was time to play a different game . The triads task was conducted in the same man - ner as in Experiment 1 . After the two train - ing triads and one filler triad , the child re - ceived the eight Cross - dimension triads with one filler triad after the first four triads . The triads were presented in a fixed order designed to facilitate transfer as determined by pilot testing : first , the four symmetry tri - ads and then the four monotonicity triads ( see the cross - dimension portion of Table 2 for exact order of presentation ) . As before , no feedback was given . RESULTS Categorization Task As predicted , children who did well on the categorization task tended to do well on the Cross - dimension triads task . Children who scored above the median ( 67 % , range = 42 % - 81 % ) on the categorization task re - sponded relationally to 67 % of the Cross - dimension trials , whereas children who scored at or below the median on the catego - rization task responded relationally to 52 % of the Cross - dimension trials ( chance = 50 % ) . As in Experiment 2 , a median - split analysis was performed . Ten of the 12 chil - dren fell into the predicted cells ( below - below and above - above , see Table 4 ) . A chi - square analysis confirmed the noninde - TABLE 4 NUMBER OF CHILDREN PERFORMING ABOVE AND BELOW THE MEDIANS OF THE CATEGORIZATION TASK AND THE TRIAD TASK IN EXPERIMENT 3 TRIAD TASK CATEGORIZATION TASK Below Above BelowAbove 62 04 pendence of performance on these two tasks , X2 ( l ) = 6 . 00 , p < . 025 . Production of Labels Overall , there were very few produc - tions of the labels . Of the 12 children in the experiment , five did not correctly label any of the 24 items , four produced two or three correct labels , and only three children pro - duced more than eight correct labels . Al - though this limited amount of production data does not permit firm conclusions , there was an interesting qualitative relation be - tween propensity to label and performance on the Cross - dimension triads task . The mean proportions correct were 55 % , 56 % , and 71 % for the children producing 0 , 2 - 3 , and 8 or more labels , respectively . DISCUSSION Learning to label and categorize higher - order relations enhanced 4 - year - olds ' recog - nition of those higher - order commonalities . Again , the number of participants was small ( N = 12 ) , and the gain in Cross - dimensional performance was not large , but in view of the relatively modest amount of experience the children had with the relational labels , the results are encouraging . These results buttress the knowledge - based account of the relational shift and the claim that children ' s increasing ability to notice relational simi - larity is due at least in part to their learning of higher - level relational categories . These results also raise the intriguing possibility that language learning—specifically , learn - ing the names of relational categories—may be a factor in the development of relational similarity ( see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . Experiment 4 In Experiment 4 , we returned to the Progressive Alignment hypothesis with the intent of creating a more definitive test . We showed in Experiment 2 that a relatively modest amount of experience with Same - Kotovsky and Gentner 2811 dimensional comparisons can facilitate chil - dren ' s performance on Cross - dimensional similarity . However , these benefits were limited to those children who did well on the Same - dimension trials , raising the con - cern that the apparent training effects might result from certain children being advanced on both tasks . Against this possibility is the fact that , as discussed above , this positive relation between performance on the Same - dimension and Cross - dimension tasks was found only when the former preceded the latter ( in Experiment 2 ) , and not when the two kinds of trials were mixed together ( in Experiment 1 ) . However , a more convincing demonstration of the hypothesis would be to show that , across the board , giving children more insight into the Same - dimension task will improve their performance on the Cross - dimensional task . Therefore , in Ex - periment 4 we trained children to a criterion on the Same - dimension triads and used a pretest - posttest comparison to see if this training led to the predicted gain in Cross - dimension performance . A second goal of Experiment 4 was to check for a possible problem with the stim - uli in the prior studies . The children ' s task was to choose whether the relational choice or the nonrelational choice was a better match for the standard . However , because the matching relational items were always examples of either symmetry or monotonic - ity , children might simply have learned to choose the " good " pattern ( either symmetry or monotonicity ) over the other alternative ( the nonrelational choice , which was always a permuted pattern of the same component objects ) . It is even conceivable that children sometimes remembered and chose the same items on the Cross - dimension task as they had chosen on the Same - dimension task . That is , children might simply be learning to select certain response alternatives or classes of alternatives ( the " good " relations ) , rather than carrying out a cross - dimensional comparison with the standard . In either case , children ' s responding would have mimicked successful Cross - dimensional comparison without such comparisons actu - ally occurring . To eliminate these possibilities , in Ex - periment 4 , the response alternatives for the Cross - dimension triads were altered . In - stead of choosing between a relational alter - native and a nonrelational alternative , chil - dren were given a monotonicity alternative and a symmetry alternative . Thus they had to choose between two good relational alter - natives , only one of which matched the stan - dard ( see Fig . 5 ) . Since children had experi - enced both these patterns as the best match equally often in the Same - dimension train - ing , the strategy of picking a known pattern would not work . There was no way to choose the correct relational pattern without com - paring the alternatives to the standard . To establish a baseline , we first gave the 4 - year - olds a pretest using the new kind of Cross - dimension triads . This was followed by a training procedure on the Same - dimension triads in both dimensions , after which we again tested children on the new Cross - dimension triads . In the Same - dimension training , we were careful to use only terms specific to the particular dimen - O 0O Standard Matching Relational Choice Non - matching Relational Choice FIG . 5 . —Sample of Cross - dimension triads used in Experiment 4 2812 Child Development sion . We know from Experiment 3 that Cross - dimensional performance can be facil - itated by giving children common abstract labels ( such as " even " or " more and more " ) that invite them to perceive the cross - dimensional relational abstraction . Here we are interested in a pure test of the Progres - sive Alignment hypothesis that experience aligning within dimensions promotes align - ment of the same relational structure across dimensions . We therefore avoided giving children domain - general abstractions in or - der to see whether they could arrive at the abstraction for themselves . Thus , the experi - menter took care to use dimension - specific terms such as " darker " or " bigger " rather than terms that could apply to both size and saturation , such as " more " for monotonicity . The hypothesis was that insight into the Same - dimension triads would make chil - dren better able to recognize the pure higher - order commonalities in the Cross - dimension triads . METHOD Participants The participants were 11 4 - year - olds , five boys and six girls ( mean age 4 - 6 , range = 4 - 0 to 5 - 0 ) . Three additional children were tested and replaced . One child was eliminated due to failure to meet criterion ( see Training ) , one due to experimenter er - ror , and one due to poor performance on the filler trials ( more than one incorrect ) . Design and Materials The dependent measure was posttest Cross - dimension performance compared to pretest Cross - dimension performance . The eight Same - dimension triads were the same as those used in Experiments 1 and 2 . The eight Cross - dimension triads were like those used in Experiments 1 and 2 except that the nonrelational choice was replaced by a non - matching relational choice ( see Fig . 5 ) . This new figure depicted either symmetry or monotonicity ( whichever was not depicted in the standard and the matching relational choice ) . In order to control object - level simi - larity , the foil ( i . e . , the nonmatching rela - tional choice ) utilized the same objects as the matching relational choice , insofar as possible . For example , if the matching rela - tional choice was a symmetrical pattern of blue circles ( light dark light ) , the foil was a monotonically increasing pattern of blue circles ( light medium dark ) . The training and filler triads were identical to those used in the previous experiments , except that two filler triads were added . ProcedurePretest . —Children were given two training trials , a filler trial , and then four Cross - dimension trials with a filler trial be - tween the first and last two . There was no feedback . Training . —After the pretest , children were trained to a criterion on the eight Same - dimension triads . After each trial the child was given feedback and a " same - dimension explanation " if needed . If the child chose the relational choice , the experi - menter said , " That ' s right ! Let ' s try another one . " If the child chose the nonrelational choice , the experimenter said , " That is not quite right . I think it would go better here . Let me show you how to figure it out . " Then the experimenter would explain the correct choice using terms specific to the dimension that was involved in the comparison ( size or color saturation ) . The experimenter used di - mension - specific terms such as " dark " or " bigger " and avoided domain - general terms that apply to both size and saturation , such as " more " for monotonicity or " even " for symmetry . For example , in a same - dimension explanation , the Experimenter might point to a symmetrical standard and say , " See , this one has two little ones on the sides and a big one in the middle . And see [ pointing to the relational choice ] , this one has two little ones on the sides and a big one in the middle . That is why this one goes with this one . This one [ pointing to the nonrela - tional choice ] is not right because it has two little ones here and a big one on the side . Let ' s try another one ! " The criterion for the training trials was seven out of the eight Same - dimension trials correct . If a child got more than one trial wrong , the entire set of eight trials was re - peated . This was continued until the child met the criterion ( nine children ) or until the experimenter judged the child to be getting frustrated with the task . In this case , the ex - perimenter repeated only the incorrect tri - ads until the child got them all correct . Three children fell into this category . Fi - nally , one child was unable to meet this cri - terion and was dropped from the analyses . The 11 children included in the analyses reached the criterion in an average of 15 . 4 training trials ( range = 8 - 24 trials ) . Test . —After completing the training task , the children were presented with the eight Cross - dimension triads . All of these tri - ads had two " good " relational choices . Four of these triads were identical to the Cross - dimension triads in the Pretest and four Kotovsky and Centner 2813 were new . The triads were presented in the same manner as in previous experiments . No feedback was given . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Pretest The first question was how the children would initially perform on the new kind of Cross - dimension trial ( with two " good " rela - tion choices ) . As in the prior studies , the 4 - year - olds initially showed no ability to choose the matching higher - order pattern . They chose the matching relational response on 41 % of the Cross - dimension trials : chance = 50 % ; * ( 10 ) = 1 . 07 , p > . 15 , one - tailed . Test As predicted , relational selectivity was elevated on the Cross - dimension trials fol - lowing the Same - dimension training trials . Ten of the 11 children performed more rela - tionally in the posttest than in the pretest . Overall , the children chose the matching re - lational response on a mean of 74 % of the Cross - dimension trials . This was reliably above the pretest performance , £ ( 10 ) = 5 . 39 , p < . 0005 , one - tailed , and also reliably above chance , t ( lQ ) = 4 . 01 , p < . 003 , one - tailed . Consistent with the Progressive Alignment hypothesis , learning to align the Same - dimension triads improved children ' s recognition of the higher - order relational commonality in the Cross - dimension trials . General Discussion The present research suggests four con - clusions . First , there is support for the claim of a relational shift from early reliance on concrete similarity to later ability to per - ceive purely relational commonalities . Sec - ond , our findings support the claim that this development is driven by changes in do - main knowledge , rather than changes in global competence or processing capacity . Third , we found evidence that language learning—specifically , the acquisition of re - lational terms—can promote the develop - ment of relational comparisons . Finally , we found evidence that the process of similarity comparison itself is instrumental in this de - velopment . Although the number of partici - pants in each of the experiments was not large , the consistency in the overall pattern of the results across the four experiments provides converging support for these con - clusions . Based on these results , we conjec - ture that the acquisition of relational lan - guage and the process of relational comparison provide mutual bootstrapping that drives representational change . Knowledge and the Relational Shift According to the " career of similarity " framework put forward by Gentner and Rat - termann ( 1991 ) , children ' s very early simi - larity matches rely on massive overlap be - tween the items ; with experience they become able to appreciate partial similarity , with object matches preceding relational matches and in turn higher - order relational matches ( see also Gentner & Medina , 1996 ) . Our current findings support this account of the relational shift . For example , in Experi - ment 1 , we found that children could recog - nize relatively concrete similarity involving first - order as well as higher - order matches before they could take advantage of purely higher - order relational commonalities . Rec - ognition of higher - order relational similarity gradually emerged between the ages of 4 and 8 years . Further , we found that children ' s per - formance in the relational task could be im - proved by their gaining more knowledge of the domain relations . We found that even 4 - year - olds , who were unable to recognize pure higher - order matches in Experiment 1 , could perceive pure higher - order matches after training in the domain relations ( Exper - iment 3 ) or repeated experience with the concrete pairs ( Experiments 2 and 4 ) . These rapid changes provide strong evidence for a change of knowledge view of the develop - ment of relational ability ( Brown , 1989 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Goswami , 1992 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) , as opposed to matu - rational changes in global competence ( Pia - get et al . , 1977 ) or processing capacity ( Half - ord , 1987 , 1992 ) . Progressive Alignment According to the Progressive Alignment hypothesis , the process of carrying out a comparison , even a concrete comparison , leads to an alignment of representations ( Gentner & Markman , 1993 , in press ; Gold - stone , 1994 ; Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ; Medin , Gold - stone , & Gentner , 1993 ; Novick , 1988 ; Ross , 1984 , 1989 ; Schumacher , 1988 ) . Through this alignment the common relational struc - ture becomes more salient . Further , because individuals prefer to see similarity rather than dissimilarity ( e . g . , Krumhansl , 1978 ) , the process of comparison invites adjust - ments to promote better alignments , leading to an increase in the uniformity of the repre - sentations ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner et al . , 1995 ; Gentner & Wolff , in press ) . Progressive alignment acts as a kind of bootstrapping mechanism . As children make similarity comparisons in a domain , 2814 Child Development the representations of the relational struc - ture in the domain become highlighted and possibly more uniform ( see below ) . This in turn makes possible even more abstract , or analogical , comparisons . This cycle can be seen as a kind of disembedding or decontex - tualizing of relations from initially situated representations to representations that can be matched across domains . We found three lines of support for the Progressive Alignment hypothesis . First , in Experiment 2 , we found that giving 4 - year - olds a very small amount of concentrated ex - perience comparing figures that were similar enough for them to align ( the four same - dimension - size comparisons and the four same - dimension - saturation comparisons ) al - lowed these children to recognize subse - quently abstract relational similarity that 4 - year - olds without the experience could not recognize . This occurred without feedback . Further , the gain could not be attributed to a general practice effect , for no such benefit occurred for children who received eight size - size comparisons . In order for 4 - year - olds to recognize abstract higher - order com - monalities , general practice in making com - parisons was not enough ; the results suggest that the relational structure in both of the participating dimensions needed to be aligned and highlighted . Finally , in the fol - low - up study to Experiment 1 , we found that this pattern of concrete alignment promoting abstract alignment held for polarity as well as for dimensional alignment . These results support progressive alignment as a mecha - nism of experiential learning . There is additional evidence that com - parison experiences can lead to recognition of further similarity . Namy , Smith , and Gershkoff - Stowe ( in press ) found that 2 - year - olds more readily learned how to cate - gorize two sets of like objects if they were given opportunities to compare the objects . Uttal , Schreiber , and DeLoache ( 1995 ) found that 4 - year - olds were able to solve a difficult delayed version of the DeLoache ( 1987 ) room - to - model mapping task ( in which children search for a hidden toy by finding the object in one room that corre - sponds to a designated object in another , smaller room ) if they had first experienced a version in which they were allowed to search immediately . Children in the imme - diate search task had perhaps achieved an alignment of the two spaces which they could then preserve under more difficult cir - cumstances . In a study by Marzolf and De - Loache ( 1994 ) , children were better able to make the correspondence between a room and a rather dissimilar model after experi - ence with a room and a highly similar model . Re - representation How might concentrated experience in alignment within each of the two di - mensions potentiate subsequent cross - dimensional alignment ? We conjecture that the relations here are initially represented in a domain - specific manner ( e . g . , darker than and bigger than ) . That is , for young children , the representation of a difference in magnitude is bound up with the dimen - sion of difference . Some kind of decomposi - tion is required in order to see these patterns as alike : for example , re - representing the differences in a manner that separates the comparison and the dimension ( i . e . , great - er [ darkness ( a ) , darkness ( b ) ] ) . The idea is that such a re - representation makes it easier to notice the commonality between change in size and change in darkness , thus permit - ting cross - dimensional alignment . This idea is related to work within lexical semantics that seeks lexical entries capturing the en - tailments of a word ( e . g . , Lakoff , 1987 ; McCawley , 1968 , 1972 ; Norman & Rumel - hart , 1975 ; Schank & Abelson , 1977 ) . Our claims about re - representation are related to Karmiloff - Smith ' s ( 1991 , 1992 ) theory that representational redescription allows initially implicit procedural knowl - edge to become available explicitly . How - ever , there are some differences . First , the scale of the changes discussed here is more local than in Karmiloff - Smith ' s discussion . Whereas Karmiloff - Smith emphasized meta - level insights into one ' s own processes , we see a role for re - representation even at the simple content level . We suggest also that the accumulation of many small , content - level adjustments may potentiate larger in - sights . Second , our research focuses on mechanisms of re - representation , using computational models from analogy and case - based reasoning ( Burstein , 1983 ; Fal - kenhainer , 1988 , 1990 ; Falkenhainer , For - bus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Forbus & Oblinger , 1990 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Kass , 1989 ; Kass & Leake , 1987 ; Kolodner & Simpson , 1989 ; Novick , 1988 ; Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ; Schank & Leake , 1989 ) . Third , whereas Karmiloff - Smith proposes that rede - scription processes begin only after behav - ioral mastery is attained in a given domain , we assume that alignment and re - representation happen from the start . The reason that re - representation does not seem to be occurring in very young children is that their earliest representations are so richly embedded in concrete detail , and so lacking Kotovsky and Centner 2815 in higher - order abstractions , that only the most conservative similarity matches can be made . Hence these early matches and their resulting inferences are often so mundane as to escape adult notice . Nonetheless , we suggest that they pave the way for the more dramatic comparisons to come . Computational Modeling We have hypothesized that an articula - tion or decomposition of the representation could lead to better recognition of abstract higher - order commonalities . Is this hypothe - sis reasonable ? It is difficult to assess the exact form of a human subject ' s representa - tion . Moreover , since both representations and processing modes can change over the course of children ' s development , it is diffi - cult to assign causality . Therefore , we used a computational model to keep the process of comparison fixed while varying the knowledge representation on which it oper - ates . If the postulated changes in knowledge representation produce the observed changes in children ' s similarity perfor - mance , this is evidence that change - of - knowledge could provide a sufficient expla - nation for the observed effects . We used the Structure - Mapping Engine ( SME ) developed by Falkenhainer , Forbus , and Gentner ( 1986 , 1989 ) , a computational model that simulates the similarity compari - son process specified by structure - mapping theory ( Gentner , 1983 ) . SME is given prepo - sitional representations of two situations and produces a favored mapping ( a maximal structural alignment ) . ( SME also has infer - ential and incremental mapping capabilities not germane to the present simulation ; see Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ; Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 . ) In the present case , we gave SME representations of the standard and the relational choice in all four of the mono - tonic - increase triad types ( Same - dim / Same - pol , Same - dim / Opposite - pol , Cross - dim / Same - pol , and Cross - dim / Opposite - pol ; see Gentner et al . , 1995 ) and it produced map - pings indicating its preferred correspon - dences between the three objects in the standard ( e . g . , the small , medium , and large squares ) and the three objects in the rela - tional choice ( e . g . , the light , medium , and dark circles ) . The critical manipulation was the kind of representations given to SME . We specu - lated that the younger children represented magnitude difference in a dimension - specific way ( e . g . , A is taller than B ) . In contrast , we assumed that the older chil - dren—and the younger children after training—could represent magnitude in a di - mension - general manner that separates the specific dimension out of the magnitude comparison ( e . g . , A ' s size is greater than B ' s size ; see Fig . 6 ) . Although the same informa - tion is encoded , dimension - general repre - sentations more readily permit the recogni - tion of abstract change - of - magnitude ( i . e . , that one value is somehow " more " than an - other along their respective dimensions ) than do specific dimensional relations like " A is bigger than B " or " C is darker than D . " Such representations should permit the learner to see the common dimensional structure even in the more abstract cases , such as in cross - dimensional pairs . SME ' s mappings showed this to be the case . The dimension - general representa - tions received relational mappings for all four pairs . SME aligned the pairs on the ba - sis of common relational structure even when both the dimensions and polarities dif - fered . This parallels the performance of the 8 - year - olds in Experiment 1 , who were suc - cessful at making Cross - dim / Opposite - pol matches . In contrast , when SME was given domain - specific representations , it generally failed to produce a relational alignment . Since the representations did not make man - ifest the potentially common relational structure across the dimensions , SME was reduced to object matches or to positional alignments . Only in the most concrete case , the Same - dim / Same - pol comparison , did SME align dimensional magnitude relations in its mapping ( e . g . , TALLER to TALLER ) . This parallels the performance of the 4 - year - olds in Experiment 1 , who were at chance in their responding to all but the Same - dim / Same - pol comparisons . By their nature , these results cannot serve as proof that these changes occur in children . However , they do constitute an ex - istence proof that change of representa - tion —more specifically , re - representation of dmension - specific magnitude relations as ar - ticulated dimension - general magnitude re - lations—could account for the relational shift in our results . The results of the com - putational simulation show that re - representation can lead to substantial im - provement in relational insight while maintaining the same basic comparison process . One arena in which we speculate that re - representation is important is in dimen - sional learning . There is evidence that the acquisition of adult dimensional structures 2816 Child Development DMENSON X ) ( DIMENSION X ) ( DMBJSION X ) ( DIMENSION X FIG . 6 . —The top portion of the figure depicts a dimension - specific representation of height in - crease in which the dimension of height and the direction of change are embedded . The bottom portion of the figure depicts a dimension - general representation of monotonic increase in which the dimension and the direction of change are disembedded . See text for additional details . involves a shift from overall global similarity to more differentiated similarity ( Foard & Kemler - Nelson , 1984 ; Garner , 1978 ; Shepp , 1978 ; Smith , 1989 ; Smith & Kemler , 1977 ; Tighe & Tighe , 1968 ) characterized by con - sistent polar alignments across dimen - sions—for example , loud big , big more ( Smith & Sera , 1992 ) . We conjecture that over development children must not only learn separate perceptual knowledge into di - mensions but also come to see them as di - mensions , as possessing a coherent ( often at least ordinal ) structure ( see Zwislocki & Goodman , 1980 ) . Once dimensions are ex - tracted , it becomes possible to grasp struc - tural parallels across different dimensions : for example , cross - domain metaphoric sys - tems such as up / down good / bad and the others discussed by Lakoff and his col - leagues ( Gibbs & O ' Brien , 1990 ; Lakoff & Johnson , 1980 ; Turner , 1987 , 1991 ) . The Role of Language There is a considerable literature show - ing that labeling sets of objects can facilitate children ' s forming categories around those objects ( e . g . , Gelman & Markman , 1987 ; Imai & Gentner , 1993 ; Markman , 1989 ; Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Waxman , 1991 ; Waxman & Gelman , 1986 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . However , this research has focused almost exclusively on names for ob - jects . Based on Gentner ' s ( 1981 , 1982 ) rela - tional relativity argument that verbs and other relational terms are more linguistically shaped than are concrete noun categories , we speculate that the influence of language and labels may be much greater for rela - tional concepts than for common object cate - gories . Our investigations support the claim that learning relational category names can serve to highlight relational structure . Expe - rience labeling and categorizing the figures used in the study helped children to recog - nize the higher - order commonalities shared by the figures . It is worth noting that the amount of language training was rather mod - est : Children sorted eight instances and four noninstances of each pattern , and the experi - menter provided the label if the child could not . Nonetheless , the evidence from Experi - ment 3 suggests that language can facilitate attention to common relational structure . Additional research likewise suggests that language may be an important pathway to learning to think relationally . Smith and Sera ( 1992 ) gave children aged 2 through 5 a cross - dimensional triads task in which they had to decide , for example , whether a dark mouse matched with a big mouse or with a small mouse . They found that children ' s mapping preferences changed developmen - tally , and further that their preferences on a verbal version of the task , using the names of the dimensions , appeared to lead their preferences on a nonverbal perceptual matching task by 1 or 2 years . This suggested an influence of dimensional language on the development of dimensional structure and cross - dimensional mapping . Rattermann et al . ( 1989 ) gave 3 - year - olds a mapping task between two triads of objects monotonically decreasing in size ( see also Centner & Rat - termann , 1991 ; Centner et al . , 1995 ) . The children had to say which object in their set corresponded to a designated object in the experimenter ' s set , using a " same - relative - size " rule ( e . g . , choose the largest object in the set ) . The task was quite difficult , due to extraneous object similarities ( cross - mappings ) that competed with the relational mapping . For example , the experimenter ' s small , medium , and large objects might be a car , cup , and house , and the child ' s small , medium , and large objects an identical cup , an identical house , and a flower pot . Thus , when the largest object was designated in the experimenter ' s set ( the house ) , the child had to pass over the house in his or her set and choose the flower pot . Even with correc - tive feedback , 3 - year - olds were at chance on this task . However , when they were taught to use relational labels for the three objects ( e . g . , " Daddy , Mommy , Baby " or " big , little , tiny " ) they were able to learn the correct mapping , and even to transfer to new sets of objects , These results suggest that the acquisi - tion of relational language may promote the recognition of abstract relational similarity and the development of relational categories ( Centner & Medina , 1966 ; Centner & Rat - termann , 1991 ; Premack , 1983 ; Vygotsky , 1962 ) . Additional research might investigate the effect of more intensive training on the relational labels ( e . g . , training to a criterion ) , the longevity of such effects , and the gener - Kotovsky and Centner 2817 alizability of such relational language to other situations . Concluding Comments Our goal in this research was to study the learning processes by which children come to appreciate relational categories . Therefore we must ask whether this learning persists beyond the immediate session and whether these processes bear any resem - blance to processes occurring in the real world . On the first point we have some evi - dence from the follow - up study to Experi - ment 1 that the gains made from aligning the more concrete triads can endure for at least a few days . In this study , 4 - year - olds showed a transfer effect from the Same - polarity to the Opposite - polarity trials in spite of the fact that the Opposite - polarity trials were presented roughly 2 days after the Same - polarity trials . Further , Rattermann and Centner ( 1996 ) have found retention over several weeks of the relational learning in their " Daddy , Mommy , Baby " mapping task described above . A second issue is whether these kinds of comparison processes occur in children ' s natural processing . There is anecdotal evi - dence that they do . Dan Slobin ( personal communication , April 1986 ) reports a spon - taneous example from his daughter , Heida , then a well - traveled 3 - year - old . One day in Turkey she heard a dog barking and re - marked , " Dogs in Turkey make the same sound as dogs in America . . . . Maybe all dogs do . Do dogs in India sound the same ? " For Heida to arrive at this question , she had to have compared dogs from different coun - tries and noted that they sound the same . But the comparison goes further , for Slobin noted in his journal , " She apparently no - ticed that while the people sounded differ - ent from country to country , the dogs did not . " Thus Heida must also have compared people from different countries and noted that they typically sound different ( speak different languages ) ; and , finally , she must have aligned these two comparisons to draw the contrast , " As you go from country to country , people sound different but dogs sound the same . " Thus her own experiential comparisons led her to a deep question about the difference between human lan - guage and animal sounds . Our findings support progressive align - ment and re - representation as mechanisms by which children may come to recognize abstract relational similarity and form rela - tional categories . We further suggest that 2818 Child Development progressive alignment takes place naturally and spontaneously as children make similar - ity comparisons . It can be promoted by con - certed experience and by the use of common labels to call attention to the relational com - monalities . The process of making simple comparisons may be a path toward finding richer and deeper commonalities . References Billow , R . M . ( 1975 ) . A cognitive developmental study of metaphor comprehension . Develop - mental Psychology , 11 , 415 - 423 . Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 369—412 ) . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Brown , A . L . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1978 ) . Skills , plans , and self - regulation . In R . S . Siegler ( Ed . ) , Children ' s thinking : What develops ? ( pp . 3 - 35 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children ' s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure , Cognitive Develop - ment , 1 , 103 - 121 . Bryant , P . E . ( 1974 ) . Perception and understand - ing in young children : An experimental ap - proach . New York : Basic . Bryant , P . E . , & Trabasso , T . ( 1971 ) . Transitive inference and memory in young children . Na - ture , 232 , 456 - 458 . Burstein , M . H . ( 1983 ) . Concept formation by in - cremental analogical reasoning and debug - ging . Proceedings of the International Ma - chine Learning Workshop ( pp . 19 - 25 ) . Urbana : University of Illinois . Carey , S , ( 1985 ) . Conceptual change in childhood . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Carey , S . ( 1991 ) . Knowledge acquisition : Enrich - ment or conceptual change ? In S . Carey & R . Gelman ( Eds . ) , The epigeneais of mind : Es - says on biology and cognition ( pp . 257 - 291 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Case , R . ( 1987 ) . The structure and process of intel - lectual development . Special Issue : The neo - Piagetian theories of cognitive development : Toward an integration . International Journal of Psychology , 22 ( 5 - 6 ) , 571 - 607 . Chen , Z . , & Daehler , M . W . ( 1989 ) . Positive and negative transfer in analogical problem solv - ing by 6 - year - old children . Cognitive Devel - opment , 4 , 327 - 368 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 1981 ) . Knowledge development and memory performance . In M . Friedman , J . P . Das , & N . O ' Conner ( Eds . ) , Intelligence and learning ( pp . 221 - 230 ) . New York : Plenum . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 151 . Chipman , S . F . , & Mendelson , M . J . ( 1979 ) . Influ - ence of six types of visual structure on com - plexity judgments in children and adults . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 5 , 365 - 378 . Crisafi , M . A . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1986 ) . Analogical transfer in very young children : Combining two separately learned solutions to reach a goal . Child Development , 57 , 953 - 968 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1987 ) Rapid change in the sym - bolic functioning of very young children . Sci - ence , 238 , 1556 - 1557 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1989 ) . The development of rep - resentation in young children . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and be - havior ( Vol . 22 , pp . 1 - 39 ) . New York : Aca - demic Press . DeLoache , J . S . ( in press ) . Early symbol under - standing and use . In D . Medin ( Ed . ) , The psy - chology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 32 ) . New York : Academic Press . Elio , R . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1981 ) . The effects of category generalizations and instance similar - ity on schema abstraction . yo«rna / of Experi - mental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 7 , 397 - 417 . Falkenhainer , B . ( 1988 ) . Learning from physical analogies : A study of analogy and the expla - nation process ( Tech . Rep . No . UIUCDCS - R - 88 - 1479 ) . Urbana : University of Illinois , De - partment of Computer Science . Falkenhainer , B . ( 1990 ) . Analogical interpretation in context . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 69 - 76 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Centner , D . ( 1986 ) . The structure - mapping engine . Pro - ceedings of tlw Fifth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( pp . 272 - 277 ) . Los Al - tos , CA : Morgan Kauhnan . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Centner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algo - rithm and examples . Artificial Intelligence , 41 , 1 - 63 . Foard , C . F . , & Kemler - Nelson , D . G . ( 1984 ) . Ho - listic and analytic modes of processing : The multiple determinants oi perceptual analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Gen - eral , 113 , 94 - 111 . Forbus , K . D . , & Centner , D . ( 1986 ) . Learning physical domains : Toward a theoretical framework . In R . S . Michalski , J , G . Carbo - nell , & T . M . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Machine learn - ing : An artificial intelligence approach ( Vol . 2 , pp . 311 - 348 ) . Los Altos , CA : Kaufmann . Forbus , K . D . , Centner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . Kotovsky and Centner 2819 MAC / FAG : A model of similarity - based re - trieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 - 205 . Forbus , K . D . , & Oblinger , D . ( 1990 ) . Making SME greedy and pragmatic . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cogni - tive Science Society ( pp . 61 - 68 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaurn . Garner , W . R . ( 1978 ) . Aspects of a stimulus : Fea - tures , dimensions , and configurations . In E . Rosch & B , B . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categorization ( pp . 99 - 133 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum , Gelman , S . A , , & Markman , E . M . ( 1987 ) . Young children ' s inductions from natural kinds : The role of categories and appearances . Child De - velopment , 58 , 1532 - 1541 . Gentner , D . ( 1977a ) . Children ' s performance on a spatial analogies task . Child Development , 48 , 1034 - 1039 . Gentner , D . ( 1977b ) . If a tree had a knee , where would it be ? Children ' s performance on sim - ple spatial metaphors . Papers and Reports an Child Language Development , 13 , 157—164 . Gentner , D . ( 1981 ) . Some interesting differences between nouns and verbs . Cognition and Brain Theory , 4 , 161 - 178 . Gentner , D . ( 1982 ) . Why nouns are learned before verbs : Linguistic relativity versus natural par - titioning . In S . Kuczaj ( Ed . ) , Language devel - opment : Vol . 2 , Language , thought and cul - ture ( pp . 301 - 334 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoret - ical framework for analogy . Cognitive Sci - ence , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure map - ping : The relational shift . Child Develop - ment , 59 , 47 - 59 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 - 241 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . ( in press ) . Individuation , relational relativity , and early word learning . In M . Bowerman & S . Levinson ( Eds . ) , Conceptual development and language acquisition . Cam - bridge : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R , , Markman , A . , Levidow , B , B . , Wolff , P . , & Forbus , K . D . ( in press ) . Conceptual change via analogical reasoning : A case study of Johannes Kepler . journal of Learning Sciences . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1993 ) . Analogy - Watershed or Waterloo ? Structural alignment and the development of connectionist models of cognition . In S . J . Hanson , J . D . Cowan , & C . L . Giles ( Eds . ) , Advances in neural infor - mation processing systems ( Vol . 5 , pp . 855 - 862 ) . San Mateo , CA : Kauffman . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1995 ) . Analogy - based reasoning and conneetionism . In M . Ar - bib ( Ed . ) , The handbook of brain theory and neural networks . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( in press ) . Struc - ture - mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and the development of cognition . Manu - script submitted for publication . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Lan - guage and die career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspective on thought and language : Interrelations in de - velopment ( pp . 225 - 277 ) . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Rattennann , M . J . , & Campbell , R . ( 1996 ) . Evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : A reply to Goswami and Brown . Manuscript submitted for publi - cation . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Sep - arating retrievability and inferential sound - ness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524—575 . Gentner , D . , Rattennann , M . J . , Markman , A . B . , & Kotovsky , L . ( 1995 ) . Two forces in the de - velopment of relational similarity . In T . J . Si - mon & G . S . Haltord ( Eds . ) , Developing cog - nitive competence : New approaches to process modeling ( pp . 263 - 313 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 1C , 277 - 300 . Gentner , D . , & Wolff , P . ( in press ) . Metaphor and knowledge change . In A . Kasher & Y . Shen ( Eds . ) , Cognitive aspects of metaphor : Stud - ies in linguistics , literature , philosophy and psychology . Amsterdam : North Holland . Gibbs , R . W . , Jr . , & O ' Brien , J . E . ( 1990 ) . Idioms and mental imagery : The metaphorical moti - vation for idiomatic meaning . Cognition , 36 , 35 - 68 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema in - ducton and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psy - chology , 15 , 1 - 38 . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Similarity , interactive ac - tivation , and mapping . Journal of Experimen - tal Psychology : Learning , Memorij and Cog - nition , 20 , 3 - 28 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L , ( 1994 ) . Similar - ity , interactive - activation and mapping . In K . J . Holyoak & J . A . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Ad - vances in connectionist and neural computa - tion theory : Vol . 2 . Analogical connections ( pp . 321 - 362 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 2820 Child Development Goswami , U . ( 1989 ) , Refational complexity and the development of analogical reasoning . Cognitive Development , 4 , 251—268 . Goswami , U . ( 1991 ) . Analogical reasoning : What develops ? A review of research and theory . Child Development , 62 , 1 - 22 . Goswami , U . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning in chil - dren . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Goswami , U . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Melting chocolate and melting snowmen : Analogical reasoning and causal relations . Cognition , 35 , 69 - 95 . Halford , G . S . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping ap - proach to cognitive development . Special Is - sue : The neo - Piagetian theories of cognitive development : Toward an interpretation . In - ternational journal of Psychology , 22 ( 5 - 6 ) , 609 - 642 . Halford , G , S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive develop - ment . Human Development , 35 , 193 - 218 . Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) . Children ' s understanding : The development of mental models . Hills - dale , NJ : Erlbaum . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , Guo , J . , Gayler , R . W . , Wiles , J . , & Stewart , J . E . M . ( 1995 ) . Gonnectionist implications for processing ca - pacity limitations in analogies . In K . J . Holy - oak & J . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Advances in connec - tionist and neural computation theory : Vol . 2 . Analogical connections ( pp . 363 - 415 ) . Nor - wood , NJ : Ablex . Hayes - Roth , F . , & McDerrnott , J . ( 1978 ) . An inter - ference matching technique for inducing ab - stractions . Communications of the ACM , 21 , 401 - 411 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . A computa - tional model of analogical problem solving . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similar - ity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 242 - 266 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Imai , M . , & Centner , D . ( 1993 ) . Linguistic relativ - ity vs . universal ontology : Cross - linguistic studies of the object / substance distinction . Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic So - ciety . Karmiloff - Smith , A , ( 1991 ) . Beyond modularity : Innate constraints and developmental change , In S . Carey & R . Gelman ( Eds . ) , The epigene - sis of mind : Essays on biology and cognition ( pp . 171 - 198 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) , Beyond modularity : A developmental perspective on cognitive sci - ence . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kass , A . ( 1989 ) . Adaptation - based explanation : Ex - planation as cases . In A . M . Segre ( Ed , ) , Pro - ceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Machine Learning ( pp . 49 - 51 ) . San Mateo , CA : Kaufrnann . Kass , A , , & Leake , D . ( 1987 ) . A case - based ap - proach to building explanations for explana - tion - based learning . Unpublished manu - script , Department of Computer Science , Yale Universty , New Haven , CT . Kolodner , J . L . , & Simpson , R . L . ( 1989 ) . The ME - DIATOR : Analysis of an early case - based problem solver . Cognitive Science , 13 , 507 - 549 . Krumhansl , C . L . ( 1978 ) . Concerning the applica - bility of geometric models to similarity data : The interrelationship between similarity and spatial density . Psychological Revieu ) , 85 , 445 - 463 . Lakoff , G , ( 1987 ) . Women , fire and dangerous things : What categories reveal about the mind . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . The metaphori - cal structure of the human conceptual system . Cognitive Science , 4 , 195 - 208 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 431 - 467 . Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Categorization in chil - dren : Problems of induction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Markman , E . M . , & Hutchinson , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Chil - dren ' s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning ; Taxonomic versus thematic rela - tions . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 1 - 27 . Mar / olf , D . P . , & DeLoaehe , J . S . ( 1994 ) . Transfer in young children ' s understanding of spatial representations . Child Development , 65 , 1 - 15 . McCawley , J . D . ( 1968 ) . The role of semantics in a grammar . In E . Bach & R . T . Harms ( Eds . ) , Universal ^ in linguistic theory ( pp . 125 - 169 ) . New York : Holt , Reinhart & Winston . McCawley , J . D . ( 1972 ) . Kac and Shibatani on the grammar of killing . InJ . P . Kirnball ( Ed . ) , Syn - tax and semantics ( Vol . 1 ) . New York : Seminar . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 ( 2 ) , 254 - 278 . Medin , D , L . , & Kass , B . H . ( 1989 ) . The specific character of abstract thought : Categorization , problem - solving , and induction . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 5 , 189 - 223 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Namy , L . L . , Smith , L . B . , & Gershkoff - Stowe , L . ( in press ) . Young children ' s discovery ot spa - tial classification . Cognitive Development . Norman , D . A . , & Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1975 ) . Explor - ations in cognition . San Francisco : Freeman . Noviek , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 - 520 . Noviek , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathemati - Kotovsky and Centner 2821 cal problem solving by analogy . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 398 - 415 . Ortony , A . , Reynolds , R . E . , & Arter , J . A . ( 1978 ) . Metaphor : Theoretical and empirical re - search . Psychological Bulletin , 85 , 919 - 943 . Palmer , S . E . ( 1975 ) . Visual perception and world knowledge : Notes on a model of sensory - cognitive interaction . In D . A . Norman , D . E . Rumelhart , & The LNR Research Group ( Eds . ) , Explorations in cognition ( pp . 279 - 307 ) . San Francisco : Freeman . Pears , R . , & Bryant , P . ( 1989 ) . Transitive infer - ences in young children about spatial posi - tion . British Journal of Psychology , 81 , 497 - 510 . Piaget , J . , Montangero , J . , & Billeter , J . ( 1977 ) . La formation des correlate . In J . Piaget ( Ed . ) , L ' Abstraction reflechissante ( pp . 115 - 129 ) . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Premack , D . ( 1983 ) . The codes of man and beasts . Behavioral < Lr Brain Sciences , 6 , 125 - 167 . Rattermann , M . J . , & Centner , D . ( 1996 ) . Use of relational language improves children ' s per - formance on an analogy task . Manuscript in preparation . Rattermann , M . J . , Centner , D . , & DeLoache , J . ( 1989 , April ) . Effects of competing surface similarity on children ' s performance in an analogical task . Poster presented at the bien - nial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Kansas City , MO . Ross , B . H . ( 1984 ) . Remindings and their effects in teaming a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psy - chology , 16 , 371 - 416 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Remindings in learning and instruction . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 438 - 469 ) . New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Rovee - Collier , C . K . , & Fagen , J . W . ( 1981 ) . The retrieval of memory in early infancy . In L . P . Lipsett ( Ed . ) , Advances in infancy research ( Vol . 1 , pp . 225 - 254 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Schank , R . C . , & Abelson , R . P . ( 1977 ) . Scripts , plans , goals , and understanding : An inquiry into human knowledge structures . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Schank , R . C . , & Leake , D . ( 1989 ) . Creativity and learning in a case - based explainer . Artificial Intelligence , 40 , 353 - 385 . Schumacher , R . M . ( 1988 ) . Some determinants of analogical reminding . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Illinois , Cham - paign - Urbana . Shepp , B . E . ( 1978 ) . From perceived similarity to dimensional structure : A new hypothesis about perceptual development . In E . Rosch & B . B , LJoyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categori - zation ( pp . 135 - 167 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Smith , L . B , ( 1984 ) . Young children ' s understand - ing of attributes and dimensions : A compari - son of conceptual and linguistic measures . Child Development , 55 , 363 - 380 . Smith , L . B . ( 1989 ) . From global similarities to kinds of similarities : . The construction of di - mensions in development . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 146 - 178 ) . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Smith , L . B . ( 1993 ) . The concept of same . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child develop - ment and behavior ( Vol . 24 , pp . 216 - 252 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Smith . L . B . , & Kemler , D . G . ( 1977 ) . Develop - mental trends in free classification : Evidence for a new conceptualization of perceptual de - velopment . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 24 , 279 - 298 . Smith , L . B . , & Sera , M . D . ( 1992 ) . A develop - mental analysis of the polar structure of dimensions . Cognitive Psychology , 24 , 99— 142 . Thorndike , E . L . ( 1903 ) . Educational psychology . New York : Lemcke & Buechner . Tighe , T . J . , & Tighe , L . S . ( 1968 ) . Perceptual learning in the discrimination processes of children : An analysis of five variables in per - ceptual pretraining . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 77 , 125 - 134 . Turner , M . ( 1987 ) . Death is the mother of heauty : Mind , - metaphor , arid criticism . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . Turner , M . ( 1991 ) . Reading minds : The study of English in the age of cognitive science . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Tyrrell , D . J . , Stauffer , L . B . , & Snowman , L . G . ( 1991 ) . Perception of abstract identity / differ - ence relationships by infants . Infant Behavior and Development , 14 , 125 - 129 . Uttal , D . H . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 , April ) . Seeing through symbols ? Children ' s devel - oping understanding of graphic and linguis - tic representations of space ; Moving beyond theoretical clashes . Paper presented at the bi - ennial meetings of the Society for Research in Child Development , Indianapolis , IN . Uttal , D . H . , Schreiber , J . C . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Waiting to use a symbol : The effects of delay on children ' s use of models . Child Development , 66 , 1875 - 1889 . Vosniadou , S . ( 1987 ) . Children and metaphors . Child Development , 58 , 870 - 885 . Vosniadou , S . ( 1989 ) . Analogical reasoning as a mechanism in knowledge acquisition : A de - velopmental perspective , In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 413—437 ) . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Vygotsky , L . ( 1962 ) . Thought and language . Cam - 2822 Child Development bridge , MA : MIT Press . ( Original work pub - lished 1934 ) . Waxman , S . ( 1991 ) . Convergences between se - mantic and conceptual organization in the preschool years . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 107—145 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Waxman , S . , & Gelman , R . ( 1986 ) . Preschoolers ' use of superordinate relations in classification and language . Cognitive Development , 1 , 139 - 156 . Waxman , S . R . , & Hall , D . G . ( 1993 ) . The develop - ment of a linkage between count nouns and object categories : Evidence from fifteen - to twenty - one - month - old infants . Child Devel - opment , 64 , 1224 - 1241 . Waxman , S . , & Markow , D . G . ( 1995 ) . Words as invitations to form categories : Evidence from 12 - month - old infants . Cognitive Psychology , 29 , 257 - 302 . Winner , E . , Rosenstiel , A . K . , & Gardner , H . ( 1976 ) . The development of metaphoric un - derstanding . Developmental Psychology , 12 , 289 - 297 . Zwislocki , J . J . , & Goodman , D . A . ( 1980 ) . Ab - solute scaling of sensory magnitudes : A val - idation . Perception and Psychophysics , 28 , 28 - 38 .