ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Dual - Processing Accounts of Reasoning , Judgment , and Social Cognition Jonathan St . B . T . Evans Center for Thinking and Language , School of Psychology , University of Plymouth , Plymouth PL4 8AA , United Kingdom ; email : jevans @ plymouth . ac . uk Annu . Rev . Psychol . 2008 . 59 : 255 – 78 First published online as a Review in Advance on May 31 , 2007 The Annual Review of Psychology is online at http : / / psych . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 59 . 103006 . 093629 Copyright c (cid:2) 2008 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4308 / 08 / 0203 - 0255 $ 20 . 00 Key Words thinking , reasoning , decision - making , social cognition , dual - process theory Abstract This article reviews a diverse set of proposals for dual processing in higher cognition within largely disconnected literatures in cog - nitive and social psychology . All these theories have in common the distinction between cognitive processes that are fast , automatic , and unconscious and those that are slow , deliberative , and conscious . A number of authors have recently suggested that there may be two architecturally ( and evolutionarily ) distinct cognitive systems under - lying these dual - process accounts . However , it emerges that ( a ) there are multiple kinds of implicit processes described by different the - orists and ( b ) not all of the proposed attributes of the two kinds of processing can be sensibly mapped on to two systems as currently conceived . It is suggested that while some dual - process theories are concerned with parallel competing processes involving explicit and implicit knowledge systems , others are concerned with the inﬂuence of preconscious processes that contextualize and shape deliberative reasoning and decision - making . 255 AR Further Click here for quick links to Annual Reviews content online , including : • Other articles in this volume • Top cited articles • Top downloaded articles • AR’s comprehensive search A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256 FEATURES ATTRIBUTED TO DUAL PROCESSES AND SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258 Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258 Age of Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259 Functional Characteristics . . . . . . . . 261 Individual Differences . . . . . . . . . . . . 262 APPLICATIONS OF DUAL - PROCESS THEORIES IN DIFFERENT DOMAINS . . . . 263 Dual - Process Theories of Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263 Dual - Process Theories of Judgment and Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265 Dual - Process Theories of Social Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268 CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270 INTRODUCTION Dual - processing accounts of human behavior abound in cognitive and social psychology . So many authors have appealed to dual processes in so many different ways that it has proved a complex and challenging task to draw to - gether any coherent overview of this topic . The review is restricted to “higher” cogni - tive processes typically described as thinking , reasoning , decision - making , and social judg - ment , although selected work from outside of these domains is also included where directly relevant . For example , there is some refer - encetoworkinthepsychologyoflearningand memory , the philosophy of mind , and evolu - tionary psychology . What dual - process theories have in com - mon is the idea that there are two differ - ent modes of processing , for which I use the most neutral terms available in the literature , System 1 and System 2 processes ( Kahneman & Frederick 2002 , Stanovich 1999 ) . Almost all authors agree on a distinction between processes that are unconscious , rapid , auto - matic , and high capacity , and those that are conscious , slow , and deliberative . Different authors have proposed a number of names for the two kinds of thinking they contrast , some of which are shown in Table 1 . The la - bels are aligned in a manner consistent with generic dual - system theory ( see below ) un - der the headings System 1 and System 2 . De - spite the tidy way in which all these labels line up , readers should beware of inferring that there are necessarily just two systems or just two kinds of dual - processing theory for rea - sons that will become clear later . Some au - thors propose only dual - process distinctions without assumptions about underlying cogni - tive systems ; some propose parallel and some sequential relationships between the two pro - cesses , and so on . Attempts have been made to map vari - ous dual - process accounts into a generic dual - system theory ( Evans 2003 ; Evans & Over 1996 ; Stanovich 1999 , 2004 ) . A major issue for this review is to consider whether such a grand theory is sustainable , or whether , in spite of ﬁrst appearances , we need to classify dual - process theories as being of different and distinct kinds . I approach this question in part by considering the clusters of attributes sup - posedly belonging to System 1 and 2 , which have been extracted from the numerous dual - process theories to be found in the literature . Of course , not all authors have made explicit statements about all of these attributes , but when they do so , they tend to make comments that are remarkably consistent from theory to theory . These putative features of Systems 1 and 2 are somewhat arbitrarily grouped here into four categories ( see Table 2 ) and each is discussed in turn prior to the review of speciﬁc dual - process theories of higher cognition . It should be noted that the attributes listed in Table 2 do not include emotion , the dis - cussion of which is generally beyond the scope of this review . Although many authors ig - nore emotion altogether in the ﬁelds reviewed here , it is clear that emotional processing would be placed in the System 1 rather than 256 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Table 1 Labels attached to dual - processes in the literature , aligned on the assumption of a generic dual - system theory References System 1 System 2 Fodor ( 1983 , 2001 ) Input modules Higher cognition Schneider & Schiffrin ( 1977 ) Automatic Controlled Epstein ( 1994 ) , Epstein & Pacini ( 1999 ) Experiential Rational Chaiken ( 1980 ) , Chen & Chaiken ( 1999 ) Heuristic Systematic Reber ( 1993 ) , Evans & Over ( 1996 ) Implicit / tacit Explicit Evans ( 1989 , 2006 ) Heuristic Analytic Sloman ( 1996 ) , Smith & DeCoster ( 2000 ) Associative Rule based Hammond ( 1996 ) Intuitive Analytic Stanovich ( 1999 , 2004 ) System 1 ( TASS ) System 2 ( Analytic ) Nisbett et al . ( 2001 ) Holistic Analytic Wilson ( 2002 ) Adaptive unconscious Conscious Lieberman ( 2003 ) Reﬂexive Reﬂective Toates ( 2006 ) Stimulus bound Higher order Strack & Deustch ( 2004 ) Impulsive Reﬂective Table 2 Clusters of attributes associated with dual systems of thinking System 1 System 2 Cluster 1 ( Consciousness ) Unconscious ( preconscious ) Conscious Implicit Explicit Automatic Controlled Low effort High effort Rapid Slow High capacity Low capacity Default process Inhibitory Holistic , perceptual Analytic , reﬂective Cluster 2 ( Evolution ) Evolutionarily old Evolutionarily recent Evolutionary rationality Individual rationality Shared with animals Uniquely human Nonverbal Linked to language Modular cognition Fluid intelligence Cluster 3 ( Functional characteristics ) Associative Rule based Domain speciﬁc Domain general Contextualized Abstract Pragmatic Logical Parallel Sequential Stereotypical Egalitarian Cluster 4 ( Individual differences ) Universal Heritable Independent of general intelligence Linked to general intelligence Independent of working memory Limited by working memory capacity www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 257 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 System 2 list . Emotion is explicitly linked to the ﬁrst system in some dual - process accounts ( Epstein 1994 ) , implied by the neurological regionsidentiﬁedinothers ( Lieberman2003 ) , and speciﬁcally attributed to automatic pro - cesses in some recent accounts of social cog - nition ( Hassin et al . 2005 ) . Moreover , the idea that emotions play a key role in decision mak - ing is being developed in some contemporary work that contrasts a fast emotional basis for decisionmakingwithaslowerandmoredelib - erativecognitivebasis ( Haidt2001 , Hanoch & Vitouch 2004 , Wang 2006 ) . FEATURES ATTRIBUTED TO DUAL PROCESSES AND SYSTEMS Consciousness A central concern for philosophers of mind , the problem of consciousness is one that has engendered a resurgence of interest in re - cent years in psychology and neuroscience ( Velmans2000 ) . However , theconceptofcon - sciousness has had a somewhat checkered his - tory in psychology . Mentalism and introspec - tionism dominated philosophy of mind and early laboratory studies of the nineteenth cen - tury when psychology ﬁrst emerged as a dis - tinct discipline . Thereafter , a series of move - ments led instead to an emphasis on what is automatic and unconscious in the control of human behavior . These are sometimes de - scribed as the psychoanalytic , behavioral , and cognitive unconscious ( Uleman 2005 ) . Each refers to a movement that undermined the concept of consciousness and the explanation ( in scientiﬁc psychology ) of behavior in terms of conscious beliefs and desires . Freud and other psychoanalysts introduced the world to the notion of an unconscious mind motivat - ing our behavior with a combination of innate drives and repressed emotions as well as a con - scious mind prone to rationalization and self - deception . Behaviorists such as Watson , Hull , and Skinner demonstrated associative and in - strumental learning processes in both humans and animals in theories that apparently al - lowed no place for consciousness and mental - isticaccountsofbehavior . However , theemer - gence of cognitive science and the widespread acceptance of a computational theory of mind led in the later part of the twentieth century to theideaofacognitiveunconscious ( Kihlstrom 1987 , Reber 1993 ) in the form of complex in - formation processing in the brain that is con - ducted without conscious awareness . Some authors are now advocating a “new uncon - scious” that also incorporates motivation and emotion ( Hassin et al . 2005 ) . While the problem of what conscious - ness is may seem intractable , the study of its function and evolution seems more promis - ing . Dual - process theories of cognition effec - tively address the important question of the cognitive correlates of consciousness . The at - tributes listed for Systems 1 and 2 under Clus - ter 1 ( Table 2 ) all reﬂect the proposed dif - ferences between the cognitive unconscious and the cognitive conscious . Authors talk of processes that are explicit and controlled ( rather than implicit and automatic ) reﬂect - ing two key concepts of consciousness : aware - ness and volition . Consciousness is also in - herently slow , sequential , and capacity lim - ited . This might be taken to mean that folk psychological accounts of mind are adequate at the System 2 level provided the System 1 level of mind is also recognized ( Frankish 2004 ) . In other words , System 2 is a form of thinking under intentional level con - trol , supported by unconscious processes in System 1 that deliver percepts , memories , and so on . However , this happy state of af - fairs , which leaves “us” in control of our behavior , is contradicted by much psycho - logical research . Many researchers have em - phasized the fact that unconscious processes may control our behavior without us be - ing aware of them doing so , and that con - scious reasoning in System 2 is often used for the confabulation of explanations for these behaviors ( Evans & Over 1996 , Nis - bett & Wilson 1977 , Stanovich 2004 , Wason & Evans 1975 , Wilson 2002 , Wilson & 258 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Dunn 2004 ) . It appears that we use the concepts of belief - desire psychology to the - orize about our behavior as well as that of others . To muddy the waters further , some so - cial psychologists are claiming evidence of in - tentionality in unconscious processing ( Bargh et al . 2001 , Bargh & Ferguson 2000 ) . The distinction between automatic and controlled cognition has been extensively re - searched in the study of lower - order cogni - tion such as that involved in perception , at - tention , and the acquisition of motor skills , in a tradition dating from Schneider & Shiffrin ( 1977 ) and more recently linked with neuro - science ( Monsell & Driver2000 ) . Inthistradi - tion , automatic processes are typically viewed as having been “automated” from those that were once controlled and conscious , an ap - proach that seems to have had a strong inﬂu - ence on the development of dual - process ac - counts of social cognition ( Chaiken & Trope 1999 ) . However , as Sloman ( 2002 ) points out , this conception is too limited for the pur - poses of dual - process accounts of higher cog - nition , in which we may feel an experience of conﬂict between an intuition acquired from experience and a conscious piece of reason - ing . Moreover , there is a contrasting liter - ature on implicit learning ( Berry & Dienes 1993 , Reber 1993 , Sun et al . 2005 ) that pro - vides much evidence that people can acquire implicit knowledge , for example to predict or control a complex system , without ever knowing an explicit rule that they could state . Hence , the term “automatic” is used here sim - ply as a contrastive with “controlled , ” imply - ing no assumption about how such processes were acquired . An operational deﬁnition of conscious - ness that seems to have appeared ( often implicitly ) in dual - process theories is that System 2 thinking requires access to a cen - tral working memory system of limited ca - pacity , whereas System 1 does not . What we are aware of at a given time is represented in this working memory , through which con - scious thinking ﬂows in a sequential manner . This would seem to be a working memory of the kind originally described by Baddeley & Hitch ( 1974 ) , which has not only short - term memory capacity but also executive and in - hibitory functions , a theory that has engen - dered a huge research literature in its own right ( see Gathercole 2003 ) . ( Consciousness is also closely associated with working mem - ory in global workspace theory—see Baars & Franklin 2003 . ) The association of conscious thought with such a working memory explains the slow , sequential , and low - capacity nature of System 2 as well as its relation to individ - ual differences in cognitive ability ( see below ) . However , skepticsmayseethisastheonlyﬁrm foundation on which the various dual - process theories stand : There is one conscious work - ing memory system and everything else . Age of Evolution The idea that System 1 cognition evolved ear - lier than System 2 is a recurring theme in dual - process theories ( Evans & Over 1996 , Epstein & Pacini1999 , Reber1993 , Stanovich 1999 ) . System 2 is thought to be associated with language , reﬂective consciousness , and higher - order control and with the capacity to think hypothetically about future and coun - terfactual possibilities . Authors have often as - serted that such characteristics of thought are distinctively or uniquely human , while at the same time arguing that System 1 cognition , shared with other animals , continues to con - trol much of our behavior . However , there is considerable evidence of a distinction be - tween stimulus - bound and higher - order con - trol process in many higher animals ( Toates 2006 ) , including rodents , which could be seen as the biological foundations for the System 1 and 2 cognition in humans . There is also ev - idence that primates , especially chimpanzees , havethecapacityforhigher - ordermentalrep - resentations , manifest as rudimentary theory of mind ( Mithen 1996 , Whiten 2000 ) , albeit very limited in comparison with the ability of the human mind for meta - representation and higher - order intentionality . The proposal that System 1 cognition is evolutionarily old and shared with other www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 259 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 animals is also problematic because it is al - most certainly not one system with a single evolutionary history . There are a number of distinct possible types of implicit cognitive processes , including forms of learning , auto - maticity , modular cognition , and the prag - matic processes that have been particularly studied in dual - process theories of deduc - tive reasoning ( see below ) . The concept of cognitive modules was introduced by Fodor ( 1983 ) in a dual - process theory that distin - guished between input modules ( such as those involved in vision and language ) and gen - eral purpose , central cognition . Fodor pro - posed a number of strict criteria for mod - ules including the requirements that they are innate , domain - speciﬁc , have specialized and isolated databases ( knowledge encap - sulation ) , are neurologically localized , and are associated with speciﬁc disorders . Some schools of evolutionary psychology later ar - gued that the mind should consist mostly or entirely of domain - speciﬁc cognitive mod - ules , even when engaged in higher order reasoning ( Cosmides & Tooby 1992 , 1996 ; Pinker 1997 ; Samuels 1998 ; Sperber 1994 ; Tooby & Cosmides 1992 ) . This view included strong claims that domain - general processes would have little part to play in human cog - nition , such as that of Tooby & Cosmides ( 1992 , p . 112 ) : “ . . . there is a host of . . . rea - sons why content - free , general - purpose sys - tems could not evolve , could not manage their own reproduction , and would be grossly in - efﬁcient and easily outcompeted if they did . ” Notsurprisingly , this“massivemodularityhy - pothesis” has been strongly attacked by dual - process theorists ( Fodor 2001 , Over 2003 , Stanovich 2004 , Stanovich & West 2003 ) . More recent writings of evolutionary psy - chologists appear to have more compatibil - ity with dual - processing frameworks , how - ever , as they acknowledge the extraordinary and distinctive features of human higher cog - nition ( Cosmides & Tooby 2000 , Sperber 2000 ) . There has also been a recent trend to weaken the criteria for modules to make massive modularity a more credible hypoth - esis ( Barrett & Kurzban 2006 , Carruthers 2006 ) . It seems unsustainable to argue that there is just one form of implicit processing , in System 1 , all of which is evolutionarily old and shared with other animals . For example , we may have forms of modular cognition that are relatively old ( e . g . , vision , attention ) and others that are much more recent and distinc - tively human ( e . g . , language , theory of mind ) . Conditioning and other forms of associative learning appear to be ancient and shared with other animals , but forms of explicit memory , and in particular the human belief system , seem to be much more recent . However , al - though the notion that there are distinct im - plicit and explicit memory systems is central to a number of the dual - process theories that are considered in this review , it could well be an error to think of the latter as uniquely human in origin . There are powerful evolu - tionary arguments ( as well as neurological ev - idence ) for multiple systems of learning and memory in both humans and other animals ( Carruthers 2006 , Sherry & Schacter 1987 ) . For example , Sherry & Schacter ( 1987 ) , who interestingly referred to System 1 and 2 mem - ory , noted that “ . . . a strong case can be made for a distinction between a memory system that supports gradual or incremental learn - ing and is involved in the acquisition of habits and skills and a system that supports rapid one - trial learning and is necessary for forming memories that represent speciﬁc situations and episodes” ( p . 446 ) . Taken in conjunc - tion with the evidence of higher - order con - trol systems in animals ( Toates 2006 ) , these arguments suggest that dual - system theorists would be better off claiming that System 2 cognition is uniquely developed , rather than uniquely present , in modern humans . Such an argument also has much greater evolutionary plausibility . If Systems 1 and 2 incorporate different memory as well as reasoning systems , then it may be a mistake to assume that any inﬂu - ence of prior knowledge on reasoning neces - sarily arises in System 1 . For example , Goel 260 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 ( 2005 ) has questioned the idea that the “be - lief bias” in reasoning that theorists have as - sociated with System 1 processing ( Evans & Over 1996 , Stanovich 1999 ) could be ancient in origin or shared with animals that lack an explicit belief system . In support of this , he has evidence from neural imaging studies that belief bias arises in the prefrontal cortex , an area most strongly developed in the modern human brain ( Goel et al . 2000 , Goel & Dolan 2003 ) . However , a dual - system theorist can reply that although System 1 has much in common with animal cognition , it looks very different in a brain that has System 2 . Thus Stanovich ( 2004 , Chapter 2 ) , for example , suggests that goals that are acquired reﬂec - tivelythroughSystem2can , throughrepeated activation , be installed into rigid implicit pro - cessing mechanisms—a kind of automation of thought . This may be why Stanovich ( 2004 ) nowpreferstotalkaboutTASS—thesetofau - tonomous subsystems—rather than System 1 . Certainly , there seems to be little foundation in arguments based on age of evolution for the claim that all implicit processes belong— in any useful sense—to a single system . Functional Characteristics Along with already discussed attributes of System 1 as rapid and automatic and System 2 as slow and controlled go a number of func - tional differences attributed to the two kinds of cognition , as shown in Table 2 under Cluster 3 . It appears that conscious thought is inherently sequential , whereas many theo - rists suppose the rapid processing and high capacity of System 1 reﬂects use of paral - lel processes . System 1 has been character - ized as associative by Sloman ( 1996 , 2002 ; see also Smith & DeCoster 2000 ) , as con - trasted with rule - based cognition in System 2 . Those authors who are not focused on the idea of innate modules certainly empha - size the experiential nature of System 1 ( for example , Epstein & Pacini 1999 , Evans & Over 1996 , Reber 1993 ) , which could reﬂect implicit learning stored in functionally par - allel neural networks ( Dijksterhuis & Smith 2005 ; Smith & DeCoster 1999 , 2000 ) . How - ever , although the notion that System 2 is in some sense rule - based is compatible with the proposals of most dual - process theorists , the characterization of System 1 as associative is not . The problem , as already identiﬁed , is thattherearemultiplesystemsofimplicitpro - cesses and it is far from clear that the differ - ent theories can be mapped on to each at the System 1 end . In particular , theories that con - trast heuristic with analytic or systematic pro - cessing ( Chen & Chaiken 1999 , Evans 2006 ) seem to be talking about something different from associative processing . Other recurring themes in the writing of dual - process theorists are that System 1 processes are concrete , contextualized , or domain - speciﬁc , whereas System 2 processes are abstract , decontextualized , or domain - general . The notion that System 1 processes rapidly contextualize problems with prior knowledge and belief has been particularly emphasized in dual - process accounts of hu - man reasoning ( Evans 2006 , Klaczynski & Lavallee 2005 , Stanovich 1999 ) . Such authors assume that belief - based reasoning is the de - fault to which conscious effortful analytic rea - soning in System 2 may be applied to over - come . However , it may be unwise to deﬁne System 2 as being abstract and decontextual - ized if we also want to retain its description as slow , sequential , explicit , and rule - based be - causenoneofthesecharacteristicsmaybelim - ited to abstract forms of reasoning ( Sloman 2002 , Verschueren et al . 2005 ) . It would prob - ably be more accurate to say that although ab - stract reasoning requires the use of System 2 , concrete contexts do not preclude its application . The consideration that System 2 think - ing is not necessarily abstract and decontex - tualized is also one reason why it should not be equated with a mental logic . The idea that higher forms of thinking require a logic in the mind was popularized by Piaget ( see Inhelder & Piaget 1958 ) and is particularly as - sociated with the idea that people have natural www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 261 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 logics composed of inference rules in their minds ( Braine & O’Brien 1998a , Rips 1994 ) . However , the popular mental models theory of deductive reasoning ( Johnson - Laird 1983 , Johnson - Laird & Byrne 1991 ) can also be re - garded as a form of mental logic , accounting for deductive competence by semantic rather than syntactic principles ( Evans & Over 1996 , Oaksford & Chater 1995 ) . Whichever ac - count of deduction is preferred , it is clear that the System 2 concept is much broader than that of logical reasoning , including such ideas as an inhibitory role ( suppressing pragmatic inﬂuences of System 1 ) and the ability to engage in hypothetical thought via supposi - tion and mental simulations . This is prob - ably why most dual - process theorists prefer broader terms such as “analytic” or “system - atic” to describe the second system . Individual Differences Some dual - process theorists ( Reber 1993 , Stanovich 1999 ) have claimed a link between System 2 processing and general intelligence , with the corollary that System 1 processes are independentofgeneralintelligence . Thispro - posal has led to an increasing use of individ - ual differences methodology in dual - process research , as revealed in the sections below . In addition to linking the effectiveness of ana - lytic reasoning and decision making with gen - eral intelligence measures , researchers have also investigated two close correlates : work - ing memory and age of development . It is now well established that individual differences in working memory capacity and general intel - ligence measures are very highly correlated ( Colom et al . 2004 ) . Working memory capac - ity is known to predict performance levels in a verywiderangeofcognitivetasksandhasbeen directly linked with dual - process accounts of cognitive functions , albeit primarily at a lower level than those that form the focus of the current review ( Barrett et al . 2004 ) . Develop - mental studies are also relevant , as the analytic thinking skills that contribute to performance on general intelligence tests develop with age . However , it has recently been claimed that it is ability and not age that is the impor - tant predictor of analytic reasoning , which may explain some inconsistencies in devel - opmental research ( Kokis et al . 2002 ) . A fur - ther complication is that , as some researchers claim , System 1 may develop in parallel with System 2 ( Klaczynski 2000 , 2001 ) . Evolutionary psychologists such as Tooby & Cosmides ( 1992 ) have emphasized that their main interest lies in explaining intelli - gence that is universal and optimized across the human species . However , they have been stronglycriticized ( Stanovich1999 , Stanovich & West 2003 ) for downplaying the impor - tance of heritable characteristics , particularly that of general intelligence , in their discus - sion of higher - order cognitive processes such as reasoning and decision making . In general , oneofthestrongerbasesfordual - systemsthe - ory is the evidence that “controlled” cogni - tive processing correlates with individual dif - ferences in general intelligence and working memory capacity , whereas “automatic” pro - cessing does not . It seems at least to indicate that behavior may be controlled both with and without the use of executive working memory resources . An important distinction in the individual differencesapproachisthatbetweenmeasures of cognitive capacity and dispositional think - ing styles . The difference is between what people are able to do and what they are in - clined to do . Stanovich ( 1999 ) , for example , shows that residual variance in solution rates of reasoning and judgment task , when the effects of cognitive ability have been taken out , can be accounted for in terms of disposi - tions for critical thinking . Evidence for cross - cultural differences in thinking styles ( Nisbett et al . 2001 ) are also dispositional as they can alter when people move to another culture . In the social cognition literature , there has been much attention to individual differences in thinking style as measured by such scales as “need for cognition” ( Cacioppo & Petty 1982 ) or the rational - experiential inventory ( Epstein et al . 1996 ) . It is important to note 262 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 that the observation of two thinking styles in itself does not constitute evidence for dual processes arising from two distinct cognitive systems . APPLICATIONS OF DUAL - PROCESS THEORIES IN DIFFERENT DOMAINS Astheprecedingdiscussionillustrates , System 2 appears to be a more coherent and consis - tentconceptinthegenericdual - systemtheory than does System 1 because multiple systems of implicit cognitive processes exist ( Wilson 2002 , Stanovich 2004 ) . It is also likely that different dual - process theorists have different implicit systems in mind and that these sys - tems do not have a single evolutionary his - tory . I return to the issue of whether generic dual - system theory is sustainable at the end of the review . At this point , I look more closely at how dual - process theories are applied to the explanation of particular phenomena in higher cognition . Dual - Process Theories of Reasoning The psychology of deductive reasoning was largely established by the work of Peter Wason in the 1960s and 1970s ( see Wason & Johnson - Laird 1972 ) . Wason invented sev - eral famous tasks—including the four - card se - lection task—that are still used in current re - search . The ﬁeld has expanded rapidly over the past 40 years and changed its character as authors have become progressively less at - tached to the normative standard of formal logic and more interested in the inﬂuence of contextual factors invoking prior belief and knowledge ( Evans 2002 ) . Dual - process ideas developed quite early on , with the ﬁrst use of the term appearing in the title of a paper published by Wason & Evans ( 1975 ) . This pa - per focused on the ﬁnding that card choices on the selection task were strongly inﬂuenced by a seemingly primitive matching bias ( se - lecting cards explicitly mentioned in the con - ditional statement ) . Participants showed no awareness of this in their verbal reports , in - stead justifying their choices with regard to theexperimentalinstructionstoprovetherule true or false . Wason & Evans concluded that participants were rationalizing with their con - scious reasoning causes of behavior that were in fact unconscious . Their arguments were very much in accord with the famous critique of introspective reports presented by Nisbett & Wilson ( 1977 ) . The heuristic - analytic theory of reason - ing ( Evans 1989 ) shifted the emphasis of the heuristic processes responsible for biases to a pragmatic and preconscious level that pre - ceded any attempt at analytic processing . This theory is narrower in scope than typical dual - process theories and is strongly focused on the explanation of biases in reasoning and judg - ment tasks . The idea was that heuristic pro - cesses selectively focused attention on task features that appeared relevant , introducing relevant prior knowledge in the process . Since analytic processing could only be applied to these selective representations , biases would be observed when either ( a ) logically relevant information was excluded or ( b ) logically irrel - evant information was included by heuristic processing . The sequential nature of the heuristic - analytic theory contrasts with parallel and interactive forms of dual - process theory , al - though many of the proposed features of the two processes correspond to those of the generic System 1 and 2 : Heuristic processes are fast , automatic , and belief based , whereas analytic reasoning is slow , sequential , and can make an effort at deduction . In a recent re - formulation of the theory , Evans ( 2006 ) has sought to reconcile it with conﬂict models by the proposal that heuristic responses can con - trol behavior directly unless analytic reason - ing intervenes . In other words , heuristics pro - vide default responses that may or may not be inhibited and altered by analytic reasoning . Analytic system intervention may be cued by strong deductive reasoning instructions and may be more likely to occur when individu - als have high cognitive ability or a disposition www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 263 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 to think reﬂectively or critically ( Stanovich 1999 ) . For much of its recent history , the psychol - ogy of deductive reasoning has been dom - inated by a debate between proponents of mental logic theorists , who attribute deduc - tive competence to sets of abstract inference rules ( Braine & O’Brien 1998a , Rips 1994 ) , and mental model theorists ( Johnson - Laird 1983 , Johnson - Laird & Byrne 1991 ) , who ex - plain it in terms of a fundamental semantic principle : An argument is valid if there are no counterexamples to it . Although the writ - ings of mental logic and mental model theo - rists include little explicit discussion of dual - process theory , the distinction is implicitly present in the theories . Mental logic theo - rists ( for example , Braine & O’Brien 1998b ) make great play of the distinction between di - rect rules of inference , which are applied ef - fortlessly and accurately , and indirect rules , which require conscious effort and are much more error prone . They also explain errors in reasoning by reference to pragmatic implica - tures and other contextual effects . Similarly , the mental model theory describes the forma - tion of initial mental models as a relatively automatic and effortless process . The process of searching for counterexamples ( Johnson - Laird & Bara 1984 ) or the ﬂeshing - out of ini - tially implicit mental models ( Johnson - Laird & Byrne 2002 ) is , however , effortful and er - ror prone and constrained by working mem - ory capacity . Both theories include proposals that could account for pragmatic inﬂuences on reasoning and for the relation of reasoning accuracy to individual differences in cognitive capacity . The paradigm case for dual processes in reasoning is belief bias . In the standard paradigm , people are given syllogisms and asked to evaluate their logical validity . Syl - logisms vary in both their validity ( whether the conclusion follows from premises ) and their believability ( whether the conclusion conforms or conﬂicts with prior belief ) . Thus , some syllogisms are belief - logic compatible , but some provide conﬂict—valid arguments with unbelievable conclusions and invalid ar - guments with believable conclusions . The ba - sic phenomena of this paradigm were estab - lished by Evans et al . ( 1983 ) , whose ﬁndings have been replicated many times since ( see Klaueretal . 2000forarecentextensivestudy ) . There is ( a ) a main effect of logic , in that valid conclusions are more often accepted than in - valid conclusions , ( b ) a main effect of belief ( belief bias ) in that believable conclusions are much more often accepted , and ( c ) a belief by logic interaction , in that belief bias is much more marked on invalid syllogisms . In the original study , Evans et al . ( 1983 ) argued , on the basis of protocol analyses and the examination of individual response pat - terns , that there was a within - person conﬂict between a logical and belief - based reasoning process . They offered two explanations of the belief by logic interaction , which were later augmentedbyonederivedfrommentalmodel theory ( Oakhill et al . 1989 ) . More recently , accounts of the phenomena have been devel - oped that are strongly compatible with dual - processtheory ( e . g . , Klaueretal . 2000 ) . These accounts are supported by evidence of a shift from logical to belief - based reasoning under severe time pressure ( Evans & Curtis - Holmes 2005 ) and under concurrent working memory load ( De Neys 2006 ) . There has been considerable interest in how people reason on belief - logic conﬂict problems ; that is , the valid - unbelievable and invalid - believable syllogisms . Logical perfor - mance on such cases is known to decline with age ( Gilinsky & Judd 1994 ) and to be re - lated to individual differences in cognitive ability ( Kokis et al . 2002 , Newstead et al . 2004 , Stanovich & West 1997 ) . Stanovich ( 1999 ) argued on this basis that participants of higher cognitive ability are more able to in - hibit belief - based reasoning . However , avail - able data are more consistent with the view that although high - ability people reason more logically with belief - laden ( as well as abstract ) syllogisms , the belief bias effect is no less marked for them than for lower - ability peo - ple ( Klaczynski 2000 , Newstead et al . 2004 , 264 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Torrens et al . 1999 ) . Thus , it may be that higher - ability people do not engage in more System2reasoningbutratheraresimplymore successful when they do so . A large literature exists on how people rea - son with the Wason four - card selection task ( see Evans & Over 2004 , Chapter 5 , for a review ) . The task requires people to decide which of four cards to turn over to decide the truth of a conditional statement . For exam - ple , if the statement says , “If a card has an A on one side then it has a 3 on the other , ” and thevisiblesidesdisplayA , D , 3 , and7 , thenthe logicallycorrectchoiceistheAandthe7 . This is because only a card that has an A and not a 3 could disprove the statement . Few people give this answer ; most are more likely to choose A and3 , orjustA . Althoughthisabstract , indica - tive form of the task is very difﬁcult , concrete and deontic forms ( concerning rules and reg - ulations ) are much easier . For example , given the statement , “If a person is drinking beer in a bar , that person must be over 19 years of age , ” most participants readily see that they must check beer ( rather than soda ) drinkers and those who are under 19 years of age . The heuristic - analytic theory explains the difﬁculty of the abstract task on the grounds of heuristics that focus attention on selected cards , a claim supported by the time that peo - ple spend observing individual cards ( Evans 1996 , but see Ball et al . 2003 , Roberts 1998 ) and the accentuation of matching bias by a requirement to respond rapidly ( Roberts & Newton 2001 ) . Stanovich & West ( 1998 ) have produced strong evidence that analytic rea - soning is involved in solving the abstract se - lection task , since solvers have much higher SAT scores than do nonsolvers . The relation to cognitive ability is , however , much weaker for concrete and deontic forms of the task , suggesting that it can be solved by pragmatic belief - based reasoning in System 1 ( see also Newstead et al . 2004 ) . Recently , various authors have applied dual - process theory to the inferences people draw from conditional statements . Consider - able evidence shows that reasoning with re - alistic conditionals is strongly inﬂuenced by pragmatic factors , including the availability of counterexamples to inferences from seman - tic memory ( Cummins et al . 1991 ; Thompson 1994 , 2000 ) and the strength of association of counterexamples as measured across both ma - terials and individual participants ( De Neys et al . 2005 , Markovits et al . 1998 , Markovits & Quinn 2002 ) . Participants are also more likely to draw inferences from conditionals that they believe rather than disbelieve ( George 1997 ; Liu et al . 1996 ; Newstead et al . 1997 ; Stevenson & Over 1995 , 2001 ) . However , ev - idence suggests that analytic System 2 reason - ing processes , as well as heuristic System 1 processes , may be inﬂuenced by prior belief about the problem context ( Verschueren et al . 2005 ) . In conclusion , dual - process theory has been widely applied to the study of syllogis - tic reasoning , the Wason selection task , and conditional inference . ( For a critical review of the theory in the psychology of reasoning , see Osman 2005 . ) Experimental evidence has consistentlyshownthatresponsesarepartially consistentwithlogicbutarealsoinﬂuencedby systematic biases such as matching bias and belief bias . Cognitive models have generally depicted these as competing inﬂuences in a within - participant conﬂict . Several different forms of evidence support dual - processing ac - counts , including ( a ) the observation of more logical and less belief - based reasoning un - der strong deductive reasoning instructions , ( b ) the association ( in general ) of better log - ical accuracy with higher - ability participants when problems cannot also be solved by a pragmatic route , and ( c ) the ﬁnding that work - ing memory load or instructions to respond rapidly increase levels of typical biases as well as reduce logical accuracy . Dual - Process Theories of Judgment and Decision Making Three main research paradigms have domi - nated the psychology of judgment and deci - sion making : ( a ) the “heuristics and biases” www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 265 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 research program that is focused particularly on judgments of probability ( Gilovich et al . 2002 , Kahneman et al . 1982 ) , ( b ) the study of decision making under risk ( Wu et al . 2005 ) , and ( c ) social judgment theory and the lens model ( Doherty 1996 ) . The last of these paradigms , which may be less familiar to read - ers , is focused on judgments made where mul - tiple cues are available in the environment . An example might be medical diagnosis in light of a number of demographic factors , patient history , symptoms , diagnostic tests , and so on . It is possible to capture the implicit policy of judges by using multiple regression analysis to show which of the various cues predict their overall judgment . Until recently , dual - process theory played a much smaller part in these ﬁelds than in the study of reasoning and social cognition . An exception is the cognitive continuum the - ory of Hammond ( e . g . , 1996 ) , working in so - cialjudgmenttheory , whichcontrastsintuitive and analytic thinking . However , as the name suggests , this theory proposes two ends of a continuum rather than discrete processes or systems and hence is not the main type of the - ory with which this review is concerned . Kahneman & Frederick ( 2002 , 2005 ) re - cently developed a dual - process theory of probability judgment that they link to the generic dual - system theory . Heuristic judg - ments , which lead to biases , are associ - ated with System 1 , and analytic reasoning , which may intervene with these judgments and improve them , are linked to System 2 . This helps explain general ﬁndings that al - though biases in probability judgment can be linked to heuristics such as representa - tiveness ( Kahneman & Tversky 1972 , Teigen 2004 ) and availability ( Reber 2004 , Tversky & Kahneman 1973 ) , these biases are not uni - versally observed but do appear to compete with a tendency to give normatively correct answers . Such conﬂicts stand in parallel with the ﬁndings in the deductive reasoning litera - ture , reviewed above , in which matching and beliefs biases compete with logically correct answers . In general , normatively correct solu - tions to problems from both literatures tend tobefoundmoreoftenbythoseofhighercog - nitive capacity ( Stanovich 1999 ) , who may be assumed to make more effective interventions with analytic or System 2 reasoning processes . The processing assumptions of Kahneman & Frederick’stheoryaresimilartothoseofthe heuristic - analytic theory of reasoning ( Evans 2006 ) . It is assumed that fast System 1 ( heuris - tic ) processes cue default intuitive judgments that must nevertheless be endorsed by the ( analytic ) System 2 , which often does so ca - sually . This may involve attribute substitu - tion , in which people actually answer a differ - ent ( and easier ) question than the one asked . However , high - effort deliberative reasoning may be applied , which can inhibit the bi - ased response and replace it with one based on reﬂective reasoning . I call this kind of dual - process theory “default - interventionist” as compared with theories ( e . g . , that of Sloman , 1996 ) that are “parallel - competitive” innature . Kahneman & Fredericksuggestthat even heuristics that are apparently conscious in application , such as the recognition heuris - tic ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 ) , have an automatic component . In this case , feelings of familiar - ity are automatically recruited and then con - sciously interpreted as a basis for making a judgment , such as the relative size of foreign cities . A major recent debate in the probabil - ity judgment literature has concerned the claim that probability problems are much eas - ier if framed in terms of frequencies rather than in probabilities ( Barbey & Sloman 2007 , Cosmides & Tooby 1996 , Gigerenzer & Hoffrage 1995 ) , thus reducing biases such as base rate neglect in Bayesian reasoning ( Kahneman & Tversky 1973 , Koehler 1996 ) . It was argued from an evolutionary perspec - tive that we would have evolved a cognitive module for processing frequency information in the environment ( Cosmides & Tooby 1996 ) that could not be applied to one - case proba - bilities . However , from a dual - process view - point , it appears that such a module would affect learning behavior in System 1 rather 266 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 than in explicit System 2 reasoning about the quantitative word problems that are actually presented ( Evans et al . 2000 ) . Consistent with this , there is now much evidence that what facilitates Bayesian reasoning is a problem structure that cues explicit mental models of nested - set relationships ( Evans et al . 2000 , Girotto & Gonzalez 2001 , Sloman et al . 2003 ) as originally proposed by Tversky & Kahnemant ( 1983 ) . However , Hoffrage et al . ( 2002 ) have responded by arguing that such nested sets are intrinsic to natural sampling , a processthatleadstotheobservationofnatural frequencies that encode base rate information implicitly . Hence , they claim that Bayesian posterior probabilities can be derived from direct comparison of such frequencies with no difﬁcult calculation involved . However , Barbey & Sloman ( 2007 ) have recently argued that this kind of evolutionary account , when examined in detail , is a good deal less parsi - monious than an explanation in terms of dual processing . Discussion of work on reasoning and judg - ment to this point may have suggested that System 2 processing is in some sense supe - rior to that of System 1 , in that the former is often associated with normatively correct responding and the latter with cognitive bi - ases . However , those authors who have looked at expert judgment and decision - making pro - vide a somewhat different perspective . For ex - ample , in Klein’s ( 1999 ) naturalistic studies of decision making in groups such as ﬁre ofﬁ - cers and paramedics , the author argues that very little rational decision - making goes on , in the sense of deliberation between alterna - tives . What typically happens is that an expert recognizesasituationasofakindencountered previously and rapidly retrieves a schema that provides a solution , a process Klein terms “recognition - primed” decision - making . The application will involve some explicit reason - ing ( sometimes mental simulations to check feasibility of solutions ) , but the key to intelli - gent action is the automatic retrieval process . The value of System 1 processing has also been emphasized by other dual - process the - orists in applications to decision - making . For example , Reyna ( 2004 ) argues that experts ac - quiregistknowledgethatallowsthemtomake intuitive responses that are automatic , rapid , and effective , whereas novices need to rely on explicit analytic reasoning . However , Reyna notes also that the former kind of process can lead to bias and error when novel problems are presented , as is typically the case in lab - oratory studies of probability judgment . Per - haps more controversial is the recent claim of Dijksterhuis et al . ( 2006 ) that there are pro - cesses of conscious and unconscious reason - ing , both of a deliberative nature , and that the unconscious reasoning leads to superior de - cision making . This is a very different kind of claim from those of the theories we have been considering that envisage fast heuris - tic processes delivering contextualized con - tent for evaluation by a conscious , analytic process . The evidence for superiority of uncon - scious decision - making is that people may make better decisions as measured by norma - tive analysis or by correspondence with expert judgments ( Wilson & Schooler 1991 ) when conscious deliberation is prevented by short - age of time or by competing tasks . This ap - plies to fairly complex , multiattributed de - cision problems . However , it is unclear why any unconscious process of deliberative rea - soning need be postulated . The evidence is consistent with the claim that where partic - ipants have a history of relevant experien - tial learning , fast recognition processes may provide accurate intuitive responses . What is interesting , however , is that conscious de - liberative reasoning may then interfere with good decision - making . It may be that this re - ﬂects its sequential and low - capacity nature . Ananalogousﬁndinginthelearningliterature is that complex rule learning may sometimes be inhibited by an instructional set for explicit learning ( Reber 1993 ) . Dual processes would seem to be impli - cated when we contrast intuitive judgment with reﬂective decision - making . Many every - day decisions seem to involve rapid intuitive www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 267 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 judgments in which courses of action spring to mind with little or no effort of conscious thinking . Much expert decision - making seems to have this character ( Klein 1999 ) . On the other hand , we can and do make some decisions in a manner much more akin to that prescribed by decision theory , exploring al - ternative actions and their consequences with extended mental simulations ( Kahneman & Tversky 1982 ) . Intuitive judgments seem to have the System 1 characteristics , whereas reﬂective decision - making seems much more like a System 2 process ( see also Kahneman & Frederick 2002 ) . Other examples familiar to us all concern phobias and compulsive behaviors like gambling , overeating , or smoking , where we may become aware of a System 1 and 2 conﬂict . We may judge our own behavior or that of others to be irrational because we compulsively behave in ways that are at odds with our explicitly stated ( System 2 ) goals . Some authors have described these kinds of phenomena as im - plying two minds in one brain ( Evans 2003 ) or a brain at war with itself ( Stanovich 2004 ) . Dual - Process Theories of Social Cognition Dual - process theories of social cognition emerged in the 1980s ( Chaiken 1980 , Petty & Cacioppo 1981 ) and developed in popularity to form the dominant paradigm for the past 20 years or more . Contemporary work par - ticularly concerns the automatic and uncon - sciousprocessingofsocialinformationinsuch domains as person perception , stereotyping , and attitude change ( Bargh 2006 , Chaiken & Trope 1999 , Forgas et al . 2003 , Hassin et al . 2005 , Smith & DeCoster 2000 , Wilson 2002 ) and its apparent dissociation from explicit be - liefs and conscious processing . The proposal of new accounts or at least new labels for dual processes in social cognition has reached near epidemic proportions , causing some reaction in terms of a unimodel that instead empha - sizes multiple parameters known to inﬂuence social judgments ( Kruglanski et al . 2003 ) . Another interesting recent development is the quad model of Conrey et al . ( 2005 ) , which proposes four kinds of process that should be distinguished in order to interpret research on automatic and controlled cognition . Dual - processing accounts of social cogni - tion have their roots in cognitive psychology , especially the study of automaticity and im - plicit memory , but have made curiously little connection with the dual - process theories of reasoning and decision - making discussed above . Although there is currently very little cross - referencing between these literatures , dual - process accounts in social psychology nevertheless share many common features with those in the cognitive psychology of reasoning and judgment . However , there are differences of emphasis . In general , the social cognition literature is less concerned with issues about cognitive architecture and evo - lution but more focused on issues concerning consciousness , free will , and the implica - tions for moral and legal responsibilities of individuals . A long - established dual - process theory is the heuristic - systematic model of Chaiken . According to Chen & Chaiken ( 1999 , p . 74 ; Petty & Cacioppo 1981 ) “ Systematic pro - cessing entails a relatively analytic and com - prehensive treatment of judgment relevant information . . . . Given its nature , system - atic processing requires both cognitive abil - ity and capacity” whereas “ Heuristic process - ing entails the activation and application of judgmental rules and ‘heuristics’ that are pre - sumed to be learned and stored in mem - ory . . . . Relative to systematic processing , heuristic processing make minimal cognitive demands on the perceiver . ” Systematic pro - cessing seems a similar concept here to that of analytic or System 2 reasoning in theo - ries described above . However , heuristic pro - cessing in this theory sounds more like the recognition - primed decision making of Klein ( 1999 ) than the contextualization process pos - tulated by reasoning theorists ( Evans 2006 , Stanovich 1999 ) . In fact , heuristic process - ing so deﬁned could be taken to be a form 268 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 of System 2 or rule - based reasoning , albeit one less effortful than that which is called systematic processing ( see Strack & Deutsch 2004 ) . The cognitive experimental self theory , or CEST ( Epstein 1994 , Epstein & Pacini 1999 ) , proposes two cognitive systems—experiential and rational—that share many common fea - tures with the generic two - system theory of reasoning . LikeSystem1 , theexperientialsys - tem is described as having a long evolutionary history with clear links to animal cognition , whereas the rational system , like System 2 , is recent and distinctively human . Many other features of the generic theory shown in Table 1 are included : fast - slow , unconscious - conscious , associative - rule based , and so on , whereas emotion is explicitly linked to the ex - periential system . However , the theory has a parallel - competitive , rather than default - interventionist , structure , and it includes the proposal that each system has access to dis - tinct forms of knowledge . Epstein’s approach is distinctive in the linkage of the two systems to two competitive processing styles . In con - trast with reasoning theorists like Stanovich , who keep a clear separation between cogni - tive systems and dispositional thinking styles , Epstein has developed a psychometric tool , the rational experiential inventory , or REI ( Epstein et al . 1996 ) , for measurement of the two styles based on self - report . Epstein & Pacini ( 1999 ) review a number of experimen - tal studies that appear to support the existence of these two processing styles . However , nei - ther people classiﬁed as rational thinkers nor those scoring highly on the related need - for - cognition scale appear to have any advantage on abstract tests of logical reasoning ( Bors et al . 2006 , Newstead et al . 2004 ) . Social psychologists have been particularly interested in links between unconscious pro - cessing and implicit forms of knowledge rep - resentation . For example , it has been pro - posed that people may have both implicit and explicit attitudes ( Wilson et al . 2000 ) , something that may help to explain the tra - ditional dissociation between verbal and be - havioral measure of attitude changes . It may be possible to change our explicit attitude while an implicit attitude continues to con - trol our social behavior . Similarly , it has been argued that we may have both implicit and explicit stereotypes that are dissociated from one another ( Bargh 1999 , Bargh & Williams 2006 , Devine 1989 ) . Many studies have used the methodology of semantic priming , bor - rowed from the literature on implicit memory ( Lucas 2000 ) . For example , Macrae et al . ( 1997 ) showed that when people are asked to view photographs of males or females and re - quired to process them in a semantic manner , their subsequent threshold for word recog - nition is primed for stereotype - consistent words . Although some authors have proposed an optimistic view that conscious processing can inhibit implicit stereotypes , the evidence suggests the contrary . Even people who have nonstereotypical explicitly stated beliefs and who are aware of the problem of stereotypical behavior can be shown experimentally to have much of their social behavior unconsciously controlled ( Bargh 1999 ) . A recent attempt to link dual - process accounts in social cognition with those in cognitive psychology was made by Smith & DeCoster ( 2000 ) , whobuildonthedistinction of two kinds of memory , one based on slow acquisition through associative learning and one linked to explicit memory ( McClelland et al . 1995 ) . These led them to a parallel system account in which associative and rule - based processing ( cf . Sloman 1996 ) are linked to the two forms of knowledge . This proposal is essentially similar to dual - process accounts that have been developed to distin - guish implicit and explicit forms of learning ( Berry & Dienes 1993 , French & Cleeremans 2002 , Reber 1993 , Sun et al . 2005 ) . Smith & DeCoster argue that the major dual - process theories in social psychology can be accom - modated within this general framework . However , as noted earlier , this is doubtful in the case of the heuristic - systematic theory , which looks more like two forms of rule - based processing ( Strack & Deutsch 2004 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 269 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 An important development for dual - process and dual - system theory generally is the emergence of social cognitive neuro - science . Particularly interesting is the iden - tiﬁcation of reﬂexive ( System 1 ) and re - ﬂective ( System 2 ) cognitive processing , with two neurological systems described as the X - system and C - system , respectively ( Lieberman 2003 , Lieberman et al . 2004 ) . The X - system is composed of the amygdala , basal ganglia , and lateral temporal cortex , brain areas known to be involved in con - ditioning and associative learning and now being linked by Lieberman and colleagues with social cognitive processes tradition - ally described as automatic or implicit . The C - system involves the anterior cingulate cortex , prefrontal cortex , and the medial - temporal lobe ( including hippocampus ) , brain areas known to be involved with ( among other things ) explicit learning and inhibitory , exec - utive control . This account is supported by recent ﬁndings concerning the neurological systems that underlie response to immedi - ate and deferred rewards in decision - making ( McClureetal . 2004 ) , whichcorrespondtoX - and C - system regions of the brain . Although in its early stages , this research program pro - vides perhaps the strongest basis in the lit - erature for maintaining some form of dual - system distinction . A ﬁnal issue to note in this section is that of self - knowledge . Although the notion that System 2 reasoning may engage in ratio - nalization or confabulation is mentioned in the cognitive literature ( Evans & Over 1996 , Stanovich 2004 ) , this idea has been more thoroughly investigated in the social psychol - ogy literature , especially by Wilson and his colleagues ( Nisbett & Wilson 1977 , Wilson 2002 , Wilson & Dunn 2004 ) . The basic idea here is that although much of our behavior is unconsciously controlled , “we” ( conscious beings ) are not aware of this fact and may live with an illusion that we are much more in con - trol of our behavior than we actually are . On this view , we observe and theorize about our own social behavior in much the same way as we attempt to perceive and understand the behavior of others . CONCLUSIONS Although dual - process theories have been around in cognitive and social psychology for 30 years and more , it is only within the past 10 years or so that the terms System 1 and System 2 have come into common use . So popular are these terms now that it may be somewhat difﬁcult to discourage their use and the implication of two underlying generic sys - tems that they convey . However , close in - spection of the evidence suggests that generic dual - system theory is currently oversimpliﬁed and misleading . In particular , ( a ) it is not pos - sible coherently to link together all the at - tributes associated with Systems 1 and 2 , re - spectively , in Table 2 , certainly when moving between clusters , and ( b ) there are at least two quite distinct forms of dual - process theory to be found in these various literatures that can - not readily be mapped on to each other . We might be better off talking about type 1 and type 2 processes since all theories seem to contrast fast , automatic , or unconscious pro - cesses with those that are slow , effortful , and conscious ( Samuels 2006 ) . Such terminology does not commit use to a two - system view . However , it would then be helpful to have some clear basis for this distinction . If we can - not associate all the System 1 ( or type 1 ) fea - tures shown in Table 2 together , for exam - ple , then which are the key ones that should distinguish them from System 2 ( or type 2 ) processes ? My suggestion is that type 2 pro - cesses are those that require access to a single , capacity - limited central working memory re - source , while type 1 processes do not require such access . This implies that the core fea - tures of type 2 processes are that they are slow , sequential , and capacity limited . The last fea - ture implies also that their functioning will correlate with individual differences in cogni - tive capacity and be disrupted by concurrent working memory load . Depending upon what else is assumed about working memory , there 270 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 may be a rationale for describing such type 2 processes as registering in consciousness and having properties associated with executive processes and intentional , higher - order con - trol . However , other proposed features of System 2 in the generic theory do not imme - diately follow from this deﬁnition of type 2 processes , for example , the proposal that such processes are uniquely human or associated with decontextualized thought or rule - based reasoning . The problem with this distinction is that type 1 processes then simply refer to any pro - cesses in the mind that can operate auto - matically without occupying working mem - ory space . As already indicated , there are a numberofdifferentkindsofsuchimplicitpro - cesses . We may have innate cognitive mod - ules with encapsulated processes for percep - tion , attention , language processing , and so on . We appear to have an associative learning system that implicitly acquires knowledge of theworldinaformsimilartoweightsinneural networks ; the knowledge cannot be called to mind as explicit knowledge , but it can directly affect our behavior . We have habitual and au - tomated behavior patterns that once required conscious type 2 effort but seem to have be - come type 1 with practice and experience . We also have powerful pragmatic processes that rapidly identify and retrieve explicit knowl - edge for conscious processing . Type 2 pro - cessing requires supporting type 1 processes to supply a continuous stream of relevant con - tent into working memory . If there are indeed multiple kinds of type 1 processes , then it is to be expected that psy - chologists will have developed different kinds of dual - process theories , which seems to be the case . Parallel - competitive forms of dual - process theory seem to be rooted in the idea of two forms of learning , leading to two forms of knowledge ( implicit and explicit ) that can then lead to competing attempts to control behavior . Theories of this type include those of Sloman ( 1996 ) , Reber ( 1993 ) , and Smith & DeCoster ( 2000 ) . As mentioned above , there is promising evidence that these theo - ries can be mapped onto neurologically dis - tinct X - and C - systems ( Lieberman 2003 ) . However , the category of theories that I call “default - interventionist” assume , in contrast , that rapid preconscious processes supply con - tent for conscious processing , cueing default behaviors that the analytic reasoning may ap - prove or intervene upon with more effortful reasoning . This approach is reﬂected in dual - process theories of reasoning ( Evans 2006 , Stanovich 1999 ) as well as the theory of in - tuitive and reﬂective judgment proposed by Kahneman & Frederick ( 2002 ) . If there are indeedtwoparallelcognitiveandneurological systems , it is possible either that ( a ) the latter class of theories are mistaken in their archi - tectural assumptions or ( b ) they are dealing with interactions between preconscious and conscious elements of the second system . In short , my conclusion is that although dual - process theories enjoy good empirical support in a number of ﬁelds of psychology , the superﬁcially attractive notion that they are all related to the same underlying two systems of cognition is probably mistaken , at least in the way that Systems 1 and 2 are being de - ﬁned in the current literatures . For example , it is almost certainly wrong to think of System 1 as one system , all of which is old and shared with other animals . Equally , it is probably a mistake to think of System 2 as the conscious mind , all of whose processes are slow and se - quential . If there is a second system , distinc - tively human , involving working memory and neurologically distinct structures , it does not follow that all of its workings are conscious and controlled . It is perfectly possible that one system operates entirely with type 1 processes and that the other includes a mixture of type 1 and type 2 processes , the latter being linked to the use of working memory , which this system uses—among other resources . Such a proposal could resolve the conﬂict between evidence for dual systems on the one hand with the proposals of different dual - process theorists on the other . www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 271 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The writing of this review was supported by a Research Fellowship award to the author by the Economic and Social Research Council of the United Kingdom ( RES 000 – 27 - 0184 ) . The author is grateful to Keith Stanovich , Tim Wilson , Phil Core , Eliot Smith , Shira Elqayam , and Yaniv Hanoch for their comments on an earlier draft of this review . LITERATURE CITED Baars BJ , Franklin S . 2003 . How conscious experience and working memory interact . Trends Cogn . Sci . 7 ( 4 ) : 166 – 72 Baddeley AD , Hitch GJ . 1974 . Working memory . In The Psychology of Learning and Motivation , Vol . 8 , ed . GA Bower , pp . 47 – 90 . New York : Academic Ball LJ , Lucas EJ , Gale AG , Miles JNV . 2003 . Inspection times and the selection task : What do eye - movements reveal about relevance effects ? Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 56A ( 6 ) : 1053 – 77 Barbey AK , Sloman SA . 2007 . Base - rate respect : from ecological validity to dual processes . Behav . Brain Sci . In press Bargh JA . 1999 . The cognitive monster : the case against the controllability of automatic stereo - type effects . See Chaiken & Trope 1999 , pp . 361 – 82 Bargh JA , ed . 2006 . Social Psychology and the Unconscious . New York : Psychol . Press Bargh JA , Ferguson MJ . 2000 . Beyond behaviorism : on the automaticity of higher mental processes . Psychol . Bull . 126 ( 6 ) : 925 – 45 Bargh JA , Gollwitzer PM , Lee - Chai A , Barndollar K , Tr¨otschel R . 2001 . The automated will : nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 81 ( 6 ) : 1014 – 27 Bargh JA , Williams EL . 2006 . The automaticity of social life . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 15 ( 1 ) : 1 – 4 Barrett HC , Kurzban R . 2006 . Modularity in cognition : framing the debate . Psychol . Rev . 113 : 628 – 47 Barrett LF , Tugade MM , Engle RW . 2004 . Individual differences in working memory capacity and dual - process theories of the mind . Psychol . Bull . 130 : 553 – 73 Berry DC , Dienes Z . 1993 . Implicit Learning . Hove , UK : Erlbaum Bors DA , Vigneau F , Lalande F . 2006 . Measuring the need for cognition : item polarity , di - mensionality , and the relation with ability . Personal . Individ . Differ . 40 ( 4 ) : 819 – 28 Braine MDS , O’Brien DP , eds . 1998a . Mental Logic . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Braine MDS , O’Brien DP . 1998b . The theory of mental - propositional logic : description and illustration . See Braine & O’Brien 1998a , pp . 79 – 89 Cacioppo JT , Petty RE . 1982 . The need for cognition . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 42 ( 1 ) : 116 – 31 Carruthers P . 2006 . The Architecture of the Mind . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Chaiken S . 1980 . Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 39 : 752 – 66 Chaiken S , Trope Y , eds . 1999 . Dual - Process Theories in Social Psychology . New York : Guilford Chen S , Chaiken S . 1999 . The heuristic - systematic model in its broader context . See Chaiken & Trope 1999 , pp . 73 – 96 Colom R , Rebollo I , Palacios A , Juan - Espinosa M , Kyllonen PC . 2004 . Working memory is ( almost ) perfectly predicted by g . Intelligence 32 ( 3 ) : 277 – 96 Conrey FR , Gawronski B , Sherman JW , Hugenberg K , Groom CJ . 2005 . Separating multiple processes in implicit social cognition : the quad model of implicit task performance . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 89 ( 4 ) : 469 – 87 272 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Cosmides L , Tooby J . 1992 . Cognitive adapations for social exchange . In The Adapted Mind : Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture , ed . JH Barkow , L Cosmides , J Tooby , pp . 163 – 228 . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Cosmides L , Tooby J . 1996 . Are humans good intuitive statisticians after all ? Rethinking some conclusions from the literature on judgment under uncertainty . Cognition 58 : 1 – 73 Cosmides L , Tooby J . 2000 . Consider the source : the evolution of adaptations for decoupling and metarepresentation . In Metarepresentations , ed . D Sperber , pp . 53 – 115 . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Cummins DD , Lubart T , Alksnis O , Rist R . 1991 . Conditional reasoning and causation . Mem . Cogn . 19 : 274 – 82 De Neys W . 2006 . Dual processing in reasoning—two systems but one reasoner . Psychol . Sci . 17 ( 5 ) : 428 – 33 De Neys W , Schaeken W , d’Ydewalle G . 2005 . Working memory and everyday conditional reasoning : retrieval and inhibition of stored counterexamples . Think . Reasoning 11 ( 4 ) : 349 – 81 Devine PG . 1989 . Stereotypes and prejudice : their automatic and controlled components . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 56 : 680 – 90 Dijksterhuis A , Bos MW , Nordgren LF , von Baaren RB . 2006 . On making the right choice : the deliberation - without - attention effect . Science 311 : 1005 – 7 Dijksterhuis A , Smith PK . 2005 . What do we do unconsciously ? And how ? J . Consum . Psychol . 15 ( 3 ) : 225 – 29 Doherty ME , ed . 1996 . Social judgement theory . Think . Reasoning 2 : 2 , 3 Epstein S . 1994 . Integration of the cognitive and psychodynamic unconscious . Am . Psychol . 49 : 709 – 24 Epstein S , Pacini R . 1999 . Some basic issues regarding dual - process theories from the perspec - tive of cognitive - experiential theory . See Chaiken & Trope 1999 , pp . 462 – 82 Epstein S , Pacini R , Denes - Raj V , Heier H . 1996 . Individual differences in intuitive - experiential and analytic - rational thinking styles . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 71 : 390 – 405 Evans JStBT . 1989 . Bias in Human Reasoning : Causes and Consequences . Brighton , UK : Erlbaum Evans JStBT . 1996 . Deciding before you think : relevance and reasoning in the selection task . Br . J . Psychol . 87 : 223 – 40 Evans JStBT . 2002 . Logic and human reasoning : an assessment of the deduction paradigm . Psychol . Bull . 128 : 978 – 96 EvansJStBT . 2003 . Intwominds : dualprocessaccountsofreasoning . TrendsCogn . Sci . 7 : 454 – 59 Evans JStBT . 2006 . The heuristic - analytic theory of reasoning : extension and evaluation . Psy - chon . Bull . Rev . 13 ( 3 ) : 378 – 95 Evans JStBT , Barston JL , Pollard P . 1983 . On the conﬂict between logic and belief in syllogistic reasoning . Mem . Cogn . 11 : 295 – 306 Evans JStBT , Curtis - Holmes J . 2005 . Rapid responding increases belief bias : evidence for the dual - process theory of reasoning . Think . Reasoning 11 ( 4 ) : 382 – 89 Evans JStBT , Handley SJ , Perham N , Over DE , Thompson VA . 2000 . Frequency versus probability formats in statistical word problems . Cognition 77 : 197 – 213 Evans JStBT , Over DE . 1996 . Rationality and Reasoning . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Evans JStBT , Over DE . 2004 . If . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Fodor J . 1983 . The Modularity of Mind . Scranton , PA : Crowell Fodor J . 2001 . The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Forgas JP , Williams KR , von Hippel W , eds . 2003 . Social Judgments : Implicit and Explicit Pro - cesses . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 273 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Frankish K . 2004 . Mind and Supermind . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press French RM , Cleeremans A , eds . 2002 . Implicit Learning and Consciousness . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Gathercole S . 2003 . Short - Term and Working Memory . London : Taylor & Francis George C . 1997 . Reasoning from uncertain premises . Think . Reasoning 3 : 161 – 90 Gigerenzer G , Hoffrage U . 1995 . How to improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction : frequency formats . Psychol . Rev . 102 : 684 – 704 Gigerenzer G , Todd PM , ABC Research Group . 1999 . Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart . New York / Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press Gilinsky AS , Judd BB . 1994 . Working memory and bias in reasoning across the life - span . Psychol . Aging 9 : 356 – 71 Gilovich T , Grifﬁn D , Kahneman D . 2002 . Heuristics and Biases : The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Girotto V , Gonzalez M . 2001 . Solving probabilistic and statistical problems : a matter of infor - mation structure and question form . Cognition 78 : 247 – 76 Goel V . 2005 . Cognitive neuroscience of deductive reasoning . In The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning , ed . K Holyoak , RG Morrison , pp . 475 – 92 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Goel V , Buchel C , Rith C , Olan J . 2000 . Dissociation of mechanisms underlying syllogistic reasoning . NeuroImage 12 : 504 – 14 Goel V , Dolan RJ . 2003 . Explaining modulation of reasoning by belief . Cognition 87 : B11 – 22 Haidt J . 2001 . The emotional dog and its rational tail : a social intuitionist approach to moral judgement . Psychol . Rev . 108 ( 4 ) : 814 – 34 Hammond KR . 1996 . Human Judgment and Social Policy . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Hanoch Y , Vitouch O . 2004 . Information , emotional arousal and the ecological reframing of the Yerkes - Dobson law . Theor . Psychol . 14 : 427 – 52 Hassin RR , Uleman JS , Bargh JA , eds . 2005 . The New Unconscious . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Hoffrage U , Gigerenzer G , Krauss S , Martigon L . 2002 . Representation facilitates reasoning : what natural frequencies are and what they are not . Cognition 84 : 343 – 52 Inhelder B , Piaget J . 1958 . The Growth of Logical Thinking . New York : Basic Books Johnson - Laird PN . 1983 . Mental Models . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Johnson - Laird PN , Bara BG . 1984 . Syllogistic inference . Cognition 16 : 1 – 61 Johnson - Laird PN , Byrne RMJ . 1991 . Deduction . Hove & London : Erlbaum Johnson - Laird PN , Byrne RMJ . 2002 . Conditionals : a theory of meaning , pragmatics and inference . Psychol . Rev . 109 : 646 – 78 KahnemanD , FrederickS . 2002 . Representativenessrevisited : attributesubstitutioninintuitive judgement . In Heuristics and Biases : The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment , ed . T Gilovich , D Grifﬁn , D Kahneman , pp . 49 – 81 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Kahneman D , Frederick S . 2005 . A model of heuristic judgment . In The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning , ed . K Holyoak , RG Morrison , pp . 267 – 94 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Kahneman D , Slovic P , Tversky A . 1982 . Judgment Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Kahneman D , Tversky A . 1972 . Subjective probability : a judgment of representativeness . Cogn . Psychol . 3 : 430 – 54 Kahneman D , Tversky A . 1973 . On the psychology of prediction . Psychol . Rev . 80 : 237 – 51 Kahneman D , Tversky A . 1982 . The simulation heuristic . See Kahneman et al . 1982 , pp . 201 – 10 274 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Kihlstrom JF . 1987 . The cognitive unconscious . Science 237 : 1445 – 52 Klaczynski PA . 2000 . Motivated scientiﬁc reasoning biases , epistemological beliefs , and theory polarization : a two - process approach to adolescent cognition . Child Dev . 71 ( 5 ) : 1347 – 66 Klaczynski PA . 2001 . Framing effects on adolescent task representations , analytic and heuristic processing , and decision making : implications for the normative / descriptive gap . Appl . Dev . Psychol . 22 : 289 – 309 Klaczynski PA , Lavallee KL . 2005 . Domain - speciﬁc identity , epistemic regulation , and intel - lectual ability as predictors of belief - biased reasoning : a dual - process perspective . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 92 ( 1 ) : 1 – 24 Klauer KC , Musch J , Naumer B . 2000 . On belief bias in syllogistic reasoning . Psychol . Rev . 107 : 852 – 84 Klein G . 1999 . Sources of Power . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press KoehlerJJ . 1996 . Thebaseratefallacyreconsidered : descriptive , normativeandmethodological challenges . Behav . Brain Sci . 19 : 1 – 53 Kokis JV , MacPherson R , Toplak ME , West RF , Stanovich KE . 2002 . Heuristic and analytic processing : age trends and associations with cognitive ability and cognitive styles . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 83 ( 1 ) : 26 – 52 Kruglanski AW , Chun WY , Erb HP , Pierro A , Mannett L , Spiegel S . 2003 . A parametric unimodel of human judgment : integrating dual - process frameworks in social cognition from a single - mode perspective . See Forgas et al . 2003 , pp . 137 – 61 Lieberman MD . 2003 . Reﬂective and reﬂexive judgment processes : a social cognitive neuro - science approach . See Forgas et al . 2003 , pp . 44 – 67 Lieberman MD , Jarcho JM , Satpute AB . 2004 . Evidence - based and intution - based self - knowledge : an fMRI study . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 87 : 421 – 35 Liu I - M , Lo K - C , Wu J - T . 1996 . A probabilistic interpretation of “If - Then . ” Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 49A : 828 – 44 Lucas M . 2000 . Semantic priming without association : a meta - analytic review . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 7 ( 4 ) : 618 – 30 Macrae CN , Bodenhausen GV , Milne AB , Thorn TMJ , Castelli L . 1997 . Out of mind but back in sight : stereotypes on the rebound . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 33 : 471 – 89 Markovits H , Fleury M - L , Quinn S , Venet M . 1998 . The development of conditional reasoning and the structure of semantic memory . Child Dev . 69 : 742 – 55 Markovits H , Quinn S . 2002 . Efﬁciency of retrieval correlates with “logical” reasoning from causal conditional premises . Mem . Cogn . 30 ( 5 ) : 696 – 706 McClelland JL , McNaughton BL , O’Reilly RC . 1995 . Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex : insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory . Psychol . Rev . 102 ( 3 ) : 419 – 57 McClure SM , Laibson DI , Loewenstein G , Cohen JD . 2004 . Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards . Science 306 ( 5695 ) : 503 – 7 Mithen S . 1996 . The Prehistory of the Mind . London : Thames & Hudson Monsell S , Driver J . 2000 . Control of Cognitive Processes . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Newstead SE , Ellis C , Evans JStBT , Dennis I . 1997 . Conditional reasoning with realistic material . Think . Reasoning 3 : 49 – 76 Newstead SE , Handley SJ , Harley C , Wright H , Farelly D . 2004 . Individual differences in deductive reasoning . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 57A : 33 – 60 Nisbett R , Peng K , Choi I , Norenzayan A . 2001 . Culture and systems of thought : holistic vs . analytic cognition . Psychol . Rev . 108 : 291 – 310 Nisbett RE , Wilson TD . 1977 . Telling more than we can know : verbal reports on mental processes . Psychol . Rev . 84 : 231 – 95 www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 275 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Oakhill J , Johnson - Laird PN , Garnham A . 1989 . Believability and syllogistic reasoning . Cog - nition 31 : 117 – 40 Oaksford M , Chater N . 1995 . Theories of reasoning and the computational explanation of everyday inference . Think . Reasoning 1 : 121 – 52 OsmanM . 2005 . Anevaluationofdual - processtheoriesofreasoning . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 11 : 988 – 1010 Over DE . 2003 . From massive modularity to metarepresentation : the evolution of higher cogntion . In Evolution and the Psychology of Thinking : The Debate , ed . DE Over , pp . 121 – 44 . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Petty RE , Cacioppo JT . 1981 . Attitudes and Persuasions : Classical and Contemporary Approaches . Dubuque , IA : Brown Pinker S . 1997 . How the Mind Works . New York : Norton Reber AS . 1993 . Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Reber R . 2004 . Availability . In Cognitive Illusions , ed . R Pohl , pp . 147 – 64 . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Reyna VF . 2004 . How people make decisions that involve risk : a dual - processes approach . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 13 ( 2 ) : 60 – 66 Rips LJ . 1994 . The Psychology of Proof . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Roberts MJ . 1998 . Inspection times and the selection task : Are they relevant ? Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 51A : 781 – 810 Roberts MJ , Newton EJ . 2001 . Inspection times , the change task , and the rapid - response selection task . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 54 ( 4 ) : 1031 – 48 Samuels R . 1998 . Evolutionary psychology and the mass modularity hypothesis . Br . J . Philos . Sci . 49 : 575 – 602 Samuels R . 2006 . The magical number two , plus or minus : some comments on dual - processing theories of cognition . In Two Minds : Dual Process Theories of Reasoning and Rationality . 2006 . Intl . Conf . , Cambridge , UK , July 5 – 7 Schneider W , Shiffrin RM . 1977 . Controlled and automatic human information processing I : detection , search and attention . Psychol . Rev . 84 : 1 – 66 Sherry DF , Schacter DL . 1987 . The evolution of multiple memory systems . Psychol . Rev . 94 : 439 – 54 Sloman SA . 1996 . The empirical case for two systems of reasoning . Psychol . Bull . 119 : 3 – 22 Sloman SA . 2002 . Two systems of reasoning . In Heuristics and Biases : The Psychology of Intu - itive Judgment , ed . T Gilovich , D Grifﬁn , D Kahneman , pp . 379 – 98 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Sloman SA , Over DE , Slovack L . 2003 . Frequency illusions and other fallacies . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 91 : 296 – 309 Smith ER , DeCoster J . 1999 . Associative and rule - based processing : a connectionist interpre - tation of dual - process models . See Chaiken & Trope 1999 , pp . 323 – 60 Smith ER , DeCoster J . 2000 . Dual - process models in social and cognitive psychology : con - ceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Rev . 4 ( 2 ) : 108 – 31 Sperber D . 1994 . The modularity of thought and the epidemiology of representations . In Mapping the Mind : Domain Speciﬁcity in Cognition and Culture , ed . LA Hirschﬁeld , SA Gelman , pp . 39 – 67 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Sperber D . 2000 . Metarepresentations in an evolutionary perspective . In Metarepresentations , ed . D Sperber , pp . 117 – 38 . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Stanovich KE . 1999 . Who is Rational ? Studies of Individual Differences in Reasoning . Mahwah , NJ : Elrbaum 276 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Stanovich KE . 2004 . The Robot’s Rebellion : Finding Meaning in the Age of Darwin . Chicago : Chicago Univ . Press Stanovich KE , West RF . 1997 . Reasoning independently of prior belief and individual differ - ences in actively open - minded thinking . J . Educ . Psychol . 89 ( 2 ) : 342 – 57 Stanovich KE , West RF . 1998 . Cognitive ability and variation in selection task performance . Think . Reasoning 4 : 193 – 230 Stanovich KE , West RF . 2003 . Evolutionary versus instrumental goals : how evolutionary psy - chology misconceives human rationality . In Evolution and the Psychology of Thinking , ed . DE Over , pp . 171 – 230 . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Stevenson RJ , Over DE . 1995 . Deduction from uncertain premises . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 48A : 613 – 43 Stevenson RJ , Over DE . 2001 . Reasoning from uncertain premises : effects of expertise and conversational context . Think . Reasoning 7 ( 4 ) : 367 – 90 Strack F , Deutsch R . 2004 . Reﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Rev . 8 ( 3 ) : 220 – 47 Sun R , Slusarz P , Terry C . 2005 . The interaction of the explicit and the implicit in skill learning : a dual - process approach . Psychol . Rev . 112 ( 1 ) : 159 – 92 Teigen KH . 2004 . Judgments by representativeness . In Cognitive Illusions , ed . R Pohl , pp . 165 – 82 . Hove , UK : Psychol . Press Thompson VA . 1994 . Interpretational factors in conditional reasoning . Mem . Cogn . 22 : 742 – 58 Thompson VA . 2000 . The task - speciﬁc nature of domain - general reasoning . Cognition 76 : 209 – 68 Toates F . 2006 . A model of the hierarchy of behaviour , cognition and consciousness . Conscious . Cogn . 15 : 75 – 118 Tooby J , Cosmides L . 1992 . The psychological foundations of culture . In The Adapted Mind : Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture , ed . JH Barkow , L Cosmides , J Tooby , pp . 19 – 136 . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Torrens D , Thompson VA , Cramer KM . 1999 . Individual differences and the belief bias effect : mental models , logical necessity , and abstract reasoning . Think . Reasoning 5 : 1 – 28 Tversky A , Kahneman D . 1973 . Availability : a heuristic for judging frequency and probability . Cogn . Psychol . 5 : 207 – 32 Tversky A , Kahneman D . 1983 . Extensional vs intuitive reasoning : the conjunction fallacy in probability judgment . Psychol . Rev . 90 : 293 – 315 Uleman JS . 2005 . Introduction : becoming aware of the new unconscious . In The New Uncon - scious , ed . RR Hassin , JS Uleman , JA Bargh , pp . 9 – 15 . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Velmans M . 2000 . Understanding Consciousness . London : Routledge Verschueren N , Schaeken W , d’Ydewalle G . 2005 . A dual - process speciﬁcation of causal con - ditional reasoning . Think . Reasoning 11 ( 3 ) : 239 – 78 Wang XT . 2006 . Emotions within reason : resolving conﬂicts in risk preference . Cogn . Emot . 20 ( 8 ) : 1132 – 52 Wason PC , Evans JStBT . 1975 . Dual processes in reasoning ? Cognition 3 : 141 – 54 Wason PC , Johnson - Laird PN . 1972 . Psychology of Reasoning : Structure and Content . London : Batsford Whiten A . 2000 . Chimpanzee cognition and the question of mental re - representation . In Metarepresentations , ed . D Sperber , pp . 139 – 67 . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Wilson TD . 2002 . Strangers to Ourselves . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Wilson TD , Dunn EW . 2004 . Self - knowledge : its limits , value , and potential for improvement . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 55 : 493 – 518 www . annualreviews . org • Dual Processing in Higher Cognition 277 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 10 ARI 4 November 2007 20 : 23 Wilson TD , Lindsey S , Schooler TY . 2000 . A model of dual attitudes . Psychol . Rev . 107 ( 1 ) : 101 – 26 Wilson TD , Schooler JW . 1991 . Thinking too much : introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and decisions . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 60 ( 2 ) : 181 – 92 Wu G , Zhang J , Gonzales R . 2005 . Decision under risk . In Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making , ed . DJ Koehler , N Harvey , pp . 299 – 423 . Oxford , UK : Blackwell 278 Evans A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Annual Review of Psychology Volume 59 , 2008 Contents Prefatory The Evolution of a Cognitive Psychologist : A Journey from Simple Behaviors to Complex Mental Acts Gordon H . Bower (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Pharmacology and Behavior Addiction and the Brain Antireward System George F . Koob and Michel Le Moal (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 29 Consummatory Behavior The Brain , Appetite , and Obesity Hans - Rudolf Berthoud and Christopher Morrison (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 55 Sex Neuroendocrine Regulation of Feminine Sexual Behavior : Lessons from Rodent Models and Thoughts About Humans Jeffrey D . Blaustein (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 93 Audition and Its Biological Bases The Biological Basis of Audition Gregg H . Recanzone and Mitchell L . Sutter (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 119 Color Perception Color in Complex Scenes Steven K . Shevell and Frederick A . A . Kingdom (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 143 Scene Perception , Event Perception , or Object Recognition Visual Perception and the Statistical Properties of Natural Scenes Wilson S . Geisler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 167 v A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Cognitive Processes The Mind and Brain of Short - Term Memory John Jonides , Richard L . Lewis , Derek Evan Nee , Cindy A . Lustig , Marc G . Berman , and Katherine Sledge Moore (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 193 Memory Relativity of Remembering : Why the Laws of Memory Vanished Henry L . Roediger , III (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 225 Reasoning and Problem Solving Dual - Processing Accounts of Reasoning , Judgment , and Social Cognition Jonathan St . B . T . Evans (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 255 Comparative Psychology , Ethology , and Evolution Putting the Altruism Back into Altruism : The Evolution of Empathy Frans B . M . de Waal (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 279 Anxiety Disorders Social Bonds and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Anthony Charuvastra and Maryl ` ene Cloitre (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 301 Inference , Person Perception , Attribution Spontaneous Inferences , Implicit Impressions , and Implicit Theories James S . Uleman , S . Adil Saribay , and Celia M . Gonzalez (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 329 Social Development , Social Personality , Social Motivation , Social Emotion Motives of the Human Animal : Comprehending , Managing , and Sharing Inner States E . Tory Higgins and Thane S . Pittman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 361 Cognition in Organizations Cognition in Organizations Gerard P . Hodgkinson and Mark P . Healey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 387 Selection and Placement Personnel Selection Paul R . Sackett and Filip Lievens (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 419 vi Contents A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Education of Special Populations The Education of Dyslexic Children from Childhood to Young Adulthood Sally E . Shaywitz , Robin Morris , and Bennett A . Shaywitz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 451 Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Health Psychology : The Search for Pathways Between Behavior and Health Howard Leventhal , John Weinman , Elaine A . Leventhal , and L . Alison Phillips (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 477 Emotion Human Abilities : Emotional Intelligence John D . Mayer , Richard D . Roberts , and Sigal G . Barsade (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 507 Data Analysis Sample Size Planning for Statistical Power and Accuracy in Parameter Estimation Scott E . Maxwell , Ken Kelley , and Joseph R . Rausch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 537 Timely Topics A Comprehensive Review of the Placebo Effect : Recent Advances and Current Thought Donald D . Price , Damien G . Finniss , and Fabrizio Benedetti (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 565 Children’s Social Competence in Cultural Context Xinyin Chen and Doran C . French (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 591 Grounded Cognition Lawrence W . Barsalou (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 617 Neuroeconomics George Loewenstein , Scott Rick , and Jonathan D . Cohen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 647 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 49 – 59 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 673 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 49 – 59 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 678 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at http : / / psych . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml Contents vii A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 255 - 278 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by W e b e r S t a t e U n i v e r s it y on 12 / 09 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .