The Idea Factory : . . . Jon Gertner A New York Times journalist narrates the history of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company in conversational language . AT & T is an excellent example because it was a major source of scientific discovery , engineering invention and industrial innovation throughout the 20 th century . The United States government allowed the company to operate a virtual monopoly over information and telecommunications ( ITC ) technologies . The book details how AT & T set - up a research and development facility ( Bell Labs ) in parallel to a product manufacturing factory ( Western Electric ) to support their innovation pipeline . The book illuminates five critical yet under - appreciated innovation success factors : 1 ) Most of the scientists and engineers came from small town and rural environments where they had first acquired technical problem - solving skills before obtaining advanced academic degrees ; 2 ) Promotion occurred through the ranks so that managers had in - depth knowledge of the programs and projects they supervised . 3 ) Senior employees often served terms as consultants to government agencies , as university executive managers , or as entrepreneurs , and brought lessons from those experiences back to internal projects . 4 ) Staff conducting fundamental research , applied research or experimental engineering , were required to log their progress in bound lab notebooks witnessed by co - workers . These notes were reviewed on a weekly basis by managers who reported up through the company . This tiered - level of oversight allowed staff to work unfettered , while protecting intellectual property claims , promoting communication between projects , and preserving continuity over the company’s base of enabling knowledge across programs and over time . 5 ) The synergy between the research and development ( R & D ) laboratory and the development and production ( D & P ) factory was sustained by the over - arching management structure .