Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 13 , 3787 – 3799 , November 2002 Stage - speciﬁc Requirement of a Mitogen - activated Protein Kinase by Trypanosoma brucei Ingrid B . Mu¨ller , * † Debora Domenicali - Pﬁster , * Isabel Roditi , and Erik Vassella ‡ Institut fu¨r Zellbiologie , Universita¨t Bern , CH - 3012 Bern , Switzerland Submitted February 21 , 2002 ; Revised July 24 , 2002 ; Accepted August 5 , 2002 Monitoring Editor : J . Richard McIntosh In cycling between the mammalian host and the tsetse ﬂy vector , African trypanosomes undergo adaptive differentiation steps that are coupled to growth control . The signaling pathways under - lying these cellular processes are largely unknown . Mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) are known mediators of growth and differentiation in other eukaryotic organisms . To establish the function of a MAPK homologue , TbMAPK2 , in T . brucei , a null mutant was constructed . Blood - stream forms of a (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 clone were able to grow normally and exhibited no detectable phenotype . When these cells were triggered to differentiate in vitro , however , they developed to the procyclic ( ﬂy midgut ) form with delayed kinetics and subsequently underwent cell cycle arrest . Introduction of an ectopic copy of the TbMAPK2 gene into the null mutant restored its ability to differentiate and to divide . In contrast , a TbMAPK2 mutant , in which the T190 and Y192 residues of the activating phosphorylation site were replaced by A and F , was unable to restore the growth and differentiation phenotypes . Analysis of the DNA content and the nucleus / kinetoplast conﬁguration of individual cells showed that the null mutant was arrested in all phases of the cell cycle and that 25 – 30 % of the cells had failed to segregate their nucleus and kinetoplast correctly . This implies that cell cycle progression by the procyclic form depends on a constitutive stimulus exerted by the signaling cascade operating through Tb MAPK2 . INTRODUCTION The protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei , which causes human sleeping sickness and Nagana in domestic animals , depends on the tsetse ﬂy for its dissemination . During cy - clical transmission , trypanosomes undergo differentiation through an ordered series of distinct stages that are highly adapted to their respective environments ( Vickerman , 1985 ) . It is extremely important for the parasite to control growth and differentiation processes accurately as this is required for long - term survival in the mammalian host and successful transmission by the tsetse ﬂy vector . Uncontrolled growth , or delayed or premature differentiation of the parasite , would either lead to rapid death of the host or the ﬂy vector or to elimination of the parasite . Throughout the life cycle of Trypanosoma brucei proliferat - ing stages alternate with stages arrested in the G 0 phase of the cell cycle ( Mottram , 1994 ) . At high parasite density in the blood , the proliferating long slender bloodstream form dif - ferentiates to the nondividing short stumpy form and thereby limits its growth in the mammalian host ( reviewed by Matthews , 1999 ) . When bloodstream forms are ingested by the tsetse , the short stumpy form , which is preadapted for survival in the ﬂy , rapidly differentiates to the prolifer - ating procyclic form in the ﬂy midgut . The parasite contin - ues its life cycle in the insect , ﬁnally giving rise to the nonproliferative metacyclic form in the salivary glands , which is capable of infecting a new host . Differentiation of the bloodstream to the procyclic form can be induced in vitro by lowering the incubation temper - ature from 37 to 27°C and by the addition of cis - aconitate to the culture medium . Bloodstream form cells express a coat of variant surface glycoproteins ( VSG ) that is replaced by a different coat composed of two major classes of glycopro - teins , the EP and GPEET procyclins , when cells differentiate to the procyclic form ( Roditi et al . , 1989 ; Ruepp et al . , 1997 ) . The short stumpy bloodstream form , which is arrested in the Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 02 – 0093 . Article and publication date are at www . molbi - olcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 02 – 0093 . ‡ Corresponding author . E - mail address : erik . vassella @ izb . unibe . ch . * Both authors contributed equally to this work . † Present address : Bernhard Nocht Institut fu¨r Tropenmedizin , Abteilung Biochemische Parasitologie , D - 20359 Hamburg , Ger - many . Abbreviations used : BrdU , 5 - bromo - 2 (cid:2) deoxyuridine ; DAPI , 4 , 6 - diamino - 2 - phenylindole ; ERK , extracellular - signal - regulated ki - nase ; GUS , (cid:1) - glucuronidase ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; ORF , open reading frame ; UTR , untranslated region ; VSG , variant surface glycoprotein © 2002 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3787 G 0 phase of the cell cycle , differentiates rapidly and synchro - nously to the procyclic form ( Ziegelbauer et al . , 1990 ; Mat - thews and Gull , 1994 ; Vassella et al . , 1997a ) . In contrast , differentiation of the proliferating long slender bloodstream form is asynchronous ( Matthews and Gull , 1994 ) and pro - ceeds via the short stumpy bloodstream form as an interme - diate stage ( Tasker et al . , 2000 ) . In the course of syringe passage between rodents bloodstream forms gradually lose their ability to differentiate to the stumpy form in vivo ( and thus become monomorphic ) but are still able to differentiate asynchronously to the procyclic form ( Roditi et al . , 1989 ; Matthews and Gull , 1994 ) . The different cellular events that occur during differenti - ation always appear in the same temporal order and with similar kinetics , making them suitable markers for mapping the different phases of this process ( reviewed by Hendriks et al . , 2000 ) . Expression of procyclins and release of the VSG coat are considered to be early markers of differentiation . Repositioning of the kinetoplast ( the genome of the single mitochondrion ) to a nucleus proximal location and progres - sion through S - phase are intermediate events . Expression of the procyclic - speciﬁc , cytoskeleton - associated protein CAP5 . 5 is a late marker of differentiation . Despite these useful markers , surprisingly little is known about the mo - lecular mechanisms involved in these differentiation steps . Although cis - aconitate is an efﬁcient trigger of differentiation in vitro , it is unlikely to be the signal for differentiation in the ﬂy . Subjecting cells to acidic stress ( Rolin et al . , 1998 ) or treatment with proteases ( Hunt et al . , 1994 ; Sbicego et al . , 1999 ) can also induce differentiation , but it is not known how these are translated into the differentiation signal . Mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) play a central role in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation in eukaryotes ( for review see Waskiewicz and Cooper , 1995 ) . They are activated by stimuli such as extracellular factors or stress and form part of phosphorylation cascades that relay the external signal to the nucleus , thereby resulting in changes in gene expression . All MAPKs contain a conserved motif TXY in the regulatory loop that is phosphorylated by dual - speciﬁc threonine - tyrosine protein kinases ( MEKs ; Waskiewicz and Cooper , 1995 ) . According to the central amino acid within this motif , they are further subdivided into extracellular - signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) , p38 and c - JUN NH 2 - terminal kinase . MAPKs phosphorylate numer - ous cellular proteins . These include cell surface proteins , cytoskeletal proteins , metabolic enzymes , components of signal transduction pathways and factors controlling tran - scription , mRNA stability , or translation ( reviewed by Guan , 1994 ; and Whitmarsh and Davis , 2000 ) . In contrast to higher eukaryotes , little is known about the role of MAP kinases in trypanosomatids and nothing about their speciﬁc substrates . In T . brucei , KFR1 , an ERK homologue most closely related to the yeast kinases KSS1 / FUS3 , has been characterized biochemically ( Hua and Wang , 1997 ) . The kinase activity of the enzyme , which is higher in the bloodstream form than in the procyclic form , is decreased by serum starvation and induced by interferon - (cid:2) . LMPK , a MAP kinase homologue from a related parasite , Leishmania mexicana , is not required for the growth of promastigotes in the insect vector ( Wiese , 1998 ) . Null mutants are able to differentiate to amastigotes in infected macrophages but these cells are unable to grow ( Wiese , 1998 ) . We have investigated the role of a new MAP kinase , Tb MAPK2 , in African trypanosomes . By generating a null mutant in bloodstream form trypanosomes and triggering these cells to differentiate to the procyclic form , we uncov - ered two TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc phenotypes . Null mutants de - veloped to the procyclic form with delayed kinetics and the newly differentiated cells were unable to divide . To our surprise these cells were arrested in all phases of the cell cycle . This indicates that procyclic form trypanosomes re - quire sustained Tb MAPK2 activity for progression through each phase of the cell cycle . MATERIALS AND METHODS Trypanosomes Monomorphic bloodstream forms of T . brucei 427 ( MITat 1 . 2 ; 221 ; Cross and Manning , 1973 ) and mutants derived from this clone were cultured according to Hesse et al . ( 1995 ) at 37°C / 5 % CO 2 . The GUSone cell line ( Sbicego et al . , 1999 ) , in which the coding region of one copy of the EP1 procyclin gene was replaced by the Escherichia coli (cid:1) - glucuronidase ( GUS ) gene , was used for generating TbMAPK2 deletion mutants . Proliferating bloodstream forms were harvested at (cid:3) 8 (cid:3) 10 5 cells / ml , resuspended in modiﬁed DTM ( Vassella and Boshart , 1996 ) at 1 – 2 (cid:3) 10 6 cells / ml , and triggered to differentiate to the procyclic form at 27°C by the addition of 6 mM cis - aconitate to the culture medium ( Brun and Scho¨nenberger , 1981 ) . Procyclic forms of the pleomorphic strain AnTat 1 . 1 ( see Vassella and Boshart , 1996 , for references ) were cultured in SDM 79 supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and 10 mM glycerol ( Brun and Schoenen - berger , 1979 ; Vassella et al . , 2000 ) . Isolation of the T . brucei MAPK2 cDNA and Sequence Analysis A cDNA clone encoding T . brucei MAPK2 was serendipitously se - lected from a directional (cid:4) gt22 cDNA expression library from pro - cyclic forms of stock 427 ( Liniger et al . , 2001 ) . The cDNA contained a long poly ( A ) stretch at the 3 (cid:2) end but no miniexon sequence . The splice - acceptor site was therefore mapped by reverse transcription - PCR ( Vassella et al . , 1994 ) using a miniexon primer ( 5 (cid:2) - CGCTAT - TATTAGAACAGTTTCTGTAC - 3 (cid:2) ) and a TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc primer ( 5 (cid:2) - AATCGTCTTTCCGTACTGGG - 3 (cid:2) ) . Comparisons of Tb MAPK2 with protein databases were performed using BLAST2 . 1 ( Altschul et al . , 1997 ) and FASTA3 ( Pearson , 1990 ) . Multiple alignments were generated by ClustalW 1 . 8 ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) . For proﬁle database searches , the network services of SMART Version 3 . 1 ( Schultz et al . , 2000 ) and PROSITE ( Hofmann et al . , 1999 ) were used . Construction of Cassettes for Deletion or Ectopic Expression of the TbMAPK2 Gene The TbMAPK2 cDNA clone was used to screen a (cid:4) EMBL3 library , constructed from genomic DNA of T . brucei stock 227 partially digested with Sau 3A ( Carrington et al . , 1987 ) . A Hin dIII / Bam HI fragment of 1 . 2 - kb containing sequences upstream of the TbMAPK2 gene , including the ﬁrst 108 base pairs of the open reading frame ( ORF ) , was isolated from the genomic clone 111 and subcloned into pBluescript SK (cid:4) ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) to generate pBS - 111a . A 2 . 8 - kb Bam HI / Kpn I fragment encompassing the last 476 base pairs of the ORF and downstream sequences was isolated and subcloned into pBluescript SK (cid:4) to give rise to pBS - 111b . Two promoterless constructs ( pMAPK2koHYG R and pMAPK2koBLE R ) were designed to delete sequentially both alleles of TbMAPK2 by homologous recombination . Each construct con - tains sequences ﬂanking TbMAPK2 including the complete 5 (cid:2) un - translated region ( UTR ) and the last 32 base pairs of the 3 (cid:2) UTR , respectively . The 3 (cid:2) ﬂanking sequence was ampliﬁed from pBS - 111b I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3788 using primer MK3 (cid:2) ( 5 (cid:2) - TAGGATCCACTCAACGTTAGT ) , which binds to the 3 (cid:2) UTR of TbMAPK2 , and a Bluescript - speciﬁc primer . Underlined sequences indicate a Bam HI site introduced to facilitate cloning . A 2 . 4 - kb fragment was cloned between the Bam HI and Kpn I sites of pBluescript SK (cid:4) to generate pBS - 3 (cid:2) ﬂank . The 5 (cid:2) ﬂanking sequence was ampliﬁed from clone 111a using the primer pair MAPK - Xba I ( 5 (cid:2) - CGTCTAGATGATGAGATCAATGG - 3 (cid:2) ) , which binds to the 5 (cid:2) end of the insert , and MAPK - Hin dIII ( 5 (cid:2) - CCGAAGCTTATTTCCTTAAACTC - 3 (cid:2) ) , which binds to the 5 (cid:2) UTR of TbMAPK2 . Relevant restriction sites used for cloning are under - lined . The PCR product was digested with Xba I and Hin dIII to release a DNA fragment of 1 . 2 kb . The hygromycin - and phleomy - cin - resistance genes were released from pKOH or pKOP ( Ruepp et al . , 1997 ) , respectively , by cleavage with Hin dIII and Bam HI . The 5 (cid:2) ﬂanking sequence and the relevant resistance gene were cloned between the Xba I and Bam HI sites of pBS - 3 (cid:2) ﬂank by a three - component ligation to give pMAPK2koHYG R and pMAPK2koBLE R , respectively . For ectopic reexpression of TbMAPK2 , the plasmid pGAPRONE - MAPK2 was constructed . The complete ORF of the gene was ampliﬁed by PCR using the primer pair MAP - ATG ( 5 (cid:2) - CCG C TCGAGTATGGA - CATACCA - 3 (cid:2) ) and MAP - TAG ( 5 (cid:2) - CG G AATTCCTAGTCACCCTTTG - 3 (cid:2) ) and clone 111 as template . The PCR product was cloned between the Sal I and Eco RI sites of a derivative of the original pGAPRONE construct ( Furger et al . , 1997 ) , in which the Hin dIII and Bam HI sites ﬂanking the GARP gene had been replaced by Sal I and Eco RI sites , respectively . The neomycin - resistance gene ( NEO ) of pGAPRONE - MAPK2 was replaced by the puromycin - resistance gene ( PAC ) as follows : the plasmid was linearized with Nhe I , and the ends were regenerated to blunt ends by Klenow treatment and cleaved with Not I to release the neomycin - resistance gene . The PAC gene was released from pGAPRONE (cid:1) 164EP1Pur ( Ruepp et al . , 1997 ) by cleavage with Pin AI and Not I and cloned into the ﬁlled in site and the Not I site of pGAPRONE - MAPK2 . For construction of pGAPRONE - MAPK2 ( T190A , Y192F ) , the oligonucleotides 5 (cid:2) - GATCAATGTACGCAGACC - TCTGCGCTCGCTGAATTCGTTGTAACTAGGTGGTATCGACCAC - CTGAAGTGTTAGGCATGGGATCCCAT - 3 (cid:2) and 5 (cid:2) - CGATGGGATC - CCATGCCTAACACTTCAGGTGGTCGATACCACCTAGTTACAAC - GAATTCAGCGAGCGCAGAGGTCTGCGTACAT - 3 (cid:2) containing com - plementary sequences were annealed and cloned between the Bcl I and Cla I sites of pGAPRONE - MAPK2 . Mutations are underlined . Stable Transformation Stable transformation of bloodstream or procyclic form cells ( Li and Gottesdiener , 1996 ) and selection of independent clones in microti - ter plates ( Vassella et al . , 2000 ) were performed as described , except that transformed procyclic form cells were supplemented with 5 (cid:3) 10 5 nontransformed cells / ml during selection in microtiter plates . Bloodstream forms were selected with 0 . 1 (cid:5) g / ml puromycin , 1 . 5 (cid:5) g / ml phleomycin , or 1 . 0 (cid:5) g / ml hygromycin and procyclic forms with 1 (cid:5) g / ml phleomycin or 20 (cid:5) g / ml hygromycin . For stable transformation , pMAPK2koHYG R and pMAPK2koBLE R were lin - earized with Xba I and Xho I and pGAPRONE - MAPK2 was linear - ized with Kpn I and Not I . Nucleic Acid and Protein Analyses Northern blot and Southern blot analyses were performed using standard procedures ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . Multiprime labeled probes used for hybridization were generated from the coding regions of TbMAPK2 , or from a Pst I fragment of plasmid 9B1 de - rived from the (cid:1) - tubulin gene ( Schneider et al . , 1988 ) . Hybridization signals were quantiﬁed with a PhosphorImager ( Molecular Dynam - ics , Sunnyvale , CA ) . For immunoblot analysis , total cell protein extracts were sepa - rated on a 12 % polyacrylamide gel and transferred to Immobilon P ( Millipore Corp . , Bedford , MA ) . A polyclonal antibody directed against KFR1 ( provided by C . C . Wang ) was used at a dilution of 1 : 2000 as described ( Hua and Wang , 1994 ) . Enzyme Assay , Cytological Assays , and Immunoﬂuorescence For the GUS activity assay , logarithmically growing bloodstream form trypanosomes were harvested , washed twice with colorless medium lacking phenol red and haemin according to Sbicego et al . ( 1999 ) , and resuspended at 10 6 cells / ml in colorless medium . At different time points after triggering differentiation at 27°C , 100 (cid:5) l aliquots were withdrawn and mixed with 100 (cid:5) l reaction buffer in microtiter plates , containing 1 mM 4 - methylumbelliferyl (cid:1) - d - gluc - uronide ( MUG ) substrate ( Molecular Probes Europe BV , Leiden , The Netherlands ) , 0 . 82 M Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 6 % SDS , and 0 . 3 mg / ml BSA , and incubated for 60 min at 37°C . The ﬂuorescent product was quantiﬁed using a Spectra MAX 340 ( Molecular De - vices , Menlo Park , CA ) set at 355 - nm excitation and 460 - nm emis - sion wavelengths . Each measurement was performed in duplicate . 5 - Bromo - 2 (cid:2) deoxyuridine ( BrdU ) incorporation into the kineto - plast and nucleus of dividing trypanosomes was performed as described ( Woodward and Gull , 1990 ; Vassella et al . , 1997a ) . Cell smears were air - dried and ﬁxed with acetone at (cid:5) 20°C for 10 min . Incorporation of BrdU was analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence using an anti - BrdU mAb ( hybridoma supernatant , obtained from the De - velopmental Studies Hybridoma Bank of the University of Illinois , Urbana , IL ) used at a dilution of 1 : 2 and a TRITC - conjugated anti - mouse secondary antibody ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) used at a dilution of 1 : 400 . Cells were counterstained with the DNA binding dye 4 , 6 - diamino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) . Analysis of the nuclear DNA content by ﬂow cytometry was performed as described ( Vassella et al . , 1997a ) . Expression of EP and GPEET procyclins and VSG on the surface of acetone - ﬁxed cells was determined by immunoﬂuorescence using the anti - EP mAb TRBP1 / 247 ( Richardson et al . , 1988 ) at 1 : 500 , anti - GPEET K1 antiserum ( Ruepp et al . , 1997 ) at 1 : 500 and poly - clonal anti - VSG 221 antiserum ( obtained from George Cross , Rock - efeller University , New York ) at 1 : 1000 . TRITC - conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( Sigma ) was used at 1 : 400 and FITC - conjugated anti - rabbit antibody ( Sigma ) at 1 : 2000 . Expression of CAP5 . 5 was determined on formaldehyde - ﬁxed cells permeabilized with Triton X - 100 ( Vassella et al . , 1997b ) using anti - CAP5 . 5 antiserum ( Mat - thews and Gull , 1994 ; provided by K . Gull , University of Manches - ter , Manchester , United Kingdom ) diluted 1 : 2 and a FITC - conju - gated anti - rat secondary antibody ( DAKO , Carpinteria , CA ) diluted 1 : 500 . RESULTS A T . brucei Protein Kinase Containing the Signature of Extracellular - Signal – Regulated Kinases A cDNA clone serendipitously selected from an expression library from procyclic forms of T . brucei matched a genomic sequence in the database encoding a MAP kinase - like pro - tein ( accession no . Z54341 ; Wilson , K . and Boothroyd , J . C , unpublished results ) . The cDNA contained a short 3 (cid:2) un - translated region ( UTR ) of 47 nucleotides and a poly ( A ) tail . All trypanosomal mRNAs contain a spliced leader at their 5 (cid:2) end that is joined to the protein - coding exon by trans - splic - ing ( Agabian , 1990 ) . The splice - acceptor site of the MAP kinase mRNA was mapped by reverse transcription - PCR to a position 60 nucleotides upstream of the start of the major open reading frame ( ORF ) . The ORF potentially encodes a protein with a length of 365 amino acids and a predicted molecular mass of 42 kDa . By using proﬁle database searches , all the conserved amino acid residues that deﬁne ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3789 the catalytic domain of protein kinases were identiﬁed in a region that encompasses the sequences from amino acid positions 30 – 318 ( Figure 1 , shaded light gray ) . A sequence motif that is diagnostic for serine - threonine protein kinases was also found in this domain ( Figure 1 , S / T ) . The signature motif of MAP kinases ( F - X 10 - R - E - X 77 - R - D - X - K - X 14 - C ) , which is absent from all other classes of protein kinases ( Dorin et al . , 1999 ) , is also present in this sequence and maps to amino acid positions 65 – 173 . In addition , the TEY activation site of the regulatory loop of ERKs was found 17 amino acids downstream of the signature motif ( Figure 1 , shaded dark gray ) . In agreement with these predictions , Blast searches of databases revealed the highest similarities to ERKs from various eukaryotes . The protein kinase shares 44 % amino acid sequence identity with ERK1 from Dictyostelium discoi - deum ( Gaskins et al . , 1994 ) , 43 % identity with ERK3 from Arabidopsis thaliana ( Mizoguchi et al . , 1993 ) , 40 – 41 % identity with ERK1 / 2 from mammals and 40 – 42 % identity with the different yeast homologues . The other MAPK from T . brucei , KFR1 ( Hua and Wang , 1994 ) , is more distantly related ( 39 % identity ) as is the case for LMPK from Leishmania major ( 35 % identity ; Wiese , 1998 ) or for the MAPK homologues from Plasmodium falciparum ( 30 – 36 % identity ) . However , the pro - tein kinase shares the highest amino acid sequence identity with an unusual MAPK - like gene product from the database of Leishmania major ( CAB94009 ; 69 % identity ) which has a TQY sequence in the regulatory loop instead of the con - served TEY motif . An alignment of the T . brucei homologue with ERKs from A . thaliana , D . discoideum , and Rattus norve - gicus and KFR1 is shown in Figure 1 , demonstrating that the conserved residues are present at the same positions in all these sequences . Based on these ﬁndings , the protein kinase gene was classiﬁed as belonging to the ERK group of MAP kinases . Since this is the second MAP kinase described in trypanosomes , it was named T . brucei MAPK2 ( TbMAPK2 ) . Although Tb MAPK2 is most similar in amino acid sequence to ERK1 and ERK2 from various organisms , it lacks the characteristic docking / cytosolic retention motif common to this subgroup of ERKs ( Tanoue et al . , 2001 ) . Generation of a TbMAPK2 Null Mutant in Bloodstream Form Trypanosomes We wanted to investigate whether TbMAPK2 was involved in growth or differentiation processes of trypanosomes . To generate a null mutant , it was important to determine the genomic organization of TbMAPK2 and to investigate if the expression of the gene was developmentally regulated . Southern blot analysis revealed that TbMAPK2 is a single copy gene ( unpublished data ) . Northern blot analysis re - vealed the presence of two TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc transcripts of 2 . 5 and 1 . 3 kb , the latter corresponding to the length of the isolated cDNA clone ( Figure 2A ) . The two transcripts might be alternatively spliced or alternatively polyadenylated products or might be derived from different alleles . The relative amounts of the two mRNA species were similar in the bloodstream and the procyclic form , but the steady state level of both mRNA species together was approximately threefold higher in the bloodstream form than in the procy - clic form . Trypanosomes are diploid organisms . To generate a null mutant by homologous recombination , two targeting con - structs , pMAPK2koHYG R and pMAPK2koBLE R , were made . These contained antibiotic - resistance genes cloned between sequences ﬂanking the ORF of TbMAPK2 ( Figure 2B ) . The constructs were used to stably transform blood - stream forms of a transgenic trypanosome clone , GUSone , in which the coding region of one EP procyclin gene had been replaced by E . coli (cid:1) - glucuronidase ( GUS ; Sbicego et al . , 1999 ) . In these cells the expression of GUS occurs in parallel to that of EP procyclin when cells are triggered to differen - tiate to the procyclic form . The advantage of using GUSone cells for gene disruption is that the kinetics of differentiation of the mutant cell lines can be easily monitored in a simple Figure 1 . The T . brucei MAPK homologue contains the signature of ERK kinases . The amino acid sequence is displayed by Clustal W alignment with the corresponding sequences of ERKs from Arabi - dopsis thaliana ( MPK3 _ ARATH , EMBL accession no . Q39023 ; Mizoguchi et al . , 1993 ) , Dictyostelium discoideum ( ERK1 _ DICDI , EMBL accession no . P42525 ; Gaskins et al . , 1994 ) , Rattus norvegicus ( ERK1 _ rat , EMBL accession no . P21708 ; Marquardt and Stabel , 1992 ) , and KFR1 from T . brucei ( EMBL accession no . L10997 ; Hua and Wang , 1994 ) . Asterisks , colons , and dots underneath the align - ment indicate identical , conserved , and semiconserved amino acids , respectively . The catalytic domain is shaded light gray and se - quences highly diagnostic for ERK kinases ( Dorin et al . , 1999 ) are shaded dark gray . Domains with known functions are overlined : these include the ATP binding site , a domain diagnostic for serine / threonine kinases ( S / T ) , the P - loop domain , and the phosphoryla - tion site of protein kinase A and protein kinase C ( P ) . I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3790 one - step enzyme reaction in microtiter plates ( Sbicego et al . , 1999 ) . The ﬁrst transformation was performed with the deletion construct pMAPK2koHYG R and the hygromycin - resistant clone MAPK2 / (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG GUS NEO was selected for Southern blot analysis . Digestion of genomic DNA with Xba I and Xho I separates both allelic loci of TbMAPK2 owing to a restriction site polymorphism . Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from GUSone wild - type cells , digested with these enzymes , revealed two DNA fragments hybridizing to a TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc probe , whereas only one fragment was detected in the mutant , demonstrating that one allele had been deleted in this clone ( Figure 2C ) . Both forms of Tb - MAPK2 mRNAs could still be detected in Northern blots , however , ruling out the possibility that the two transcripts were derived from different alleles ( Figure 2D ) . This clone was subjected to a second round of transformation using the deletion construct pMAPK2koBLE R . One clone , (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG / (cid:1) mapk2 : : BLE GUS NEO , in which the second copy of TbMAPK2 had been deleted ( Figure 2C ) , was se - lected for further analysis in vitro . TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc mRNA was not detected in this clone ( Figure 2D ) , conﬁrming that both copies of the kinase gene were deleted . Bloodstream forms of the null mutant had a population doubling time indistinguishable from that of the wild type ( Figure 3A ) and no detectable alterations in cell morphology . To investigate whether ( over ) expression of other ERK homologues might compensate for the deletion of TbMAPK2 , immunoblot anal - ysis was performed using an antiserum against KFR1 . How - ever , the levels of KFR1 were similar in wild - type and null mutant cells ( Figure 2E ) . Deletion of TbMAPK2 Results in Delayed Differentiation and Growth Inhibition Bloodstream form trypanosomes can be triggered to differ - entiate to the procyclic form in vitro by subjecting the cells to a drop in temperature and the addition of cis - aconitate to the culture medium ( Brun and Scho¨nenberger , 1981 ) . When (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 bloodstream forms were exposed to the dif - ferentiation signal , the majority of cells showed morpholog - ical changes characteristic for the procyclic form ( Figure 3B ) , including repositioning of their kinetoplast , the mitochon - drial genome , to a nucleus proximal location ( unpublished data ) . In marked contrast to the wild type , however , the null mutant underwent subsequent growth arrest ( Figure 3B ) , and an increased proportion of cells showed aberrant mor - phologies ( unpublished data ) . It was theoretically possible that growth inhibition of this mutant was due to secondary mutations unrelated to TbMAPK2 deletion . Before we em - barked on a detailed phenotypic analysis of the null mutant , we reintroduced one copy of TbMAPK2 into an ectopic locus of the null mutant in order to verify whether growth could be restored . A puromycin - resistant clone ( (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG / (cid:1) mapk2 : : BLE GUS NEO MAPK2 PAC ) was obtained in which the ﬁrst gene of the pair of procyclin genes in the EP / PAG1 locus ( Roditi and Clayton , 1999 ) had been replaced by the TbMAPK2 gene and the second gene by the puromycin - resistance gene . Correct integration of the TbMAPK2 add - back construct was conﬁrmed by Southern blot analysis ( unpublished data ) . On Northern blots , a single species of mRNA was detected that corresponded to the predicted length of the transcript of (cid:6) 1400 nucleotides ( un - Figure 2 . Nucleic acid analyses of TbMAPK2 mutants . ( A ) Steady state level of TbMAPK2 mRNA . Total RNA ( 10 (cid:5) g ) extracted from bloodstream form ( BSF ) or procyclic form ( PCF ) trypanosomes was compared by Northern blot analysis using a TbMAPK2 - speciﬁc probe ( top panel ) . The rRNA bands were used as internal control for sample loading ( bottom panel ) . ( B ) Deletion constructs . The Tb - MAPK2 locus is shown in the top part of the ﬁgure and the targeting constructs for deletion of both alleles of TbMAPK2 are shown below ( drawn to scale ) . The ORFs of the kinase and the resistance genes are indicated by horizontal arrows , the splice - acceptor site ( SAS ) and polyadenylation site ( PA ) by vertical arrows , the catalytic region by a gray box , and sequences ﬂanking the TbMAPK2 gene in the knock - out constructs by open boxes . Relevant restriction sites used for cloning are shown . ( C ) Southern blot analysis of TbMAPK2 mutants . Genomic DNA was digested with Xho I and Xba I , which separate the two TbMAPK2 alleles (cid:6) and (cid:1) , and hybridized with a radiolabeled probe from the ORF of TbMAPK2 . ( D ) Northern blot analysis of TbMAPK2 mutants . Total RNA extracted from blood - stream form trypanosomes of the wild - type and TbMAPK2 mutants were hybridized with sequences from TbMAPK2 ( top panel ) or , as a control for sample loading , with a (cid:1) - tubulin – speciﬁc probe ( bottom panel ) . ( E ) Top panel : immunoblot analysis of bloodstream forms of the wild - type and the null mutant using a rabbit antiserum against KFR1 ( Hua and Wang , 1997 ) . Equal cell numbers were loaded per lane . Bottom panel : after electroblotting , the residual proteins in the polyacrylamide gel were stained with Coomassie blue , conﬁrming that similar amounts of proteins were loaded per lane . ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3791 published data ) . In this clone , the steady state level of Tb - MAPK2 mRNA was 5 – 10 fold higher than in the wild - type , presumably due to transcription from the strong procyclin promoter upstream of the ectopic TbMAPK2 gene . In marked contrast to the null mutant , the TbMAPK2 add - back mutant was able to grow after triggering differentiation to the procyclic form ( Figure 3B ) . The population doubling time of this clone ( 21 . 6 h , r (cid:7) 1 . 00 ) , calculated from the slope of the linear regression from days 2 – 6 in Figure 3B , was almost identical to that obtained for the wild type ( 20 . 9 h , r (cid:7) 0 . 99 ) . Thus , growth inhibition of the null mutant is due to deletion of the TbMAPK2 gene . Activation of MAP kinases requires phosphorylation at both threonine and tyrosine residues of the TEY site in the regulatory loop by dual - speciﬁc MEK ( Waskiewicz and Coo - per , 1995 ) . To investigate whether activation of TbMAPK2 is essential for growth of the parasite , a TbMAPK2 mutant was constructed in which the T190 and Y192 residues in the activation domain were substituted by alanine and phenyl - alanine , respectively , and integrated into the procyclin locus of the TbMAPK2 null mutant . Two independent blood - stream form clones ( (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 MAPK2 ( T190A , Y192F ) 1 and 5 ) in which the mutated TbMAPK2 gene had inte - grated correctly ( as shown by PCR analysis of genomic DNA ) were selected for further analysis . Northern blots conﬁrmed that the mutated gene was expressed in these cells ( unpublished data ) . When the (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 MAPK2 ( T190A , Y192F ) clones 1 and 5 were triggered to differentiate to the procyclic form , they ceased to proliferate ( Figure 3C ) , as was the case for the null mutant . This suggests that phosphorylation of Tb MAPK2 by MEK is essential for the parasite to establish procyclic form cultures . The null mutant might either be blocked in differentiation or , alternatively , might be able to undergo differentiation but be unable to grow as procyclic form trypanosomes . We therefore assessed the expression proﬁle of markers of the early and late phases of differentiation . We ﬁrst determined activation of GUS expression as an early marker of differen - tiation . As shown in Figure 4A , (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 trypano - somes were able to express high levels of GUS enzyme activity , but the kinetics of appearance of this marker was delayed by 10 – 12 h relative to the GUSone wild - type or the add - back mutant ( (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 MAPK2 ) . This result was conﬁrmed in two further experiments ( unpublished data ) . In individual cells , GUS expression mirrors that of EP procy - clin during differentiation ( Sbicego et al . , 1999 ) . GPEET pro - cyclin appears on the surface a few hours later than EP procyclin and is regulated independently ( Vassella et al . , 2000 ) . We therefore investigated the appearance of GPEET - positive cells by immunoﬂuorescence ( Figure 4B ) . GPEET - positive cells from the wild - type and the add - back appeared with similar kinetics , whereas those from the null mutant Figure 3 . Stage - speciﬁc growth inhibition of the TbMAPK2 null mutant . ( A ) Population growth of bloodstream form trypanosomes of the wild - type ( MAPK2 / MAPK2 GUS NEO ) and the null mutant ( (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG / (cid:1) mapk2 : : BLE GUS NEO ) . ( B and C ) Population growth upon triggering differentiation ( (cid:4) cis - aconitate ) of ( B ) the same clones as above and the add - back mutant ( (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG / (cid:1) mapk2 : : BLE GUS NEO MAPK2 PAC ) and ( C ) the add - back mutant together with two clones in which the TEY activation site of TbMAPK2 was mutated ( (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG / (cid:1) mapk2 : : BLE GUS NEO MAPK2 ( T190A , Y192F ) PAC 1 and 5 ) . Cells triggered to differentiate to the procyclic form were diluted at daily intervals to ensure logarithmic growth . The population growth was calculated as cell density multiplied by the cumulative dilution factors . A represen - tative experiment from six independent experiments is shown , to - gether with Normarski images of formaldehyde - ﬁxed wild - type or null mutant cells , harvested 5 d after exposure to the differentiation signal . I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3792 were delayed by (cid:6) 13 h ( calculated from the time points at which 50 % of the cells were positive for GPEET in the different cultures ) , consistent with the results obtained with the GUS activity . The same also held true for the expression of CAP5 . 5 , a marker of late phase differentiation , which appears with a lag of (cid:6) 8 h relative to EP procyclin ( Mat - thews and Gull , 1994 ; Figure 4C ) . The expression levels of GPEET and CAP5 . 5 were not affected by the deletion of TbMAPK2 , because differentiating cells of the wild - type , knock - out , or add - back mutant , stained with the different antibodies , exhibited similar ﬂuorescence intensities ( un - published data ) . In conclusion , in the null mutant the ap - pearance of each of these markers was delayed by approx - imately 12 h relative to the wild - type or the add - back clone . This was conﬁrmed in a total of seven differentiation exper - iments using the different markers . By days 3 – 4 , differenti - ation of the null mutant was complete , as indicated by maximal expression of the entire set of differentiation mark - ers in all cells . In addition , all cells had completely shed their variant surface glycoprotein ( VSG ) coat at that time point ( unpublished data ) . Thus , the null mutant seems to be able to undergo complete differentiation , but it develops to the procyclic form with markedly delayed kinetics . The same also holds true for the (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 MAPK2 ( T190A , Y192F ) clones 1 and 5 , which differentiated with kinetics similar to those of null mutant cells ( unpublished data ) , demonstrating that phosphorylation of TbMAPK2 is also required for this developmental process . To uncouple differentiation from growth , we attempted to produce null mutants in established procyclic forms of the pleomorphic strain AnTat1 . 1 . We were able to obtain single knock - out clones ( MAPK2 / (cid:1) mapk2 : : HYG ) , but it was not pos - sible to delete the second copy of TbMAPK2 . MAPK2 / (cid:1) mapk2 cells that were stably transformed with the second construct ( pMAPK2koBLE R ) and selected with phleomycin in the ab - sence of hygromycin , always integrated the phleomycin - resistance gene into the locus containing the hygromycin - resistance gene , thereby deleting the latter . This was conﬁrmed by Southern blot analysis of 10 independent clones ( unpublished data ) . In contrast , 10 independent trans - formants that were selected with both antibiotics integrated the phleomycin - resistance gene incorrectly and retained the second copy of TbMAPK2 ( unpublished data ) . This supports the conclusion that TbMAPK2 is also required by fully dif - ferentiated procyclic forms . The Null Mutant Undergoes Cell Cycle Arrest When long slender forms are triggered to differentiate to the procyclic form , they transiently express markers of the short stumpy bloodstream form and presumably also undergo transient cell cycle arrest in the G 0 phase in which the short stumpy form is held ( Tasker et al . , 2000 ) . Release of the cell from a quiescent state is one of the major functions of MAP kinases in different systems ( Lavoie et al . , 1996 ) . We there - fore investigated if the reason for the failure of the null mutant to grow as procyclic forms was due to irreversible arrest in G 0 . To test this hypothesis , trypanosomes were triggered to differentiate and , at daily intervals , aliquots were pulse labeled for 6 h with the thymidine analogue BrdU , which is incorporated into the genome of cells pro - ceeding through S - phase . Acetone - ﬁxed trypanosomes were double - labeled with antibodies directed against BrdU and GPEET procyclin ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . To exclude cells that were still replicating as bloodstream forms from the analy - sis , the percentage of BrdU - positive cells was determined only from those expressing GPEET . Twenty - four hours after Figure 4 . The null mutant expresses early and late differentiation markers with slow kinetics . ( A ) Kinetics of GUS expression upon triggering differentiation with cis - aconitate at 27°C . Substrate con - version was assayed in duplicate in a SpectraMax 340 ( Molecular Devices ) at 460 nm . The mean ( (cid:8) SD ) from three independent ex - periments is presented . ( B and C ) Kinetics of appearance of GPEET procyclin ( B ) and CAP5 . 5 ( C ) in cells triggered to differentiate . The percentage of positive cells was determined by immunoﬂuorescence using speciﬁc antibodies . Differentiating cells of the wild - type , knock - out , or add - back mutant , stained with the different antibod - ies , exhibited similar ﬂuorescence intensities ( unpublished data ) . At least 100 cells were counted per sample . ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3793 exposure to the differentiation signal , 30 – 40 % of GPEET - positive cells of the wild - type and the add - back mutant had incorporated BrdU during the short labeling period ( Figure 5B ) , which corresponds to one quarter of the generation time of procyclic forms . More than half of this population re - mained BrdU - negative , because these cells had not pro - ceeded through S - phase during the labeling period . Extend - ing the incubation period to 24 h resulted in the labeling of (cid:9) 90 % of these cells ( unpublished data ) . A similar percent - age of double - positive cells was also obtained for the (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 clone ( Figure 5B ) . This clearly demonstrates that most null mutant cells are able to progress efﬁciently through the ﬁrst cell division as procyclic form trypano - somes . At later time points after exposure to the differentiation signal , the percentage of BrdU - positive cells from the null mutant dropped progressively . By day 3 , (cid:6) 20 % of the cells were BrdU positive , varying slightly between experiments , and by days 4 – 5 virtually no BrdU - positive cells were de - tected ( Figure 5B ) . In contrast , the proportion of BrdU - pos - itive cells from the wild - type and the add - back clone re - mained at a constant level between 30 and 40 % during the course of the experiment . Cell Cycle Position of Arrested Cells In trypanosomes , replication and division of the nucleus and the kinetoplast occurs in a temporally ordered manner ( Woodward and Gull , 1990 ) . Cells in the interphase of the cell cycle contain one kinetoplast ( K ) and one nucleus ( N ) . Dividing trypanosomes ﬁrst segregate their daughter kin - etoplasts before they segregate their daughter nuclei . As a consequence , cells with the 2K / 1N conﬁguration are still in the G 2 phase of their nuclear cell cycle ( Woodward and Gull , 1990 ) . After nuclear division has occurred , cells show the 2K / 2N conﬁguration and , after cytokinesis , two daughter cells emerge , both showing the 1K / 1N conﬁguration . Thus , by determining the proportion of cells with the different kinetoplast / nucleus conﬁgurations it is possible to map the position in the cell cycle in which the null mutant was arrested . To distinguish between proliferating and arrested cells , trypanosomes were labeled with BrdU for 24 h . During this labeling period , which corresponds to one generation time , we would expect that almost all replicating cells would become BrdU positive , while cells which had arrested before the labeling period would remain BrdU negative . Cells were triggered to differentiate and subsequently cultured for 3 d in the absence and 1 d in the presence of BrdU . Acetone - ﬁxed cells were labeled with anti - BrdU mAb and counter - stained with DAPI . BrdU - positive or - negative cells were scored individually for their nucleus / kinetoplast conﬁgura - tions . As expected , (cid:7) 90 % of the wild type and the add - back mutant incorporated BrdU , and these showed the normal distribution of cells with 1K / 1N ( 70 % ) , 2K / 1N ( 10 % ) , and 2K / 2N ( 8 % ) conﬁgurations ( Woodward and Gull , 1990 ; Fig - ure 6 , top panel ) . The only discernible difference between the two cultures was a higher percentage of aberrant forms ( scored as 0K / 1N , 0K / 2N , 1K / 2N , or xK / yN , y (cid:7) 3 ) in the add - back ( 10 % ) than in the wild type ( 3 % ) . Virtually all the BrdU - negative wild - type or add - back cells had the 1K / 1N conﬁguration , and cells with the 2K / 1N or 2K / 2N conﬁgu - rations were never found in these cultures ( Figure 6 , bottom panel ) . This is to be expected , because cells showing these conﬁgurations have just emerged from S - phase and would therefore be BrdU positive . In contrast to the wild type and the add - back mutant , 90 % of the null mutant cells had undergone arrest and , among these , 25 – 30 % showed aberrant conﬁgurations ( Figure 6 , bottom panel ) . From the arrested cells with normal conﬁg - urations , 89 % showed the 1K / 1N , 6 % the 2K / 1N , and 5 % the 2K / 2N conﬁgurations ( Figure 6A , bottom panel , and Figure 6B ) , reminiscent of the distribution in proliferating wild - type and the TbMAPK2 add - back cultures ( Figure 6A , top panel ) . This suggests that the null mutant had under - gone arrest at multiple phases of the cell cycle . Among the arrested cells with aberrant conﬁgurations , 47 % showed the 1K / 2N conﬁguration , 21 % had lost their nucleus ( xK / 0N conﬁguration , termed zoid according to Matthews et al . , 1994 ) , 15 % had lost their kinetoplast ( 0K / xN , termed akin - Figure 5 . Growth inhibition of the null mutant is due to cell cycle arrest . Bloodstream form trypanosomes were triggered to differen - tiate by addition of cis - aconitate at 27°C . At daily intervals , aliquots were pulse - labeled with BrdU for 6 h . Acetone - ﬁxed cells were double - stained with antibodies against GPEET procyclin and BrdU . ( A ) Kinetics of appearance of GPEET - positive cells . ( B ) Percentage of BrdU - positive cells of the subpopulation expressing GPEET dur - ing the time course of the experiment . At least 100 cells were counted per sample . After 4 – 5 d (cid:7) 90 % of the null mutant cells had undergone cell - cycle arrest ( 4 independent experiments ) . I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3794 etoplast ) , and 17 % were multinucleated ( xK / yN , y (cid:7) 3 ; see Figure 6B ) . These ﬁndings suggest that cytokinesis is also severely impaired in the null mutant . To conﬁrm that null mutant cells had undergone non - phase - speciﬁc arrest , the DNA content of propidium iodide – stained cells was measured by ﬂow cytometry . Cells were gated on ﬂuorescence pulse width vs . area measurement to exclude cell doublets ( and cells that had segregated their daughter nuclei ) from the analysis . Measurements by ﬂow cytometry revealed a similar distribution of cells in G 1 ( 2n ) , S ( 2n - 4n ) , and G2 - M ( 4n ) in proliferating wild - type cultures and arrested (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 cultures ( Figure 7 ) . This con - ﬁrms that the null mutant had undergone arrest in multiple phases of the cell cycle . Among the cells with aberrant conﬁgurations , only the akinetoplasts ( 0K / 1N ) , which com - prise 4 – 5 % of the total population , were gated , whereas the 1K / 2N cells , the zoids and the multinucleated cells were excluded from the analysis ( see above ) . Thus , in the gated population , aberrant cells are unlikely to be overrepresented in a speciﬁc phase of the cell cycle . DISCUSSION A TbMAPK2 deletion mutant , lacking both alleles of the single copy gene , was constructed in bloodstream form try - panosomes . The null mutant exhibited no detectable pheno - type in this stage , but was unable to grow after differentia - tion to the procyclic form . Compared with the wild type , the null mutant differentiated to the procyclic form with mark - edly delayed kinetics . The appearance of both early and late markers of differentiation was delayed by (cid:6) 12 h . This phe - notype was due to TbMAPK2 deletion , because the kinetics of differentiation of the add - back mutant was similar to that of the wild type . If the differentiation “clock” runs more slowly in the null mutant , we would expect later events to be delayed more than early events . Because appearance of pro - cyclin and CAP5 . 5 were delayed to the same extent , this rather suggests that cells are retarded in passing a particular checkpoint in differentiation but are then free to proceed through the subsequent steps at a normal pace . This check - point would be before the onset of procyclin expression . Generating TbMAPK2 null mutant cells in procyclic form trypanosomes was not possible , indicating that the inability of (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 cells to grow as procyclic forms was not due to a block in differentiation . Thus , the growth and differentiation phenotypes of the null mutant are not cou - pled . Both these processes seem to be controlled by activated Tb MAPK2 , because introduction of a kinase mutant , in which the TEY activation domain was replaced by the amino acids AEF , into the null mutant did not restore its ability to differentiate with fast kinetics and to proliferate thereafter . This indicates that growth and differentiation are controlled by one or several signaling cascades operating through Tb - MAPK2 . Searches of database libraries revealed four puta - tive MEKs in T . brucei , but it remains to be shown if one of these is able to phosphorylate Tb MAPK2 . Null mutant cells that had undergone differentiation were able to progress efﬁciently through S - phase of the ﬁrst cell cycle as procyclic forms , as indicated by a high proportion of BrdU / GPEET double - positive cells 1 – 2 d after triggering differentiation . Although null mutant cells incorporated BrdU , the cell density did not increase during this incuba - tion period ( see Figure 3 ) . The apparent discrepancy be - tween these results may be explained by the ﬁnding that Figure 6 . Null mutant cells are arrested at multiple phases of the cell cycle . ( A ) Percentage of di - viding ( BrdU - positive ) and non - dividing ( BrdU - negative ) cells showing different kinetoplast / nucleus conﬁgurations as indi - cated in the ﬁgure . Cells with 0K / 1N , 0K / 2N , 1K / 2N and xK / yN , y (cid:7) 3 conﬁgurations were scored as aberrant cells . Trypano - somes were triggered to differen - tiate , cultured for 3 d and then incubated for an additional day in the presence of BrdU . Acetone - ﬁxed cells were labeled with a monoclonal anti - BrdU antibody and counterstained with DAPI . Bloodstream forms of all three clones showed only a low per - centage ( (cid:3) 5 % ) of aberrant cells . At least 600 cells were counted per sample . ( B ) Examples of non - dividing null mutant cells with aberrant conﬁgurations . Cells were stained with DAPI ( left panel ) and labeled with the monoclonal anti - BrdU antibody ( right panel ) . ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3795 30 – 40 % of bloodstream forms normally fail to differentiate to the procyclic form and die subsequently ( Matthews et al . , 1994 ) . In contrast to the wild type , differentiated null mutant cells underwent cell cycle arrest . Again , this phenotype was completely restored in the add - back mutant . Analysis of the DNA content by ﬂow cytometry and the nucleus / kineto - plast conﬁguration of procyclic forms both revealed that the null mutant arrested in all phases of the cell cycle . Moreover , 25 – 30 % of the null mutant cells either showed the 1K / 2N conﬁguration , had lost their kinetoplast or nucleus , or were multinucleated , indicating that cytokinesis was also im - paired to some extent . Proliferating bloodstream forms are only receptive for the differentiation signal when they reach a particular window in G 1 , in which the stumpy form is held ( Matthews et al . , 1994 ) . Thus , it can be formally excluded that null mutant cells were arrested at different phases of the cell cycle as procyclic forms because they were already in these phases before differentiation . We were surprised by the ﬁnding that most procyclic form cells showed normal morphology , were motile , and sur - vived for relatively long periods in culture , although they were arrested in all phases of the cell cycle . Nonphase - speciﬁc arrest is not unique for trypanosomes , however , because incubation of proliferating T cells ( Eichhorn et al . , 1993 ) or B cells ( Vaickus et al . , 1989 ; Higaki et al . , 1994 ) with antibodies directed against major histocompatibility com - plex class II antigens also resulted in growth arrest in all phases of the cell cycle . Moreover , arrest was reversible in these cells ( Eichhorn et al . , 1993 ) , indicating that they had not lost their vital cell functions . Inhibitors of tyrosine protein kinases abolished antibody - induced growth arrest , suggest - ing that this process is mediated by tyrosine kinases or phosphatases ( Eichhorn et al . , 1993 ) , but it is not known whether the MAP kinase pathway is involved . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst example of a MAP kinase knock - out that resulted in nonphase - speciﬁc arrest . In other cell systems , overexpression of dominant negative mutants of MAP kinase pathways or addition of speciﬁc inhibitors of MEK to cultured cells always resulted either in speciﬁc arrest in G 1 ( Weber et al . , 1997 ; Talarmin et al . , 2000 ) at the entry into S ( Rescan et al . , 2001 ) or in G 2 ( Wright et al . , 1999 ) . Mammalian MAP kinases control cell cycle progres - sion by activating cyclin D1 - cdk4 or cyclin B - CDC2 com - plexes ( Cheng et al . , 1998 ; Wright et al . , 1999 ) . These are unlikely to be the sole targets of Tb MAPK2 , however , which rather seems to be required at multiple phases of the cell cycle . In higher eukaryotes , MAPKs have also been shown to phosphorylate a variety of other proteins involved in cellu - lar growth ( reviewed by Whitmarsh and Davis , 2000 ) . These include proteins regulating gene expression , e . g . , transcrip - tion factors , factors controlling mRNA stability , eukaryotic translation factor - 4E , or proteins implicated in modulating chromatin structure . MAPKs also control growth and differ - entiation by inhibition of phosphodiesterase 4 , thus modu - lating intracellular cAMP levels ( Hoffmann et al . , 1999 ) . Re - cently , rat ERK1 has been shown to phosphorylate carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II ( Graves et al . , 2000 ) , a key enzyme in the de novo synthesis of pyrimidines . To investigate whether growth arrest in the Tb MAPK2 null mutant was caused by low intracellular concentrations of pyrimidines , (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 cells were cultured in the pres - ence of orotate , a membrane - permeable product of dihy - droorotate dehydrogenase operating downstream of car - bamoyl phosphate synthetase II ( Seymour et al . , 1997 ) . It was not possible , however , to restore growth of the null mutant under these conditions . Likewise , addition of lipophilic 8 - ( 4 - chlorophenylthio ) - cAMP to the culture medium had no ef - fect ( unpublished results ) . In higher eukaryotes , MAPK has been shown to contrib - ute to the regulation of cellular functions and growth in different stages of differentiation . In contrast , Tb MAPK2 seems to be restricted to one life cycle stage . A deletion mutant of the MAP kinase LMPK in L . mexicana revealed a phenotype very reminiscent of that of TbMAPK2 in T . brucei . The null mutant grew normally as the promastigote form and was also able to differentiate to the amastigote form ( via the nondividing metacyclic form ) , but the latter stage was unable to grow ( Wiese , 1998 ) . Triggering differentiation of the Leishmania null mutant resulted in a fourfold increase in cell density before cells stopped proliferating . The authors speculated that promastigotes could undergo several cell divisions before entering the differentiation program to Figure 7 . Nuclear DNA content of wild - type ( MAPK2 / MAPK2 ) and null mutant ( (cid:1) mapk2 / (cid:1) mapk2 ) cells . Trypanosomes were trig - gered to differentiate and subsequently cultured in DTM medium for 4 d . Cells were ﬁxed with 70 % ethanol at (cid:5) 20°C , stained with propidium iodide , and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . Cells with the DNA content 2n - 4n were gated on ﬂuorescence pulse width vs . area measurement to exclude cell doublets from the analysis . The per - centage of cells in the different cell - cycle phases was calculated using the Watson Pragmatic Model of FlowJo ( v3 . 4 ) software ( Tree Star , Inc . , San Carlos , CA ) . I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3796 amastigotes , and this would be responsible for the increase in cell density ( differentiation in this system is also asyn - chronous ) . Because their results were only based on cell counts—no cell cycle and differentiation markers were used—it is also possible that , by analogy to the TbMAPK2 null mutant , freshly differentiated amastigotes could divide several times before undergoing arrest . It was not investi - gated if the LMPK null mutant differentiated with delayed kinetics or if growth arrest of amastigotes was nonphase speciﬁc . It would be interesting to know if growth and differentiation processes in different trypanosomatids might operate by the same mechanism ( s ) . Despite the ﬁnding that TbMAPK2 is not required by the bloodstream form , the steady state level of TbMAPK2 mRNA in this stage was threefold higher than in the procy - clic form of the parasite . Northern blot analysis of the pleo - morphic strain AnTat1 . 1 revealed that the expression level of TbMAPK2 mRNA in the long slender form was similar to that in the short stumpy bloodstream form , whereas syn - chronously differentiating cells , exposed to cis - aconitate for 2 h , showed a twofold reduction in the expression level . Finally , 6 h after triggering differentiation , cells had reached the expression level of procyclic forms ( E . V . , unpublished results ) . If the gene had no function in the bloodstream form , it would be difﬁcult to understand why the mRNA levels were speciﬁcally upregulated in this stage . A plausible ex - planation for these apparently contradictory results is that Tb MAPK2 is functionally redundant in the bloodstream form ( but not in the procyclic form ) and can be compensated by ( over ) expression of other kinases . A potential candidate for such a functional homologue might be KFR1 , which exhibits (cid:6) 10 - fold more kinase activity in extracts from the bloodstream form than from the procyclic form ( Hua and Wang , 1997 ) . However , expression of KFR1 was not upregu - lated in the null mutant . Searches of database libraries re - vealed six additional candidate MAP kinases in T . brucei that might also be able to functionally replace Tb MAPK2 in the bloodstream form . Many protozoan parasites have to control growth and differentiation processes adequately to be able to survive in the different environments they encounter during their life cycle . One way to control growth of different life - cycle stages individually in response to extracellular signals might be by expressing different sets of MAP kinases for each proliferative stage . Tb MAPK2 may control growth of procy - clic form trypanosomes in the tsetse midgut , LMPK growth of Leishmania amastigotes in macrophages , and it is possible that other MAP kinases might be required for growth of other life - cycle stages in these and other related parasites . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Keith Gull ( University of Manchester ) , C . C . Wang ( Uni - versity of California ) , and George Cross ( Rockefeller University ) for antibodies and Dirk Dobbelaere for critical reading of the manu - script . This research was supported by grants from the Swiss Na - tional Science Foundation ( 31 - 63987 . 00 ) , the Stanley Thomas John - son Foundation and the Novartis and Roche Research Foundations to I . R . and by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation ( 31 - 64900 . 01 ) to E . V . REFERENCES Agabian , N . ( 1990 ) . Trans - splicing of nuclear pre - mRNAs . Cell 61 , 1157 – 1160 . Altschul , S . F . , Madden , T . L . , Schaffer , A . A . , Zhang , J . , Zhang , Z . , Miller , W . , and Lipman , D . J . ( 1997 ) . Gapped BLAST and PSI - BLAST : a new generation of protein database search programs . Nucleic Acids Res . 25 , 3389 – 3402 . Brun , R . , and Schoenenberger , M . ( 1979 ) . Cultivation and in vitro cloning of procyclic culture forms of Trypanosoma brucei in a semi - deﬁned medium . Acta Trop . 36 , 289 – 292 . Brun , R . , and Scho¨nenberger , M . ( 1981 ) . Stimulating effect of citrate and cis - aconitate on the transformation of Trypanosoma brucei blood - stream forms to procyclic forms in vitro . Z . Parasitenkd . 66 , 17 – 24 . Carrington , M . , Roditi , I . , and Williams , R . O . ( 1987 ) . The structure and transcription of an element interspersed between tandem arrays of mini - exon donor RNA genes in Trypanosoma brucei . Nucleic Acids Res . 15 , 10179 – 10198 . Cheng , M . , Sexl , V . , Sherr , C . J . , and Roussel , M . F . ( 1998 ) . Assembly of cyclin D - dependent kinase and titration of p27 kip1 regulated by mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase ( MEK1 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 1091 – 1096 . Cross , G . A . M . , and Manning , J . C . ( 1973 ) . Cultivation of Trypanosoma brucei ssp . in semi - deﬁned media . Parasitology 67 , 315 – 331 . Dorin , D . , Alano , P . , Boccaccio , I . , Cice´ron , L . , Do¨rig , C . , Sulpice , R . , Parzy , D . , and Do¨rig , C . ( 1999 ) . An atypical mitogen - activated pro - tein kinase ( MAPK ) homologue expressed in gametocytes of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 29912 – 29920 . Eichhorn , M . , Prospero , T . D . , Heussler , V . T . , and Dobbelaere , D . A . E . ( 1993 ) . Antibodies against major histocompatibility complex class II antigens directly inhibit the growth of T cells infected with Theileria parva without affecting their state of activation . J . Exp . Med . 178 , 769 – 776 . Furger , A . , Schu¨rch , N . , Kurath , U . , and Roditi , I . ( 1997 ) . Elements in the 3 (cid:2) untranslated region of procyclin mRNA regulate expression in insect forms of Trypanosoma brucei by modulating RNA stability and translation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 4372 – 4380 . Gaskins , C . , Maeda , M . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation and functional analysis of a developmentally regulated extracellular signal - regulated kinase gene in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 , 6997 – 7012 . Graves , L . M . , Guy , H . I . , Kozlowski , P . , Huang , M . , Lazarowski , E . , Pope , R . M . , Collins , M . A . , Dahlstrand , G . N . , Earp , H . S . 3rd , and Evans , D . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of carbomoyl phosphate synthetase by MAP kinase . Nature 403 , 328 – 332 . Guan , K . - L . ( 1994 ) . The mitogen activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway : from the cell surface to the nucleus . Cell Signal . 6 , 581 – 589 . Hendriks , E . , van Deursen , F . J . , Wilson , J . , Sarkar , M . , Timms , M . , and Matthews , K . R . ( 2000 ) . Life - cycle differentiation in Trypanosoma brucei : molecules and mutants . Biochem . Soc . 28 , 531 – 536 . Hesse , F . , Selzer , P . M . , Mu¨hlsta¨dt , K . , and Duszenko , M . ( 1995 ) . A novel cultivation technique for long - term maintenance of blood - stream form trypanosomes in vitro . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 70 , 157 – 166 . Higaki , Y . , Hata , D . , Kanazashi , S . , Horiguchi , Y . , Yamaoka , K . , Ohshima , Y . , Kim , K . - M . , Hike , T . , and Mayumi , M . ( 1994 ) . Mech - anisms involved in the inhibition of growth of a human B lym - phoma cell line , B104 , by anti - MHC class II antibodies . Immunol . Cell Biol . 72 , 205 – 214 . ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3797 Hoffmann , R . , Baillie , G . S . , MacKenzie , S . J . , Yarwood , S . J . , and Houslay , M . D . ( 1999 ) . The MAP kinase ERK2 inhibits the cyclic AMP - speciﬁc phosphodiesterase HSPDE4D3 by phosphorylating it at Ser579 . EMBO J . 18 , 893 – 903 . Hofmann , K . , Bucher , P . , Falquet , L . , and Bairoch , A . ( 1999 ) . The PROSITE database , its status in 1999 . Nucleic Acids Res . 27 , 215 – 219 . Hua , S . B . , and Wang , C . C . ( 1994 ) . Differential accumulation of a protein kinase homolog in Trypanosoma brucei . J . Cell . Biochem . 54 , 20 – 31 . Hua , S . B . , and Wang , C . C . ( 1997 ) . Interferon - gamma activation of a mitogen - activated protein kinase , KFR1 , in the bloodstream form of Trypanosoma brucei . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 10797 – 10803 . Hunt , M . , Brun , R . , and Ko¨hler , P . ( 1994 ) . Studies on compounds promoting the in vitro transformation of Trypanosoma brucei from bloodstream to procyclic forms . Parasitol . Res . 80 , 600 – 606 . Lavoie , J . N . , Rivard , N . , L’Allemain , G . , and Pouysse´gur , J . ( 1996 ) . A temporal and biochemical link between growth factor - activated MAP kinases , cyclin E1 induction and cell cycle entry . Prog . Cell Cycle Res . 2 , 49 – 58 . Li , F . S . , and Gottesdiener , K . M . ( 1996 ) . An efﬁcient method for stable transfection of bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei . Nucleic Acids Res . 24 , 534 – 535 . Liniger , M . , Bodenmu¨ller , K . , Pays , E . , Gallati , S . , and Roditi , I . ( 2001 ) . Overlapping sense and antisense transcription units in Trypanosoma brucei . Mol . Microbiol . 40 , 869 – 878 . Marquardt , B . , and Stabel , S . ( 1992 ) . Sequence of a rat cDNA encod - ing the ERK1 - MAP kinase . Gene 120 , 297 – 299 . Matthews , K . ( 1999 ) . Developments in the differentiation of Trypano - soma brucei . Parasitol . Today 15 , 76 – 80 . Matthews , K . R . , and Gull , K . ( 1994 ) . Evidence for an interplay between cell cycle progression and the initiation of differentiation between life cycle forms of African trypanosomes . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1147 – 1156 . Mizoguchi , T . , Hayashida , N . , Yamaguchi - Shinozaki , K . , Kamada , H . , and Shinozaki , K . ( 1993 ) . ATMPKs : a gene family of plant MAP kinases in Arabidopsis thaliana . FEBS Lett . 336 , 440 – 444 . Mottram , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Cdc2 - related protein - kinases and cell - cycle control in trypanosomatids . Parasitol . Today 10 , 253 – 257 . Pearson , W . R . ( 1990 ) . Rapid and sensitive sequence comparison with FASTP and FASTA . Methods Enzymol . 183 , 63 – 98 . Rescan , C . , Coutant , A . , Talarmin , H . , Theret , N . , Glaise , D . , Gu - guen - Guillouzo , C . , and Baffet , G . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism in the sequen - tial control of cell morphology and S phase entry by epidermal growth factor involves distinct MEK / ERK activations . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 725 – 738 . Richardson , J . P . , Beecroft , R . P . , Tolson , D . L . , Liu , M . K . , and Pearson , T . W . ( 1988 ) . Procyclin : an unusual immunodominant glycoprotein surface antigen from the procyclic stage of African trypanosomes . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 31 , 203 – 216 . Roditi , I . , and Clayton , C . ( 1999 ) . An unambiguous nomenclature for the major surface glycoproteins of the procyclic form of Trypano - soma brucei . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 103 , 99 – 100 . Roditi , I . et al . ( 1989 ) . Procyclin gene expression and loss of the variant surface glycoprotein during differentiation of Trypanosoma brucei . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 737 – 746 . Rolin , S . , Hancocq Quertier , J . , Paturiaux Hanocq , F . , Nolan , D . P . , and Pays , E . ( 1998 ) . Mild acid stress as a differentiation trigger in Trypanosoma brucei . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 93 , 251 – 262 . Ruepp , S . , Furger , A . , Kurath , U . , Kunz Renggli , C . , Hemphill , A . , Brun , R . , and Roditi , I . ( 1997 ) . Survival of Trypanosoma brucei in the tsetse ﬂy is enhanced by the expression of speciﬁc forms of procy - clin . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1369 – 1379 . Sambrook , J . , Fritsch , E . F . , and Maniatis , T . ( eds . ) ( 1989 ) . Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . Sbicego , S . , Vassella , E . , Kurath , U . , Blum , B . , and Roditi , I . ( 1999 ) . The use of transgenic Trypanosoma brucei to identify compounds inducing the differentiation of bloodstream forms to procyclic forms . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 104 , 311 – 322 . Schneider , A . , Hemphill , A . , Wyler , T . , and Seebeck , T . ( 1988 ) . Large microtubule - associated protein in T . brucei has tandemly repeated , near - identical sequences . Science 241 , 459 – 462 . Schultz , J . , Copley , R . R . , Doerks , T . , Ponting , C . P . , and Bork , P . ( 2000 ) . SMART : a web - based tool for the study of genetically mobile domains . Nucleic Acids Res . 28 , 231 – 234 . Seymour , K . K . , Yeo , A . E . T . , Rieckmann , K . H . , and Christopherson , R . I . ( 1997 ) . dCTP levels are maintained in Plasmodium falciparum subjected to pyrimidine deﬁciency or excess . Ann . Trop . Med . Para - sitol . 91 , 603 – 609 . Talarmin , H . , Rescan , C . , Cariou , S . , Glaise , D . , Zanninelli , G . , Bilodeau , M . , Loyer , P . , Guguen - Ghillouzo , C . , and Baffet , G . ( 2000 ) . The mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase / extracellular signal - regulated kinase cascade activation is a key signaling pathway in the regulation of G 1 phase progression in proliferating hepatocytes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 6003 – 6011 . Tanoue , T . , Maeda , R . , Adachi , M . , and Nishida , E . ( 2001 ) . Identiﬁ - cation of a docking groove on ERK and p38 MAP kinases that regulates the speciﬁcity of docking interactions . EMBO J . 20 , 466 – 479 . Tasker , M . , Wilson , J . , Sarkar , M . , Hendriks , E . , and Matthews , K . ( 2000 ) . A novel selection regime for differentiation defects demon - strates an essential role for the stumpy form in the life cycle of the African trypanosome . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1905 – 1917 . Thompson , J . D . , Higgins , D . G . , and Gibson , T . J . ( 1994 ) . CLUSTAL W : improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting , position - speciﬁc gap pen - alties and weight matrix choice . Nucleic Acids Res . 22 , 4673 – 4680 . Vaickus , L . , Jones , V . E . , Morton , C . L . , Whitford , K . , and Bacon , R . N . ( 1989 ) . Antiproliferative mechanism of anti - class II monoclonal an - tibodies . Cell . Immunol . 119 , 445 – 458 . Vassella , E . , and Boshart , M . ( 1996 ) . High molecular mass agarose matrix supports growth of bloodstream forms of pleomorphic Trypanosoma brucei strains in axenic culture . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 82 , 91 – 105 . Vassella , E . , Braun , R . , and Roditi , I . ( 1994 ) . Control of polyadenyl - ation and alternative splicing of transcripts from adjacent genes in a procyclin expression site : a dual role for polypyrimidine tracts in trypanosomes ? Nucleic Acids Res . 22 , 1359 – 1364 . Vassella , E . , Reuner , B . , Yutzy , B . , and Boshart , M . ( 1997a ) . Differ - entiation of African trypanosomes is controlled by a density sensing mechanism which signals cell cycle arrest via the cAMP pathway . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 2661 – 2671 . Vassella , E . , Stra¨sser , K . , and Boshart , M . ( 1997b ) . A mitochondrion - speciﬁc dye for multicolour ﬂuorescent imaging of Trypanosoma brucei . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 90 , 381 – 385 . Vassella , E . , van Den Abbeele , J . , Bu¨tikofer , P . , Kunz Renggli , C . , Furger , A . , Brun , R . , and Roditi , I . ( 2000 ) . A major surface glyco - protein of Trypanosoma brucei is expressed transiently during devel - opment and can be regulated post - transcriptionally by glycerol or hypoxia . Genes Dev . 14 , 615 – 626 . Vickerman , K . ( 1985 ) . Developmental cycles and biology of patho - genetic trypanosomes . Br . Med . Bull . 41 , 105 – 114 . I . B . Mu¨ller et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3798 Waskiewicz , A . J . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Mitogen and stress re - sponse pathways : MAP kinase cascades and phosphatase regulation in mammals and yeast . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 798 – 805 . Weber , J . D . , Raben , D . M . , Phillips , P . J . , and Baldassare , J . J . ( 1997 ) . Sustained activation of extracellular - signal - regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) is required for the continued expression of cyclin D1 in G 1 phase . Biochem . J . 326 , 61 – 68 . Whitmarsh , A . J . , and Davis , R . J . ( 2000 ) . A central control for cell growth . Nature 403 , 255 – 256 . Wiese , M . ( 1998 ) . A mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase homo - logue of Leishmania mexicana is essential for parasite survival in the infected host . EMBO J . 17 , 2619 – 2628 . Woodward , R . , and Gull , K . ( 1990 ) . Timing of nuclear and kineto - plast DNA replication and early morphological events in the cell cycle of Trypanosoma brucei . J . Cell Sci . 95 , 49 – 57 . Wright , J . H . , Munar , E . , Jameson , D . R . , Andreassen , P . R . , Margolis , R . L . , Seger , R . , and Krebs , E . G . ( 1999 ) . Mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase activity is required for the G 2 / M transition of the cell cycle in mammalian ﬁbroblast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 11335 – 11340 . Ziegelbauer , K . , Quinten , M . , Schwarz , H . , Pearson , T . W . , and Over - ath , P . ( 1990 ) . Synchronous differentiation of Trypanosoma brucei from bloodstream to procyclic forms in vitro . Eur . J . Biochem . 192 , 373 – 378 . ERK Kinase in T . brucei Vol . 13 , November 2002 3799