The wind of change : A dynamic managerial capabilities perspective on the role of marketing managers as strategic change agents Valentina Kirova Associate Professor Excelia Business School 102 rue de Coureilles , 17024 La Rochelle Cedex 1 France 00 33 ( 0 ) 5 46 51 77 00 kirovav @ excelia - group . com Declarations of interest : none 1 The wind of change : A dynamic managerial capabilities perspective on the role of marketing managers as strategic change agents Abstract This article investigates the role of marketing managers as strategic change agents from a dynamic managerial capabilities’ perspective . Nurturing the broader theoretical questioning of marketing’s contribution to corporate strategy , this research uncovers how marketing practitioners’ complex skills and knowledge are combined and deployed while driving strategic change programs . To fill a gap identified in the literature regarding the role of marketing managers in strategic change , their involvement is analyzed according to a twofold perspective by considering the degree of proactivity in both the change in strategy content and the change in strategy processes . Drawing on qualitative data , the empirical investigation suggests a change agency model and uncovers the distinctive roles endorsed by marketing managers . These roles lead to four different postures in strategic change programs ( i . e . , the pilot , advisor , expert and synergist ) and the respective dynamic managerial capabilities that marketing managers rely on in each of the configurations . Keywords : marketing manager ; change agent ; strategic change ; dynamic managerial capabilities ; typology . 2 1 . Introduction Over the last decade , many academic contributions have investigated the role of marketing managers in strategy formulation and implementation ( Engelen et al . , 2013 ; Eriksson et al . , 2020 ; Melaia et al . , 2008 ) . Although these works generally focus on various attributes that shape the organization of the marketing function ( Moorman & Day , 2016 ) along with elements of the power , commitment and functional responsibilities of marketing managers , researchers assume marketing managers’ strategic position as enablers of firm performance ( Eriksson et al . , 2020 ; Feng et al . , 2015 ; Ramaseshan et al . , 2013 ) . Still , the more specific concern relative to the role of marketing managers over strategic change is not explicitly addressed . A few investigations dating back to the 1990s highlighted the involvement of marketing practitioners in strategic change programs , although they are predominantly conceptual and prescriptive ( Piercy , 2001 ) . Within the confines of strategic management , organizational theory or human resources , the conceptual and empirical investigation of strategic change has received uninterrupted attention ( Alfes et al . , 2010 ; Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ; Schriber & Löwstedt , 2020 ) . Scholars consider that the intensity of environmental change is constraining organizations to transform themselves rapidly to remain competitive . This process of transformation is dynamic and multifaceted , and it is usually characterized by a high degree of complexity , ambiguity , and contradictions ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . The continuous interest in the topic has led to a robust conceptual framework encompassing a wide range of investigations focusing on different aspects of strategic change , such as the content or process perspective , strategic change antecedents and consequences , and the management of strategic change ( Cameron & Green , 2016 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ) . Despite the extensive body of knowledge tackling strategic change , according to academics , this stream of research has not reached its full potential ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ) . In particular , within this variety of 3 investigations , the managerial perspective on strategic change has not been sufficiently explored . This perspective relates to the understanding of the managers - driven processes that enable organizations to successfully change their strategies ( Guiette et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , a promising gap to explore can be found in the expansion of the scope of the actors considered in relation to strategic change , and how these change agents enact strategic change ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . Thus far , research has viewed marketing managers as change recipients rather than change agents , which calls for broadening the scope of current research to a more fine - grained , functional levels of investigation of change agency ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . A marketing perspective on strategic change is crucial , as the marketing function plays a central role in firms’ transformation because of its distinctive position at the interface between the company and the market ( Eriksson et al . , 2020 ; Moorman & Day , 2016 ) . To provide a more thorough understanding of the dynamics of marketing agency , degree of involvement and nature of engagement in managing strategic change programs , this paper draws on the dynamic managerial capabilities’ framework . Dynamic managerial capabilities are defined as the “capabilities with which managers build , integrate , and reconfigure organizational resources and competencies” ( Adner & Helfat , 2003 , p . 1012 ) . These capabilities are decisive to coping with strategic change challenges ( Helfat & Martin , 2015 ) . Strategic change is generally understood as a major organizational change that can have exogenous or endogenous sources and that implies a shift in the firm’s mission , scope , priorities and goals ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ) . Managers who participate in strategic change programs can leverage a wide range of dynamic capabilities and accordingly may make different decisions and perform different roles with regard to both the content and to the process of the firm’s strategic path ( Adner & Helfat , 2003 ) . Consequently , in this article , the functional contributions of marketing in driving change are analyzed by crossing these two continuums : the degree of proactivity of marketing managers in strategic change programs and their type of 4 contribution , which may involve either the strategic content or the strategic change processes ( Alfes et al . , 2010 ; Morgan et al . , 2019 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ) . The investigation is guided by the following research question : what are the roles performed by marketing managers as strategic change agents and the respective dynamic managerial capabilities they rely on ? The purpose of this empirical research is to establish a typology and a categorization of the change agency roles for the marketing function in strategic change programs . The first part of this study outlines the theoretical background , and a presentation of the current research related to the nature , scope and actors involved in strategic change is followed by a discussion of the relevant literature highlighting the role of marketing in strategic change . The second part is focused on the results of an empirical investigation to suggest a change agency model for the marketing function and reveal the distinctive postures of marketing practitioners in strategic change programs . 2 . Theoretical background 2 . 1 . The management of strategic change and the change agent’s role The study of strategic change has been a recurrent theme in the field of management and strategy since the 1970s ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ) . Progressively , the existing knowledge has expanded with emphases on the key dimensions , purpose and dynamics of strategic change ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . Researchers have proposed that transformations in both the external environment and organizational conditions engender deep changes in the organization’s strategic path . In their seminal article , Mintzberg and Westley ( 1992 ) emphasize that change can take place in an organization from the narrowest and most concrete level , for example , in budgeting , to the broadest , most conceptual level , for 5 example , in culture . Accordingly , these authors argue that change can be considered to happen in two basic spheres : pertaining to the organization , or the basic state , and pertaining to strategy , or the directional thrust . While organizational change transforms the state of the organization , strategic change modifies its direction . Strategic change encompasses the major constituents of the firm , such as its structure , identity , and transformations in organizational culture , while organizational change may encompass a much wider range of changes that may or may not be strategic and may be much smaller in scope ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , strategic change differs from organizational change and is manifested as a substantial modification in the overall organizational priorities by redefining the firm’s mission , scope and goals ( Gioia et al . , 1994 ) . In attempting to provide a further understanding of the substance of strategic change , scholars consider that it can be described in terms of a significant shift in the strategy content , strategy process , or both ( Morgan et al . , 2019 ) . The strategy content is defined by the strategy’s scope , resource deployments and competitive advantages ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ) , while the strategy process reflects an organization’s overall approach with regard to the structures , systems , culture and values that mediate its relationship with the environment ( Ginsberg , 1988 ) . This overarching content or process logic is enriched by an additional comprehensive view of strategic change that emphasizes the need to consider external and internal forces creating pressure to foster changes in strategy ( Kunisch et al . , 2017 ) . Accordingly , Müller and Kunisch ( 2018 ) identify three perspectives through which strategic change materializes in organizations : the deterministic , voluntaristic and dialectical perspectives . From a deterministic perspective , strategic change is shaped by exogenous factors . As such , a change in strategy takes place as a result of a gap in an organization’s alignment with its external environment . In a voluntaristic pattern , strategic change is induced by organizational leaders . This perspective stresses the proactive role of managers in strategic change , as they are actively shaping the environment and organizational structures . Finally , the 6 dialectical perspective considers strategic change as a result of both exogenous factors and strategic leaders’ actions . Here , strategic change results from the interplay among change agents , organizational constraints and pre - existing environmental conditions , where organizational actors can be either proactive and reactive with respect to environmental pressures while dealing with opposing forces of determinism and voluntarism . Although these perspectives provide very valuable insights into the interrelationships between strategic change and its context , they also reveal the need to enrich the dialectical perspective to emphasize the importance of an individual - level agency for successful change management ( Nikolaou et al . , 2007 ) . The reason is that change management is enacted by individuals whose actions are contextuality dependent and can reactively or proactively alter their firms’ destinies ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ) . Accordingly , academics have increasingly begun to express interest in this opportunity by investigating the role of change agents ( Chebbi et al . , 2020 ; Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ) . Change agents can be defined as individuals or groups that are either external or internal to the organization and that initiate , support , trigger or promote change efforts ( van der Heijden et al . , 2012 ) . Academics have suggested various forms of change agency , improving the understanding of change management in different contexts ( van den Berg et al . , 2019 ) . Individuals from all hierarchical levels ( with or without an official position of authority ) can handle a change agency role within an organization . For instance , Caldwell ( 2003 ) suggests that change agents can be parts of the top management team of a company who are assigned to initiate , plan , and drive large - scale and transformational changes ; however , these agents can also be middle managers who are part of a functional specialization ( HR , finance , marketing ) and who adapt , pursue , or support strategic change within strategic business units or functional departments . Other forms of change agency include external consultants or team change agents who act as a team composed of internal and / or external members and intervene at different 7 hierarchical levels because of their change management expertise ( Cameron & Green , 2016 ) . The study of change agency models is of growing interest ( van den Berg et al . , 2019 ; van der Heijden et al . , 2012 ) ; however , the seeds for potential progress in this field of investigation lie in the examination of appropriate competencies and capabilities for managing major change ( Higgs & Rowland , 2000 ) . The literature exploring specific expertise , knowledge and skills for effective change management is quite limited ( Nikolaou et al . , 2007 ) , although researchers acknowledge that focusing on leadership by individuals may be a central element in the more general dynamic capability of an organization to change ( Adner & Helfat , 2003 ) . 2 . 2 . Marketing perspective on strategic change Previous research has suggested that regardless of its structure within the organization ( whether it is centralized or dispersed ) , the role of marketing is to take into account the environment and consumers’ needs to formulate and implement the marketing strategy . The role of marketing is decisive in the pursuit of competitive advantage ( Davcik & Sharma , 2016 ; Moorman & Day , 2016 ) . The marketing function contributes to the formulation and implementation of changes in favor of customer orientation and , as a result , enables the firm’s market orientation . Although marketing responsibility in change processes has been articulated in previous research ( Piercy , 2001 ) , there have been limited empirical investigations and understanding of the role that marketing plays in strategic change ( Finney & Scherrebeck - Hansen , 2010 ) . The review of relevant research streams shows that this theme is mainly addressed in two theoretical areas : the internal marketing view and the resource - based view in marketing . Internal marketing considers the involvement of the marketing function within the internal processes of the company ( Ahmed & Rafiq , 2003 ) . Firms that have higher levels of 8 internal marketing orientation are likely to be more responsive in generating internal information and disseminating this information to their internal stakeholders ( Ferdous et al . , 2013 ; Lings , 2004 ) . An illustration of the link between internal marketing and change management emerged for the first time in the work of Piercy and Morgan ( 1991 ) . These authors advance a model of market - oriented “external” marketing defined by the 4Ps ( product , price , place , and promotion ) and the corresponding “internal” marketing , oriented toward intraorganizational processes . From a change management perspective , internal marketing is targeted at all employees and fosters interfunctional coordination , organizational change and competence generation ( Ferdous et al . , 2013 ; O’Keeffe et al . , 2016 ; Rafiq & Ahmed , 2000 ) . As such , internal marketing can be considered a change agent whose goal is to modify the attitudes and behaviors of all organizational actors in favor of a commercial logic and of a customer orientation . Internal marketing facilitates incremental cultural change processes and innovation ( Chebbi et al . , 2020 ) . To increase a firm’s competitive advantage , this function builds internal structures and coordination processes that link different organizational departments around common values and convergent goals ( Lings , 2004 ; Varey , 1995 ) . According to Rafiq and Ahmed ( 2000 ) , in strategic change programs , internal marketing overcomes organizational inertia and promotes transversal functional integration and employee motivation toward effective implementation . Empirical evidence on internal marketing’s role in strategic change is scarce but steadily evolving . Kelemen and Papasolomou ( 2007 ) shed light on the role of internal marketing as a trigger for changing the organizational culture in the context of the UK banking sector . In this specific case , internal marketing can potentially be conceived as a culture change agent . Papadas et al . ( 2019 ) acknowledge the role of internal marketing as a green change agent that disseminates knowledge and embeds environmental values throughout the entire organization . For Finney and Scherrebeck - Hansen ( 2010 ) , internal marketing is a vehicle for generating or facilitating change in the process of rebranding . 9 The second research stream bridging marketing and strategic change is the resource - based literature and , in particular , the dynamic capabilities framework ( Lin & Wu , 2014 ; Moorman & Day , 2016 ; Vorhies & Morgan , 2005 ) . The concept of dynamic capabilities is first considered at the organizational level to address the important role of capabilities to build , integrate and reconfigure firms’ resources that are essential to cope with a highly volatile environment ( Eisenhardt & Martin , 2000 ) . Researchers suggest that the capabilities exercised in stationary processes are ordinary - level capabilities ; by contrast , in strategic change , firms need to rely on first - order dynamic capabilities to remain competitive ( Qaiyum & Wang , 2018 ) . By focusing specifically on the ability of managers to impact strategic change , Adner and Helfat ( 2003 ) extend the concept of dynamic capabilities by suggesting the existence of dynamic managerial capabilities , indicating that organizations’ dynamic capabilities may be located in the corresponding individual capabilities of managers . Accordingly , the impact of managers on strategic change differs , and differences can lead to different outcomes ( Helfat & Martin , 2015 ) . Managerial cognition , managerial social capital and managerial human capital are the three core underpinnings of dynamic managerial capabilities that provide managers with the capacity to sense , seize and reconfigure organizational resources and thereby handle strategic change ( Adner & Helfat , 2003 ; Helfat & Martin , 2015 ) . Therefore , with a specific focus on the marketing function , marketers can contribute to the firm’s competitive advantage through effective change management based on their areas of specific knowledge , skills and expertise . The marketing function has a critical position in the organization at the interface between the internal actors and the external stakeholders . In organizations operating in a dynamic environment , marketers are most likely to perceive changes in the external environment and consumer expectations ( O’Keeffe et al . , 2016 ) . In this context , marketing leaders undertake relevant strategies to create a market - oriented culture ( Moorman & Day , 2016 ) . Marketing managers’ familiarity with customers and other 10 stakeholders enables them to interpret environmental changes and potential strategic issues , which will lead to better organizational performance ( Ramaseshan et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , the marketing function can potentially drive change by anticipating future customer needs , market sensing , and knowledge management and by leveraging the market orientation to adjust the organization to an ever - changing business environment ( O’Keeffe et al . , 2016 ) . In this stream of research , marketing’s role is more content - driven and connected with a large spectrum of capabilities and skills that enable effective customer relationship management , brand asset management , strategic marketing planning and implementation ( Moorman & Day , 2016 ) . 3 . Research methodology To better understand the roles endorsed by marketing managers and the dynamic managerial capabilities that shape these roles in strategic change programs , this article reports on the results of a qualitative study . A qualitative approach is suitable to address the research question , as it favors an in - depth , rich and contextual understanding of the phenomenon under investigation ( Flick , 2009 ) . In addition , the previous studies on dynamic managerial capabilities have been mostly quantitative , which further indicates the need to adopt a different perspective and gather more naturalistic and richer information on this complex and context - dependent phenomenon ( Morgan et al . , 2019 ) . The procedure for collecting and analyzing the qualitative data involves several phases . Prior to the field entry phase , a semi - structured interview guide was built around three broad sections based on the theoretical premises of the dynamic managerial capabilities . In the introductory section , respondents were invited to present their concrete missions and the organization of the marketing function within the firm . The focusing section comprises questions covering the description and specifics of a current major strategic change program within the company in which the respondent is involved . During the reflection 11 section , respondents elaborate on their participation in this strategic change program , with an explicit focus on how they frame this role , the distinctive expertise they provide , and how they connect with the other stakeholders . In the sampling phase , the e - mail addresses of one hundred marketing executives from major international companies were collected through a professional database . These companies were selected in accordance with two criteria for detecting dynamic capabilities suggested in previous research ( Schriber & Löwstedt , 2020 ) : ( 1 ) the firm achieves , defends , or reestablishes a leading position and ( 2 ) the relevant environment is transforming rapidly . An e - mail was sent to each executive summarizing the research topic and asking for an interview with a key person in the marketing department who is involved in strategic change programs . Among the managers who responded to the solicitation , seven declined as they were not currently assuming a role in a change program , so they did not meet the definition of a change agent . Twelve respondents designated a marketing colleague within the same organization participating in the management of an ongoing strategic change program . Finally , nine managers felt able to answer , as they were involved in managing change in the organization . This process ensured that the key informant was effectively assuming a change agent role ; furthermore , it helped to probe dynamic capabilities with the actors who are playing a role in their enactment ( Kevill et al . , 2020 ) . The definitive body of data includes 21 semi - structured recorded interviews from 50 to 90 minutes in length that were conducted in the period from June 2018 to April 2020 ( cf . Table 1 ) . The interview gathering was stopped when theoretical saturation was reached and redundancy of the collected information occurred ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) . All of the interviews were completely transcribed and coded with the NVivo 12 software . To analyze the data from the interviews , verbatim transcripts were progressively encoded based on the content , process , and reactive or proactive dichotomies stemming from the strategic 12 change framework ( Ginsberg , 1988 ; Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer , 1997 ) . This thematic analysis of each interview led to the identification of four potential roles that marketing managers can assume in strategic change programs : proactive in content and process ; proactive in content and reactive in process ; proactive in process and reactive in content ; reactive in content and process . Subsequently , a more fine - grained content analysis of each potential role is conducted , allowing us to shed light on the underlying dynamic managerial capabilities that reside and are enacted through each specific posture ( Adner & Helfat , 2003 ) . Then , we compared the results of these four categories of roles to identify existing patterns within each realm based on the distinction of sensing , seizing , and reconfiguring key capabilities . An identification of keywords stemming from the literature review allowed us to discriminate the four potential roles in terms of the tasks and skills that evoke each of the key dynamic managerial capabilities . 4 . Findings The overarching finding of this research emerges from the examination of the specific involvement of marketing managers in strategic change programs . The analysis is conducted with a twofold perspective that considers the degree of proactivity in the change of strategy content and the change in strategy processes . The field investigation reveals that in strategic change plans , the content issues in which marketing managers are engaged are related to changes in the branding strategy , customer relationships , customer value proposition , business models , positioning and new product development . The process issues in strategic change include the coordination of strategic business units’ development or merging plans , the cross - functional procedures and deployment of team communication and coordination tools , and the synergies and configuration of cultural norms and values . However , according to the 13 respondents , their degree of commitment and proactivity on each of these two continuums ( content and process ) is variable , pointing to four potential roles that marketing managers assume in strategic change programs ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Proposition of a change agency model for marketing managers A more fine - grained analysis of interview quotes for each of the identified roles shows that the combination of dynamic managerial capabilities that provide managers with the capacity to impact strategic change is different for each specific role . 4 . 1 . Marketing managers as change pilots 14 In the first configuration ( quadrant 1 ) , marketing managers are the driving force of strategic change programs . Among the twenty - one marketing managers participating in the study , seven assume the change agent’s leading role ( R2 , R5 , R6 , R7 , R11 , R13 , R18 ) . They have leadership in strategic change programs related mostly to the redefinition of brand values and customer value propositions but also to business model innovation , customer experience transformation , new product and market segmentation and resource reallocation . Each of the respondents stressed his central role in championing strategic change by actively participating in all stages of the change program : “ It forces you to be very good , but it’s great . Driving the whole is part of my missions and yes giving the strategic direction and reshaping the brand and the customer dimensions is my priority ” ( R5 ) . The thematic analysis suggests that here marketers rely on a combination of a large spectrum of skills encompassing the dynamic capabilities of sensing , seizing and reconfiguring . When sensing , marketers continuously scan the organizational environment to identify market opportunities , internalize the customer and competitor’s perspective , and reflect on the brand concept . Interestingly , according to our interviewees , the capacity to be at the forefront of change is not only about sensing with an external focus but also includes an internal aspect of grasping the organizational context , history , structure and culture . For instance , R2 explains “ I am going to take a step back and see how the company went about deciding on redefining its brand values . In fact , the brand has existed since 1905 and has built its history and growth on three pillars . But there has not been a very big breakthrough innovation since then . Above all , we need to have an all - encompassing view at our brand . ” The driving force of marketing managers as change agents is also visible when they proactively seize business opportunities . In line with their specific boundary - spanning position , these managers are particularly invested in process management and able to mobilize various resources , which are both human and financial , to address needs and opportunities and to 15 capture value in the process : “ I encourage all stakeholders to align with the needs and priorities of the company ; this also guides our development plan and the allocation of our resources at the highest level of the organization . Encouraging managers who are working on significant aspects of the project is super important too , like interacting with them at the middle and upper level of the organization , so that they can have a correct reading of the strategic change plan to share ” ( R11 ) . In this first realm , the piloting role of marketing managers is often revealed through the interconnection and cooccurrence of the three processes . This quotation indicates that along with anticipation ( sensing ) and providing ( seizing ) , there is follow - on rewriting ( reconfiguring ) of strategy : “ So everything starts by anticipating and then providing answers , about all that concerns the brand and the customer . Then , the goal is to rewrite our brand strategy with a clear vision , a differentiated position , a real solution for our primary group of target customers ” ( R18 ) . 4 . 2 . Marketing managers as change advisors In the opposite quadrant , ( 2 ) marketing managers have a largely responsive approach in both the content and process of strategic change . This pattern is observed in four out of twenty - one change programs ( R10 , R14 , R15 , R16 ) . In these four cases , strategic changes are related to the market development strategy , developing synergies between brands , or a transition from a product - centric to a customer - centric organization . Here , managers count more on routinized capabilities to support change with a relatively advisory role : “ The aim is to assist and support the organization in the transformation of its strategic orientation… so basically draw on consulting and coaching capabilities in the company , as well as one can do with an external consultant ” ( R16 ) . However , the interviewees stressed that they are particularly committed to 16 nurturing change by infusing knowledge and new ideas based on the use of formal analysis and robust data . Therefore , the microfoundations of dynamic managerial capabilities in this case appear to be embedded largely in sensing . Respondent 14 explains the importance of dynamically gathering and interpreting external information to feed strategic decisions : “ Once you have the knowledge , you have the control over data , which for me is a genuine influence on strategy with all the studies and data that are used to carry out the business plan . It always involves future - oriented awareness and vision . You need to know everything about both the market and its evolution , and both the customer and its evolution ” . Additional evidence of this process can be found in the formal responsibility and critical capacity of marketers to appraise information : “… the point in fact is to make information valuable . And to give value to information is to show that on the one hand the information that we are going to seek is the most relevant and on the other hand to find formats that are best suited , so to enhance information sharing” ( R16 ) . In contrast , strategic change here is not supported by dynamic capabilities that demonstrate the occurrence of both seizing and reconfiguring processes . For instance , managers confess that their impact on strategic change is mainly reactive and infused with inertia when the change concerns designs and implementation : “ Even if I have a more global vision of the major levers of transformation that I can activate , I clearly do not feel able to activate operational teams… I mean , it’s frankly difficult . It requires a form of investment , the change of model which in fact means that we tend to have a lot more inertia and which means that the shift is still not accomplished ” ( R10 ) . Thus , this role can be considered a hybrid form of change agency , where marketers are proactive on sensing but feel dispossessed of the decisional and reorganizing activities pertaining to the seizing and reconfiguring dynamic capabilities . 4 . 3 . Marketing managers as change experts 17 The third configuration ( quadrant 3 ) illustrates that the marketing function can be largely responsive to process issues and move forward through different stages in the strategic change plan , which would mostly occur through content generation . Here , marketing managers can be considered change agents who are experts in their field and skillful with regard to the construction of strategic change ( R4 , R9 , R12 , R17 , R19 , R20 , R21 ) . Within this realm , strategic change programs concern both firms engaged in a transformation of their strategic orientation , shifting from a product - to a customer - or market - centric orientation and new product or business development . The verbatim analysis revealed that dynamic capabilities associated with sensing and seizing were actively enacted among all informants . For instance , one of the managers acting as a change agent in a firm undergoing brand repositioning emphasizes the ability to reshuffle corporate resources in response to changing customer segments : “ I’m in a position that is really the position that leads [ one ] to think about the orientation choices of the entity we are working on , both in terms of development and investment . And in relation to the strategic orientations , it’s about defining the means which we will need to be able to reach the objectives . By means , what I mean by means is of course the possible investments that can be made to be able to hit the target that you want to hit” ( R4 ) . This quote also illustrates that often in this specific posture , the dynamic capabilities inherent to sensing and seizing are entangled and reveal managers’ individual ability to combine both higher - order capabilities . The expert position in change programs is also evidenced in marketers’ proactive force in reasoning and problem solving , which is related to new opportunities to capture value from the market . “ Yes . . . you know , regulatory changes are often taken as a constraint of the environment , while it can be an opportunity , for example the regulatory context on the insurance optical bonus will change . Well clearly I am at the forefront to propose actions on how to effectively address this issue” ( R21 ) . 18 Thus , marketers feel unable to develop and enact transforming capabilities that pertain to reconfiguring . In change programs , marketers appear to be rather passive and compliant with the other stakeholders’ leadership ; therefore , they enact ordinary - level capabilities . A chief strategic marketing officer in an insurance company highlighted the difficulty of making use of those transformative skills that are considered necessary to make a new product offering evolve : “ Yes , yes , because this first offer is already out there but it’s not necessarily integrated into the commercial approach . I hope being able to transpose it into the business model at some point , so … trying to have an influence . . . As marketers , we don’t want to be disconnected and work hard to make things attractive . We participate in it , but it’s not easy… knowing how to make things evolve is not easy ” ( R12 ) . 4 . 4 . Marketing managers as change synergists Finally , the fourth configuration ( quadrant 4 ) reveals that marketing managers can be to a large extent oriented toward internal processes that are vectors of strategic change . In this change agency realm , strategic change plans are about restructuring respective firms’ strategic business units ( R1 , R3 , R8 ) . Here , marketing managers rely mainly on process - oriented dynamic capabilities to support strategic change programs . These managers are actively involved in guiding change plans through coordination , internal communication and the creation of synergies between strategic business units : “ My goal is clearly to strengthen the coordination and to support the creation of new potentials , so managing cross - cutting issues from the beginning… for example , even before the merger of the two IT and consumer electronics branches , I felt [ it was ] necessary to create and promote synergies to develop the multiscreen services ” ( R1 ) . In this change , agency realm marketers have the role of synergists who take part and deliver complex large - scale change missions . These missions are reflected 19 through activities and cognitive abilities that can be identified with tasks performed in the processes of seizing and reconfiguring assets in strategic change . Specifically , in the process of seizing , the most important skills documented among marketing managers were communication , creating strong ties , structuring and organizing . The process of reconfiguring is evidenced in the ability to transform existing assets by overcoming the resistance to change , creating synergies inside the firm and evolving the value proposition of the company : “ There are certain industrial choices that are not coordinated between the business units , sometimes with the risk of having different things on one side and the other . So being able to organize and structure the decision - making on our industrial effort has brought much more consistency to industrial choices . And then the management of our portfolio is becoming more flexible and allows us to make it evolve over time ” ( R8 ) . In this synergist configuration , while actively engaged in processes of seizing and reconfiguring , marketers are less involved and have a supporting role in sensing processes . The respondents mentioned their secondary role in the process of sensing opportunities and threats . The respondents consider that for them , environmental scanning , customers , markets and competitor analyses are more routinized ordinary activities but express the regret that this cannot fully help them gather knowledge and make sense of the business environment . For instance , a chief innovation officer in a postal services company explains that “ Conceptualizing the product is a real issue , as we no longer conceptualize customer benefits , we take it for granted . Saying we’re going to do coconstruction , codesign , all those words that we often use , I don’t think it’s effective . Well , suddenly that can greatly diminish the added value that we bring to the customer to complete our value proposition ” ( R3 ) . This fourth configuration of the marketing change agency model suggests that marketers are not well equipped with the dynamic ability to sense rapid environmental shifts . 20 5 . Discussion and conclusions The main purpose of this empirical research is to thoroughly explore the various roles endorsed by marketing managers in strategic change programs . There is increasing interest in examining individual - level agency ( van den Berg et al . , 2019 ) and in particular in scrutinizing dynamic managerial capabilities and their singular impact on the success of strategic change ( Helfat & Martin , 2015 ; Schriber & Löwstedt , 2020 ) . However , despite its significance and relevance , the past research has not investigated the particular role of marketing managers in strategic change programs and the specific capabilities required to manage the challenges linked with the accomplishment of this mission . As marketing managers are influential strategic players because of their boundary - spanning positions in the organization , the findings of this article add to the rich conversation on why their distinctive capabilities , resources and skills matter within an organization undergoing strategic change ( Browne et al . , 2014 ; Davcik & Sharma , 2016 ; Helfat & Martin , 2015 ) . 5 . 1 . Theoretical contributions This investigation contributes to the literature in several ways . The first overarching theoretical contribution is the proposition of a change agency model for the marketing function , with four distinctive roles for marketing managers as strategic change agents , i . e . , the pilot , advisor , expert and synergist . This contribution is in line with the continuing call of researchers to focus on the often - overlooked individual level of change agency ( Nikolaou et al . , 2007 ; van den Berg et al . , 2019 ) . As such , this paper suggests a broader vision of the role of marketing in strategic change moving beyond the classic dichotomy between “internal” marketing and “external” marketing , and it also demonstrates the existence of hybrid forms of change agency . 21 By contributing to the dialectical perspective of strategic change , this paper demonstrates that marketing managers can be both proactive and reactive while handling changes in the strategy content or process ( Müller & Kunisch , 2018 ) . The second contribution of this article stems from the introduction of the dynamic - managerial - capabilities theoretical loop in the analysis of each of these hybrid forms of change agency . Drawing on the framework of dynamic capabilities reflected in the three processes of sensing , seizing and reconfiguring , this article demonstrates that the marketing change agency role is not inert and homogeneous across strategic change plans . A specific blend of dynamic managerial capabilities is deployed in coping with strategic change in different situations , which highlights the diversity of change agency roles that the marketing function may play . Moreover , the results suggest that in various configurations , marketing managers handle change through a combination of dynamic and ordinary capabilities . Even if ordinary capabilities are negatively connoted with the inability to meaningfully adjust to change in the previous literature , the results show that effective change agency does not systematically entail sensing , seizing and reconfiguring capabilities at the same time . The empirical investigation provides evidence that the combination of dynamic and ordinary capabilities can be valuable in dealing with strategic change ( Schriber & Löwstedt , 2020 ) . Third , this study contributes to marketing strategy theory by addressing one of the key challenges identified by Morgan et al . ( 2019 ) with regard to the different levels and types of participation in change management processes . By suggesting an integrative model of marketing change agency , this study complements and goes beyond previous investigations of change management ( Chebbi et al . , 2020 ; O’Keeffe et al . , 2016 ) . The findings describe the pattern of how the marketing change agency can happen but also enlighten the mechanisms of why it can happen by portraying four different configurations , each of which relies on a specific combination of dynamic managerial capabilities . In the first configuration , marketing managers 22 as pilots draw on a large variety of capabilities corresponding to sensing , seizing and reconfiguring to proactively drive strategic change . The second configuration demonstrates a more responsive view of the marketing change agency , where marketing managers rely mainly on sensing to orient strategic change plans . The third role focuses on marketing managers’ expertise , where they can play the role of change agents by adopting a proactive role mainly in the change of strategy content reflected in crucial tasks and choices concerning the value proposition , the offerings , the target markets , and the business models ( Eriksson et al . , 2020 ) . These capabilities are mostly reflected in an association of the processes of sensing and seizing . Finally , the fourth model attests that marketing managers can be change agent synergists by adopting a proactive posture in the management of strategic change processes reflected in interfunctional coordination , internal communication , organizational structure systems , culture and values ( Finney & Scherrebeck - Hansen , 2010 ; Kelemen & Papasolomou , 2007 ) , which are revealed through the dynamic capabilities of seizing and reconfiguring . 5 . 2 . Practical implications From a managerial point of view , the study provides important insights into the marketing resources and capabilities within a company undergoing strategic change . O’Keeffe , Ozuem and Lancaster ( 2016 ) state that in recent years , marketing has lost its significance due to the perception of being content - driven and not having its own voice and credibility , while business areas such as finance and operations have grown in importance . However , this study reveals that marketing managers have not lost their importance in strategic change programs , and in different change contexts , they are able to enact a large scope of dynamic managerial capabilities . Conventional content - driven marketing is just one of the aspects of marketing leadership in change programs ( O’Keeffe et al . , 2016 ) . By guiding internal processes , marketers 23 can also be involved with reconfiguring resources to a larger extent to align the whole company with the customer orientation . In addition , this study can be useful for practitioners , as it helps to create different profiles of marketing change agents , whose expertise and skills can be combined with those of managers from other departments to optimize the success of strategic change plans . 5 . 3 . Limitations and future research directions This study is not exempt from limitations . A qualitative research protocol was chosen in accordance with the exploratory nature of the research question . Although valuable , this method restricts one from addressing many other aspects of the topic , such as marketing managers and organizational and strategic change program characteristics . In addition , the findings show that for similar strategic change plans ( e . g . , new product development ) , marketing managers can have different roles ( e . g . , pilots or experts ) . Therefore , there are determinants of the marketing change agency other than the type of strategic change plan , which also suggests examining the industrial and environmental context within which change is happening . Another possible limitation of the study’s exploratory design was that marketing managers were chosen to assess their change management skills . Future studies need to address these issues by using , for example , quantitative , observative or experimental methods to gather and balance different characteristics and functional perspectives on marketing dynamic managerial capabilities . 24 References Adner , R . , & Helfat , C . E . ( 2003 ) . Corporate effects and dynamic managerial capabilities . Strategic Management Journal , 24 ( 10 ) , 1011‑1025 . Ahmed , P . K . , & Rafiq , M . ( 2003 ) . Internal marketing issues and challenges . European Journal of Marketing , 37 ( 9 ) , 1177‑1186 . Alfes , K . , Truss , C . , & Gill , J . ( 2010 ) . The HR manager as change agent : Evidence from the public sector . Journal of Change Management , 10 ( 1 ) , 109‑127 . Browne , S . , Sharkey - Scott , P . , Mangematin , V . , Lawlor , K . , & Cuddihy , L . ( 2014 ) . Adapting a book to make a film : How strategy is adapted through professional practices of marketing middle managers . Journal of Marketing Management , 30 ( 9‑10 ) , 949‑973 . Caldwell , R . ( 2003 ) . Models of Change Agency : A Fourfold Classification . British Journal of Management , 14 ( 2 ) , 131‑142 . Cameron , E . , & Green , M . ( 2016 ) . Making sense of change management : A complete guide to the models , tools and techniques of organizational change . Kogan Page , Limited . Chebbi , H . , Yahiaoui , D . , Sellami , M . , Papasolomou , I . , & Melanthiou , Y . ( 2020 ) . Focusing on internal stakeholders to enable the implementation of organizational change towards corporate entrepreneurship : A case study from France . Journal of Business Research , 119 , 209‑217 . Davcik , N . S . , & Sharma , P . ( 2016 ) . Marketing resources , performance , and competitive advantage : A review and future research directions . Journal of Business Research , 69 ( 12 ) , 5547‑5552 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Martin , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Dynamic capabilities : What are they ? Strategic Management Journal , 21 ( 10‑11 ) , 1105‑1121 . 25 Engelen , A . , Lackhoff , F . , & Schmidt , S . ( 2013 ) . How can chief marketing officers strengthen their influence ? A social capital perspective across six country groups . Journal of International Marketing , 21 ( 4 ) , 88‑109 . Eriksson , T . , Robertson , J . , & Näppä , A . ( 2020 ) . Functional top management teams and marketing organization : Exploring strategic decision - making . Journal of Strategic Marketing , 1‑18 . Feng , H . , Morgan , N . A . , & Rego , L . L . ( 2015 ) . Marketing department power and firm performance . Journal of Marketing , 79 ( 5 ) , 1‑20 . Ferdous , A . , Herington , C . , & Merrilees , B . ( 2013 ) . Developing an integrative model of internal and external marketing . Journal of Strategic Marketing , 21 ( 7 ) , 637 - 649 . Finney , S . , & Scherrebeck - Hansen , M . ( 2010 ) . Internal marketing as a change management tool : A case study in re - branding . Journal of Marketing Communications , 16 ( 5 ) , 325‑344 . Flick , U . ( 2009 ) . An introduction to qualitative research , 4th ed ( p . xxi , 505 ) . Sage Publications Ltd . Ginsberg , A . ( 1988 ) . Measuring and modelling changes in strategy : Theoretical foundations and empirical directions . Strategic Management Journal , 9 ( 6 ) , 559‑575 . Gioia , D . A . , Thomas , J . B . , Clark , S . M . , & Chittipeddi , K . ( 1994 ) . Symbolism and strategic change in academia : The dynamics of sensemaking and influence . Organization Science , 5 ( 3 ) , 363‑383 . Guiette , A . , Matthyssens , P . , & Vandenbempt , K . ( 2014 ) . Organizing mindfully for relevant process research on strategic change . Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing , 29 ( 7 / 8 ) , 610‑618 . 26 Helfat , C . E . , & Martin , J . A . ( 2015 ) . Dynamic managerial capabilities : Review and assessment of managerial impact on strategic change . Journal of Management , 41 ( 5 ) , 1281‑1312 . Higgs , M . , & Rowland , D . ( 2000 ) . Building change leadership capability : ‘The quest for change competence’ . Journal of Change Management , 1 ( 2 ) , 116‑130 . Kelemen , M . , & Papasolomou , I . ( 2007 ) . Internal marketing : A qualitative study of culture change in the UK banking sector . Journal of Marketing Management , 23 ( 7‑8 ) , 746‑768 . Kevill , A . , Trehan , K . , Harrington , S . , & Kars - Unluoglu , S . ( 2020 ) . Dynamic managerial capabilities in micro - enterprises : Stability , vulnerability and the role of managerial time allocation . International Small Business Journal , 0266242620970473 . Kunisch , S . , Bartunek , J . M . , Mueller , J . , & Huy , Q . N . ( 2017 ) . Time in strategic change research . Academy of Management Annals , 11 ( 2 ) , 1005‑1064 . Lin , Y . , & Wu , L . - Y . ( 2014 ) . Exploring the role of dynamic capabilities in firm performance under the resource - based view framework . Journal of Business Research , 67 ( 3 ) , 407‑413 . Lings , I . N . ( 2004 ) . Internal market orientation : Construct and consequences . Journal of Business Research , 57 ( 4 ) , 405‑413 . Melaia , S . , Abratt , R . , & Bick , G . ( 2008 ) . Competencies of marketing managers in South Africa . Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice , 16 ( 3 ) , 233‑246 . Mintzberg , H . , & Westley , F . ( 1992 ) . Cycles of organizational change . Strategic Management Journal , 13 ( S2 ) , 39‑59 . Moorman , C . , & Day , G . S . ( 2016 ) . Organizing for marketing excellence . Journal of Marketing , 80 ( 6 ) , 6‑35 . 27 Morgan , N . A . , Whitler , K . A . , Feng , H . , & Chari , S . ( 2019 ) . Research in marketing strategy . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 4‑29 . Müller , J . , & Kunisch , S . ( 2018 ) . Central perspectives and debates in strategic change research . International Journal of Management Reviews , 20 ( 2 ) , 457‑482 . Nikolaou , D . I . , Gouras , A . , Vakola , M . , & Bourantas , D . ( 2007 ) . Selecting change agents : Exploring traits and skills in a simulated environment . Journal of Change Management , 7 ( 3‑4 ) , 291‑313 . O’Keeffe , A . , Ozuem , W . , & Lancaster , G . ( 2016 ) . Leadership marketing : An exploratory study . Journal of Strategic Marketing , 24 ( 5 ) , 418‑443 . Papadas , K . - K . , Avlonitis , G . J . , Carrigan , M . , & Piha , L . ( 2019 ) . The interplay of strategic and internal green marketing orientation on competitive advantage . Journal of Business Research , 104 , 632‑643 . Piercy , N . ( 2001 ) . Market - led strategic change : New marketing for new realities . The Marketing Review , 2 , 385‑404 . Piercy , N . , & Morgan , N . ( 1991 ) . Internal marketing—The missing half of the marketing programme . Long Range Planning , 24 ( 2 ) , 82‑93 . Qaiyum , S . , & Wang , C . L . ( 2018 ) . Understanding internal conditions driving ordinary and dynamic capabilities in Indian high - tech firms . Journal of Business Research , 90 , 206‑214 . Rafiq , M . , & Ahmed , P . K . ( 2000 ) . Advances in the internal marketing concept : Definition , synthesis and extension . Journal of Services Marketing , 14 ( 6 ) , 449‑462 . Rajagopalan , N . , & Spreitzer , G . M . ( 1997 ) . Toward a theory of strategic change : A multi - lens perspective and integrative framework . The Academy of Management Review , 22 ( 1 ) , 48‑79 . 28 Ramaseshan , B . , Ishak , A . , & Rabbanee , F . K . ( 2013 ) . The role of marketing managers’ commitment and involvement in marketing strategy implementation . Journal of Strategic Marketing , 21 ( 6 ) , 465‑483 . Schriber , S . , & Löwstedt , J . ( 2020 ) . Reconsidering ordinary and dynamic capabilities in strategic change . European Management Journal , 38 ( 3 ) , 377‑387 . Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . ( 1998 ) . Basics of qualitative research . SAGE Publications Inc . van den Berg , J . , Zijp , M . C . , Vermeulen , W . J . V . , & Witjes , S . ( 2019 ) . Identifying change agent types and its implications for corporate sustainability integration based on worldviews and contextual factors . Journal of Cleaner Production , 229 , 1125‑1138 . van der Heijden , A . , Cramer , J . M . , & Driessen , P . P . J . ( 2012 ) . Change agent sensemaking for sustainability in a multinational subsidiary . Journal of Organizational Change Management , 25 ( 4 ) , 535‑559 . Varey , R . J . ( 1995 ) . Internal marketing : A review and some interdisciplinary research challenges . International Journal of Service Industry Management , 6 ( 1 ) , 40‑63 . Vorhies , D . W . , & Morgan , N . A . ( 2005 ) . Benchmarking marketing capabilities for sustainable competitive advantage . Journal of Marketing , 69 ( 1 ) , 80‑94 . 29 Table 1 . Sample characteristics Respondent Key informant’s position within the company Firm’s sector Strategic change plan R1 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Electronic equipment Merging of two strategic business units R2 Chief Marketing Officer Agri - food industry Redefining vision , mission and brand values R3 Chief Innovation Officer Postal services Unlocking synergies between business units R4 Chief Marketing Officer Aerospace systems Brand repositioning and customer value proposition R5 Chief Marketing Officer Retail Redefining brand values and customer value proposition R6 Executive VP Marketing Optical Industry Business model innovation R7 Chief Marketing Officer Tourism New customers and brand experience R8 Chief Marketing Officer Information Technology Redesigning the transversality between business units R9 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Insurance From a product - centric to a customer - centric strategic orientation R10 Chief Strategy Officer Energy New development strategy 30 R11 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Agri - food industry Transformation of the CRM strategy R12 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Insurance New product development R13 Chief Innovation Officer Insurance New product development R14 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Retail Redesigning group’s customer strategy R15 Chief Marketing Officer Insurance Developing synergies between brands R16 Chief Strategic Marketing Officer Financial services From a product - centric to a customer - centric strategic orientation R17 Chief Marketing Officer Energy From a product - centric to a customer - centric strategic orientation R18 Chief Marketing Officer Financial services New branding strategy R19 Chief Product Manager Machinery manufacturing From a product - centric to a market - centric strategic orientation R20 Deputy CEO Boat manufacturing New product development R21 Chief Marketing Officer Insurance Redesigning the business development