Cells internalize extracellular material , ligands , and plasma membrane proteins and lipids by endocytosis . This removal of membrane from the cell surface is bal - anced by endosomal recycling pathways that return much of the endocytosed proteins and lipids back to the plasma membrane . The balance between endocytic uptake and recycling controls the composition of the plasma mem - brane and contributes to diverse cellular processes , including nutrient uptake , cell adhesion and junction formation , cell migration , cytokinesis , cell polarity and signal transduction . Because it is estimated that cells internalize the equivalent of their cell surface one to five times per hour 1 , endocytic recycling pathways must be robust and coordinately regulated . Endocytosis occurs by various mechanisms , which can be divided into those that are clathrin dependent and those that are clathrin independent 2 , 3 ( FIG . 1 ) . In clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( CDE ) , the cytoplasmic domains of plasma membrane proteins are specifically recognized by adaptor proteins and packaged into clathrin - coated vesicles that are brought into the cell . The receptors for iron - bound transferrin ( TFRs ) and low - density lipo - protein ( LDLRs ) are classic examples of cargo proteins in CDE . CDE is facilitated by numerous accessory proteins , requires the GTPase dynamin for vesicle scission and has been widely studied 2 , 3 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , by contrast , can come in many forms and has been less well studied , but is increasingly gaining attention from cell biologists 4 , 5 . There are also specialized actin - driven CIE pathways 6 , such as macropinocytosis and phagocytosis , and these might be stimulated forms of CIE 7 . Regardless of the mode of entry , endocytosed cargo is usually delivered to the early endosome , where sorting occurs . Cargo - specific sorting leads to distinct subse - quent cargo itineraries ( FIG . 1 ) . Cargo can be routed from the early endosome to the late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation , to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) or to recycling endosomal carriers that bring the cargo back to the plasma membrane . A previous review on endocytic recycling specifically focused on cargo recycling in CDE 8 and emphasized the default nature of receptor and mem - brane lipid recycling . In this Review , we focus on endo - cytic recycling pathways , in particular those pathways and requirements that have been discovered for cargo recycling back to the plasma membrane in CIE . We do not yet know the extent to which these new pathways and requirements regulate recycling in all cells or whether cargoes in CIE and CDE share recycling pathways . The reader is referred to other reviews for discussions on traf - ficking to degradative compartments and the formation of multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) 9 – 11 , and on bidirectional trafficking between endosomes and the TGN 12 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis pathways Many cell surface transmembrane proteins lack cyto - plasmic sequences for the recruitment and internal - ization into clathrin - coated vesicles . Over the past few years , many of these proteins have been shown to be internalized by CIE mechanisms . There seem to be several distinct mechanisms of CIE 4 that might reflect , to some extent , the different cell types and cargo mol - e cules monitored . Caveolar endocytosis involves the * Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry , Rutgers University , Piscataway , New Jersey 08854 , USA . ‡ Laboratory of Cell Biology , National Heart Lung and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Building 50 , Room 2503 , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , USA . e - mails : grant @ biology . rutgers . edu ; jdonalds @ helix . nih . gov doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2755 Macropinocytosis An actin - dependent process by which cells engulf large volumes of fluids . Phagocytosis An actin - dependent process by which cells engulf external particulate material by extension and fusion of pseudopods . Multivesicular body An endocytic intermediate organelle in the lysosomal degradative pathway that contains small vesicles and is surrounded by a limiting membrane . Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling Barth D . Grant * and Julie G . Donaldson ‡ Abstract | Endocytic recycling is coordinated with endocytic uptake to control the composition of the plasma membrane . Although much of our understanding of endocytic recycling has come from studies on the transferrin receptor , a protein internalized through clathrin - dependent endocytosis , increased interest in clathrin - independent endocytosis has led to the discovery of new endocytic recycling systems . Recent insights into the regulatory mechanisms that control endocytic recycling have focused on recycling through tubular carriers and the return to the cell surface of cargoes that enter cells through clathrin - independent mechanisms . Recent work emphasizes the importance of regulated recycling in processes as diverse as cytokinesis , cell adhesion , morphogenesis , cell fusion , learning and memory . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 597 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Lateendosome Clathrin - independent endocytosis Clathrin - dependent endocytosis Recyclingendosome Recycling endosome Rapidrecycling ERC Early endosome RAB8 and RAB22A Clathrin - coated pit ESCRT Cargo Clathrin RAB10 , RAB22A and RAB35 , PAR3 and CDC42 RAB11 RAB5 EEA1 RAB4 and RAB35 RAB11 ARF6 , RAB11 , and actin RAB11FIP5 , SNX4 and dynein RAB11FIP2 – EHD3 , RAB10 and RAB22A RAB11FIP3 – ARF6 and RAB11FIP3 – RAB11 EHD1 – ALIX and EHD1 – RAB11FIP2 Lipid raft A microdomain in cellular membranes that is implicated in certain types of endocytosis and signalling and that is enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids . caveolin coat , is dynamin dependent and is the mecha - nism that glycosphingolipids and some viruses use for cell internalization 4 , 5 . A mode of CIE that depends on CDC42 , ADP - ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) 13 and actin has also been described , which is dynamin independent and responsible for endocytosis of fluid - phase markers , glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins and bacterial toxins 4 , 5 . Another dynamin - independent mechanism of CIE , first described in HeLa cells , is associated with the ARF6 GTPase and is responsible for endocytosis of many cell surface integral membrane proteins that lack adaptor protein recognition sequences ( see below ) . Disparate forms of CIE share a requirement for free cholesterol , and proteins and lipids that reside in sphingolipid - rich lipid raft membranes seem to be prom - inent among cargoes in CIE 4 , 5 . Recent analysis of recy - cling of endogenous cargo proteins in CIE is revealing an unexpected complexity in CIE recycling systems . The ARF6 - associated pathway has been an impor - tant experimental paradigm for studies of CIE , allow - ing the identification of many clathrin - independent cargo proteins and the elucidation of the itineraries and mechanisms of their recycling . Among the endo - genous proteins originally shown to enter cells through this CIE mechanism are the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I proteins 14 , β - integrins 15 , 16 and the GPI - anchored protein CD59 ( ReF . 17 ) . A recent proteomics analysis of the ARF6 - associated early endo - some identified additional cargo proteins , including the ubiquitous glucose transporter GLuT1 ( also known as sLC2A1 ) and other proteins that are involved in amino acid uptake and cell – extracellular matrix interactions 18 ( TABLe 1 ) . Other cargo proteins travelling in this path - way , including the interleukin 2 receptor α - subunit ( also known as TAC ) 14 , the MHC - like molecule CD1a 19 and the β2 adrenergic and M3 muscarinic receptors in the absence of ligand 20 , have been identified in transfected HeLa cells ( TABLe 1 ) . In most cases , following internaliza - tion into distinct vesicles the cargo is transferred to the early endosome , where it meets CDE cargo , and can then be routed along the degradative pathway to the lysosome or recycled back to the cell surface . Figure 1 | Pathways of endocytosis and endocytic recycling . Itinerary of cargo proteins entering cells by clathrin - dependent ( blue cargo ) and clathrin - independent ( red cargo ) endocytosis . Subsequent routing of cargo to the early endosome , juxtanuclear endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) and the recycling endosome is shown . RAB5 and early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) funtion in the generation and maintenance of the early endosome . Some cargoes are selected in the early endosome by the ESCRT machinery to enter the multivesicular body pathway and to be transported on to late endosomes ( dashed arrow ) . Clathrin - dependent cargoes can recycle back to the cell surface through a rapid recycling pathway that requires RAB4 and RAB35 . Both types of cargo can move from the early endosome to the ERC by a process that requires sorting nexin 4 ( SNX4 ) , dynein , RAB10 , RAB22A , RAB11 family - interacting protein 2 ( RAB11FIP2 ; in complex with carboxy - terminal epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 homology domain - containing protein 3 ( EHD3 ) ) , RAB11FIP3 ( in complex with ARF6 or RAB11 ) and RAB11FIP5 . From the ERC , recycling of both types of cargo requires RAB11 , and recycling of clathrin - independent cargoes involves the generation of distinctive RAB8 - and RAB22A - dependent tubules , in addition to many other factors . Some clathrin - dependent cargoes might also recycle through these different pathways . RAB10 , RAB11 , RAB22A and RAB35 are associated with the tubular recycling endosome and , along with EHD1 ( homologous to receptor mediated endocytosis protein 1 ( RME - 1 ) in C . elegans ) in complex with the mammalian apoptosis - linked gene 2 - interacting protein X1 homologue ALIX ( also known as PDCD6IP ) and RAB11FIP2 , are required for recycling . In the periphery , the tubules seem to break up into vesicles prior to fusing with the cell surface , a process that initially requires partitioning defective protein 3 ( PAR3 ) and CDC42 and subsequently ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) , RAB11 and cortical actin . This is a composite description of endocytic recycling and all of the components shown here may not be evident in a given cell type . R E V I E W S 598 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ESCRT ( endosomal sorting complex required for transport ) . A multiprotein machinery that promotes inward vesiculation at the limiting membrane of the sorting endosome and selects cargo proteins for delivery to the intralumenal vesicles of MVBs . DENN domain ( Differentially expressed in neoplastic versus normal cells domain ) . A domain present in many proteins that are involved in vesicle trafficking . Although this CIE pathway is associated with ARF6 , endocytosis is not dependent on ARF6 – GTP ; instead , it is the recycling from this pathway that requires active ARF6 ( ReF . 14 ) . The identification of this CIE pathway was facilitated by the characteristic elaborate tubular endosomal recycling system , which is easily visualized in HeLa cells labelled for cargo , ARF6 and / or EHD1 . However , mechanistically similar trafficking of such cargo has been observed in various other cells , including Cos , MCF7 ( ReF . 21 ) , B cells 22 , cardiomyocytes 23 , hippo - campal neurons 23 and dendritric cells 22 and in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine 24 , 25 , indicating that there is wide conservation of these pathways . However , in some cells , notably CHO cells , ARF6 is also associated with and influences the recycling of cargo proteins in CDE , such as the TFR 26 . The early endosome : a cargo - sorting station The early endosome is defined as the organelle that receives incoming material from primary vesicles that have been generated by CIE and CDE . The small GTPase RAB5 , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and its product phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) mark the early endosome and are required for its function . The lumen of the early endosome is mildly acidic 8 , thereby facilitating conformational changes in proteins that can lead to ligand release from receptors . sorting of mem - brane proteins and lipids from luminal content and the generation of membrane tubules emanating from endosomes can lead to the entry of the membrane pro - teins and lipids into fast recycling pathways ( see below ) . Alternatively , they can transfer to a later , juxtanuclear , endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) from which recycling endosomes emerge ( FIG . 1 ) . Membrane pro - teins that have been tagged with monoubiquitin are corralled by the eSCRT machinery and enter the MVB pathway along with the luminal content of the early endosome 9 – 11 . For the ‘classic’ CDE cargoes , TFRs and LDLRs , recycling back to the plasma membrane seems to be the default pathway and does not require any spe - cific cytoplasmic sequences for recognition and sorting 8 . By contrast , recycling of cargoes and signalling receptors in CIE might involve a positive selection process . Regulators of traffic and of recycling in particular include GTPases ( Rab and Arf proteins ) and their effectors ( BOX 1 ; TABLe 2 ) , the receptor - mediated endocytosis 1 ( RME - 1 ) family of carboxy - terminal epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 ( EPs15 ) homology domain - containing proteins 1 – 4 ( EHD1 – EHD4 ) , which are scaf - folding , membrane tubulating and perhaps membrane fission proteins 27 , 28 , and motor proteins ( TABLe 3 ) that transport recycling endosomal carriers . Our under - standing of endocytosis and recycling has benefited from genetic studies in yeast and more recently in C . elegans 29 – 32 . In particular , the C . elegans analysis has identified many metazoan - specific regulators of endocytosis and recyc - ling that are now known to have similar functions in mammalian cells . Cells in C . elegans also clearly possess and require a morphologically distinct ERC , an organelle that is yet to be defined in yeast systems 32 . Rapid recycling route The existence of a fast recycling route back to the plasma membrane from either the early endosome or an earlier stage in the endocytic pathway has been documented for the transport of TFR 8 and glycosphingolipids 33 . Early studies identified RAB4 as being important for recycling of TFR 8 , 34 and glycosphingolipids 33 from early endosomes ( FIG . 1 ) . The published literature is not clear on the precise role of RAB4 in recycling , as expression of dominant - negative RAB4 inhibits fast recycling but small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) - mediated knock down of RAB4 increases rapid recycling , perhaps by blocking early endosome - to - ERC transport 35 , 36 . Recent studies using RNA interference ( RNAi ) and knockout approaches have indicated that RAB35 is an important regulator of rapid recycling . studies revealed that RAB35 localizes to the plasma membrane as well as to early endosomes and is required for rapid recycling of mammalian TFR 37 and the C . elegans LDLR - like yolk recepto r 38 . Furthermore , in C . elegans recruitment of RAB - 35 ( also known as RME - 5 ) to the early endosome depends on RME - 4 , a DeNN domain - containing protein Table 1 | Cargo proteins in clathrin - independent endocytosis cargo * Function ‡ refs MHC class I molecule Immune responses 14 MHC class II molecule ( peptide - loaded ) Immune responses 22 CD1a Immune responses 19 β - integrins Cell – extracellular matrix interactions and adhesion 15 , 16 E - cadherin Cell – cell junctions 91 PMP22 § Myelination 123 CD44 ( hyaluronan receptor ) Cell – extracellular matrix interactions 18 CD98 ( SLC3A2 and 4F2HC ) Interacts with β - integrins , ICAM1 and the heavy chain of amino acid transporters 18 CD147 ( EMMPRIN and basigin ) Cell – extracellular matrix interactions 18 ICAM1 ( CD54 ) Cell – extracellular matrix interactions and adhesion 23 Syndecan 1 Cell – extracellular matrix interactions 21 CD55 ( DAF ) GPI - AP ; protects cell from complement 57 CD59 ( protectin ) GPI - AP ; protects cell from complement 17 Mucolipin 2 § TRP - like cation channel 57 Kir3 . 4 ( GIRK4 and KCNJ5 ) Inwardly rectifying potassium channel 23 GLUT1 ( SLC2A1 ) Glucose transporter 18 LAT1 ( SLC7A5 ) L - type amino acid transporter 18 β 2 adrenergic receptor § ( no ligand ) Signalling receptor 20 M3 receptor § ( no ligand ) Signalling receptor 20 MGLUR7 § ( no ligand ) Signalling receptor 124 * Alternative names are provided in brackets . ‡ Indicated function or functions have been shown for endogenous proteins , unless indicated § by transfection studies . GLUT1 , glucose transporter type 1 ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; GPI - AP , glycosyl phosphatidylinositol - anchored protein ; ICAM1 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ; LAT1 , Y and L amino acid transporter 1 ; MGLUR7 , metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 ; MHC , major histocompatibility complex ; PMP22 , peripheral myelin protein 22 , TRP , transient receptor potential . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 599 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Clathrin - coated pit The initial site of invagination of a clathrin - coated vesicle . GTPase - activating protein A protein that catalyses GTP hydrolysis on GTP - bound proteins . Immunological synapse A junction that forms at the contact region between a T cell and its target cells . T cell activation occurs here . Sorting nexin A member of a family of proteins that are implicated in membrane trafficking and that contain a Phox domain , which binds to phosphoinositides . that is related to mammalian connecdenn . RME - 4 binds to GDP - associated RAB - 35 and adaptor protein 2 ( AP - 2 ) , thereby recruiting RAB - 35 to clathrin - coated pits 38 , 39 . Another study showed that overexpression of the RAB35 GTPase - activating protein TBC1 domain family member 10C ( TBC1D10C ; also known as EPI64C ) , or depletion of RAB35 , impaired TFR recycling and the formation of the immunological synapse 40 , highlighting a role for rapid recycling in T cell function . The localiza - tion of RAB35 to incoming clathrin - coated vesicles links this rapid recycling route to CDE . RAB35 is also associated with ARF6 - and EHD1 - positive tubular recycling endosomes that carry cargo back to the plasma membrane in CIE 22 . Whether RAB35 is functional on tubular recycling endosomes or is just a passenger is not known . RAB35 was also found to be required for efficient abscission , breaking the final bridge that links daughter cells after cytokinesis ( see below ) 37 . Slow recycling route The so - called slow recycling route is the route that is typically studied when experimentally measuring recy - cling and involves the transport of cargo proteins from the early endosome to the ERC and from the ERC to the plasma membrane . In many tissue culture cells the ERC is localized centrally , near the microtubule organizing centre and Golgi complex , but this is not always the case , especially in polarized cells . The prevailing model of geometry - based iterative sorting posits that during maturation the early endosome extends tubules that become the ERC , whereas the main body of the early endosome becomes the MVB 8 . Evidence of this trans - formation has come from live imaging studies , showing that the early endosome loses RAB5 and acquires RAB11 ( ReF . 41 ) . The ERC is defined molecularly by the presence of RAB11 and / or EHD1 and morphologically as a tubular compartment that is largely devoid of fluid . Traffic to the ERC Numerous proteins have been shown to be important for the juxtanuclear positioning of the ERC and for the transport of endocytosed cargo to the ERC ( FIG . 1 ; TABLeS 2 , 3 ) . One of these proteins , EHD4 , is important for export from the early endosome to the ERC and late endosome 42 . Another member of the same family , EHD3 , binds to the Asn – Pro – Phe motifs in two Rab effectors , rabenosyn 5 and RAB11 family - interacting protein 2 ( RAB11FIP2 ) , suggesting a role for EHD3 as a linker between the RAB5 - associated early endosome and the RAB11 - associated ERC 43 . Another RAB11 effector , RAB11FIP5 , is important for the movement of TFR from the early endosome to the ERC . Loss of RAB11FIP5 inhibits the transport of TFR from the early endosome to the ERC , which seems to lead to enhanced recycling of TFR , presumably through the fast recycling route directly from the early endosome to the plasma mem - brane 44 . RAB11FIP3 ( homologous to NuF in Drosophila melanogaster ) interacts with both RAB11 and ARF6 , is important for the juxtanuclear positioning of the ERC 45 and has a role in cytokinesis ( see below ) . In addition , AsAP1 ( Arf - GAP with sH3 domain , ANK repeat and PH domain - containing protein 1 ) also binds to RAB11FIP3 and influences ERC positioning 46 . RAB22A is also important for the movement of cargo from the early endosome to the ERC , and RAB22A depletion inhibits slow TFR recycling 47 . RAB - 10 in C . elegans and its mammalian homologue in polarized epithelial cells has been implicated in cargo transport between early endosomes and recycling endosomes in both CIE and CDE 24 , 48 . An important function of cargo transport from the early endosome to the ERC might be to prevent cargo entry into degradative compartments . The sorting nexins serve this function in yeast 49 , and in mammalian cells sorting nexin 4 ( sNX4 ) associates with tubular vesicular elements on the early endosome and ERC . Loss of sNX4 causes the TFR to be sorted to the late endosome for degradation 50 . sNX4 interacts with the dynein motor through the linker protein WW domain - containing protein 1 ( WWC1 ; also known as KIBRA ) , facilitating the movement of the early endosome or ERC to the juxtanuclear region . Depletion of WWC1 results in a peripheral distribution of TFR , but does not lead to TFR degradation , suggesting that sNX4 coordinates the sort - ing of TFR away from the late endosome and , together with dynein , the movement of TFR towards the ERC 50 . Interestingly , another study found that depletion of the AP2 complex leads to increased routing of the MHC class I and β - integrin cargoes to degradative compart - ments in CIE and reduces their recycling 51 , similar to the block of TFR recycling observed with sNX4 deple - tion . Because AP2 depletion inhibits the internalization Box 1 | Rab and Arf GTPases involved in endocytic recycling Low - molecular - mass GTP - binding proteins act as molecular switches to regulate the steps that are involved in vesicle carrier formation , movement and fusion with target membranes . These proteins cycle between a GDP - bound ‘off’ state and a GTP - bound ‘on’ state , in which they interact with and activate effector proteins . Conversion between these states is catalysed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors that convert them to the on state and GTPase - activating proteins that stimulate GTP hydrolysis , returning them to the off state . There are over 60 Rab proteins in mammals that have distinct localizations and functions in membrane trafficking 119 , 120 . Of the Rab proteins that are associated with the regulation of endosomal traffic ( RAB4 , RAB5 , RAB7 , RAB8 , RAB10 , RAB11 , RAB22A and RAB35 ) , RAB5 and RAB11 have been studied the most . Two effectors of RAB5 , phosphatidylinositide 3 - kinase and the membrane - tethering protein early endosomal antigen 1 , lead to the generation of phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate on the membrane and facilitate early endosomal membrane fusion . Many proteins have been identified that interact with RAB11 and are known as RAB11 family - interacting proteins ( RAB11FIPs ) . RAB11FIPs , in turn , interact with many other proteins , serving as scaffolds to organize and coordinate endosomal transport 121 . Of the six mammalian ADP - ribosylation factor ( Arf ) proteins , ARF6 has a distinctive peripheral plasma membrane localization , whereas the other Arf proteins cycle between the Golgi and cytosol . However , recent findings have also documented roles for Golgi Arf proteins at the plasma membrane 13 , 122 . ARF6 activates phospholipase D , generating phosphatidic acid , which is required for endocytic recycling . ARF6 also activates phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase , which generates phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate on the distal portions of the recycling endosome and at the plasma membrane . In addition , ARF6 interacts with the effector RAB11FIP3 to facilitate movement to the endocytic recycling compartment . ARF6 interaction with the Jun N - terminal kinase interacting protein 3 ( JIP3 ) and JIP4 motor protein scaffolds is important during cytokinesis . R E V I E W S 600 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved of TFR but not that of MHC class I molecules or β - integrins , this raises the possibility that input from CDE at the early endosome might be required for recy - cling of cargo proteins in CIE . For example , cargoes in CDE , such as TFR and the proteins that associate with it , might facilitate the movement of cargoes in CIE from early endosomes to the ERC for subsequent recycling . Further studies will be needed to determine the extent to which CDE and CIE are interdependent . From the ERC to the plasma membrane There are probably several distinct recycling pathways from the ERC back to the plasma membrane . In HeLa cells the bifurcation from the ERC is distinctive . TFRs leaving the ERC are recycled back to the plasma mem - brane in carriers , which are separate from the tubular recycling endosomes that carry CIE cargoes back to the plasma membrane 14 , 17 , 52 . Although both recycling endo - some and tubular recycling endosome pathways require RAB11 ( ReF . 53 ) , the latter , which is a more elaborate recycling system that we refer to as the CIE recycling pathway , is subject to much more regulation ( by Arf , Rab and polarity proteins , for example ) , as discussed below . studies in C . elegans also indicate that there are genetically separable recycling pathways for cargoes in CDE and CIE , suggesting the conservation of bifurcated export from the ERC 25 . ARF6 and recycling from the ERC . The CIE recycling pathway was originally described to include ARF6 - associated tubular endosomes that emanate from the juxtanuclear ERC and carry cargoes such as MHC class I molecules back to the plasma membrane . The tubular endosomes align along microtubules , and recy - cling back to the plasma membrane depends on both microtubules and actin 14 , 53 , 54 . Importantly , ARF6 exerts its effect by promoting recycling from the tubular endo - some membrane back to the plasma membrane . ARF6 is required , at least in part , for the activation of phospho - lipase D2 ( PLD2 ) 55 . PLD2 is present on the tubular Table 2 | GTPases and their regulators in endocytic recycling gTPases and regulators * localization , domains and functions refs Rab and Arf proteins ARF6 CIE recycling pathway 14 RAB4 Early endosome 8 , 34 RAB8 Recycling endosome tubules 61 RAB10 Early endosome 24 , 48 RAB11 ERC 8 , 53 RAB22A Recycling endosome tubules 47 , 53 RAB35 Early endosome and recycling endosome tubules 37 , 38 Rab and Arf effectors Rabenosyn 5 FYVE and NPF domains ; interacts with RAB4 , RAB5 , EHD1 , EHD3 and VPS45 43 RAB11FIP2 C2 and NPF domains ; binds to RAB11 43 RAB11FIP3 ( NUF ) EF hands and ERM domain ; binds to RAB11 45 RIP11 ( RAB11FIP5 ) C2 domain ; binds to RAB11 44 Phospholipase D2 PX and PH domains ; cleaves phosphatidylcholine to generate phosphatidic acid and choline ; is regulated by ARF6 and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 55 PtdIns ( 4 ) P5K Generates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 from PtdIns4P ; is activated by ARF6 15 , 26 SEC10 ( EXOC5 ) Binds to ARF6 ; promotes tethering and fusion 60 JIP3 and JIP4 Leucine - zipper domains ; bind to ARF6 , KLC1 and dynactin 59 Rab and Arf regulators RME - 4 ( connecdenn ) DENN domain ; interacts with RAB35 and AP2 36 , 37 TBC1D10C ( EP164C ) RAB35 GAP 38 ASAP1 ARF6 GAP 46 ACAP1 ARF6 GAP 58 Loner ( Schizo and ARFGEP100 ) ARF6 nucleotide exchange factor 105 * Alternative names are provided in brackets . ACAP1 , Arf - GAP with coiled - coil , ANK repeat and PH domain - containing protein 1 ; ARF , ADP - ribosylation factor ; ASAP1 , Arf - GAP with SH3 domain , ANK repeat and PH domain - containing protein 1 ; CIE , clathrin - independent endocytosis ; EHD , epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 homology domain - containing protein ; ERC , endocytic recycling compartment ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; JIP , Jun N - terminal kinase interacting protein ; KLC1 , kinesin light chain 1 ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PtdIns4P , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate ; PtdIns ( 4 ) P5K , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PX , Phox ; RME - 1 , receptor - mediated endocytosis 1 ; TBC1D10C , TBC1 domain family member 10C ; VPS45 , vacuolar protein sorting - associated protein 45 . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 601 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Syndecan A member of a family of integral membrane heparin sulphate proteoglycans that interact with the extracellular matrix and with growth factors . PDZ domain A protein interaction domain that is often found in scaffolding proteins and that is named after the founding members of this protein family ( PSD95 , Discs large and ZO1 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange factor A protein that facilitates the exchange of GDP ( guanine diphosphate ) for GTP ( guanine triphosphate ) in the nucleotide - binding pocket of a GTP - binding protein . recycling endosome , and the lipid products of PLD2 , phosphatidic acid and diacylglycerol , are important for recycling 55 . Phosphatidic acid has been implicated in membrane fission and so might also promote the release of recycling carriers , whereas diacylglycerol has been implicated in membrane fusion and fission and so might also promote the fusion of such carriers with the plasma membrane . ARF6 also activates PtdIns ( 4 ) P5K ( PtdIns ( 4 ) P5 - kinase ) , the enzyme that generates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is present both at the cell surface and on the distal por - tions of the tubular endosome 15 and is important for the recruitment to the membrane of many proteins involved in vesicle formation , fusion and actin polymerization . Indeed , it is this ARF6 - directed endocytic recycling back to the plasma membrane that modulates the cortical actin cytoskeleton for cell spreading , cell migration , wound healing and metastasis 26 , activities that have all been ascribed to ARF6 . several proteins that have been found to be associated with the tubular endosomes might regulate the activa - tion of ARF6 . Inhibition of extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) inhibits ARF6 activation , causes a build up of CIE tubular recycling endosomes and inhibits recycling 56 . The activities of other signalling molecules ( Ras , Rac and src proteins ) that are localized to these tubules might also alter ARF6 activation and / or recy - cling 7 . For example , the cation channel mucolipin 2 is associated with the tubular recycling endosome and its overexpression results in increased activation of ARF6 , whereas its depletion results in decreased recycling of CD59 ( ReF . 57 ) . In addition to these global requirements for ARF6 in CIE recycling , three studies have implicated ARF6 in cargo - specific sorting and recycling . The recycling of syndecan 1 , a heparin sulphate proteoglycan , and fibro - blast growth factor receptor ( FGFR ) , which traffics with syndecans , requires ARF6 , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( produced by ARF6 - mediated activation of PtdIns ( 4 ) P5K ) and syn - tenin , a PDZ domain - containing protein that binds to the C terminus of syndecans . Expression of syntenin mutants that cannot bind to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 causes the accumula - tion of syndecan and FGFR in endosomes and blocks their recycling back to the plasma membrane ; this results in impaired cell spreading 21 . In another example , a cyto - plasmic acidic cluster motif that is present on inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir3 . 4 ( also known as GIRK4 and KCNJ5 ) binds to the ARF6 guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) EFA6 ( also known as PsD ) , lead - ing to the activation of ARF6 and the increased presence of Kir3 . 4 at the plasma membrane 23 . Another intriguing observation is that ACAP1 ( Arf - GAP with coiled - coil , ANK repeat and PH domain - containing protein 1 ) , which hydrolyses GTP and thus inactivates ARF6 , binds to clathrin , and both ACAP1 and clathrin were found to be important for the recycling of β - integrins and the glucose transporter GLuT4 ( also known as sLC2A4 ) 58 , although exactly how and where these components func - tion to sort such diverse cargoes is not clear . Two additional ARF6 effectors , Jun N - terminal kinase interacting protein 3 ( JIP3 ; also known as MAPK8IP3 ) and JIP4 ( also known as sPAG9 ) , and the sec10 subunit of the exocyst ( EXOC5 ) might have distinct roles in the regulation of endosomal trafficking , in particular con - trolling the targeting of recycling membrane ( TABLe 2 ) . JIP3 and JIP4 are scaffolding proteins that bind to the plus end - directed motor kinesin and the minus end - directed motor dynein . ARF6 might regulate the binding of the JIP proteins to these two motors and thereby con - trol the direction of transport along microtubules 59 . This interaction is important during cytokinesis ( see below ) and might also function along the CIE pathway in inter - phase cells . The interaction of ARF6 with the exocyst also seems to influence the target site at the plasma membrane that receives the cargo from recycling CIE 60 . Other regulators of recycling . The ERC is defined by the presence of RAB11 and the many proteins that inter - act with it . Because the ERC is where slow recycling of TFR occurs , interfering with RAB11 or its interactors Table 3 | Motors , adaptors and other proteins in endocytic recycling Proteins * Domains and functions refs Myosin Vb Actin - based , barbed end - directed motor 110 Myosin VI Actin - based , pointed end - directed motor 88 Dynein Microtubule based , minus end - directed motor 50 , 59 p150glued and p50 Components of the dynein activator complex ( dynactin ) 59 KLC1 Microtubule - based , plus end - directed motor 59 RME - 1 ( EHD1 ) and EHD2 – EHD4 EH domain ; lipid binding and tubulation ( fission ? ) and ATPase 27 Syndapin ( pacsin ) F - BAR and SH3 domains ; membrane tubulation and actin remodelling 25 , 68 ALX - 1 ( ALIX , PDCD6IP and Bro1 ) Bro1 - and V - domains and Pro - rich region ; regulates MVB and recycling 25 PAR3 PDZ domain ; cell polarity 29 , 98 – 100 PAR6 PDZ domain ; cell polarity 29 , 98 – 100 CDC42 Rho - family small GTPase 29 , 98 – 100 aPKC Ser / Thr kinase ; cell polarity 29 , 98 – 100 Myoferlin C2 domains ; synaptotagmin - family member 107 WWC1 ( KIBRA ) WW and C2 - like domains and carboxy - terminal Glu - rich region ; binds to SNX4 and dynein 50 SNX4 PX and coiled - coil domains ; binds to WWC1 50 ERK Ser / Thr kinase 7 Ras GTPase 7 Src SH3 and SH2 domains ; protein Tyr kinase 7 RAC1 Rho - family GTPase 7 , 104 – 106 Mucolipin 2 Transient receptor potential superfamily cation channel 57 Kir3 . 4 ( GIRK4 and KCNJ5 ) Subunit of inward rectifier K + channel 23 Clathrin Coat protein 2 * Alternative names are provided in brackets . ALX - 1 , apoptosis - linked gene 2 - interacting protein X1 ; aPKC , atypical protein kinase C ; EH , Eps15 homology ; ERK , extracellular signal - regulated kinase ; KLC1 , kinesin light chain 1 ; MVB , multivesicular body ; PAR , partitioning defective protein ; PX , Phox ; SH , Src homology ; SNX4 , sorting nexin 4 ; WWC1 , WW domain - containing protein 1 . R E V I E W S 602 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Exocyst A complex of proteins , forming a membrane tether , that is implicated in exocytosis and is localized to the plasma membrane . inhibits recycling and often alters the positioning of the ERC in the cell . The recycling of the MHC class I 53 and β - integrin 16 cargoes in CIE is also dependent on RAB11 function . Other Rab proteins seem to be associated with the ERC or are involved in differentiation of the ERC to form the recycling tubules that carry cargoes in CIE back to the plasma membrane . Although RAB22A seems to be important for early endosome - to - ERC transport 47 , it is also crucial for the biogenesis of the recycling endosome tubules and for the recycling of MHC class I molecules 53 and CD1a 19 back to the plasma membrane . RAB8 is also present on tubular endosomes of the CIE pathway , where it might function with ARF6 to promote recycling and cortical actin - driven plasma membrane protrusions 61 . specific cargo sorting for endosomal recycling is especially evident in polarized epithelial cells . The AP1B adaptor is important for targeting proteins to the baso - lateral surface of these cells 62 . Furthermore , proteins des - tined for apical or basolateral recycling are sorted into distinct domains in the recycling endosome 63 . Exactly how recycling pathways in polarized epithelial cells are similar to or distinct from those in non - polarized cells remains to be determined . The variety of pathways that are observed in non - polarized cells could be indicative of the distinct trafficking pathways in polarized cells . The genetic screen for endocytosis mutants in C . elegans has been instrumental in expanding our understanding of recycling from the ERC . The first endocytosis mutant from the screen , RME - 1 and its mammalian homologue EHD1 , are required for the recycling of MHC class I molecules and , in some cells , TFR 64 – 66 . EHD1 can bind to PtdIns4P and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and its ability to bind to PtdIns4P seems to be important for the association of EHD1 with the tubular aspects of recycling endosomes 67 . EHD1 also binds to rabenosyn 5 and RAB11FIP2 ( ReF . 43 ) , hence coupling RAB5 with RAB11 effectors . Furthermore , EHD1 can bind to syn - dapins ( also known as pacsins ) , which are proteins that are thought to be links between membrane trafficking and membrane - associated actin . syndapins colocalize with EHD1 or RME - 1 on the CIE recycling tubules in mammals and C . elegans , respectively 25 , 68 . structural data from the related protein EHD2 in mice suggests that RME - 1 - family proteins might function similarly to dynamin , assembling in ring structures around mem - branes and promoting fission 28 . Thus , EHD1 ( or RME - 1 ) might be part of the fission apparatus for release of recycling cargo carriers . C . elegans apoptosis - linked gene 2 - interacting protein X1 ( ALX - 1 ; known as ALIX or PDCD6IP in mammals and Bro1 in yeast ) was identified as an RME - 1 - binding protein that is required for recycling of human TAC in CIE but not for recycling of human TFRs in CDE 25 . This was an unexpected finding as ALIX and Bro1 in mam - mals and yeast , respectively , are known to be associ - ated with the EsCRT complex during MVB biogenesis . However , the new study found that ALX - 1 in C . elegans was also associated with a subset of RME - 1 - positive endosomes and was required in CIE for the recycling of human TAC , expressed in C . elegans as a cargo marker of the CIE pathway . Mutation of the RME - 1 - binding site in ALX - 1 produced a version of the protein that could still function in MVB and late endosomal processes , but lacked its recycling function 25 . Overexpression of trun - cated human ALIX in HeLa cells strongly inhibited the recycling of MHC class I molecules 25 . The MVB regu - lator hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ( HRs ) has also been implicated in the recycling process and , similarly to ALIX , is associated with tubu - lar endosomes in vivo , suggesting that some proteins that are known to act in receptor degradation have dual functions 69 , 70 . Another surprising set of proteins to be identified by the C . elegans screens were the polarity proteins parti - tioning defective protein 3 ( PAR - 3 ) , PAR - 6 and CDC - 42 ( ReF . 29 ) . CDC - 42 colocalizes with RME - 1 - and EHD1 - labelled endosomes in worms and HeLa cells , respec - tively , and expression of dominant - negative forms of PAR - 6 and CDC - 42 led to an inhibition of MHC class I recycling , with no effect on TFR recycling . However , the inhibitory forms of PAR - 6 and CDC - 42 diminished TFR endocytosis with no effect on MHC class I endocytosis . This suggests a coordinate regulation of the CDE and CIE pathways , with important implications for understanding how these pathways function in the organism . Endocytic recycling function in organisms Cell division , cell migration , cell junction formation and maintenance , cell – cell fusion events , control of neuronal signalling during learning and memory , and cell polarity seem to all share certain molecular underpinnings . In particular , each of these processes depends on accu - rate and efficient endocytic recycling . These are heavily studied and complex areas of research , each deserving its own review . In the interest of space , we have taken specific examples of the involvement of recycling in these pro cesses to illustrate the contributions of recycling pathways to these complex processes . Recycling in cytokinesis . Plasma membrane remodelling during cytokinesis is known to depend on the regula - tion of endosomal membrane traffic . As cultured cells round up prior to cell division , endocytic recycling function is temporarily blocked while endocytosis pro - ceeds , leading to the loss of plasma membrane area and the accumulation of cell surface - derived membrane in the endosomal system 71 . soon after , the contractile ring forms and the cytokinetic furrow ingresses . In plants , cytokinesis proceeds through the de novo synthesis of plasma membrane by vesicle transport and fusion at the centre of a mother cell ( reviewed in ReF . 72 ) . Although animal cell cytokinesis was initially thought to be mecha - nistically distinct from that of plant cells , it is now clear that in animal cells vesicular transport is also crucial for cytokinesis . This was first evidenced by the production of multinucleate cells after the depletion of a particular soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ( sNARE ) protein 73 – 75 . Vesicles that are important for animal cell cytokinesis are derived from recycling endosomes and the Golgi complex and con - tribute membrane to the advancing cleavage furrow 76 , 77 . Recycling endosomes are also closely associated with the R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 603 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology + + – – Kinesin 1 RAB11 – GTP JIP4 RAB11FIP3 Dynactin ARF6 – GTP ARF6 – GTP Exocyst RAB35 – GTP EE - derived vesicle Golgi - derived vesicle Microtubule Recyclingendosome Abscission Intercellular bridge ( midbody ) late step of cytokinesis , called abscission — a process that breaks the final thin connection between daughter cells ( FIG . 2 ) . In particular , the recycling endosome - specific GTPases RAB11 and ARF6 are required for cytokinesis in several organisms , including vertebrates and invertebrates 78 – 80 . The association of recycling endosomes with the cleavage furrow , and the donation of membrane to the furrow , depends on RAB11 ( ReF . 79 ) . In cultured mam - malian cells , ARF6 seems to have less effect on furrowing but is important for severing the final intercellular bridge during abscission 80 , 81 . In D . melanogaster spermatocytes , ARF6 is required during the early and late phases of cyto - kinesis , but somatic cell cytokinesis can proceed without it 82 . Another key recycling endosomal protein in cyto - kinesis is RAB11FIP3 , the RAB11 and ARF6 effector 79 , 83 . In cultured mammalian cells , RAB11FIP3 knockdown inhibits abscission , whereas in D . melanogaster embryos the loss of NuF ( the D . melanogaster homologue ) inhibits membrane addition to ingressing furrows 79 , 83 . In flies , RHOGEF2 activates RHOA and is important for actin polymerization on furrowing membranes 84 , 85 . The key function of NuF seems to be the recruitment of RHOGEF2 to the cleavage furrow 86 , and RHOGEF2 might be associated with vesicles trafficked to the fur - row by NuF 85 . In mammals , epithelial cell - transforming sequence 2 oncogene ( ECT2 ) , in association with central - spindlin ( a complex composed of cytokinesis defect 4 ( CYK4 ) and kinesin - like protein KIF23 ( also known as MKLP1 ) ) , activates RHOA to promote furrowing 87 . During telophase ECT2 is lost from the centralspindlin complex , allowing CYK4 to recruit RAB11 – RAB11FIP3 , promoting tethering of recycling endosomes to the midbody 87 ( FIG . 2 ) . It remains to be determined exactly how RHOA - promoted actin dynamics influences furrowing . Actin could act as a track for vesicle movement , ultimately promoting localized fusion . This idea is supported by evidence that the motor protein myosin VI is important for cytokinesis 88 . Another possible explanation for the NuF and RHOGEF2 phenotypes is that NuF recruits RHOGEF2 to recycling endosomes and RHOGEF2 activity promotes recycling endosome - derived vesicle budding . Actin polymerization is required for cargo recycling back to the plasma membrane in CIE 14 , 53 and might be associated with membrane budding events , pre - sumably providing membrane tension that contributes to vesicle scission 89 . The microtubule - based spindle is important for many aspects of cell division , and recycling endosomes are clearly associated with microtubules and microtubule - based motors 90 . Association of recycling endosomes with the cleavage furrow requires molecular motor activity that is associated with the spindle . As noted above , JIP3 and JIP4 are proposed effectors of ARF6 ( ReF . 59 ) , and new evidence indicates that during cytokinesis ARF6 activity acts as a switch that controls recycling endo - some movement to the intercellular bridge 59 . The leucine zipper 2 domain of JIP proteins was found to interact with two dynein activator complex ( dynactin ) compo - nents , p150glued and p50 , kinesin light chain 1 ( KLC1 ) and ARF6 – GTP . p150glued and KLC1 compete for bind - ing to the leucine zipper 2 domain of JIP proteins , and the addition of the constitutively active mutant of ARF6 enhanced the association of dynactin and antagonized KLC1 binding . It was therefore proposed that ARF6 activation couples kinesin - to - dynein motor switching ( FIG . 2 ) . E‑cadherin recycling in cell adhesion and morphogenesis . Cell adhesion and morphogenesis also depends on endocytic recycling pathways . As mentioned above , E - cadherin can be taken up from the cell surface by CIE 91 . Once internalized , the decision whether to degrade or recycle E - cadherin seems to be crucial for cells under - going adhesion and morphogenesis . RAB11 and ARF6 , as well as sNX1 , are thought to be regulators of E - cadherin recycling from endosomes to the plasma membrane 92 – 94 . sNX1 promotes E - cadherin trafficking along the retro - grade route to the Golgi , prior to transport through the RAB11 - and ARF6 - regulated recycling endosomes 93 , 94 . The exocyst is also required for E - cadherin recycling 95 . Tracheal development in D . melanogaster is a par - ticularly interesting example of how morphogenesis is regulated by the modulation of recycling activity . The D . melanogaster trachea is a complex set of branched epithelial tubes that allow gas exchange . During devel - opment , the trachea changes shape . Initially , all tracheal branches are large - diameter ‘multicellular’ tubes . As development proceeds , cells in most branches undergo Figure 2 | recycling and cytokinesis . During anaphase , membrane is added to the cleavage furrow by recycling endosomes and Golgi - derived vesicles . During abscission , the removal of epithelial cell - transforming sequence 2 oncogene ( ECT2 ) ( not shown ) from the central spindle complex allows binding of cytokinesis defect 4 ( not shown ) to RAB11 family - interacting protein 3 ( RAB11FIP3 ) , which helps to recruit RAB11 – GTP - and RAB11FIP3 - positive recycling endosomes to the intercellular bridge ( or midbody ) . Transport to the bridge is mediated , at least in part , through the association of kinesin 1 with the recycling endosome adaptor Jun N - terminal kinase interacting protein 4 ( JIP4 ) . At the bridge , ADP - ribosylation factor ( ARF6 ) – GTP promotes fusion through interaction with RAB11FIP3 and the exocyst . ARF6 – GTP also interacts with JIP4 , promoting exit from the intercellular bridge through motor switching to the dynein activator complex ( dynactin ) . RAB35 – GTP also contributes to abscission , probably through contribution of early endosome ( EE ) - derived vesicles , and seems to be important for phosphatidylinosi - tol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate accumulation at the midbody . R E V I E W S 604 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Intercalation The interdigitation of cells or molecules in a reversible reaction . Adherens junction A cell – cell adhesion complex that contains cadherins and catenins that are attached to cytoplasmic actin filaments . a rearrangement , termed intercalation , which causes the branches to decrease in diameter . However , cells in the tracheal branch , known as the main dorsal trunk , are prevented from undergoing intercalation . The decision of a cell to intercalate or not is regulated by multi ple signalling inputs 96 . Recent work indicates that increased accumulation of RAB11 in the dorsal trunk of D . melano­ gaster , concomitant with transcriptional upregulation of its effector RIP11 ( a downstream effect of Wingless signalling ) , increases junctional accumulation of E - cadherin . It was proposed that such an increase in junctional E - cadherin inhibits cell intercalation in this tracheal branch . Conversely , the absence of RIP11 and the lower levels of RAB11 and junctional E - cadherin in other tracheal branches allows intercalation to occur 97 . Another regulator of cell adhesion during devel - opment is the CDC42 – PAR6 – PAR3 – atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) complex . In C . elegans and human HeLa cells , these proteins were found to regulate cargo uptake in CDE and to regulate cargo recycling in CIE 29 . Interestingly , several groups working in D . melanogaster have recently described a requirement for CDC42 and its effectors PAR6 and aPKC in the regulation of adherens junctions . One study followed cellular rearrangements during neuroectoderm development 98 . Approximately one - third of the cells in this tissue layer rearrange their adherens junctions and ingress to become neuroblasts , whereas the other cells remain in the epithelium and become epidermal cells . CDC42 , PAR3 , PAR6 and aPKC activity seemed to be specifically required to maintain junction integrity during the ingression process 98 . Apical polarity protein Crumbs and apically endo - cytosed styryl dye FM 4 - 64 in cells lacking CDC42 or Par proteins abnormally accumulated in enlarged HRs - positive endosomes . These phenotypes probably indi - cate a defect in apical recycling of Crumbs and FM 4 - 64 , or increased uptake and reduced early - to - late endosome transport in the absence of CDC42 or Par activity 98 , 99 . Around the same time , two related studies in D . melano gaster examined the role of CDC42 , PAR6 and aPKC in the development of the dorsal thorax of pupae 100 , 101 . In this context , CDC42 , PAR6 and aPKC , but not PAR3 , were required to maintain E - cadherin at adherens junctions . Junctional dynamics downstream of CDC42 – PAR6 – aPKC were mediated by the only D . melanogaster member of the CDC42 - interacting pro - tein 4 ( CIP4 ) and the transducer of CDC42 - dependent actin assembly ( TOCA ) protein family . CIP4 and TOCA proteins contain F - BAR domains that bind and remodel lipid bilayers . These proteins also regulate actin dynamics through their src - homology 3 domains , which bind to neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , thereby acti - vating the actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex . In this case , CIP4 also directly or indirectly associates with dynamin . The primary defect in E - cadherin transport seems to be at the level of scission of plasma membrane - derived tubules , structures that probably remove E - cadherin from the cell surface . Tubule scission might normally be facilitated by local actin poly merization . Taken together , these three studies emphasize the importance of polarity proteins in developmentally controlled membrane trafficking , and suggest that some of these same proteins can function at the level of the plasma membrane and at the level of endosomes , depending on the developmental context and the particular cargo proteins involved . Recycling in myoblast fusion . Another important devel - opmental process that requires efficient endosomal recycling is myoblast fusion , which is required dur - ing growth , regeneration and repair of skeletal muscle . RAC1 and its activator Myoblast city ( homo logous to mammalian dedicator of cytokinesis protein 1 ; also known as Dock180 ) are the best - known components that are needed for this cell – cell fusion event — a requirement conserved from D . melanogaster to mam - mals 102 , 103 . RAC1 is enriched at cell – cell contact sites prior to myoblast fusion and probably remodels the local actin cytoskeleton to promote cell – cell fusion . RAC1 is also known to activate certain types of CIE uptake , and so local RAC1 activation might also remodel the lipid and integral membrane composition of the con - tact sites 104 . Over the past few years , several additional proteins that are important for endocytic recycling have been shown to function in myoblast fusion . These include the ARF6 activator Loner ( also known as schizo ; homologous to human ARFGEP100 ) and ARF6 itself 105 . These proteins probably direct important cargoes from recycling endosomes to the contact membranes . In par - ticular , RAC1 activation and localization seems to be impaired after mutation or perturbation of Loner and ARF6 ( ReF . 105 ) . Recent data in migrating cells indicate that RAC1 activation occurs on endosomal membranes and that activated RAC1 might be transported to spe - cific leading - edge membrane sites by ARF6 - mediated recycling 106 . In light of these data , it is tempting to speculate that , during myoblast fusion , activated RAC1 must also be recycled from endosomal activation sites to plasma membrane domains that are involved in cell – cell fusion . Recent work suggests a role for actin - enriched foci in targeting the fusion of intracellular vesicles to the contact membrane . A requirement for myoferlin and EHD2 in endocytic recycling and in cell – cell fusion events has also been shown 107 . It remains to be deter - mined whether myoferlin and EHD2 are also important for the accumulation of activated RAC1 and / or other actin regulators at cell contact sites . Recycling in learning and memory . Experience - dependent modification of synaptic strength is thought to be a key process in learning and memory , and one well - studied example is the remodelling of dendritic spines in the mammalian hippocampus . spines increase in membrane area and in the number of surface - resident AMPARs ( α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazole propionic acid receptors ) in response to NMDAR ( N - methyl - d - aspartate receptor ) activation during long - term potentiation , and both of these acute changes depend on RAB11 - and EHD1 - positive recy - cling endosome function 108 , 109 . Recent work points to myosin Vb as a key protein in this process 110 ( FIG . 3 ) . In the presence of low calcium levels myosin Vb is found in an in active conformation , lacking association with recycling R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 605 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Ca 2 + RAB11 RABFIP2 Myosin Vb open Myosin Vb closed Activation Recyclingendosome Recyclingendosome Actin Kir3 . 4 NMDAR RAB8 AMPAR endosomes . However , transient increases in calcium lev - els in dendritic spines after NMDAR activation alter the conformation of myosin Vb , allowing it to associate with recycling endosomes through RAB11FIP2 , leading to a locally increased recycling of membrane , AMPARs and other endosomal cargoes 110 . EHD1 - dependent recycling of G protein - activated inwardly rectifying potassium channels was also increased after NMDAR activation , suggesting a similar regulatory mechanism 111 ( FIG . 3 ) . The small GTPase RAB8 seems to regulate the final insertion of AMPAR into the plasma membrane of dendritic spines 112 , 113 . Interestingly , recent work in C . elegans suggests that a pool of postsynaptic AMPARs undergo CIE and that recycling of this pool of recep - tors requires the GTPase RAB - 10 , a close relative of RAB - 8 ( ReF . 114 ) . It remains to be determined whether CIE contributes to similar processes in the mammalian nervous system . Perspectives The recycling endosome resembles the TGN with respect to its relationship with the plasma membrane . For instance , the plasma membrane fusion machinery , which was first defined for secretory vesicles , is also used by vesicles derived from the recycling endosome 60 . This view is furthered by recent findings that a significant fraction of the secretory cargoes that leave the Golgi pass through the recycling endosome en route to the plasma membrane 115 , 116 . The recycling endosome seems to be enriched in PtdIns4P , as with the Golgi , with por - tions enriched in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and cholesterol , as with the plasma membrane 15 , 67 , 117 . similar to the Golgi , the recycling endosome requires PLD2 and its lipid prod - uct phosphatidic acid for cargo export , and Arf proteins regulate the accumulation of such lipids 55 , 118 . How the recycling endosome interfaces with the Golgi will be an important question to address in the coming years . Much remains to be learned about the mechanisms of recycling from the endosomal pathway . Many of the protein and lipid components that are important for recy - cling endosome function described here have been iden - tified , but most are not understood in detail . In particular , there is no clear model of how cargo carriers are produced from the recycling endosome . several technical hurdles must be cleared to better understand recycling endosome budding in detail . An in vitro reconstitution system , such as those developed for the early secretory pathway , and an in vivo imaging system to allow direct visualization of recycling endosome budding would greatly benefit in our understanding of , for example , the order of recruitment of regulatory proteins . such technical advances have so far proved elusive for the recycling endosome and are a major challenge for the field . Likewise , the field is still at an early stage in integrating the information gained so far into an understanding of higher - order physiology in a cell and among interacting cells . One interesting aspect that deserves greater atten - tion is how endocytosis is coordinated with recycling and degradation , and how CIE pathways coordinate with the CDE pathways . There are many indications from the published literature that such pathways are coupled or inversely coupled , but little is known of the mechanism or mechanisms of such a coupling . Furthermore , issues of physiology are probably crucially dependent on cell type , environment and developmental stage , but most of our information about these pathways comes from a few cultured cell lines . More work in the context of whole organs and organisms is required to understand how the pathways identified are adapted to such conditions . 1 . Steinman , R . M . , Mellman , I . S . , Muller , W . A . & Cohn , Z . A . Endocytosis and the recycling of plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 1 – 27 ( 1983 ) . 2 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 3 . Doherty , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Mayor , S . & Pagano , R . E . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Sandvig , K . , Torgersen , M . L . , Raa , H . A . & van Deurs , B . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : from nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem . Cell Biol . 129 , 267 – 276 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Swanson , J . A . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 639 – 649 ( 2008 ) . 7 . Donaldson , J . G . , Porat - Shliom , N . & Cohen , L . A . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : a unique platform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell Signal . 21 , 1 – 6 ( 2009 ) . 8 . Maxfield , F . R . & McGraw , T . E . Endocytic recycling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 121 – 132 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Gruenberg , J . & Stenmark , H . The biogenesis of multivesicular endosomes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 317 – 323 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Slagsvold , T . , Pattni , K . , Malerod , L . & Stenmark , H . Endosomal and non - endosomal functions of ESCRT proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 317 – 326 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Woodman , P . G . & Futter , C . E . Multivesicular bodies : co - ordinated progression to maturity . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 408 – 414 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Johannes , L . & Popoff , V . Tracing the retrograde route in protein trafficking . Cell 135 , 1175 – 1187 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Kumari , S . & Mayor , S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 30 – 41 ( 2008 ) . 14 . Radhakrishna , H . & Donaldson , J . G . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 49 – 61 ( 1997 ) . Figure 3 | endocytic recycling and long - term potentiation . In postsynaptic membranes , NMDAR ( N - methyl - d - aspartate receptor ) - mediated long - term potentiation requires myosin Vb , a conformation - dependent binding partner of RAB11 family - interacting protein 2 ( RAB11FIP2 ) . NMDAR activation results in calcium influx , triggering the activation of myosin Vb and the translocation of recycling endosomes and their cargoes into the spine . This series of events increases spine membrane area and increases AMPAR ( α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazole propionic acid receptor ) density on the spine surface . The G protein - activated inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir3 . 4 ( also known as GIRK4 and KCNJ5 ) density on the spine surface is also increased , probably through the same or similar mechanisms . Final transport from the recycling endosome to the spine surface is mediated by RAB8 . R E V I E W S 606 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 15 . Brown , F . D . , Rozelle , A . L . , Yin , H . L . , Balla , T . & Donaldson , J . G . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and Arf6 - regulated membrane traffic . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1007 – 1017 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Powelka , A . M . et al . Stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin β 1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Traffic 5 , 20 – 36 ( 2004 ) . 17 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . & Donaldson , J . G . Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3542 – 3552 ( 2004 ) . 18 . Eyster , C . A . et al . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Traffic 10 , 590 – 599 ( 2009 ) . This study identified endogenous plasma membrane proteins that enter human cells by CIE , thereby providing new cargo proteins that can be examined in different cell types . 19 . Barral , D . C . et al . CD1a and MHC class I follow a similar endocytic recycling pathway . Traffic 9 , 1446 – 1457 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Scarselli , M . & Donaldson , J . G . Constitutive internalization of G protein - coupled receptors and G proteins via clathrin - independent endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 3577 – 3585 ( 2009 ) . 21 . Zimmermann , P . et al . Syndecan recycling is controlled by syntenin - PIP2 interaction and Arf6 . Dev . Cell 9 , 377 – 388 ( 2005 ) . First report of specific intracellular sorting of the cargo protein syndecan in CIE by phosphoinositides , syntenin and ARF6 . 22 . Walseng , E . , Bakke , O . & Roche , P . A . MHC class II - peptide complexes internalize using a clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 14717 – 14727 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Gong , Q . et al . Identification and characterization of a new class of trafficking motifs for controlling clathrin - independent internalization and recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 13087 – 13097 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Chen , C . C . et al . RAB - 10 is required for endocytic recycling in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1286 – 1297 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Shi , A . et al . A novel requirement for C . elegans Alix / ALX - 1 in RME - 1 - mediated membrane transport . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1913 – 1924 ( 2007 ) . New role for ALX - 1 ( homologous to Bro1 in yeast ) , previously implicated in MVB formation , in RME - 1 - regulated endocytic recycling . 26 . D’Souza - Schorey , C . & Chavrier , P . ARF proteins : roles in membrane traffic and beyond . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 347 – 358 ( 2006 ) . 27 . Grant , B . D . & Caplan , S . Mechanisms of EHD / RME - 1 protein function in endocytic transport . Traffic 9 , 2043 – 2052 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Daumke , O . et al . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 , 923 – 927 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Balklava , Z . , Pant , S . , Fares , H . & Grant , B . D . Genome - wide analysis identifies a general requirement for polarity proteins in endocytic traffic . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1066 – 1073 ( 2007 ) . Genome - wide analysis of genes involved in endocytosis and recycling in C . elegans , finding a role for polarity proteins in CDE and for cargo recycling in CIE . 30 . Fares , H . & Greenwald , I . Genetic analysis of endocytosis in Caenorhabditis elegans : coelomocyte uptake defective mutants . Genetics 159 , 133 – 145 ( 2001 ) . 31 . Grant , B . & Hirsh , D . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in the Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4311 – 4326 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Shaw , J . D . , Cummings , K . B . , Huyer , G . , Michaelis , S . & Wendland , B . Yeast as a model system for studying endocytosis . Exp . Cell Res . 271 , 1 – 9 ( 2001 ) . 33 . Choudhury , A . , Sharma , D . K . , Marks , D . L . & Pagano , R . E . Elevated endosomal cholesterol levels in Niemann – Pick cells inhibit rab4 and perturb membrane recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4500 – 4511 ( 2004 ) . 34 . van der Sluijs , P . et al . The small GTP - binding protein rab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 729 – 740 ( 1992 ) . 35 . Deneka , M . et al . Rabaptin - 5 α / rabaptin - 4 serves as a linker between rab4 and γ 1 - adaptin in membrane recycling from endosomes . EMBO J . 22 , 2645 – 2657 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Yudowski , G . A . , Puthenveedu , M . A . , Henry , A . G . & von Zastrow , M . Cargo - mediated regulation of a rapid rab4 - dependent recycling pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2774 – 2784 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Kouranti , I . , Sachse , M . , Arouche , N . , Goud , B . & Echard , A . Rab35 regulates an endocytic recycling pathway essential for the terminal steps of cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1719 – 1725 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Sato , M . et al . Regulation of endocytic recycling by C . elegans Rab35 and its regulator RME - 4 , a coated - pit protein . EMBO J . 27 , 1183 – 1196 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Allaire , P . D . et al . Connecdenn , a novel DENN domain - containing protein of neuronal clathrin - coated vesicles functioning in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J . Neurosci . 26 , 13202 – 13212 ( 2006 ) . 40 . Patino - Lopez , G . et al . Rab35 and its GAP EPI64C in T cells regulate receptor recycling and immunological synapse formation . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 18323 – 18330 ( 2008 ) . 41 . Sonnichsen , B . , De Renzis , S . , Nielsen , E . , Rietdorf , J . & Zerial , M . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 and Rab11 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 901 – 913 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Sharma , M . , Naslavsky , N . & Caplan , S . A role for EHD4 in the regulation of early endosomal transport . Traffic 9 , 995 – 1018 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Naslavsky , N . , Rahajeng , J . , Sharma , M . , Jovic , M . & Caplan , S . Interactions between EHD proteins and Rab11 - FIP2 : a role for EHD3 in early endosomal transport . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 163 – 177 ( 2006 ) . Reports on the interaction of EHD1 and EHD3 with the same RAB11 effector , RAB11FIP2 , leading to spatially distinct functions of these scaffolding proteins . 44 . Schonteich , E . et al . The Rip11 / Rab11 - FIP5 and kinesin II complex regulates endocytic protein recycling . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3824 – 3833 ( 2008 ) . 45 . Horgan , C . P . et al . Rab11 - FIP3 is critical for the structural integrity of the endosomal recycling compartment . Traffic 8 , 414 – 430 ( 2007 ) . 46 . Inoue , H . , Ha , V . L . , Prekeris , R . & Randazzo , P . A . Arf GTPase - activating protein ASAP1 interacts with Rab11 effector FIP3 and regulates pericentrosomal localization of transferrin receptor - positive recycling endosome . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 4224 – 4237 ( 2008 ) . 47 . Magadan , J . G . , Barbieri , M . A . , Mesa , R . , Stahl , P . D . & Mayorga , L . S . Rab22a regulates the sorting of transferrin to recycling endosomes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 2595 – 2614 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Babbey , C . M . et al . Rab10 regulates membrane transport through early endosomes of polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 3156 – 3175 ( 2006 ) . 49 . Pelham , H . R . Insights from yeast endosomes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 454 – 462 ( 2002 ) . 50 . Traer , C . J . et al . SNX4 coordinates endosomal sorting of TfnR with dynein - mediated transport into the endocytic recycling compartment . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1370 – 1380 ( 2007 ) . Reports that SNX4 promotes dynein minus end - directed movement of early endosomes towards the ERC . 51 . Lau , A . W . & Chou , M . M . The adaptor complex AP - 2 regulates post - endocytic trafficking through the non - clathrin Arf6 - dependent endocytic pathway . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 4008 – 4017 ( 2008 ) . 52 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . & Donaldson , J . G . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 417 – 431 ( 2003 ) . 53 . Weigert , R . , Yeung , A . C . , Li , J . & Donaldson , J . G . Rab22a regulates the recycling of membrane proteins internalized independently of clathrin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3758 – 3770 ( 2004 ) . Shows that cargo recycling back to the plasma membrane in CIE requires RAB11 , RAB22 and actin , distinguishing it from TFR recycling processes . 54 . Balasubramanian , N . , Scott , D . W . , Castle , J . D . , Casanova , J . E . & Schwartz , M . A . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafficking of lipid rafts . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1381 – 1391 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Jovanovic , O . A . , Brown , F . D . & Donaldson , J . G . An effector domain mutant of Arf6 implicates phospholipase D in endosomal membrane recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 327 – 335 ( 2006 ) . 56 . Robertson , S . E . et al . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase regulates clathrin - independent endosomal trafficking . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 645 – 657 ( 2006 ) . Provides evidence that ERK signalling stimulates cargo recycling back to the plasma membrane in CIE . 57 . Karacsonyi , C . , Miguel , A . S . & Puertollano , R . Mucolipin - 2 localizes to the Arf6 - associated pathway and regulates recycling of GPI - APs . Traffic 8 , 1404 – 1414 ( 2007 ) . 58 . Li , J . et al . An ACAP1 - containing clathrin coat complex for endocytic recycling . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 453 – 464 ( 2007 ) . 59 . Montagnac , G . et al . ARF6 interacts with JIP4 to control a motor switch mechanism regulating endosome traffic in cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 19 , 184 – 195 ( 2009 ) . Evidence that ARF6 can control the direction of endosomal movement by binding to the JIP scaffolding proteins , which bind to either dynein or kinesin . 60 . Prigent , M . et al . ARF6 controls post - endocytic recycling through its downstream exocyst complex effector . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1111 – 1121 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Hattula , K . et al . Characterization of the Rab8 - specific membrane traffic route linked to protrusion formation . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4866 – 4877 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Folsch , H . , Pypaert , M . , Maday , S . , Pelletier , L . & Mellman , I . The AP - 1A and AP - 1B clathrin adaptor complexes define biochemically and functionally distinct membrane domains . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 351 – 362 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Thompson , A . et al . Recycling endosomes of polarized epithelial cells actively sort apical and basolateral cargos into separate subdomains . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2687 – 2697 ( 2007 ) . Provides evidence for the segregation of recycling cargoes into separate subdomains in the recycling endosome . 64 . Caplan , S . et al . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 21 , 2557 – 2567 ( 2002 ) . 65 . Grant , B . et al . Evidence that RME - 1 , a conserved C . elegans EH - domain protein , functions in endocytic recycling . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 573 – 579 ( 2001 ) . 66 . Lin , S . X . , Grant , B . , Hirsh , D . & Maxfield , F . R . Rme - 1 regulates the distribution and function of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 567 – 572 ( 2001 ) . 67 . Jovic , M . , Kieken , F . , Naslavsky , N . , Sorgen , P . L . & Caplan , S . Eps15 homology domain 1 - associated tubules contain phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate and phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate and are required for efficient recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2731 – 2743 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Braun , A . et al . EHD proteins associate with syndapin I and II and such interactions play a crucial role in endosomal recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3642 – 3658 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Welsch , S . et al . Ultrastructural analysis of ESCRT proteins suggests a role for endosome - associated tubular - vesicular membranes in ESCRT function . Traffic 7 , 1551 – 1566 ( 2006 ) . 70 . Yan , Q . et al . mVps24p functions in EGF receptor sorting / trafficking from the early endosome . Exp . Cell Res . 304 , 265 – 273 ( 2005 ) . 71 . Boucrot , E . & Kirchhausen , T . Endosomal recycling controls plasma membrane area during mitosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7939 – 7944 ( 2007 ) . Shows that reduced recycling occurs during mitosis , which contributes to a reduced plasma membrane area and the rounding up of dividing cells . 72 . Van Damme , D . , Inze , D . & Russinova , E . Vesicle trafficking during somatic cytokinesis . Plant Physiol . 147 , 1544 – 1552 ( 2008 ) . 73 . Jantsch - Plunger , V . & Glotzer , M . Depletion of syntaxins in the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo reveals a role for membrane fusion events in cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 738 – 745 ( 1999 ) . 74 . Xu , H . et al . Syntaxin 5 is required for cytokinesis and spermatid differentiation in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 251 , 294 – 306 ( 2002 ) . 75 . Low , S . H . et al . Syntaxin 2 and endobrevin are required for the terminal step of cytokinesis in mammalian cells . Dev . Cell 4 , 753 – 759 ( 2003 ) . 76 . Glotzer , M . The molecular requirements for cytokinesis . Science 307 , 1735 – 1739 ( 2005 ) . 77 . Montagnac , G . , Echard , A . & Chavrier , P . Endocytic traffic in animal cell cytokinesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 454 – 461 ( 2008 ) . 78 . Skop , A . R . , Bergmann , D . , Mohler , W . A . & White , J . G . Completion of cytokinesis in C . elegans requires a brefeldin A - sensitive membrane accumulation at the cleavage furrow apex . Curr . Biol . 11 , 735 – 746 ( 2001 ) . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWs | Molecular cell Biology VOLuME 10 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | 607 f o c u S o n E n d o c y to S I S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 79 . Riggs , B . et al . Actin cytoskeleton remodeling during early Drosophila furrow formation requires recycling endosomal components Nuclear - fallout and Rab11 . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 143 – 154 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Fielding , A . B . et al . Rab11 - FIP3 and FIP4 interact with Arf6 and the exocyst to control membrane traffic in cytokinesis . EMBO J . 24 , 3389 – 3399 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Schweitzer , J . K . & D’Souza - Schorey , C . Localization and activation of the ARF6 GTPase during cleavage furrow ingression and cytokinesis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 27210 – 27216 ( 2002 ) . 82 . Dyer , N . et al . Spermatocyte cytokinesis requires rapid membrane addition mediated by ARF6 on central spindle recycling endosomes . Development 134 , 4437 – 4447 ( 2007 ) . 83 . Hickson , G . R . et al . Arfophilins are dual Arf / Rab11 binding proteins that regulate recycling endosome distribution and are related to Drosophila nuclear fallout . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 2908 – 2920 ( 2003 ) . 84 . Grosshans , J . et al . RhoGEF2 and the formin Dia control the formation of the furrow canal by directed actin assembly during Drosophila cellularisation . Development 132 , 1009 – 1020 ( 2005 ) . 85 . Padash Barmchi , M . , Rogers , S . & Hacker , U . DRhoGEF2 regulates actin organization and contractility in the Drosophila blastoderm embryo . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 575 – 585 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Cao , J . , Albertson , R . , Riggs , B . , Field , C . M . & Sullivan , W . Nuf , a Rab11 effector , maintains cytokinetic furrow integrity by promoting local actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 301 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 87 . Simon , G . C . et al . Sequential Cyk - 4 binding to ECT2 and FIP3 regulates cleavage furrow ingression and abscission during cytokinesis . EMBO J . 27 , 1791 – 1803 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Arden , S . D . , Puri , C . , Au , J . S . , Kendrick - Jones , J . & Buss , F . Myosin VI is required for targeted membrane transport during cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4750 – 4761 ( 2007 ) . 89 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . & De Camilli , P . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 ( 2006 ) . 90 . Lin , S . X . , Gundersen , G . G . & Maxfield , F . R . Export from pericentriolar endocytic recycling compartment to cell surface depends on stable , detyrosinated ( glu ) microtubules and kinesin . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 96 – 109 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Paterson , A . D . , Parton , R . G . , Ferguson , C . , Stow , J . L . & Yap , A . S . Characterization of E - cadherin endocytosis in isolated MCF - 7 and chinese hamster ovary cells : the initial fate of unbound E - cadherin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21050 – 21057 ( 2003 ) . 92 . Palacios , F . , Price , L . , Schweitzer , J . , Collard , J . G . & D’Souza - Schorey , C . An essential role for ARF6 - regulated membrane traffic in adherens junction turnover and epithelial cell migration . EMBO J . 20 , 4973 – 4986 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Lock , J . G . & Stow , J . L . Rab11 in recycling endosomes regulates the sorting and basolateral transport of E - cadherin . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1744 – 1755 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Bryant , D . M . et al . EGF induces macropinocytosis and SNX1 - modulated recycling of E - cadherin . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1818 – 1828 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Langevin , J . et al . Drosophila exocyst components Sec5 , Sec6 , and Sec15 regulate DE - cadherin trafficking from recycling endosomes to the plasma membrane . Dev . Cell 9 , 365 – 376 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Ribeiro , C . , Ebner , A . & Affolter , M . In vivo imaging reveals different cellular functions for FGF and Dpp signaling in tracheal branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 2 , 677 – 683 ( 2002 ) . 97 . Shaye , D . D . , Casanova , J . & Llimargas , M . Modulation of intracellular trafficking regulates cell intercalation in the Drosophila trachea . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 964 – 970 ( 2008 ) . Connects morphological events in development with the temporal and spatial regulation of the underlying recycling endosome machinery . 98 . Harris , K . P . & Tepass , U . Cdc42 and Par proteins stabilize dynamic adherens junctions in the Drosophila neuroectoderm through regulation of apical endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 1129 – 1143 ( 2008 ) . 99 . Duncan , M . C . & Peifer , M . Regulating polarity by directing traffic : Cdc42 prevents adherens junctions from Crumblin’ aPart . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 971 – 974 ( 2008 ) . 100 . Georgiou , M . , Marinari , E . , Burden , J . & Baum , B . Cdc42 , Par6 , and aPKC regulate Arp2 / 3 - mediated endocytosis to control local adherens junction stability . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1631 – 1638 ( 2008 ) . 101 . Leibfried , A . , Fricke , R . , Morgan , M . J . , Bogdan , S . & Bellaiche , Y . Drosophila Cip4 and WASp define a branch of the Cdc42 - Par6 - aPKC pathway regulating E - cadherin endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1639 – 1648 ( 2008 ) . 102 . Erickson , M . R . , Galletta , B . J . & Abmayr , S . M . Drosophila myoblast city encodes a conserved protein that is essential for myoblast fusion , dorsal closure , and cytoskeletal organization . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 589 – 603 ( 1997 ) . 103 . Pajcini , K . V . , Pomerantz , J . H . , Alkan , O . , Doyonnas , R . & Blau , H . M . Myoblasts and macrophages share molecular components that contribute to cell – cell fusion . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 1005 – 1019 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Grassart , A . , Dujeancourt , A . , Lazarow , P . B . , Dautry - Varsat , A . & Sauvonnet , N . Clathrin - independent endocytosis used by the IL - 2 receptor is regulated by Rac1 , Pak1 and Pak2 . EMBO Rep . 9 , 356 – 362 ( 2008 ) . 105 . Chen , E . H . , Pryce , B . A . , Tzeng , J . A . , Gonzalez , G . A . & Olson , E . N . Control of myoblast fusion by a guanine nucleotide exchange factor , loner , and its effector ARF6 . Cell 114 , 751 – 762 ( 2003 ) . 106 . Palamidessi , A . et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 ( 2008 ) . 107 . Doherty , K . R . et al . The endocytic recycling protein EHD2 interacts with myoferlin to regulate myoblast fusion . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 20252 – 20260 ( 2008 ) . 108 . Derkach , V . A . , Oh , M . C . , Guire , E . S . & Soderling , T . R . Regulatory mechanisms of AMPA receptors in synaptic plasticity . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 101 – 113 ( 2007 ) . 109 . Park , M . , Penick , E . C . , Edwards , J . G . , Kauer , J . A . & Ehlers , M . D . Recycling endosomes supply AMPA receptors for LTP . Science 305 , 1972 – 1975 ( 2004 ) . 110 . Wang , Z . et al . Myosin Vb mobilizes recycling endosomes and AMPA receptors for postsynaptic plasticity . Cell 135 , 535 – 548 ( 2008 ) . Elegant study that shows how NMDAR - stimulated calcium levels allow myosin Vb to associate with RAB11FIP2 - positive endosomes bearing AMPARs , facilitating their delivery to dendritic spines . 111 . Chung , H . J . et al . G protein - activated inwardly rectifying potassium channels mediate depotentiation of long - term potentiation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 635 – 640 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Brown , T . C . , Correia , S . S . , Petrok , C . N . & Esteban , J . A . Functional compartmentalization of endosomal trafficking for the synaptic delivery of AMPA receptors during long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 27 , 13311 – 13315 ( 2007 ) . 113 . Gerges , N . Z . , Backos , D . S . & Esteban , J . A . Local control of AMPA receptor trafficking at the postsynaptic terminal by a small GTPase of the Rab family . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 43870 – 43878 ( 2004 ) . 114 . Glodowski , D . R . , Chen , C . C . , Schaefer , H . , Grant , B . D . & Rongo , C . RAB - 10 regulates glutamate receptor recycling in a cholesterol - dependent endocytosis pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4387 – 4396 ( 2007 ) . 115 . Ang , A . L . et al . Recycling endosomes can serve as intermediates during transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 531 – 543 ( 2004 ) . 116 . Murray , R . Z . , Kay , J . G . , Sangermani , D . G . & Stow , J . L . A role for the phagosome in cytokine secretion . Science 310 , 1492 – 1495 ( 2005 ) . 117 . Hao , M . M . et al . Vesicular and non - vesicular sterol transport in living cells . The endocytic recycling compartment is a major sterol storage organelle . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 609 – 617 ( 2002 ) . 118 . Padron , D . , Tall , R . D . & Roth , M . G . Phospholipase D2 is required for efficient endocytic recycling of transferrin receptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 598 – 606 ( 2006 ) . 119 . Jordens , I . , Marsman , M . , Kuijl , C . & Neefjes , J . Rab proteins , connecting transport and vesicle fusion . Traffic 6 , 1070 – 1077 ( 2005 ) . 120 . Pfeffer , S . R . Structural clues to Rab GTPase functional diversity . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 15485 – 15488 ( 2005 ) . 121 . Jones , M . C . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . Endocytic recycling pathways : emerging regulators of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 549 – 557 ( 2006 ) . 122 . Cohen , L . A . et al . Active Arf6 recruits ARNO / cytohesin GEFs to the PM by binding their PH domains . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2244 – 2253 ( 2007 ) . 123 . Chies , R . et al . Alterations in the Arf6 - regulated plasma membrane endosomal recycling pathway in cells overexpressing the tetraspan protein Gas3 / PMP22 . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 987 – 999 ( 2003 ) . 124 . Lavezzari , G . & Roche , K . W . Constitutive endocytosis of the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR7 is clathrin - independent . Neuropharmacology 52 , 100 – 107 ( 2007 ) . Acknowledgements We apologize to colleagues whose work we could not cite owing to length restrictions . We thank S . Caplan and mem - bers of the Grant and Donaldson laboratories for comments . B . D . G . is supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant R01 GM067237 . J . G . D . is supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , NIH . DATABASES uniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ACAP1 | ALX - 1 | ARF6 | ASAP1 | CD1a | CD59 | EHD1 | EHD3 | EHD4 | JIP3 | JIP4 | PAR - 3 | PAR - 6 | RAB4 | RAB5 | RAB11 | RAB11FIP2 | RAB11FIP3 | RAB35 | RME - 4 | SNX4 | TAC | WWC1 FURTHER INFORMATION Barth d . Grant’s homepage : http : / / www . barthgrant . com Julie G . donaldson’s homepage : http : / / dir . nhlbi . nih . gov / labs / lcb / mb / index . asp all links are acTive in The online PDF R E V I E W S 608 | sEPTEMBER 2009 | VOLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved