10 . 1177 / 0160017602250974 ARTICLE INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS S TRATEGIC I NTERACTION AMONG G OVERNMENTS : A N O VERVIEW OF E MPIRICAL S TUDIES J AN K . B RUECKNER Department of Economics and Institute of Government and Public Affairs , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Champaign , IL , jbrueckn @ uiuc . edu This article provides an overview of empirical models of strategic interaction among govern - ments . To clarify the theoretical roots of such studies , the discussion shows how the empirical frameworksfitintotwobroadcategories : spillovermodelsandresource - flowmodels . Bothtypes of models generate jurisdictional reaction functions , and the empirical task is to estimate such functions . Whentheestimatedreaction - functionslopeisnonzero , thepresenceofstrategicinter - action is confirmed . The second part of the article reviews three econometric issues relevant to this estimation problem . Keywords : strategic interaction ; spatial econometrics 1 . I NTRODUCTION Strategic interaction among governments has recently become a major focus of theoretical work in public economics . In the tax - competition literature , which rep - resents an important segment of research in this area , governments levy taxes on a mobile tax base . When the number of jurisdictions is small , these taxes are chosen in strategic fashion , taking account of the inverse relationship between a jurisdic - tion’s tax rate and its base ( see Wilson 1999 for a survey ) . A related literature focuses on “welfare competition , ” analyzing income redistribution by state govern - ments when the poor migrate in response to differentials in welfare benefits . In such models , states choose benefit levels in strategic fashion taking account of the mobility of the poor ( see Brueckner 2000 for a survey ) . A third literature analyzes strategic interaction due to benefit “spillovers . ” A major line of research in this area focuses on choice of environmental standards by individual jurisdictions , I NTERNATIONAL R EGIONAL S CIENCE R EVIEW 26 , 2 : 175 – 188 ( April 2003 ) For their comments , I thank participants at both the CSISS Workshop on Spatial Externalities and the Workshop on Strategic Interaction among Local Governments , held in May 2001 at the Università Cattolica , Milan . Luc Anselin and Albert Solé - Ollé also provided useful feedback . However , I am responsible for any shortcomings in the article . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0160017602250974 © 2003 Sage Publications recognizing that interaction arises through pollution spillovers ( see Wilson 1996 for a survey ) . Spillovers can arise through different mechanisms in other types of models . Spurred in part by these theoretical developments , strategic interaction among governments is now the focus of a growing empirical literature . The purpose of this short article is to provide an overview of this literature , highlighting its linkages to the underlying theoretical models while discussing the econometric issues it must confront . The discussion begins by showing how the theoretical models underlying most of the existing empirical studies can be separated into two main categories : spillover models and “resource - flow” models . The former category includes envi - ronmental models , while the latter category includes tax - and welfare - competition models . The discussion in section 2 provides a general characterization of each type of model and then shows how various examples in the literature represent special cases . Both the spillover and resource - flow models generate a reaction function that shows how the decision variable for a given jurisdiction depends on the choices of other jurisdictions . Estimation of this reaction function is the goal of most empirical studies , and a number of econometric issues must be handled to do so successfully . These issues are discussed in section 3 , and section 4 offers conclusions . 2 . C ATEGORIZATION OF M ODELS 2 . 1 . T HE S PILLOVER M ODEL The empirical literature relies on two principal types of strategic - interaction models . Despite their differences , these models ultimately lead to the same empiri - cal specification . The first type can be referred to as the spillover model . In this framework , each jurisdiction i chooses the level of a decision variable z i , but the jurisdiction is also directly affected by the z ’s chosen elsewhere , indicating the pres - ence of spillovers . Thus , jurisdiction i ’s objective function is written V ( z i , z – i ; X i ) , ( 1 ) where z – i is the vector of z s for other jurisdictions and X i is a vector of characteristics of i , which help determine preferences . Jurisdiction i chooses z i to maximize equation ( 1 ) , setting ∂ V / ∂ z i ≡ V z i = 0 . Because this derivative depends on z – i and X i , the z i solution depends on choices elsewhere and on jurisdiction i ’s characteristics . The solution can thus be written z i = R ( z – i ; X i ) . ( 2 ) 176 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) The function R represents a reaction function , which gives jurisdiction i ’s best re - sponse to the choices of other jurisdictions . Note that the position of the reaction function depends on jurisdiction i ’s characteristics . Theory is silent regarding the sign of the reaction function’s slope . Differentia - tion of the above first - order condition shows that ∂ z i / ∂ z – i = – V V z z z z i i i Á i / , where the expressions are the second partial derivatives of V . Although V z z i i must be negative for the second - order condition to be satisfied , V z z i Á i ( which represents a vector of derivatives ) can take either sign , depending on the properties of preferences . 1 Thus , the slope R z Á of the reaction function ( again a vector expression ) can be positive or negative . While the slope could also be zero , this outcome represents a knife - edge case of little practical interest . Note , however , that the reaction function’s slope will be identically zero in the case where spillovers are absent , with z – i not appearing in equation ( 1 ) . Thus , a test of the null hypothesis that the reaction func - tion’s slope is zero is effectively a test for the existence of spillovers . The spillover model underlies a number of the existing empirical studies of stra - tegic interaction . The earliest paper in the literature , the study of Case , Rosen , and Hines ( 1993 ) , is based on this model . Their empirical framework assumes that resi - dents of each U . S . state benefit from public expenditure in other states , as well as from their own state’s spending . Residents of California , for example , might benefit from spending on roads in Arizona , which would affect the convenience of vacation travel in that state . To derive V for this case , let the preferences for a representative resident of state i be given by U ( c i , e i , e – i ; ~ X i ) , where c i is private consumption , the e s represent spending per capita in state i and other states ( replacing the z s in equation [ 1 ] ) , and ~ X i represents state characteristics aside from income . Letting y i denote per capita income in state i , the individual budget constraint is c i = y i – e i , and substitu - tion then yields U ( y i – e i , e i , e – i ; ~ X i ) ≡ V ( e i , e – i ; X i ) . Relying on such a model , Case , Rosen , and Hines estimated state - expenditure reaction functions . Murdoch , Rahmatian , and Thayer ( 1993 ) carried out a similar exercise , focusing on city - level spillovers in recreation expenditures and estimating reaction functions using municipal data . Kelejian and Robinson ( 1993 ) estimated a related model based on county - level spillovers of police expenditures . Environmental models also fit in the spillover context , as mentioned above . To derive V for such a model , let consumer preferences be given by U ( c i , p i ; ~ X i ) , where p i is the pollution level in jurisdiction i . Also , let a i and a – i represent pollution abate - ment expenditures in the different jurisdictions , taking the place of the z s in equa - tion ( 1 ) . For simplicity , suppose that pollution disperses evenly , so that pollution levels are the same everywhere and depend on the total abatement expenditures across all n jurisdictions . Thus , p i = P ( Σ jn aj = 1 P ′ < 0 . Eliminating c i using the bud - get constraint and substituting for p i , jurisdiction i ’s objective function is then U [ y i – a i , P ( Σ a j ) ; ~ X i ] ≡ V ( a i , a – i ; X i ) . Note that an increase in abatement in another jurisdic - tion benefits residents of i . 2 This type of model forms the basis for the empirical Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 177 studies of Murdoch , Sandler , and Sargent ( 1997 ) and Fredriksson and Millimet ( 2002 ) , which estimate pollution - abatement reaction functions for European coun - tries and U . S . states , respectively . The yardstick - competition model of Besley and Case ( 1995 ) also fits within the spillover framework . In the model , voters look at public services and taxes in other jurisdictions to help judge whether their government is wasting resources ( through inefficiency or rent seeking ) and deserves to be voted out of office . Although Besley and Case developed this idea using a sophisticated information - theoretic frame - work , the essence of the approach can be illustrated as follows , using a simple but incomplete model . Consumer preferences are now given by U ( y i – T i , q i ; ~ X i ) , where T i is a tax pay - ment and q i represents the level of a public good . Taxes cover the minimal produc - tion cost of the public good plus any extra resources lost to waste or rent seeking . These lost resources cannot be observed by voters , but their extent is gauged by comparisons to other jurisdictions . Suppose , in particular , that these comparisons yield a minimum level of public good provision relative to taxes ( q i / T i ) that must be delivered for jurisdiction i ’s government to remain in office . This required level de - pends on observed public good levels relative to taxes in other jurisdictions , and it can be written q i / T i = φ [ ( q / T ) – i ] . By indicating a more favorable relationship be - tween q and taxes elsewhere , an increase in any of the ratios q j / T j , j ≠ i , forces i ’s government to raise q i / T i ( φ is thus increasing in its arguments ) . Writing q i as T i φ , preferences can then be rewritten as U { y i – T i , T i φ [ ( q / T ) – i ] ; ~ X i } ≡ V ( T i , T – i ; X i ) . ( 3 ) Note that by worsening outcomes elsewhere , an increase in T j ( with q j held fixed ) harms residents of jurisdiction i , allowing q i to be reduced for a given T i . 3 In this way , information spillovers from other jurisdictions affect the delivery of public services to i ’s residents . Relying on such a model , Besley and Case ( 1995 ) estimated tax reaction func - tions at the state level , using the total state tax burden as the variable of interest . Also relying on a model of yardstick competition , Bivand and Szymanski ( 1997 , 2000 ) estimated reaction functions involving public - sector costs , focusing on the costs of local garbage collection in Britain . 2 . 2 . T HE R ESOURCE - F LOW M ODEL A second type of strategic - interaction framework can be referred to as a resource - flow model . In this model , a jurisdiction is not affected directly by the z levels in other jurisdictions . But the jurisdiction is affected by the amount of a par - ticular “resource” that resides within its borders . Because the distribution of this resource among jurisdictions is affected by the z choices of all , jurisdiction i is indi - rectly affected by z – i . In this model , jurisdiction i ’s objective function is written 178 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) ~ V ( z i , s i ; X i ) , ( 4 ) where s i is the resource level enjoyed by i . The distribution of resources depends on the entire z vector as well as on jurisdiction characteristics . Thus , the resources available to i are given by s i = H ( z i , z – i ; X i ) . ( 5 ) Note that since X i can be measured relative to the average characteristics of all juris - dictions , X – i need not appear in equation ( 5 ) . To derive the reduced form of the resource - flow model , equation ( 5 ) is substi - tuted into ( 4 ) , yielding ~ V [ z i , H ( z i , z – i ; X i ) ; X i ] ≡ V ( z i , z – i ; X i ) . ( 6 ) Thus , even though the underlying model is different , this objective function has the same form as equation ( 1 ) , with z i , z – i , and X i appearing as arguments . As a result , maximizing equation ( 6 ) by choice of z i yields a reaction function like equation ( 2 ) . The properties of this function are now more complex , with its slope depending jointly on the properties of the H and ~ V functions . As before , however , the reaction function’s slope is ambiguous in sign . The tax - competition model represents the best - known example of the resource - flow framework . In the model , jurisdictions produce a private good using mobile capital and immobile labor , with f ( k i ) giving the intensive form of the common pro - duction function and k i representing capital per worker in jurisdiction i ( the resource s i ) . Jurisdictions , which are assumed for simplicity to have identical popu - lation sizes , levy a tax on locally employed capital , with t i denoting the tax per unit in i ( which plays the role of z i ) . Since capital moves across jurisdictions to equalize net - of - tax returns , its distribution must satisfy f ′ ( k j ) – t j = ρ , j = 1 , . . . , n ( 7 ) k nk j i n = = ∑ 1 , ( 8 ) where ρ is the endogenous net return and k is the economy - wide level of capital per worker . Equations ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) determine k j , j = 1 , . . . , n , and ρ as functions of all the tax rates , with k i = H ( t i , t – i ) ( 9 ) ρ = G ( t ) , ( 10 ) where t represents the entire vector of tax rates . 4 Differentiation of equations ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) establishes H t i < 0 , indicating that capital flees jurisdiction i when t i increases , while showing that ρ falls when any of the tax rates rises . Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 179 Tax revenue is used to provide a public good q i that has private characteristics . With q i produced at unit cost , its level is then given by t i k i , which equals tax revenue per worker . Individual consumption of the private good , again denoted c i , is equal to the wage w ( k i ) , which depends positively on k i , plus income from ownership of cap - ital , which equals ρ k ( consumers own equal shares of the total ) . Combining all the above information , preferences U ( c i , q i ; ~ X i ) can be written U [ w ( k i ) + ρ k , t i k i ; ~ X i ] = U { w [ H ( t i , t – i ) ] + G ( t ) k , t i H [ t i , t – i ] ; ~ X i } ≡ V ( t i , t – i ; ~ X i ) . ( 11 ) Thus , the objective function ultimately depends on jurisdiction i ’s tax rate and rates elsewhere . In choosing t i , the jurisdiction takes account of the flight of capital caused by an increase in its tax rate , which moderates the incentive to raise t i , while recognizing that a tax increase also depresses capital’s net return ρ . Because the impact of the higher t i depends on tax rates elsewhere , the optimal value depends on these rates , yielding a reaction function like equation ( 2 ) . Brueckner and Saavedra ( 2001 ) presented an example based on specific functional forms showing that the slope of this function may be positive or negative , as noted above . Brueckner and Saavedra ( 2001 ) also estimate tax reaction functions , focusing on property taxes for cities in the Boston metropolitan area . Other empirical studies that the rely on the tax - competition model to motivate the estimation of tax reaction functions include Brett and Pinkse ( 2000 ) , who focused on local property taxes in Canada ; Buettner ( 2001 ) , who studied the local business tax in Germany ; and Hayashi and Boadway ( 2001 ) , who focused on provincial corporate income taxes in Canada . Ladd ( 1992 ) , Heyndels and Vuchelen ( 1998 ) , and Revelli ( 2001a , 2001b ) have also looked for strategic behavior in the choice of local taxes ( in the United States , Belgium , and the United Kingdom , respectively ) , but these studies are agnostic about the source of the interaction . They recognize that tax competi - tion may be one source but that yardstick competition or some other type of behav - ior related to spillovers may also generate strategic interaction . Accordingly , they refer to interaction as “tax mimicking , ” a phrase that does not pin down the underly - ing cause of the behavior . Models of welfare competition also fall into the resource - flow category . 5 In such models , the altruistic rich in jurisdiction i provide a transfer b i to the poor , who also work at low - skill jobs ( the transfer plays the role of z i ) . The low - skill wage in i equals w ( L i ) , where L i represents i ’s poor population and w ′ < 0 ( L i plays the role of the resource s i ) . Poor gross income in i then equals w ( L i ) + b i ≡ Y i . Since migration of the poor equalizes gross incomes across jurisdictions , the distribution of the poor population must satisfy w ( L j ) + b j = Y j = 1 , . . . , n ( 12 ) 180 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) L L j j n = = ∑ 1 , ( 13 ) where Y is the endogenous , uniform level of gross income and L is the total number of poor in the economy . In similar fashion to the tax - competition model , equations ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) yield solutions for Y and L j , j = 1 , . . . , n , as functions of the transfers in all jurisdictions . For jurisdiction i , the latter solution can be written L i = H ( b i , b – i ) . ( 14 ) Differentiation of equations ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) establishes H b i > 0 , so that jurisdiction i ’s poor population increases when its transfer rises . The preferences of the rich in jurisdiction i are given by U ( c i , Y i ; ~ X i ) . Their bud - get constraint is c i = y i – b i L i / m , where m is the uniform number of rich in each juris - diction and y i gives the exogenous rich income in i . Substituting , the objective func - tion may then be written U [ y i – b i L i / m , w ( L i ) + b i ; ~ X i ] = U { y i – b i H [ b i , b – i ] / m , w [ H ( b i , b – i ) ] + b i ; ~ X i } ≡ V ( b i , b – i ; X i ) . ( 15 ) In choosing b i , the jurisdiction takes account of the inflow of the poor caused by a higher transfer , which tends to moderate the incentive for redistribution . Because the magnitude of this inflow depends on benefit levels elsewhere , the optimal b i depends on these benefits , again yielding a reaction function like equation ( 2 ) . Brueckner ( 2000 ) demonstrated that , as before , the reaction function can slope up or down . For studies that estimate welfare reaction functions using U . S . data , see Figlio , Kolpin , and Reid ( 1999 ) and Saavedra ( 2000 ) . A third example of the resource - flow model is provided by Brueckner ( 1998 ) , who analyzed strategic interaction in the choice of growth controls by California cities . In this case , the mobile resource is the population of renters . This population is controlled by each community through limitations on density and new construc - tion , and the goal is to raise house prices , generating capital gains for homeowners . The optimal stringency of growth controls in a given community depends on their stringency elsewhere , again yielding a reaction function like equation ( 2 ) . 2 . 3 . O THER M ODELS In almost all the empirical studies discussed above , the estimated reaction func - tion is upward sloping . Thus , the decision variables of the interacting governments represent “strategic complements . ” In each case , the emergence of a nonzero slope coefficient confirms the presence of strategic interaction , which may arise either from interjurisdictional spillovers or from each government’s awareness that its decisions affect resource flows . Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 181 The evidence of positive interaction appears to be connected to an important fea - ture shared by all the models discussed above , which has not been explicitly men - tioned so far . This feature is a common focus on “horizontal” interaction among governments at the same level ( local , state , or national ) . Another kind of model focuses on vertical interaction among governments at different levels , and such models can generate downward - sloping empirical reaction functions ( indicating that decision variables are “strategic substitutes” ) . These vertical - interaction mod - els , however , do not neatly fit into either the spillover or resource - flow framework , a consequence of the inherent asymmetry resulting from consideration of govern - ments at different levels . The existing models of this type focus on the interaction arising from taxation of a common tax base by governments at different levels . Besley and Rosen ( 1998 ) , Hayashi and Boadway ( 2001 ) , Goodspeed ( 2000 ) , and Esteller - Moré and Solé - Ollé ( 2001 ) have studied interaction between national and provincial ( or state ) gov - ernments . Besley and Rosen , along with Esteller - Moré and Solé - Ollé , have studied interaction in the United States , focusing on commodity taxes and income taxes , respectively . Hayashi and Boadway focused on Canadian corporate income taxes , and Goodspeed studied income taxes in Europe . Although Besley and Rosen as well as Esteller - Moré and Solé - Ollé found upward - sloping state reaction functions , both Hayashi and Boadway and Goodspeed estimated reaction functions for lower - level governments that are downward sloping . 6 Several of these studies assumed Stackelberg leadership on the part of the national government , while Hayashi and Boadway tested for such behavior , confirming its presence . 7 3 . E CONOMETRIC I SSUES As seen above , both the spillover and resource - flow models of strategic interac - tion generate reaction functions , which relate each jurisdiction’s chosen z to its own characteristics and to the choices of other jurisdictions . The goal of empirical work is to estimate such functions , and following equation ( 2 ) , the estimating equation can be written z z X i ij j i i j = + + ≠ ∑ β ω θ ε 1 , ( 16 ) where β and θ are unknown parameters ( the latter a vector ) , ε i is an error term , and the ω ij represent nonnegative weights , which are specified a priori . These weights indicate the relevance of other jurisdictions j in the process of interaction , and they can be viewed as part of jurisdiction i ’s characteristics . The weights typically cap - ture the location of i relative to other jurisdictions , and a scheme that assigns weights based on contiguity is commonly used . Under such a scheme , ω ij = 1 for jurisdictions j that share a border with i and ω ij = 0 for noncontiguous jurisdictions . Once the pattern of interaction has been specified , the weights are normalized so that their sum equals unity for each i . 182 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) While choice of the weights is based on prior judgement about the pattern of interaction , the parameter β , which reflects the strength of interaction among juris - dictions , is estimated from the data . Note that equation ( 16 ) implies that the direc - tion of i ’s interaction with all other jurisdictions is the same , with its sign deter - mined by the sign of β . The magnitude of the effect , however , depends on the relevant weight , with ∂ z i / ∂ z j = βω ij . As is well known from the literature on spatial econometrics ( see Anselin 1988 ) , three econometric issues must be confronted in estimating equation ( 16 ) . These are ( 1 ) endogeneity of the z j s , ( 2 ) possible spatial error dependence , and ( 3 ) possible correlation between X i and the error term . These issues are considered in turn in the following discussion . 3 . 1 . E NDOGENEITY OF THE z j s Because of strategic interaction , the z values in different jurisdictions are jointly determined . As a result , the linear combination of the z j s appearing on the right hand side ( RHS ) of equation ( 16 ) is endogenous and correlated with the error term ε i . To see this formally , the first step is to rewrite equation ( 16 ) in matrix form , which yields z = β Wz + X θ + ε , ( 17 ) where z is the vector of the z i s , X is the characteristics matrix , and W is the weight matrix , with representative element ω ij . Then , equation ( 17 ) can be used to solve for the equilibrium values of the z i s , which yields z = ( I – β W ) – 1 X θ + ( I – β W ) – 1 ε . ( 18 ) Note that the solution in equation ( 18 ) gives the Nash equilibrium generated by interaction among the jurisdictions . The key implication of equation ( 18 ) is that the random component of z k is equal to the inner product of the k th row of the matrix ( I – β W ) – 1 and the error vector ε . With each element of z thus depending on all the ε s , it follows that each of the z j s on the RHS of equation ( 16 ) depends on ε i , the equation’s error term . The resulting correlation means that ordinary least squares ( OLS ) esti - mates of the parameters of equation ( 16 ) are inconsistent , requiring use of an alter - nate estimation method . Two such methods are employed in the literature . Under the first method , the reduced form equation given by equation ( 18 ) is estimated using maximum likeli - hood ( ML ) methods . Note that since the key parameter β enters nonlinearly in this equation , a nonlinear optimization routine must be used to estimate it . Among the horizontal - interaction studies cited above , those using the maximum likelihood approach are Case , Rosen , and Hines ( 1993 ) ; Murdoch , Rahmatian , and Thayer ( 1993 ) ; Besley and Case ( 1995 ) ; Bivand and Szymanski ( 1997 , 2000 ) ; Brueckner Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 183 ( 1998 ) ; Murdoch , Sandler , and Sargent ( 1999 ) ; Saavedra ( 2000 ) ; and Brueckner and Saavedra ( 2001 ) . The second method is an instrumental variables ( IV ) approach . Under this approach , a typical procedure is to regress Wz on X and WX and to use the fitted val - ues Wz as instruments for Wz . Note that this procedure involves regressing the weighted linear combination of the z j s from the RHS of equation ( 16 ) on X i and on the same linear combination of the X j s . In effect , each of the z j s is thus viewed as depending on its associated X j vector and on X i . Like the ML method , the IV approach also yields consistent estimates of the parameters of equation ( 16 ) . Horizontal - interaction studies that use the IV approach are Ladd ( 1992 ) ; Kelejian and Robinson ( 1993 ) ; Brett and Pinkse ( 2000 ) ; Heyndels and Vuchelen ( 1998 ) ; Figlio , Kolpin , and Reid ( 1999 ) ; Fredriksson and Millimet ( 2000 ) ; Buettner ( 2001 ) , and Revelli ( 2001a , 2001b ) . In constrast to these papers and those using the ML approach , Hayashi and Broadway ( 2001 ) avoided the endogeneity issue entirely . They did so by assuming that interaction occurs with a time lag , so that the z values on the RHS of equation ( 16 ) are lagged one or more periods . With simultaneity thus eliminated , OLS estimation yields consistent estimates . 3 . 2 . S PATIAL E RROR D EPENDENCE The presence of spatial dependence in the errors also complicates the estimation of equation ( 16 ) . When spatial error dependence is present , the error vector ε satis - fies the relationship ε = λ M ε + v , ( 19 ) where M is a weight matrix often assumed to be the same as W in equation ( 17 ) , v is well - behaved error vector , and λ is an unknown parameter . Spatial error dependence arises when ε includes omitted variables that are them - selves spatially dependent . For example , suppose that z measures the park acreage in a community , and suppose that such acreage is inversely related to natural topo - graphical features such as beachfront , riverfront , adjacent mountains , and so on . Such features encourage outdoor recreation without the need for community investment in parks , and they are likely to be unmeasured and thus part of the error term ε ( natural features enter negatively in ε ) . A key fact , however , is that topo - graphical features are spatially correlated , with their presence ( absence ) in one community usually implying their presence ( absence ) in nearby communities . This correlation generates spatial dependence in the error term ε . When this spatial error dependence is ignored , estimation of equation ( 17 ) can provide false evidence of strategic interaction . To understand this outcome , sup - pose that β = 0 , so that strategic interaction in the choice of park acreage is actually absent . Then , note from above that ε ( and hence z ) will be low in communities with good natural topographical features , while ε and z will be high in communities with 184 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) poor natural features . But since communities of each type will tend to be near one another because of spatial dependence in the errors , estimation of equation ( 16 ) will indicate a positive association between the z levels in nearby communities , yielding a positive estimate of β . This result , however , reflects spatial error dependence and not strategic interaction . To deal with this problem , one approach is to use ML to estimate equation ( 17 ) , taking account of the error structure in equation ( 19 ) . This approach , which is implemented by Case , Rosen , and Hines ( 1993 ) , is computationally challenging . In addition , the similar roles played by the parameters β and λ in the model may lead to difficulties in identifying their individual magnitudes ( see Anselin 1988 ) . An easier remedy is to rely on the IV estimation method discussed above . Kelejian and Prucha ( 1998 ) showed that this method generates a consistent esti - mate of β even in the presence of spatial error dependence . A third approach is to estimate equation ( 17 ) by ML under the assumption that spatial error dependence is absent , relying on hypothesis tests to verify this absence . Because a test based on the ML results themselves is invalid if spatial dependence is actually present , the robust tests of Anselin et al . ( 1996 ) can be employed instead . These tests are based on OLS estimates of equation ( 17 ) , and they are not contaminated by uncorrected spatial error dependence . This approach is used by Bivand and Szymanski ( 1997 , 2000 ) , Brueckner ( 1998 ) , Saavedra ( 2000 ) , and Brueckner and Saavedra ( 2001 ) . 3 . 3 . C ORRELATION BETWEEN X i AND i If the jurisdiction characteristics in X i are correlated with the error term , then both the ML and IV estimates discussed above are inconsistent . Such correlation could arise , for example , through endogenous sorting of households across com - munities . In the park case , suppose that high - income households have a high demand for natural topographical features and thus end up residing in the low - ε communities possessing such features . The result is a negative correlation between community income ( an element of X i ) and ε i . This correlation leads to an inconsis - tent estimate of the income coefficient while also potentially distorting the esti - mates of the remaining coefficients in the equation . While this problem can be addressed if suitable instruments for the offending X i variable ( s ) are available , finding such instruments can be difficult . An alternative approach , however , is to use panel data . With such data , all time - invariant commu - nity characteristics , observed or unobserved , can be represented by community - specific intercepts . In effect , the estimate of β is then generated by estimating equa - tion ( 17 ) in first - difference form . Although some of the correlation between X i and ε i may remain if the unobserved community characteristics generating it are time - varying and thus not purged by first differencing , much of the correlation is likely to be eliminated . For studies using this approach , see Figlio , Kolpin , and Reid ( 1999 ) and Revelli ( 2001a ) . Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 185 Use of panel data may also help eliminate spatial error dependence , which arises through spatial autocorrelation of omitted variables . When the influence of such variables is captured in community - specific intercept terms , the remaining error term in the equation may exhibit little spatial dependence . As before , however , this remedy is incomplete when the offending omitted variables are strongly time dependent and thus imperfectly captured by the community - specific intercepts . 4 . C ONCLUSION This article has provided an overview of empirical models of strategic interac - tion among governments . To clarify the theoretical roots of such studies , the discus - sion shows how the empirical frameworks fit into two broad categories : spillover models and resource - flow models . Empirical papers that focus on strategic choice of environmental standards , on yardstick competition , and on public expenditure spillovers were all shown to fit within the spillover model . Papers that focus on tax competition and welfare competition represent special cases of the resource - flow model . Both types of models generate jurisdictional reaction functions , and the empiri - cal task is to estimate such functions . When the estimated reaction - function slope is nonzero , the presence of strategic interaction is confirmed . The second part of the article reviewed three econometric issues relevant to this estimation problem : endogeneity of the choice variables of other jurisdictions , which appear on the RHS of the reaction function ; spatial error dependence ; and correlation between jurisdic - tion characteristics and the error term . In conclusion , it must be stressed that , while successful handling of these empir - ical issues leads to reliable estimates of reaction - function parameters , such esti - mates do not directly reveal the nature of the behavior underlying the observed interaction . For example , a nonzero slope for a tax reaction function is consistent with both the yardstick - competition and tax - competition models , and to discrimi - nate between the models , additional evidence is needed . Such evidence can come from estimates of the structural equations that generate the reaction function . For example , to substantiate the comparative behavior underlying the yardstick - competition model , Besley and Case ( 1995 ) estimated an auxiliary equation that relates voter approval of an incumbent to taxes in neighboring jurisdictions ( expect - ing a positive coefficient ) . Similarly , to support their view that tax - competition behavior underlies interac - tion in the choice of tax rates , Brett and Pinkse ( 2000 ) estimated an equation relat - ing a jurisdiction’s tax base to its tax rate ( expecting a negative coefficient ) . By illu - minating the source of the interaction , such auxiliary evidence lends credibility to claims , based on reaction - function estimates , that governments engage in strategic behavior . As a result , it is a desirable feature of future work . 186 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) N OTES 1 . Note that the forms of both V z z i Á i and V z z i i will depend on the details of the model used , as can be seen by referring to the examples later in the article . 2 . Note that in a more realistic formulation , jurisdiction i would be affected most by the a levels of nearby jurisdictions . 3 . Equilibriumvaluesforthe q sand T swouldbedeterminedasfollows . T i wouldbechosentomaxi - mizeequation ( 3 ) , givinganoptimalvalueconditionalon ( q / T ) – i and X i for i = 1 , . . . , n . Therelationship q i / T i = φ [ ( q / T ) – i ] , i = 1 , . . . , n , then provides n additional equations . This system of 2 n equations deter - mines equilibrium values for q i and T i , i = 1 , . . . , n . 4 . Note , in contrast to equation ( 10 ) , i ’s tax rate in equation ( 9 ) must be distinguished from those in other jurisdictions in determining k i . 5 . The ensuing discussion follows Brueckner ( 2000 ) , which in turn drew on Wildasin ( 1991 ) . 6 . Although Revelli ( 2001a ) focused mainly on horizontal interaction , he allowed for vertical inter - action as well in his empirical model . 7 . Hayashi and Boadway ( 2001 ) simultaneously considered horizontal interaction between Cana - dianprovincialgovernments , asnotedabove . Esteller - MoréandSolé - Ollé ( 2001 ) alsoincorporatedhor - izontal interaction between the U . S . states , and their results showed that this interaction is positive . R EFERENCES Anselin , L . 1988 . Spatial econometrics . Dordrecht , the Netherlands : Kluwer Academic . Anselin , L . , A . K . Bera , R . Florax , andM . J . Yoon . 1996 . Simplediagnostictestsforspatialdependence . Regional Science and Urban Economics 26 : 77 - 104 . Besley , T . J . , andA . C . Case . 1995 . Incumbentbehavior : Voteseeking , taxsettingandyardstickcompeti - tion . American Economic Review 85 : 25 - 45 . Besley , T . J . , andH . S . Rosen . 1998 . Verticalexternalitiesintaxsetting : Evidencefromgasolineandcig - arettes . Journal of Public Economics 70 : 383 - 98 . Bivand , R . , and S . Szymanski . 1997 . Spatial dependence through local yardstick competition : Theory and testing . Economics Letters 55 : 257 - 65 .  . 2000 . Modeling the spatial impact of the introduction of compulsory competitive tendering . Regional Science and Urban Economics 30 : 203 - 19 . Brett , C . , and J . Pinkse . 2000 . The determinants of municipal tax rates in British Columbia . Canadian Journal of Economics 33 : 695 - 714 . Brueckner , J . K . 1998 . Testing for strategic interaction among local governments : The case of growth controls . Journal of Urban Economics 44 : 438 - 67 .  . 2000 . Welfare reform and the race to the bottom : Theory and evidence . Southern Economic Journal 66 : 505 - 25 . Brueckner , J . K . , and L . A . Saavedra . 2001 . Do local governments engage in strategic tax competition ? National Tax Journal 54 : 203 - 29 . Buettner , T . 2001 . Local business taxation and competition for capital : The choice of the tax rate . Regional Science and Urban Economics 31 : 215 - 45 . Case , A . C . , H . S . Rosen , and J . C . Hines . 1993 . Budget spillovers and fiscal policy interdependence : Evidence from the states . Journal of Public Economics 52 : 285 - 307 . Esteller - Moré , À . , andA . Solé - Ollé . 2001 . Verticalincometaxexternalitiesandfiscalinterdependence : Evidence from the U . S . Regional Science and Urban Economics 31 : 247 - 72 . Figlio , D . N . , V . W . Kolpin , andW . E . Reid . 1999 . Dostatesplaywelfaregames ? JournalofUrbanEco - nomics 46 : 437 - 54 . Brueckner / STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG GOVERNMENTS 187 Fredriksson , P . G . , andD . L . Millimet . 2002 . Strategicinteractionandthedeterminantsofenvironmental policy across US states . Journal of Urban Economics 51 : 101 - 22 . Goodspeed , T . 2000 . Tax structure in a federation . Journal of Public Economics 75 : 493 - 506 . Hayashi , M . , and R . Boadway . 2001 . An empirical analysis of intergovernmental tax interaction : The case of business income taxes in Canada . Canadian Journal of Economics 34 : 481 - 503 . Heyndels , B . , andJ . Vuchelen . 1998 . TaxmimickingamongBelgianmunicipalities . NationalTaxJour - nal 51 : 89 - 101 . Kelejian , H . H . , andI . R . Prucha . 1998 . Ageneralizedspatialtwo - stageleastsquaresprocedureforesti - mating a spatial autoregressive model with autoregressive disturbances . Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 17 : 99 - 121 . Kelejian , H . H . , and D . Robinson . 1993 . A suggested method of estimation for spatial interdependent models with autocorrelated errors , and an application to a county expenditure model . Papers in Regional Science 72 : 297 - 312 . Ladd , H . F . 1992 . Mimicking of local tax burdens among neighboring counties . Public Finance Quar - terly 20 : 450 - 67 . Murdoch , J . C . , M . Rahmatian , and M . Thayer . 1993 . A spatially autoregressive median voter model of recreation expenditures . Public Finance Quarterly 21 : 334 - 50 . Murdoch , J . C . , T . Sandler , and K . Sargent . 1997 . A tale of two collectives : Sulphur versus nitrogen oxide emission reduction in Europe . Economica 64 : 381 - 401 . Revelli , F . 2001a . Spatial patterns in local taxation : Tax mimicking or error mimicking ? Applied Eco - nomics 33 : 1101 - 7 .  . 2001b . Testing the tax mimicking vs . expenditure spill - over hypothesis using English data . Applied Economics 33 : 1101 - 7 . Saavedra , L . A . 2000 . A model of welfare competition with evidence from AFDC . Journal of Urban Economics 47 : 248 - 79 . Wildasin , D . E . 1991 . Incomeredistributioninacommonlabormarket . AmericanEconomicReview 81 : 757 - 74 . Wilson , J . D . 1996 . Capital mobility and environmental standards : Is there a theoretical basis for the racetothebottom ? In Fairtradeandharmonization : Prerequisitesforfreetrade ? Vol . 1 , editedby J . Bhagwati and R . Hundee . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press .  . 1999 . Theories of tax competition . National Tax Journal 52 : 269 - 304 . 188 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW ( Vol . 26 , No . 2 , 2003 ) Request Permissions / Order Reprints Request Permission or Order Reprints Instantly Interested in copying , sharing , or the repurposing of this article ? U . S . copyright law , in most cases , directs you to first get permission from the article’s rightsholder before using their content . To lawfully obtain permission to reuse , or to order reprints of this article quickly and efficiently , click on the “Request Permission / Order Reprints” link below and follow the instructions . For information on Fair Use limitations of U . S . copyright law , please visit Stamford University Libraries , or for guidelines on Fair Use in the Classroom , please refer to The Association of American Publishers’ ( AAP ) . All information and materials related to SAGE Publications are protected by the copyright laws of the United States and other countries . SAGE Publications and the SAGE logo are registered trademarks of SAGE Publications . Copyright © 2003 , Sage Publications , all rights reserved . Mention of other publishers , titles or services may be registered trademarks of their respective companies . Please refer to our user help pages for more details : http : / / www . sagepub . com / cc / faq / SageFAQ . htm