Biomechan Model Mechanobiol ( 2007 ) 6 : 199 – 210 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10237 - 006 - 0046 - x ORIGINAL PAPER S . L . Crick · F . C . - P . Yin Assessing micromechanical properties of cells with atomic force microscopy : importance of the contact point Received : 1 March 2005 / Accepted : 1 May 2006 / Published online : 15 June 2006 © Springer - Verlag 2006 Abstract Mechanical properties are obtainable from atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) indentation force – depth curves , which are calculated from relationships between tip deﬂec - tionandcantileverposition , i . e . deﬂectioncurves . Indentation depth is the difference between tip deﬂections on a rigid and a soft material for the same amount of cantilever advance - ment , after contact is made . Since the contact point cannot be unequivocally identiﬁed from experimental data , there is some uncertainty in estimating material properties . Us - ing simulations , this study examines some important issues related to the inﬂuence of contact point identiﬁcation on esti - mated material properties . Simulations for linear materials using a typical stiffness for an AFM cantilever demonstrate that certain portions of the post - contact region of deﬂection curvesforsoftandverystiffmaterialscanbeapproximatedbyquadraticandlinearfunctions , respectively . Based on these ﬁndings , we ﬁrst develop and verify an objective , automatic method to identify the contact point for materials with linear properties . We then assess the effect of misidentifying the contact point , with and without noise . If the contact point is missed by < 50nm , material properties for small inden - tations are erroneous but the error decreases asymptotically beyond 200nm of indentation and the correct estimate of material stiffness is obtained . If the contact point is missed by > 100nm , however , the true material properties cannot be estimated accurately . Noise adds to uncertainty in mate - rial properties at small indentations but the combined effect of missing the contact point and noise is dominated by the former . Even though the algorithm was developed for linear materials , it is also suitable for certain nonlinear materials making it more generally applicable . S . L . Crick · F . C . - P . Yin ( B ) Department of Biomedical Engineering , Washington University , Campus Box 1097 , One Brookings Drive , St . Louis , MO 63130 , USA E - mail : yin @ biomed . wustl . edu Tel . : + 1 - 314 - 9356164 Fax : + 1 - 314 - 9357448 1 Introduction An atomic force microscope ( AFM ) can be used as an inden - ter to probe the nanomechanical properties of small regions of materials — including living cells ( Lal and John 1994 ; Hofmann et al . 1997 ; Wu et al . 1998 ; Sato et al . 2000 ; Tao et al . 1992 ; Burnham and Colton 1989 ; Bowen et al . 2000 ; Heinz and Hoh 1998 , 1999 ; Radmacher 1997 ; Mathur et al . 2001 ; Shroff et al . 1995 ) . AFM indentation is simple to apply , but analyzing and correctly interpreting the results is fraught with pitfalls . This is because the mechanical properties of the material being examined can only be obtained indirectly from the indentation force – depth relationship , which , in turn , has to be inferred from the relationship between the deﬂec - tion of the tip and the vertical position of the cantilever as it is moved toward and then touches the specimen . This latter relationship is usually called a deﬂection curve . The inden - tation depth , at a given cantilever position after contact with a material , is the difference between the tip deﬂection on a rigid and the soft material . Indentation depth , and hence the estimated mechanical property , is therefore dependent on the identiﬁcation of the contact point . The importance of identifying the contact point is well known but has not been subjected to careful study . For a rigid material , the contact point is rather easily discerned as it demarcates the transition from the approach of the canti - lever where there is no deﬂection to a line with a slope of about unity ( since for a given amount of cantilever advance , the tip deﬂects the same amount ) . For a material that can be indented , however , the contact point can never be identiﬁed with certainty , but rather must be inferred from the deﬂection curve . Several factors make this identiﬁcation difﬁcult . First , unless the cantilever tip is ﬂat , once contact has occurred , the relationship between cantilever position and tip deﬂection is no longer linear . Second , after contact , the tip deﬂection is not a perfect quadratic function of cantilever position but rather a complicatednonlinearfunctionthatdependsupontherelativestiffnessesofthecantileverandmaterial . The softer the mate - rial and / or the stiffer the cantilever the less tip deﬂection there 200 S . L . Crick and F . C . - P . Yin will be . This complicated nonlinear effect precludes using a simple function to ﬁt the post - contact portion of all displace - ment curves . The two factors are exacerbated by the inherent electrical and mechanically - induced noise in the cantilever deﬂection signal . After initial contact is made , as tip deﬂec - tion increases with increasing indentation , the signal is easier to discern from the noise . Hence , the initial small indenta - tions , including the contact point , are the most difﬁcult to clearly identify . In fact , this difﬁculty in identifying the con - tact point led to an analysis method that attempted to cir - cumvent this problem ( A - Hassan et al . 1998 ) . This method provides , however , only relative comparisons between differ - ent samples and does not speciﬁcally quantify properties of a given material . Therefore , before indentation with AFM can be used reliably to investigate the mechanical properties of a sample , the interrelated effects of misidentifying the contact point and noise in the signal must be elucidated . Even assuming one has accurately identiﬁed the con - tact point and obtained a force – depth relationship , analytical difﬁculties remain . For example , the pyramidal or conical geometry of most AFM tips results in an inherently nonlin - ear force – depth relationship . ( Briscoe et al . 1994 ; Dimitriadis et al . 2002 ) This tip effect dominates the force – depth relation - ship , and may obscure subtle differences from the quadratic behavior that characterizes materials with linear stress – strain properties . Severalstudiesindicatethatnotcorrectlyaccount - ing for tip geometry and hence the resulting mechanics can result in erroneous estimates of material properties , whereas correctly accounting for tip geometry and employing proper mechanical principles , may even enable one to discriminate between different types of materials . ( Briscoe et al . 1994 ; Dimitriadis et al . 2002 ; Costa and Yin 1999 ) Additionally , the cantilever deﬂection must be converted into force using an appropriate calibration scheme . Calibration of AFM canti - levers has also been the subject of many reports , but no clear , widely - accepted method has resulted ( Cleveland et al . 1993 ; D (cid:1) Costa and Hoh 2005 ; Hutter and Bechhoefer 1993 ; Jensen 1993 ; Scholl et al . 1994 ; Smith and Howard 1994 ; Sader et al . 1995 ; Cumpson et al . 2003 ; Gibson et al . 2003 ) . For all of the above reasons , the absolute values of the reported mechan - ical properties are , to some extent , uncertain . Although the issues of tip geometry and calibration are important to accu - rately assess mechanical properties of cells , addressing them is beyond the scope of the present study . Rather , we focus on issues related to identiﬁcation of the contact point and how this affects the subsequent determination of the mechanical properties . The purpose of this study is to carefully examine the above issues . We use simulated data for materials with linear stress – strain relationships covering a wide range of stiffnesses and for some types of materials with nonlinear stress – strain relationships to develop guidelines and an algo - rithm to semi - automatically identify the contact point . We also use experimental data for an endothelial cell to illustrate the approach . Based on detailed analysis of the post - contact region of simulated deﬂection curves for the linear materials we propose an objective method to automatically identify the contact point . This method presumes that the contact point is the transition from the linear to the nonlinear region of the deﬂection curves . The algorithm not only can identify accurately the contact point for linear materials but it also can do so for some nonlinear materials . We next assess the effect on the mechanical property estimations of misiden - tifying the contact point , with and without simulated noise , for both linear and nonlinear materials . For linear materials if the contact point is misidentiﬁed by 50nm , there are large er - rors in the estimated apparent point - by - point modulus ( E pp , Costa and Yin 1999 ) for indentations less than 200nm . At indentations greater than 200nm , however , the value asymp - totically approaches the correct value . If the contact point is misidentiﬁed by ∼ 100nm or more , however , E pp cannot be accurately estimated . As expected , the effect of noise is also manifested as uncertainties in material properties at small indentations . Surprisingly , however , for indentations larger than 200nm the combined effect of misidentifying the con - tact point and noise is dominated by the former . For non - linear materials with polynomial stress – strain relationships the effects of misidentifying the contact points are generally similar to those for linear materials . Speciﬁcally , misiden - tifying the contact point by up to ﬁve data points produces a nonlinear dependence of E pp on indentation depth . The error in E pp is bounded to less than a factor of two at low indentation depths and decreases with increasing indentation depth . For materials with exponential type stress – strain laws , however , opposite results are observed . The same amount of misidentiﬁcation results in errors of less than a factor of two at indentation depths less than 200nm . However , the error bounds increase with increasing indentation depth reaching more than an order of magnitude at indentation depths greater than about 400nm . The highly nonlinear deﬂection curves of materials with exponential stress – strain behavior appear to render accurate analysis of force - indentation data problem - atic for this type of material . The results of this study should serve as a foundation for future studies of AFM indentation in soft materials , including biological tissues and cells . 2 Methods 2 . 1 Deﬂection curves To address the issues of interest requires some deﬂection curves for which we know the precise contact point . We convert known force – depth relationships into simulated deﬂection curves . Note that for any tip that is not ﬂat , the conversion of a force – depth relationship into a deﬂection curve is not simple because the complex tip geometry must be taken into account . Speciﬁcally , even for a perfect cone with a quadratic relationship between indentation force and depth , the tip deﬂection after contact is not a simple qua - dratic function of cantilever position . For more complicated , but also more realistic tip geometries , the displacement curve can only be obtained by numerical simulation . In addition to