Article Cell - Size - Dependent Transcription of FLC and Its Antisense Long Non - coding RNA COOLAIR Explain Cell - to - Cell Expression Variation Graphical Abstract Highlights d The kinetics and variability of FLC expression are quantiﬁed in single cells d Without antisense transcription , FLC mRNA production scales with cell size d FLC transcription shows minimal stochasticity and no large bursts d In cells transcribing the antisense RNA COOLAIR , size scaling of FLC is altered Authors Robert Ietswaart , Stefanie Rosa , Zhe Wu , Caroline Dean , Martin Howard Correspondence caroline . dean @ jic . ac . uk ( C . D . ) , martin . howard @ jic . ac . uk ( M . H . ) In Brief Ietswaart et al . quantify the kinetics of Arabidopsis FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ) expression on the single - cell level . They reveal that while FLC expression is variable from cell to cell , this is not due to noise . Instead , variability arises from a linear scaling between FLC mRNA number and cell size . The size scaling of FLC expression can be modulated by transcription of its antisense long non - coding RNA , COOLAIR . Ietswaart et al . , 2017 , Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 June 28 , 2017 ª 2017 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2017 . 05 . 010 Cell Systems Article Cell - Size - Dependent Transcription of FLC and Its Antisense Long Non - coding RNA COOLAIR Explain Cell - to - Cell Expression Variation Robert Ietswaart , 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 Stefanie Rosa , 2 , 4 , 6 Zhe Wu , 2 , 5 , 6 Caroline Dean , 2 , * and Martin Howard 1 , 2 , 7 , * 1 Computational and Systems Biology 2 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology John Innes Centre , Norwich Research Park , Norwich NR4 7UH , UK 3 Present address : Department of Genetics , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 4 Present address : Institute of Biochemistry and Biology , Plant Physiology , University of Potsdam , 14476 Potsdam - Golm , Germany 5 Present address : Department of Biology , Southern University of Science and Technology , Shenzhen 518055 , China 6 These authors contributed equally 7 Lead Contact * Correspondence : caroline . dean @ jic . ac . uk ( C . D . ) , martin . howard @ jic . ac . uk ( M . H . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2017 . 05 . 010 SUMMARY Single - cell quantiﬁcation of transcription kinetics and variability promotes a mechanistic understand - ing of gene regulation . Here , using single - molecule RNA ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization and mathe - matical modeling , we dissect cellular RNA dynamics for Arabidopsis FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ) . FLC expression quantitatively determines ﬂowering time and is regulated by antisense ( COOLAIR ) transcrip - tion . In cells without observable COOLAIR expres - sion , we quantify FLC transcription initiation , elon - gation , intron processing , and lariat degradation , as well as mRNA release from the locus and degra - dation . In these heterogeneously sized cells , FLC mRNA number increases linearly with cell size , re - sulting in a large cell - to - cell variability in transcript level . This variation is accounted for by cell - size - dependent , Poissonian FLC mRNA production , but not by large transcriptional bursts . In COOLAIR - expressing cells , however , antisense transcription increases with cell size and contributes to FLC tran - scription decreasing with cell size . Our analysis therefore reveals an unexpected role for antisense transcription in modulating the scaling of transcrip - tion with cell size . INTRODUCTION A thorough understanding of gene regulation requires an accu - rate quantiﬁcation of the kinetic parameters inﬂuencing the tran - scription cycle . The rates of transcript production and mRNA degradation directly determine mRNA concentrations ( Bentley , 2014 ; Dolken et al . , 2008 ; Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ; Sid - away - Lee et al . , 2014 ; Wu et al . , 2016 ) . However , transcription elongation , intron splicing , and mRNA release from the locus can also feed through to modulate mRNA levels ( Bentley , 2014 ; de la Mata et al . , 2003 ; Hazelbaker et al . , 2013 ; Stuparevic et al . , 2013 ) , for example where kinetic coupling occurs ( Bentley , 2014 ; de la Mata et al . , 2003 ; Hazelbaker et al . , 2013 ) . Such ki - netic couplings between RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) elongation , splicing , or termination can quantitatively control the formation of alternative mRNA isoforms ( Bentley , 2014 ) . An element that can affect precise control of gene expression is stochasticity ( Chubb and Liverpool , 2010 ; Corrigan et al . , 2016 ; Dar et al . , 2012 ; Elowitz et al . , 2002 ; Huh and Paulsson , 2011 ; Lenstra et al . , 2015 ; Raj et al . , 2006 , 2010 ; Raj and van Ou - denaarden , 2008 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ; Sherman et al . , 2015 ; Skinner et al . , 2016 ; Thattai , 2016 ; Zenklusen et al . , 2008 ; Zopf et al . , 2013 ) . Any comprehensive quantiﬁcation of RNA dynamics must therefore also take into account its degree of variability . Fundamentally , transcription and RNA degradation are both stochastic processes . How transcriptional output could be inﬂuenced by intrinsic stochasticity has been intensively stud - ied ( Chubb and Liverpool , 2010 ; Corrigan et al . , 2016 ; Dar et al . , 2012 ; Elowitz et al . , 2002 ; Huh and Paulsson , 2011 ; Lenstra et al . , 2015 ; Raj et al . , 2006 , 2010 ; Raj and van Oudenaarden , 2008 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ; Skinner et al . , 2016 ; Thattai , 2016 ; Zenklusen et al . , 2008 ) . Nevertheless , it still remains unclear as to what extent variation previously often attributed to intrinsic stochasticity is actually caused by extrinsic variation due to cell cycle , cell size , or other fundamentally deterministic features ( Battich et al . , 2015 ; Kempe et al . , 2015 ; Padovan - Mer - har et al . , 2015 ; Sherman et al . , 2015 ; Zopf et al . , 2013 ) . Measuring the kinetics and variability of transcription and RNA processing in vivo is a challenging task in multicellular organ - isms . Previous approaches have focused on parts of the RNA life cycle ( e . g . , production / degradation ) , or have provided only relative , not absolute kinetic measurements ( Battich et al . , 2015 ; Corrigan et al . , 2016 ; Dolken et al . , 2008 ; Elowitz et al . , 2002 ; Huh and Paulsson , 2011 ; Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ; Raj et al . , 2006 ; Sidaway - Lee et al . , 2014 ; Skinner et al . , 2016 ; Thattai , 2016 ; Wu et al . , 2016 ) . In this study , we combine sin - gle - cell assays with mathematical modeling to comprehen - sively quantitate in vivo the transcription and RNA dynamics of 622 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 ª 2017 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ) ( Michaels and Amasino , 1999 ; Sheldon et al . , 1999 ) , a key quantitative developmental regulator in Arabidopsis thaliana ( Figure 1 ) . FLC encodes a MADS - box transcription factor that functions as a repressor of the transi - tion to ﬂowering . In warm conditions , FLC is regulated by two antagonistic pathways : it is upregulated through the transcrip - tional activator FRIGIDA ( FRI ) ( Creville´n and Dean , 2011 ) , and repressed by the so - called Autonomous pathway ( Ietswaart et al . , 2012 ) . The latter is mediated in part by a group of antisense long non - coding transcripts , termed COOLAIR ( Figure 1 ) , whose transcription start site is located immediately downstream of the FLC poly ( A ) site ( Swiezewski et al . , 2009 ) . COOLAIR expres - sion is tissue speciﬁc and in warm conditions COOLAIR is observed in root prevasculature cells ( Figure 1 ) ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . The quantitative level of FLC established by these antag - onistic Autonomous and FRI pathways determines whether the plant goes through winter before ﬂowering . If such overwintering does occur , cellular FLC expression is epigenetically silenced by the prolonged cold of winter , through the process of vernaliza - tion ( Figure 1 ) ( Berry and Dean , 2015 ) . Such silencing is a sto - chastic all - or - nothing effect at individual FLC loci , but where the fraction of silenced loci increases quantitatively with an increasing duration of cold exposure ( Angel et al . , 2011 ; Song et al . , 2012 ) . However , how quantitative regulation and stochas - ticity interplay to determine FLC expression in warm conditions has remained unclear . In this work , we determine the kinetics of FLC mRNA produc - tion and degradation , Pol II elongation , intron processing , lariat degradation , and mRNA release in cells without observable COOLAIR expression . We also quantitate the degree of stochas - ticity in the dynamics of FLC RNA . We observe large cell - to - cell variability in FLC mRNA numbers but ﬁnd that it is not due to intrinsic stochasticity . Instead , it is well explained by a linear scaling of transcript number with cell size . We show that this size scaling results from a total cellular mRNA production that in - creases linearly with cell size . Our ﬁndings are consistent with the entire FLC RNA dynamics being minimally stochastic . Finally , in COOLAIR - expressing cells it is antisense transcription that scales with cell size , which contributes to FLC transcription now decreasing with cell size . Our work therefore reveals an un - expected role for antisense transcription in modulating the cell size dependence of sense transcription . RESULTS Cell - to - Cell Variability of FLC mRNA Is Larger than Predicted from Poisson Production and Degradation Processes We utilized single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Raj et al . , 2008 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) in the A . thaliana Columbia ecotype with an active FRI allele ( ColFRI ) to measure single - cell RNA levels in warm condi - tions . The samples were prepared using a root squash method that typically yields single cell layers that originate from the outer cell layers of the root ( mostly from the epidermis and cortex ) ( Fig - ure 1 ) , with cells that do not express observable COOLAIR ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . DAPI stain was then used to label nuclei and two distinct smFISH probe sets employed to visualize FLC RNA : one covering sense FLC exons ( FLC mRNA ) and the second covering sense intron 1 ( Figure 2A ) . Intron 1 FLC signal was only detected in the nucleus ( Figure 2A ) . Using consecutive smFISH and DNA FISH , we found that intron 1 FLC co - localized exclusively with FLC loci ( Figure S1A ) , indicating that sense intron 1 splicing and lariat degradation occurs at the locus . This ﬁnding therefore enabled us to use the FLC intron 1 signal to label transcriptionally active FLC loci . Intron 1 FLC foci were found with counts ranging from 0 up to 4 per cell , with most cells exhibiting at least one FLC intron 1 focus ( Figure 2B ) . In Arabidopsis sister - chromatid cohesion is variable and incom - plete ( Schubert et al . , 2006 ) , meaning that the presence of a maximum of four intronic foci per cell is consistent with these root cells being diploid ( Hayashi et al . , 2013 ; Yin et al . , 2014 ) . Below , we quantify the underlying transcription and RNA degra - dation kinetics responsible for these observations . Exonic signal was abundant and mostly cytoplasmic , indi - cating that FLC mRNA can be easily detected with the appro - priate probe set ( Figure 2A ) . The cellular distribution of FLC mRNA counts was unimodal with a mean of 58 ± 2 molecules ( Figure 2C ) . Here and elsewhere , unless stated otherwise , we report the mean ( ±SEM ) . We estimate our mRNA counting error Time Prevasculature cells Outer layer cells FLC FLC FLC FLC FLC FLC COOLAIR FLC FLC FLC FLC FLC COOLAIR Root Warm Cold Warm Figure 1 . Overview of Transcriptional Regu - lation at FLC Schematicindicatingtheregulationoftranscription at FLC , which encodes a MADS - box transcription factor that represses the Arabidopsis transition to ﬂowering ( Michaels and Amasino , 1999 ; Sheldon etal . , 1999 ) . The FLC locusisalsotranscribedfrom its 3 0 end in the antisense direction , resulting in a group of long non - coding transcript isoforms collectively termed COOLAIR ( Swiezewski et al . , 2009 ) . In warm conditions , as investigated in this study , unspliced COOLAIR is expressed in root prevasculature cells ( inner layer tissue ) but was not detected in outer layer cells ( mostly from the epidermis and cortex ) ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . FLC levels are quantitatively controlled through the antagonistic FRI and Autonomous pathways ( Creville´n and Dean , 2011 ; Ietswaart et al . , 2012 ) , which respectively activate and repress FLC transcription . A short period of winter cold temperatures leads to a transient induction of COOLAIR transcription and concomitant FLC transcriptional repression ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ; Swiezewski et al . , 2009 ) . Prolonged winter cold induces epigenetically stable repression of the FLC locus through the process of vernalization ( Angel et al . , 2011 ; Berry and Dean , 2015 ; Song et al . , 2012 ) . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 623 ( legend on next page ) 624 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 to be at most 4 % by comparing our algorithm ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Olsson and Hartley , 2016 ) with FISH - quant , a separate counting method ( Mueller et al . , 2013 ) . By comparing these cellular levels with a Poisson distribution ( Figure 2C ) , we found that the experimental mRNA distribution from single cells is much broader than for the Poisson case ( Kolmogorov - Smirnov [ KS ] test , p = 10 (cid:2) 25 ) : the distribution variance is (cid:3) 14 - fold larger than the mean . Assuming that cellular mRNA production and degradation occur as Poisson processes , i . e . , independently of each other and with constant probabilities p and d per unit time , respectively ( Chubb and Liverpool , 2010 ; Gardiner , 2009 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ) , we would expect a Poisson distribution for such a birth - death process ( Chubb and Liver - pool , 2010 ; Gardiner , 2009 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ; That - tai , 2016 ) , with mean mRNA copy number p / d . We therefore conclude that the cellular FLC mRNA variation cannot be ex - plained by a birth - death process with constant production and degradation probabilities per unit time . FLC mRNA Degradation Is Well Described by a Poisson Process with a Constant Half - Life To determine whether FLC mRNA degradation might be responsible for the observed broad cell - to - cell variation in mRNA levels , we considered what would happen to the FLC mRNA distribution after inhibition of transcription . Initially the mRNA distribution would be as observed in Figure 2C , but as time progresses mRNA levels will decrease . A simple hypoth - esis is that mRNA degradation occurs with a constant degrada - tion rate d ( units : s (cid:2) 1 ) . The degradation rate d can then be esti - mated by ﬁtting an exponential function R ( t ) = R ( 0 ) exp ( (cid:2) d t ) to the experimentally measured mean mRNA levels ( Dolken et al . , 2008 ; Gardiner , 2009 ; Sidaway - Lee et al . , 2014 ) . The corre - sponding Poisson stochastic process is characterized by a constant degradation probability per unit time d ( Gardiner , 2009 ) . If mRNA degradation is well described by this Poisson model , which exhibits inherently minimal stochasticity , the cellular mRNA distribution after transcription inhibition should be completely determined by the mRNA distribution before inhi - bition and the degradation probability per unit time d . To probe this hypothesis , we ﬁrst derived the probability distribution for the number of mRNA molecules , r , as a function of time P ( r , t ) , given the observed initial distribution P ( r , 0 ) before transcriptional inhibition ( STAR Methods ) . This derivation resulted in : P ð r ; t Þ = X M b = r (cid:2) br (cid:3) ð exp ð(cid:2) dt ÞÞ r ð 1 (cid:2) exp ð(cid:2) dt ÞÞ b (cid:2) r P ð b ; 0 Þ ( Equation 1 ) where M indicates the maximum amount of cellular mRNA observed in the initial distribution . To experimentally test whether FLC mRNA degradation is well described by this model with minimal associated stochas - ticity , we treated plant seedlings with the transcription elonga - tion inhibitor actinomycin D ( ActD ) ( Dolken et al . , 2008 ) . We then subsequently performed smFISH in a time series . We observed that intron 1 FLC foci were almost completely absent as compared with a DMSO - treated sample ( mock ) after 4 hr and 6 hr of ActD addition , indicating that transcription was indeed inhibited ( Figure 2D ) . We used the experimentally measured mean mRNA count levels h R exp ð t Þi after 4 and 6 hr of treatment to estimate the mean degradation rate d : h R exp ð 4 hr Þi h R exp ð 6 hr Þi = exp ½ d ð 6 hr (cid:2) 4 hr Þ(cid:4) . This resulted in d = 3 . 3 ± 0 . 1 3 10 (cid:2) 5 s (cid:2) 1 , equivalenttoahalf - lifeofapproximately t 1 / 2 z 6 hr . Using the estimated degradation rate , we then compared the stochastic model prediction from Equation 1 with the exper - imentally observed mRNA count distributions after 4 hr and 6 hr ( Figures 2E and 2F ) . Here , we used the pooled mock treated FLC mRNA count distributions ( Figure S1B ) as the initial distribu - tion in the model to minimize the inﬂuence of cell size variation ( see below ) between experiments . Furthermore , we assumed that mRNA degradation started after a time lag t of 1 hr after ActD treatment ( through replacing t by t (cid:2) t in Equation 1 for t = 4 or 6 hr ) . Such a time lag is reasonable considering the ActD penetration time into the plant tissue . The cumulative distri - bution functions of the model and experiments were then indeed similar at both the 4 - and 6 - hr time points , as shown in Figures 2E and 2F ( KS test , p = 0 . 66 and 0 . 21 for 4 and 6 hr , respectively ) . Furthermore , starting from the experimental 4 - hr distribution as an initial condition , we could correctly predict the entire 6 - hr dis - tribution using the same degradation rate but with no time lag in Equation 1 ( KS test , p = 0 . 48 ) ( Figure S1C ) . Note that , since our Figure 2 . Cellular Variation of FLC mRNA Production and Degradation in Outer Layer Root Cells ( A ) Schematic of FLC gene with exons ( boxes ) and introns ( dashed lines ) indicated , and different probe sets for labeling FLC mRNA ( green ) and FLC full - length intron1 ( red ) . Fluorescencelocalization ( z - stackprojection ) of FLC mRNA , full - lengthintron1 , andanoverlaycontainingmRNA , intron1 FLC , andDAPIstain ( blue ) in representative ColFRI outer layer root cells . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Cellular FLC intron 1 foci counts ( gray , n = 106 cells from four biological replicates , i . e . , roots from different plants ) . ( C ) HistogramofcellularmRNAfocicounts ( blue , n = 209cellsfromeightbiologicalreplicates ) andaPoissondistributionﬁt ( red ) , whichwouldbeexpectedfroma simple birth / death process of FLC mRNA production / degradation with constant probabilities per unit time ( see schematic above ) . ( D ) Cellular FLC intron1focicountsaftertreatmentwithActDorDMSO ( mock ) for4hrand6hr . WithActD , after4hrand6hrthevastmajorityofintron1signalhas disappeared . Mock - treated FLC mRNA distributions are shown in Figure S1B . ( E ) Leftpanel : histogram ofcellular FLC mRNA foci countsafter4hrof ActD treatment ( blue ) and Poisson decay process prediction ( red ) . Rightpanel : cumulative distribution functions ( CDFs ) of the FLC mRNA foci counts and Poisson decay process prediction . Schematic above histogram shows FLC mRNA degradation only , as appropriate for ActD treatment . ( F ) As in ( E ) but after 6 hr of ActD treatment . Cells in ( D ) , ( E ) , and ( F ) are pooled from three biological replicates for each treatment and time point . ( G ) Scatterplot of cellular FLC mRNA foci counts ( same data as in C ; blue ) as a function of cell volume , together with least - squares ﬁt ( red ) . Schematic above shows FLC mRNA production increasing with cell volume and volume - independent degradation . ( H ) Variance plotted against mean of cellular FLC mRNA foci counts , both for given binned cell volume ( ColFRI , Volume - binned ) . Also shown is the behavior predicted by model with Poisson probability distribution with parameter b V ( Poisson ) , as well as a Poisson model that takes into account volume measurement error ( Poisson + Volume error ) . All error bars indicate standard errors on the respective quantities . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 625 time window of 2 hr is relatively short compared with the cell cy - cle time ( 17 hr ) for these Arabidopsis meristematic root cells ( Hayashi et al . , 2013 ; Yin et al . , 2014 ) , a reduction in mRNA levels due to dilution during cell division ( Huh and Paulsson , 2011 ) is unlikely to affect these results . We conclude that FLC mRNA degradation is well described by a Poisson process with a con - stant half - life of (cid:3) 6 hr in all outer layer cells . The observed broad distribution ( Figure 2C ) is therefore not caused by variation in FLC mRNA degradation . Cellular FLC mRNA Levels Scale Linearly with Cell Size , Generated by a Similar Scaling of the Total mRNA Production Rate Visual inspection suggested that cellular FLC mRNA levels could increasewithcellsizeasobservedforcertaingenesinmammalian cells ( Kempe et al . , 2015 ; Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . We there - fore asked whether the broad distribution of FLC mRNA counts could be inﬂuenced by cell - to - cell variability in cell size . We quantiﬁed cellular volume using two separate methods ( STAR Methods ) , which gave consistent measures to within z 20 % ( Fig - ure S1D ) . We then compared cell volume with the corresponding cellular mRNA counts ( Figure 2G ) . We found a strong linear corre - lation between FLC mRNA ( R ) and cell volume ( V ) using linear regression : R = a + b V ( R 2 - statistic = 0 . 8 , F - statistic : p = 3 3 10 (cid:2) 74 ) , with a slope b = 31 ± 1 pL (cid:2) 1 ( Figure 2G ) . The intercept a was not signiﬁcantly different from zero ( p = 0 . 4 ) . Given that FLC degradation is well described by a Poisson process with a cell size - independent degradation probability per unit time , we conclude that the total cellular FLC mRNA production rate would needtoincreaselinearlywithvolume , p ( V ) = b Vd , inordertoexplain the observed linear scaling between mRNA and cell volume . The FLC mRNA Distribution Is Consistent with Minimally Stochastic Poisson Dynamics To disentangle how much of the cell - to - cell variation in FLC mRNA is governed by cell size under warm conditions , we can consider the cellular mRNA levels as a random variable such that its mean value as a function of cell volume V is given by the observed linear relationship : R ( V ) = b V ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . Here , b is the slope of the ﬁt in Figure 2G . If the major determinant of the variation would be cell volume with minimal residual variation , then the resulting distribution for a given vol - ume would be Poisson , characterized by a mean and variance being both equal to b V ( Figure 2H , Poisson ) . To test this hypoth - esis , we binned the experimental FLC mRNA levels according to volume ( bin width : 0 . 5 pL ) and computed the mean and variance for the experimental binned data ( Figure 2H , experiments ) . Indeed , in cells with larger sizes , the mean and variance of FLC mRNA levels increased . However , the variances were systemat - ically higher than the Poisson limit ( Figure 2H ) . The above anal - ysis assumes cell volumes are known precisely . In practice , our measurement error of z 20 % for estimating cell volumes ( Figure S1D ) generates additional uncertainty in the relation be - tween cellular volume and mRNA levels . This uncertainty feeds through into a lower limit on our observable variance ( for a given cell volume ) that is higher than the Poisson limit ( see derivation in STAR Methods ) . When we also took into account our error in vol - ume estimation , we found that our experimental data are in fact well described by an underlying Poisson distribution ( Figure 2H , Poisson + Volume error ) . To further establish that our residual variation is consistent with a Poisson distribution , we calculated the volume - corrected noise measure N R = Var ð R exp Þ h R exp i 2 (cid:2) Cov ð R exp ; V exp Þ h R exp ih V exp i ( STAR Methods and Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) , where V exp are the experimentally measured cell volumes . This expression for N R can be evaluated directly from our data , resulting in N R = 0 . 04 ± 0 . 01 , which is indeed close to the Poisson limit 1 h R exp i = 0 : 02 . For comparison , N R has been found to reach values above 1 for certain mammalian high - noise genes ( Pado - van - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . Altogether , our analysis shows that cell size is the major source of cell - to - cell variation in FLC mRNA levels . Moreover , after controlling for volume measure - ment errors , the observed residual variation is consistent with minimal , Poisson variation . To further test that our mRNA distribution can be explained by cell size variation and Poisson residual variation , we per - formed stochastic simulations using a Gillespie algorithm ( Sle - poy et al . , 2008 ) of cellular mRNA production and degradation ( Figure S1E and STAR Methods ) . Degradation was simulated with a constant degradation probability per unit time as described above . The total cellular mRNA production probability per unit time was given by p ( V ) = b Vd . To approximate the deter - ministic cell - to - cell variation in mRNA production , we used our experimentally observed cell size distribution as an input ( Fig - ure S1F ) . As expected , with this procedure we could explain the cellular mRNA distribution ( Figure S1G , KS test : p = 0 . 35 ) , as well as its variance ( Levene’s test : p = 0 . 53 ) . The FLC mRNA Distribution Is Inconsistent with Large Transcriptional Bursts To discern whether alternative mechanisms could also explain the mRNA distribution , we altered the above cell - size - dependent Poisson model to include an OFF state in which the production rate was zero , but which could switch back and forth to an ON state characterized by an mRNA production probability per unit time p on ( Figure S1E and STAR Methods ) . This ON / OFF model can exhibit ‘‘bursty’’ transcription kinetics , whereby mul - tiple transcripts are being produced in bursts as opposed to un - correlated single transcription events generated by a Poisson process . The transition probability per unit time from OFF to ON is termed the burst frequency ( k on ) , whilst the mean number of transcripts produced per ON - OFF cycle is termed the burst size bs = p on k off ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . Here , k off indicates the transition probability per unit time from the ON to the OFF state . Transcription occurs in bursts when k off [ k on with a burst size bs [ 1 ( Dar et al . , 2012 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ) . We ﬁxed k off = 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 , which effectively ensured that the ﬁrst condi - tion was met in our simulations , then systematically increased the burst size from 1 upward . The average production rate as determined above is approximately the product of burst size and burst frequency : p ð V Þ = b Vd = p on k off 1 1 + k on k off k on y bs k on . We then chose to allow either burst frequency or burst size scale 626 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 with volume , the latter as proposed for mammalian genes ( Pado - van - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . In this way the remaining a priori un - known parameters k on and p on were also speciﬁed ( STAR Methods ) . We found that the ON / OFF model was only consistent with our cellular FLC mRNA distribution if the burst size was maximally three transcripts for both the cases where burst size or burst frequency scale with volume ( Figure S1G , Levine’s [ vari - ance ] test : p = 0 . 10 and 0 . 05 , respectively ; see STAR Methods for additional statistical test results ) . For a volume - dependent burst size , this number reﬂects the burst size for a cell of average volume ( V = 1 . 8 pL ) . Increasing the burst size further led to too broad an FLC mRNA distribution ( Levine’s test : p < 0 . 05 ) , due to the considerable fraction of cells in either the transcriptionally inactive or ‘‘bursty’’ states . Burst sizes compatible with our data ( at most three transcripts ) do not reﬂect a very ‘‘bursty’’ tran - scriptional mode , and are rather similar to Poisson transcription which can be interpreted in terms of our ON / OFF model as hav - ing a burst size per locus of 1 . Altogether we conclude that , for a given volume , FLC transcriptional dynamics are inconsistent with large transcriptional bursts . Estimation of FLC Transcription Initiation Rates Since we have quantiﬁed cellular mRNA levels , we can utilize these data to infer the mean absolute transcript production rate per locus F in root outer layer cells . This quantiﬁcation of F is important for a full quantitative understanding of FLC tran - scription , and will also be necessary to subsequently quantify further RNA dynamics , such as intron processing . The average cellular mRNA levels are the ratio of production and degradation : h R i = p d = N loci F d , where N loci is the number of FLC gene copies . Although the mean degradation rate is constant during the cell cycle , the number of loci and potentially also the production rate per locus will vary . However , averaging mRNA levels over all observed cells is equivalent to averaging over the cell cycle because in this tissue , cells cycle constantly and asynchro - nously . We can thus consider an average copy number N loci = 2 . 5 and mean mRNA production rate per locus F arising from time averaging over the Arabidopsis root meristematic cell cycle time scales ( STAR Methods ) . Above we both experimentally measured h R i and determined the mean FLC mRNA degradation rate d = 3 . 3 ± 0 . 1 3 10 (cid:2) 5 s (cid:2) 1 . From the above formula for h R i , we can therefore extract the mean production rate per locus of F = 7 . 5 ± 0 . 4 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 , approximately once per 20 min . This estimate should be interpreted as an average over the cell cycle and relevant to a cell of average volume 1 . 8 pL . Altering the rele - vant cell cycle time scales by up to an hour resulted in N loci ranging from 2 . 4 to 2 . 8 ( STAR Methods ) . It is also possible that the production rate per locus could dynamically change during the cell cycle to buffer against changes in gene copy number , as found for mammalian genes ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . This case leads to N loci = 2 . 7 ( STAR Methods ) . In all of these cases , the effective value for N loci is only changed slightly from its original value of 2 . 5 . Hence , a mean production rate per locus of approximately once per 20 min is retained . Above we found a linear scaling of the total mRNA production rate with cell volume ( Figure 2 ) : p ( V ) = b Vd . Since the total pro - duction rate is the sum of the production rates at the individual loci , we also have p ( V ) = F ( V ) N loci ( V ) , where we now explicitly include volume dependence in both the number of loci N loci ( V ) and the production rates per locus F ( V ) . Rearranging , we conclude that F ð V Þ = b Vd N loci ð V Þ . Unfortunately , however , the rela - tionship N loci ( V ) between gene copy number and cell volume re - mains unclear . Nevertheless , by using 2 and 4 as respective lower and upper bounds on the gene copy number N loci ( V ) , we can estimate bounds on the average production rates per locus for a given volume . For small cells ( V = 0 . 5 pL ) , these bounds are once per 135 min and 65 min . In large cells ( V = 4 pL ) , the average production rate is increased to lie between once per 16 min and 8 min . In our analysis above , we have extracted mRNA production rates per locus . Such a production rate can be interpreted as a transcription initiation rate provided there is no premature Pol II termination or co - transcriptional degradation of the transcripts . Previous work has failed to ﬁnd evidence for such processes at FLC in high transcriptional states such as those investigated here ( Wu et al . , 2016 ) . We therefore interpret our mRNA produc - tion rates per locus as transcription initiation rates , with a mean value of approximately once per 20 min per locus . Finally , we also revisited the ON / OFF model from the previous section to investigate whether bursty transcription dynamics at each locus could be consistent with our cellular mRNA distribu - tion . Here , we used the above mRNA production rate per locus F ( V ) , using the lower ( upper ) bound values of N loci = 2 ( 4 ) ( STAR Methods ) . The cellular mRNA levels are the sum over N loci inde - pendent simulation outcomes . We then repeated our earlier analysis to ﬁnd again that a burst size per locus of at most three transcripts remained consistent with our observed mRNA distri - bution for both N loci = 2 and 4 ( STAR Methods ) . These results reconﬁrm that FLC transcriptional dynamics are inconsistent with large transcriptional bursts . Simultaneous Quantiﬁcation of Pol II Elongation , Intron 1 Processing , and Lariat Degradation To further quantitate any relation between cell size and the transcriptional and RNA processing dynamics at FLC , we next investigated FLC intron 1 levels more extensively using smFISH . Generally intronic RNA levels depend on Pol II initiation ( F , unit : s (cid:2) 1 ) , PolIIelongation ( v , unit : bp / s ) , andintronprocessing ( s , unit : s (cid:2) 1 ) ( Figure 3A ) . The timescale s (cid:2) 1 equates to the time in - terval between completion of intron 1 transcription and the start of lariat degradation , and thus includes the acts of splicing and lariat debranching . Intronic RNA levels are additionally depen - dent on lariat degradation . Since it is unclear how lariat degrada - tionoccurs ( Hesselberth , 2013 ) , weallowforboth5 0 to3 0 and3 0 to 5 0 degradation , with rates k 53 and k 35 , respectively ( unit : bp / s ) . Potential other RNA degradation mechanisms , e . g . , endoribonu - clease cleavage , couldbe captured throughlarge valuesofeither or both of the degradation rates described above . However , as shown below , we ﬁnd little evidence for such scenarios at FLC . To quantify these processes we developed a new methodol - ogy , measuring various different intronic RNA levels and using these measurements to determine the above kinetic parameters . Speciﬁcally , we designed four different smFISH probe sets ( Fig - ure 3B ) covering , respectively : the full intron 1 as described above ( Figure 2A ) , the 5 0 half , the middle of the intron ( symmetri - cally positioned with a length of half the intron ) , and the 3 0 half . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 627 Figure 3 . Quantiﬁcation of Pol II Elongation , FLC Intron 1 Processing , Lariat Degradation , and mRNA Release from the Locus ( A ) Schematic ofdifferent processes contributing to FLC intron1life cycle : transcription initiation rate ( F ) , Pol IIelongation ( v ) , and intron processing rate ( s ) . Time scale s (cid:2) 1 indicatesthetimeintervalbetweencompletionofintron1transcriptionandstartoflariatdegradation , whichcanoccurfrom5 0 to3 0 end ( rate : k 53 ) and / or 3 0 to 5 0 end ( rate : k 35 ) . Also shown is mRNA release from the locus ( rate : k x ) and subsequent degradation ( rate : d ) . ( B ) Fluorescence localization ( z - stack projection ) of four different FLC intron 1 probe sets , as indicated on schematic : full - length ( full , red ) , 5 0 end ( red ) , middle ( mid , red ) , and 3 0 end ( green ) . All images are overlays of respective intron 1 signal and DAPI stain ( blue ) in representative outer layer root cells . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( legend continued on next page ) 628 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 We denote their respective mean RNA levels at an FLC locus as I f , I 5 0 , I m and I 3 0 . For all of the probe sets , the mean RNA levels are then described by I j = FT j . F is the average FLC transcription initi - ation rate per locus as estimated above and T j is the mean life - time of the intronic RNA , which is speciﬁc for each probe set location ( subscript j = { f , 5 0 , m , 3 0 } ) . Importantly , for each probe set , the respective lifetime T j depends on the kinetic parameters ( STAR Methods ) . This timescale is additionally dependent on how many probes need to be bound for a signal to be experi - mentally detected . We and others have found that having only two - thirds of the probe set bound could already be sufﬁcient to generate a detectable signal ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Raj et al . , 2008 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . Consequently , intronic RNA with a ‘‘missing length fraction’’ of up to one - third of the probe set length is assumed to still generate a detectable smFISH signal ( STAR Methods ) . To quantify the four unknown kinetic rates ( v , s , k 35 , and k 53 ) , we determined for each of the four probe sets the mean number of foci per cell , indicated respectively as h S f i , h S 5 0 i , h S m i , and h S 3 0 i ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . We found that h S f i and h S 3 0 i were similar and likewise for h S 5 0 i and h S m i ( Figure 3C ) . Consistent with h S 5 0 i being larger than h S 3 0 i ( Figure 3C ) , all 3 0 foci co - local - ized with 5 0 foci but not the reverse . A positive signal corre - sponds to at least one intron RNA molecule , which co - localizes with the FLC locus exclusively ( Figure S1A ) . Therefore , the mean foci number per cell equals the average number of FLC loci per cell multiplied by the expectation to observe a signal at a locus ( STAR Methods ) : h S j i = N loci ð 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) FT j Þ . Here , we use Poisson transcription initiation and RNA degra - dation kinetics , consistent with our ﬁndings above . To determine which values for the a priori unknowns ( v , s , k 35 , and k 53 ) gener - ated a good ﬁt to the average foci per cell for each probe set , we systematically varied these four parameters , calculated the respective model values for the average foci per cell , and as - sessed with a c 2 test ( degrees of freedom k = 4 , acceptance probability p R 0 . 1 ) whether the model values were sufﬁciently probable compared with the experimental data in Figure 3C . As a result , we obtained distributions of parameter values that generated good model ﬁts ( Figure 3D ) , with all the consistent parameter estimates lying in the range v = 2 – 20 bp / s , s = 1 . 0 – 2 . 0 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 , k 53 = 1 – 5 bp / s , and k 35 = 1 – 4 bp / s . To determine the robustness of our parameter estimates to uncertainty in the missing length fraction , we repeated the parameter inference also for a range of missing length fractions ( STAR Methods ) . The resulting variation in our kinetic rate estimates was limited ( Figures S2A – S2D ) , yielding similar estimates to the above meth - odology . Our elongation rate ( 0 . 1 – 1 . 2 kb / min ) and intron pro - cessing timescale estimates ( 8 – 17 min ) are in line with the ranges described for other species ( Bentley , 2014 ) . We next wondered whether the four above kinetic rates might scale with cell size , similar to the transcription initiation rate . To investigate this question , we ﬁrst examined how the number of intron foci scaled as a function of cell size by sorting and including cells according to their size ( STAR Methods ) . We found that levels of intronic RNA from all four probe sets h S j ( V ) i increased systematically with increasing cell size ( Figures 3E , 3F , and S2E ) , as would be expected with a transcription initiation rate that also increases with cell size . To investigate whether we could explain these cell size depen - dencies with our above determined kinetic rate estimates , we ﬁrst generalized the model prediction for the foci number for a given volume V : h S j ð V Þi = N loci ð V Þð 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) F ð V Þ T j ð V Þ Þ . We next assumed that only the transcription initiation rate varied with size : F ð V Þ = b Vd N loci , with the size - independent probe speciﬁc life - times T j ( V ) = T j as determined above . To account for the unknown behavior of N loci ( V ) , we adopted a similar approach as previ - ously , ﬁrst using the mean N loci = 2 . 5 , before investigating N loci = 2 and N loci = 4 as lower and upper bounds . Using N loci = 2 . 5 , we were able to reproduce the observed number of foci over the range of observed volumes ( see Figures 3E and 3F with v = 3 bp / s , s = 1 . 5 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 , k 53 = 2 bp / s , and k 35 = 2 bp / s ) . However , ﬁtting using the lower and upper bounds N loci = 2 and N loci = 4 , for both small volumes ( 0 . 9 pL ) and large volumes ( 2 . 8 pL ) , yielded ﬁts with 3 - fold or more variation in the parameter values for v , s , k 53 , and k 35 from those given above . Given this spread , we cannot rigorously conclude whether the co - transcriptional parameters v , s , k 53 , and k 35 depend on cell size . Nevertheless , by analyzing intronic RNA foci we have been able to extract robust mean values for the FLC elongation , intron processing , and lariat degradation . Quantiﬁcation of FLC mRNA Release from the Locus The release of mRNA from a transcribed locus is an important part of the RNA life cycle ( Figure 3A ) as it can inﬂuence transcript fate ( Stuparevic et al . , 2013 ) . To quantify FLC mRNA release from the locus , we assessed the exonic FLC RNA distribution , i . e . , FLC exonic sequences present at the FLC locus itself ( C ) Average foci counts per cell for the four probe sets described in ( B ) from outer layer cells together with analytical model ﬁts ( mean and SEM using all allowed parameter values , see text and STAR Methods ) . Number of cells analyzed , respectively , for full , mid , 5 0 , and 3 0 : 200 , 382 , 326 , and 326 pooled from three , four , four , and four biological replicates , respectively . Error bars denote SEM . ( D ) Marginaldistributionsforintronprocessing ( s ) , elongation ( v ) , 5 0 to3 0 lariatdegradation ( k 53 ) , and3 0 to5 0 lariatdegradation ( k 35 ) ratesthatgenerategoodﬁtsto the data shown in ( C ) according to a c 2 test ( degrees of freedom k = 4 , acceptance probability p R 0 . 1 ) with the ‘‘missing’’ length fraction 1 / 3 . Box plots indicate minimum , 25 % quantile , median , 75 % quantile , and maximal values . ( E ) Volume dependence of average cellular foci counts per cell in outer layer cells for FLC intron 1 : full - length ( full ) and 5 0 end . Number of cells analyzed as in ( C ) . Alsoshownareanalyticalmodelﬁts ( black , gray ) withparameter valuesthatgeneratedgoodﬁtstopopulationaveragesin ( C ) : v = 3bp / s , s = 1 . 5 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 , k 53 = 2 bp / s , and k 35 = 2 bp / s . Error lines denote SEM as function of volume . ( F ) As in ( E ) but for middle ( mid ) and 3 0 end FLC intron 1 probe sets . ( G ) Locus - associated exonic FLC RNA ( R loc ) distributions given presence of full - length FLC intron 1 signal from outer layer cells . Three different quantiﬁcation methods were used on the same experimental dataset ( n = 114 cells pooled from four biological replicates ) : integration of 2D Gaussian ﬁt to the spatial intensity proﬁle ( Int ) , superposition of point spread functions ( PSF ) , and superposition of amplitudes of PSF at the locus ( Amp ) ( STAR Methods ; Mueller et al . , 2013 ) . ( H ) Volume dependence of average locus - associated exonic FLC RNA levels . Data and three different quantiﬁcation methods as described in ( G ) . Error lines denote SEM as a function of volume . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 629 ( Figure 2A ) . By utilizing the software package FISH - quant ( Muel - ler et al . , 2013 ) , we performed an unbiased quantitative image analysis on the FLC exonic intensities at FLC loci . First , a system - atic averaging of FLC exonic smFISH signal ( Figure 2A ) spatial in - tensity proﬁles resulted in the point spread function ( PSF ) that represents a single FLC RNA molecule ( Mueller et al . , 2013 ) . Next we exploited the full - length FLC intron 1 probe set to label the FLC locus itself ( Figures 2A and S1A ) . The exonic FLC RNA signals co - localizing with intron 1 were then quantitatively compared with the PSF intensity using three different quantiﬁca - tion algorithms ( STAR Methods ; Mueller et al . , 2013 ) each esti - mating how many exonic RNAs are at the locus ( Figure 3G ) . All three methods gave similar exonic FLC RNA distributions ( Fig - ure 3G ) , with up to at most six transcripts at the locus in all three methods , which indicates the robustness of this approach . We estimate the average exonic FLC RNA at the locus ( conditioned on the presence of intron 1 FLC ) to be h R loc i = 2 . 2 ± 0 . 3 . To quantify the mean exonic FLC RNA release rate from the locus , we ﬁrst assume that the mean total release is equal to k x h R loc i , where k x is the release rate . Equating this to the mean initiation rate F , we ﬁnd that k x = 3 . 4 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 . However , this analysis overlooks any possible correlations between the pres - ence of exonic and intronic signal . Since our measurements of exonic RNA are conditioned on the presence of intronic RNA signal , such correlations might alter our estimate for k x . To quan - titatively investigate this possibility , we performed stochastic simulations of the transcriptional dynamics at an individual FLC locus using a spatiotemporal Gillespie algorithm ( Figures 3A and S3A ; STAR Methods ) . This methodology simulated the spatiotemporal transcriptional dynamics at FLC , including FLC mRNA release from the locus as a single - step Poisson process with an a priori unknown probability per unit time k x . This anal - ysis generated results that could then be compared with the experimental exonic FLC RNA distributions . We used the ki - netic parameters determined previously ( v = 3 bp / s , s = 1 . 5 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 , k 53 = 2 bp / s , k 35 = 2 bp / s ) to simulate an FLC locus in a cell of average size h V i = 1 . 8 pL , where the mean transcrip - tion initiation probability per unit time was given by F = b h V i d N loci , with b = 31 pL (cid:2) 1 , d = 3 . 3 3 10 (cid:2) 5 s (cid:2) 1 , and N loci = 2 . 5 , assuming also a missing length fraction of 1 / 3 for all smFISH species . As expected , with this procedure we could reproduce the mean levels of the FLC mRNA as well as the four different intron 1 probe sets . We next output the simulated distributions of exonic RNA at the locus given that at least one intron was present at the locus and ﬁtted k x , the mean release probability per unit time , through the mean value of the experimental exonic RNA distribu - tion h R loc i . This resulted in k x = 5 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 , approximately once per half an hour , similar to our earlier estimate . We next checked that our Gillespie algorithm simulations could account for our earlier data on intron foci number as a function of cell size . Using a size - dependent transcription initia - tion probability per unit time per locus of F ð V Þ = b Vd N loci , we could again reproduce these data satisfactorily ( Figure S3B ) , conﬁrm - ing our earlier analytic approach . Finally , we measured experimentally the amount of exonic RNA at the locus as a function of cell size ( Figures 3H and S3C ) . Notably , this quantity varied only weakly with cell size , quite unlike the intronic foci signal ( Figures 3E and 3F ) . This result suggests that the RNA release rate from the locus should scale linearly with cell size in order to compensate for a similarly increasing transcription initiation rate , thereby generating an approximately constant exonic signal . Overall , we have suc - ceeded in quantitating the size scaling of total mRNA production and the size - independent mRNA degradation rate , as well as the mean rates for transcription elongation , intron processing , lariat degradation , and mRNA release from the locus ( Table 1 ) . Antisense Transcription Contributes to a Decrease of Intronic FLC Levels with Cell Size in Prevasculature Cells FLC expression is quantitatively repressed by the Autono - mous pathway , in a mechanism involving antisense ( COOLAIR ) Table 1 . Overview of Kinetic Rates and Quantities Estimated in This Study Symbol Deﬁnition Estimate R cellular FLC mRNA counts ( in outer layer cells ) average : 58 ± 2 ; min – max : 7 – 145 V cell volume ( in outer layer cells ) average : 1 . 8 pL ; min – max : 0 . 5 – 4 pL b slope of linear relationship between cellular FLC mRNA count and cell volume 31 ± 1 pL (cid:2) 1 d mRNA degradation rate 3 . 3 ± 0 . 1 3 10 (cid:2) 5 s (cid:2) 1 p cellular mRNA production rate average : 1 . 8 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 ; min – max : 0 . 5 – 4 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 N loci cell cycle averaged number of FLC loci per cell 2 . 5 ; range : 2 . 4 – 2 . 8 F cell cycle averaged FLC transcription initiation rate 7 . 5 ± 0 . 4 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 v Pol II elongation rate 2 – 20 bp / s s intron processing rate 1 . 0 – 2 . 0 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 k 53 intron lariat 5 0 to 3 0 degradation rate 1 – 5 bp / s k 35 intron lariat 3 0 to 5 0 degradation rate 1 – 4 bp / s R loc FLC mRNA levels at locus average : 2 . 2 ± 0 . 3 ; min – max : 0 – 6 k x mRNA release rate from locus 3 . 4 – 5 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 bs burst size in ON / OFF model 1 – 3 k off transition rate from ON to OFF state in ON / OFF model 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 630 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 Figure 4 . Antisense Transcription Contributes to a Reduction of FLC Intron 1 Expression with Cell Size in Prevasculature Tissue ( A ) Fluorescence localization of full - length sense intron 1 ( red , top right ) and antisense ( COOLAIR ) 5 0 end distal intron ( green , bottom right ) and wider - ﬁeld merge ( left ) , all with DAPI stain ( blue ) , in representative ColFRI prevasculature root cells , with the same cells in different images identiﬁed by * or * * , respectively . Scale bar , 5 m m . Also shown ( top ) is schematic of FLC gene with sense transcript as in Figure 2A , and antisense proximal and distal isoforms together with corre - sponding sense and antisense probe sets . ( B ) Average cellular foci number of full - length FLC intron 1 and COOLAIR 5 0 end distal intron in outer layer ( black ) and prevasculature cells ( white ) , from one and three biological replicates , respectively . Error bars denote SEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * * * p < 10 (cid:2) 4 . ( C ) Area dependence of average cellular foci count per cell of full - length FLC intron 1 and COOLAIR 5 0 end distal intron in ColFRI root outer layer cells ( outer ) and full - length FLC intron 1 in prevasculature ( prevasc ) root cells . Data as in ( B ) and Figure 2B . Error lines denote SEM as a function of area . ( legend continued on next page ) Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 631 transcription . The COOLAIR transcription start site is located immediately downstream of the sense FLC poly ( A ) site ( Swie - zewski et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 4A ) . In the root outer layer ( epidermis and cortex ) cells studied above ( Figure 1 ) , from where our esti - mates for FLC transcriptional kinetics are extracted , we detected no antisense COOLAIR expression ( Figure 4B ) . To investigate the role of antisense transcription on sense regulation , we there - fore shifted our focus onto the inner prevasculature cells ( Fig - ure 1 ) , which show higher levels of COOLAIR transcription ( Fig - ure 4B ) ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . Due to the dense packing of prevasculature cells ( Figure 4A ) , accurate cellular volume and FLC mRNA estimates could not be obtained . This difﬁculty precluded quantiﬁcation of transcrip - tional kinetics in these cells . However , cell area as well as sense and antisense intronic smFISH foci ( Figure 4A ) could still be determined manually , the small number of intron signals being much easier to deﬁnitely assign to cells , as compared with the much larger number of FLC mRNA foci . With this approach , it was therefore still possible to investigate the cell size depen - dencies of sense and antisense transcription using the intronic signals . Average cellular FLC intron 1 foci counts were lower in pre - vasculature tissue than in the root outer layer ( Figure 4B ) , partly because prevasculature cells are smaller ( Figure 4C ) . As ex - pected , in outer layer cells , FLC intron 1 foci counts increased with cell size , consistent with transcription initiation increasing with cell size in these cells . However , in prevasculature cells the intron 1 foci counts generally reduced with cell size ( Fig - ure 4C ) . Moreover , using probes at the 5 0 end of the distal COOLAIR intron ( Figure 4A ) , COOLAIR foci counts increased with cell size in the prevasculature cells ( Figure 4D ) . We found previously that COOLAIR and FLC expression are mutually exclusive at single FLC loci ( Figure S4 and Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . Consistently , we ﬁnd here that mean sense / antisense levels as a function of cell size in prevasculature tissue are strongly anticorrelated ( Figure 4D , Pearson correlation coefﬁcient r = (cid:2) 0 . 9 , p = 10 (cid:2) 73 ) . To investigate whether COOLAIR transcription caused the reduction in sense intronic RNA levels with cell size , we measured sense intronic RNA foci counts in plants with reduced antisense expression using a previously described FLC Terminator EXchange ( FLC - TEX ) transgene ( Csorba et al . , 2014 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . This transgene exchanges the FLC terminator / COOLAIR promoter with the strong RBCS terminator from Arabidopsis RBCS3B , acting to reduce anti - sense expression . As expected , in outer layer cells without observable antisense expression in ColFRI ( Figures 4B and 4C ) , FLC intron 1 foci in FLC - TEX still increased with cell size ( Figure 4E ) . Moreover , compared with an FLC control ( FLC - CTL ) transgene ( Csorba et al . , 2014 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) , anti - sense expression was now almost absent in prevasculature tissue in FLC - TEX ( Figure 4F ) . In these cells , FLC intron 1 RNA foci counts were now increased ( Figure 4F ) , most notably in larger cells where antisense expression was highest in ColFRI ( Figure 4D ) and FLC - CTL ( Figure 4F ) . This result strongly favors a causal role for COOLAIR in repressing sense transcrip - tion . However , sense intron 1 RNA foci counts in FLC - TEX pre - vasculature cells did not revert to increasing with cell size , as in the outer cells , but were instead roughly constant with cell size ( Figure 4F ) . We conclude that in prevasculature cells COOLAIR expression increases with cell size and that COOLAIR contrib - utes to repression of sense FLC transcription ( Figure 4G ) . As a result , sense FLC expression in prevasculature cells reduces with increasing cell size . DISCUSSION In this work , we have dissected with high resolution the cell - size - dependent RNA kinetics and variability of FLC , an important developmental regulator in a multicellular eukaryote . Our anal - ysis has indicated that in outer layer cells without observable COOLAIR expression , total cellular mRNA production increases linearly with cell size , while the mRNA degradation rate is cell size independent . In these cells , we also quantiﬁed the mean rates for transcription elongation , intron processing , and lariat degrada - tion , as well as mRNA release from the locus ( Table 1 ) using a new methodology measuring intronic RNA levels . The net result of these dependencies is a cytoplasmic FLC mRNA number that scales linearly with cell size ( Figure 2G ) . We also found low levels of stochasticity at FLC , with little evidence for bursty transcription . The low levels of stochasticity at FLC do not support the con - ventional picture of bursty gene regulation . Instead , the apparent broad width of the cellular FLC mRNA distribution is almost entirely explained by a linear scaling of total mRNA production with cell size . This striking conclusion suggests that previous work on stochastic gene expression may need to be revisited , more carefully controlling for sources of deterministic variation between cells , as recently argued for mammalian cells ( Battich et al . , 2015 ; Kempe et al . , 2015 ; Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . Potentially , the large cell size diversity ( (cid:3) 8 - fold ) predisposes this feature as being particularly important in plants . When con - trolling for cell size , the residual FLC mRNA variation is then consistent with Poissonian transcription initiation dynamics . Limited bursty transcription kinetics are also consistent with our data but where the burst size is at most only three transcripts . These conclusions are supported by the low levels of transcript accumulation observed at FLC loci and are also compatible with a burst size of about ﬁve transcripts found for a number of endogenous mammalian genes ( Levesque and Raj , 2013 ) . Importantly , transcriptional bursts , often modeled as purely stochastic events , could arise not only due to intrinsic noise in biochemical reactions , but also through deterministic sources of cell - to - cell or time - dependent variation ( Sherman et al . , 2015 ; Zopf et al . , 2013 ) . Altogether , our ﬁndings signiﬁcantly advance our understanding of gene regulation in plants , where issues such as transcriptional scaling with cell size and ( D ) As in ( C ) , here for FLC and COOLAIR expression in prevasculature cells . ( E ) Areadependenceofaveragecellularfocicountspercelloffull - length FLC intron1fromterminatorexchange ( TEX ) orwild - type FLC transgenes ( CTL ) , inouter layer ( outer ) or prevasculature ( prevasc ) root cells , all from four biological replicates per condition . Error lines denote SEM as a function of area . ( F ) As in ( E ) , here for FLC and COOLAIR 5 0 end distal intron expression in prevasculature cells . ( G ) Schematic of FLC regulation by cell - size - dependent COOLAIR transcription in prevasculature cells . 632 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 stochastic or bursty gene expression have not previously been investigated . A further key outcome of our analysis is quantiﬁcation of tran - scription initiation and elongation rates for FLC . We found that in an outer layer cell of average size , the typical time between initi - ation events ( (cid:3) 20 min ) is similar to the time to elongate ( 5 – 50 min ) through the gene . Previous work has indicated that the FLC locus adopts a 5 0 to 3 0 end looped conﬁguration ( Crevillen et al . , 2013 ) . We propose as a possible scenario that in outer layer cells , which lack observable antisense expression , a single Pol II could transcribe the sense strand almost continuously and reinitiate soon after termination . This mechanism could also explain the apparent absence of large transcriptional bursts at FLC . Furthermore , intron processing and degradation of FLC intron 1 ( (cid:3) 3 . 5 kb in length ) takes a considerable time ( 15 – 45 min ) and appears to occur on a similar timescale as Pol II elongation through the gene . Our estimates are also consistent with recent ﬁndings in budding yeast that splicing ( exon / exon ligation ) oc - curs mostly up to 50 bp downstream of the intron acceptor site ( Carrillo Oesterreich et al . , 2016 ) . With our Pol II elongation rates , this would be within a minute and thus much shorter than our intron - processing timescale ( 8 – 17 min ) , which reﬂects the time - scale from intron birth until the start of lariat degradation . Overall , our transcription and RNA - processing kinetic estimates indicate that these processes occur in parallel and with relatively similar timescales . We have found that in prevasculature tissue , cell - size - depen - dent COOLAIR transcription represses sense expression . This contributes to an overall decrease of sense FLC transcription with cell size in these cells in contrast to the positive scaling observed in outer layer cells . Interestingly , it is antisense tran - scription that positively correlates with size in prevasculature tissue , indicating that its expression could be prioritized over sense transcription in these cells . The mechanistic basis for such prioritization remains unclear , but is an intriguing question for future investigation both at FLC and genome - wide . Our previous whole plant studies showed that co - transcriptional proximal COOLAIR processing contributes to FLC repression ( Marquardt et al . , 2014 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) , likely through a repressed chromatin state at the locus ( Liu et al . , 2010 ; Wu et al . , 2016 ) . Distally polyadenylated COOLAIR also inﬂu - ences transcription of the sense FLC strand ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . How nascent COOLAIR transcription in prevasculature cells connects with these mechanisms remains to be addressed . Nevertheless , given the widespread prevalence of antisense expression in different organisms ( Lenstra et al . , 2015 ; Mayer et al . , 2015 ; Pelechano and Steinmetz , 2013 ) , antisense tran - scription could be a general mechanism to modulate size scaling of transcription . Overall , our precise quantiﬁcation of the FLC RNA kinetics is a vital step in the functional dissection of FLC regulation . In the future it will be interesting to see how quantitative FLC kinetics are modulated by temperature , ranging from the relatively high temperatures ( 20 (cid:5) C ) analyzed here to winter cold ( 4 (cid:5) C ) . In the latter case the vernalization pathway is activated , which re - presses FLC transcription at a single - cell level via the Polycomb system in a digital and epigenetically stable manner ( Angel et al . , 2011 ; Berry and Dean , 2015 ; Song et al . , 2012 ) . How quantitative FLC regulation in the warm interfaces with digital vernalization is a critical matter for future investigation . Such investigations are expected to beneﬁt from the single - cell kinetic quantiﬁcation methods developed in this study . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Species and Genotype of Experimental Models B Plant Material and Growth Conditions d METHOD DETAILS B smFISH Procedure on Root Squashes B Synthesis of the Probes B Image Acquisition B Combined RNA - DNA FISH d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B smFISH RNA Count Quantiﬁcation B Estimation of Cellular Volumes and Areas B Calculation of Mean and Standard Error of Parameter Estimates Using Propagation of Errors B Poisson Process Describing FLC mRNA Degradation B Mathematical Characterization of Variation Due to Cell Volume and Intrinsic Noise B Time Averaging of FLC Gene Copy Number throughout the Cell Cycle B Determination of Cellular FLC Intron 1 and Exonic Foci Count Scaling with Cell Size B Inference of Pol II Elongation , FLC Intron 1 Processing and Lariat Degradation Rates B Stochastic Simulations of Cellular FLC mRNA Produc - tion and Degradation B Stochastic Simulations of Spatiotemporal FLC Tran - scriptional Dynamics B Quantiﬁcation of FLC mRNA Release from the Locus d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes four ﬁgures and one table and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2017 . 05 . 010 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . I . , S . R . , Z . W . , C . D . , and M . H . conceived the study ; S . R . and Z . W . performed the experiments ; R . I . , S . R . , and Z . W . performed data analysis ; R . I . and M . H . constructed the mathematical models ; R . I . performed the simulations ; R . I . , C . D . , and M . H . wrote the manuscript , with assistance from S . R . and Z . W . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by BBSRC grant BB / K007203 / 1 ( M . H . , C . D . ) , BBSRC Institute Strategic Program GRO ( BB / J004588 / 1 ) , BBSRC student - ship , EMBO FellowshipALTF 422 - 2016 ( R . I . ) , and European Research Council Advanced grant MEXTIM ( M . H . , C . D . ) . We thank Matthew Hartley and Tjelvar Olssonfordevelopingthevolumeestimationcode , SusanDuncanforhelpwith the smFISH experiments , and Rea Kourounioti for comments on the manu - script . We thank C . D . and M . H . group members for discussions . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 633 Received : December 19 , 2016 Revised : March 5 , 2017 Accepted : May 11 , 2017 Published : June 14 , 2017 REFERENCES Angel , A . , Song , J . , Dean , C . , and Howard , M . ( 2011 ) . A Polycomb - based switch underlying quantitative epigenetic memory . Nature 476 , 105 – 108 . Battich , N . , Stoeger , T . , and Pelkmans , L . ( 2015 ) . Control of transcript vari - ability in single mammalian cells . Cell 163 , 1596 – 1610 . Bentley , D . L . ( 2014 ) . Coupling mRNA processingwithtranscription intime and space . Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 , 163 – 175 . Berry , S . , andDean , C . ( 2015 ) . Environmentalperceptionandepigeneticmem - ory : mechanistic insight through FLC . Plant J . 83 , 133 – 148 . Carrillo Oesterreich , F . , Herzel , L . , Straube , K . , Hujer , K . , Howard , J . , and Neugebauer , K . M . ( 2016 ) . Splicing of nascent RNA coincides with intron exit from RNA polymerase II . Cell 165 , 372 – 381 . Chubb , J . R . , andLiverpool , T . B . ( 2010 ) . Burstsandpulses : insightsfromsingle cell studies into transcriptional mechanisms . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 20 , 478 – 484 . Corrigan , A . M . , Tunnacliffe , E . , Cannon , D . , and Chubb , J . R . ( 2016 ) . A contin - uum model of transcriptional bursting . Elife 5 , e13051 . Creville´n , P . , and Dean , C . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of the ﬂoral repressor gene FLC : the complexity of transcription in a chromatin context . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 14 , 38 – 44 . Crevillen , P . , Sonmez , C . , Wu , Z . , and Dean , C . ( 2013 ) . A gene loop containing the ﬂoral repressor FLC is disrupted in the early phase of vernalization . EMBO J . 32 , 140 – 148 . Csorba , T . , Questa , J . I . , Sun , Q . W . , and Dean , C . ( 2014 ) . Antisense COOLAIR mediates the coordinated switching of chromatin states at FLC during vernal - ization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 16160 – 16165 . Dar , R . D . , Razooky , B . S . , Singh , A . , Trimeloni , T . V . , McCollum , J . M . , Cox , C . D . , Simpson , M . L . , and Weinberger , L . S . ( 2012 ) . Transcriptional burst fre - quency and burst size are equally modulated across the human genome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 17454 – 17459 . de laMata , M . , Alonso , C . R . , Kadener , S . , Fededa , J . P . , Blaustein , M . , Pelisch , F . , Cramer , P . , Bentley , D . , andKornblihtt , A . R . ( 2003 ) . AslowRNApolymerase II affects alternative splicing in vivo . Mol . Cell 12 , 525 – 532 . Dolken , L . , Ruzsics , Z . , Radle , B . , Friedel , C . C . , Zimmer , R . , Mages , J . , Hoffmann , R . , Dickinson , P . , Forster , T . , Ghazal , P . , et al . ( 2008 ) . High - resolu - tion gene expression proﬁling for simultaneous kinetic parameter analysis of RNA synthesis and decay . RNA 14 , 1959 – 1972 . Duncan , S . , Olsson , T . S . G . , Hartley , M . , Dean , C . , and Rosa , S . ( 2016 ) . A method for detecting single mRNA molecules in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Methods 12 , 13 . Elowitz , M . B . , Levine , A . J . , Siggia , E . D . , and Swain , P . S . ( 2002 ) . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 . Gardiner , C . W . ( 2009 ) . Handbook of Stochastic Methods ( Springer ) . Hayashi , K . , Hasegawa , J . , and Matsunaga , S . ( 2013 ) . The boundary of the meristematicandelongationzonesinroots : endoreduplicationprecedesrapid cell expansion . Sci . Rep . 3 , 2723 . Hazelbaker , D . Z . , Marquardt , S . , Wlotzka , W . , and Buratowski , S . ( 2013 ) . Kinetic competition between RNA Polymerase II and Sen1 - dependent tran - scription termination . Mol . Cell 49 , 55 – 66 . Hesselberth , J . R . ( 2013 ) . Lives that introns lead after splicing . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . RNA 4 , 677 – 691 . Huh , D . , and Paulsson , J . ( 2011 ) . Non - genetic heterogeneity from stochastic partitioning at cell division . Nat . Genet . 43 , 95 – 100 . Ietswaart , R . , Wu , Z . , andDean , C . ( 2012 ) . Floweringtimecontrol : anotherwin - dow to the connection between antisense RNA and chromatin . Trends Genet . 28 , 445 – 453 . Kempe , H . , Schwabe , A . , Cremazy , F . , Verschure , P . J . , and Bruggeman , F . J . ( 2015 ) . The volumes and transcript counts of single cells reveal concentration homeostasis and capture biological noise . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 797 – 804 . Lee , I . , Michaels , S . D . , Masshardt , A . S . , and Amasino , R . M . ( 1994 ) . The late - ﬂowering phenotype of frigida and mutations in luminidependens is sup - pressed in the landsberg erecta strain of Arabidopsis . Plant J . 6 , 903 – 909 . Lenstra , T . L . , Coulon , A . , Chow , C . C . , and Larson , D . R . ( 2015 ) . Single - mole - cule imaging reveals a switch between spurious and functional ncRNA tran - scription . Mol . Cell 60 , 597 – 610 . Levesque , M . J . , andRaj , A . ( 2013 ) . Single - chromosometranscriptionalproﬁling reveals chromosomal gene expression regulation . Nat . Methods 10 , 246 – 248 . Li , P . J . , Tao , Z . , and Dean , C . ( 2015 ) . Phenotypic evolution through variation in splicing of the noncoding RNA COOLAIR . Genes Dev . 29 , 696 – 701 . Liu , F . , Marquardt , S . , Lister , C . , Swiezewski , S . , andDean , C . ( 2010 ) . Targeted 3 0 processing of antisense transcripts triggers Arabidopsis FLC chromatin silencing . Science 327 , 94 – 97 . Marquardt , S . , Raitskin , O . , Wu , Z . , Liu , F . , Sun , Q . , and Dean , C . ( 2014 ) . Functional consequences of splicing of the antisense transcript COOLAIR on FLC transcription . Mol . Cell 54 , 156 – 165 . Mayer , A . , diIulio , J . , Maleri , S . , Eser , U . , Vierstra , J . , Reynolds , A . , Sandstrom , R . , Stamatoyannopoulos , J . A . , and Churchman , L . S . ( 2015 ) . Native elongating transcript sequencing reveals human transcriptional activity at nucleotide res - olution . Cell 161 , 541 – 554 . Michaels , S . D . , and Amasino , R . M . ( 1999 ) . FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a novelMADSdomainproteinthatactsasarepressorofﬂowering . Plantcell 11 , 949 – 956 . Mueller , F . , Senecal , A . , Tantale , K . , Marie - Nelly , H . , Ly , N . , Collin , O . , Basyuk , E . , Bertrand , E . , Darzacq , X . , and Zimmer , C . ( 2013 ) . FISH - quant : automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat . Methods 10 , 277 – 278 . Olsson , T . S . , and Hartley , M . ( 2016 ) . jicbioimage : a tool for automated and reproducible bioimage analysis . PeerJ 4 , e2674 . Padovan - Merhar , O . , Nair , G . P . , Biaesch , A . G . , Mayer , A . , Scarfone , S . , Foley , S . W . , Wu , A . R . , Churchman , L . S . , Singh , A . , and Raj , A . ( 2015 ) . Single mammalian cells compensate for differences in cellular volume and DNA copy number through independent global transcriptional mechanisms . Mol . Cell 58 , 339 – 352 . Pelechano , V . , and Steinmetz , L . M . ( 2013 ) . Gene regulation by antisense tran - scription . Nat . Rev . Genet . 14 , 880 – 893 . Raj , A . , and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2008 ) . Nature , nurture , or chance : stochas - tic gene expression and its consequences . Cell 135 , 216 – 226 . Raj , A . , Peskin , C . S . , Tranchina , D . , Vargas , D . Y . , and Tyagi , S . ( 2006 ) . Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol . 4 , e309 . Raj , A . , van den Bogaard , P . , Rifkin , S . A . , van Oudenaarden , A . , and Tyagi , S . ( 2008 ) . Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat . Methods 5 , 877 – 879 . Raj , A . , Rifkin , S . A . , Andersen , E . , and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2010 ) . Variability in gene expression underlies incomplete penetrance . Nature 463 , 913 – 918 . Rosa , S . , Duncan , S . , andDean , C . ( 2016 ) . Mutuallyexclusivesense - antisense transcription at FLC facilitates environmentally induced gene repression . Nat . Commun . 7 , 13031 . Schubert , V . , Klatte , M . , Pecinka , A . , Meister , A . , Jasencakova , Z . , and Schubert , I . ( 2006 ) . Sister chromatids are often incompletely aligned in meristematic and endopolyploid interphase nuclei of Arabidopsis thaliana . Genetics 172 , 467 – 475 . Shahrezaei , V . , and Swain , P . S . ( 2008 ) . Analytical distributions for stochastic gene expression . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 17256 – 17261 . Sheldon , C . C . , Burn , J . E . , Perez , P . P . , Metzger , J . , Edwards , J . A . , Peacock , W . J . , and Dennis , E . S . ( 1999 ) . The FLF MADS box gene : a repressor of ﬂowering in Arabidopsis regulated by vernalization and methylation . Plant Cell 11 , 445 – 458 . Sherman , M . S . , Lorenz , K . , Lanier , M . H . , and Cohen , B . A . ( 2015 ) . Cell - to - cell variability in the propensity to transcribe explains correlated ﬂuctuations in gene expression . Cell Syst . 1 , 315 – 325 . 634 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 Sidaway - Lee , K . , Costa , M . J . , Rand , D . A . , Finkenstadt , B . , and Penﬁeld , S . ( 2014 ) . Direct measurement of transcription rates reveals multiple mecha - nisms for conﬁguration of the Arabidopsis ambient temperature response . Genome Biol . 15 , R45 . Skinner , S . O . , Xu , H . , Nagarkar - Jaiswal , S . , Freire , P . R . , Zwaka , T . P . , and Golding , I . ( 2016 ) . Single - cell analysis of transcription kinetics across the cell cycle . Elife 5 , e12175 . Slepoy , A . , Thompson , A . P . , andPlimpton , S . J . ( 2008 ) . Aconstant - timekinetic Monte Carlo algorithm for simulation of large biochemical reaction networks . J . Chem . Phys . 128 , 205101 . Song , J . , Angel , A . , Howard , M . , and Dean , C . ( 2012 ) . Vernalization—a cold - induced epigenetic switch . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 3723 – 3731 . Stuparevic , I . , Mosrin - Huaman , C . , Hervouet - Coste , N . , Remenaric , M . , and Rahmouni , A . R . ( 2013 ) . Cotranscriptional recruitment of RNA exosome cofac - tors Rrp47p and Mpp6p and two distinct Trf - Air - Mtr4 Polyadenylation ( TRAMP ) complexes assists the exonuclease Rrp6p in the Targeting and degradation of an aberrant messenger ribonucleoprotein particle ( mRNP ) in yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 31816 – 31829 . Swiezewski , S . , Liu , F . , Magusin , A . , and Dean , C . ( 2009 ) . Cold - induced silencing by long antisense transcripts of an Arabidopsis Polycomb target . Nature 462 , 799 – 802 . Thattai , M . ( 2016 ) . Universal Poisson statistics of mRNAs with complex decay pathways . Biophys . J . 110 , 301 – 305 . Wang , Z . W . , Wu , Z . , Raitskin , O . , Sun , Q . W . , and Dean , C . ( 2014 ) . Antisense - mediated FLC transcriptional repression requires the P - TEFb transcription elongation factor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 7468 – 7473 . Wu , Z . , Ietswaart , R . , Liu , F . Q . , Yang , H . C . , Howard , M . , and Dean , C . ( 2016 ) . Quantitative regulation of FLC via coordinated transcriptional initiation and elongation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 218 – 223 . Yin , K . , Ueda , M . , Takagi , H . , Kajihara , T . , Aki , S . S . , Nobusawa , T . , Umeda - Hara , C . , and Umeda , M . ( 2014 ) . A dual - color marker system for in vivo visualization of cell cycle progression in Arabidopsis . Plant J . 80 , 541 – 552 . Zenklusen , D . , Larson , D . R . , and Singer , R . H . ( 2008 ) . Single - RNA counting re - veals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1263 – 1271 . Zopf , C . J . , Quinn , K . , Zeidman , J . , and Maheshri , N . ( 2013 ) . Cell - cycle depen - dence of transcription dominates noise in gene expression . PLoS Comp . Biol . 9 , e1003161 . Zwillinger , D . ( 1998 ) . Handbook of Differential Equations , Third Edition ( Academic Press ) . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 , June 28 , 2017 635 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Martin Howard ( martin . howard @ jic . ac . uk ) . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Species and Genotype of Experimental Models Arabidopsis ColFRI , ﬁrst described in ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) : Col - 0 ecotype with an introgressed active FRIGIDA allele from the Spanish San Feliu 2 ( Sf2 ) accession . Arabidopsis FLC - TEX , ﬁrst described in ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) : transformation of 12 - kb FLC genomic DNA fragment composed of the promoter region , gene body , and replacement of the 3 0 region by rbcs3B terminator into the ﬂc - 2 / FRI genotype . ﬂc - 2 / FRI is a loss - of - function FLC genotype , which has a deletion / rearrangement within the endogenous FLC gene in a ColFRI background ( Michaels and Amasino , 1999 ) . A representative FLC - TEX line ( no . 577 ) was selected ( Csorba et al . , 2014 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) . Arabidopsis FLC - CTL , ﬁrst described in ( Csorba et al . , 2014 ) : transformation of FLC genomic construct ( 15 kb of the FLC locus , FLC - 15 ) into ﬂc - 2 / FRI background . REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies anti - DIG - ﬂuorescein antibody Roche Cat # 11207741910 ; RRID : AB _ 514498 Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Digoxigenin - dUTP Roche Cat # 11745816910 Actinomycin D SigmaTM Cat # A4262 - 2MG Glucose oxidase Sigma TM Cat # G0543 Bovine liver catalase Sigma TM Cat # C3155 Experimental Models : Organisms / Strains Arabidopsis ColFRI : Col - 0 ecotype with an introgressed active FRIGIDA allele from the Spanish San Feliu 2 ( Sf2 ) accession . Caroline Dean laboratory , ﬁrst described in ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . N / A Arabidopsis FLC - TEX : transformation of 12 - kb FLC genomic DNA fragment composed of the promoter region , gene body , and replacement of the 3 0 region by rbcs3B terminator into the ﬂc - 2 FRI genotype . ﬂc - 2 is a loss - of - function FLC genotype , which has a deletion / rearrangement within the endogenous FLC gene . A representative FLC - TEX line ( no . 577 ) was selected . Caroline Dean laboratory , ﬁrst described in ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) N / A Arabidopsis FLC - CTL : transformation of FLC genomic construct ( 15 kb of the FLC locus , FLC - 15 ) into ﬂc - 2 FRI background . Caroline Dean laboratory , ﬁrst described in ( Csorba et al . , 2014 ) N / A Oligonucleotides smFISH probes , see Table S1 Biosearch Technologies N / A Software and Algorithms Cellular RNA count and Z - projected cell area script Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Olsson and Hartley , 2016 https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel Cell volume estimation script This study https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel Cellular mRNA production and degradation simulations This study https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel FLC transcription and RNA processing simulations This study https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel FISH - quant Mueller et al . , 2013 https : / / code . google . com / archive / p / ﬁsh - quant / e1 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 Plant Material and Growth Conditions Seeds were surface sterilized in 5 % v / v sodium hypochlorite for 5 min and rinsed three times in sterile distilled water . Seeds were stratiﬁed for 3 days at 5 (cid:5) C before germination in a growth cabinet ( Sanyo MLR - 351H ) in vertically oriented Petri dishes containing MS media minus glucose ( 16 hours light , 100 m mol m (cid:2) 2 s (cid:2) 1 , 22 (cid:5) C ± 1 (cid:5) C ) for 1 week . For Actinomycin D ( ActD ) experiments , plants were initially germinated in non - supplemented media for 6 days and then transferred to new plates containing ActD . Before pouring into plates , molten media was supplemented with a stock solution of ActD ( 1mg / ml dissolved in DMSO ) to a ﬁnal concentration of 20ug / ml . ActD was obtained from SigmaTM ( catalogue # A4262 - 2MG ) . METHOD DETAILS smFISH Procedure on Root Squashes Seedlings were removed from the media and root tips were cut using a razor blade and placed into glass wells containing 4 % para - formaldehyde and ﬁxed for 30 min . Roots were then removed from the ﬁxative and washed twice with nuclease free 1X PBS ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Lutterworth , UK ) . Several roots were then arranged on a Poly - L - Lysine slide ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Lutterworth , UK ) and covered by a glass coverslip ( Slaughter , Uppminster , UK ) . The meristems were then squashed by tapping the coverslips , before each slide was submerged ( together with the coverslips ) for a few seconds in liquid nitrogen until frozen . The coverslips were then ﬂipped off the slides using a razor blade and the roots were left to dry at room temperature for 30 min . Tissue permeabilization was achieved by immersing the samples in 70 % ethanol for a minimum of one hour . The ethanol was then left to evaporate at room temperature for 5 min before two washes were carried out with wash buffer ( containing 10 % formamide and 2x SSC ) . 100 m l of hybridization solution ( containing 10 % dextran sulfate , 2x SSC and 10 % formamide ) , with each probe set at a ﬁnal concentration of 250nM , was then added to each slide . Coverslips ( Slaughter , Uppminster , UK ) were carefully laid over the samples to prevent evaporation of the buffer and the probes were left to hybridize at 37 (cid:5) C overnight in the dark . The hybridization solution containing unbound probes was pipetted off the following morning . Each sample was then washed twice with wash buffer with the second wash left to incubate for 30 min at 37 (cid:5) C . 100 m l of the nuclear stain DAPI ( 100ng / mL ) was then added to each slide and left to incubate at 37 (cid:5) C for 30 minutes . The DAPI was removed and 100 m l 2xSSC was added and then removed . 100 m l GLOX buffer minus enzymes ( 0 . 4 % glucose in 10mM Tris , 2X SSC ) was added to the samples and left to equilibrate for 2 min . This was removed and replaced with 100 m l of GLOX buffer containing the enzymes glucose oxidase and catalase , where 1 m l of each enzyme ( Glucose oxidase ( # G0543 from Sigma ) and catalase ( # C3155 from Sigma ) ) was added to a total of 100 m l of GLOX minus enzymes . The samples were then covered by 22mm x 22mm No . 1 coverslips ( Slaughter , Uppminster , UK ) , sealed with nail varnish and immediately imaged . Synthesis of the Probes The probes for FLC mRNA , full - length FLC intron 1 and COOLAIR were as described in ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . We used the online program Stellaris Probe Designer version 2 . 0 from Biosearch Technologies to design probe sequences for the 5 0 half , 3 0 half and middle of FLC intron 1 ( Table S1 ) . Image Acquisition For imaging we used a Zeiss Elyra PS1 inverted microscope , with a x100 oil - immersion objective ( 1 . 46 NA ) and cooled EM - CCD Andor iXon 897 camera ( 512x512 QE > 90 % ) ; or a Zeiss CellObserver HS system equipped with a PlanApo 1 . 4 / 100x objective , an Axiocam MRm Rev . The following wavelengths were used for ﬂuorescence detection : for probes labeled with Quasar570 an excita - tion line of 561 nm was used and signal was detected at 570 - 640 nm ; for probes labeled with Quasar670 an excitation line of 642 nm was used and signal was detected at 655 - 710 nm ; for DAPI an excitation line of 405 nm was used and signal was detected at 420 - 480 nm . Maximum projections and analysis of 3D pictures were performed using Fiji ( an implementation of ImageJ , a public domain pro - gram by W . Rasband available from http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Combined RNA - DNA FISH For sequential RNA - DNA FISH , after imaging RNA by smFISH ( protocol outlined above ) , coverslips were removed and washed three times in 4X - SSC / 0 . 2 % Tween at 37 (cid:5) C . Slides were then re - ﬁxed with 4 % ( w / v ) paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) in 1XPBS buffer for 10 min and washed again several times in 1X PBS . Afther that slides were treated with 100 m g / mL RNase for 1 h at 37 (cid:5) C and washed twice in 1X PBS . Samples were then digested in a mixture of 1 % driselase , 0 . 5 % cellulase , and 0 . 025 % pectolyase for 10 min at 37 (cid:5) C . Slides were then washed and re - ﬁxed with 4 % PFA for 10 min and transferred to a series of ethanol steps increasing to 70 % , 85 % and 100 % . Probes were labeled with Digoxigenin - dUTP ( # 11745816910 , Roche ) by nick translation . Bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome ( BAC ) clone JAtY71K18 , which contains an insert of 75 kb , was used as a probe . The hybridization mixture ( 20 ng / mL labeled DNA , 50 % formamide , 10 % dextran sulfate , 2X SSC , 1mg / ml salmon sperm ( D9156 , Sigma ) ) was denatured at 85 (cid:5) C for 10 min and applied to the slides . Slides containing the hybridization mixture were denatured for 7 min at 75 (cid:5) C ( in an omnislide ) , and hybridized overnight Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 e2 at 37 (cid:5) C . After hybridization , slides were washed at 42 (cid:5) C once in 2X SSC , twice in 20 % formamide plus 0 . 1X SSC and twice in 2X SSC , and ﬁnally twice in 2X SSC at room temperature and twice in 4X SSC plus 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 . Then the slides were blocked in TNB ( 0 . 1M TrisHCl , 0 . 15M NaCl , 3 % BSA ) for 30 min at 37 (cid:5) C . Digoxigenin – dUTP probes were detected with anti - DIG - ﬂuorescein antibody ( # 11207741910 , Roche ) prepared in TNB buffer ( 1 : 100 ) . Nuclei were counterstained with 1 mg / mL DAPI , and slides were mounted in Vectashield ( Vector Laboratories ) . In order to ﬁnd the cells previously imaged for smFISH , we saved the stage positions of the cells imaged and acquired large image tiles in order facilitate the identiﬁcation of the cells . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS smFISH RNA Count Quantiﬁcation Cellular count quantiﬁcation of FLC mRNA dots from the z projection of optical sections of outer layer cells consisted of two com - ponents - segmentation and mRNA counting , as described in ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ) . These two components were combined into an overall workﬂow that resulted in an image where each cell was annotated with the number of probes located inside it . The image analysis workﬂow operated on image collections where each image represented a unique channel / z - stack pair . To separate the captured microscopy image into individual channel / z - stack pairs , Bioformats was used and the pipeline was implemented in the Python programming language , available at https : / / github . com / JIC - CSB / FISHcount and https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel . To determine the counting error we also determined mRNA counts on the same data sets using FISHquant , as described in brief in the last section below and also in ( Mueller et al . , 2013 ) . Cellular levels of FLC intron 1 and COOLAIR ( all probe sets ) were determined manually using ImageJ or ZEN ( proprietary software from Zeiss ) . Estimation of Cellular Volumes and Areas Volume estimation for outer layer cells was performed using two methods : the projection method and 3D segmentation method ( Dun - can et al . , 2016 ; Olsson and Hartley , 2016 ) . In the ﬁrst method , we determined the cell area in pixels from the z - stack projection image that was also utilized to determine the cellular FLC mRNA counts ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ) . This value was then multiplied by the average number of images along the z direction that contained cells in focus . Lastly we multiplied by the voxel size 0 . 1 3 0 . 1 3 0 . 2 m m 3 for im - ages generated using the Zeiss Elyra , and 0 . 075 3 0 . 075 3 0 . 1 m m 3 for images generated by the Zeiss CellObserver . The second method determined the cell area in pixels for each z - plane using the same algorithm as described in ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Olsson and Hartley , 2016 ) that was previously used for the z - projection area calculation . Cell volume was then estimated as the sum of cell area pixels over all z - planes multiplied by the above voxel size . The two segmentation methods are implemented in the Python programming language and are available at https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel . For prevasculature cells , manual inspection indicated that the above described computational algorithms ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Olsson and Hartley , 2016 ) did not generate accurate segmentation results . This was because the prevasculature cells were more tightly packed in the root squash such that the cell outlines were less pronounced . Instead , by using ImageJ ( ROI manager plugin ) , we manually segmented these cells to determine their cell area in pixels in one z - plane that was in focus with the DAPI signal . This value was then multiplied by the pixel area ( 0 . 1 3 0 . 1 m m 2 for Zeiss ) , resulting in the cell area . We conﬁrmed that for outer layer cells , manual and computational cell area segmentation methods generated similar results . Calculation of Mean and Standard Error of Parameter Estimates Using Propagation of Errors Throughout this study we utilized the theory of propagation of errors to estimate the mean and error ( SEM ) on a quantity ( e . g . param - eter values ) that is generally a function f ( X 1 , . . , X n ) of n experimentally determined quantities X 1 . X n with given means h X 1 i . h X n i and errors ( SEM ) dX 1 . dX n . Assuming statistical independence and relatively small errors : Mean of quantity of interest : h f ( X 1 , . . , X n ) i = f ( h X 1 i , . . , h X n i ) , Error on quantity of interest : df ð X 1 ; : : ; X n Þ = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP ni = 1 (cid:2) v f v X i dX i (cid:3) 2 s . Poisson Process Describing FLC mRNA Degradation To model cellular FLC mRNA levels after transcription inhibition , we consider a Poisson process with a constant probability per unit time d for degradation of a single mRNA . The probability that a given mRNA does not degrade during a time t is therefore e (cid:2) dt , while the probability that it does is 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) dt . If the system is initialized with b mRNA molecules , then the probability P ( r , t ) that r % b survive at time t is therefore (cid:2) b r (cid:3) ð e (cid:2) dt Þ r ð 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) dt Þ b (cid:2) r . Generalising to the case where the system is initialized with any number of mRNA b up to a maximum of M , with probability P ( b , 0 ) , then the probability P ( r , t ) is then given by P ð r ; t Þ = P Mb = r (cid:2) b r (cid:3) ð e (cid:2) dt Þ r ð 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) dt Þ b (cid:2) r P ð b ; 0 Þ , as stated in the main text . e3 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 More formally this result can also be derived as follows . The master equation for P ( r , t ) is given by ( Gardiner , 2009 ) : v v t P ð r ; t Þ = d ð r + 1 Þ P ð r + 1 ; t Þ (cid:2) d r P ð r ; t Þ . First , we deﬁne the generating function G ð w ; t Þ = P N b = 0 w b P ð b ; t Þ ( Gardiner , 2009 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ) . We then convert the master equation into a partial differential equation for G ( w , t ) : v v t G ð w ; t Þ = d ð 1 (cid:2) w Þ v v wG ð w ; t Þ . We solve this equation analytically for G ( w , t ) , given the Dirichlet boundary conditions G ð w ; 0 Þ = P N b = 0 w b P ð b ; 0 Þ , using the method of characteristics ( Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ; Zwillinger , 1998 ) . This results in the following expression : G ð w ; t Þ = P N b = 0 ð we (cid:2) dt + 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) dt Þ b P ð b ; 0 Þ . By the deﬁnition of the generating function we can make use of its Taylor series expansion to obtain P ð r ; t Þ = 1 r ! v v w r G ð w ; t Þ (cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) w = 0 . We then obtain the desired result : P ð r ; t Þ = P Mb = r (cid:2) br (cid:3)(cid:6) e (cid:2) dt (cid:7) ð 1 (cid:2) e (cid:2) dt Þ b (cid:2) r P ð b ; 0 Þ . Mathematical Characterization of Variation Due to Cell Volume and Intrinsic Noise To assess the relation between FLC mRNA and volume for the data shown in Figure 2H , we investigated the mean and variances as follows . We took a bin size of D V = 0 . 5 pL and binned the data ranging from V min = 0 . 5 pL up to V max = 3 . 5 pL accordingly . We then calculated for the data in each bin the mean ( with errorbars : SEM ) and variance ( with error bars : standard error on the variance SE Var ð X Þ = Var ð X Þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n (cid:2) 1 p , with n the number of relevant data points ) . Furthermore we compared these results with a model where the FLC mRNA scales linearly with cell volume , as described previously ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . We also extended this analysis to include the effects of our volume estimation error , as described below . As described in the main text and supported by our experimental observations ( Figure 2G ) , we consider the cellular mRNA levels as a random variable R ( V ) such that its expectation conditioned on cell volume V is given by the observed linear relationship : E ( R j V ) = b V ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . If the residual variation would be minimal , the conditional distribution would be Poissonian : P ( R j V ) = Pois ( l = b V ) . In this case , the variance as a function of volume is Var ( R j V ) = b V ( Figure 2H , Poisson limit ) . To assess the mean and variance of this Poisson model in the presence of our experimental volume measurement error of 3 = 0 . 3 pL ( z 20 % of the average cell volume , Figure S1D ) , we instead computed E ð R ð ~ V Þ (cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4)Þ and Var ð R ð ~ V Þ (cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4)Þ as follows . First note that by deﬁnition we have E (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) = Z N 0 r P (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) = r j ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) dr : The conditional probability can be computed by invoking Bayes’ rule : P (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) = r j ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) = Z V + 3 V (cid:2) 3 P ð R ð V Þ = r j V Þ P ð V Þ dV Z V + 3 V (cid:2) 3 P ð V Þ dV : We computed in a custom - written MATLAB script , the ( non - normalized ) probability density P ( V ) directly from our experimental data by binning our volume estimates with bin size D V = 0 . 02pL . Then by inserting the underlying Poisson distribution P ð R ð V Þ = r j V Þ = ð b V Þ r r ! e (cid:2) b V with our experimentally observed volume distribution we can approximate the conditional probability by a sum : P (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) = r j ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) = P V + 3 ~ V = V (cid:2) 3 ð b ~ V Þ r r ! e (cid:2) b ~ V P (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) P V + 3 ~ V = V (cid:2) 3 P (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) : With this expression we then approximated the conditional expectation and variance as sums : E (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) = X R max r = 0 r P (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) = r j ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) and Var (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) = E (cid:10)(cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) (cid:2) E (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9)(cid:9) 2 (cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:11) = P R max r = 0 h r (cid:2) E (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5) ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9)i 2 P (cid:8) R (cid:8) ~ V (cid:9) = r j ~ V ˛ ½ V (cid:2) 3 ; V + 3 (cid:4) (cid:9) Here , R max indicates the maximal FLC mRNA number as observed in our data set . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 e4 Lastly , to assess intrinsic variability in mRNA levels in the presence of external variability arising from cell volume , we computed the volume - corrected noise measure , as previously described in Ref . ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) : N R : = Var ð R Þ (cid:2) Var ð E ð R j V ÞÞ E ð R Þ 2 . In our case of the linear relation E ( R j V ) = b V the second variance term can be expressed as Var ( E ( R j V ) ) = Var ( b V ) = b 2 Var ( V ) . Furthermore by taking the expectation over E ( R j V ) , we ﬁnd that E ( R ) = b E ( V ) . We use this result to ﬁnd an expression for the covariance : Cov ( R , V ) = E ( RV ) (cid:2) E ( R ) E ( V ) = b E ( V 2 ) (cid:2) b E ( V ) 2 = b Var ( V ) . We can now combine these results to obtain Var ( E ( R j V ) ) = b Cov ( R , V ) . Altogether , this leads to ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) : N R = Var ð R Þ E ð R Þ 2 (cid:2) Cov ð R ; V Þ E ð R Þ E ð V Þ . Error bars were determined by bootstrapping as in ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) . For the Poisson limit model , we can instead calculate the volume - corrected noise measure directly from its deﬁnition . First we note that from the law of total probability ( Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ; Sherman et al . , 2015 ) , we have Var ( R ) = E ( Var ( R j V ) ) + Var ( E ( R j V ) ) . This expression then leads to the ﬁnal result : N R = E ð Var ð R j V ÞÞ E ð R Þ 2 = E ð b V Þ E ð R Þ 2 = 1 E ð R Þ . Time Averaging of FLC Gene Copy Number throughout the Cell Cycle We used Arabidopsis cell cycle stage time period estimates determined by ( Hayashi et al . , 2013 ; Yin et al . , 2014 ) to approximate the average FLC gene copy number N loci . The cell cycle for meristematic root cells ( as analysed in our smFISH assay ) is , on average , 17h ( Hayashi et al . , 2013 ; Yin et al . , 2014 ) . In these cells FLC gene copy number increases from 2 in G1 to 4 by the end of S phase . During mitosis , transcription seems not to occur so that the copy number is effectively zero ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . If N loci ( t ) represents the gene copy number throughout the cell cycle for 0 % t % 17 h , then the copy number changes over time as follows : N loci ð t Þ = 8 > > < > > : 2 if 0 % t % 7 h 3 if 7 h % t % 8 h 4 if 8 h % t % 14 : 5 h 0 if 14 : 5 h % t % 17 h The time average of N loci ( t ) throughout the cell cycles is then N loci = 2 . 5 . As described , the cell cycle averaged production rate per locus F then equals : F = h R i d N loci , with h R i the average cellular FLC mRNA level and d the mRNA degradation rate . We also varied the above dynamics such that the time points where N loci ( t ) changed ( i . e . at 7h , 8h and 14 . 5h ) , could deviate by at most 1 hour from these values . Such alterations resulted in a maximal average loci value of N loci = 2 . 8 and a minimum of N loci = 2 . 4 . In the scenario where the production rate per locus F ( t ) dynamically changes to counteract changes in gene copy number N loci ( t ) throughout the cell cycle time t , we would have the following situation : C = N loci ( t ) F ( t ) , with C a constant that is not dependent on the cell cycle time ( except during mitosis where F ( t ) = 0 ) . As explained in the main text , integrating over the cell cycle is equivalent to aver - aging over the observed cell population : h R i = 1 d 1 17 h Z 17 h 0 N loci ð t Þ F ð t Þ dt . This results in C = 17 14 : 5 h R i d . The time averaged production rate per locus ( F ) is then obtained again by integrating over the cell cycle : F = 1 17 h Z 17 h 0 F ð t Þ dt = h R i d 2 : 7 . This shows that this scenario is effectively equivalent to having the cell - cycle averaged copy number N loci = 2 . 7 . Determination of Cellular FLC Intron 1 and Exonic Foci Count Scaling with Cell Size In order to determine how the cellular intron foci counts for the various probe sets scale with cell size ( either volume or cell area ) , as shown in Figures 3E , 3F , and 3H , 4C – 4F , S2E , S3B , and S3C , we wrote a custom MATLAB script that ﬁrst ordered the cells according to their cell size . For volumes , this procedure generated the sequence V 1 % V 2 . . % V N , where N is the total number of cells . We then calculated the range of attained sizes h V k i = 1 k X k i = 1 V i for k = 1 . N and h V N + k i = 1 N (cid:2) k X N i = 1 + k V i for k = 1 . N - 1 , which are thus av - erages over the relevant cell subpopulations . Note that by construction , the h V j i are monotonically increasing with j = 1 . ( 2 N (cid:2) 1 ) and range from the minimal size h V 1 i = V 1 to the maximal size h V 2 N (cid:2) 1 i = V N . Then , with the given cell order above , we calculate the cor - responding ( average ) cellular intron foci counts for a given volume h V j i : S ðh V k iÞ = 1 k X k i = 1 S ð V i Þ for k = 1 . N , and S ðh V N + k iÞ = 1 N (cid:2) k X N i = 1 + k S ð V i Þ for k = 1 . N - 1 . Error bars of these estimates are the standard error on the mean : SE S ðh V k iÞ = 1 ﬃﬃﬃ k p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 k (cid:2) 1 X k i = 1 ð S ð V i Þ (cid:2) S ðh V k iÞÞ 2 r for k = 1 . N , and SE S ðh V N + k iÞ = 1 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ N (cid:2) k p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 N (cid:2) k (cid:2) 1 X N i = 1 + k ð S ð V i Þ (cid:2) S ðh V N + k iÞÞ 2 r for k = 1 . N - 1 . To ensure precise estimates , we have only included averages calculated from at least 10 experimentally observed cells in all plots shown . e5 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 Inference of Pol II Elongation , FLC Intron 1 Processing and Lariat Degradation Rates For the estimation of the Pol II elongation rate ( v ) , intron processing ( s ) and lariat degradation rates , respectively 5 0 to 3 0 ( k 53 ) and 3 0 to 5 0 ( k 53 ) , we investigated the levels observed from four different intron 1 smFISH probe sets ( Figure 3 ) . One covered the full intron 1 , the second covered the 5 0 half , the third covered the middle of the intron symmetrically , also with a length of half the intron , and the fourth covered the 3 0 half . We denote their respective RNA levels at an FLC locus as I f , I 5 0 , I m and I 3 0 ( Figure 3B ) . The gene length covered by the 5 0 , mid and 3 0 probe sets is L p = 1 . 8 kb ( Table S1 ) , i . e . half the intron length , with a covered gene length of 2 L p for the full - length intron probe set ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . We , and others have found that having only two thirds of the probe set bound could already be sufﬁcient to generate a detectable focus signal ( Duncan et al . , 2016 ; Raj et al . , 2008 ; Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . Conse - quently , intronic RNA with a ‘‘missing length fraction’’ f Lp of up to one - third of the probe set length could in principle still be detected . Full - length intron 1 has , by the deﬁnition of s ( Figure 3A ) , a lifetime of T f = 1 s . However , detected intron 1 RNA with a missing length 2 L p f Lp could arise from two sources : partially complete transcripts where Pol II has not yet transcribed this missing length or a pre - viously full - length lariat RNA that is already partly degraded . Therefore , we ﬁnd the expectation value : E ð I f Þ = F s + 2 FL p f Lp v + 2 FL p f Lp k 53 + k 35 , where F is the population averaged FLC transcription initiation rate per locus . Effectively , the lifetime in the presence of a missing length is then T f = 1 s + 2 L p f Lp v + 2 L p f Lp k 53 + k 35 . I 5 0 is constituted by full - length intron 1 , but also Pol II elongating in the 3 0 half of the intron . Then by taking into account again the missing length fraction arising from the same two sources : not yet fully transcribed RNA and lariat degradation intermediates , we obtain : T 5 0 = 1 s + L p v + L p f Lp v + min (cid:2) L p f Lp k 53 ; L p ð 1 + f Lp Þ k 53 + k 35 (cid:3) . I 3 0 is constituted by full - length intron 1 , but with similar missing length fraction contributions as for I 5 0 : T 3 0 = 1 s + L p f Lp v + min (cid:2) L p f Lp k 35 ; L p ð 1 + f Lp Þ k 53 + k 35 (cid:3) . Lastly , I m is constituted of full - length intron 1 , Pol II elongating in the 3 0 quarter of intron 1 and the missing length fractions : T m = 1 s + 0 : 5 L p v + L p f Lp v + min (cid:2) L p ð 0 : 5 + f Lp Þ k 53 ; L p ð 0 : 5 + f Lp Þ k 35 ; L p ð 1 + f Lp Þ k 53 + k 35 (cid:3) . Our observed quantities are the respective average FLC intron 1 foci numbers per cell : h S f i ; h S 5 0 i ; h S m i and h S 3 0 i . We next assume that the variables I j ( subscript j ˛ f f ; 5 0 ; m ; 3 0 g ) are Poisson distributed with mean production rate F and degradation rate T (cid:2) 1 j . Given our average FLC copy number N loci , the h S j i can then be modelled by : E ð S j Þ = N loci P ð I j > 0 Þ = N loci ð 1 (cid:2) P ð I j = 0 ÞÞ = N loci ð 1 (cid:2) exp ð(cid:2) FT j ÞÞ . To estimate the four unknown kinetic parameters ( v , s , k 35 and k 53 ) from our average cellular foci numbers h S j i , we wrote a custom MATLAB script that performed a systematic parameter sweep for all parameter combinations lying in the range : v = 0 . 1 - 20 bp / s , k 53 = 0 . 1 - 20 bp / s and k 35 = 0 . 1 - 20 bp / s , and s = 3x10 (cid:2) 4 – 20x10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 , while we varied the missing length fraction f Lp ˛ (cid:12) 0 ; 1 9 ; 2 9 ; 1 3 (cid:13) . We then calculated our chi - square statistic : c 2 = X j ˛ f f ; 5 0 ; m ; 3 0 g h S j i (cid:2) E ð S j Þ SE h S j i ! 2 . Assuming normally distributed standard errors on our es - timates SE h S j i , c 2 then follows a chi - square distribution with four degrees of freedom . For all resulting c 2 statistics , we determined their probabilities P ( c 2 ) and accepted the statistic as a good ﬁt when P ( c 2 ) R 0 . 1 . This resulted in a set of consistent parameter sets for which the marginal distribution are shown in Figures S2A – S2D and , for f Lp = 1 3 , in Figure 3D ( boxplot : median , Q1 , Q3 and min / max ) . Similar results were also obtained using P ( c 2 ) R 0 . 05 . Note that for f Lp = 0 , the mathematical expressions for I f and I 3 are equal . As a consequence , k 53 and k 35 remain undetermined with this missing length fraction ( Figures S2C and S2D ) . We also per - formed the same procedure for a wide range of parameter values outside the above described regions , but we could not ﬁnd any further good ﬁts according to the criteria above . Lastly , we repeated the above described parameter ﬁtting procedure to the average intron foci numbers S j ( h V k i ) ( Figures 3E and 3F ) for small ( h V k i = 0 . 9pL ) and large cells ( h V k i = 2 . 8pL ) , using the lower and upper bounds N loci = 2 and N loci = 4 in the expression F ðh V k iÞ = b h V k i d N loci for the per locus transcription initiation probability per unit time . Stochastic Simulations of Cellular FLC mRNA Production and Degradation To investigate the potential consistency of transcriptional bursting with the observed cellular FLC mRNA levels ( Figure 2C ) , we simulated stochastic cellular FLC mRNA production and degradation in root outer layer cells ( see Figure S1E for a graphical repre - sentation ) by implementing a Gillespie algorithm ( Slepoy et al . , 2008 ) in C + + ( https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel ) . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 e6 Cellular FLC mRNA production occurred with probability per unit time ( propensity ) : p t = b Vd . This reaction resulted in a sense FLC mRNA : sFLC . This mature transcript could then be degraded with probability per unit time d . Here , b = 31 pL (cid:2) 1 indicates the slope of the linear FLC mRNA scaling with cell volume V ( Figure 2G ) . Furthermore , d = 3 . 3 3 10 (cid:2) 5 s (cid:2) 1 indicates the experimentally determined FLC mRNA degradation rate . For the ON / OFF transcription model ( see Figure S1E for a graphical representation ) we include reactions for the Boolean STATE variable to transition from an active ( inactive ) into an inactive ( active ) state with probability per unit time p t = k off STATE ( p t = k on ( 1 (cid:2) STATE ) ) . Production can occur with propensity : p t = (cid:12) p on if STATE = 1 0 if STATE = 0 . The production probability per unit time in the ON state p on is related to the burst size bs = p on k off , where bs is deﬁned as the mean number of transcripts produced per ON - OFF cycle . In order to be considered bursty transcription , two conditions have to be met ( Dar et al . , 2012 ; Shahrezaei and Swain , 2008 ) : k off [ k on with a burst size bs [ 1 . To investigate whether FLC production could be bursty , we set the off rate sufﬁciently fast , k off = 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 , which effec - tively ensured that the ﬁrst condition was met ( see below ) . The total production rate ( per locus ) has to be equal to the time - averaged transcription rate ( per locus ) , leading to : F ð V Þ = b Vd N loci = p on k off 1 1 + k on k off k on = bs 1 1 + k on k off k on . Here N loci represents the number of FLC loci in each cell . In the main text we ﬁrst described a cellular ON / OFF production model : in this case N loci equals 1 . We then also simulated the more realistic cases where ON / OFF transcription occurs from N loci = 2 or 4 ( independent ) loci . These considerations lead to two distinct scenarios : 1 ) Burst size scales with volume , as proposed for mammalian genes ( Padovan - Merhar et al . , 2015 ) , with burst frequency k on independent of volume : bs ð V Þ = h bs i V h V i and k on = k off b h V i d k off N loci h bs i (cid:2) b h V i d : Here h bs i is a chosen constant , the burst size in a cell of average volume h V i = 1 . 8 pL . 2 ) Burst size bs is a chosen constant and burst frequency scales with volume : k on = k off b Vd k off N loci bs (cid:2) b Vd . To investigate how large the burst sizes could be , bs ( and in scenario 2 : h bs i ) was then systematically varied from 1 upwards . Through the expressions above for each scenario , setting these burst size parameters then fully determined both the burst frequency k on and p on . As a model input parameter , we provided to each simulation an experimentally observed cell volume V ( Figure S1F ) . To obtain robust model distributions of the simulated mRNA levels , we repeated the procedures described above over 50 simulations for each cellular volume as observed from the full - length FLC intron 1 data set ( Figure S1F ) . We then repeated this procedure for N loci batches , resulting in 10000 simulations per batch . Simulations started at time t = 0 and ran until ( simulated ) time t , updated according to the Gillespie algorithm , exceeded a predeﬁned time of 10 days , to allow the system to reach steady state . We then output the cellular volume and simulation FLC mRNA levels ( Figure S1G ) . For the simulations with N loci = 2 and 4 , we summed the 10000 simulations from the ﬁrst batch with the other batches to generate 10000 simulated cells with associated cellular mRNA levels , in accordance with the observed cellular volume distribution . We then compared the experimentally observed cellular mRNA distribu - tion ( n = 209 , Figure 2C ) with the 10000 simulated cells using a Levene’s test , a Brown - Forsythe test and a Kolmogorov - Smirnov test . The former two test for equal variance by using the mean or median in their test statistics , while the latter tests for equal distributions . When the resulting p values were smaller than 0 . 05 , we considered the chosen burst size incompatible with our experimental results . Maximal consistent burst sizes were , respectively : Scenario 1 , burst size scales with volume : Levene’s test : 3 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 10 , N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 07 , N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 05 ) ; Brown - Forsythe test : 5 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 07 , N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 05 ) and 6 ( N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 05 ) ; Kolmogorov - Smirnov test : 8 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 05 ) and 7 ( N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 07 , N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 06 ) . Scenario 2 , burst frequency scales with volume : Levene’s test : 3 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 05 , N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 06 , N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 06 ) ; Brown - Forsythe test : 4 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 06 , N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 09 , N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 06 ) ; Kolmogorov - Smirnov test : 5 ( N loci = 1 : p = 0 . 06 , N loci = 2 : p = 0 . 07 , N loci = 4 : p = 0 . 08 ) . Stochastic Simulations of Spatiotemporal FLC Transcriptional Dynamics To quantify mRNA release from the FLC locus ( Figure 3A ) , we simulated stochastic FLC transcription and RNA dynamics in root outer layer cells by implementing a spatiotemporal Gillespie algorithm ( Slepoy et al . , 2008 ) in C + + ( https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel ) . The reactions included are described below and illustrated in Figure S3A . e7 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 The FLC locus ( (cid:3) 6 kb ) was divided into L = 209 sites of length N bp = 30 bp ( see Figure S3A for a graphical representation ) . The sites are numbered 0 . . . ( L - 1 ) . The sense / antisense Transcription Start Sites ( TSSs ) are represented by site 4 and 208 respectively . Each site can be occupied by at most one Pol II . If a TSS site is unoccupied , a Pol II can bind to that TSS . We refer to this process as transcription initiation . Since outer layer cells exhibit very low antisense expression ( Figures 4B and 4C ) , we set the antisense tran - scription initiation rate to zero . Once a Pol II has bound to a sense TSS we assume it is competent to elongate in the sense direction . Of course , transcription initiation , subsequent formation of a transcription elongation complex and possibly promoter proximal pausing are themselves complex processes . Nevertheless , within our minimal modelling approach we account for these processes within a single ‘‘coarse - grained’’ transcriptional initiation probability . Incorporating these processes in more detail would not quali - tatively alter our conclusions on FLC regulation . If the TSS site is unoccupied , sense initiation can occur with probability per unit time ( propensity ) : p t = b Vd N loci . Based on previously published Pol ChIP expression in ColFRI ( Li et al . , 2015 ) and consistent with previous modelling of FLC regulation ( Wu et al . , 2016 ) , we assume the magnitude of the elongation rate is independent of position along the FLC gene . Further - more , within our minimal modelling approach we do not explicitly incorporate Pol II pausing , backtracking or arrest . Including these processes in more detail would not qualitatively alter our conclusions . In case of sense transcription , a Pol II at site i ( P i = 1 ) can elon - gate to a neighbouring site i + 1 , if that neighbouring site is unoccupied , with propensity : p t = v N bp P i Here , v = 3 bp / s represents the elongation rate , consistent with the range determined through our parameter inference procedure ( Figure 3D ) . Consistent with previous ﬁndings ( Wu et al . , 2016 ) , we assume that there is no early termination , only termination of a transcribing Pol II as a consequence of cleavage / polyadenylation of the RNA transcript . We used the annotated RNA 3 0 ends to determine where Pol II could drop off the template after elongation . We assume that Pol II ceases to elongate soon after it transcribes its canonical pA sequence ( Wu et al . , 2016 ) : when a sense Pol II reaches the Transcription End Site ( TES ) , site 204 , it can terminate with probability per unit time of k pA = 0 . 02 s (cid:2) 1 , resulting in a free Pol II and a 3 0 processed sense transcript that remains at the locus ( Figure S3A ) . The exact value of k pA has little inﬂuence on our results as long it is shorter than the mRNA release rate k x , as is the case in our choice of pa - rameters ( see below ) . The creation of sense RNA is modelled as follows ( Figure S3A ) . A sense Pol II at site i ( P i ) has produced unspliced RNA correspond - ing to the sites TSS . i - 1 . Splicing of sense FLC intron 1 is explicitly modelled : as soon as Pol II elongates past the intron 1 acceptor site I1A = 131 , Pol II can continue to elongate and , in addition , splicing of intron 1 can occur with a probability per unit time s = 1 . 5 3 10 (cid:2) 3 s (cid:2) 1 , consistent with the range determined through our parameter inference method ( Figure 3D ) . This reaction results in a Pol II with nascent , spliced RNA attached : P si . This Pol II species can elongate with the same dynamics as for Pol II with unspliced nascent RNA ( P i ) . After splicing , lariat degradation is assumed here to occur immediately ( see below ) . In the main text , the s (cid:2) 1 timescale was deﬁned slightly differently as the time from when intron 1 is completely transcribed to the moment of splicing , plus the extra waiting time until lariat degradation begins . However , our results ( Figure 3 ) do not depend on this model simpliﬁcation because our simulation output , i . e . all the RNA species that were measured experimentally ( described below in detail ) , are unaffected by this detail . There - fore , despite this simpliﬁcation , we can directly compare the simulation output with our experimental observations . A splicing reaction results in cleaved intronic ( lariat ) RNA with the 5 0 end at site I1D = 14 and 3 0 end at site I1A - 1 . We term this RNA species IN I 1 D , I 1 A (cid:2) 1 , with the ﬁrst index indicating the 5 0 end and the second index the 3 0 end . This RNA and in general IN i , j can then be degraded from 5 0 to 3 0 in a ﬁrst order reaction with rate k 53 and propensity p t = k 53 N bp IN i ; j . As a result of this reaction , IN i + 1 , j is formed , corresponding to intronic RNA with a 5 0 end at site i + 1 ( and 3 0 end at j > i + 1 ) . In the case of the last step of intron RNA degradation such that i + 1 = j , this reaction occurs without a reaction product . Similar to 5 0 to 3 0 degradation , we also allowed 3 0 to 5 0 lariat degradation with propensity p t = k 35 N bp IN i ; j resulting in reaction product , IN i , j (cid:2) 1 . The k 53 and k 35 estimates were both set to 2 bp / s consistent with our experimental estimates . We only explicitly modelled splicing reactions of sense intron 1 in the simulations . Incorporating splicing of additional sense introns in the model would not affect our results provided that each splicing reaction is independent of the others . Splicing can also occur after sense Pol II has terminated ( Figure S3A ) . If Pol II has terminated with intron 1 spliced out , s1FLC is created , a cleaved full - length RNA at the locus with intron 1 spliced out . If Pol II has terminated prior to splicing of intron 1 , a full - length , unspliced RNA termed unsFLC is produced . unsFLC can be spliced in intron 1 with probability per unit time s resulting in s1FLC and IN I 1 D , I 1 A (cid:2) 1 . The lariat can then be degraded as described above . s1FLC can be released from the locus with probability per unit time : p t = k x s1FLC , i . e . we performed simulations with a constant export rate k x = 5 3 10 (cid:2) 4 s (cid:2) 1 in the presence of missing length fraction f Lp = 1 / 3 , see below . Lastly , FLC mRNA release from the locus leads to a mature ( spliced ) sense FLC mRNA : sFLC . This mature transcript can then be degraded with probability per unit time d . Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 e8 We output the cell volume , simulation RNA levels corresponding to FLC mRNA , the number of RNAs corresponding to the four intron 1 probe sets ( I f , I 5 0 I m and I 3 0 ) and the number of exonic RNAs ( R loc , only considered in further analyses when I f > 0 ) , whilst taking into consideration a missing length fraction f Lp = 1 / 3 , as follows : I f = unsFLC + X L (cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 23 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ P i + X I 1 D + 13 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = i + 23 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j ; I m = unsFLC + X L (cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 712 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ P i + X I 1 D + 14 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = I 1 D + 712 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j + X I 1 D + 512 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 14 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = i + 13 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j ; I 5 0 = unsFLC + X L (cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 13 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ P i + X I 1 D + 16 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D (cid:2)X I 1 D + 12 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 j = i + 13 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j + X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = I 1 D + 12 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j (cid:3) ; I 3 0 = unsFLC + X L (cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 56 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ P i + X I 1 D + 12 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = I 1 D + 56 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j + X I 1 D + 23 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ(cid:2) 1 i = I 1 D + 12 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ X I 1 A (cid:2) 1 j = i + 13 ð I 1 A (cid:2) I 1 D Þ IN i ; j ; R loc = unsFLC + s 1 FLC + X sTES i = sTES (cid:2) 11 (cid:6) P i + P si (cid:7) : The number of cellular FLC mRNA equals : N loci 3 sFLC . The number of intron foci per cell were then for each simulation calculated as S j = N loci I J with j ˛ { f , 5 0 , m , 3 0 } . Simulated time and number of simulations were as described for the cellular FLC mRNA dynamics simulations . Calculations of population average and averages for various attained volumes were performed in the same manner as described above for the experimental data points . Quantiﬁcation of FLC mRNA Release from the Locus To determine the amount of exonic FLC RNA at the locus given the presence of FLC full - length intron 1 , we utilized FISH - quant , a MATLAB software suite ( Mueller et al . , 2013 ) . We followed the quantiﬁcation procedures as detailed in the manual available from http : / / dev . mri . cnrs . fr / documents / 95 . This method requires abundant mRNA smFISH signal as well as a method to indicate the locations of loci : in our case FLC full - length intron 1 smFISH signal as this co - localizes exclusively with FLC loci ( Figure S1A ) . Cell area outlines ( using an overlay of mRNA and DAPI signal ) and loci ( using the intron 1 focus signal ) were segmented manually . FISH - quant then determined computationally for each cell the ( predominantly cytoplasmic ) mRNA foci locations and background intensity proﬁle . The resulting foci were manually inspected to conﬁrm the accuracy of the algorithm . Cell areas and corresponding mRNA counts were then output to a text ﬁle . Cell areas were then converted into cell volumes using the projection method described above . As part of the mature mRNA quantiﬁcation procedure , an overall average mRNA spatial intensity focus proﬁle ( point spread function , PSF ) was then calculated from all determined mRNA foci . This background corrected intensity proﬁle represents one mRNA molecule . The next step was to quantitatively compare the mRNA signal at the indicated loci with the PSF . Here , we considered three different algorithms that have been shown to be accurate for intensity quantiﬁcation in the regime of relatively low RNA copy number with a spatially conﬁned transcription site ( Mueller et al . , 2013 ) : 1 . Comparison of integrated intensity of the transcription site and individual mRNA molecules ( Int ) . 2 . Superimposition of PSFs to reconstruct an image of the transcription site ( PSF ) . 3 . Comparison of the estimated amplitude of the transcription site and individual mRNA molecules ( Amp ) . The results which indicated the number of molecules for each transcription site were then output . Lastly , we manually included the appropriate cell area as obtained from the mature mRNA output in the nascent RNA output list in order to relate cell area and exonic RNA number . The resulting three distributions were relatively similar , albeit with means varying from 1 . 9 up to 2 . 5 exonic RNA molecules ( Figure 3H ) . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY Cell volume and area estimation and RNA foci count code , as well as code for stochastic simulations of ( 1 ) FLC mRNA production and degradation and ( 2 ) FLC transcription and RNA processing kinetics , all as described above , are available on https : / / github . com / ri23 / FISHmodel . FISH - quant software , used to estimate the number of exonic FLC RNA at the locus , is available on https : / / code . google . com / archive / p / ﬁsh - quant / . e9 Cell Systems 4 , 622 – 635 . e1 – e9 , June 28 , 2017 Cell Systems , Volume 4 Supplemental Information Cell - Size - Dependent Transcription of FLC and Its Antisense Long Non - coding RNA COOLAIR Explain Cell - to - Cell Expression Variation Robert Ietswaart , Stefanie Rosa , Zhe Wu , Caroline Dean , and Martin Howard Supplemental Information Figure legends Figure S1 . Related to Figure 2 Characterization of cellular FLC expression , mRNA degradation variation and cellular volume ( A ) Fluorescence localization of FLC DNA as assayed by DNA - FISH , full length FLC intron 1 RNA as assayed by smFISH ( red ) , and an overlay containing both the above and DAPI stain ( blue ) in representative ColFRI outer layer root cells . Scale bar : 5µm . Data previously published in ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . ( B ) Histogram of pooled cellular FLC mRNA distributions after treatment with DMSO ( mock ) for 4 h and 6 h ( N = 202 cells from 3 biological replicates ) . ( C ) Histogram of cellular FLC mRNA counts after 6 h of ActD treatment ( blue ) and Poisson decay process prediction ( red ) with distribution of mRNA after 4 h ActD treatment ( shown in Fig . 2E ) as the initial distribution . Right panel : Cumulative distribution functions ( CDFs ) of the FLC mRNA count and model prediction . ( D ) Scatter plot comparing two volume estimation methods : 3D segmentation vs projection method in ColFRI outer layer root cells from where FLC mRNA counts were recorded ( N = 209 cells from 8 biological replicates , Fig . 2C ) . Also shown is line with unit slope ( black ) . ( E ) Schematic of reactions implemented in stochastic Gillespie simulations of cellular FLC mRNA production , with either Poisson or ON / OFF dynamics , and degradation . ( F ) Histogram of cell volume distribution ( N = 200 cells from 3 biological replicates ) from root outer layer cells from where full length intron 1 foci counts were recorded ( Fig . 3B , C ) . These cell volumes were used as an input into the stochastic simulations described in ( E ) to account for the variation in cell size affecting FLC transcription . ( G ) Histograms of cellular mRNA model predictions from stochastic simulations described in ( E ) given the experimentally observed volume distribution described in ( F ) . ON / OFF simulations had a burst size of 3 transcription events per ON / OFF cycle with either the burst frequency ( k on ) or burst size ( bs ) scaling with cell volume . Right panel : cumulative distribution functions ( CDFs ) of FLC mRNA ( from Fig . 2C ) and model predictions . 0 50 100 150 200 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 FLC mRNA Poisson simulations ON / OFF simulations k on ~ Vol ON / OFF simulations bs ~ Vol 0 50 100 150 200 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Poisson simulations , N = 10000 ON / OFF simulations k on ~ Vol , N = 10000 ON / OFF simulations bs ~ Vol , N = 10000 S1A . N u m be r o f c e ll s N u m be r o f c e ll s FLC mRNA ( cell - 1 ) FLC mRNA ( cell - 1 ) C o l F R I RNA FISH Overlay DNA FISH B . 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 ColFRI , N = 209 Projection method cell volume ( pL ) 3 D s eg m en t a t i on c e ll v o l u m e ( pL ) D . C . 0 50 100 150 0 5 10 Pooled mock 4h and 6h , N = 202 0 50 100 150 0 2 4 6 ActD , N = 142 model 0 50 100 0 0 . 5 1 ActD model FLC mRNA ( cell - 1 ) CD F N u m be r o f c e ll s F . Cell volume ( pL ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 5 10 15 ColFRI , N = 200 G . E . N u m be r o f s i m u l a t ed c e ll s CD F FLC mRNA ( cell - 1 ) FLC mRNA ( cell - 1 ) mRNA production Poisson model reactions : mRNA degradation sFLC sFLC ON to OFF state transition OFF to ON state transition ON / OFF model reactions : STATE = 1 STATE = 0 STATE = 0 STATE = 1 mRNA degradation sFLC if STATE = 1 : mRNA production sFLC Figure S2 . Related to Figure 3 Estimation of Pol II elongation , FLC intron 1 processing and lariat degradation rates using a range of missing probe length fractions ( A ) Marginal distributions for intron processing rate that generate good fits to the data shown in Fig . 3C according to a χ 2 test ( degrees of freedom k = 4 , acceptance probability p≥0 . 1 ) with missing probe length fractions ranging from 0 to 1 / 3 . Boxplots indicate : minimum , 25 % quantile , median , 75 % quantile and maximal values . ( B ) As in ( A ) but for elongation rate . ( C ) As in ( A ) but for 5’ to 3’ lariat degradation rate . ( D ) As in ( A ) but for 3’ to 5’ lariat degradation rate . ( E ) Volume dependence of replicates measuring cellular smFISH foci counts per cell in outer layer cells for four different FLC intron 1 probe sets : full length ( full ) , middle ( mid ) , 5’ end and 3’ end . Full length : two separate experiments were performed using respectively 4 and 3 biological replicates , respectively . Experiment 1 : data as in Fig . 2B and 4C , experiment 2 : data as in Fig . 3C . For the other probe sets ( mid , 5’ end and 3’ end ) replicates are shown as pooled data from two biological replicates each ; for these , all biological replicates pooled together are shown in Fig . 3E , F . Error lines : s . e . m . as function of volume . S2A . B . C . D . 0 4 8 12 16 20 0 4 8 12 16 20 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 ’ t o 3 ’ l a r i a t deg r ada t i on r a t e k 53 ( bp / s ) 3 ’ t o 5 ’ l a r i a t deg r ada t i on r a t e k 35 ( bp / s ) E l onga t i on r a t e v ( bp / s ) 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 x 10 −3 I n t r on p r o c e ss i ng r a t e σ ( bp / s ) missing probe length fraction 0 1 / 9 2 / 9 1 / 3 missing probe length fraction 0 1 / 9 2 / 9 1 / 3 missing probe length fraction 0 1 / 9 2 / 9 1 / 3 missing probe length fraction 0 1 / 9 2 / 9 1 / 3 E . I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) Cell volume ( pL ) Cell volume ( pL ) Cell volume ( pL ) Cell volume ( pL ) Figure S3 . Related to Figure 3 Spatiotemporal Gillespie simulations of FLC transcription to quantify FLC mRNA release from the locus ( A ) Schematic of spatially discretized FLC gene and reactions as implemented in spatiotemporal stochastic Gillespie simulations of FLC transcription and RNA degradation dynamics . Sense ( black ) and antisense ( grey ) transcripts are indicated . Since antisense transcription is very low in root outer layer cells , we did not include antisense transcription in our simulations . ( B ) Volume dependence of cellular smFISH foci counts per cell in outer layer cells for FLC intron 1 as in Fig 3E , F . In left panel : full length ( full ) and 5’ end ; in right panel : middle ( mid ) and 3’ end . Also shown are spatiotemporal Gillespie simulation fits ( black , grey ) . Error lines : s . e . m . as function of volume . ( C ) Volume dependence of average locus associated exonic FLC RNA levels from two separate experiments ( with 2 biological replicates per experiment ) . Three different quantification methods shown as in Fig . 3H , which shows the pooled data . Error lines : s . e . m . as a function of volume . S3A . 0 4 14 s T S S a s T S S s en s e T E S d i s t a l a s T E S I 1 A I 1 D 131 204 208 Site number sense elongation sense TES i ≥ I1A P IN I1D , I1A - 1 P s co - transcriptional sense intron 1 splicing i i + 1 X X X Sense full length RNA * sense termination X = P Pol II with unspliced intron 1 P s Pol II with spliced intron 1 Different forms of sense transcribing Pol II : * sense full length RNA forms : unsFLC : unspliced intron 1 , resulting from P termination s1FLC : intron 1 spliced , resulting from P s termination post - transcriptional sense intron 1 splicing at the locus unsFLC s1FLC + IN I1D , I1A - 1 sense FLC mRNA release from the locus mRNA degradation sFLC s1FLC sFLC P sense initiation sTSS 5’ to 3’ intronic RNA degradation IN i , j IN i + 1 , j 3’ to 5’ intronic RNA degradation IN i , j IN i , j - 1 i and j indicate locations corresponding respectively to 5’ and 3’ end of intron if i + 1 < j if i + 1 = j if i + 1 < j if i + 1 = j B . Cell volume ( pL ) Cell volume ( pL ) I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) I n t r o n f o c i c o u n t ( c e ll - 1 ) Cell volume ( pL ) Cell volume ( pL ) E x on i c F L C a t l o c u s ( g i v en F L C i n t r on 1 ) E x on i c F L C a t l o c u s ( g i v en F L C i n t r on 1 ) Experiment 1 Experiment 2 C . Figure S4 . Related to Figure 4 . Characterization of anticorrelation between FLC sense and antisense transcription ( A ) Fluorescence localization of full length sense intron 1 ( red ) and antisense ( COOLAIR ) 5’ end distal intron ( green ) overlaid with DAPI stain ( blue ) in representative ColFRI prevasculature root cell . Scale bar : 5µm . Data previously published in ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . ( B ) Frequency of loci containing FLC full length intron 1 , when COOLAIR 5’ end distal intron is not present ( S ) or present ( S if AS ) at the same locus in root prevasculature cells . N = 254 cells from 6 biological replicates . Error bars : s . e . m . * * * * p - value < 10 - 4 . Data previously published in ( Rosa et al . , 2016 ) . 20 40 60 ) % ( yc n e uq e r F S S ( if AS ) N = 254 FLC COOLAIR S4A . B .