Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Ethics Inf Technol DOI 10 . 1007 / s10676 - 017 - 9431 - 7 ORIGINAL PAPER Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks Alice E . Marwick 1 , 2 © Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2017 Keywords Reddit · Revenge porn · Sexting · Celebrities · Gender and privacy · Online misogyny Introduction : the fappening On August 31 , 2014 , an anonymous user posted a large archive of digital images of female celebrities to the image - sharing website 4Chan . The pictures were mostly selfies , self - portraits taken with digital cameras , of some of the most famous women in the world , including the highest - paid actress in Hollywood , Jennifer Lawrence . They were personal , intimate ; the settings were bedrooms and bath - rooms , a few contained boyfriends or husbands , and in the vast majority of the photographs , the women were nude or partially - clad . As it turned out , hackers had obtained the images by phishing , using remote access tools , forcing password resets , and using social engineering to access the email accounts and mobile phones of entertainment industry insiders ( Cubrilovic 2014 ) . These techniques were identical to those used by a robust underground network of image traders , who use darknet bulletin boards to share nude images of celebri - ties ( Kaminsky 2014 ) . Most of the images circulated within this subculture are never widely disseminated . In this case , however , an individual , who described himself as a “col - lector , ” obtained a selection of images and posted them on the image board 4chan in exchange for the digital currency Bitcoin . Unsurprisingly , these salacious images of celebri - ties rapidly spread across the internet , creating a scandal in their wake . The media dubbed the event “Celebgate” ; Reddit users , on the other hand , quickly created a subreddit called “The Fappening” ( / thefappening , a portmanteau of “The Happening” and “fap , ” an internet slang term for masturba - tion ) to post , organize , and discuss the images . Within days , Abstract In 2014 , a large archive of hacked nude photos of female celebrities was released on 4chan and organized and discussed primarily on Reddit . This paper explores the ethical implications of this celebrity nude photo leak within a frame of gendered privacy violations . I analyze a selec - tion of a mass capture of 5143 posts and 94 , 602 comments from / thefappening subreddit , as well as editorials written by female celebrities , feminists , and journalists . Redditors justify the photo leak by arguing the subjects are privileged because they are celebrities ; that the celebrities are at fault for failing to appropriately protect their information ; and that the only person ethically responsible for the leak is the hacker . The popular press primarily took a feminist per - spective , linking the photo leak to institutionalized sexism and misogyny . I argue that the Reddit participants frame the privacy violations within a context of geek masculinity , in which references to masturbation and pornography and casually misogynist language are used to signify a normative masculine self . Privacy violations are de - emphasized when the victims are women and gender or feminist concerns are rejected . Entitlement to viewing women’s bodies and male sexual desire are prioritized over ethical concerns over pri - vacy violations . The paper contributes to understanding how privacy violations are normatively gendered and reinforced by gender inequality . * Alice E . Marwick amarwick @ gmail . com 1 Department of Communication , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , CB # 3285 , 115 Bingham Hall , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 - 3285 , USA 2 Data & Society Research Institute , 36 W . 20th Street , 11th Floor , New York , NY 10011 , USA A . E . Marwick 1 3 this group became the fastest - growing subreddit of all time , with more than 100 , 000 users ( Massanari 2015a ) . Fans and representatives of the women represented in the stolen photos , including actors Jennifer Lawrence , Gabri - elle Union , and Kirsten Dunst , spoke out publicly against the leak and asked fans not to share or look at the photos . The users of / thefappening , in contrast , were beside them - selves with delight . Early posts on / thefappening included hundreds of statements like “This is the best day of my life” and “This . . . This is just beyond our wildest dreams . ” Reddit administrators , concerned about the rapidly worsening pub - lic outcry against the pictures , warned users that any links to leaked images of US gymnast McKayla Maroney or actress Liz Lee would be removed . The two were both under 18 at the time their photos were taken , making the photos legally child pornography . A week later , after Digital Millennium Copyright Act ( DMCA ) requests from celebrity lawyers and a great deal of bad publicity , Reddit CEO Yishan Wong wrote a public blog post explaining the company’s decision to keep / thefappen - ing up and running ( yishan 2014 ) . This post , titled “Every Man is Responsible for his own Soul , ” stated that , because Reddit believed in free speech and individual responsibility , they would not delete subreddits for bad behavior . “Hard” policy , such as bans and rules , would only be used to pre - vent imminent physical danger or prevent the site from func - tioning properly . Instead , Reddit chose to encourage good behavior by highlighting more wholesome actors on the platform . Confusingly , on the same day the company shut down / thefappening anyway , claiming that DMCA requests had become too onerous to moderate ( alienth 2014 ) . Reddit’s statement suggests that the subreddit was not removed due to ethical concerns , nor to preserve the privacy of the women in the pictures . The Fappening community was instead taken down by reason of legal pressure , child pornography laws , and DMCA complaints—in other words , legal consequences that might harm Reddit the company . In fact , Reddit made enough money from the Fappening , both in terms of page views and premium accounts , to pay for its server costs for a month ( Greenberg 2014 ) . The pictures are still widely avail - able online . A fevered public debate over the ethics of not only leak - ing , but viewing and spreading the photos followed . In The Atlantic , feminist writer Jessica Valenti argued that people seeking out the photos were violating the women’s privacy just as much as the original hackers had done ( Valenti 2014 ) . Jennifer Lawrence herself told Vanity Fair , “It is not a scan - dal . It is a sex crime . It is a sexual violation… It’s disgust - ing…Just because I’m a public figure , just because I’m an actress , does not mean that I asked for this” ( Kashner 2014 ) . Such ethics of looking are similar to the public discussion that emerged around the beheading video of James Foley , a journalist captured by ISIS . James Foley’s cousin stated , “Please honor James Foley and respect my family’s privacy . Don’t watch the video . Don’t share it . That’s not how life should be” ( Parkinson 2014 ) . While the ethics of specta - torship have been analyzed by many scholars ( Chouliaraki 2006 ; Sontag 1977 , 2003 ) , most of this work focuses on the questionable ethics of distributing and viewing representa - tions of violence , war , and suffering in a way that allows distance and disassociation . In the case of Celebgate , it is not the content of the photographs , but the circumstances of their distribution , that raises ethical concerns . Beyond celeb - rities , hacking phones or cloud accounts of non - celebrities to obtain private photos , and “revenge porn , ” or posting private photos of people without their consent , is increas - ingly commonplace . Unlike many types of privacy violations that affect men and women equally , revenge porn is both more common for women and linked to misogynistic inter - net subcultures and sexism in general ( Eikren and Ingram - Waters 2016 ; Fairbairn 2015 ; Marcotte 2014 ; Stroud 2014 ) . What does Celebgate tell us about how interested internet users and the general public view the ethics of such actions ? Moreover , can this event illuminate the gendered nature of certain privacy violations ? This paper explores the ethical implications of the celeb - rity nude photo leak within a frame of gendered privacy violations . By gendered privacy , I mean a type of privacy violation that is more likely to happen to a particular gender due to structural inequality . It is grounded in an emerging feminist literature on geek masculinity , gendered harass - ment , and misogynist subcultures online ( Chess and Shaw 2015 ; Citron 2014 ; Nakamura 2012 ) . I use critical discourse analysis ( Fairclough 2003 ) to examine how Redditors and journalists framed and made meaning of the nude photo leaks . Specifically , I analyze comments from / thefappening subreddit where the photos were leaked , organized , and dis - cussed , as well as popular press articles written by female celebrities , prominent feminists , and journalists . Literature review : revenge porn , Reddit and geek masculinity Revenge porn Revenge porn is an umbrella term that refers to “the act of non - consensually sharing an intimate image of another person” ( Eikren and Ingram - Waters 2016 ) . While the term “revenge” suggests an intent to shame and humiliate the sub - ject of the photograph , an image can be considered revenge porn whether or not this is true , as long as it is shared with - out consent ( Eikren and Ingram - Waters 2016 ) . Many images circulated in this way were produced and shared consensu - ally , as part of intimate relationships ( so - called “sexting” ) ; in such cases , it is not the production but the non - consensual Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 distribution of images to other contexts which is problematic ( Hasinoff 2015 ; Henry and Powell 2015 ) . In other cases , sexual imagery can be used by “perpetrators of domestic and family violence… as a tool to threaten , harass and / or control both current and former partners , ” such as threaten - ing to show sexual images to family members or coercing partners into taking such photographs ( Henry and Powell 2015 , p . 113 ) . The dynamics of revenge porn are deeply gendered , since most victims of revenge porn are women , while most perpetrators are men ( Lenhart et al . 2016 ) . Thus , feminist legal scholars and sociologists frame revenge porn as part of a continuum of structural sexism and sexual vio - lence against women ( Citron 2014 ; Fairbairn 2015 ; Franks 2012 ) , what Henry and Powell label “technology facilitated sexual violence” ( Henry and Powell 2015 ) . Within a feminist framework , revenge porn is understood as sexual violence connected to social and cultural misog - yny ( Eikren and Ingram - Waters 2016 ; Fairbairn 2015 ) . For instance , in their study of sexting practices among young people in London , Ringrose et al . found that sexting was embedded within a culture of taken - for - granted sexual harassment and normalized sexism ( Ringrose et al . 2012 ) . Both boys and girls in their sample shared “the deeply rooted notion that girls and young women’s bodies are somehow the property of boys and young men , ” reflected not only in the nature of sexual images exchanged , but the prevalence of sexual insults , groping , and even sexual assault in young women’s lives ( 2012 , p . 28 ) . Such experiences are hardly unusual , as they take place within a culture of normalized sexism . According to the National Sexual Violence Resource Center , in the United States , 1 in 5 women will be raped during her lifetime , and 1 in 2 will experience sexual vio - lence ( 2016 ) . Street harassment is so common as to be a “routine manifestation of the continuum of sexual violence” ( Gray 2016 ) , with empirical studies of the United States and Canada showing from 81 to 100 % of women had been har - assed in public places ( Vitak et al . 2017 ) . A recent study estimates that one in 25 Americans has been the victim of revenge porn , and that 10 % of women under 30 have expe - rienced threats to share images nonconsensually ( Lenhart et al . 2016 ) . Women are also particularly susceptible to online har - assment and sexual violence as the result of social media’s networked properties , particularly women of color and queer women ( Lenhart et al . 2016a ; Vitak et al . 2017 ) . Online har - assment covers a spectrum of behaviors including pejora - tive language and insults ; “doxing , ” or publicizing personal , private information ; “dogpiling” or “brigading” ( coordinat - ing attacks on particular people or targets ) ; social shaming ; cyberstalking ; and so forth ( Lenhart et al . 2016b ) . While both men and women undergo online harassment , women are more likely to face its more serious forms and describe their experiences as harassment , to the point where young women may face pervasive harassment online and see it as an everyday part of internet interaction ( Lenhart 2016b ; Vitak et al . 2017 ) . Thus , online harassment has a chilling effect where women and LGB individuals are less likely to contribute content and more likely to self - censor . Feminist legal scholars and political theorists have been intimately involved in the debate over the dichotomy between public and private realms ( Kelly 2003 ; Landes 1998 ; Pateman 1988 ) . While liberal political traditions conceptualize the private sphere as domestic , intimate and free of state interference , while the public sphere is associ - ated with culture and politics , this has historically corre - sponded to a male / female dichotomy in which the public is male - gendered and the private female - gendered ( Landes 1998 ) . Feminist scholars argue that women’s confinement within the private sphere excluded them from public and civic participation and facilitated domestic and sexual vio - lence , with the effect of supporting and reinforcing structural inequality ( Hawkesworth 2007 ; Kelly 2003 , p . 33 ) . Privacy writ large is thus both a value normatively accorded to men and conceptualized around male - gendered behaviors ( Allen and Mack 1989 ) , with many feminists questioning the utility of maintaining such a dichotomy at all . However , research also recognizes women are more susceptible to certain types of privacy violations , from online consumer profiling to video voyeurism and revenge porn ( Bartow 1999 ; Citron and Franks 2014 ) . As a result , as political scientist Susan Gallagher summarizes , “feminists have stressed that sexual equality will not be achieved until there is general recogni - tion of the role of gender in defining both the general con - cept of privacy and the traditional divisions between the public and private spheres” ( 2007 , p . 247 ) . Thus , revenge porn , a contemporary issue that is both deeply gendered and a gross violation of privacy , allows a closer examination of how gender functions in popular privacy discourse . Reddit and geek masculinity Reddit is a social media site organized into a multitude of “subreddits” or “subs , ” communities focused on particular topics such as / knitting or / personalfinance . Some are quite esoteric , as there are 975 , 056 subreddits as of November 2016 ( Redditmetrics 2016 ) . Each subreddit is moderated by volunteers ( Matias 2016 ) . Users submit content , including text posts , links , and images , which are then commented upon and upvoted ( approved / liked ) or downvoted ( disap - proved / disliked ) by other users . As a result , Reddit affords lengthy threaded discussions and it is not unusual for popu - lar posts to have thousands of comments . Reddit is a popu - lar site , but is only used by 4 % of online adults in the US , according to a study conducted by the Pew Research Center in February 2016 ( Barthel et al . 2016 ) . Reddit’s userbase is young , male , and leans politically liberal / libertarian : A . E . Marwick 1 3 amongst Reddit’s core demographic of US male internet users 18 – 29 , 15 % use Reddit ( Barthel et al . 2016 ; Duggan and Smith 2013 ) . In the 1980s , Raewyn Connell theorized that there is no singular concept of masculinity , but multiple masculinities which vary across contexts . At any given time , the most revered form of masculinity gives its practitioners great priv - ilege , which Connell named hegemonic masculinity ( Connell 1985 , 2005 ) . Masculinity involves not just power relations between men and women , but relationships between men , as different masculine identities are policed and bounded ( Carrigan et al . 1985 ) . For instance , as boys are social - ized into acceptable masculine practices , they must present themselves as “heterosexually active” to signify a masculine self , such as exhibiting sexual desire for women , viewing pornography and seeming to be sexually knowledgeable ( Schrock and Schwalbe 2009 , p . 282 ) . To teenagers , this often involves sexual harassment , rape jokes , and homopho - bic insults to mark the boundaries between feminine and masculine behavior ( Pascoe 2007 ) . Such behavior continues into adulthood , as men publicly sexualize women to chal - lenge their authority and protect themselves from homopho - bic abuse ( Schrock and Schwalbe 2009 ) . Adrienne Massanari , who studies Reddit , argues that the site’s culture is characterized by geek masculinity , a type of middle - class , white masculinity that privileges techni - cal expertise and command of pop - cultural knowledge , while narrowly circumscribing proper “geek” identity within a raced and gendered framework ( Massanari 2015b , pp . 128 – 129 ) . Geek or nerd masculinity is both hegemonic and subordinate . On one hand , nerds or geeks are typically considered outsiders . They may have been bullied as teenag - ers , lack physical prowess and appear sexually undesirable to women . In her study of the tech message board Slashdot , Eva Zekany argues that geek masculinity acknowledges these forms of subordination but claims masculine identity by asserting a monopoly on “rationality” and “mastery of technology” ( Zekany and Cerwonka 2011 ) . While investi - gating a public controversy over sexism in a game - related comic strip , Salter and Blodgett argue that the “gaming pub - lic”—people who define themselves as gamers and discuss gaming on the internet—collectively reinforces a type of masculinity that is marked by outsider - ness ( geeks , nerds ) but also an exaggeration of masculine cultural stereotypes such as aggressiveness and sexism . In gaming culture , overt sexism and hostility towards women and femininity police who “counts” as a gamer and , most importantly , who is able to criticize gaming culture ( Salter and Blodgett 2012 ) . Genre entertainment , fandom , and technology in general are likewise constructed as masculine and carefully policed ( Kohnen 2014 ) . Geek culture is thus framed as a ( white ) boy’s club in which women are outsiders who lack technical competence ( Nakamura 2012 ) . This allows geeks to claim masculinity by carefully policing gender expression and voicing hostility to women , despite not fitting into hegem - onic masculine norms . In the last decade , several high - profile incidents , includ - ing the online harassment of tech blogger Kathy Sierra and the targeted harassment of female Yale Law students on the AutoAdmit message boards , have raised questions around the limits of online free speech and the prevalence of explic - itly sexist commentary on the internet ( Banet - Weiser and Miltner 2016 ; Citron 2014 ; Massanari 2015a ) . These issues were brought into wider public consciousness by an inci - dent known as GamerGate ( Chess and Shaw 2015 ; Jhaver et al . 2016 ) . Gamergate is a more - or - less anonymous activ - ist movement , whose participants “allege that there is cor - ruption in video games journalism and that feminists are actively working to undermine the video game industry” ( Chess and Shaw 2015 , p . 210 ) . GamerGate participants used networked technologies to harass journalists , feminists , video game critics , and a wide variety of others caught up in the controversy ( Burgess and Matamoros - Fernández 2016 ) . These efforts were strategically planned and coordinated on Twitter , the subreddit Kotaku In Action , 4chan , 8chan , and Google Documents , where participants created wikis , FAQs , historical archives and various guides for newbies ( Trice 2015 ) . Thus , the same properties of social media that facili - tate activism and cultural participation can , in such cases , enable networked abuse and targeted intimidation . Massanari argues that the corporate ethos of Reddit and the site’s technical affordances and platform politics ( Gillespie 2010 ) enable a site - wide acceptance of sexism . As Massanari writes , while the most virulent anti - feminism on Reddit is found within specific subreddits such as / theredpill ( pickup artists ) and / mensrights , their misogynis - tic views do not simply stay put in those subreddits ; they become part of the larger Reddit culture—informing the ways in which women are discussed and treated on the rest of the site ( 2015b , p . 138 ) . The vocabulary and beliefs of men’s rights activists , such as “misandry” ( hatred of men by women ) and “SJWs” ( social justice warriors , a pejora - tive term ) , have infiltrated many internet spaces , especially those which privilege geek masculinity ( Massanari 2015b , pp . 128 – 129 ) . Indeed , Reddit has a history of high - profile instances in which certain subreddits and / or redditors engaged in sexist or oppressive behavior ; for instance , Violentacrez , a popular Reddit user , maintained communities promot - ing racism , misogyny , and nonconsensual photography of underage girls ( including / chokeabitch , / n * * * * * jailbait and / creepshots ) . Among Redditors , there was a wide - spread perception that the company was protecting Vio - lentacrez . Although many users had complained about the subreddits that he maintained , some of which had been shut down , he was not subject to repercussions until he Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 was doxed by Gawker in response to his actions ( Chen 2012a ) . In 2014 , / beatingwomen , which featured graphic depictions of violence against women , was removed by Reddit administrators for doxing its users ( Alfonso 2014 ) . More recently , Reddit has come under heavy criticism for subreddits devoted to Donald Trump and the so - called alt - right that promote neo - Nazi beliefs and white supremacy ( Menegus 2016 ) . 1 Internet communities like 4Chan and Reddit share a strong belief in free speech and view the regulation of online participation as censorship ( Reagle 2015 ) . Such classic liberal values of the internet in practice frequently privilege combative or openly biased community mem - bers over the comfort of female members , leading to male domination even in high - minded online communities like Wikipedia ( Reagle 2012 ) . Members of online communi - ties , particularly those framed as open or participatory , often explain gender gaps in membership as a matter of individual choice , rather than systemic bias . Thus , aggres - sive online speech , whether practiced in the profanity and pornography - laced environment of 4Chan or the loftier venues of newspaper comments sections , frequently posi - tions sexism as an issue of freedom of expression and nor - malizes sexist , anti - feminist language . Former Reddit CEO Yishan Wong acknowledged the issue of hate speech on the site , but clarified that while such content is distasteful , “We stand for free speech . This means we are not going to ban distasteful subreddits” ( Chen 2012b ) . This policy was discontinued under succeeding CEO Ellen Pao , who banned a variety of “hate” subreddits and implemented a new policy . Reddit users retaliated by flooding the site with sexist and racist memes about her ( Massanari 2015a ) . Given that Reddit provides a male - gendered context for understanding a female - gendered privacy violation , it may help us understand how gendered privacy violations are justified and maintained . Given this context , and using popular media as a counter - example , I ask two questions : RQ1 : What are the ethical understandings of the celeb - rity nude photo leaks by those who viewed them on Red - dit ? RQ2 : What are the ethical understandings of the celebrity nude photo hacks in the popular media ? Method This paper analyzes selections from a mass capture of 5143 posts and 94 , 602 text comments from reddit . com / r / thefappening posted between 8 / 31 / 14 and 9 / 6 / 14 . Since / thefappening was a public subreddit , we were able to cap - ture all the available content on the subreddit by query - ing Reddit’s public API . While Reddit had already shut down the subreddit at this point , the data was still available in the API which we accessed through / redditanalytics , which archives 30 days of data . To the best of our knowl - edge , this is a fairly complete archive of all comments on the subreddit ( neither Google’s archives nor the Internet Archive have a complete copy of the subreddit ) . On Red - dit , a parent “post” spawns a number of “comments” which are collectively a “thread . ” Data collection included infor - mation about each post or comment , including the title of the post , parent comment , the body or textual content , ID number , timestamp when the post was made , author alias , link or URL ( if included ) , and the author id . While we were unable to collect upvote and downvote information for individual comments , Reddit obscures this information in the public API to prevent spam , so it would not have been possible to get accurate counts ( Reddit 2016 ) . After data was collected , it was imported into Excel and cleaned . We used Excel to find basic information about the data , such as number of posts and comments , number of posters ( 30 , 131 ) , and threads with the most comments ( Table 1 ) . Due to the prohibitively large number of comments , we selected a sub - section for analysis . We chose the ten posts with the most comments as representative of the subred - dit , and read all the top - level comments and sub - threads ( Table 1 ; these ten threads had 22 , 813 comments in total ) . This immersion allowed new insights to emerge , specifi - cally in identifying categories of responses to the photo leak , such as “personal responsibility” and “analogies to the NSA , ” as well as interesting moments in the data . All comments on the most popular post ( 11 , 531 comments ) were read and manually coded according to these catego - ries . Individual comments were selected for critical dis - course analysis based on two criteria : comments that best represented a recurring theme in the data , or comments that illustrated moments of conflict over norms . Reddit uses persistent pseudonyms which are rarely linked to a “real name . ” However , because most of the Fappening posters still maintain Reddit accounts , user - names and all potentially identifying information have been removed for the sake of privacy . In certain cases , we have assigned pseudonyms to users to excerpt particular conversations . Because there is no complete public archive of / thefappening , users cannot be identified by searching exact text strings on Google . Thus , user comments are exact quotes . 1 Reddit is not the cesspool of misogyny that this paragraph might suggest . It is comprised of thousands of subreddits , each with its own culture , norms , and demographics . There are subreddits devoted to sports , technology , parenting , popular culture , politics , etc . that strictly moderate content considered hateful or insulting . There are subreddits mostly comprised of women . There are progressive and liberal subreddits that brigade , insult , and attack others . However , amongst the 50 default subs ( which appear on the site automatically for new users and people without an account ) , there is often a sopho - moric , male - normative attitude . A . E . Marwick 1 3 These comments are augmented by a discourse analysis of 21 editorials and popular press articles , and two articles in which celebrities responded to the photo leaks ( Table 2 ) . The corpus was constructed by searching for keywords “celebgate , ” “celebrity photo leaks” and “fappening” that appeared in articles on Google News between 8 / 31 / 14 and 10 / 31 / 14 . Articles chosen for analysis were 500 words or more , contained some discussion of ethical consideration , and posted on a major news site . They were coded in Atlas . ti using an emergent system of coding , beginning with map - ping the major ethical debates found through analyzing the Reddit data and adding to them as we went along . Note that these articles are overwhelmingly from left - leaning sites like Slate and The Atlantic ; possibly such publications were more likely to examine the ethical implications of the hack than their right - wing equivalents . Reactions from Reddit The Fappening subreddit began with threads devoted to hacked pictures of actresses Jennifer Lawrence , Kirsten Dunst , and Victoria Justice . Early posters on these threads expressed joyful excitement over seeing the naked bodies of celebrities , particularly Jennifer Lawrence , who is not only a high - paid Oscar - winning actress , but a Reddit favorite ( Mas - sanari 2015a ) . Most messages posted to the subreddit are characterized by glee , happiness , and camaraderie . This . . . This is just beyond our wildest dreams ( 8 / 31 / 14 15 : 50 ) Holy sh * t . Can we nominate the guy for a pulitzer or a nobel prize for doing humanitarian work . I love you . ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 05 ) call me crazy but i like this sense of community . we are all united by the overload of nudes from celebs we have been jacking off to for years . it’s like we all had our perverted celebrity wishes come true , like this is the closest Jennifer Lawrence will come to doing porn and we have all accepted that with open arms and lowered pants constantly refreshing just hoping there is a new picture with her showing off dat ass . ( 9 / 1 / 14 12 : 25 ) The use of “our” and “we” indicates a homosocial solidarity in which the Redditors recognize each other as men enjoy - ing a common experience . Throughout the corpus mastur - bation to pornography is framed as an everyday practice . Simultaneously discovering each “new picture” functions as male bonding ( “Let’s fap together ! ” ) . This solidarity and the excitement and positivity of the messages are consistent throughout the comments . The first messages expressing concern appear about two hours after the subreddit opens , once a thread is posted containing pictures of Game of Thrones actress Maisie Williams , who was under 18 at the time . Users expressed concern over legality and that underage photos—which are legally child pornography in the US—might jeopardize the subreddit’s future . She’s 17 you pedophile ( 8 / 31 / 14 16 : 40 ) cmon dont post cp [ child pornography ] you’ll get the whole sub banned ( 8 / 31 / 14 16 : 40 ) Bro no . She’s [ Maisie Williams ] underage . You do this and you may ruin our chances of getting the other wins ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 22 ) These comments do not express concern that the pictures are unethical , but fear that child pornography will hurt their chances of getting access to other nude photographs , Table 1 Threads with the most comments Rank Number of comments Thread title Date 1 11 , 531 New Celeb leaked pics . All in ONE place ! 8 / 31 / 14 4 : 30 PM 2 2016 Prostate Cancer Foundation returns donations from Reddit 9 / 2 / 14 4 : 12 PM 3 1849 NEW JLAW 9 / 1 / 14 7 : 40 PM 4 1407 Not only are we worse than cancer , but people dying to thirst as well . Water . org has officially closed our donation page 9 / 3 / 14 12 : 21 PM 5 1403 [ META ] Effective immediately : any images / galleries / torrents / mega dumps / etc containing McKayla Maroney or Liz Lee will be immediately removed due to the fact that they were underage ( < 18 ) in the photos taken 9 / 2 / 14 1 : 08 PM 6 1058 Victoria Justice has finally responded 9 / 2 / 14 6 : 51 PM 7 903 Seth Rogen’s Reaction to the Leak 9 / 1 / 14 8 : 59 PM 8 897 Looks like Emma Watson doesn’t like The Fappening 9 / 1 / 14 4 : 37 PM 9 885 Mod post about nude celebrity leaks and how this subreddit will be shaping up for the next 24 – 48 h 8 / 31 / 14 8 : 45 PM 10 864 William Shatner defends Reddit on Twitter 9 / 2 / 14 10 : 20 PM Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 or “wins . ” There is a shared understanding of the US age of consent as normative , as many comments suggest that anyone who might enjoy a nude picture of a 17 - year - old is a pedophile , while looking at pictures of naked 18 - year - old women is a common and healthy part of male heterosexuality . The most comprehensive ethical discussion takes place in a thread titled “New Celeb leaked pics . All in ONE place . ” As the most popular thread in the subreddit with 1138 com - ments ( see Table 1 ) , it appeared at the top of the page for many users , making it a convenient place to voice general opinions . It also had enough upvotes to appear on / all , referred to colloquially as “reaching the front page . ” The / all view of Reddit aggregates the most popular posts across the entire site , is the default view for any visitor without an account or who is not logged in , and is often browsed by reg - ular Redditors to find newsworthy or interesting links . Thus , posts on / all attract a lot of attention , including people unfa - miliar with the context from which a particular post origi - nated . ( For example , when a / r / HillaryClinton post made the front page during the 2016 election , it was inundated by negative comments from posters who did not support Hillary Clinton and were not familiar with the norms of the sub . ) Because the “New Celeb leaked pics” thread was posted before Celebgate was discussed in the mainstream media , it may have been the first place that many Redditors heard about the leaks . The thread became a space where people outside / thefappening community could weigh in with their general opinions on Celebgate . Before the thread reached the front page , however , ethical concerns had already emerged : Probably the first to say it but I feel guilty and bad that this happened to [ Jennifer Lawrence ] and the others , Table 2 Popular press articles analyzed Date Title Author Publication August 31 , 2014 If you click on Jennifer Lawrence’s naked pictures , you’re perpetuating her abuse Van Badham The Guardian September 1 , 2014 What’s Wrong With Checking Out Stolen Nude Photos of Celebrities : The ethics of looking away Jessica Valenti The Atlantic September 1 , 2014 Those Jennifer Lawrence Pictures Aren’t Scandalous Anne Helen Peterson Buzzfeed September 1 , 2014 Jennifer Lawrence Nude Photo Leak Isn’t A ‘Scandal . ’ It’s A Sex Crime Scott Mendelson Forbes September 1 , 2014 Where Are All the Hacked Pics of Men ? Sarah Miller Time September 2 , 2014 Jennifer Lawrence’s Leaked Nude Photos Remind Us How Crappy The Internet Can Be For Women Emma Gray Huffington Post September 2 , 2014 Don’t Take Nude Selfies , ’ Shrug It Off , and Other Gross Advice for Hacked Celebs Amanda Hess Slate September 2 , 2014 Everyone Needs to Stop Blaming Jennifer Lawrence and the Other Celebs for the Nude Photo Scandal Jenna Mullens E ! September 2 , 2014 It’s Not Just Jennifer Lawrence : Women In Pop Culture Are Under Attack Todd VanDerWerff Vox September 2 , 2014 This isn’t about iPhones . This is about women being shamed , objectified , and treated like property Kelsey McKinney Vox September 2 , 2014 Stop Blaming Jennifer Lawrence and Other Celebrities for Taking Nude Photos in the First Place Megan Gibson Time September 2 , 2014 You know who’s not to blame for Jennifer Lawrence’s Nude Photo Leaks ? Jen - nifer Lawrence Lily Karlin Huffington Post September 2 , 2014 The naked celebrity hack : An outstanding example of sexism Hadley Freeman The Guardian September 3 , 2014 The fappening has revealed a new type of pervert Roisin Kiberd Vice News September 24 , 2014 Misogyny Is Not Human Nature Eric Michael Johnson Slate September 30 , 2014 The Great Naked Celebrity Photo Leak of 2014 Is Just the Beginning Roxane Gay The Guardian October 8 , 2014 Open Letter to Jennifer Lawrence Danielle Citron Forbes October 10 , 2014 Jennifer Lawrence , it’s time for a reality check Carla Hall LA Times October 10 , 2014 Jennifer Lawrence doesn’t strengthen her argument with those racy Vanity Fair photos Charlotte Allen LA Times October 10 , 2014 Good for Jennifer Lawrence for speaking up , not remaining the silent object of the male gaze Susan Rohwer LA Times October 10 , 2014 Let’s reserve the “sex criminal” label for actual sex criminals Jon Healy LA Times November 2014 Both Huntress and Prey ( cover story on Jennifer Lawrence ) Sam Kashner Vanity Fair November 5 , 2014 Gabrielle Union : “My Nude Photos Were Stolen , and I’m Fighting Back” Gabrielle Union and Abigail Pesta Cosmopolitan A . E . Marwick 1 3 it seems more enjoyable to guess as compared to ok boom there she is ( 8 / 31 / 14 16 : 53 ) This user indicates personal guilt and regret about looking at the images and expresses empathy for Jennifer Lawrence , but frames it within a personal framework of entitlement—that it is “more enjoyable” for him to “guess” what her body looks like rather than having it displayed in front of him . He also implies that his bad feelings are unusual on the subreddit . The second negative comment , which is the first to spe - cifically reference “privacy , ” appears shortly after : User Y : This is sickening . The people who invade oth - ers’ privacy to do this are horrid excuses for human beings . I hope they get put in jail for a very long time . And all of you on this thread encouraging it are almost as bad . ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 02 ) Reply 1 : Why are people downvoting this person ? He / she speaks the truth . Y’all bitch and moan about the NSA , but when something like this happens it’s okay ? Fucking pathetic and hypocritical . Reply 2 : It really is disgusting to see how little empa - thy these people have User Y suggests that the leaks are illegal and may lead to a jail sentence for the perpetrator , but also holds the Fap - pening posters accountable for inciting further leaks . Once the thread hits / all , this comment garners a few supportive responses . Replies 1 and 2 express solidarity with User Y and denigrate the Fappening participants as “pathetic” “dis - gusting” and “hypocritical . ” However , User Y’s comment is mostly met with insults and jeers : Reply 3 : Says the person who found the link to this sub deep in the comments from where it was originally posted , and came all the way here just to say that . You go , dude . Reply 4 : It’s reddit . Shut up ! Reply 5 : lol shut the fuck up you cancerous cunt Reply 6 : Thank you , I’m so glad you told us how supe - rior your sense of morality is . Reply 7 : Fuckoff loser . Reply 8 : fuck you Reply 9 : They made their choice by photographing themselves nude . Reply 3 makes fun of the poster for taking what s / he charac - terizes as excessive effort to criticize the subreddit , implying that User Y had a prurient interest in the pictures which caused he / she to seek them out . Reply 6 sarcastically sug - gests that the poster’s ethical stance is arrogant and patron - izing . Replies 5 , 7 and 8 demonstrate the intensity of their feelings by using taboo words “fuck” and “cunt” to both criticize the poster and dismiss his or her concerns . Reply 9 justifies looking at the pictures by stating that the celebri - ties were asking for it by taking nude photographs . As these posts demonstrate , the primary response to criticism of / thefappening is to attack the poster , rather than contending with his or her argument . While most of these naysayers only post once or twice and then leave , one particular person ( User X ) posts 62 com - ments and argues with respondents throughout : User X : It’s really sad that distributing stolen property is considered a good thing to do . ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 24 ) Reply 1 : It’s really sad you don’t realize their entire careers and livelihoods revolve around public adora - tion . So , fuck off . Reply 2 : Digital images aren’t property . Reply 2 takes issue with User X’s contention , namely that digital images can be property . Reply 1 justifies looking at the pictures because the subjects are celebrities , not regular people ( more on that later ) . User X : Anybody with a conscious knows that this sort of thing is wrong . These threads are all being upvoted by guys with Dicks in their hands who care a lot more about seeing a pair of tits than personal rights . It makes me really sad . Reply 1 : Le Reddit White Knight Army is here . The term “white knight” is an internet slang term with origins in gaming and Men’s Rights communities . In this context , a white knight is a man who comes to a woman’s defense or espouses feminist views solely to score romantic points by helping a damsel in distress . The term is intrinsi - cally misogynist since it suggests that any man holding anti - sexist views , or even wanting to befriend a woman , would only do so to curry favor , implying that feminist principles are so ridiculous that a man could not possibly hold them . It also suggests that any man who stands up for women is not a “real man” . Reply 2 : I know it’s wrong . But I have fapped . Of course , once you’ve fapped , it does feel really shitty for all the celebs involved . This is like Jlaw’s first ever leak , and it’s so so damaging . As a hunger games fan , I’m just happy that they’ve finished shooting ages ago . The second poster states that he felt bad about the pri - vacy invasion once his sexual feelings passed . This point of view appears throughout the corpus . It allows the poster to both adhere to normative masculinity on the sub by pro - claiming his sexual desire for women and his enthusiastic masturbatory habits , while simultaneously claiming to have empathy and distancing himself from the more misanthropic Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 participants . It also supports the idea that male sexual desire is so overwhelming that it overcomes common sense and moral judgment . Reply 3 : * Conscience , but yeah . Still , I think the rule applies to EVERYONE that if you don’t want to risk someone seeing nude pics of you , don’t take them ! Reply 4 : The violation of rights is the fun part . In the third reply again we see the blame - the - victim men - tality prevalent throughout the thread . The fourth response suggests that the photos are more enticing because they were obtained without consent , insinuating sexual pleasure taken from the humiliation of women . While such an overt state - ment is not common , it should not be discounted either , as there are similar comments in the thread like “it is the for - bidden tit that is the sweetest . ” Ultimately , User X is met with waves of arguments and resistance and very few sup - portive comments . Most of the ethical concerns on the first day of the Fap - pening were expressed by outsiders to the community , while subscribers primarily expressed positive , excited feelings . When responding to criticism , Redditors justified viewing the pictures in several ways . They’re celebrities , so it’s ok This perspective holds that the celebrity leaks are justified either because the victims are celebrities and rely on posi - tive publicity for their careers , or because the subjects of the photos are famous and wealthy . For instance , one user wrote : If you profit off public imagery of yourself , then it is fair game for the public to access any and all images of you in existence , with only some limits , like medical imagery . These people profit off seeking our attention . They cannot then cry privacy rights . ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 55 ) According to this viewpoint , celebrities court publicity when it is convenient for their careers , but decry it when it is detrimen - tal . This is generally why most people have little sympathy for celebrities when they lobby for enhanced anti - paparazzi laws or protection for their children ( DeCew et al . 2000 ) , since they otherwise rely on public attention . While the quote above may be extreme in calling for public access to all images—some - thing there is no support for either normatively or legally—it illustrates the perception that celebrities , particularly celeb - rity women , are considered public property rather than people accorded the same human dignity as the audience . Other users compared the privilege accorded to celeb - rities with that of Reddit users , who frame themselves as “regular joes” : I and a lot of other people have a hard time sympathiz - ing with people who have millions in the bank and live amazing fucking lives . All we have is rubbing our c * * * * and making jokes about it , so we will be damned if we don’t make the most out of it ! ( 9 / 3 / 14 3 : 14 ) The celebrity royalty are paraded as sex objects , like a carrot on a stick , to the American serfs . If anything Hollywood is just upset that some of their assets have been devalued . So no , you shouldn’t feel bad . Their t * * * * and asses are shoved in our faces 24 / 7 . ( 9 / 3 / 14 9 : 45 ) Celebrities have “millions in the bank” and “amazing lives , ” compared to the average Reddit user , an “American serf” who has only masturbatory fantasies about celebrity women to make up for his otherwise unfortunate lot in life . To these users , women are objectified in mass media and used as eco - nomic assets to manipulate spectators ; an undercurrent of resentfulness suggests that they deserve anything that they get , or at least that their privilege mitigates any negative experiences their fame might bring . It’s their own fault The most common justification for looking at the pictures was to blame the celebrities , either for taking the pictures in the first place , or , more commonly , for storing them in the cloud . Often it was implied that taking nude pictures was vain , narcissistic , or slutty : It’s wrong that this happened to them , but you don’t see people like Emma Watson being the victims here because she knew better than to take naked pictures on her phone . You’re acting as if taking nude photos is as normal as stepping outside of your house . It’s not . ( 9 / 1 / 14 8 : 26 ) i think its ridiculous not to expect this to happen , they literraly had it coming once they took those photos also , what vanity . . disgraceful ( 9 / 1 / 14 11 : 58 ) if they wouldn’t have been sluts and gotten naked then none of this would’ve happened . who are we to blame for watching them pay for their mistake ? ( 9 / 3 / 14 7 : 10 ) Such “slut - shaming” implies that women taking nude pic - tures is unusual and immoral ; however , nowhere in the cor - pus is criticism of men for looking at such nude pictures . Far from it , since looking at pornography is framed in / thefappening as intrinsic to masculinity . Such monitoring of female sexuality is indicative of a traditional double - standard towards acceptable behavior for men and women ( Hasinoff 2015 ) . A few men argued instead that taking nude photos is a normal part of modern life by asserting their sexual experience : A . E . Marwick 1 3 Maybe it’s just me , but the amount of nude photos these people take comes off as extremely narcissistic . Also , take nude photos of yourself and keeping them on your phone is dumb . I do honestly feel sorry that this happened and I have looked at all the pics , but people need to tone done on the self - worship . ( 9 / 1 / 14 7 : 46 ) Reply : seriously man ? ? you must not be up on todays day and age . . . have you ever sent or received nude pics ? Obviously not , with todays technology its awe - some getting nude pics from your S / O or girls you are flirting with ( 9 / 1 / 14 10 : 00 ) No one here thinks they’re sluts . Nearly everyone takes noods for their partner ( s ) . ( 9 / 6 / 14 12 : 36 ) These commenters also implied that those criticizing women for taking naked pictures were inexperienced ( note that they also acknowledge men’s role in sexting rather than suggest - ing that it is entirely the responsibility of women ) . Similarly , a few visitors to the subreddit scorned the participants for being sexually inexperienced and socially inept ( “Comments like ‘This day will go down in history’ are so fucking creepy HURR HURR TODAY WAS DA DAY I GOT TO SEE NAKED WOMANS Fucking mouth - breather ! ” ) . Rather than the geek masculinity expressed on the sub , which takes frequent masturbation as a point of pride , such comments reflect a more hegemonic masculinity that imples that the participants are not real men because they are satisfied with pictures of naked celebrities rather than actual sex . While overt slut - shaming was met with pushback , more common was judgment over proper security practices , namely , using remote storage for cellphone photos . People don’t think it’s right that this stuff is posted but it has been posted . There is a lesson to be learned : don’t store nude images on a cloud server and don’t send them to people . Is it wrong that we have to assume that everything we do is being tracked and monitored ? Absolutely . But that is the world we have created and people shouldn’t expect sympathy when their carelessness bites them in the ass . ( 8 / 31 / 14 21 : 42 ) Such comments reinforce privacy as an important value , but also suggest that individuals have a responsibility to mini - mize privacy violations by avoiding practices that might make them susceptible . These assertions often spurred lengthy debates over online cloud security ( such as the level of encryption in iCloud , whether Android phones were more secure , and whether pictures deleted from a cellphone still appear in cloud storage ) . An addendum to this argument was that because celebrities are more likely than the average per - son to be hacked , they should have taken special care with their pictures . Those who used iCloud or Dropbox to store nudes were thus “stupid” “careless” “morons” who “should know better , ” in contrast to the technically - savvy Reddi - tors . Participants thus reaffirmed their mastery of technical knowledge in contrast to female celebrities who deserved to be hacked because they lacked the proficiency to protect themselves . There’s nothing to feel guilty about Throughout the corpus , Redditors debated what penalties might befall the hacker , the leaker , and the original 4chan posters . They also frequently argued that there was nothing to feel guilty about unless you were the hacker . This is the internet , the floodgates have opened—us enjoying them or not enjoying them will make no dif - ference on the fact they are never going back to being un - leaked . So might as well enjoy them ( 9 / 1 / 14 1 : 50 ) The only person who is guilty of anything is the hacker who broke into Apples servers . People looking at the photos are not guilty of anything . There’s nothing wrong with looking at a digital copy of a digital photo . Of course they’re trying to regulate photons but its useless . ( 9 / 4 / 14 3 : 46 ) The ethics of looking are not present in these comments ; instead the question is whether looking is illegal . ( One poster said tersely , “I said looking wasn’t illegal . I didn’t hack shit . ” ) This point of view holds that only the hacker committed a crime , the pictures are widely available , and not looking at them will not “un - leak” them . In an informal interview elsewhere on Reddit , the creator of the subreddit agreed : Kell08 : Do you feel any guilt at all for creating this subreddit ? johnsmcjohn : No . I created it on a whim and just rode the wave as it went viral . Kell08 : So you have no regrets ? johnsmcjohn : My only regret is that the admins folded to legal pressure ( johnsmcjohn 2014 ) . This point of view sidesteps all ethical and moral considera - tions in favor of a strict legal interpretation : illegal actions are wrong , but all legal actions are right , not because of a moral sense but simply due to their legality . Thus , viewing nude pictures of underage actresses is wrong because it is illegal ; viewing , even collecting , nude pictures that were obtained illegally is not wrong because the crime was com - mitted by someone else . Ultimately , thefappening adhered to a homosocial , het - erosexual normativity that painted looking at pornography as a normal , natural part of masculinity and masturbation as a collective bonding experience . Some participants cri - tiqued the bodies of the women in minute detail ( “she looks Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 plain and fat” “Her body is so sloppy looking” ) , calling them “average” or “overrated , ” or comparing them to porn stars . Others loudly called for leaks of their favorite actress , at times stating that it was unfair for celebrity women to wear tight clothing or appear in sex scenes but refuse to pose nude . In other words , the photo leaks were framed almost entirely as a benefit to men and as something they were entitled to , rather than a privacy violation for women . Peo - ple who came into the sub to argue an alternate viewpoint were attacked ; in the few instances where people brought up gender or feminism they were vociferously shouted down . Privacy was thus clearly gendered . Men valued their own privacy , but acknowledged that this could be guaranteed only by technical mastery ( a skill considered masculine ) . As we will see , this is markedly different from the way that Celeb - gate was discussed editorially . Popular press The popular press primarily maintained that celebrities involved in Celebgate were victims of a crime , that their privacy had been violated , that they were not to blame , and that the hack was evidence of structural sexism . Two articles specifically called out / thefappening for inculcating misog - yny ( in Vice News and Slate ) . Several stated that anyone who looked at the photos was equally complicit in the crime ( in The Guardian and The Atlantic ) . The LA Times printed a panel of four editorials , three of which challenged this domi - nant frame ( two argued that the photo leaks were not a “sex crime” , while the other said Jennifer Lawrence undermined her argument by posing for Vanity Fair ) . The only other article to provide an alternate viewpoint was by Buzzfeed writer Anne Helen Peterson , who argued that since sexting is a normal part of everyday life for young women , Jennifer Lawrence should be able to take advantage of the scandal rather than having it define her . The dominant frame taken by the press , then , was very different from that of Reddit . Editorials in left - leaning publications primarily took an explicitly feminist approach to the photo leaks , linking the hacks to structural sexism and the objectification of women . In The Atlantic , prominent feminist writer Jessica Valenti wrote “In much the same way that misogyny tells men that women are there for male consumption , the public and media tell us that famous women are public property…The under - lying premise is that these women have consented to being there for public entertainment—whether they like it or not . ” In the Huffington Post , Lily Karlin commented , “The steal - ing of these photos , the audience that’s hungry for them , and the victim - blaming comments sweeping the web all emerge from a culture that endorses the idea that women’s bodies exist for public consumption . ” And in the Guardian , feminist novelist and academic Roxane Gay wrote : [ The leak ] is meant to remind women of their place . Don’t get too high and mighty , ladies . Don’t step out of line . Don’t do anything to upset or disappoint men who feel entitled to your time , bodies , affection or attention . Your bared body can always be used as a weapon against you . Your bared body can always be used to shame and humiliate you . Your bared body is at once desired and loathed . Such articles drew clear lines between the celebrity leaks and a broader patriarchal culture where revenge porn , online harassment , and sexual assault are common . To such writers , the celebrity nude photo hacks exemplify attitudes towards women that reduce them to objects . This feminist lens was common and appeared in 15 out of 21 articles . 2 Similarly , the editorials connected the privacy needs of the victims and the privacy needs of “regular women . ” In Vox , Todd VanDerWerff wrote , “These women deserve to have private lives . They deserve to have that most basic , most human thing and share it with the people they choose , when and if they choose to . ” In The LA Times , Susan Rohwer noted , “We live in a society that values the protection of per - sonal information online . We take great pains to secure our banking information and medical records . And yet when it comes to the bodies of our celebrities , privacy is a privilege to which they are seemingly not entitled . ” Celebrities , like all people , deserved privacy . Notably , none of the editorials blamed the victims . Sev - eral explained exactly why the victims should not be blamed , including an E ! Online editorial titled “Everyone Needs to Stop Blaming Jennifer Lawrence and the Other Celebs for the Nude Photo Scandal . ” ( Notably , in these articles the only evidence cited of widespread victim - blaming were tweets by comedian Ricky Gervais and tech journalist Nick Bilton , and a video of rapper RZA at the airport . ) The E ! editorial , however , garnered 201 comments , many of which included victim - blaming comments like : No , I shouldn’t feel remorse if I look at these pho - tos because , quite simply , if you use your iphone to take a picture of yourself covered in semen—you’ve saved it to the apple cloud , it’s no longer YOURS . I mean , it is , but now it’s out there , on a server , waiting for someone to find it . Perhaps , instead of using your hackable iPhones , use a digital camera , or better yet , a film based one . Or just don’t take pictures of yourself covered in semen—but either way , you had it coming for being a * * * * * who takes pictures of herself cov - ered in semen . 2 Three articles were not explicitly feminist , three espoused an anti - feminist perspective and two were first - person accounts by celebrities . A . E . Marwick 1 3 ( Notably , this comment ignores the role of the man in this situation . ) Such comments were closer to those on / thefappening than the feminist point of view espoused in the editorial . While a few commenters defended the celebrities as victims of a crime , many others believed they should not have taken nude photos , and certainly not stored them in the Cloud . The above quote demonstrates many themes : the poor judgment of celebrities in taking nude pictures ; the idea that women who take nude pictures are sluts ; and the poor judg - ment of using cloud storage for nude photos . There is a clear disconnect between the feminist point of views taken by the popular press ( with the exception of the two LA Times editorials ) and the slut - shaming and victim - blaming found in the comments of E ! News . This is different still from the gleeful abandon and sense of entitlement found in the Reddit comments . How can we explain these differing points of view ? Discussion : privacy as gendered Edward Snowden’s 2013 release of documents showing mass surveillance by the National Security Agency provoked widespread ire on Reddit , whose denizens are both techni - cally apt and libertarian - leaning . In July 2014 , only a month before Celebgate , the Washington Post published a major story showing that the NSA had collected text messages and e - mails of private citizens . The celebrity photos were thus leaked amidst ongoing pro - privacy , anti - surveillance discus - sions on Reddit . Many of the Fappening naysayers pointed out this hypocrisy : Funny how reddit hates the NSA looking at their shit . But if someone hacks someone’s phone and then posts the pics online it’s awesome ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 16 ) I’m not comfortable with how these images were obtained . We cannot decry the use of intelligence communities like the NSA while indulging in ille - gally obtained pictures of other people . It is hypocrisy . ( 8 / 31 / 14 17 : 22 ) Such comments inspired a spirited back - and - forth contrast - ing the two—the main argument being that the NSA is a government organization engaging in systemic surveillance , while the photo hacker is a private citizen who committed a singular crime . Others argued that the only reason these privacy violations were notable is because the victims were privileged , wealthy , celebrities : Lol , it only matters when the people being spied on are famous . Then the FBI , the “righteous bridage” [ sic ] , and the media all seem to have a problem with it . Yeah , I see no problem with the common folk getting a bit stupid over boob pictures . Especially , when the gov - ernment , the rich , and the famous get away with worse all the time . ( 9 / 3 / 14 4 : 14 ) To this commenter , when “regular people” have their privacy violated—through warrantless wiretapping or NSA metadata collection—it is ignored by the government and the media , but celebrities , because they are privileged elites , are more likely to have the resources to combat privacy violations . However , throughout the subreddit “celebrity” means celebrity women . Redditors consistently blamed women for storing nude pictures on their phones or in the cloud , imply - ing a feminine lack of technical proficiency . Gendered terms like “celebrity sluts” further gendered privacy as something men are entitled to ( “attention whores who secretly want their images to be discovered to further their careers” ) and play into discourses of women “asking for it” that justify sexual violations . Despite this , when criticized , Redditors repeatedly denied that gender played a part : Its got nothing to do with rape and calling it “rape culture” is wrong . I can understand your point that this is theft of their privacy but TBH the gender of the people in the image shouldn’t matter . Its theft of someones privacy the people just happen to be female ( 8 / 31 / 14 19 : 04 ) This has nothing to do with women you idiot . In fact , if there were any hot men leaked , we wouldn’t hear women complaining at all ( 9 / 1 / 14 2 : 29 ) Of course , this discussion is taking place in a forum with widespread use of sexist language , sexual objectification , and aggressive performances of masculinity . The / Fappening exemplifies the geek masculinity that Adrienne Massanari documents on Reddit ( Massanari 2015a ; Almog and Kaplan 2015 ) . There is very little ethi - cal compunction about viewing stolen / hacked photos or empathy for the victims . Instead , there is a shared sense of entitlement , ownership , and critique of women’s bod - ies . Participants rarely refer to relationships with women ; instead , masturbation becomes a proxy for male bonding and sexual prowess . When men do refer to girlfriends or sexual partners , it is to contradict dominant narratives of victim - blaming and slut - shaming . This suggests that many of / thefappening participants are not involved in intimate relationships with women , romantic or otherwise . Instead , women are viewed as sexual objects . Thus , the photo leaks are justified from within a culture of normalized sexism and the dehumanization and devaluation of women . In Reddit’s blog post about the Fappening , the com - pany stated , “The philosophy behind this stems from the idea that each individual is responsible for his or her moral actions” ( yishan 2014 ) . The idea that individuals are respon - sible if their privacy is violated is widespread , and is the primary frame that Americans , young and old alike , hold Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 when it comes to digital privacy ( Hargittai and Marwick 2016 ; Marwick and boyd 2014 ; Marwick et al . 2017 ) . While editorials about Celebgate were careful to call out victim blaming , this is an explicitly feminist view that draws from discursive resources around larger conversations of sexual assault and rape culture . Commenters on both Reddit and E ! Online were dismissive of such claims , instead suggesting that victims were asking for it for posting their nudes on the cloud—or even taking them in the first place . This same point of view is generally taken with regard to revenge porn ( Hasinoff 2015 ) , contributing to a culture which expects men to pass around naked photos of women and blames the woman for taking the picture , rather than the man for dis - tributing it , if it gains a wider audience than intended . Simi - larly , the use of pornography is normalized for men while the female participants are denigrated as sluts or whores . Unfortunately , this entitlement and victim - blaming extends to non - famous women as well . While research - ing a previous paper , a co - author and I discovered a forum where young men posted the Facebook profiles of female classmates , asking people to hack their accounts in hopes of finding nudes . Websites like Thedirty and AnonIB are image - sharing networks where men collaborate to locate and distribute nudes without consent , often without the knowl - edge of the victim . The Fappening may indicate a lack of understanding as to why such actions are ethically and mor - ally , if not legally , wrong . Normalization of pornography and sexual frustration do not entitle young men to view women’s naked bodies . However , when “regular” women get their pictures shared non - consensually , they lack the resources of celeb - rities . They are far more likely to be socially shamed and lose educational or employment opportunities as a result . While revenge porn is increasingly recognized as a legal and criminal issue , there is still a long way to go . In an age where more people are “public” than ever before , not only because of the widespread popularity of social media but because a larger segment of the population is required to appear online or court publicity for success , the justifica - tion that “they’re public figures , so it’s OK” or that taking nude pictures is “asking for it” —is deeply problematic . The potential for attention and publicity brought about by the material affordances of the modern internet creates a con - tinuum between “celebrities” and “average people . ” Thus , attitudes towards nude photos of celebrities may mirror public attitudes towards stolen photos of the non - famous , namely , revenge porn . This analysis thus illuminates popular understandings of privacy as gendered . In contrast to feminist writers who framed revenge porn as a crime linked to structural sexism , Reddit and E ! commenters justified it based on gender stere - otypes . Arguing that women who take nude selfies are “ask - ing for it” or that privacy violations are justified if the victim does not display an appropriate level of technical proficiency sets up a paradigm in which women have less of a right to privacy than men unless they adhere to male - gendered val - ues . As a result , women are blamed for revenge porn , which reinforces the idea of the female body as public property . Conclusion Celebgate represents the culmination of two forces : the enti - tlement that men , especially young men , feel over women’s bodies ; and the emergent form of geek masculinity , a norma - tive masculine identity characterized by technical expertise , interest in genre entertainment , and a political commitment to free speech and libertarianism . Those who subscribe to this free speech discourse often justify the use of tactics that researchers or victims would characterize as “online harass - ment” or networked abuse as ways to check over - reaching “political correctness , ” which they consider oppressive and an assault on free speech ( Jhaver et al . 2016 ) . In other words , the value put on privacy protection by Reddit users does not extend to women , who are objectified and denied agency throughout the site . Women’s right to privacy over pictures of their bodies is less important than men’s rights to those bodies . Sadly , this is consistent with an overarch - ing misogynist worldview . It is worth asking to what extent communities like Reddit actively inculcate such views in their participants , and whether there is a moral responsibil - ity among moderators and tech companies to counter these points of view . Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Dr . Elena Fila - tova ( New York City College of Technology ) and Dr . Alex Leavitt ( Facebook Research ) for their assistance collecting data from Reddit . Many thanks to the Data & Society Research Institute for supporting this research with a Fellowship . Earlier versions of this work were presented at the Privacy Research Group at the Information Law Insti - tute at NYU Law School ; Hunter College ; and at the 2016 Association of Internet Researchers annual meeting . Thank you to everyone who provided help and feedback . References Alfonso , F . ( 2014 , June 10 ) . Reddit’s “beating women” forum banned . The Daily Dot . Retrieved from http : / / www . dailydot . com / news / reddit - beating - women - banned / . alienth . ( 2014 , September 7 ) . Time to talk • / r / announcements [ forum post ] . Retrieved December 2 , 2016 , from https : / / www . reddit . com / r / announcements / comments / 2fpdax / time _ to _ talk / . Allen , A . L . , & Mack , E . ( 1989 ) . How privacy got its gender . N . Ill . UL Rev , 10 , 441 . Almog , R . , & Kaplan , D . ( 2015 ) . The nerd and his discontent : The seduction community and the logic of the game as a geeky solu - tion to the challenges of young masculinity . Men and Masculini - ties , 20 ( 1 ) , 27 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10971 84X15613831 . A . E . Marwick 1 3 Banet - Weiser , S . , & Miltner , K . M . ( 2016 ) . # MasculinitySoFragile : Culture , structure , and networked misogyny . Feminist Media Stud - ies , 16 ( 1 ) , 171 – 174 . Barthel , M . , Stocking , G . , Holcomb , J . , & Mitchell , A . ( 2016 , Febru - ary 25 ) . Reddit news users more likely to be male , young and digital in their news preferences [ blog post ] . Retrieved December 1 , 2016 , from http : / / www . journalism . org / 2016 / 02 / 25 / reddit - news - users - more - likely - to - be - male - young - and - digital - in - their - news - preferences / . Bartow , A . ( 1999 ) . Our date , ourselves : Privacy , propertization , and gender . USFL Rev , 34 , 633 . Burgess , J . , & Matamoros - Fernández , A . ( 2016 ) . Mapping sociocul - tural controversies across digital media platforms : One week of # gamergate on Twitter , YouTube , and Tumblr . Communication Research and Practice , 2 ( 1 ) , 79 – 96 . Carrigan , T . , Connell , B . , & Lee , J . ( 1985 ) . Toward a new sociology of masculinity . Theory and Society , 14 ( 5 ) , 551 – 604 . Chen , A . ( 2012a , October 12 ) . Unmasking Reddit’s vio - lentacrez , the biggest troll on the web [ blog post ] . Retr ieved from http : / / gawker . com / 5950981 / unmasking - reddits - violentacrez - the - biggest - troll - on - the - web . Chen , A . ( 2012b , October 16 ) . Reddit CEO speaks out on violenta - crez in leaked memo : ‘We stand for free speech’ . Gawker . http : / / gawker . com / 5952349 / reddit - ceo - speaks - out - on - violentacrez - in - leaked - memowe - stand - for - free - speech . Chess , S . , & Shaw , A . ( 2015 ) . A conspiracy of fishes , or , how we learned to stop worrying about # gamergate and embrace hegem - onic masculinity . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media , 59 ( 1 ) , 208 – 220 . Chouliaraki , L . ( 2006 ) . The spectatorship of suffering . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications , Ltd . Citron , D . ( 2014 ) . Hate crimes in cyberspace . Cambridge , MA : Har - vard University Press . Citron , D . , & Franks , M . A . ( 2014 ) . Criminalizing revenge porn . Wake Forest Law Review , 49 , 345 . Connell , R . W . ( 1985 ) . Theorising gender . Sociology , 19 ( 2 ) , 260 – 272 . Connell , R . W . ( 2005 ) . Masculinities . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Cubrilovic , N . ( 2014 , September 2 ) . Notes on the celebrity data theft— new web order [ blog post ] . Retrieved September 27 , 2016 , from https : / / www . nikcub . com / posts / notes - on - the - celebrity - data - theft / . DeCew , J . W . , Regan , P . M . , & Strentz , H . ( 2000 ) . Celebrity , pri - vacy , and American culture . Focus on Law Studies , 15 ( 2 ) , 1 – 11 . Retrieved from http : / / www . americanbar . org / publications / focus _ on _ law _ studies _ home / publiced _ focus _ priv _ celebrity . html . Duggan , M . , & Smith , A . ( 2013 ) . 6 % of online adults are Reddit users [ blog post ] . Retrieved February 10 , 2015 , from http : / / www . pewin - ternet . org / 2013 / 07 / 03 / 6 - of - online - adults - are - reddit - users / . Eikren , E . , & Ingram - Waters , M . ( 2016 ) . Dismantling “You Get What You Deserve” : Toward a feminist sociology of revenge porn . Ada : A Journal of Gender , New Media , and Technol - ogy , ( 10 ) . Retrieved from http : / / adanewmedia . org / 2016 / 10 / issue10 - eikren - ingramwaters / . Fairbairn , J . ( 2015 ) . Rape threats and revenge porn : Defining sexual violence in the digital age . In J . Bailey & V . Steeves ( Eds . ) , eGirls , eCitizens ( pp . 229 – 252 ) . Ottawa , ON : University of Ottawa Press . Retrieved from https : / / egirlsproject . ca / research / egirls - ecitizens - putting - technology - theory - and - policy - into - dialogue - with - girls - and - young - womens - voices / chapter - 9 - rape - threats - and - revenge - porn - defining - sexual - violence - in - the - digital - age - jordan - fairbairn / . Fairclough , N . ( 2003 ) . Analysing discourse : Textual analysis for social research . New York : Routledge . Franks , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Sexual harassment 2 . 0 . Maryland Law Review , 71 . Retrieved from http : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract _ id = 1492433 . Gallagher , S . E . ( 2007 ) . Gender . In Staples ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of privacy ( Vol . A - M ) . ‎ Portsmouth : Greenwood Press . Gillespie , T . ( 2010 ) . The politics of “platforms . ” New Media & Society , 12 ( 3 ) , 347 – 364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444809342738 . Gray , F . V . ( 2016 ) . Men’s intrusion , women’s embodiment : A critical analysis of street harassment . New York : Routledge . Greenberg , A . ( 2014 , September 10 ) . Hacked celeb pics made Reddit enough cash to run its servers for a month . WIRED . Retrieved from http : / / www . wired . com / 2014 / 09 / celeb - pics - reddit - gold / . Hargittai , E . , & Marwick , A . ( 2016 ) . “What can i really do ? ” Explain - ing the privacy paradox with online apathy . International Journal of Communication , 10 , 21 . Hasinoff , A . A . ( 2015 ) . Sexting panic : Rethinking criminalization , pri - vacy , and consent . Champaign , IL : University of Illinois Press . Hawkesworth , M . ( 2007 ) . Gender and the public sphere : A genealogy from the west . Ab Imperio , 58 ( 1 ) , 329 – 354 . Henry , N . , & Powell , A . ( 2015 ) . Embodied harms : Gender , shame , and technology - facilitated sexual violence . Violence Against Women , 21 ( 6 ) , 758 – 779 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077801215576581 . Jhaver , S . , Chan , L . , & Bruckman , A . ( 2016 ) . The view from the other side : The border between controversial speech and harassment on Kotaku in action ( under review ) . johnsmcjohn . ( 2014 , September 7 ) . I created / r / TheFappen - ing . AMA • / r / IAmA [ forum post ] . Retrieved Novem - ber 18 , 2014 , from http : / / www . reddit . com / r / IAmA / comments / 2fom77 / i _ created _ rthefappening _ ama / . Kaminsky , D . ( 2014 , September 3 ) . Not safe for not working on [ blog post ] . Retrieved September 27 , 2016 , from https : / / dankaminsky . com / 2014 / 09 / 03 / not - safe - for - not - working - on / . Kashner , S . ( 2014 , October 20 ) . Both huntress and prey . Vanity Fair . Retrieved from http : / / www . vanityfair . com / hollywood / 2014 / 10 / jennifer - lawrence - photo - hacking - privacy . Kelly , K . A . ( 2003 ) . Domestic violence and the politics of privacy . New York : Cornell University Press . Kohnen , M . ( 2014 ) . “The power of geek” : Fandom as gendered com - modity at Comic - Con . Creative Industries Journal , 7 ( 1 ) , 75 – 78 . 10 . 1080 / 17510694 . 2014 . 892295 . Landes , J . B . ( Ed . ) . ( 1998 ) . Feminism , the public , and the private . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Lenhart , A . , Ybarra , M . L . , & Price - Feeney , M . ( 2016a ) . Nonconsen - sual image sharing : One in 25 Americans has been a victim of “ revenge porn . ” New York : Data & Society Research Institute , Center for Innovative Public Health Research . Retrieved from https : / / datasociety . net / pubs / oh / Nonconsensual _ Image _ Shar - ing _ 2016 . pdf . Lenhart , A . , Ybarra , M . L . , Zickuhr , K . , & Price - Feeney , M . ( 2016b ) . Online harassment , digital abuse , and cyberstalking in America . New York : Data & Society Research Institute . Marcotte , A . ( 2014 , September 3 ) . “The fappening” and revenge porn culture : Jennifer Lawrence and the Creepshot Epidemic . The Daily Beast . Retrieved from http : / / www . thedailybeast . com / arti - cles / 2014 / 09 / 03 / the - fappening - and - revenge - porn - culture - jennifer - lawrence - and - the - creepshot - epidemic . html . Marwick , A . , & boyd , danah . ( 2014 ) . Networked privacy : How teen - agers negotiate context in social media . New Media & Society , 16 ( 7 ) , 1051 – 1067 . Marwick , A . , Fontaine , C . & boyd , danah . ( 2017 ) . “Nobody sees it , nobody gets mad” : Social media , privacy , and personal responsibility among low - SES youth . Social Media & Soci - ety , 3 ( 2 ) . Retrieved from http : / / journals . sagepub . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1177 / 2056305117710455 . Massanari , A . ( 2015a ) . # Gamergate and the fappening : How Reddit’s algorithm , governance , and culture support toxic technocultures . New Media & Society , 19 ( 3 ) , 329 – 346 . Scandal or sex crime ? Gendered privacy and the celebrity nude photo leaks 1 3 Massanari , A . ( 2015b ) . Participatory culture , community , and play : Learning from Reddit . New York : Peter Lang Publishing . Matias , J . N . ( 2016 ) . Going Dark : Social factors in collective action against platform operators in the reddit blackout . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 1138 – 1151 ) . ACM . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2858391 . Menegus , B . ( 2016 , November 30 ) . Reddit is tearing itself apart . Gizmodo . Retrieved from http : / / gizmodo . com / reddit - is - tearing - itself - apart - 1789406294 . Nakamura , L . ( 2012 ) . Queer female of color : The highest difficulty set - ting there is ? Gaming rhetoric as gender capital . Ada : A Journal of Gender , New Media , and Technology , 1 ( 1 ) . Retrieved from http : / / adanewmedia . org / 2012 / 11 / issue1 - nakamura / . National Sexual Violence Resource Center . ( 2016 , January ) . What is sexual violence ? Retrieved from http : / / www . nsvrc . org / sites / default / files / saam _ 2016 _ what - is - sexual - violence _ 0 . pdf . Pateman , C . ( 1988 ) . The patriarchal welfare state . In A . Gutmann ( Ed . ) , Democracy and the welfare state ( pp . 231 – 260 ) . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Parkinson , H . J . ( 2014 , August 20 ) . James Foley : How social media is fighting back against Isis propaganda . The Guardian . Retrieved from http : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2014 / aug / 20 / james - foley - how - social - media - is - fighting - back - against - isis - propaganda . Pascoe , C . J . ( 2007 ) . Dude , you’re a fag : Masculinity and sexuality in high school . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Reagle , J . M . ( 2012 ) . “Free as in sexist ? ” Free culture and the gender gap . First Monday , 18 ( 1 ) . Retrieved from http : / / journals . uic . edu / ojs / index . php / fm / article / view / 4291 . Reagle , J . M . ( 2015 ) . Reading the comments : Likers , haters , and manipulators at the bottom of the web . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Reddit . ( 2016 , August 17 ) . How is a submission’s score deter - mined ? [ frequently asked questions document ] . Retrieved December 2 , 2016 , from https : / / www . reddit . com / wiki / faq # wiki _ how _ is _ a _ submission . 27s _ score _ determined . 3F . Redditmetrics . ( 2016 , November 30 ) . New subreddits by date : Reddit history . Retrieved November 30 , 2016 , from http : / / redditmetrics . com / history . Ringrose , J . , Gill , R . , Livingstone , S . , & Harvey , L . ( 2012 ) . A quali - tative study of children , young people and “ sexting ” : a report prepared for the NSPCC . London , UK : National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children . Retrieved from http : / / eprints . lse . ac . uk / 44216 . Salter , A . , & Blodgett , B . ( 2012 ) . Hypermasculinity & Dickwolves : The contentious role of women in the new gaming public . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media , 56 ( 3 ) , 401 – 416 . 10 . 1080 / 08838151 . 2012 . 705199 . Schrock , D . , & Schwalbe , M . ( 2009 ) . Men , masculinity , and manhood acts . Annual Review of Sociology , 35 , 277 – 295 . Sontag , S . ( 1977 ) . On Photography . New York : Picador . Sontag , S . ( 2003 ) . Regarding the pain of others . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux . Stroud , S . R . ( 2014 ) . The dark side of the online self : A pragmatist critique of the growing plague of revenge porn . Journal of Mass Media Ethics , 29 ( 3 ) , 168 – 183 . Trice , M . ( 2015 ) . Putting GamerGate in context : how group docu - mentation informs social media activity . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual International Conference on the Design of Commu - nication ( p . 37 ) . ACM . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2775471 . Valenti , J . ( 2014 , September 1 ) . What’s wrong with checking out stolen nude photos of celebrities . The Atlantic . Retrieved from http : / / www . theatlantic . com / entertainment / archive / 2014 / 09 / leaked - photos - nude - celebrities - abuse / 379434 / . Vitak , J . , Chadha , K . , Steiner , L . , & Ashktorab , Z . ( 2017 ) . Identifying women’s experiences with and strategies for mitigating negative effects of online harassment . In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Portland , OR : ACM . Retrieved from https : / / vitak . files . wordpress . com / 2009 / 02 / vitak _ etal - 2017 - cscw - online - harassment . pdf . yishan . ( 2014 , September 6 ) . Every man is responsible for his own soul [ blog post ] . Retrieved November 18 , 2014 , from http : / / www . red - ditblog . com / 2014 / 09 / every - man - is - responsible - for - his - own . html . Zekany , E . , & Cerwonka , A . ( 2011 ) . The gendered geek : Performing masculinities in cyberspace . Unpublished Masters Dissertation , Budapest , Central European University . Retrieved from http : / / www . etd . ceu . hu / 2011 / zekany _ eva . pdf .