a r X i v : 1102 . 5720v1 [ m a t h . HO ] 28 F e b 2011 LIBER MATHEMATICAE : A WEB - BASED DOCUMENTATION AND COLLABORATION PROJECT FOR MATHEMATICS MARKUS J . PFLAUM AND JOHN TULEY Traditionally , mathematical knowledge is published in printed media such as books or journals . With the advent of the Internet , a new method of publication became available . To date , however , most online mathematical publications do not employ the full capabilities of the medium . For example , the arXiv preprint server [ 1 ] hosts documents in Adobe’s Portable Document Format ( PDF ) , a format designed to transmit print documents between computers and maintain the formatting . Wikipedia [ 6 ] , on the other hand , presents documents in - browser , but does not have support for presenting mathematics in scalable or copyable ways , since all mathematics is presented as images , not text . The languages of the World Wide Web , namely HTML and XHTML , are derived from Standardized Generalized Markup Language ( SGML ) , originally , and Extensible Markup Language ( XML ) , more recently . Unfortunately , ( X ) HTML has no provisions for displaying mathematics , a problem which the World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) solved with the MathML markup language . Like XHTML , MathML is a markup language with “programs” stored as human - readable , plain - text ﬁles , formatted by a web browser or special viewer . As such , and as a standardized language , MathML is uniquely able to serve as a platform by which mathematics can be presented – primarily on the Web – but also processed by computer programs . In particular , computer algebra systems or tools for processing and disseminating text - based information such as search engines can handle mathematical content written in MathML . In an article in the Notices of the AMS from May 2005 , Miner [ 4 ] explained in detail such features and the importance of MathML for the cummunication of mathematical content in the future . The real power of XML technology is that it allows to transcend a current “consumer culture” within the community of mathematicians , in which a few people produce content which is then consumed by many others , and reach what Fischer [ 2 ] calls a “culture of participation” in which knowledge is created , shared , and acted upon by all parties . This goal can be achieved by encoding mathematics in browser - readable and easily - editable documents in MathML , instead of in read - only documents like PDF . The Liber Mathematicae project [ 3 ] looks to bring the open source model of software development to mathematics publishing by employing cutting edge XML technology , high - quality mathematics fonts for the Web from the STIX Fonts project [ 5 ] ( see also [ 7 ] ) , and relational database technology to allow for a sophisticated version control and review process for the submitted mathematical content . We have developed a web site , where members of the mathematical community can not only view articles but can additionally participate in the creative process by contributing corrections , suggest improvements , or by expanding on the original content . In contrast to traditional mathematics journals , the main goals of Liber Mathematicae are to have articles which are expandable , correctable and dynamic , with tools for collaborative writing and open access to the entire mathematics community . Moreover due to their online nature , articles on Liber Mathematicae may contain more than static text and images and may in fact hold animations , live computational demonstrations , and so forth , and may use hyperlinking to strongly cross - reference other articles . An additional goal is to create a logical dependance tree for all mathematical theorems on Liber Mathematicae . We hope that with this new environment for communicating mathematical knowledge , the openness and cooperation will help to increase both the pace and quality of new mathematical research . References [ 1 ] arXiv : http : / / www . arXiv . org [ 2 ] Fischer , G . : End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation , Journal of Organiza - tional and End User Computing 22 ( 2010 ) , 52 - 82 , http : / / l3d . cs . colorado . edu / ~ gerhard / papers / 2010 - JOEUC . pdf [ 3 ] Liber Mathematicae : http : / / www . libermath . org [ 4 ] Miner , R . : The Importance of MathML to Mathematics Communication , Notices of the AMS 52 , nr . 5 ( 2005 ) , 532 – 538 [ 5 ] STIX Fonts : http : / / www . stixfonts . org [ 6 ] Wikipedia , The Free Encylopedia : http : / / www . wikipedia . org [ 7 ] Selingo , J . : “WHAT’S NEXT ; The Noah’s Ark of the Web , 7 , 000 Characters at a Time” , New York Times , Nov 7 , 2002 Department of Mathematics , University of Colorado , Boulder , CO 80309 - 0395 , U . S . A . E - mail address : Markus . Pflaum @ colorado . edu Department of Mathematics , University of Colorado , Boulder , CO 80309 - 0395 , U . S . A . E - mail address : John . Tuley @ colorado . edu presented at Workshop on the Future of Mathematics Journals , MSRI , Berkeley , USA on February 15 , 2011 .