ns * ns PEER - REVIEW PATTERNS An analysis of thousands of submissions to the journal eLife — in which peer - review panels openly discuss submitted works — found that all - female reviewer groups accepted more manuscripts with female last authors than did all - male panels . 80 60 40 20 A cc e p t e d s u b m i ss i o n s ( % ) Female Female All - female reviewers All - male reviewers Mixed - gender reviewers Gender of last author Female Male Male Male 520 21 735 1 , 952 56 2 , 211 0 BY DALMEET SINGH CHAWLA W omen are inadequately represented as peer reviewers , journal editors and last authors of studies , accord - ing to an analysis of manuscript submissions to an influential biomedical journal . The study looked at all submissions made to the open - access title eLife from its launch in 2012 to 2017 — nearly 24 , 000 . It found that women worldwide , and researchers outside North America and Europe , were less likely to be peer reviewers , editors and last authors . The paper — which hasn’t itself yet been peer - reviewed — was posted on the preprint server bioRxiv on 29 August ( D . Murray et al . Preprint at BioRxiv https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 400515 ; 2018 ) . About 7 , 000 of the submitted studies went through the full submission process ( at eLife , authors make a ‘pre - submission query’ before being invited by the journal to send a full paper — a relatively uncommon practice among journals ) . In all , the analysis covered the activity of about 7 , 000 referees , 890 reviewing editors and 57 senior editors . The researchers found that women make up only 21 % of peer reviewers , and around one in four reviewing editors . Most reviewing editors and peer reviewers were based in the United States — 62 % and 56 % , respectively they disagree on how to explain these patterns . One approach views electrons as strongly inter - acting particles 2 , 3 , whereas the other treats them as wave - like and only weakly interacting . To glean more information about these patterns , Kim’s team designed neural networks — AI inspired by structures in the brain — that studied images of the pseudogap . Patterns in the images , taken with a scanning tunnelling micro - scope , often seem disordered to the human eye because of the material’s naturally chaotic and fluctuating nature , and noise in the measure - ments . The advantage of machine learning in this situation is that algorithms can learn to recognize patterns that are invisible to people . PATTERN RECOGNITION To train the algorithms , the team fed neural networks examples of rippled patterns that corresponded to different theoretical predic - tions . Having learnt to recognize these exam - ples , each algorithm applied this learning to real data from cuprates in the pseudogap . Over 81 iterations , the algorithms repeatedly identi - fied one modulating pattern that corresponded to the particle - like description of electrons , which dates back to the 1990s . The team’s paper shows that the particle - like description is more appropriate in this case than is the conventional wave - like description , says André - Marie Tremblay , a physicist at the University of Sherbrooke in Canada , who was at Kim’s talk in Beijing . Working out the nature of the patterns is crucial to interpreting what causes them , says Milan Allan , a physicist at Leiden University in the Netherlands . The technique could eventually help physicists to understand high - temperature superconductivity , says Allan , although he cautions that the paper is far from definitive and that debate about what the pseudogap is will continue . The work is an impressive , original application of machine - learning algorithms to this type of experimental data , says Tremblay . But the algorithm can only distinguish between the various hypotheses it is given , he says , rather than find entirely new patterns . During her talk , Kim said that work is under way to apply the technique to rapidly make sense of data from the X - ray diffraction of quantum materials — a technique that uses the scattering of electromagnetic waves to reveal a mater ial’s 3D physical structure , but which creates patterns so rich that they can take months to unravel by conventional means . In this case , the AI must draw out similarities and classifications itself , rather than be given pre - labelled examples , by grouping features that it sees as similar . “This journey of using AI , or machine learning , for various aspects of our quest to understand quantum emergence has just begun , ” said Kim . ■ 1 . Zhang , Y . et al . Preprint at https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1808 . 00479 ( 2018 ) . 2 . Kivelson , S . A . , Fradkin , E . & Emery , V . J . Nature 393 , 550 – 553 ( 1998 ) . 3 . Zaanen , J . Science 286 , 251 – 252 ( 1999 ) . GENDER BIAS Peer review fails equity test Analysis of submissions to eLife reveals a gender gap in whom journals invite to do reviews . S O U R C E : D . M U RR A Y E T A L . P R E P R I N T A T B I O R X I V H TT P S : / / D O I . O R G / 10 . 1101 / 400515 ( 2018 ) . Micrograph of yttrium barium copper oxide , a high - temperature superconductor . 2 0 S E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 8 | V O L 5 6 1 | N AT U R E | 2 9 5 IN FOCUS NEWS © 2018 Sp r inger Nature Limited . All rights reserved . — followed by the United Kingdom and Germany in second and third place . Less than 2 % of reviewers were in developing nations . Of the full submissions , the study found that 1 , 549 ( 22 % ) had a female last author — a posi - tion that indicates seniority — and 5 , 127 had a male last author . About 53 % of manuscripts with male last authors were accepted , com - pared with around 50 % of those with female last authors . Fifty - seven per cent of fully submitted papers with a male last author were accepted when the review panel was all male ( see ‘Peer - review patterns’ ) , whereas mixed - gender teams accepted 51 % of male - last - author papers . And submissions that had been edited or reviewed by someone in the same country as the corre - sponding author were more likely to be accepted than those with a country mismatch . The trends are likely to be a result of implicit biases , says study co - author Cassidy Sugimoto , an information scientist at Indiana University Bloomington . The study did not seek to reveal how the disparities arose , say the authors . But because the gender make - up of senior authors and gatekeepers closely matches disparities found broadly in science , there is no evidence that eLife is making such disparities worse . The research was prompted by eLife , which approached Sugimoto and her colleagues with the data ; two study authors are eLife employees . The journal’s reviewing process is unorthodox in that referees know each other’s identities , which allows them to discuss any differences of opinion on manuscripts . BODY OF EVIDENCE The study is robust , says Jevin West , an infor - mation scientist at the University of Washing - ton in Seattle . And it is concerning that women and authors in developing countries seem to be marginalized in peer review , he says . “It’s very important that we have diverse voices repre - sented and that those voices are treated equitably . ” The results echo previous findings about peer review . This month , a global survey by Publons — a site that allows academics to record their peer - review activity — found that researchers in developing coun - tries are under - represented as reviewers , yet are more likely than scientists in richer coun - tries to accept review requests , and complete reviews faster . And last year , an analysis of American Geophysical Union ( AGU ) journals found that women are invited to review less often than expected , but that the editors’ gender has no influence on acceptance rates ( J . Lerback and B . Hanson Nature 541 , 455 – 457 ; 2017 ) . Sugimoto says that journal policies should aim to ensure diversity on review panels , for example , by inviting a greater proportion of women and researchers in developing nations to do reviews . “This is one of the simplest pol - icy changes we can make , ” she says , “without high risks , and potentially high benefits . ” Andrew Collings , eLife’ s executive editor and a study co - author who is based in Cambridge , UK , says that the team is communicating its results to the editorial board , so that editors can consider the findings as they assess submissions and select reviewers . “We are particularly keen to see editors using diverse groups of reviewers whenever possible . ” To weed out the effect of implicit biases on acceptance rates , it is tempting to see blinding as a solution , West says . But , he adds , double - blind peer review — in which neither authors nor reviewers know each others’ identities — often works poorly , because some fields are so small that reviewers can guess who wrote a paper . Sugimoto says that more data are needed to determine the effectiveness of techniques such as blinding or open peer review , in which reviews are published and authors and review - ers might know each other’s identities . She hopes that more journals and publishers will release data on peer review for analysis . “Then , we can inform it with evidence rather than with anecdote . ” ■ BY AMY MAXMEN A dvances in video cameras and low - light sensors are revealing animal behaviours in the deep sea that researchers have never recorded before . The behaviours include a worm - like predator shooting off rings of blue light , and an animal anchored to the sea floor sending flashes of light dancing along its body , creat - ing the illusion of a tiny creature swimming upwards . Steven Haddock , a marine biologist at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute ( MBARI ) in California , showcased videos of these phenomena and more for the first time on 13 September at the Deep Sea Biology Symposium in Monterey . He is one of a hand - ful of researchers around the world who are using extremely high - resolution cameras and ultra - sensitive sensors to capture unprece - dented footage of marine organisms in the wild . “We can see natural behaviour in a way that we’ve never been able to before , ” says Haddock . COMING INTO FOCUS Until recently , researchers needed to use bright lights to capture footage of animals living in the deep dark ocean . The lights scared many creatures away , and when sci - entists tried filming under low - light con - ditions , poor camera resolution made it difficult to pick out fine details such as a small ring of light . In 2016 , Haddock’s team attached a 4K camera , which has four times as many pixels per image as a high - definition ( HD ) camera , to one of MBARI’s remotely operated vehicles ( ROVs ) . On one of Haddock’s first voyages with the camera , he recorded a 2 . 5 - centimetre - long animal called an arrow worm emitting a trail of doughnut - shaped rings of blue light . Haddock speculates that the creature uses the display to distract predators as it escapes . “Our HD camera wouldn’t have captured this at all , ” he says . In mid - August , another research team deployed an 8K camera in the deep sea for the first time to explore hydrothermal vents in the Okinawa Trough near Japan . The 8K camera’s resolution nearly matches that of the human eye , and it enabled Dhugal Lindsay , a marine biologist at the Japan Agency for Marine - Earth Science and Tech - nology in Yokosuka , to film near - micro - scopic plankton in enough detail to identify their species . SEEING IN THE DARK Other marine biologists are fine - tuning the latest low - light camera sensors that also reduce noise from scattered , indirect light . This allows researchers to use a lot less illu - mination to record ocean life , decreasing the chances of their ROVs scaring off animals . The sensors also allow scientists to pick up phenomena such as bioluminescence — the production of light by an organism — and to ECOLOGY Hidden lives of deep - sea animals Cameras record behaviours long cloaked in darkness . “It’s important that we have diverse voices represented and that those voices are treated equitably . ” 2 9 6 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 6 1 | 2 0 S E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 8 IN FOCUS NEWS © 2018 Springer Nature Limited . All rights reserved .