WWW . ASTASTRINGS . ORG | 29 American String Teacher Vol . 70 , No . 4 , November 2020 , pp . 29 – 34 DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0003131320963098 Article reuse guidelines : sagepub . com / journals - permissions Copyright © 2020 , American String Teachers Association FEATURE FEATURE In the August 2020 issue of American String Teacher , I provided a rationale for the importance of providing access to students with disabilities into our studios and classrooms . The two primary concepts were as follows : • Effective instructional adaptations begin with a correct perspective toward students with disabilities . • Neurological diversity is a strength , not a weakness— without exceptional learners , we would not have had some of the greatest art , science , or other creations that we currently have . We are changing our vocabulary from “abnormality” to “non neuro - typical” to reflect this . This is a philosophical , ethical , and medical issue . The word neurotypical ( NT ) is used to describe children who do not have developmental delays or giftedness . Students with special needs can be pretty remarkable . Consider the contributions that the following list of individuals have made to human achievement despite some pretty overwhelming challenges : • Stephen Hawking ( motor neuron disease / ALS 1 ) • Leonardo da Vinci ( ASD ) • Albert Einstein ( ASD ) • Steve Jobs , Founder of Apple ( dyslexia ) • Richard Branson , Founder of Virgin ( dyslexia , which he called his “greatest strength” ) • George Washington ( LD ) • Benjamin Franklin ( ASD ) • Steven Spielberg ( dyslexia ) • Agatha Christie ( dysgraphia ) • Helen Keller ( developmental disabilities ; visual and hearing impairment ) • Anderson Cooper , Journalist ( dyslexia ) • Magic Johnson , Hall of Fame basketball player ( dyslexia ) • Michael Phelps , Olympic gold medalist in swimming ( ADHD ) • Pablo Picasso ( dyslexia ) • Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart ( ADHD ) • Ludwig van Beethoven ( dyslexia , hearing impairment ) • John Lennon ( dyslexia ) Types of Disabilities The types of disabilities most frequently encountered by educators are known as developmental disabilities , which are a group of conditions due to an impairment in physical , learning , language , or behavior areas . These conditions begin during the developmental period , may affect day - to - day functioning , and usually last throughout a person’s lifetime . 2 Common developmental disabilities include ASD ; ADHD ; cerebral palsy ; fetal alcohol spectrum disorders ; hearing loss ; intellectual disabilities ; communication , language , and speech disorders ; LDs ; Tourette syndrome ; and vision impairment . In this article , I deal specifically with the prevalent types of disorders affecting students in the string / orchestra classroom and music studio : ASD , ADHD , and LDs . The majority of these disabilities are classified as neurodevelopmental disorders , meaning that there is some level of impairment in the central nervous system , including the brain . These disorders have multiple origins and may occur as a result of genetic factors , social factors , traumatic brain injury , nutrition deficiency , and / or poisoning from neurotoxicants such as alcohol , narcotics , heavy metals , and others . These conditions may affect emotion , self - control , memory , learning abilities , physical functions , and other operations . Without appropriate treatment and accommodations , these conditions can have a significant detrimental effect on an individual’s ability to function successfully in life . Accommodations for exceptional students range greatly and recommendations for accommodations change frequently , based on new research and increasing understanding of specific nontypical characteristics . Critical Understandings for String Teachers In my experience , many string teachers lack sufficient training in understanding disabilities and typical child development . Music education majors may have required courses for working with nontypical students , but teachers note that once they enter the workforce , they do not receive sufficient training in working with specific disabilities in their classroom , beyond being informed about Individualized Education Plans ( IEPs ) or 504 Plans 3 ( both provide support for students with varying levels of disabilities ) . And , unless the studio teachers have a formal music education background or training in child development , they may have limited awareness about nontypical students . The instructional adaptations for students in the music classroom often look very different from the regular classroom . Though not 963098 STA American String Teacher WWW . ASTAWEB . COM CELEBRATING ALL LEARNERS , PART II : HELPING STudENTS wITH CommoN dISABILITIES ANd SPECIAL NEEdS SuCCEEd PLAyING STRING By Stephen J . Benham 30 | AmeRIcAN STRING TeAcheR | NOvembeR 2020 FEATURE required by law , it is a good idea for the music teacher to be present at the IEP or 504 meetings . Awareness and use of the IEP and adherence to 504 accommodations are required by law for all teachers . Parents and teachers should also be aware of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) which specifies the legal framework for accommodations . 4 The following six categories are typically used to diagnose disability or exceptionality : • Measured intelligence —Though there is no agreed model of intelligence , psychologists generally include items such as the ability to reason and analyze , to create and solve problems , to learn from one’s experiences , to understand one’s self ( self - awareness ) , to adapt to one’s circumstances , think abstractly , and comprehend complex ideas . A distinction is also made between general intelligence and specific intelligence , crystallized ( i . e . , things that have been learned ) and fluid ( things that we are still in the process of learning ) intelligence ( Cattell 1987 ) . Sternberg ( 1985 , 1988 ) identifies three categories of intelligence : analytical intelligence , creative intelligence , and practical intelligence . In general , these tests are limited to very specific types of intelligence areas : verbal , mathematic , and spatial abilities . • Social interaction —The extent to which the student makes and sustains eye contact , enjoys interaction with others , prefers solitude to group activities , picks up social cues , and so on . • Communication —The extent to which the child is able to use words to communicate . • Behaviors —The extent to which children demonstrate unusually repetitive or nontypical behaviors . • Sensory —The extent to which children have unusual responses to sensory information , such as visual stimuli , smell , sound , taste , and feel . • Motor —The extent to which students are typical in their development on both gross motor skills ( such as walking ) and fine motor skills ( such as using fingers to grasp and manipulate an intricate item , such as a bow ) . These same categories are used to determine developmental delay , which is the description of those children who do not meet certain developmental milestones . Developmental screening is used by doctors , nurses , schools , and psychologists to determine if children have such delays and if they need extra learning support . These tests are parts of normal infant and childhood physical examinations ; schools may also provide additional screening . Neither the studio teacher nor the school educator should attempt to diagnose their students in any situation . This important work should be left to authorized medical and school personnel , who are both trained and have experience in working with children with disabilities . The Demographics of Disability The following statistics are extremely informative and highlight the need for increased awareness and training for classroom and studio teachers . • One in six children in the United States have one or more developmental disabilities or other developmental delays . 5 • There has been an increase in developmental disabilities among children in the United States . 6 • Boys are nearly three times as likely to be diagnosed with ASD than girls . • Non - Hispanic white children were 30 percent more likely to be identified with ASD than non - Hispanic black children and were almost 50 percent more likely to be identified with ASD than Hispanic children . ASD The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) defines ASD as a developmental disability that can cause significant social , communication and behavioral challenges . There is often nothing about how people with ASD look that sets them apart from other people , but people with ASD may communicate , interact , behave , and learn in ways that are different from most other people . The learning , thinking , and problem - solving abilities of people with ASD can range from gifted to severely challenged . Some people with ASD need a lot of help in their daily lives ; others need less . A diagnosis of ASD now includes several conditions that used to be diagnosed separately : autistic disorder , pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified ( PDD - NOS ) , and Asperger syndrome . “ Neurological diversity is a strength , not a weakness—without exceptional learners , we would not have had some of the greatest art , science , or other creations that we currently have . ” WWW . ASTASTRINGS . ORG | 31 FEATURE ASD begins before the age of three and lasts throughout a person’s life , although symptoms may improve over time . Some children with ASD display traits in the first few months of life . In others , symptoms may not show up until twenty - four months or later . Some children with ASD develop normally until around eighteen to twenty - four months of age and then stop gaining new skills or lose the skills they once had ( Johnson 2004 ) . Studies have shown that 30 – 50 percent of parents of children with ASD noticed a problem before their child’s first birthday , and nearly 80 – 90 percent saw problems by twenty - four months of age ( Kozlowski et al . 2011 ) . Scientists do not know yet exactly what causes these differences . Current literature shows potentially up to 2 , 000 different genetic and environmental factors related to the ASD . So , it is not a matter of being “more” or “less” autistic . Rather , ASD is a condition in which an individual may have multiple ASD traits , but in which not one autistic person is like another . A common statement among those who research ASD is this : “if you’ve met one person with ASD , you’ve met just one person with ASD . ” Possible Indicators of ASD 7 A person with ASD might • Not respond to their name by twelve months of age • Not point at objects to show interest ( point at an airplane flying over ) by fourteen months • Not play “pretend” games ( pretend to “feed” a doll ) by eighteen months • Have trouble understanding other people’s feelings or talking about their own feelings • Have delayed speech and language skills • Flap their hands , rock their body , spin in circles , or engage in other self - stimulating behaviors when experiencing sensory overload or high levels of anxiety ( aka , “stimming” ) . Repeating words or phrases over and over ( echolalia ) is a form of stimming . • Give unrelated answers to questions • Get upset by minor changes • Have obsessive interests • Have unusual reactions to the way things sound , smell , taste , look , or feel Social issues are one of the most common symptoms in all the types of ASD . It is more than just being shy . These issues cause serious problems in everyday life . ASD children frequently • Avoid eye contact and prefer to play alone • Do not share interests with others • Only interact to achieve a desired goal • Have flat or inappropriate facial expressions • Do not understand personal space boundaries • Avoid or resist physical contact • Are not comforted by others during distress • Have trouble understanding other people’s feelings or talking about their own feelings Some people with ASD might not be interested in other people at all . Others might want friends , but not understand how to develop friendships . Many children with ASD have a very hard time learning to take turns and share—much more so than other children . This can make other children not want to play with them . All these symptoms can make other social problems even harder to manage and can result in high rates of anxiety and depression . 8 Each person with ASD has different communication skills . Some people can speak well . Others cannot speak at all or only very little . About 40 percent of children with ASD do not talk at all . About 25 – 30 percent of children with ASD have some words at twelve to eighteen months of age and then lose them . 9 Others might speak , but not until later in childhood . Children with ASD might • Have delayed speech and language skills • Reverse pronouns ( e . g . , says “you” instead of “I” ) • Use language in unusual ways ; give unrelated answers to specific questions • Use few or no gestures ( e . g . , does not wave goodbye ) • Talk in a flat , robot - like , high - pitched , or sing - song voice ; do not understand vocal inflection or tone of voice • Do not pretend in play ( e . g . , does not pretend to “feed” a doll ) • Do not understand jokes , sarcasm , or teasing • Display facial expressions , movements , and gestures that do not match what they are saying . For instance , they might smile while saying something sad . • Stand too close to the person they are talking to or might stick with one topic of conversation for too long . They do not easily recognize nonverbal social cues , so they might talk a lot about something they really like , rather than have a back - and - forth conversation with someone . Many people with ASD have unusual interest or behaviors , such as the following : • Lining up toys or other objects • Playing with toys the same way every time • Obsessing with small parts of objects ( e . g . , wheels ) • Extremely organized • Getting disproportionally upset by minor changes • Needing routines—A change in the normal pattern of the rehearsal or lesson can be very upsetting to people with ASD . They might “lose control” and have a “melt down” or tantrum , especially if in a strange place . • Some people with ASD may also develop routines that might seem unusual or unnecessary . For example , a person might try to look in every window he or she walks by a building or might always want to watch a video from beginning to end , including the previews 32 | AmeRIcAN STRING TeAcheR | NOvembeR 2020 FEATURE and the credits . Not being allowed to do these types of routines might cause severe frustration and tantrums . Finally , children with ASD may display the following characteristics , which are also frequently associated with ADHD . • Hyperactivity ( very active ) • Impulsivity ( acting without thinking ) • Short attention span • Aggression • Causing self - injury • Temper tantrums • Unusual eating and sleeping habits • Unusual mood or emotional reactions • Lack of fear ( in situations in which typical children might respond or more fear than expected , based on what the autistic individual perceives to be a very real and rational threat ) • Unusual reactions to the way things sound , smell , taste , look , or feel ADHD ADHD is a common neurobehavioral disorder ( also called ADD ) , typically diagnosed in childhood and frequently lasting into adult years . The most common symptoms are difficulty paying attention and controlling impulsive behaviors . While NT children may struggle with focus and behavior at one point or another , children with ADHD do not generally improve without intervention . Their symptoms often worsen over time , and this can make learning quite difficult . ADHD children can often be described as immature , oppositional , or rebellious . A child with ADHD might display the following : • Difficulty paying attention ; frequently daydreaming • Appearing not to be listening • Easily distracted from schoolwork or play ( can also be hyperfocused on a single object ) • Frequently forgets things • In constant motion , unable to stay seated , impulse control problems • Squirms or fidgets frequently • Talks too much , out of turn , and can interrupt others • Acts and speaks without thinking • Does not always take turns in activities or games ( lacks awareness of others in the process ) Strategies for the String Teacher You will note that many of the strategies for working with ASD and ADHD populations are the same or closely related . Why ? Research studies show that 16 – 85 percent of ASD children and adolescents also have high rates of ADHD symptoms ( Leitner 2014 ) . The following list applies to both populations de l’Etoile and Shannon ( 2005 ) ; Freer ( 2012 ) ; Heikkila & Knight ( 2012 ) ; Robe ( 2004 ) : • Create a highly structured environment that is consistent and predictable . Sequencing instruction appropriately is essential . Refer to the ASTA String Curriculum for specific learning sequences , teaching strategies , and indicators of success for students and parents to use at home . • Set clear expectations for behavior and performance . • Minimize instructional downtime . • Avoid abrupt transitions in instruction . • Forecast deviations from routines well in advance , so surprises are minimized . Writing rehearsal or lesson order , learning objectives , behavioral outcomes , and so on on the board or in a notebook is very helpful . • Work with the parent and child to develop nonverbal signals to let the child know that they are moving toward unacceptable behavior . • Engage the child in the instructional process by giving them specific , concrete tasks to accomplish , for example , “in your home practice , play each exercise correctly x number of times , at this tempo . As you play , use the checklist to make sure that each of the following are correct : body posture , instrument position , bow hand , and others” as appropriate . • Give specific answers to general questions . When a child does not understand , rather than asking for clarification , they seek to distract themselves . • Give frequent assessment and clear feedback to the students about musical and behavioral issues , both . • Engage students in a self - assessment of both performance and behavior . • High - achieving ASD students may work very well by themselves . Group projects can be very frustrating . Reward their individuality with projects like chamber music or assignments that challenge their exceptional intellectual capacity . • Physical space : two options exist for students with ADHD : ( 1 ) near the teacher station / conducting podium , so that distractions from behind are minimized or ( 2 ) seating toward the back , but not in the very back , of a section . This allows them to see what is happening without feeling isolated . Give new seating situations two weeks before determining if the placement is working . Respect the physical space of students with ASD . Recognize that they may not want to be touched or may be uncomfortable with the feel of the instrument ( correct fitting shoulder rests and chinrests are essential ) . LDs LDs include problems with language , arithmetic , auditory processing , organization , attention and concentration , motor coordination , memory , and resulting behavioral issues . The three primary types of LD are dyslexia ( atypical difficulty with reading and reading processing ) , dyscalculia ( atypical difficulty with mathematics or processing numbers ) , and dysgraphia WWW . ASTASTRINGS . ORG | 33 FEATURE ( atypical difficulty with writing ) . According to the CDC , some of the symptoms of LDs include the following : • Difficulty telling right from left • Reversing letters , words , or numbers , after the first or second grade • Difficulty recognizing patterns or sorting items by size or shape • Difficulty understanding and following instructions or staying organized • Difficulty remembering what was just said or what was just read • Lacking coordination when moving around • Difficulty doing tasks with the hands , like writing , cutting , or drawing • Difficulty understanding the concept of time Within the music classroom , LD issues are most noticeable in the area of musical literacy . For teachers to be successful in helping students with an LD , the following understandings are important . Reading notation is a complex activity that requires at least the following : • Decoding rhythmic notation and coordinating that notation with specific physical motions in both the right and left hands . • Decoding specific pitch notation patterns ( such as scalar patterns and fingerboard logic ) • Accurate performance of imagined / audiated pitch and rhythm patterns • Decoding articulation markings ( slurs vs . phrasing ; staccato vs . dotted notes and so on are all very difficult ) , dynamic , and tempo markings • Understanding bar lines , repeats , and other musical direction symbols and notation Many students who have some form of an LD are also extremely gifted in other areas but may be afraid to speak in class for fear of embarrassment . Teachers should confirm student efforts and provide extra support as students develop reading skills . • Mnemonic devices ( e . g . , every - good - boy - does - fine for remembering the lines of the treble clef staff ) do not always work well with LD students . Short - term memory is a great challenge for students with an LD . de l’Etoile and Shannon ( 2005 ) . • Students with both reading and arithmetic disabilities may struggle on many areas . Strategies for the String Teacher • Teach aural and visual skills separately . • Use chant before moving directly to the instrument . Add bow on a single pitch to help students associate kinesthetic movement with rhythmic notation . • Scaffold reading instruction , starting with simple notation on a single line before moving to a full staff . Teach solfège so that pitch notation is associated with a specific sound . • Use colors to mark different musical symbols , that is , one color for pitch notation and another color for musical expression and so on . • Remember that activities like “sight - reading” can be incredibly stressful for LD students . Create specific , repeatable strategies for approaching a new piece . • Solve potential physical discomfort issues with instruments ( such as chinrests , shoulder rests , or the sides / corners of cellos and basses touching the body ) with extra cushions , moleskin ( on a chinrest ) , or soft cloth . • Post a series of pictures around the classroom that nonverbal students can use to reference things , like chinrest , shoulder rest , rosin , string , and so on . This will also help students who struggle to remember terminology . A Word about Musical Exceptionality and Creativity Exceptionality in musical aptitude also occurs in students with disabilities ; however , music and other creative aptitudes are less frequently diagnosed because schools do not routinely test student aptitude in those subjects . There are five components that are likely to be important for the development of creativity , and these things are also critical components of what string educators do every day in the classroom and studio in working with students with disabilities . 10 • Recognize expertise . Creative people have carefully studied and know a lot about the topic that they are working in ( Ericsson , 1998 ; Weisberg , 2012 ) . • Promote imaginative thinking . Creative people often view a problem in a visual way , allowing them to see it from a new and different point of view . • Guide risk - taking . Creative people are willing to take on new but potentially risky approaches . • Validate intrinsic interest . Creative people tend to work on projects because they love doing them , not because they are paid for them ( Hennessey and Amabile 2010 ) . • Foster a creative environment . Creativity is in part a social phenomenon . Simonton ( 1992 ) found that the most creative people were supported , aided , and challenged by other people working on similar project . This is a call for all of us to consider again ASTA’s vision of “Enriching lives through universal access to fine string playing and teaching . ” Notes 1 . ALS = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( aka , Lou Gehrig’s disease ) , ASD = autism spectrum disorder , LD = learning disorder ) , ADHD = attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder . 34 | AmeRIcAN STRING TeAcheR | NOvembeR 2020 FEATURE 2 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / developmentaldisabilities / facts . html # ref 3 . This refers to Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 . See https : / / www . parentcenterhub . org / section504 / for additional information . 4 . Refer to https : / / www . parentcenterhub . org / doe / for current guidelines and information from the US Department of Education related to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) and the rights of parents and children . 5 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / developmentaldisabilities / index . html 6 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / developmentaldisabilities / features / increase - in - developmental - disabilities . html 7 . Throughout this article , I use the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) lists of descriptors and characteristics for describing and understanding each of these particular conditions . The CDC takes a middle ground on disability issues and reflects both good medical and psychological research , in addition to informing federal and state policy . 8 . Burchi and Hollander indicate that around 40 percent of young people with ASD have clinically elevated levels of anxiety or at least one anxiety disorder , including obsessive compulsive disorder . See https : / / adaa . org / learn - from - us / from - the - experts / blog - posts / consumer / anxiety - autism - spectrum - disorder . 9 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / autism / signs . html # 1 10 . https : / / opentextbc . ca / introductiontopsychology / chapter / 9 - 1 - defining - and - measuring - intelligence / References Cattell , Raymond B . 1987 . Intelligence : Its Structure , Growth , and Action . 1st ed . , Vol . 35 . Amsterdam : Elsevier . https : / / www . elsevier . com / books / intelligence - its - structure - growth - and - action / cattell / 978 - 0 - 444 - 87922 - 6 de l’Etoile , Shannon K . 2005 . “Teaching Music to Special Learners : Children with Disruptive Behavior Disorders . ” Music Educators Journal 91 : 37 – 43 . Ericsson , K . Anders . 1998 . “The Scientific Study of Expert Levels of Performance : General Implications for Optimal Learning and creativity . ” High Ability Studies 9 ( 1 ) : 75 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 1359813980090106 . Freer , Patrick K . 2012 . “Attention Deficits and the Choral Rehearsal . ” Music Educators Journal 99 : 18 – 21 . Heikkila , Elizabeth , and Andrew Knight . 2012 . “Inclusive Music Teaching Strategies for Elementary - Age Children with Developmental Dyslexia . ” Music Educators Journal 99 : 54 – 59 . Hennessey , Beth A . , and Teresa M . Amabile . 2010 . “Creativity . ” Annual Review of Psychology 61 : 569 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 093008 . 100416 . Johnson , Chris Plauché . 2004 . “Autism Spectrum Disorders in Children . ” In Autistic Spectrum Disorders in Children , edited by Vidya Bhushan Gupta , 85 – 123 . NewYork : Marcel Dekker . Kozlowski , Alison M . , Johnny L . Matson , Max Horovitz , Julie A . Worley , and Daniene Neal . 2011 . “Parents’ First Concerns of Their Child’s Development in Toddlers with Autism Spectrum Disorders . ” Developmental Neurorehabilitation 14 ( 2 ) : 72 – 78 . Leitner , Yael . 2014 . “The Co - occurrence of Autism and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children—What Do We Know ? ” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8 : 268 . Robe , Harry R . 2004 . “Eight Classroom Strategies for Working with ADD / ADHD Children : A Guide for Teachers and Parents . In Spotlight on Making Music with Special Learners : Selected Articles from State MEA Journals , 48 - 53 . Reston : MENC . Simonton , Dean Keith . 1992 . “The Social Context of Career Success and Course for 2 , 026 Scientists and Inventors . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 18 ( 4 ) : 452 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167292184009 . Sternberg , Robert J . 1985 . Beyond IQ : A Triarchic Theory of Human Intelligence . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , Robert J . 1988 . The Triarchic Mind : A New Theory of Human Intelligence . New York : Viking . Weisberg , Robert W . 2012 . Creativity : Understanding Innovation in Problem Solving , Science , Invention , and the Arts . California : Content Technologies . Stephen J . Benham ( benham @ duq . edu ) is a professor of music education and chair of performance at the Mary Pappert School of Music at Duquesne University ( Pennsylvania ) . He has degrees from the University of Minnesota , the University of Michigan ( MM ) , and the Eastman School of Music ( PhD ) . At Duquesne , he teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in music education and string pedagogy . Prior to this , he held teaching positions in both public and private schools in Oregon , Michigan , and New York . He maintains a very active schedule as a guest conductor , clinician , speaker , and adjudicator , with professional appearances in nearly 40 states and more than 30 countries .