Research made simple 2 Evidence - Based Nursing January 2012 | volume 15 | number 1 | Qualitative data analysis Kate Seers Good qualitative research uses a systematic and rigor - ous approach that aims to answer questions concerned with what something is like ( such as a patient experience ) , what people think or feel about something that has hap - pened , and it may address why something has happened as it has . Qualitative data often takes the form of words or text and can include images . Qualitative research covers a very broad range of phil - osophical underpinnings and methodological approaches . Each has its own particular way of approaching all stages of the research process , including analysis , and has its own terms and techniques , but there are some common threads that run across most of these approaches . This Research Made Simple piece will focus on some of these common threads in the analysis of qualitative research . So you have collected all your qualitative data – you may have a pile of interview transcripts , fi eld - notes , documents and notes from observation . The process of analysis is described by Richards and Morse 1 as one of transformation and interpretation . It is easy to be overwhelmed by the volume of data – novice qualitative researchers are sometimes told not to worry and the themes will emerge from the data . This suggests some sort of epiphany , ( which is how it happens sometimes ! ) but generally it comes from detailed work and refl ection on the data and what it is telling you . There is sometimes a fi ne line between being immersed in the data and drowning in it ! A fi rst step is to sort and organise the data , by coding it in some way . For example , you could read through a transcript , and identify that in one paragraph a patient is talking about two things ; fi rst is fear of surgery and second is fear of unrelieved pain . The codes for this para - graph could be ‘fear of surgery’ and ‘fear of pain’ . In other areas of the transcript fear may arise again , and perhaps these codes will be merged into a category titled ‘fear’ . Other concerns may emerge in this and other transcripts and perhaps best be represented by the theme ‘lack of control’ . Themes are thus more abstract concepts , refl ect - ing your interpretation of patterns across your data . So from codes , categories can be formed , and from catego - ries , more encompassing themes are developed to describe the data in a form which summarises it , yet retains the richness , depth and context of the original data . Using quotations to illustrate categories and themes helps keep the analysis fi rmly grounded in the data . You need to constantly ask yourself ‘what is happening here ? ’ as you code and move from codes , to categories and themes , making sure you have data to support your decisions . Analysis inevitably involves subjective choices , and it is important to document what you have done and why , so a clear audit trail is provided . The coding example above describes codes inductively coming from the data . Some researchers may use a coding framework derived from , for example , the literature , their research questions or interview prompts , ( Ritchie and Spencer 2 ) or a combina - tion of both approaches . Qualitative data , such as transcripts from an inter - view , are often routed in the interaction between the par - ticipant and the researcher . Refl ecting on how you , as a researcher , may have infl uenced both the data collected and the analysis is an important part of the analysis . As well as keeping your brain very much in gear , you need to be really organised . You may use highlighting pens and paper to keep track of your analysis , or use qualitative software to manage your data ( such as NVivio or Atlas Ti ) . These programmes help you organise your data – you still have to do all the hard work to analyse it ! Whatever you choose , it is important that you can trace your data back from themes to categories to codes . There is nothing more frustrating than looking for that illustra - tive patient quote , and not being able to fi nd it . If your qualitative data are part of a mixed methods study , ( has both quantitative and qualitative data ) careful thought has to be given to how you will analyse and pres - ent fi ndings . Refer to O’Caithain et al 3 for more details . There are many books and papers on qualitative anal - ysis , a very few of which are listed below . 4 – 6 Working with someone with qualitative expertise is also invaluable , as you can read about it , but doing it really brings it alive . Competing interests None . References 1 . Richards L , Morse J . Users Guide to Qualitative Methods Second edition . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage 2007 . 2 . Ritchie J , Spencer E . Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research . In , Bryman A , Burgess RG , eds . Analyzing Qualitative Data . London : Routledge 1994 . 3 . O’Cathain , Murphy E Nicholl J . Three techniques for integrating data in mixed methods . BMJ 2010 ; 341 : c4587 . 4 . Bradley EH , Curry LA , Devers KJ . Qualitative data analysis for health services research : developing taxonomy , themes , and theory . Health Serv Res 2007 ; 42 : 1758 – 72 . 5 . Gibbs GR . What and how to code , 2010 . http : / / onlineqda . hud . ac . uk / Intro _ QDA / how _ what _ to _ code . php ( accessed 21 October 2011 ) . 6 . Miles MB , Huberman AM . Qualitative Data Analysis . An Expanded Sourcebook . Second edition . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage 1994 . 10 . 1136 / ebnurs . 2011 . 100352 Correspondence to : Kate Seers RCN Research Institute , School of Health & Social Studies , University of Warwick , Coventry , CV4 7AL , Warwick , UK ; kate . seers @ warwick . ac . uk 02 _ ebnurs - 2011 - 100352 . indd 2 02 _ ebnurs - 2011 - 100352 . indd 2 12 / 16 / 2011 10 : 39 : 23 AM 12 / 16 / 2011 10 : 39 : 23 AM group . bmj . com on April 19 , 2017 - Published by http : / / ebn . bmj . com / Downloaded from Qualitative data analysis Kate Seers doi : 10 . 1136 / ebnurs . 2011 . 100352 2012 15 : 2 Evid Based Nurs http : / / ebn . bmj . com / content / 15 / 1 / 2 Updated information and services can be found at : These include : References # BIBL http : / / ebn . bmj . com / content / 15 / 1 / 2 This article cites 2 articles , 1 of which you can access for free at : service Email alerting box at the top right corner of the online article . Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article . Sign up in the CollectionsTopic Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections ( 139 ) Trauma ( 112 ) Injury ( 320 ) Pain ( neurology ) ( 83 ) Editor ' s choice ( 23 ) Research made simple Notes http : / / group . bmj . com / group / rights - licensing / permissions To request permissions go to : http : / / journals . bmj . com / cgi / reprintform To order reprints go to : http : / / group . bmj . com / subscribe / To subscribe to BMJ go to : group . bmj . com on April 19 , 2017 - Published by http : / / ebn . bmj . com / Downloaded from