1 Substrate elasticity does not impact on DNA methylation changes during differentiation of pluripotent stem cells . Mohamed H . Elsafi Mabrouk 1 , 2 , * , Kira Zeevaert 1 , 2 , * , Ann - Christine Henneke 1 , 2 , Catharina Maaßen 1 , 2 , Wolfgang Wagner 1 , 2 1 . Helmholtz - Institute for Biomedical Engineering , RWTH Aachen University Medical School , Aachen , 52074 , Germany . 2 . Institute for Stem Cell Biology , University Hospital of RWTH Aachen , 52074 Aachen , Germany . * Those authors contributed equally to the work . Correspondence : Wolfgang Wagner , Email : wwagner @ ukaachen . de Abstract Substrate elasticity may direct cell - fate decisions of stem cells . However , it is largely unclear how matrix stiffness impacts on differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) and if this is also reflected by epigenetic modifications . We have therefore cultured iPSCs on tissue culture plastic ( TCP ) and polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) with different Young´s modulus ( 0 . 2 kPa , 16 kPa , or 64 kPa ) to investigate the sequel on growth and differentiation towards endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm . Immunofluorescence and gene expression of canonical differentiation markers was hardly affected by the substrates . Notably , when we analyzed DNA methylation profiles of undifferentiated iPSCs or after three - lineage differentiation , we did not see any significant differences on the three different PDMS elasticities . Only when we compared DNA methylation profiles on PDMS - substrates versus TCP , we observed epigenetic differences , particularly upon mesodermal differentiation . Taken together , stiffness of PDMS - substrates did not impact on directed differentiation of iPSCs , whereas the moderate epigenetic differences on TCP might also be attributed to other chemical parameters . Keywords : Elasticity , PDMS , iPSC , germ layer , epigenetic , DNA methylation 2 Introduction Physical parameters - such as surface chemistry , micro - topography , or substrate elasticity - can impact on growth and differentiation of stem cells in vitro ( 1 , 2 ) . It is often anticipated that stem cells can sense the mechanical properties of their environment and differentiate accordingly . For example , it has been suggested that very soft tissues like the brain , with a Young´s modulus of less than 1 kPa , direct toward neurogenic lineage ; 8 - 17 kPa might support myogenic ; and 25 - 40 kPa might rather correspond to cross - linked collagen of bones and hence enhance osteogenic differentiation ( 3 ) . The effects of substrate elasticity were extensively investigated for adult stem cells , such as mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) ( 3 , 4 ) , whereas effects on pluripotent stem cells were less studied . For the latter , it has been suggested that substrate elasticity seems to alter the expression of germ layer markers during directed differentiation ( 5 , 6 ) and affect differentiation of iPSC - derived embryoid bodies ( 7 ) . On the other hand , there are studies that did not observe any effect of elasticity on directed germ layer specification of iPSCs ( 8 , 9 ) . Moreover , descriptions of unequivocal effects of substrate elasticity on differentiation of pluripotent cells is hampered by different substrate chemistries , topography , or 2D versus 3D approaches ( 5 , 7 , 10 , 11 ) . Thus , it is still under debate if matrix elasticity really is a central parameter to direct differentiation of pluripotent cells – and if potential phenotypic modifications would also be reflected in the epigenetic makeup , which ultimately defines cellular differentiation ( 9 , 12 ) . DNA methylation ( DNAm ) is an epigenetic modification that changes in a highly concerted and reproducible manner during cellular differentiation ( 13 ) . In fact , the DNA methylation pattern is very cell type specific ( 14 , 15 ) , and it can be used to track early differentiation events of iPSCs ( 16 , 17 ) . We have therefore systematically investigated direct differentiation of iPSCs toward specific germ layers on polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) with different Young´s modulus ( 0 . 2 kPa , 16 kPa , or 64 kPa ) , along with TCP , as a control material . If the elasticity of PDMS directs cell fate decisions , we would anticipate finding reproducible changes in the cell - type specific DNA methylation patterns . Materials and Methods Cell culture and differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells Three human induced pluripotent stem cell ( hiPSCs ) lines were used in this study with hPSCreg accessions ( UKAi009 - A , UKAi010 - A , and UKAi011 - A ) . They were generated from bone - marrow derived MSCs ( iPSC - 102 - 2 , 104 - 12 , and 106 - 3 ) and reprogrammed using episomal plasmids expressing OCT4 , L - Myc , SOX2 , KLF4 , and Lin28A ( 9 ) . The study was approved by the local ethic committee and all samples were taken after written consent ( permit number : EK206 / 09 ) . Cells were cultured regularly on tissue culture plastic ( TCP ) coated with 3 vitronectin ( 0 . 5 µg / cm 2 ) in StemMACS iPS - Brew ( Miltenyi Biotec , Bergish Gladbach , Germany ) and passaged regularly using intermittent Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) treatment . To investigate the impact of substrate elasticity , iPSCs were dissociated with Accutase ( STEMCELL Technologies , Vancouver , Canada ) and seeded ( 0 . 5 - 3 × 10 5 cells / cm 2 ) on either PDMS with different Young´s modulus ( 0 . 2 kPa , 16 kPa , or 64 kPa ; Advanced Biomatrix , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) or TCP ( approximately 1 GPa ; TPP , Trasadingen , Switzerland ) , with Matrigel coating . Differentiation towards endoderm , mesoderm was carried out for 5 days and ectoderm for 7 days using STEMdiff Trilineage Differentiation Kit ( STEMCELL Technologies ) . Alternatively , endoderm differentiation was performed according to the protocol by Wang et al . ( 18 ) on vitronectin - coated substrates . The endoderm differentiation medium consisted of RPMI - 1640 base medium ( Gibco , Carlsbad , USA ) supplemented with 1 % non - essential amino acids , L - Glutamine , and Penicillin / Streptomycin ( all from Gibco ) with addition of 1 % B27 supplements ( Gibco ) , CHIR99021 ( 6 . 45 µM ; Tocris Biosciences , Bristol , UK ) , and Activin A ( 100 ng / mL ; Proteintech , Rosemont , USA ) for the first day , and only Activin A ( 100 ng / mL ) for the following three days . Immunostaining and image analysis Cells were fixed using 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) for 10 minutes , treated with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 1000 ( Carl Roth GmbH , Karlsruhe , Germany ) and 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ; Sigma - Aldrich , Saint - Louis , USA ) in PBS for 20 minutes , and then incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies against OCT4 ( clone C - 10 ) , PAX6 ( clone AD2 . 35 ; both from Santa Cruz ) , Brachyury ( R & D Systems ) , or GATA6 ( clone D61E4 ; Cell Signaling ) . Secondary antibody staining was carried out at room temperature for 1 hour using donkey anti - goat ( Alexa Fluor 488 ) , goat anti - rabbit ( Alexa Fluor 594 ) , and goat anti - mouse ( Alexa Fluor 594 ; all from Invitrogen ) . Samples were counterstained with DAPI for 15 minutes . Imaging was performed using the Axioplan 2 fluorescence microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) or EVOS FL Auto ( Life Technologies , Carlsbad , USA ) . Quantification of fluorescence images was carried out using cellpose python package ( v2 . 2 ) ( 19 ) . Fluorescence markers and DAPI images were segmented using the pre - trained “nuclei” model with default parameters and the number of cells was counted from the generated segmentation mask using scikit - image ( 20 ) . Semi - quantitative reverse - transcription PCR Total RNA was isolated using the NucleoSpin RNA kit ( Macherey - Nagel , Düren , Germany ) , quantified with the NanoDrop ND - 1000 spectrophotometer ( Thermo Scientific , Waltham , USA ) , and reverse transcribed using the High - Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit ( Applied Biosystems , Waltham , USA ) . Semi - quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR ( RT - qPCR ) was carried out using Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix ( Applied Biosystems , Waltham , USA ) and primers for germ layer differentiation and pluripotency marker genes ( Suppl . Table 1 ) using 4 StepOnePlus machine ( Applied Biosystems , Waltham , USA ) . GAPDH was used for normalization . DNA methylation analysis Genomic DNA was isolated using the NucleoSpin Tissue Kit ( Macherey - Nagel ) and quantified on a NanoDrop ND - 2000 spectrophotometer ( Thermo Scientific ) . 1 . 2 µg of DNA were bisulfite converted and analyzed using the EPIC BeadChip microarray ( Illumina , San Diego , USA ) by Life & Brain company ( Bonn , Germany ) . The data was analyzed with the minfi R package ( 21 ) and normalized using ssNoob ( 22 ) . CpG sites on XY chromosomes , non - CG probes , and SNP associated CpGs were removed . In addition , the detection p - value of the remaining CpGs were evaluated using SeSAMe package and CpG sites with detection P > 0 . 05 were removed ( 23 ) . Limma R package was used for identification of differentially methylated CpGs . Significant CpG sites were defined as showing at least 10 % difference in mean beta values and a Benjamini - Hochberg adjusted p - value smaller to 0 . 05 . Over - representation analysis of the significant CpGs was carried out using the MissMethyl package employing the gene ontology database ( 24 ) . Estimation of germ layer specification was carried with GermLayerTracker ( alternatively called PluripotencyScreen ) , which is based on DNA methylation at 12 CpGs ( 17 ) . As SeSAMe masking is stringent and resulted in removal of several CpGs associated with the GermLayerTracker , we carried out the deconvolution using the more permissive detection p - values from the minfi package instead . Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was carried out using t - test from statannotations python package for quantification of immunofluorescence imaging or the moderated t - test from the limma R package for differential methylation analysis . P was adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini - Hochberg procedure when appropriate and P > 0 . 05 were considered significant . Results Substrate elasticity hardly affects differentiation of iPSCs . Human iPSCs were cultured on soft ( 0 . 2 kPa ) , medium ( 16 kPa ) , or stiffer PDMS - substrates ( 64 kPa ) , and for comparison on conventional tissue culture plastic ( about 1 GPa ) . Immunophenotypic analysis revealed similar expression of OCT4 ( Fig . 1A ) , and absence or very low expression of the germ layer specific markers GATA6 ( endoderm ) , Brachyury ( mesoderm ) , and PAX6 ( ectoderm , Suppl . Fig . S1A ) . When we induced differentiation towards endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm , we observed the clear presence of GATA6 , Brachyury , and PAX6 protein , respectively – and there were again no clear differences on the different substrates ( Fig . 1A ) . Furthermore , gene expression of pluripotency markers OCT4 and NANOG ; mesoderm markers TBXT ( Brachyury ) and MIXL1 ; and ectoderm markers PAX6 and 5 LHX5 were similar on the different substrates ( Fig . 1B , Suppl . Fig . S1B ) . Notably , a moderate up - regulation of the endodermal differentiation markers GATA6 and SOX17 was observed on 0 . 2 kPa substrates ( n = 6 ; P < 0 . 05 ) as compared to differentiation on PDMS substrates of higher elasticity and TCP ( Fig 1B ) . However , this could not be validated in immunofluorescence imaging , even after quantification of GATA6 positive cells by image segmentation using a neural network model ( 3 biological replicas ; n > 20 per substrate ; t - test ; Suppl . Fig 1C ) . Figure 1 : Early germ layer specification of iPSCs on different substrates . A ) Immunofluorescence images of cells in PDMS substrates with different elasticities ( 0 . 2 kPa , 16 kPa , and 64 kPa ) , or tissue culture plastic ( TCP ) . Undifferentiated iPSCs stained with OCT4 , endoderm differentiation stained with GATA6 , mesoderm differentiation stained with Brachyury , and ectoderm differentiation stained with PAX6 . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI . Images show no significant differences between undifferentiated or differentiated iPSCs on different substrate elasticities ( scale bar : 50 µm ) . B ) Gene expression analysis with RT - qPCR of candidate genes for lineage - specific differentiation . Data are normalized to undifferentiated cells on TCP ( n = 6 ; significance measured with unpaired t - test ; * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . We alternatively tested a different differentiation regimen toward endoderm on TCP and 64 kPa PDMS , and there was no significant difference in immunofluorescence of GATA6 , nor did the coating with either vitronectin or Matrigel impact on the differentiation ( n > 10 ; Suppl . Fig . S2A - B ) . The up - regulation of gene expression of GATA6 , SOX17 , or NANOG was also the 6 same on PDMS and TCP ( n = 6 ; Suppl . Fig . S2C ) . Taken together , they retained their stemness and revealed very similar differentiation on the different substrates , which is in line with previous observations ( 8 ) . DNA methylation changes during differentiation are not affected by elasticity . Subsequently , we investigated how the DNA methylation profiles were affected by culture and differentiation of iPSCs on the different substrates . Multidimensional scaling ( MDS ) plot for the top 10 , 000 variable CpG sites revealed that samples mainly separated according to their state of differentiation ( Fig 2A ) . Initially we focused on these germ layer associated epigenetic modifications across all different substrates and observed significant DNA methylation changes at 16 , 024 CpGs during endodermal differentiation , in 63 , 729 CpGs during mesodermal differentiation , and in 22 , 059 CpGs during ectodermal differentiation ( delta mean DNAm > 10 % , Adj . P < 0 . 05 ; Fig . 2B ) . These epigenetic modifications were enriched in Gene Ontology ( GO ) categories that may be relevant for the corresponding differentiation process ( Suppl . Fig . S3 ) . Furthermore , GermLayerTracker analysis ( 17 ) could clearly classify all cell preparations as undifferentiated , endodermal , mesodermal and ectodermal differentiation – but , there was no clear impact from the substrates ( Fig 2C ) . To further investigate if substrate elasticity had significant impact on DNA methylation profiles , we performed pairwise comparison between the three replicates of each culture condition . There were some differences between TCP and each of the PDMS substrates . However , there were no significant differences upon culture on the different PDMS elasticities ( Fig . 2D ) . This was unexpected as PDMS substrate covered a broad range of elasticities ( from 0 . 2 kPa to 64 kPa ) . Thus , the different substrate elasticities in PDMS did neither affect DNA methylation patterns in undifferentiated iPSCs , nor the DNA methylation changes during directed differentiation . 7 Figure 2 : DNA methylation changes during germ layer specification on different elasticities . A ) MDS dimensional reduction plot for top 10 , 000 variable CpG sites for ectoderm ( ECTO ) , endoderm ( ENDO ) , mesoderm ( MESO ) , and iPSCs ( SC ) . Cells were cultured on substrates with different Young’s modulus on PDMS ( 0 . 2 kPa , 16 kPa , and 64 kPa ) and TCP ( 1 GPa ) . B ) Volcano plot showing significantly hypermethylated ( red ) or hypomethylated ( blue ) CpGs after differentiation into endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm , respectively ( Adj . p < 0 . 05 ; diff . in mean DNAm ( beta - value ) as compared to iPSCs > 10 % ) . C ) Estimation of the composition of germ layers based on epigenetic signatures of 12 CpGs of GermLayerTracker ( PluripotencyScreen ) ( 17 ) . D ) Pairwise comparison of differentiated CpGs between cells culture on different substrates . This analysis was performed for undifferentiated iPSCs , endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm differentiation . The scatter plots depict mean DNAm values on the corresponding substrates and the number of significantly hypo - and hypermethylated CpGs are indicated ( Adj . p < 0 . 05 , diff . mean DNAm > 10 % ) . 8 Different materials can evoke DNA methylation changes . To better understand the above - mentioned differences between PDMS and TCP , we compared all PDMS substrates versus TCP . Even under non - differentiation culture conditions , we observed 522 hypomethylated , and 514 hypermethylated CpGs on PDMS ( Adj . p - value < 0 . 05 ; mean DNAm difference > 10 % ) . Particularly upon mesodermal differentiation there were marked epigenetic differences between PDMS and TCP : 25 , 254 CpGs became significantly hypomethylated ( Fig 3A ) . We then analyzed if these substrate - associated DNA methylation changes were related to the germ layer specific DNA methylation changes . In fact , the vast majority of the CpGs that were hypomethylated on PDMS were also hypomethylated during the course of mesodermal differentiation ( Fig 3B ) . Thus , the choice of PDMS and TCP affects the DNA methylation profiles and may point toward enhanced mesodermal differentiation on PDMS . Figure 3 : Differentially methylated CpGs on PDMS versus TCP . A ) Volcano plots showing differentially methylated CpGs between samples cultured on TCP or PDMS for undifferentiated iPSCs , endodermal - , mesodermal - , and ectodermal - differentiated cells . The numbers of significantly hypomethylated ( blue ) and hypermethylated ( red ) CpGs on PDMS are indicated ( Adj . p < 0 . 05 , diff . mean DNAm ( beta - value ) > 10 % ) . B ) Scatter plots showing comparison of DNA methylation changes during differentiation toward endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm , respectively ( x - axis ) , against the DNA methylation changes between TCP and PDMS ( y - axis ) . Many CpGs that are hypomethylated during mesodermal differentiation are also hypomethylated on PDMS . 9 Discussion Within the last 15 years , it became almost a dogma that stiffness plays a central role in directing cell - fate decisions . Thus , it was unexpected that the broad range of substrate elasticities on PDMS did neither clearly affect differentiation of iPSCs , nor their DNA methylation patterns . It is conceivable , that some of the matrix stiffness related effects are masked by the interaction with proteins that are absorbed to the surface for coating or secreted by the stem cells ( 25 , 26 ) . Yet , culture of iPSC is not possible without suitable coating ( 27 ) , and we did not observe differences on Matrigel or vitronectin coated substrates . Furthermore , in our previous work we did not observe significant epigenetic differences in iPSC - derived mesenchymal stromal cells ( iMSCs ) that were either generated on tissue culture plastic or a collagen - based hydrogel ( 9 ) . It is plausible that some of the phenotypic stiffness - related effects are only transient – while the cells are on the substrate – but not reflected in epigenetic changes , which ultimately determine cell fate . As already mentioned above , modulation of the physical parameter elasticity is often interwoven with other relevant factors , such as surface topography or surface chemistry ( 28 , 29 ) . This might explain , why we observed some epigenetic differences on TCP versus PDMS . Cells committed to mesoderm and endoderm were shown to undergo widespread coordinated epigenetic rearrangements driven by ten - eleven translocation ( TET ) - mediated demethylation ( 30 ) . It needs to be further explored , if the increased hypomethylation events on PDMS substrates are really associated with enhanced mesodermal differentiation – at least with regards to immunophenotype or expression of marker genes , we did not observe such differences . Taken together , a wide range of elasticities of PDMS substrates did not affect differentiation of iPSC . Albeit TCP has a very high non - physiological Young’s modulus , epigenetic impact of TCP versus PDMS is not necessarily related to differences in elasticity – they may rather be attributed to many other physical or chemical parameters that differ between these materials . 10 Glossary DNA methylation ( DNAm ) ; iPSC - derived mesenchymal stromal cells ( iMSCs ) ; induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) ; mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) ; polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) ; Semi - quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR ( RT - qPCR ) ; tissue culture plastic ( TCP ) ; ten - eleven translocation ( TET ) ; Multi dimensional scaling ( MDS ) . Author Contributions M . E . M . contributed to experimental procedure , performed image quantification and bioinformatics and data analysis . K . Z . performed iPSCs cell culture and differentiation experiments . A . C . H and C . M . contributed to gene expression measurement and immunofluorescence imaging . W . W . conceptualized and supervised the study . M . E . M . and W . W . wrote the manuscript and all authors approved final version . Conflicts of Interest W . W . is a founder of Cygenia GmbH that can provide service for various epigenetic signatures ( www . cygenia . com ) . The medical faculty of RWTH - Aachen has claimed patent application for GermLayerTracker and M . E . M . , K . Z . , and W . W . are co - applicants for the patent . Funding This research project was supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( GO - Bio : Pluri - Screen , 16LW0017 ) , and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG , German Research Foundation – 363055819 / GRK2415 ; WA 1706 / 12 - 2 within CRU344 ; WA1706 / 14 - 1 ) . References 1 . Donnelly H , Salmeron - Sanchez M , Dalby MJ . Designing stem cell niches for differentiation and self - renewal . Journal of the Royal Society Interface . 2018 ; 15 ( 145 ) : 20180388 . 2 . Zeevaert K , Elsafi Mabrouk MH , Wagner W , Goetzke R . Cell Mechanics in Embryoid Bodies . Cells . 2020 ; 9 ( 10 ) . 3 . Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell . 2006 ; 126 ( 4 ) : 677 - 89 . 4 . Du J , Chen X , Liang X , Zhang G , Xu J , He L , et al . Integrin activation and internalization on soft ECM as a mechanism of induction of stem cell differentiation by ECM elasticity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 2011 ; 108 ( 23 ) : 9466 - 71 . 5 . Evans ND , Minelli C , Gentleman E , LaPointe V , Patankar SN , Kallivretaki M , et al . Substrate stiffness affects early differentiation events in embryonic stem cells . Eur cell mater . 2009 ; 18 ( 1 ) : e13 . 6 . Eroshenko N , Ramachandran R , Yadavalli VK , Rao RR . Effect of substrate stiffness on early human embryonic stem cell differentiation . Journal of biological engineering . 2013 ; 7 : 1 - 8 . 11 7 . Macri - Pellizzeri L , Pelacho B , Sancho A , Iglesias - Garcia O , Simón - Yarza AM , Soriano - Navarro M , et al . Substrate stiffness and composition specifically direct differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells . Tissue Engineering Part A . 2015 ; 21 ( 9 - 10 ) : 1633 - 41 . 8 . Virdi JK , Pethe P . Soft substrate maintains stemness and pluripotent stem cell - like phenotype of human embryonic stem cells under defined culture conditions . Cytotechnology . 2022 ; 74 ( 4 ) : 479 - 89 . 9 . Goetzke R , Franzen J , Ostrowska A , Vogt M , Blaeser A , Klein G , et al . Does soft really matter ? Differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells into mesenchymal stromal cells is not influenced by soft hydrogels . Biomaterials . 2018 ; 156 : 147 - 58 . 10 . Jaramillo M , Singh SS , Velankar S , Kumta PN , Banerjee I . Inducing endoderm differentiation by modulating mechanical properties of soft substrates . Journal of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine . 2015 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 1 - 12 . 11 . Sun Y , Yong KMA , Villa - Diaz LG , Zhang X , Chen W , Philson R , et al . Hippo / YAP - mediated rigidity - dependent motor neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells . Nature materials . 2014 ; 13 ( 6 ) : 599 - 604 . 12 . Schellenberg A , Joussen S , Moser K , Hampe N , Hersch N , Hemeda H , et al . Matrix elasticity , replicative senescence and DNA methylation patterns of mesenchymal stem cells . Biomaterials . 2014 ; 35 ( 24 ) : 6351 - 8 . 13 . Smith ZD , Meissner A . DNA methylation : roles in mammalian development . Nature Reviews Genetics . 2013 ; 14 ( 3 ) : 204 - 20 . 14 . Schmidt M , Maié T , Dahl E , Costa IG , Wagner W . Deconvolution of cellular subsets in human tissue based on targeted DNA methylation analysis at individual CpG sites . BMC Biology . 2020 ; 18 : 178 . 15 . Moss J , Magenheim J , Neiman D , Zemmour H , Loyfer N , Korach A , et al . Comprehensive human cell - type methylation atlas reveals origins of circulating cell - free DNA in health and disease . Nat Commun . 2018 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 5068 . 16 . Bock C , Kiskinis E , Verstappen G , Gu H , Boulting G , Smith ZD , et al . Reference Maps of human ES and iPS cell variation enable high - throughput characterization of pluripotent cell lines . Cell . 2011 ; 144 ( 3 ) : 439 - 52 . 17 . Schmidt M , Zeevaert K , Mabrouk MHE , Goetzke R , Wagner W . Epigenetic biomarkers to track differentiation of pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cell Reports . 2023 ; 18 ( 1 ) : 145 - 58 . 18 . Wang H , Luo X , Yao L , Lehman DM , Wang P . Improvement of cell survival during human pluripotent stem cell definitive endoderm differentiation . Stem Cells and Development . 2015 ; 24 ( 21 ) : 2536 - 46 . 19 . Pachitariu M , Stringer C . Cellpose 2 . 0 : how to train your own model . Nature methods . 2022 ; 19 ( 12 ) : 1634 - 41 . 20 . Van der Walt S , Schönberger JL , Nunez - Iglesias J , Boulogne F , Warner JD , Yager N , et al . scikit - image : image processing in Python . PeerJ . 2014 ; 2 : e453 . 21 . Aryee MJ , Jaffe AE , Corrada - Bravo H , Ladd - Acosta C , Feinberg AP , Hansen KD , et al . Minfi : a flexible and comprehensive Bioconductor package for the analysis of Infinium DNA methylation microarrays . Bioinformatics . 2014 ; 30 ( 10 ) : 1363 - 9 . 22 . Triche Jr TJ , Weisenberger DJ , Van Den Berg D , Laird PW , Siegmund KD . Low - level processing of Illumina Infinium DNA methylation beadarrays . Nucleic Acids Res . 2013 ; 41 ( 7 ) : e90 - e . 23 . Zhou W , Triche Jr TJ , Laird PW , Shen H . SeSAMe : reducing artifactual detection of DNA methylation by Infinium BeadChips in genomic deletions . Nucleic Acids Res . 2018 ; 46 ( 20 ) : e123 - e . 12 24 . Phipson B , Maksimovic J , Oshlack A . missMethyl : an R package for analyzing data from Illumina’s HumanMethylation450 platform . Bioinformatics . 2015 ; 32 ( 2 ) : 286 - 8 . 25 . Rowland TJ , Miller LM , Blaschke AJ , Doss EL , Bonham AJ , Hikita ST , et al . Roles of integrins in human induced pluripotent stem cell growth on Matrigel and vitronectin . Stem cells and development . 2010 ; 19 ( 8 ) : 1231 - 40 . 26 . Murphy C , Naderlinger E , Mater A , Kluin RJ , Wilmes A . Comparison of human recombinant protein coatings and fibroblast - ECM to Matrigel for induced pluripotent stem cell culture and renal podocyte differentiation . ALTEX - Alternatives to animal experimentation . 2023 ; 40 ( 1 ) : 141 - 59 . 27 . Elsafi Mabrouk MH , Goetzke R , Abagnale G , Yesilyurt B , Salz L , Cypris O , et al . The spatial self - organization within pluripotent stem cell colonies is continued in detaching aggregates . Biomaterials . 2022 ; 282 : 121389 . 28 . Phillips JE , Petrie TA , Creighton FP , García AJ . Human mesenchymal stem cell differentiation on self - assembled monolayers presenting different surface chemistries . Acta biomaterialia . 2010 ; 6 ( 1 ) : 12 - 20 . 29 . McNamara LE , McMurray RJ , Biggs MJ , Kantawong F , Oreffo RO , Dalby MJ . Nanotopographical control of stem cell differentiation . Journal of tissue engineering . 2010 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 120623 . 30 . Argelaguet R , Clark SJ , Mohammed H , Stapel LC , Krueger C , Kapourani CA , et al . Multi - omics profiling of mouse gastrulation at single - cell resolution . Nature . 2019 ; 576 ( 7787 ) : 487 - 91 . Supplemental Materials Supplemental Figures S1 - S4 and Table S1 Fig S1 : Early germ layer marker gene expression in undifferentiated iPSCs ; Fig S2 : Endoderm differentiation on substrates with different coating ; Fig S3 : Gene ontology for CpGs associated with germ layer differentiation ; Fig . S4 : Differential DNA methylation during germ layer differentiation versus PDMS / TCP ; Table S1 : Primer list .