Efficient correction of a disease mutation in patient iPSCs 1740 npg Cell Research | Vol 21 No 12 | December 2011 LETTER TO THE EDITOR Efficient correction of hemoglobinopathy - causing mutations by homologous recombination in integration - free patient iPSCs Cell Research ( 2011 ) 21 : 1740 - 1744 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2011 . 186 ; published online 22 November 2011 npg Cell Research ( 2011 ) 21 : 1740 - 1744 . © 2011 IBCB , SIBS , CAS All rights reserved 1001 - 0602 / 11 $ 32 . 00 www . nature . com / cr Dear Editor , Hemoglobinopathies are a collection of heritable diseases caused by abnormal structure or insufficient production of hemoglobins [ 1 ] . Many forms of hemo - globinopathies , such as sickle cell disease ( SCD ) and β - thalassemia , which are caused by mutations of the β - globin ( HBB ) gene , lead to severe anemia and other life - threatening conditions . Ultimately , due to the lack of a curative treatment , patients generally have shortened life spans even under life - long supportive care . Given the high prevalence of these diseases , especially in some areas of Africa , Asia and the Mediterranean region , much effort has been devoted to developing a genetic cure for hemoglobinopathies . Current strategies for correcting the genetic defects entail the transduction of patient he - matopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) with viral vectors carrying a normal globin transgene with the hope of substituting for the defective endogenous counterparts [ 1 ] . However , there has been little success up to date . The challenges facing these approaches include , but are not limited to : i ) the transduction efficiency of human HSCs is very low , which leads to low engraftment of corrected HSCs ; ii ) vectors fail to recapitulate physiological levels of human globin expression because their cargo capacity is well below the size of the globin regulatory regions ( over 100 kb ) , which are critical for high expression . Additionally , transgenes might be subjected to silencing due to chro - mosomal position effects ; iii ) random integration of viral transgenes can lead to insertional mutagenesis and ma - lignancy . Alternatively , the disease - causing mutations can be repaired in situ . Correction by homologous recombina - tion ( HR ) results in the reversion to wild - type sequences in the natural genomic context , thus circumventing many of the above - mentioned issues . Induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) represent an ideal cell population for per - forming HR - mediated gene correction , since they can self - renew indefinitely , have the ability to differentiate into all cell types , can be derived from patient somatic cells , and are suitable for autologous transplantations . Previously , the Jaenisch group demonstrated the feasibil - ity of mouse iPSC - based gene correction for treatment of SCD in a mouse model , but the authors cautioned that the retroviral reprogramming strategy used in the same study was not suitable for human therapy [ 2 ] . In view of future clinical applications , patient iPSCs should be ideally free of transgenes and be derived in a fast and efficient man - ner . However , current methodologies for reprogramming are largely based on integrative approaches or excisable vectors , both leading to random integration of exogenous DNA into the host genome or leaving behind genetic “scars” upon excision . Altogether , translational iPSC technology and gene correction should ideally aim for two underlying and complementary methodologies , re - programming to pluripotency by efficient non - integrative approaches and the use of HR for precise and “in - context” gene editing . Recently , several reports have confirmed the applica - bility of HR for the correction of genetic mutations in disease - specific iPSCs , using helper - dependent adenovi - ral vectors ( HDAdVs ) , bacterial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) , and zinc - finger nucleases ( ZFNs ) [ 3 - 5 ] . HR efficiency in general is still low , making it arduous to obtain a large number of corrected clones for the purpose of quality control . The ZFN approach is also plagued by concerns about potential off - target effects leading to un - desired mutations and chromosomal aberrations , which cannot be predicted by mere bioinformatics algorithms [ 6 , 7 ] . We have previously shown that HDAdVs were highly efficient at gene correction ( ~ 46 % ) of transcriptionally inactive loci in patient iPSCs while maintaining high genomic and epigenomic integrity [ 4 ] . Furthermore , this method does not rely on induced DNA double strand breaks , which might lead to off target effects . Here we report on the establishment of a highly efficient and safe method for correction of HBB mutations in iPSCs . This www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Mo Li et al . 1741 npg Efficient correction of a disease mutation in patient iPSCs 1742 npg Cell Research | Vol 21 No 12 | December 2011 approach combined with an efficient protocol for genera - tion of SCD - specific integration - free iPSCs represents a step forward in iPSC - based cell - replacement therapy . SCD - specific primary fibroblasts homozygous for the hemoglobin S ( HbS ) mutation were obtained from the Coriell Institute for Medical Research . The A→T transversion at nucleotide 20 ( HbS ) in the HBB gene was verified by direct sequencing ( Supplementary infor - mation , Figure S1A ) . To provide a platform for testing HDAdV - mediated gene correction in the HBB locus , we first reprogrammed the SCD fibroblasts using retroviral vectors expressing either the Klf4 , Oct4 , Sox2 , and c - Myc ( KOSM ) cocktail or an alternative combination in which Oct4 was substituted with a fusion protein between Oct4 and the transactivation domain of VP16 , which has been shown to enhance reprogramming [ 8 ] . ESC - like flat and compact colonies were picked ~ 3 weeks after viral transductions . These colonies were readily expanded and strongly expressed alkaline phosphatase ( Supplementary information , Figure S1B ) . The established iPSC lines dis - played typical characteristics of pluripotency , including expression of pluripotency marker proteins , upregulation of the endogenous pluripotency transcription network , silencing of viral transgenes , demethylation of the Oct4 promoter , and the ability to differentiate into lineages of all three germ layers in vitro and in vivo ( Supplementary information , Figures S1C - S1F and S2 ) . Five of six ran - domly selected clones displayed normal karyotypes , with one clone containing two translocation events ( Supple - mentary information , Figure S3 ) . We confirmed the pres - ence of the HbS mutation in all SCD - iPSC lines ( Supple - mentary information , Figure S1A ) . We next sought to generate integration - free SCD - iPSCs in a fast and efficient manner . To this end , we performed a single nucleofection of EBNA1 / oriP - based episomal vectors expressing six reprogramming factors ( Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , L - Myc , Lin28 and p53 shRNA , i . e . , the Y4 combination as described in [ 9 ] ) and an EGFP re - porter . Colonies with epithelial - like morphology emerged on day 15 , and by day 18 they displayed typical ESC - like morphology ( Figure 1A ) . The majority of the colo - nies robustly expressed Nanog ( Figure 1A ) . On average , we obtained 115 Nanog - positive colonies from 5 × 10 5 fibroblasts ( reprogramming efficiency is 0 . 023 % ) . One hundred percent of the colonies initially picked based on morphological characteristics established iPSC lines ( n = 25 ) . These episomal - derived SCD - iPSCs ( epi - SCD - iPSCs ) displayed properties of pluripotent stem cells , including expression of pluripotency protein markers , activation of the endogenous pluripotency transcription network and differentiation into derivatives of all three germ layers in vitro ( Figure 1B - 1D and Supplementary information , Figure S1C ) . Additionally , the original HbS mutation was detected in all epi - SCD - iPSCs , thereby Figure 1 Generation of epi - SCD - iPSCs and correction of SCD - associated HBB mutation in iPSCs with HBB - c - HDAdV . ( A ) left panel : schematic representation of the episomal - based reprogramming protocol . Time and description of key events are labeled . FGM : fibroblast growth medium ; right panel : At the end of the protocol , colonies were stained with a Nanog antibody to calculate the reprogramming efficiency . ( B ) Quantitative RT - PCR analysis showing upregulation of endodermal ( GATA4 ) , mesodermal ( cTnT ) , and ectodermal ( SOX1 ) markers , and downregulation of pluripotency marker ( NANOG ) in epi - SCD - iP - SCS before ( SC - 15N iPSC ) and after embroid body ( EB ) - mediated differentiation ( SC - 15N EB ) . Data are shown as mean ± s . d . ( C ) Immunofluorescence analyses performed on EBs derived from epi - SCD - iPSCs showing expression of ectodermal ( Tuj1 ) , mesodermal ( SMA ) , and endodermal ( FOXA2 ) markers . Bar , 20 μ m . ( D ) Quantitative RT - PCR analysis on the expression of pluripotency transcription factors from the endogenous genes ( Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , L - Myc and Lin28 ) or transgenes ( Oct4 - tg , Sox2 - tg , Klf4 - tg , L - Myc - tg and Lin28 - tg ) . Error bars represent standard deviations . ( E ) Quantification of copy number of episomal vectors ( EBNA1 ) and genes encoding the reprogramming factors ( Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , L - Myc and Lin28 ) . Episomal vectors are not detectable in any of the epi - SCD - iPSC clones , whereas the average copy number of episomal vectors in fi - broblasts 5 days after nucleofection is 275 ( EBNA1 , see Supplementary information , Figure S5A ) . We observed no significant deviation from the endogenous copy numbers of the genes used in reprogramming , whereas extra copies of them were de - tected in retrovirally - derived iPSCs ( see Supplementary information , Figure S5B ) . Error bars represent standard deviations . ( F ) Schematic molecular representation of HBB gene correction with gene - correction vector ( HBB - c - HDAdV ) . The primers for PCR are shown as arrows ( P1 , P2 , P3 and P4 ) . HSV tk stands for herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene cassette used for negative selection ; neo stands for neomycin - resistance gene cassette used for positive selection ; CMV - β gal indicates the βgal expression cassette for determination of HDAdV titer ; Red X , The A→T mutation site at nucleotide 20 ( A20T ) in exon 1 . ( G ) PCR analyses of SCD - iPSCs and gene - corrected iPSCs ( cSCD - iPSCs ) using 5 ′ primer pair ( P1 and P2 ; 14 . 8 kb ) or 3 ′ primer pair ( P3 and P4 ; 10 . 1 kb ) . M , DNA ladder . ( H ) Sequencing results of A20T mutation site in exon 1 of HBB in SCD - iPSCs , HBB - c - HDAdV and cSCD - iPSCs . ( I ) Gene - targeting and gene - correction efficiencies at the HBB locus in multiple SCD - iPSC clones ( S3 - 6 , SC - 1H and SC - 9N ) . ( J ) Immunostaining showing expression of key pluripotency transcription fac - tors Oct4 , Sox2 and Nanog , and expression of hES cell - specific surface antigens Tra - 1 - 60 and SSEA4 in gene - corrected epi - SCD - iPSCs . Nuclei were stained with DAPI . Bar , 100 μ m . www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Mo Li et al . 1743 npg verifying their origin ( Supplementary information , Figure S1A ) . The presence of residual episomal vec - tor sequence was not detected in any of the 6 randomly picked epi - SCD - iPSC lines by passage 2 - 3 . Moreover , none of the reprogramming factors was integrated into the host genome ( Figure 1E ) , nor did we detect residual transcripts of the transgenes ( Figure 1D ) . Together , our results suggest that the epi - SCD - iPSCs are free of exog - enous sequences . In summary , the episomal strategy em - ployed here led to the simple and efficient generation of integration - free epi - SCD - iPSCs , which could represent a more desirable cell population for correcting the disease - causing mutations . With such a premise in mind , we next attempted to correct the SCD - specific mutation in the HBB gene by HR . The HBB gene consists of three small exons , which are located close together within a 2 kb genomic region . With the aim to develop a single method amenable for the correction of all possible HBB mutations , we engi - neered an HDAd - based gene - correction vector ( HBB - c - HDAdV ) , covering the whole HBB coding region . A neomycin - resistance ( neo R ) cassette and an HSV tk cas - sette were included to allow for positive and negative selection , respectively ( Figure 1F ) . In our previous study , we determined that HDAdVs are capable of repairing mutations up to 4 . 4 kb away from the neo R insertion site [ 4 ] . Accordingly , the neo R cassette was inserted 1 kb downstream of the 3′ UTR , or 2 . 5 kb away from the mu - tation site . We next infected one of the retroviral - integrated iPS clones ( S3 - 6 ) and two integration - free iPS clones ( SC - 1H and - 9N ) with HBB - c - HDAdV . After sequential positive ( G418 ) and negative ( Ganciclovir : GANC ) selections , double - resistant colonies were expanded and maintained in hESC medium . We screened 48 drug - resistant clones from multiple iPS lines and identified 41 gene - targeted clones by PCR , indicating a gene - targeting efficiency of 85 % ( Figure 1G and 1I ) . Furthermore , DNA sequenc - ing showed that mutations in 39 of the 41 gene - targeted colonies were successfully corrected in one of the alleles , indicating a gene - correction efficiency of 81 % ( Figure 1H and 1I ) . These gene - corrected SCD - iPSCs displayed properties of pluripotent stem cells , including expres - sion of pluripotency protein markers , upregulation of key transcription factors of the pluripotency network and demethylation of the Oct4 promoter ( Figure 1J and Supplementary information , Figure S1F and S1G ) . Be - cause heterozygous carriers of the SCD mutation do not manifest the disease , our corrected SCD - iPSCs carrying one wild - type allele could have therapeutic potential in the clinic . It should be emphasized that the HbS mutation is far from the neo R insertion site , suggesting a possibil - ity that HBB - c - HDAdVs may be suitable for correcting other HBB mutations . To this end , we sequenced the upstream region of the HBB locus in SCD - iPSCs , look - ing for specific SNP sites that are not present in the vec - tor . Two SCD - iPSC specific SNP sites ( rs16911905 and rs1003586 , dbSNP build 130 [ 10 ] ) located upstream of the proximal promoter region were found in the uncor - rected cells and were used as a readout for our analysis ( Supplementary information , Figure S4 ) . These two SNP sites are located 3 . 6 kb upstream of the neo - insertion site . By examining for the presence of these two SNPs in the corrected SCD - iPSCs , we found that 7 of 7 and 5 of 7 were replaced by the HBB - c - HDAdV sequence at rs16911905 and rs1003586 , respectively . Based on these results , this vector could potentially be used to correct all HBB mutations , which cause SCD and β - thalassemia . Finally , we examined the possibility of vector ran - dom integration in gene - corrected clones . Southern blot , Quantitative PCR , and fluorescent in situ hybridization ( FISH ) analyses indicated that there is no ectopic vector integration in the gene - corrected clones ( Supplementary information , Figure S6 ) . While this manuscript was in preparation , two pub - lications describing gene correction of the HbS muta - tion using an alternative strategy based on ZFNs were published [ 11 , 12 ] . Although ZFNs have been shown to promote efficient HR in many loci , interestingly , both studies reported lower gene - correction efficiencies at the HBB locus than ours . This may be attributed to the influence of the genomic context on ZFN performance , further underlining the fact that designing ZFNs for mu - tation correction is a complex and difficult process . An - other important difference between the two approaches is that HDAdVs promote HR in considerably larger regions than ZFNs in the HBB locus ( 3 . 6 kbp in this study and 82 bp in Sebastiano et al . [ 11 ] , respectively ) , which af - fords greater flexibility in targeting vector design and the convenience of using one vector for the entire locus . Nonetheless , HDAdVs , ZFNs , and other gene - targeting technologies are complementary approaches that should be further refined to achieve more efficient and safer gene correction in the future . In summary , we have efficiently generated gene - corrected patient - specific cells from integration - free SCD - iPSCs by combining episomal vector - based repro - gramming and HDAdV - mediated gene correction . The presence of the episomal vectors was completely unde - tectable by passage 2 - 3 , thus further reducing the time necessary for the generation of high - quality integration and exogenous DNA - free iPSCs . Despite the fact that the HBB locus is transcriptionally inactive in pluripotent Efficient correction of a disease mutation in patient iPSCs 1744 npg Cell Research | Vol 21 No 12 | December 2011 stem cells , we achieved highly efficient gene correction ( 80 - 100 % ) in SCD - iPSCs . We have previously demon - strated that HDAdV - mediated gene editing did not result in genetic and epigenetic abnormalities [ 4 ] . Therefore , our strategy minimizes genomic alterations both during reprogramming and gene - correction steps . We believe that non - integrative approaches for reprogramming in combination with HDAdV - mediated gene editing rep - resent a significant step forward towards the develop - ment of iPSC - based therapy . Experimental materials and methods are described in the Supplementary information , Data S1 . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Drs K Mitani ( Saitama Medical Uni - versity , Japan ) , P Ng ( Baylor College of Medicine , USA ) , and A Lieber ( University of Washington , USA ) for kindly providing experimental materials , CG Santos and MC Llach ( Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona , Spain ) for karyotyping , M Marti ( Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona , Spain ) for teratoma analysis , E Nivet , S Ruiz , AD Panopoulos , SL Yang , and C Rodriguez Esteban for helpful discussions , Y Xia , T Berggren , M Lutz , A Goebl , RD Soligalla and J Kim for technical help , and M Schwarz for administrative help . This study was supported by grants from the G . Harold and Leila Y . Mathers Charitable Foun - dation , Sanofi - Aventis , Ellison Medical Foundation , The Leona M . and Harry B . Helmsley Charitable Trust , MICINN and Fundacion Cellex ( JCIB ) . Mo Li 1 , * , Keiichiro Suzuki 1 , * , Jing Qu 1 , Preeti Saini 1 , Ilir Dubova 1 , Fei Yi 1 , Jungmin Lee 1 , Ignacio Sancho - Martinez 1 , Guang - Hui Liu 1 , Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte 1 , 2 1 Salk Institute for Biological Studies , 10010 N . Torrey Pines Rd . , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA ; 2 Center of Regenerative Medi - cine in Barcelona , Dr . Aiguader , 88 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain * These two authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence : Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte E - mail : belmonte @ salk . edu ; izpisua @ cmrb . eu References 1 Papanikolaou E , Anagnou NP . Major challenges for gene therapy of thalassemia and sickle cell disease . Curr Gene Ther 2010 ; 10 : 404 - 412 . 2 Hanna J , Wernig M , Markoulaki S , et al . Treatment of sickle cell anemia mouse model with iPS cells generated from au - tologous skin . Science 2007 ; 318 : 1920 - 1923 . 3 Howden SE , Gore A , Li Z , et al . Genetic correction and analy - sis of induced pluripotent stem cells from a patient with gyrate atrophy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 6537 - 6542 . 4 Liu GH , Suzuki K , Qu J , et al . Targeted gene correction of laminopathy - associated LMNA mutations in patient - specific iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell 2011 ; 8 : 688 - 694 . 5 Soldner F , Laganiere J , Cheng AW , et al . Generation of isogen - ic pluripotent stem cells differing exclusively at two early on - set Parkinson point mutations . Cell 2011 ; 146 : 318 - 331 . 6 Gabriel R , Lombardo A , Arens A , et al . An unbiased genome - wide analysis of zinc - finger nuclease specificity . Nat Biotech - nol 2011 ; 29 : 816 - 823 . 7 Pattanayak V , Ramirez CL , Joung JK , Liu DR . Revealing off - target cleavage specificities of zinc - finger nucleases by in vitro selection . Nat Methods 2011 ; 8 : 765 - 770 . 8 Wang Y , Chen J , Hu JL , et al . Reprogramming of mouse and human somatic cells by high - performance engineered factors . EMBO Rep 2011 ; 12 : 373 - 378 . 9 Okita K , Matsumura Y , Sato Y , et al . A more efficient method to generate integration - free human iPS cells . Nat Methods 2011 ; 8 : 409 - 412 . 10 Sherry ST , Ward MH , Kholodov M , et al . dbSNP : the NCBI database of genetic variation . Nucleic Acids Res 2001 ; 29 : 308 - 311 . 11 Sebastiano V , Maeder ML , Angstman JF , et al . In situ genetic correction of the sickle cell anemia mutation in human induced pluripotent stem cells using engineered zinc finger nucleases . Stem Cells 2011 ; 29 : 1717 - 1726 . 12 Zou J , Mali P , Huang X , Dowey SN , Cheng L . Site - specific gene correction of a point mutation in human iPS cells derived from an adult patient with sickle cell disease . Blood 2011 ; 118 : 4599 - 4608 . ( Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper on the Cell Research website . )