Augmenting Scientiﬁc Creativity with Retrieval across Knowledge Domains Hyeonsu B . Kang 1 * Sheshera Mysore 2 * Kevin Huang 3 ∗ Haw - Shiuan Chang 2 Thorben Prein 3 Andrew McCallum 2 Aniket Kittur 1 Elsa Olivetti 3 1 Human - Computer Interaction Institute , CMU , PA , USA 2 Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences , UM ASS A MHERST , MA , USA 3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering , MIT , MA , USA { hyeonsuk , nkittur } @ cs . cmu . edu { smysore , hschang , mccallum } @ cs . umass . edu { kjhuang , prein , elsao } @ mit . edu Abstract Exposure to ideas in domains outside a sci - entist’s own may beneﬁt her in reformulating existing research problems in novel ways and discovering new application domains for ex - isting solution ideas . While improved perfor - mance in scholarly search engines can help sci - entists efﬁciently identify relevant advances in domains they may already be familiar with , it may fall short of helping them explore diverse ideas outside such domains . In this paper we explore the design of systems aimed at aug - menting the end - user ability in cross - domain exploration with ﬂexible query speciﬁcation . To this end , we develop an exploratory search system in which end - users can select a portion of text core to their interest from a paper ab - stract and retrieve papers that have a high simi - larity to the user - selected core aspect but differ in terms of domains . Furthermore , end - users can ‘zoom in’ to speciﬁc domain clusters to re - trieve more papers from them and understand nuanced differences within the clusters . Our case studies with scientists uncover opportuni - ties and design implications for systems aimed at facilitating cross - domain exploration and in - spiration . 1 Introduction Analogies have been a central mechanism for cross - boundary inspirations and innovation throughout the history of science and technology ( Gentner et al . , 1997 ; Oppenheimer , 1956 ) . For example , analogical reasoning helped the Greek philosopher Chrysippus ( c . 240 B . C . ) model sound waves from observations of water waves , two domains that did not interact prior to this insight . However , as knowledge areas deepen in specialization , they interact less with each other ( Swanson and Smal - heiser , 1996 ; Chu and Evans , 2021 ) and analogical reasoning across domains becomes increasingly challenging . Yet , a systematic review of existing literature suggests that enabling connections that ∗ * Equal contribution . jump between scientiﬁc domains may bring signiﬁ - cant innovations and scientiﬁc progress ( Rzhetsky et al . , 2015 ) . As such , developing a computational means to augmenting human intelligence with ana - logical creativity remains a holy - grail challenge in both cognitive science and AI research ( Mitchell , 1993 ; Hesse , 1965 ; Kittur et al . , 2019 ) . To this end , recent approaches for retrieving ana - logically similar ideas have demonstrated promis - ing results ( Kang et al . , 2022a ; Hope et al . , 2017 , 2021 ; Chan et al . , 2018 ) . The central idea of these approaches focuses on retrieving analogs similar in one aspect of a pre - determined schema ( e . g . , ‘problem solved’ ) while differing on the other ( e . g . , ‘method used’ ) , exposure to which has shown to unlock scientists’ creativity to break out of ﬁxation and mechanistic conventions ( Kang et al . , 2022a ) . While promising , there are remaining technical and design challenges that prohibit realization of systems that support exploration across boundaries of knowledge domains . The ﬁrst challenge is devel - oping mechanisms that allow end - users to explore diverse domains and ﬁnd ones they want to jump to ﬁnd analogous retrievals . Prior work in cognitive psychology research on human creativity ( Chan et al . , 2015 ; Gonçalves et al . , 2013 ) has noted a sweet spot of distance for retrieval , with effective results being neither too different from the query , which may cause early rejection from searchers , nor too similar , which may be insufﬁcient for break - ing out of conventions and ﬁxation ( Jansson and Smith , 1991 ) . This notion of effective distance is a departure from the commonly used notions of rele - vance in the literature of IR and NLP that rely on topical overlap ( Borlund , 2003 ) and development of methods often optimized for maximal content - similarity ( Carterette , 2011 ) . A notable exception is the prior research in search diversiﬁcation ( see Santos et al . ( 2015 ) ) , which contributes mecha - nisms for optimizing the novelty and coverage of search results given ambiguous queries . However , a r X i v : 2206 . 01328v2 [ c s . I R ] 14 D ec 2022 they often lack the controllability for end - users who want to specify the kinds of novelty they are interested in and the scope of coverage . The second challenge is the lack of labeled data for scaling a schematic representation of docu - ments . Barriers to domain knowledge make ac - curate labeling of research papers using a pre - determined schema across diverse domains pro - hibitively costly . While Chan et al . ( 2018 ) demon - strated a potential pipeline for crowdsourcing the labels with non - expert crowdworkers , a subsequent paper in which a supervised model was trained based on the crowd - labeled data showed limita - tions on the model accuracy and downstream re - trieval usefulness ( Kang et al . , 2022a ) . Further - more , emerging scientiﬁc domains present an addi - tional challenge with updating data . Finally , studying how cross - domain explorations occur in authentic use scenarios requires a ) develop - ment of an interactive search system with a usable performance and b ) evaluating it with scientists seeking inspirations on real - world research prob - lems . Insights from the study also contribute to the growing literature that studies open questions around how informational and exploration needs in creative work change over time and during the exploration ( Li et al . , 2022 ) . In this work we develop an interactive prototype system which we use to probe these challenges and uncover design implications for future analog - ical search systems aimed at supporting retrieval across knowledge domains 1 . Our system leverages the recently introduced faceted Query - by - Example ( QbE ) paradigm to increase the controllability of search novelty and scope , by allowing searchers to query using a paper abstract and a sentence 2 in the abstract that indicates personally interesting core aspects of the paper ( Mysore et al . , 2021 ) . To ﬁnd matching abstracts based on the query aspect , our system ﬁrst indexes documents using each of its sentences and retrieves similar sentences using a strong sentence encoding model ( sbert . net , 2021 ) at runtime . To go beyond the high - demand for labeled data in a challenging domain , our approach relaxes the mechanism for retrieval from relying on a pre - determined schematic representation of abstracts to using a readily available , intuitive sentence - level representation . To support an increased diversity 1 https : / / github . com / olivettigroup / cross - domain - exploration 2 Future systems may extend this to support sub - sentence spans or multiple - sentence queries . Title : Sustainable machining with vegetable ﬂuids ( Rao et al . 2015 ) Abstract : mechanics polymers plant biologysemiconductors flow , shear cutting , metal Global clusters 2 Aspect based querying 1 Local clusters 3 ‘Zoom - in’ Searcher flow Document cluster Figure 1 : We leverage free - form sentence level query - ing 1 (cid:13) to retrieve documents across automatically built domain clusters 2 (cid:13) . These are expanded based on searcher selection and re - clustered to allow navigation of nuanced differences within selected global clusters 3 (cid:13) . Searchers can move between global clusters , ‘zoom in’ to examine global clusters , and reformulate their queries for additional alternative exploration . of matching over prior work that mapped each ab - stract into a single ‘best’ schematic representation , we enable users to select any sentence in an ab - stract as interesting for querying . The system then retrieves papers similar to the selected aspect but different in terms of their domains . Domain clus - ters in our system were constructed using a pre - trained scientiﬁc document representation model trained on citation data ( Cohan et al . , 2020 ) captur - ing a global domain knowledge structure , and also do not require explicit labeled data in the process . In order to center authentic user needs in the de - velopment of our prototype system , we adopted an iterative design process and sought feedback from a group of materials science researchers studying cli - mate change mitigation strategies . Due to the com - plex systems nature of climate change , develop - ment of mitigation strategies such as clean energy technologies and more sustainable building materi - als requires a cross - disciplinary approach ( Xu et al . , 2016 ) and related closely to the needs we set out to support in this research . We conducted case stud - ies with our system to gain deeper insights into whether the system retrieves results that represent meaningful ‘jumps’ between knowledge domains , whether scientists can make sense of them , and the design challenges for future exploratory search systems that facilitate cross - boundary inspirations . 2 System Description Our system allows searchers to explore retrievals from global clusters and select interesting ones . The user may zoom into the clusters by retrieving additional results from them , which may reveal nuanced differences via local clustering . This in - teraction is supported by the ‘Zoom in’ button in A B C D Figure 2 : Front - end interface . A (cid:13) In the input panel , searchers enter the query paper abstract and a speciﬁc sentence aspect they want to align the retrieval results on . B (cid:13) Once searchers click on ‘Search’ at the bottom left , the system retrieves papers along with global domain clusters and displays them at the top of the navigation panel . Searchers can switch between different clusters to examine the results . Clicking on a cluster label highlights it and ﬁlters the papers that belong to the cluster in the table ( clicking again on a selected cluster label de - selects it and refreshes the ﬁltered table view ) . C (cid:13) The papers are displayed in the table on the right , with a green sentence highlight showing the closest aspect to the query . Searchers can type keywords in the ﬁlter at the top to ﬁnd papers that contain them ( matching keywords in the abstract are highlighted ) . Optional control buttons for our case studies for collecting feedback data are also shown in the table . D (cid:13) Clicking the ‘Zoom in’ button retrieves more papers from the selected clusters , allowing searchers to examine nuanced differences within the selected domain clusters . the interface ( Fig . 2 ) . There are three main compo - nents of the system ( Fig . 1 ) : Global clusters . A set of clusters partitioning the entire corpus of papers into domains , built from paper embeddings com - puted with Cohan et al . ( 2020 ) ’s transformer - based model ; Sentential representations . Each sentence in an abstract is encoded using a state - of - the - art sentence encoder ( sbert . net , 2021 ) to enable faceted retrieval at that level ; Local clusters . A set of nested clusters built from query - speciﬁc retrievals within user - speciﬁed global clusters to reveal variations within the clusters . For the text corpus of our sys - tem , we used 3 . 2M Materials Science abstracts in the S2ORC corpus ( Lo et al . , 2020 ) . Global domain clusters . We represent broad sub - disciplines of materials science with a set of global clusters , G ∈ G . These serve as the primary means for searchers to control the distance of retrievals to a query . The clusters were obtained via citation - based similarity clustering using SPECTER embed - dings of abstracts d ’s in the corpus ( Cohan et al . , 2020 ) . We employ a K - Means clustering of the embeddings with | G | = 20 . This use follows from results indicating that pre - trained representations often capture domain structures well ( Aharoni and Goldberg , 2020 ; Peng et al . , 2021 ) . We further validate these clusters in Appendix A . Following the creation of G , we index the sen - tences s , of documents in each cluster , d g ∈ G , with a cluster speciﬁc approximate nearest neigh - bour search index , I G , in preparation for search . We use the HNSW index of Faiss ( Johnson et al . , 2019 ) and a pre - trained sentence encoder , BERT s to encode the sentences ( sbert . net , 2021 ) . Sentence - level retrieval . We leverage the recently proposed faceted QbE search paradigm ( Mysore et al . , 2021 ) for querying , shown to support ex - ploratory search tasks well ( Lissandrini et al . , 2019 ) . Here , searchers query the system with an abstract q and a sentence in the abstract s q ∈ q indicative of the aspect of their interest . We embed s q with BERT s , and retrieve the T nearest sentences from each global cluster index I G . Users can then browse the results by switching between domains in the front - end interface , and additionally indicate speciﬁc global clusters G s ⊂ G they want to explore further . These serve as input to constructing query - speciﬁc local clusters . Zooming in on global clusters with local clus - tering . Given a set of global clusters G s , and the query s q , we retrieve the L nearest sentences to s q from selected indices I G ∈G s . To support retrieval of more results from the same domain ( s ) , we set L > T . We then re - cluster the similar document sentences into a set of M clusters to show varia - tions within the selected global clusters . Finally , our prototype used a preliminary TFIDF scoring of unigrams in a cluster to extract descrip - tors for global and local clusters – the informative - ness of the descriptors was however limited . Interface used in the case studies . The main com - ponents of the front - end interface of our system are ( See Fig . 2 ) A : Query input panel , B : Cluster navigation panel , C : Retrieval table view with ﬁltering , and D : An optional ‘Zoom in’ button . Clicking this button retrieves more papers from the domain clusters searchers selected which allows them to explore and make sense of nuanced details among the results within the selected clusters . 3 Case Studies We conducted think - aloud interviews ( Fonteyn et al . , 1993 ) with three participants who engage in Materials Science and Engineering research to probe 1 ) what potentially distinct values our system may bring to scientists exploring their own research questions compared to baseline systems , and 2 ) de - sign challenges for realizing the full potential of search systems aimed at cross - domain exploration . We detail the study procedure in Appendix B . 4 Findings Diverse results & complementary value . All par - ticipants commented on seeing more diverse results using our system over the baselines ( Table 3 ) . P1 compared his experiences as follows : “ On ConnectedPapers ( P1’s baseline system ) , I can see the overall relations between works such as who’s citing who , and identifying what’s well - cited . . . but focused in the closely related ﬁelds like geochemistry and dissolu - tion of cement . . . In [ our system ] , you can see that it’s picking up things that I quite frankly had no idea why it picked up at ﬁrst . ” – P1 This quote demonstrates that while the prototype system did seem to retrieve more diverse results compared to the baseline system , the difference in results may require a closer look for apt engage - ment . Participants thought the value of retriev - ing such diverse results in the prototype system was complementary to that of the baseline systems . Both P2 and P3 , who chose keyword query - based search engines as baselines , felt the baseline sys - tems were useful for ﬁnding things in the domain they already knew : “ In regular search engines like S CI F INDER I can put in the exact query to ﬁnd precisely that kind of papers ” ( P2 ) . In compari - son , “ [ our system ] is fantastic for learning more about a topic and kind of exploring . . . there are a lot of things that I found that I hadn’t seen anywhere before . ” ( P2 ) . However , this value also seemed to depend on how focused the search goal was : “ It depends on what I’m trying to do . . . If I had a spe - ciﬁc experiment in mind , for example tracking the activity of magnesium . . . I probably wouldn’t be in - terested in looking at even iron or non - manganese materials . . . but in other times , I’ll be open to see - ing even non - battery domains so long as similar challenges are addressed . ” ( P3 ) . Sourcing diversity from global domain clusters . This diversity seemed to originate from the differ - ences in domains that participants perceived while interacting with the system . Speciﬁcally , partic - ipants thought the global clusters mapped to dif - ferent application domains of similar mechanisms captured in their query sentences . For P1 , this included clusters of papers focused on ‘mixture strategies to create cement with radiation shielding to use in military bases’ ( as opposed to recapturing materials from industrial wastes to create mixtures for buildings for non - military use ) or ‘mixtures for bone - like scaffolds and implants in mice’ ( as op - posed to buildings ) . In addition , P1 perceived the application domain of military bases as closer than Orthopedics in mice . An example P2 found interest - ing was a paper describing solid - state electrolytes for use in electrochromic mirrors , as opposed to the domain of battery technologies he was familiar with . This and other papers in the cluster showed P2 a whole new set of application domains related to optical properties of electrolytes that P2 did not know of . P3 found the results describing ‘discharg - ing’ mechanisms interesting and useful for learning new contexts of research that explore similar mech - anisms , e . g . , papers on electrostatic discharging observed in clouds or the effects of mechanical properties in anode coatings on discharging . Zooming in & realizing hidden assumptions . While reviewing the variations among the re - sults , participants realized hidden assumptions that guided them to seek inspirations in ‘typical’ do - mains . For example , in seeing varying uses of a similar mechanism ( e . g . , discharging ) in different contexts ( e . g . , electrostatic vs . electrochemical ) , P3 learned about other domains which she did not tap into for inspirations before : “ Now I can see that dis - charging happens everywhere , even outside the bat - tery domains . What I assumed was that discharg - ing is only related to rate - related challenges in ( an ) electrochemical ( context ) . ” – P3 . Unlike similarity - maximizing search , learning about various domains helped P3 realize her own pre - conceived notion of typicality of a search domain , broaden potential domains of inspiration , and connect previously dis - joint clusters ( e . g . , [ mechanical strategies ] , such as nanoindentations in anode coating materials , to [ electrochemical ] discharging efﬁciency ) . Retrieving more results in selected domain clus - ters and surfacing local clusters not only assisted participants in making sense of the high - level simi - larity within the clusters but also helped them see nuanced differences . For P2 , seeing results on [ dop - ing ] and [ sintering temperature ] were on - point with regards to the core mechanistic relevance for his experiments ( high - level similarity ) , while zoom - ing in the clusters revealed more nuanced trade - off relationships such as how doping has been used as a mitigation strategy against loss of lithium at high temperatures . Examining the additional re - trievals also led P2 to notice diverse sub - ﬁelds such as [ powder metallurgy ] and [ laser deposition ] that the nuanced mechanistic differences occurred . Sometimes recognizing such nuanced differ - ences helped participants make sense of how the search system worked : “ So these papers lack ( con - nection to ) dissolution and are mostly about pro - duction of cement which makes sense because my query sentence only mentions producing aggre - gates . But I thought because the rest of the abstract talks about dissolution of aggregates , the system would know that’s the context I’m focusing on . ” – P1 . Interpreting how the system worked guided participants’ query reformulation to counter their hidden assumptions or broaden the scope of search . 5 Implications for Design These results conﬁrm earlier ﬁndings that empha - size support for an iterative discovery of impor - tant and generative mis - alignments during analog - ical search ( Kang et al . , 2022a ) , while also con - tributing new challenges speciﬁc to cross - domain exploration . Compared to similarity - maximizing search that optimizes for alignment of search re - sults , cross - domain inspiration requires identiﬁca - tion of aspects in analogs that may be diversiﬁed for end - user inspiration versus those that need to be preserved for retaining relevance . Speciﬁcally , how to identify clusters that lack im - portant connections to query problems is challeng - ing because a cluster can be centered around a spe - ciﬁc mechanism relevant to the query while lack - ing connections to other contextual mechanisms ( e . g . , a cluster of papers that focuses on produc - tion mechanisms of aggregate mixture but does not study the dissolution process of waste materials , which is a related mechanism for providing the in - gredients to the production pipeline ) , or may not preserve important directionality of the cause - and - effect relationships ( e . g . , papers that demonstrate techniques to make electrolytes more inﬂammable may be useful in certain application domains but not for making battery technologies safer ) . Given the importance of participants’ reﬂection on their own assumptions and how the system performed search , future designs may focus on supporting stateful explorations and aim to help searchers keep track of which clusters they have visited , what they found as useful ( and not useful ) in them , and how they might reformulate subse - quent search queries based on the previously hid - den but salient aspects of their search intent . This information may provide valuable feedback to the system for tuning its behavior over time . Lastly , unfamiliar domains may require explana - tions of relevance for searchers to scaffold engage - ment at a deeper level and to prevent early rejection based on snap judgment . We observed that orga - nizing papers in domain clusters based on their high - level similarity to the query aspect serves as an important anchor for sensemaking . Furthermore , encouraging end - users to zoom into local clusters that exhibit nuanced differences may have led our expert users to slow down their judgment ( Carol - anne et al . , 2007 ) , allowing a deeper processing of results . However , open questions remain for future work to effectively communicate papers’ relevance to scientists ( e . g . , Kang et al . ( 2022b ) ) . 6 Conclusion Our work presents an novel approach for exploring domain clusters to broaden sources of scientiﬁc in - spiration and probe design implications for future interactive systems . Our case studies suggest that systems leveraging the global structure of knowl - edge domains and enabling ﬂexible aspect - based retrieval help scientists ﬁnd meaningful inspira - tions outside the domains they are familiar with . Additional work is needed to realize the full poten - tial of interactive systems that augment scientiﬁc creativity via cross - domain inspirations . 7 Acknowledgments We thank our study participants for their valu - able insights and feedback . We would like to ac - knowledge partial funding from Shell , the Cen - ter for Knowledge Acceleration , the Allen Insti - tute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AI2 ) , National Sci - ence Foundation under Grant Number IIS - 1763618 , FW - HTF - RL - 1928631 , and IIS - 1816242 , DMREF Awards 1922311 , 1922372 , and 1922090 , the Of - ﬁce of Naval Research ( ONR ) under contracts : N00014 - 20 - 1 - 2280 and N00014 - 19 - 1 - 2114 , the IBM Research AI through the AI Horizons Net - work , and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative under the project Scientiﬁc Knowledge Base Construc - tion . This work is also supported by the Google Cloud Research Credits program with the award GCP19980904 . References KP Abhilash , P Christopher Selvin , B Nalini , P Nithyadharseni , and BC Pillai . 2013 . Investiga - tions on pure and Ag doped lithium lanthanum ti - tanate ( LLTO ) nanocrystalline ceramic electrolytes for rechargeable lithium - ion batteries . Ceramics In - ternational , 39 ( 2 ) : 947 – 952 . Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg . 2020 . Unsupervised domain clusters in pretrained language models . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 7747 – 7763 . Iz Beltagy , Kyle Lo , and Arman Cohan . 2019 . SciB - ERT : A pretrained language model for scientiﬁc text . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan - guage Processing ( EMNLP - IJCNLP ) , pages 3615 – 3620 , Hong Kong , China . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Pia Borlund . 2003 . The concept of relevance in IR . Journal of the American Society for information Sci - ence and Technology , 54 ( 10 ) : 913 – 925 . E Moulton Carol - anne , Glenn Regehr , Maria Mylopou - los , and Helen M MacRae . 2007 . Slowing down when you should : a new model of expert judgment . Academic Medicine , 82 ( 10 ) : S109 – S116 . Ben Carterette . 2011 . System effectiveness , user mod - els , and user utility : a conceptual framework for in - vestigation . In Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop - ment in information retrieval , pages 903 – 912 . Tanmoy Chakraborty , Amrith Krishna , Mayank Singh , Niloy Ganguly , Pawan Goyal , and Animesh Mukher - jee . 2016 . Ferosa : A faceted recommendation sys - tem for scientiﬁc articles . In Proceedings , Part II , of the 20th Paciﬁc - Asia Conference on Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining - Volume 9652 , PAKDD 2016 , page 528 – 541 , Berlin , Heidel - berg . Springer - Verlag . Joel Chan , Joseph Chee Chang , Tom Hope , Dafna Sha - haf , and Aniket Kittur . 2018 . Solvent : A mixed initiative system for ﬁnding analogies between re - search papers . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , 2 ( CSCW ) . Joel Chan , Steven P . Dow , and Christian D . Schunn . 2015 . Do The Best Design Ideas ( Really ) Come From Conceptually Distant Sources Of Inspiration ? Design Studies , 36 : 31 – 58 . Johan SG Chu and James A Evans . 2021 . Slowed canonical progress in large ﬁelds of science . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118 ( 41 ) . Arman Cohan , Sergey Feldman , Iz Beltagy , Doug Downey , and Daniel Weld . 2020 . SPECTER : Document - level representation learning using citation - informed transformers . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2270 – 2282 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Daniel Cohen , Bhaskar Mitra , Katja Hofmann , and W Bruce Croft . 2018 . Cross domain regularization for neural ranking models using adversarial learning . In The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1025 – 1028 . Khalid El - Arini and Carlos Guestrin . 2011 . Beyond keyword search : Discovering relevant scientiﬁc lit - erature . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’11 , page 439 – 447 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machin - ery . Michael Färber and Adam Jatowt . 2020 . Citation rec - ommendation : approaches and datasets . Interna - tional Journal on Digital Libraries , 21 ( 4 ) : 375 – 405 . Marsha E Fonteyn , Benjamin Kuipers , and Susan J Grobe . 1993 . A description of think aloud method and protocol analysis . Qualitative health research , 3 ( 4 ) : 430 – 441 . D . Gentner , S . Brem , R . W . Ferguson , P . Wolff , A . B . Markman , and K . D . Forbus . 1997 . Analogy and Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler . In T . B . Ward , J . Vaid , and S . M . Smith , editors , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes , pages 403 – 459 . American Psycho - logical Association , Washington D . C . Milene Gonçalves , Carlos Cardoso , and Petra Badke - Schaub . 2013 . Inspiration peak : exploring the se - mantic distance between design problem and textual inspirational stimuli . International Journal of De - sign Creativity and Innovation , 1 ( 4 ) : 215 – 232 . Kevin Heffernan and Simone Teufel . 2018 . Identifying problems and solutions in scientiﬁc text . Scientomet - rics , 116 ( 2 ) : 1367 – 1382 . Mary Hesse . 1965 . Models and analogies in sci - ence . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 16 ( 62 ) . Tom Hope , Joel Chan , Aniket Kittur , and Dafna Sha - haf . 2017 . Accelerating innovation through analogy mining . In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’17 , pages 235 – 243 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . Tom Hope , Jason Portenoy , Kishore Vasan , Jonathan Borchardt , Eric Horvitz , Daniel Weld , Marti Hearst , and Jevin West . 2020 . SciSight : Combining faceted navigation and research group detection for COVID - 19 exploratory scientiﬁc search . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu - ral Language Processing : System Demonstrations , pages 135 – 143 , Online . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Tom Hope , Ronen Tamari , Hyeonsu Kang , Daniel Her - shcovich , Joel Chan , Aniket Kittur , and Dafna Sha - haf . 2021 . Scaling creative inspiration with ﬁne - grained functional facets of product ideas . Sarthak Jain , Edward Banner , Jan - Willem van de Meent , Iain J Marshall , and Byron C Wallace . 2018 . Learning disentangled representations of texts with application to biomedical abstracts . In EMNLP , vol - ume 2018 , page 4683 . David G Jansson and Steven M Smith . 1991 . Design ﬁxation . Design studies , 12 ( 1 ) : 3 – 11 . Jeff Johnson , Matthijs Douze , and Hervé Jégou . 2019 . Billion - scale similarity search with GPUs . IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7 ( 3 ) : 535 – 547 . Marius Kaminskas and Derek Bridge . 2016 . Diversity , serendipity , novelty , and coverage : a survey and em - pirical analysis of beyond - accuracy objectives in rec - ommender systems . ACM Transactions on Interac - tive Intelligent Systems ( TiiS ) , 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 42 . Hyeonsu Kang , Xin Qian , Tom Hope , Dafna Shahaf , Joel Chan , and Aniket Kittur . 2022a . Augmenting scientiﬁc creativity with an analogical search engine . Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction . Hyeonsu B Kang , Rafal Kocielnik , Andrew Head , Jiangjiang Yang , Matt Latzke , Aniket Kittur , Daniel S Weld , Doug Downey , and Jonathan Bragg . 2022b . From Who You Know to What You Read : Augmenting Scientiﬁc Recommendations with Im - plicit Social Networks . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems , CHI ’22 , New York , NY , USA . Associ - ation for Computing Machinery . Aniket Kittur , Lixiu Yu , Tom Hope , Joel Chan , Hila Lifshitz - Assaf , Karni Gilon , Felicia Ng , Robert E Kraut , and Dafna Shahaf . 2019 . Scaling up ana - logical innovation with crowds and ai . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 ( 6 ) : 1870 – 1877 . Alex Ksikes . 2014 . Towards exploratory faceted search systems . Ph . D . thesis , University of Cam - bridge . Or Levi , Ido Guy , Fiana Raiber , and Oren Kurland . 2018 . Selective cluster presentation on the search results page . ACM Trans . Inf . Syst . , 36 ( 3 ) . Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Robert Capra . 2022 . An - alyzing information resources that support the cre - ative process . In ACM SIGIR Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval , pages 180 – 190 . Matteo Lissandrini , Davide Mottin , Themis Palpanas , and Yannis Velegrakis . 2019 . Example - based search : a new frontier for exploratory search . In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor - mation Retrieval , pages 1411 – 1412 . Kyle Lo , Lucy Lu Wang , Mark Neumann , Rodney Kin - ney , and Daniel Weld . 2020 . S2ORC : The semantic scholar open research corpus . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu - tational Linguistics , pages 4969 – 4983 , Online . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Christopher D . Manning , Prabhakar Raghavan , and Hinrich Schütze . 2008 . Introduction to Information Retrieval . Cambridge University Press . Melanie Mitchell . 1993 . Analogy - making as percep - tion : A computer model . Mit Press . Sheshera Mysore , Arman Cohan , and Tom Hope . 2022 . Multi - vector models with textual guidance for ﬁne - grained scientiﬁc document similarity . NAACL . Sheshera Mysore , Tim O’Gorman , Andrew McCal - lum , and Hamed Zamani . 2021 . CSFCube - a test collection of computer science research articles for faceted query by example . In Thirty - ﬁfth Con - ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track ( Round 2 ) . Mariana Neves , Daniel Butzke , and Barbara Grune . 2019 . Evaluation of scientiﬁc elements for text sim - ilarity in biomedical publications . In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Argument Mining , Florence , Italy . Association for Computational Linguistics . R . Oppenheimer . 1956 . Analogy in science . American Psychologist , 11 ( 3 ) : 127 – 135 . Malte Ostendorff , Nils Rethmeier , Isabelle Augenstein , Bela Gipp , and Georg Rehm . 2022 . Neighborhood contrastive learning for scientiﬁc document repre - sentations with citation embeddings . Malte Ostendorff , Terry Ruas , Till Blume , Bela Gipp , and Georg Rehm . 2020 . Aspect - based document similarity for research papers . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Compu - tational Linguistics , pages 6194 – 6206 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . International Committee on Compu - tational Linguistics . Liang Pang , Qingyao Ai , and Jun Xu . 2021 . Beyond probability ranking principle : Modeling the depen - dencies among documents . In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , WSDM ’21 , page 1137 – 1140 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Hao Peng , Qing Ke , Ceren Budak , Daniel M Romero , and Yong - Yeol Ahn . 2021 . Neural embeddings of scholarly periodicals reveal complex disciplinary or - ganizations . Science Advances , 7 ( 17 ) : eabb9004 . Jason Portenoy , Marissa Radensky , Jevin D West , Eric Horvitz , Daniel S Weld , and Tom Hope . 2022 . Bursting scientiﬁc ﬁlter bubbles : Boosting innova - tion via novel author discovery . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’22 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Andrey Rzhetsky , Jacob G Foster , Ian T Foster , and James A Evans . 2015 . Choosing experiments to ac - celerate collective discovery . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , 112 ( 47 ) : 14569 – 14574 . Rodrygo L . T . Santos , Craig Macdonald , and Iadh Ou - nis . 2015 . Search result diversiﬁcation . Found . Trends Inf . Retr . , 9 ( 1 ) : 1 – 90 . sbert . net . 2021 . sentence - transformers all - mpnet - base - v2 . Soumya Shukla and Orland Hoeber . 2021 . Visually linked keywords to support exploratory browsing . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval , pages 273 – 277 . Amin Sorkhei , Kalle Ilves , and Dorota Glowacka . 2017 . Exploring scientiﬁc literature search through topic models . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Workshop on Exploratory Search and Interactive Data Analyt - ics , pages 65 – 68 . Nicole Sultanum , Christine Murad , and Daniel Wigdor . 2020 . Understanding and supporting academic lit - erature review workﬂows with litsense . In Proceed - ings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , pages 1 – 5 . Don R Swanson and Neil R Smalheiser . 1996 . Undis - covered public knowledge : A ten - year update . In KDD , pages 295 – 298 . Brandon Tran , Maryam Karimzadehgan , Rama Kumar Pasumarthi , Michael Bendersky , and Donald Met - zler . 2019 . Domain adaptation for enterprise email search . In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop - ment in Information Retrieval , pages 25 – 34 . Brian Traynor , Ciara Mulcahy , Hugo Uvegi , Tunahan Aytas , Nicolas Chanut , and Elsa A Olivetti . 2020 . Dissolution of olivines from steel and copper slags in basic solution . Cement and Concrete Research , 133 : 106065 . Ryen W . White and Resa A . Roth . 2009 . Exploratory search : Beyond the query - response paradigm . Syn - thesis Lectures on Information Concepts , Retrieval , and Services , 1 : 98 . Yi Xie , Yuqing Sun , and Elisa Bertino . 2021 . Learn - ing Domain Semantics and Cross - Domain Correla - tions for Paper Recommendation , page 706 – 715 . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . Xiaofeng Xu , Santonu Goswami , Jay Gulledge , Stan D Wullschleger , and Peter E Thornton . 2016 . Inter - disciplinary research in climate and energy sciences . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Energy and Envi - ronment , 5 ( 1 ) : 49 – 56 . Dengmei Zhou , Chong Zeng , Jing Xiang , Tao Wang , Zitian Gao , Chunlian An , and Wanxia Huang . 2022 . Review on Mn - based and Fe - based layered cathode materials for sodium - ion batteries . Ionics , pages 1 – 12 . A Evaluation of Global Clusters To investigate the ability of clustering methods for separation of materials science corpora into co - herent subdomains , we compare model generated clusters with author - provided keywords treated as gold standard labels . Dataset . To generate our evaluation dataset do - main experts ﬁrst screened most frequent keywords in a multi - domain dataset of 700k English materi - als science publications and selected 18 keywords indicative of sub - domains ( see Table 2 ) . Next , only a subset of the corpus with documents assigned a single keyword of the 18 sub - domain keywords was retained for evaluation . This yields a corpus of 39 , 699 documents . A sample of these documents were checked manually to ensure that they rep - resented reasonable paper - keyword assignments . This corpus is available . 3 Experimental Protocol . We compare the method used in our system , SPECTER ( Cohan et al . , 2020 ) to TFIDF and SCIBERT baselines ( Beltagy et al . , 3 https : / / github . com / olivettigroup / cross - domain - exploration Keywords Present Keywords Removed RANDOM 27 . 37 27 . 37 TFIDF 48 . 08 39 . 75 SCIBERT 31 . 80 31 . 32 SPECTER 47 . 93 43 . 90 Table 1 : Domain cluster purity for SPECTER , compared to baseline approaches on a corpus of materials science papers and author - provided keywords . Number of clus - ters = 18 . Reported metrics represent cluster purity in percent , averaged over three runs . “Keywords Removed” represents the performance after removal of all category deﬁning keywords ( of Table 2 ) from the text of the title and abstract based on which paper representations are computed . 2019 ) . For evaluation of document clusters , em - beddings are computed using publications titles and abstracts . SCIBERT and SPECTER input the papers as " Title [ SEP ] Abstract " . To generate clusters we employ K - Means with K = 18 . We report average cluster purity over three separate runs of clustering ( Manning et al . , 2008 , C16 . 3 ) . Results . Results ( Table 1 ) show SPECTER s’ abil - ity to induce subdomains clusters . Surprisingly high dimensional TFIDF embeddings perform sim - ilarly to transformer generated SPECTER embed - dings ( column : “Keywords Present” ) . An expla - nation for this might be found in the evaluation dataset we created – clusters based on author pro - vided keywords , which are also likely to appear in the title and abstract of a paper are likely to see term - based methods ( i . e . TFIDF ) seeing strong per - formance . To investigate this further , we repeat the evaluation after removing the 18 category deﬁning keywords ( Table 2 ) from abstracts and title text before encoding papers . This experiment ( column : “Keywords Removed” ) strengthens our hypothesis , showing a larger drop in the measured cluster pu - rity values for the TFIDF approach compared to SPECTER . SPECTER ’s ability to induce clusters in the absence of explicit term overlap provides the value needed in our search setup . B Procedure and Interface Design Used in the Case Studies Participants . Three participants ( 1 female ) whose research areas are in the broader space of mate - rial science and engineering were recruited for in - terviews . The mean age of participants was 24 ( SD = 4 . 04 ) . They all reported conducting a review magnetic materials carbon materials ceramics optical properties electrochemistry nanomaterials alloys photocatalysis semiconductors solar cells fuel cells polymers composite materials biomaterials thermodynamics lithium - ion batteries thin ﬁlms microstructure Table 2 : Keywords representative of clusters in our cluster evaluation dataset . of related work using scholarly search engines as a research facilitator and vehicle for learning . Procedure . Participants prepared a query paper and a description of their research problem ( Ta - ble 3 ) and chose search engines they personally use the most and are familiar with for the ﬁrst stage ( 20 min ) of the interview . Using the search en - gines of their choice , participants in the ﬁrst stage looked for as many related work as possible for the query domain . The goal of this stage was to gain a sense of ‘what is out there’ which served as context for their judgement on retrieval results in the subsequent stage using our system . In the next stage , participants interacted with our system with the focus of ﬁnding different ideas than what they have found in the ﬁrst stage ( 20 min ) . For the papers they found interesting , they provided feedback on two dimensions , 1 ) Novelty with the following ternary response options ( 1 : “ I have seen this exact paper before ” ; 2 : “ I have not seen this exact paper but similar ideas before ” ; 3 : “ I have not seen anything like this before , ” similar to the scale used in ( Kang et al . , 2022a ) ) and 2 ) Relevance with binary response options . The collected feed - back was used in the end - of - session debriefs to aid both the interviewer’s and participants’ memory and discussion grounded on speciﬁc examples . C Related Work Our work bears resemblance to a number of prior lines of work . We group these broadly into methods for exploratory search of text corpora , and method - ological NLP and information retrieval work which bears resemblance to parts of our system . C . 1 Exploratory Search for Text Corpora A large body of work has explored the problem of exploratory search for text corpora , with searchers PID Research Domains Seed Paper & Query sentence Baseline Search System 1 New ways of producing cement using indus - trial wastes to lower the carbon footprint and maintain sustainability in commercial bldgs Query sentence was the 2nd sentence in the abstract of Traynor et al . ( 2020 ) C ONNECTED P APERS 4 2 New electrolyte materials for simultaneously increasing the capacity and stability of batteries Query sentence : 8th abstract sentence in Abhilash et al . ( 2013 ) S CI F INDER 5 3 Understanding the barriers to scaling up the manufacturing of effective cathode materials Query sentence : 2nd abstrct sentence in Zhou et al . ( 2022 ) G OOGLE S CHOLAR Table 3 : Participants’ research domains , seed papers used in the study , and baseline search engines they chose . often interested in learning and discovery of new content . These search tasks are often characterized by an open - ended and multifaceted information need and involve a sizable browsing component ( White and Roth , 2009 , Sec 2 . 4 ) . Given the impor - tance of these aspects , we group the ways in which prior work represents documents in a system , this in turn , affect the ways that users query a search system . In describing past work we also highlight the ways in which they facilitate browsing . Exploration via rhetorical structure . This line of work primarily consists of designing a schema of labels to describe the rhetorical structure elements of documents , automatically or manually extract - ing these elements from documents , and indexing and retrieving documents along these aspects in response to a query . Document representation with rhetorical structure elements follows from a large body of work demonstrating that problem solving is often characterized by descriptions of the Situation , Problem , Solution , and Evaluation ( Heffernan and Teufel , 2018 , Sec 1 ) . In practice , a primary bottle - neck of this line of work is its reliance on a schema of labels - making transitions to new corpora chal - lenging . The closest prior work of this type is that of analogical search for creative ideation applied to science and design ( Hope et al . , 2017 , 2021 ; Kang et al . , 2022a ) . The method of query speciﬁcation in this body of work is primarily via short text queries . In contrast , our system adopts a faceted query - by - example approach where searchers query with an example document and indicate an aspect of the document they would to focus on via selecting text spans , with documents indexed at the sentence level ( Mysore et al . , 2021 ) . In this respect , work of Chan et al . ( 2018 ) and Neves et al . ( 2019 ) bear the closest resemblance to ours in supporting querying with documents in combination with a ﬁxed schema of aspect labels . While most work highlighted above retrieve a list of documents , Chan et al . ( 2018 ) and Hope et al . ( 2021 ) present exceptions in allowing browsing via domain - like structures - bearing resemblance to our approach . While Chan et al . ( 2018 ) search across domain structures informed by document metadata , our system relies on a set of automatically built global domain clusters and a set of query speciﬁc local clusters . Similarly , Hope et al . ( 2021 ) , allow exploration of purpose and mechanism aspects via a hierarchical organization of these aspects con - structed with a rule - mining approach . This ap - proach , while well suited to use cases where as - pects can be pre - extracted proves challenging to operationalize in the absence of these extractions . Our work complementarily prioritizes ﬂexibility in query speciﬁcation without a schema based docu - ment representation . Other work also bear resemblance to the ones presented above . Jain et al . ( 2018 ) learn aspect disentangled paper representations with aspect spe - ciﬁc encoders trained with similarity data aligned to aspects in biomedical abstracts . Chakraborty et al . ( 2016 ) present a system for retrieval of similar pa - pers grouped along a schema of aspects based on citation and content similarities to a query . Osten - dorff et al . ( 2020 ) , present an approach to classify the aspect of similarity between a pair of papers rather than producing a ranking over documents . Portenoy et al . ( 2022 ) present a system for explor - ing authors across knowledge domains . Exploration via topical structures . A separate line of work has also leveraged topical structures such as knowledge base entities ( concepts ) , key - words , or other model inferred topic structures . Hope et al . ( 2020 ) present a system for exploration of biomedical concepts ( e . g . proteins , diseases , drugs ) and research groups . Similarly , Shukla and Hoeber ( 2021 ) enhance academic search engine result pages with keywords available in document metadata , and Sorkhei et al . ( 2017 ) allow explo - ration of a corpus of papers via topics inferred with a LDA model . Besides the bottleneck of concept ex - traction in some of these methods , a key challenge of concept based exploration , as noted in Hope et al . ( 2020 ) and Sultanum et al . ( 2020 ) , stems from users desire to continually explore additional concepts unavailable in a system or add concepts of their own . We alleviate this drawback in part by allowing users to directly query with text spans in a document context . That said , the two meth - ods provide complementary value – while topical structures provide value in gaining an overview of a corpus our approach is likely to allow expression of more complex queries . C . 2 Search and Recommendation A body of work in NLP , information retrieval , and recommendation bear resemblance to parts of our system . We group these into query - by - example methods and methods for cluster ranking and result diversiﬁcation . While the former contextualizes our document representation and querying mechanism the latter contextualizes our result presentation . Query - by - Example . This body of work primar - ily intends to retrieve documents given a query document and is well suited to exploratory search given its ability to express more context for under - speciﬁed queries ( Ksikes , 2014 ; Lissandrini et al . , 2019 ) . This is best represented in El - Arini and Guestrin ( 2011 ) , who present a system for person - alized recommendation of papers given a set of user trusted papers - with documents presented as a diversiﬁed ranking of candidate documents based on citation network similarities . A large body of work under citation recommendation also recom - mends documents similar to a query document Fär - ber and Jatowt ( 2020 ) . Recent work has also seen strong performance for a variety of scientiﬁc paper recommendation tasks by training transformer bi - encoder models on citation network data ( Cohan et al . , 2020 ; Ostendorff et al . , 2022 ) . In contrast with this work , our work intends to model aspect conditional similarities . Closest work to ours is pre - sented by Mysore et al . ( 2022 ) who extend these transformer bi - encoder models to a sentence level multi - vector model intended for ﬁner - grained as - pect conditional document similarities trained with co - citation data and textual supervision . Cluster retrieval and diversiﬁcation . In our gen - eration of results based on a set of global clusters and a set of local clusters , our work departs from the standard IR assumption of treating candidate documents as independent from each other - Pang et al . ( 2021 ) overview this line of work . In doing so , our work relates to lines of work on search result diversiﬁcation and cluster retrieval . Work in search result diversiﬁcation most often intends to improve retrieval performance for ambiguous queries by optimizing the novelty of retrieved results or opti - mizing for coverage of all possible interpretations of a query , Santos et al . ( 2015 ) surveys this body of work in the context of search , while Kaminskas and Bridge ( 2016 ) survey similar work in the con - text of recommendations . Close work in cluster retrieval comes from Levi et al . ( 2018 ) , who in - vestigate the appropriate queries for which results should be grouped on a search result page . These lines of work differ from ours in intending to im - prove performance for ad - hoc search , our work on the other hand intends to use clusters of documents as a means of controlling “distance” to a query in an exploratory search setup . In this respect , Xie et al . ( 2021 ) represents closely related recent work in training a model for citation recommendation across - domain boundaries while leveraging an ex - isting ontology of domain concepts to learn the domain speciﬁc semantics - training similar mod - els for our setup represent exciting future steps . Finally , cross - domain retrieval ( Cohen et al . , 2018 ; Tran et al . , 2019 ) aims to improve in - domain performance of retrieval models in a transfer learn - ing setup while our work focuses on retrieval across domain boundaries .