Key messages • Almost all managers ( 95 percent ) interviewed said they benefited from the people they consulted in five ways : 1 ) solutions ( know - what and know - how ) ; 2 ) referrals ; 3 ) problem reformulation ; 4 ) validation ; and 5 ) legitimation . • No more than three of these five components of actionable knowledge ever came from the same person , indicating different types of actionable knowledge come from relationships with different attributes . • Learning is affected by existing knowledge , and by specific relational characteristics and source behaviours , that enhance or hinder one’s ability to learn from another . . . . making research work 1565 Carling A ve . Suite 700 Ottawa , ON K1Z 8R1 T : 613 - 728 - 2238 F : 613 - 728 - 3527 brokering @ chsrf . ca www . c h s r f . ca B r o k e r i n g D i g e s t A spotlight on knowledge brokering resources Issue # 27 , November 2006 More Than an Answer : Information Relationships for Actionable Knowledge Rob Cross and Lee Sproull From these data , the authors identified five components of actionable knowledge : 1 ) Solutions : 87 percent of sources offered procedural knowledge that helped turn theory into action . Only 13 percent provided declarative knowledge . 2 ) Referrals : 70 percent of sources pointed to other people who were also more likely to offer information because of their connection with the source . 3 ) Problem reformulation : 45 percent of sources were valued for their ability to shape the seeker’s problem , as well as to point out consequences and anticipate issues . 4 ) Validation : 49 percent of informants said their sources bolstered their confidence and helped them create more persuasive arguments for a case . 5 ) Legitimation : Legitimation of a proposed approach by sources was valued at important project junctures because it saved research time and sped up the time needed to get agreement . Relationships for referrals , problem reformulation , and validation were characterized by greater intimacy than those for solutions or legitimation . This research looks at how information relationships in organizations are cultivated , maintained , and used to create actionable knowledge — knowledge that leads to immediate progress on a current project . The research involved two studies , one qualitative and one quantitative , involving 158 managers from one large accounting firm . Qualitative Study This study developed concepts related to information relationships and actionable knowledge , based on 40 managers’ descriptions of how they solved complex problems under tight deadlines . Members of the informant group , half men and half women , were responsible for generating pragmatic solutions that could move their client - consultant relationships forward . The researchers did not assume key sources of information would be people . However , when asked to describe sources of information critical to project success , 85 percent of managers immediately named one or more people . Interviewees were then asked to identify three important individuals and describe how their interactions with them resulted in the creation of actionable knowledge . Most of the sources named were described as partners in information relationships rather than “experts . ” Interviewees revealed that while formal structure influenced their choices ( for example , 36 percent of relationships were with hierarchical superiors ) , informal aspects of relationships were also important . Connections on a personal level ( such as education , family , and philosophical outlook ) made these relationships feel safer , allowing the managers to take risks or ask dumb questions — qualities that promoted creativity . Ninety - seven percent of sources were described as “willing to engage , ” or to think with them rather than dump information on them . These relationships were cultivated and maintained over time . Proactive sharing of information and opportunities , and quality rather than quantity of interactions , were important maintenance behaviours . . . . making research work Issue # 27 , November 2006 Page 2 Quantitative study This quantitative research , involving 118 managers , sought to assess how formal and informal attributes of the knowledge seeker , the knowledge source , and the relationship between the two predict the uptake of actionable knowledge . The authors found : • seeker expertise affects the receipt of referral , problem reformulation , and validation components , particularly when dealing with ill - structured problems ; • perceived source expertise is important in predicting seeker receipt of all components of actionable knowledge except problem reformulation , where tie strength and willingness to engage in problem - solving were most important ; • the source’s willingness to actively think with the seeker helps the seeker assimilate and use new knowledge ; • weak ties are important for solutions , while strong ties matter for problem reformulation and validation , which require effort ( such as seeking additional information ) on the part of the source ; and • seekers turn to peers only for problem reformulation . The paper describes its methodological weaknesses and concludes with the wish that future research take a more collective approach to learning . Who learns what from whom , how rapidly , and how faithfully , and how is organizational performance ( effectiveness , efficiency , and innovation ) affected ? This research offers valuable insights for managers , suggesting the types of advice they should seek and the relationship investments they should make to yield actionable knowledge for themselves personally , and the importance of supporting social networks in their organizations generally . For more information about the Brokering Digest series or to retrieve other summaries , please go to www . chsrf . ca / brokering / brokering _ digest _ e . php . Please note that this summary is an interpretation and is not necessarily endorsed by the author ( s ) of the work cited . Cross , Rob and Lee Sproull . 2004 . “More Than an Answer : Information Relationships for Actionable Knowledge . ” Organization Science ; 15 ( 4 ) : 446 - 462 . 1565 Carling A ve . Suite 700 Ottawa , ON K1Z 8R1 T : 613 - 728 - 2238 F : 613 - 728 - 3527 brokering @ chsrf . ca www . chsrf . ca