Novel Information Discovery and Collaborative Filtering to Support Group Creativity Tracy A . Jenkin Queen’s University David B . Skillicorn Queen’s University Yolande E . Chan Queen’s University Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada . Abstract Teams that innovate encounter challenges in divergent and convergent thinking processes related to the need to : 1 ) leverage diverse internal and external knowledge , and 2 ) produce something that is both novel and valuable . Integrating the extant literature , we describe these challenges and propose a new approach to solving issues related to divergent and convergent thinking in groups in an innovation context . Specifically , we design group processes to support divergent and convergent thinking , including the use of several information technology ( IT ) tools to support them : 1 ) a novel - information discovery tool to foster computer - supported divergent thinking and sensemaking , and 2 ) a collaborative - filtering tool to foster computer - supported convergent thinking and sensegiving . Findings indicate that the novel - information discovery tool increases efficiency and effectiveness in the divergent thinking process and that the collaborative - filtering tool supports convergent thinking by focusing the group’s attention on ideas that might otherwise be neglected . Combining these two IT tools with group processes for divergent and convergent thinking has important implications for both research and practice . Keywords : Computer - supported Group Creativity ; Divergent Thinking ; Convergent Thinking ; Collaborative Filtering ; Novel Information Discovery ; Knowledge Creation ; Data Analytics ; Innovation ; Mixed Methods Design . Introduction As the pressure to innovate rises , developing effective creative processes that leverage diverse knowledge sources is an increasingly important organizational capability ( Elerud - Tryde & Hooge , 2014 ; Majchrzak , More , & Faraj , 2012 ) . Divergent thinking is used to generate novel ideas and convergent thinking to select valuable and feasible ones ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ) . In practice , groups perform these creative tasks and , therefore , it is important to study creativity in the group context ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Stroebe , Nijstad , & Rietzschel , 2010 ; Sutton & Hargadon , 1996 ) . Although groups bring a number of benefits ( e . g . , inter - participant synergies and diverse knowledge ) , they also encounter a number of challenges that impede these creative processes and innovation overall . By combining their knowledge in novel ways ( Hwang , Singh , & Argote , 2014 ) , groups with diverse knowledge are well - suited to generate ideas with greater novelty , i . e . , ideas that are radical , departing from the current paradigm ( e . g . , Hung , Lai , Yen , & Chen , 2017 ) . However , groups may encounter interpretational differences due to this diverse knowledge ( Carlile , 2004 ; Majchrzak , et al . , 2012 ) and biases ( Carlile , 2004 ; Hargadon & Fanelli , 2002 ; Keum & See , 2017 ) , and may generate infeasible ideas if members do not possess sufficiently deep knowledge ( Hwang , et al . , 2014 ) . Deep domain knowledge , although important for generating ideas that are feasible , can constrain mental models , limiting the novelty of ideas ( Hwang , et al . , 2014 ; Zhou & Li , 2012 ) . Although accessing external knowledge may help in this regard , there is a danger that external knowledge will contribute to information overload and be detrimental to creative processes ( Zhou & Li , 2012 ) . Given these challenges , developing a shared understanding of novel ideas and reaching a consensus regarding the most valuable ideas is difficult for groups and known to result in groups developing less creative ideas ( Weick , 2006 ) , thereby negatively affecting the organization’s ability to innovate . Based on a review of the creativity literature , we identified three gaps related to group creativity and computer support for this creativity . First , although it is recognized that both divergent and convergent thinking processes are important for creativity and innovation , there are few studies that examine both and most focus on divergent processes ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Müller - Wienbergen , Müller , Seidel , & Becker , 2011 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ) . Further , in addition to the challenges with divergent processes ( i . e . , idea generation ) , groups face a number of challenges with convergence ( e . g . , selecting a novel and valuable idea to pursue ) ( see Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . Second , although studies examining divergent thinking processes note that , in theory , providing external stimuli should help with this process , the empirical findings are mixed ( Agogue et al . , 2014 ; Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) and there is limited research on the usefulness of external information for this purpose ( Li , Zhang , & Cao , 2009 ) . Third , there are calls for research that examines creative processes and related IT tools in field studies in the group and organizational context rather than the laboratory ( Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ; Seidel , Müller - Wienbergen , & Becker , 2010 ) . Thus , open issues still remain regarding how best to address the challenges associated with group creativity processes using IT tools in practice , particularly where innovation and novelty are the objectives . Accordingly , our research objective is to explore new approaches to supporting groups in these highly creative and innovation - focused contexts . To do so we conduct a case study using an integrated mixed methods design ( Teddlie & Tashakkori , 2009 ) to explore IT tools that foster computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking for groups in innovation contexts . We combine two new tool innovations that leverage text - and data - analytics - based solutions to propose a new approach to divergent and convergent thinking that not only addresses the group challenges associated with these processes but offers new ways to enhance them in terms of effectiveness and efficiency . For computer - supported divergent thinking , we examine the utility of a novel - information discovery ( NID ) tool ( Jenkin , Chan , Skillicorn , & Rogers , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) 1 in a group setting within an organizational context . We describe an NID tool , called ATHENS , that locates novel information that is indirectly related to a focal concept and that helps users make sense of the resulting non - obvious connections to stimulate thinking and support the generation of novel ideas . The NID tool addresses the challenges with deep knowledge and overload identified above and supports sensemaking processes . Although this tool has been examined for individual use in experimental settings , there is a lack of understanding of how to use the tool in both an organizational and group context , and how to combine it with convergent processes and supporting IT tools . Since creative processes occur in groups in practice , and groups have unique benefits and challenges , it is important to understand how groups appropriate an NID tool and its utility . Our findings show that an NID tool can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of divergent thinking in groups , reduce the stake individuals have in their own ideas and provide highly novel results , upon which the group can then work to converge . For computer - supported convergent thinking , we introduce a collaborative - filtering ( CF ) tool ( described later ) that provides a new way of analyzing the opinions of group members by favoring the most competent ( i . e . , discerning ) evaluators , which differs from more common approaches to recommendation agents . Our findings indicate that this tool can improve the effectiveness of convergent processes by highlighting important ideas that tend to be overlooked during group discussion . By doing so , the CF tool acts as a sensegiving device and triggers additional sensemaking by the group . This paper is organized as follows . First , we examine the problems associated with divergent and convergent thinking in groups , suggesting how processes and IT tools can help . Then , we discuss our research approach and findings and conclude with a discussion of key insights . Group Creativity Challenges and Solutions Creativity has been defined as an “act , idea or product that changes an existing domain or that transforms an existing domain into a new one” ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 p . 28 ) . Across the varied definitions of creativity , the following common elements emerge : the outcome has novelty and value ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Amabile , Conti , Coon , Lazenby , & Herron , 1996 ; Barron & Harrington , 1981 ; Ghiselin , 1952 ; Mumford & Gustafson , 1988 ; Newell , Shaw , & Simon , 1962 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) , and often involves the recombination of existing ideas or technologies ( Couger , 1990 ; Couger , Higgins , & McIntyre , 1993 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ; Hwang , et al . , 2014 ; Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ) . The social nature of creativity has also been highlighted , for example , outcomes must be recognized by others as novel and valuable ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 ; Shneiderman , 2007 ) , and the creative process should occur in groups in practice ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ; Sutton & Hargadon , 1996 ) . The creativity literature describes two distinct yet interrelated cognitive processes : divergent and convergent processes . Divergent “thinking” involves imagining and generating disparate insights and ideas that are novel and branch out from what is commonly known ( Guilford , 1956 ; Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ) . Convergent thinking , on the other hand , involves synthesizing , refining , and selecting valuable and feasible ideas to implement ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Guilford , 1956 ; Massetti , 1996 ) . Below , we examine both of these processes and the challenges faced by groups in executing them , as well as solutions to these challenges . Divergent Thinking It is well established in the creativity literature that although interacting groups have the advantage of creating unique hybrid ideas due to inter - participant synergies , nominal groups of the same size ( i . e . , non - interacting individuals ) tend to generate more , as well as more novel , ideas ( e . g . , Allport , 1920 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Steiner , 1972 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . This is due to process losses encountered by interacting groups 2 as seen , for example , with production blocking ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1991 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ; Steiner , 1972 ) : the inability of a group member to contribute an idea while another is speaking . To address this , the divergent phase of creativity typically begins with each member generating ideas separately before participating in group discussion ( e . g . , Girotra , Terwiesch , & Ulrich , 2010 ; Potter & Balthazard , 2004 ) . Theories that seek to explain divergent thinking typically discuss how individuals search through familiar categories and associations in their memories ( Anderson , 1992 ; Barsalou , 1983 ; Hintzman , 1988 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) and mental models ( Piaget , 1954 ) – frameworks to help organize and make sense of information ( Hedberg , 1981 ) . Examples of theories used to explain divergent thinking include search for ideas in associative memory ( SIAM ) ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) , ACT * theory ( Anderson , 1992 ; Garfield , Taylor , Dennis , & Satzinger , 2001 ) , and the dual pathway to creativity ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ) . Productivity can be improved by providing individuals with stimuli to help with this memory search ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Hoffman , 1959 ; Nagasundaram & Dennis , 1993 ; Potter & Balthazard , 2004 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . Generally , these theories suggest that the novelty of the ideas generated is affected by the degree to which the stimuli are related to the problem ( VanGundy , 1988 ) and to the individuals’ existing mental models . When individuals are given stimuli related to the problem , they tend to search narrowly , accessing familiar associations within existing mental models . As a result , these techniques are less cognitively demanding and more efficient than those involving unrelated stimuli because familiar associations are triggered within existing mental models ( Agogue , et al . , 2014 ; Barsalou , 1983 ; Hender , Dean , Rodgers , & Nunamaker , 2002 ; Nagasundaram & Dennis , 1993 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Potter & Balthazard , 2004 ) . However , existing mental models constrain creativity , and the resulting ideas tend to be less novel or radical ( Hender , et al . , 2002 ; Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ; Nagasundaram & Bostrom , 1994 ) and the range of ideas is limited ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ) . When given unrelated stimuli , the act of forcing a relationship back to the problem ( VanGundy , 1988 ) requires individuals to make unfamiliar and non - obvious connections , reframing their existing mental models ( Hender , et al . , 2002 ; Li , et al . , 2009 ) . Although this process is more cognitively demanding and time - consuming ( Nijstad and Stroebe 2007 ) , it often results in ideas that are higher in novelty ( Hender , et al . , 2002 ; Nagasundaram & Bostrom , 1994 ; Nagasundaram & Dennis , 1993 ) . As suggested above , combining existing ideas or technologies in new ways has been noted as an effective approach to generating highly radical ideas ( e . g . , Couger , 1990 ; Couger , et al . , 1993 ; Hargadon , 2002 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ; Hwang , et al . , 2014 ; Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ) , but requires a broad range of knowledge to generate and assess the potential relevance of the novel combinations ( Schulz , 2001 ; Zhou & Li , 2012 ) . However , when groups are composed of individuals with this broad knowledge , understanding how knowledge in one domain is relevant in another can be difficult due to the specialized and domain - specific knowledge that each member possesses ( Carlile & Rebentisch , 2003 ; Majchrzak , et al . , 2012 ) . In other words , making connections across domain boundaries is often challenging . Further , sufficiently deep knowledge is needed to refine the idea to ensure it is valuable and feasible ( Hwang , et al . , 2014 ; Majchrzak , et al . , 2012 ) . Another impediment to group creativity is the additional coordination burden . As groups identify and discuss new ideas , the increased social complexity , due to coordination needs ( Steiner , 1972 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) , affects the creativity of the group . To coordinate , group members rely on their common knowledge rather than imagining novel possibilities ( Weick , 2006 ) . Radical ideas may be discarded in favor of ordinary ones and new ideas created by the group tend to be no more novel than individual ideas . Computer - Supported Divergent Thinking As discussed above , approaches to increase the novelty of the ideas generated via divergent thinking tend to be cognitively demanding and time - consuming . Thus , IT tools to support these approaches are valuable . There is substantial research on the benefits of electronic brainstorming systems ( EBS ) to support groups in creative processes ( Dennis et al . , 2005 ; Hender , et al . , 2002 ; Nagasundaram & Dennis , 1993 ; Potter & Balthazard , 2004 ) . By enabling parallel and anonymous entry of ideas , the main purpose of EBS is to reduce the effects of production blocking and evaluation apprehension ( Dennis , et al . , 2005 ) . Beyond EBS , a number of IT tools have been proposed to stimulate divergent thinking . For example , a design theory for creativity support systems has been proposed in which a knowledge management system could structure existing knowledge to allow for divergent and convergent thinking ; however , this theory has not been empirically tested ( Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ) . In a recent study by Althuizen and Reichel ( 2016 ) , an IT tool that provided external and related stimuli to support divergent thinking outperformed other creativity enhancing IT tools . Past studies have examined IT tools that use different types of external stimuli , assessing the impact on divergent thinking outcomes in individual and group contexts . Across these studies , the external stimuli examined varied in the degree to which they were related or remote vis - à - vis the focal topic , the stimuli source , and the degree to which the stimuli were external . For example , at the individual level , a dictionary of related associations ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ) as well as remote and related external cases in a case - based reasoning tool ( Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) have been examined . In the group context , prompts by a facilitator ( Santanen , Briggs , & De Vreede , 2004 ) , exposure to novel ideas proposed by others ( Garfield , et al . , 2001 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) , access to an ideas bank ( Massetti , 1996 ) , and external information support ( Li , et al . , 2009 ) have been studied . However , despite theoretical support for the importance of remote external stimuli , the findings of these studies have been mixed in terms of the benefits for divergent thinking processes and the novelty of the ideas . Recognizing that highly novel ideas may come from combining existing ideas and technologies , external sources of information should be valuable for divergent thinking ( Zhou & Li , 2012 ) by providing information on existing technologies , products , or services that can then be combined together in new ways . However , individuals must make these “non - obvious” connections , which leads them to the novel idea . Although social networks can help link individuals , who may make these connections ( Hargadon , 2002 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ; Jennex , 2017 ) , there are no known IT tools to support the identification of “non - obvious” connections of ideas . It is for this reason that we are undertaking the current study and describing the NID tool , ATHENS , we have created . Given its potential usefulness and the vast amounts of external information available today , external sources of information can take on a potentially larger and more central role in divergent thinking processes than external stimuli have in the past . However , accessing this type of external knowledge can result in cognitive overload ( Zhou & Li , 2012 ) . Despite its potential as a source of external information and rich repository for divergent thinking ( as external stimuli ) , the World Wide Web ( hereafter the Web ) is challenging to use because of information overload ( e . g . Chung , Chen , & Nunamaker Jr , 2005 ) . Further , the results of a typical search engine are highly related to the search terms ( Beccerra - Fernandez , Gonzalez , & Sabherwal , 2004 ) . As a result , the connections between the search terms and results are simple , and generally do not stimulate thinking beyond the obvious and known connections . Although the Web has been used in previous studies to assist with grouping ( Roussinov & Zhao , 2003 ) and generating ideas ( Li , et al . , 2009 ) , it has not been used as a primary source to support divergent thinking . Furthermore , the findings from these previous studies suggest that the stimuli provided were not “surprising” and did not assist in producing ideas that were notably more novel ( Li , et al . , 2009 ) . Ideally , information that is indirectly related to search terms , or “focal concepts” ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ) , would provide external stimuli sufficiently remote that it would stimulate divergent thinking . However , locating this type of “novel” information on the Web is challenging ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ) . Further , assessing the relevance of this information and making the connection to the focal concept are intrinsically difficult activities because information exists outside individual mental models and non - obvious associations between concepts must be invoked ( e . g . , Hargadon & Douglas , 2001 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . NID Tool for Computer - Supported Divergent Thinking . We propose that an NID tool , recently developed in other studies ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) , can help users overcome the challenges associated with divergent thinking by providing computer support for this task . Our NID tool , ATHENS , uses an iterative clustering technique to support the discovery of novel information on information repositories such as the Web . ATHENS returns information that is indirectly related to the search terms provided , yet contextually appropriate , and this becomes the desired stimuli . This is done by using the results of the initial search to identify directly related concepts and searching “outwards” by pairing newly discovered terms with terms from the previous step . This is repeated twice , so that the resulting information is unlikely to be directly associated with the initial search terms , but very likely to be “just over the horizon” with respect to them . The results , Web pages found as part of this outward search , are clustered according to similarity . The end result is a set of novel clusters that contain concepts indirectly and non - obviously related to the original search terms . Background information on the NID tool is provided in Appendix A . We describe our NID tool in this article so that other researchers may explore creating their own tools . Additional technical details and information on the algorithms used are available ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) . In previous studies , the utility of the NID tool for individual use was assessed using experiments . In a Web experiment , tool developers used an early prototype to conduct a search back - dated to September 12 , 2001 , assessing whether the results would have generated novel insights into the September 11 terrorist attacks ( Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) . The tool was enhanced and evaluated against two other IT tools in a lab experiment ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ) . The findings demonstrated that ATHENS was more effective than other more commonly available IT tools in locating novel information and supporting the generation of ideas higher in radicalness . Our current study represents the first time that the use and utility of an NID tool ( specifically ATHENS ) has been assessed in both an organizational context and group setting . In a group context , there is a need for radical ideas that are valuable and novel , but also for those ideas to be understood enough so that the groups can converge on an idea . Below , we discuss how the tool can assist groups with divergent thinking . When looking for information on the Web , groups with diverse knowledge bring the unique perspectives of each member to the problem at hand , resulting in variations in the search terms used . With ATHENS , each group member begins by using the NID tool individually , using search terms he or she deems important to the problem context . Users browse through the resulting novel clusters and as they do so , uncover content ( keywords , URLs , and document content ) that is indirectly related to their original search term , spurring them to generate highly novel ideas . These indirect connections are a middle ground between the high cognitive demands of completely unrelated knowledge and the potential staleness of existing mental models . The potential value of these indirect connections is analogous to the value of weak ties versus strong ties , as described by Granovetter ( 1973 ) . The NID tool differs from other IT tools that provide stimuli that is either highly related ( e . g . , Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ) or unrelated to the focal topic ( e . g . , Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) , or that provides access to others’ ideas ( e . g . , Garfield , et al . , 2001 ; Massetti , 1996 ) as a form of stimuli . In a group context , the user of the NID tool can share not only the ideas he or she generates , but the results ( i . e . , the novel cluster or a specific web page within that cluster ) that spurred him or her to generate that idea . Extending beyond the theories that explain divergent thinking in terms of movements between short term and long term memories , we propose that theories of sensemaking ( e . g . , Gioia & Chittipeddi , 1991 ; Gioia & Mehra , 1996 ; Weick , 1995 ) provide another valuable lens for examining how individuals and groups use NID and CF tools for divergent and convergent thinking , respectively , for the following reasons . First , sensemaking theories have been used to explain the process of meaning making at the individual and group levels and the interplay between them ( Weick , Sutcliffe , & Obstfeld , 2005 ) . Second , sensemaking theories distinguish between a future - oriented ( i . e . , prospective ) and a more historically - oriented ( i . e . , retrospective ) type of sensemaking , which are useful for examining creative processes ( Stigliani & Ravasi , 2012 ) . Lastly , the role of physical artifacts ( e . g . , Majchrzak , et al . , 2012 ; Stigliani & Ravasi , 2012 ) , including digital ones ( e . g . , Abbasi , Zhou , Deng , & Zhang , 2018 ) , has been noted as important in sensemaking processes . Thus , theories of sensemaking fit well with the individual - group interaction and use of IT tools to support divergent and convergent thinking . Sensemaking and the NID Tool . When a user reviews the results produced by an NID tool , they are trying to understand how the resulting novel clusters might be related to the search terms entered . This involves retrospective sensemaking , or interpreting and making meaning of the past ( Weick , 1995 ) , which in this case is what is presented in the tool results . This retrospective sensemaking involves the user reviewing the contents of the novel clusters , the intermediate clusters , and tags to make meaning of the purported non - obvious connections . The intermediate clusters and tags provide clues that help explain why the tool has identified these novel clusters , similar to how a recommendation agent ( e . g . , on Netflix or Amazon ) might provide a clue regarding why it is recommending a product ( e . g . , because you bought another product ) . Although the tool suggests a relationship between the focal concept and novel information , it is up to the user to make sense of , identify , and explain the relationship between these concepts that have meaning in the given context . The user then updates his or her mental model with any new connections formed during this process . The potential he or she sees in these connections then triggers a more prospective form of sensemaking , where the user envisions the possible opportunities this connection could afford ( Gioia & Mehra , 1996 ) . The degree to which the connection is non - obvious will likely impact the novelty of the idea generated . This sensemaking process is based on both the stimuli presented by the tool and the individuals’ mental models , which reflect their knowledge , experience , and associations between concepts . By bringing his or her unique perspective , search terms , and knowledge to the problem , each user is apt to generate a unique set of novel ideas . The group now has a larger and more diverse pool of highly novel ideas to discuss and upon which to build . The group must make sense of all the ideas generated , and although divergent thinking may continue at the group level , the number of ideas and the need to make choices will lead to convergent processes , discussed in the next section . Convergent Thinking Convergent thinking involves the synthesis , refinement , and selection of ideas to implement ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Guilford , 1956 ; Massetti , 1996 ) . Although individuals outperform groups in the divergent phase ( generating ideas ) , individuals do not perform as well when selecting the best ideas to pursue ( Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . Groups also have challenges selecting the best idea to pursue ( Girotra , et al . , 2010 ) . Next , we review group challenges specific to convergence when dealing with highly novel ideas . Groups may have interpretive differences in how they ascribe meaning to and evaluate novel ideas . Although diverse knowledge may aid in divergent processes for idea generation , some common knowledge between group members is required to communicate effectively and leverage the specialized knowledge of each group member during convergent thinking processes ( Carlile , 2002 , 2004 ; Cohen & Levinthal , 1990 ; Majchrzak , et al . , 2012 ) . When dealing with novel ideas , this common knowledge may not be sufficient for the group to understand how each other’s specialized knowledge applies to the idea . This can result in shallow , surface level ideas that are not particularly novel but understood by all members of the group . Alternatively , the novel ideas that are generated might only be understood by one or two members . Furthermore , individuals tend to select their own ideas over others ( Keum & See , 2017 ) . Novel ideas may exacerbate this bias and be particularly costly to certain group members whose knowledge is “at stake” ( Carlile , 2004 ) because the idea may require discarding acquired expertise and knowledge ( Hargadon & Fanelli , 2002 ) . The group overall may exhibit shift tendencies in the ideas selected in the convergent phase . It has been observed that , as the group moves towards a consensus on which idea ( s ) to pursue , they tend to shift their preferences . Two theories used to explain this shift are persuasive arguments theory ( Vinokur , 1969 ; Vinokur & Burnstein , 1974 ) and social comparison theory ( Festinger , 1954 ) . Persuasive arguments theory suggests that preferences shift in either a riskier or more conservative direction ( e . g . Sia , Tan , & Wei , 2002 ; Stoner , 1968 ; Vinokur , 1969 ; Vinokur & Burnstein , 1974 ) , depending on the degree to which partially - shared persuasive arguments ( i . e . , information not known by all group members ) are made , the validity and novelty of the arguments ( Sia , et al . , 2002 ; Vinokur & Burnstein , 1974 ) , and the riskiness of the alternatives these arguments support ( Vinokur , 1969 ; Vinokur & Burnstein , 1974 ) . However , when persuasive arguments are absent or alternatives are ambiguous , individuals tend to conform to the group majority , in accordance with social comparison theory ( McGrath , 1984 ; Vinokur , 1969 ) . Since risk , information asymmetry , and ambiguity are likely with novel ideas , group preferences will tend to shift towards either popular ideas ( Elerud - Tryde & Hooge , 2014 ; Sia , et al . , 2002 ) or more extreme ideas ( McGrath , 1984 ; Vinokur , 1969 ; Vinokur & Burnstein , 1974 ) . These shift tendencies can inappropriately promote ideas that are too conservative or too risky . Computer - Supported Convergent Thinking The creativity literature has noted a dearth of research examining the design of IT tools to support and stimulate convergent thinking processes , with most studies either focusing on divergent processes or creativity more broadly ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ) . Of the studies that do examine these types of IT tools , one proposes a design theory including features for accessing , organizing , and refining existing knowledge ( Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ) ; however , the authors do not evaluate the tool . Another study examines a tool that enables users to organize their ideas ; however , the tool performed no better than the control software ( Massetti , 1996 ) . Yet another study evaluates a tool that guides the user step - by - step through the process of convergence and found a significant difference in the number of useful ideas produced ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ) , but not in the novelty of those ideas . These studies investigated tools for individuals , not groups . In general , group support systems ( GSS ) can be used for computer - supported group creativity ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ; Seidel , et al . , 2010 ) with democratic voting and tabulation being features that can support convergent processes . However , these GSS features were designed to address more general group issues such as the influence of high - status individuals , uneven participation , and facilitation of the group process ( Benbasat & Lim , 1993 ; DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ) , not necessarily the group issues specific to convergent thinking discussed above . CF Tool for Computer - Supported Convergent Thinking . In this study , we propose a tool that provides functionality quite distinct from the process guides , voting tools , and organizing functionality of the IT tools reviewed in the past . Specifically , we propose a method of analyzing the opinions of group members : a new CF tool ( see Herlocker , Konstan , Terveen , & Riedl , 2004 , for a review of CF tools ) designed to help groups when dealing with high degrees of novelty and breadth of knowledge . Using data analytics techniques to combine the opinions of individuals , the CF tool evaluates and weights each one’s ability to judge and provides a “global” recommendation . Google has used a similar approach for Web page ranking : a page’s relevance is assessed by the number of pages that link to it , weighted by the quality of those pages ( Chen , 2001 ) . In contrast to a democratic vote , CF discounts the opinions of individuals who appear to be “weak” assessors and emphasizes the opinions of those who appear to be “strong” assessors . The quality of an assessment is based on the degree to which an individual’s opinions are in agreement with the opinions of other individuals who have demonstrated better judgment skills . CF resolves this circular relationship to provide a collective recommendation that retains the variance in opinions across the group and develops a bias towards strong assessors . One can think of a strong assessor as “discerning . ” For example , the conventionally best movies are known as “blockbusters” which are universally popular – most people like them , but often only weakly . The worst movies are also universally regarded as bad . However , it is often more interesting to look at movies that are liked by a relatively smaller number of discerning movie critics . These movies do not appeal to everyone but are regarded as excellent by a small number of individuals with high - quality movie - rating skills . The bias incorporated into CF is supported by McGrath ( 1984 ) , who notes the appropriateness of favoring more competent participants . Recent work on group recommender systems also assigns weights to individuals based on an individual’s representativeness in the group ( Wang , Zhang , & Lu , 2016 ) . In theory , the results from a CF tool will differ from a democratic vote and bring unique , and perhaps less commonly understood , ideas to the forefront of the idea selection process , rather than only the most popular ideas . Below , how we measure an assessor’s ability to judge and incorporate this bias is discussed in more detail . The CF tool in this study uses matrix decomposition , specifically singular value decomposition ( SVD ) ( see Skillicorn ( 2007 ) for a description of SVD ) , scripted in Matlab ( www . mathworks . com ) . A matrix is constructed with one row for each evaluator , and one column for each idea . The matrix entries are numerical scores , corresponding to opinions , given by each evaluator to each idea . The variation among evaluators is conceived to be the result of one or more latent variables that can be extracted using essentially the same mechanism as principal component analysis . The use of SVD makes it possible to project the data into an appropriate number of dimensions because the singular values are an indication of how much the data ( in this case , the opinions ) vary in each dimension . There is a geometric intuition to the projected decomposition : points corresponding to individuals are drawn to those of other individuals with whom they share common opinions with the same intensity . Thus , the point corresponding to an individual who broadly agrees with everyone else tends to be projected close to the origin . On the other hand , someone whose opinions are completely different from those of everyone else tends to occupy dimensions that will be removed by projection and so will also be placed close to the origin . The decomposition , therefore , ensures that individuals whose opinions are broadly consistent with those of others and those whose opinions are idiosyncratic project close to the origin . The inherent symmetry of the decomposition ensures that the same is true of the ideas themselves : ideas about which opinions are uniform and those about which opinions are highly divergent will project close to the origin . Ideas , and individuals , that are represented farthest from the origin are those whose correlation with other ideas and individuals is moderate , which is a working definition of being interesting or discerning ( i . e . , a strong assessor ) ( Skillicorn , 2007 ) . In the movie example , using an SVD will place both blockbusters and subgenre movies close to the origin ( leaving more interesting movies , perhaps those sometimes called “sleepers” , farthest from the origin ) and , simultaneously , place evaluators far from the origin when they prefer more interesting movies . Both assessors who agree with most other assessors , and those whose opinions are completely idiosyncratic , are mapped close to the origin by the projection ; those who remain farther from the origin can therefore be regarded as those who have interesting opinions . To simplify the feedback to the group , the points corresponding to ideas are projected onto a line that passes from the origin to the point defined by the first two singular values as coordinates , ( s1 , s2 ) , to provide a single score for what is a two - factor property . Ideas can now be listed in order of their projected positions on this line . Ideas that were close to the origin are placed in the middle of the ranking , ideas far from the origin appear at the extremes of the ranking , and there will often be a natural interpretation of these extremes as “good” and “bad . ” All recommender systems aim to infer interesting objects by using the known opinions of existing users about these objects ( Jannach , Zanker , Felfernig , & Friedrich , 2010 ) – the differences lie in how this information is used . For example , for reasons of efficiency , a common strategy is to find , for a new user who wishes a recommendation , only a few similar users based on a few similar objects . In contrast , the approach described here computes the global fixed point of the known affinities between objects and users . This might be computationally impractical for large - scale recommender systems but is perfectly serviceable for smaller scale sets of opinions and , thus , the smaller group settings often used in organizational contexts . Additional background information on the CF tool is provided in Appendix A . Sensemaking , Sensegiving , and the CF Tool . Sensemaking theories can also be used to understand how the CF tool influences convergent thinking in groups . Whereas sensemaking involves making meaning and interpreting information , sensegiving involves providing information in a way that influences this interpretation ( Gioia & Chittipeddi , 1991 ; Weick , et al . , 2005 ) , that is , to influence the sensemaking of others . We propose that , by highlighting important ideas that may have been overlooked by the group during convergent thinking processes , the CF tool would give sense to the group , suggesting that they reconsider such ideas . This would trigger additional discussion and sensemaking to understand what was missed and whether the idea has value and should be pursued . The CF tool acts as an external third party and helps to bring forward ideas that may have been inappropriately dropped from consideration due to the issues discussed earlier ( e . g . , shift tendencies and interpretational differences ) . We now describe our research approach and how we combine IT tools and processes to alleviate the group challenges described above to foster computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking . Research Approach Given the complexity and ambiguity of the processes we are exploring ( i . e . , computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking in groups ) as well as the novelty of the IT tools we are examining ( i . e . , NID and CF ) , we chose to adopt a case study approach , useful for examining behaviors in a natural setting ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Scandura & Williams , 2000 ) , especially ones involving the interaction between organizations , individuals , and technologies ( Dubé & Paré , 2003 ) . Although the NID tool has been evaluated for its utility in experimental settings at an individual level , its utility has not been studied previously in an organizational context or group setting . The CF tool included in this study is new and has not previously been evaluated . Furthermore , the combination of IT tools and processes we propose in this study is also new and has not yet been studied . The creativity literature also highlights the need to study creative group processes in the natural contexts in which they occur ( e . g . , Seidel , et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , we deemed it important to explore how these IT tools could be used for computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking in a group setting within an organization . We examined an in - depth single case study with unique characteristics , including the organization’s previous experience using a GSS and their interest in this new approach and in innovating ( Yin , 2009 ) . Experience with a GSS was important because it served as a baseline against which participants could compare the new tools and approach utilized in this study . We also used the general features of the GSS to support the collection of data during the main study . The organization , referred to as High Tech ( a pseudonym ) , is a Canadian subsidiary of a large Fortune 500 organization in the high - tech industry . For our research design , we adopted an integrated mixed - methods design ( Teddlie & Tashakkori , 2009 ) , involving the collection and analysis of qualitative and quantitative data iteratively throughout the study . Using both qualitative and quantitative approaches allowed us to leverage the strengths of both , and offset their relative weaknesses ( Venkatesh , Brown , & Bala , 2013 ; Venkatesh , Brown , & Sullivan , 2016 ) . Data Collection Planning During initial phone and e - mail discussions with the organizational sponsor , we discussed the goals of the study and helped the sponsor identify a group of individuals and problem context that could benefit from the proposed approach . Further discussions were held to confirm : 1 ) the appropriateness of the participating group and problem context , and 2 ) the technical environment requirements for the study . The participating group consisted of six members ( three women and three men ) representing a range of roles ( from business analyst to senior director ) and departments ( from market intelligence to user design ) . The group members all knew each other and were colocated in the same building . We arranged an initial site visit to meet with this group to provide an introduction to the study and training on the NID tool . We discussed the problem context as well as the goals of the process and tools . The problem context and study task involved exploring a strategic question for the company , one that looked at how High Tech could generate business value from emerging technologies . The study task was to generate novel ideas that addressed this problem and identify two ideas for High Tech to pursue , covering both divergent and convergent processes . Given the prototypical state of the NID tool and potentially lengthy processing time , participants were asked to submit their keywords to the researchers prior to the main study , which was conducted in the organization’s group decision lab ( using GroupSystems TM , the GSS used at High Tech ) . This allowed the researchers to run and prepare the NID search results before the main study , the focus of which was on the use of the results , not on the technical query entry process . The separation of query entry from results interpretation is consistent with prior studies ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) . Main Study Design During the main study , we facilitated sessions in which participants followed our proposed approach to computer - supported divergent and convergent processes in a face - to - face colocated setting . As described below , we collected both qualitative and quantitative data during these sessions to explore how the process and IT tools helped address group challenges . We were also interested in identifying any additional challenges encountered by the group and how those challenges could be overcome . Next , we describe this process in more detail . Divergent Phase . We began with the divergent phase ( phase 1 ) , leveraging the NID tool for computer - supported divergent thinking . The goal of this phase was for individuals to generate novel ideas that addressed the study task . At the start of this phase , participants were colocated in a meeting room and provided with their NID results . They were asked to generate up to five novel ideas to address the task using their NID results to help reuse , modify , or create new ideas . Because of the complexity and novelty of the task , we anticipated that individuals would produce a relatively small number of ideas ( Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) as opposed to the large numbers observed in brainstorming activities ( Osborn , 1953 ) . Participants were asked to document their ideas and the Web link that spurred this idea . At the end of this phase , participants were asked to submit comments on the tool’s functionality and usefulness for divergent thinking . Thus , primarily qualitative data were collected during this phase . Convergent Phase . Next , we moved to the convergent phase , which included the collection of both quantitative and qualitative data . The goal of this phase was for the group to evaluate the novel ideas generated in the divergent phase and to reach a consensus on which two ideas to pursue . The evaluation of ideas progressed sequentially through two rounds of idea ratings followed by idea selection by group consensus and then via the CF tool , allowing us to closely examine how opinions and ratings shifted based on the group discussion , democratic votes , and the CF results . Although we did not compare our findings to a “no tool use” case , we asked participants to comment on the utility of the tools and approach in comparison to other processes and / or IT tools they had used previously ( e . g . , GSS ) . Across convergent phases 2 and 3 , participants were asked to evaluate ideas two separate times ( see Figure 1 ) . Outcomes of creative processes such as the ones examined here have typically been evaluated using criteria such as novelty and value ( Amabile , 1983 ; Couger & Dengate , 1992 ; Mollick & Nanda , 2016 ; Newell , et al . , 1962 ) . Consistent with prior studies , we asked participants to rate the radicalness and potential benefit of each idea , as well as how well the idea addressed the task overall . Rating instructions were based on definitions of radicalness ( Barnett , 1953 ; Dahlin & Behrens , 2005 ; Hall & Martin , 2005 ; Hill & Rothaermel , 2003 ; Leifer et al . , 2000 ; Zaltman , Duncan , & Holbeck , 1973 ) and benefit ( Parker , Benson , & Trainor , 1988 ; Ryan & Harrison , 2000 ) in the literature . For radicalness ratings , participants were asked to focus on the extent to which the technical content of the idea ( i . e . , products , services , processes , materials , technologies ) was new to the organization on a scale of 1 to 10 ( 1 : not new , 10 : radically new ) . For benefit ratings , participants were asked to think of the idea’s potential benefits less costs on a scale of 1 to 10 ( 1 : not beneficial , 10 : extremely beneficial ) . Participants were asked to submit comments regarding the process at the end of each phase . This allowed us to understand the effectiveness of the process and tools . Figure 1 . Divergent and Convergent Phases In the initial convergent phase ( phase 2 ) , the group anonymously rated the ideas prior to any group discussion . Two separate group discussions were conducted in the subsequent convergent phase ( phase 3 ) , one following the initial idea ratings ( initial discussion in Figure 1 ) and another following the second idea ratings ( final discussion in Figure 1 ) . The resulting debate , discussion , and persuasive arguments were expected to reduce variation in the group’s ratings , creating a shared understanding and high level of agreement . The group selected the ideas to pursue at the end of this final discussion ( idea selection by group consensus in Figure 1 ) . For additional details on convergent phases 2 and 3 , see Appendix B . The group discussion and debate may move the group away from controversial and radical ideas ( Weick , 2006 ) . To counteract this effect , feeding idea ratings to the CF tool should , we expect , highlight ideas that are not widely popular but viewed as important by “discerning” evaluators . Thus , after the site visit , we fed the scores from phase 2 ( initial idea ratings ) to the CF tool to identify the top - ranked ideas selected by it ( phase 4 , idea selection by collaborative filtering tool in Figure 1 ) . Due to the prototypical nature of the CF tool and time constraints of the participating organization , we conducted this analysis after the site visit . We then reviewed the findings of this analysis with the organizational sponsor . The focus here was on identifying whether the CF tool would highlight important but less popular ideas and whether the sponsor believed this additional analysis was of value for convergent thinking . Data Analysis Our data analysis followed an iterative , sequential , mixed - analysis design approach ( Teddlie & Tashakkori , 2009 ) ; that is , we iterated between qualitative and quantitative data analysis sequentially across the various phases outlined in Figure 1 and integrated our findings from each phase to produce meta - inferences ( Teddlie & Tashakkori , 2009 ; Venkatesh , et al . , 2013 ; Venkatesh , et al . , 2016 ) . Combining both qualitative and quantitative data analyses helped strengthen the reliability of our findings . As noted by Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) : [ T ] he combination of data types can be highly synergistic . Quantitative evidence can indicate relationships which may not be salient to the researcher . It also can keep researchers from being carried away by vivid , but false , impressions in qualitative data , and it can bolster findings when it corroborates those findings from qualitative evidence . The qualitative data are useful for understanding the rationale or theory underlying relationships revealed in the quantitative data or may suggest directly theory which can then be strengthened by quantitative support . ( p . 538 ) A broader qualitative analysis was performed to deepen our understanding of the group challenges , how participants engaged with the IT tools and process , and how this helped to address the group challenges . This analysis included reviewing and coding transcripts from the group discussion and debriefing session , and reviewing the comments submitted at the end of each phase . Although we did not specify a coding schema a priori , our coding was guided by the key constructs identified in our literature review and the relevant group challenges ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Eisenhardt & Graebner , 2007 ) . For example , we coded comments related to persuasive arguments , reaching a shared understanding , the process , and measurement . We then compared these preliminary qualitative findings with our quantitative analyses . Using quantitative data , outcomes were compared across convergent phases , and choice shifts ( i . e . , changes in the ratings assigned to an idea ) were assessed . These findings were further explained using our qualitative data . We performed qualitative and quantitative analyses iteratively across the initial divergent phase and then subsequent convergent phases to develop an integrated set of findings ( meta - inferences ) . Findings The findings from our analysis are discussed below , beginning with those in the divergent phase and followed by those in the convergent phase . Divergent Phase Processes Insights into the effectiveness and efficiency of the NID tool for computer - supported divergent thinking and the associated group challenges were primarily derived from the debriefing session transcripts . Analysis of participant comments suggests that individuals used the tool in different ways to generate novel ideas . One participant found that the ongoing process of reviewing and progressing through the NID tool results helped her to generate ideas more than the review of any one Web page in particular . For example , one participant’s results ( see Appendix C ) spurred ideas regarding new applications for the focal task subject . Another participant depended less on the specific results but used the results as a jumping off point to think more creatively . Another found scanning the descriptive terms helped stimulate ideas . This participant felt an NID tool could be useful in her job . One participant noted that it “does seem to be very individual . Some people liked to look at the result set , which by itself spurs off ideas . ” This participant reflected on the approach taken by others where “ < participant name > wanders off on his own , who is naturally curious . All depends on how we use it . I used it as a tool to assist versus a tool that is going to give you results . ” Participant comments also suggested that an NID tool could help groups with computer - supported divergent thinking , making the process more efficient . One participant commented on the speed with which the group came up with innovative ideas . Based on this participant’s past experience , this process lasts for days , rather than half a day in this case . Another commented , “I found the limited amount of time to generate ideas using the tool helpful , ” further noting “…it usually takes me a long time to generate ideas and find information on the Web . ” She found that the tool and the process used facilitated information foraging ( i . e . , searching for information based on the expected value and cost of the search , Pirolli & Card , 1995 ; 1999 ) , helped speed up idea generation , and stimulated thinking . For these two participants , the tool helped increase the efficiency of generating ideas . It is plausible that the indirectly related results helped stimulate creativity , as suggested in the creativity literature ( Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ; Hender , et al . , 2002 ; Nagasundaram & Bostrom , 1994 ) . In addition to comments regarding the NID tool’s effectiveness and efficiency for divergent processes , participants mentioned challenges with the novelty of the results . However , participants agreed that having more practice with the tool would help , and they indicated an interest in using the tool in future work . Convergent Phase Processes We conducted both quantitative and qualitative analyses to examine how preferences changed across phases as the group moved towards consensus on idea selection . Analyzing the comments from the group discussion periods , along with the choice shifts between these periods , provided insights into how group challenges with convergent thinking were being addressed , if at all . Finally , we compared the outcomes of the different phases , including both quantitative and qualitative data , to understand where there were differences and why . We begin by discussing how choices shifted across phases . Choice Shift To understand shifts in preferences , we analyzed the rating data collected . Specifically , choice shifts ( i . e . , changes in ratings ) , were analyzed across phases 2 and 3 ( see Figure 1 ) using paired t - tests 3 ( 21 pairs each ) . We also analyzed comments made during the group discussion to better understand how the group interacted and how this affected preferences and idea selection . Below , we discuss our analysis . Shift Analysis : Phases 2 to 3 . At the group level , choice shifts between ratings in phases 2 and 3 ( Figure 1 ) were analyzed ( changes in the average score for each idea ) . We found that on average , group members decreased their ratings of ideas from phase 2 to 3 ( α 0 . 01 level for overall , α 0 . 001 for benefit and radical dimensions , paired t - test , n = 21 ) , suggesting members took a more critical view in phase 3 . Initial Group Discussion Analysis . Analysis of the discussion transcripts in phase 3 ( initial and final discussion ) provided insights into the content and progression of the discussion . A subset of the emergent codes identified in this analysis , number of comments , and illustrative quotes are provided in Table 1 . We triangulated the insights developed here with the choice shift findings . For instance , one participant commented in the initial discussion , “I also feel strongly that I can go radical on my voting . I ' m going low and high . I feel that I ' m eliminating the bottom 80 percent . ” This comment helped explain the decrease in ratings between phase 2 and 3 . Facilitated by the lead researcher , the initial group discussion involved participants reviewing the phase 2 scores presented in a structured decision model and discussing the content of the ideas in an effort to come to a shared understanding . Our analysis of the transcript for this phase showed that participants often discussed why they felt an idea was beneficial , or radical , or why it was problematic . In some cases , this involved a lengthy discussion including explanations of technical complexities and different interpretations so that others could understand the idea . After arguments were presented , participants tended to agree and move on to the next idea . Table 1 . Analysis of Comments in Group Discussion Count of Comments Code Definition Initial Final Illustrative Quote Process The way in which ideas are evaluated and discussed . 6 0 “I almost feel like I would like to rate them 1 through 21 or 1 through 10 . ” Measure The meaning and definition of evaluation criteria . 10 0 “But when I looked at benefit , I said , ‘Would High Tech be a leader in this versus a supplier , or is collaboration required ? ’ So , separate how we benefit from it visibly versus internally . ” Knowledge The importance of knowledge in interpreting and evaluating the ideas . 4 0 “Doesn’t it also depend on our background ? We all come from the lab . But people from sales might think that what we call not radical they think is uber radical . ” Cluster Grouping similar ideas together . 7 8 “There were some that I thought were somewhat related and you could almost group it into one . Even the banks related to the virtual exchange idea . ” Argument Rationale provided for the evaluation or importance of an idea . 11 17 “I liked that idea but gave it low on cost - benefit because of the cost involved . Seems right up our alley and new . I think that is why there is a big standard deviation in benefit . ” Ownership Person identifies an idea as their contribution . 3 1 “It’s a volume thing too . I actually generated that one . But I was thinking you could sell it for 10 or 30 dollars . But how many and how much time would you have to devote to just making these things just to make a million dollars ? So it wouldn’t be worth it . ” Question Poses a question to the group . 1 3 “So , the second one , what’s the business value ? ” Agreement Indicates agreement or shared understanding . 9 7 “Yes , those two as one . We ' re going to do this , right ? ” Figure 2 . Illustrative Example of a Partially - shared Persuasive Argument We expected that partially shared persuasive arguments would result in more similar idea ratings in the second round of idea ratings after this discussion . Participants often shared their rationale for liking or disliking a particular idea in the discussion , an example of a partially - shared persuasive argument ( see Figure 2 for a sample of such a dialogue ) . Our analysis of the transcript from the initial group discussion showed that participants discussed the rating criteria ( coded as “measure” in Table 1 ) in an effort to develop a shared understanding of it . Specifically , participants recognized that they viewed radicalness slightly differently , a challenge also noted in the group creativity literature ( Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) , and noted that the definition was relative to each individual’s risk perceptions and level of knowledge . Before the next round of idea ratings ( second idea ratings ) , participants agreed to define radicalness as “innovativeness to the organization . ” Thus , any differences in ratings due to variation in the interpretation of rating criteria were assumed to have been reduced or eliminated in the second round of ratings . Analyzing the debriefing transcript , we noted that participants commented that they found the discussion helped them develop shared understandings of ideas and rating criteria . This should have led to a greater degree of agreement on ratings . We conducted further quantitative analyses to test this assumption . First , we noticed that on average , the standard deviation in scores for each idea increased from phase 2 to 3 for the overall , radical , and benefit dimensions ( 0 . 44 , 0 . 63 , and 0 . 71 increases in standard deviation , respectively ) , signaling lack of consensus and shared understanding . We found that these increases in standard deviations between phases were significant ( p = 0 . 065 for overall , p = 0 . 003 for radical and p = 0 . 000 for benefit , n = 21 ) 4 . After the initial group discussion and second round of idea ratings ( phase 3 ) , the updated decision model was presented to the participants . A final facilitated discussion was held so that a consensus could be reached regarding idea selection . The discussion led to the selection of five ideas , four of which were clustered to form one of the top ideas . Final Group Discussion Analysis . We analyzed the discussion that led up to the group consensus . As shown above in Table 1 , during the final discussion participants discussed the rationale for idea evaluations in order to reach agreement , similar to the initial group discussion . Analyzing the final group discussion transcript showed that participants clustered ideas together ( 9 , 7 , 6 , 18 ) to form one of their top ideas . This cluster of ideas was viewed as large in scale and costly to implement . However , the group felt the central idea of this cluster would be beneficial to the company . This idea cluster was a natural progression for the organization and not viewed as particularly radical . One participant commented , “I don’t see it as that innovative . Is that a problem ? ” Another responded , “No . These are things we do well . ” The other selected idea ( 4 , single idea ) was viewed as smaller in scale , but much more innovative . One participant commented , “I think it’s ( the idea ) critical to the future of this technology . ” During both group discussions ( initial and final ) , we noted that there were very few “ownership” comments ( i . e . , a person identifies an idea as his or her contribution ) , suggesting participants had less “stake” in the ideas they contributed . Overall , participants only discussed 12 out of the 21 ideas and began clustering certain ideas that represented a common theme . Thus , not all ideas were actively discussed . Shift Analysis : Selected versus Non - selected Ideas . To better understand the lack of consensus that existed after the second round of idea ratings , we examined choice shifts between phases 2 and 3 , but this time comparing the choice shifts between the ideas selected by group consensus and those that were not selected using a Mann - Whitney test , valid for small samples involving two groups ( Siegel , 1956 ) . There were significant differences between choice shifts for the selected and non - selected ideas for the overall ( p = 0 . 001 ) and radical dimensions ( p = 0 . 060 ) ( see Table 2 ) . For the overall dimension , the selected ideas had , on average , an increase in scores and decrease in standard deviation , whereas the non - selected ideas had a decrease in scores and increase in standard deviation . For the radical dimension , the choice shift was negative for both selected and non - selected ideas ; however , the negative shift was significantly smaller for the selected ideas ( see Table 2 ) . This result suggests that the group was less critical on some dimensions and , for the overall dimension , more positive about the ideas selected at the end of phase 3 than the non - selected ideas . Overall , the findings suggest that a shared understanding and consensus had not yet been fully achieved . Comparison of Outcomes Across Phases We were interested in comparing the outcomes from phases 2 and 3—the two rounds of idea ratings ( i . e . , democratic votes ) and discussion - based consensus— with those from phase 4 ( idea selection by CF ) to determine whether the CF tool could alleviate some of the group challenges associated with convergent thinking as expected . To generate the CF results , we used the ratings from phase 2 as input to the CF tool in the form of a matrix : idea ratings ( row ) by individual rater ( column ) . The CF tool produced global - idea rankings ( ideas 9 , 18 , 13 , 16 , 4 ) that differed from the democratic - vote rankings and the ideas selected by group consensus ( see Table 3 ) . Table 2 . Differences between Group Choice Shifts Non - selected Ideas ( n = 16 ) Selected Ideas ( n = 5 ) Significance ( Exact ) Overall Shift Mean ( Std Dev ) - 1 . 36 ( 1 . 06 ) 0 . 43 ( 0 . 53 ) Mann - Whitney ( mean rank ) 8 . 69 18 . 40 p = 0 . 001 * * Radical Shift Mean ( Std Dev ) - 1 . 79 ( 0 . 88 ) - 0 . 90 ( 0 . 69 ) Mann - Whitney ( mean rank ) 9 . 56 15 . 60 p = 0 . 060 † Benefit Shift Mean ( Std Dev ) - 1 . 73 ( 0 . 94 ) - 1 . 07 ( 0 . 72 ) Mann - Whitney ( mean rank ) 9 . 75 15 . 00 p = 0 . 109 * * significant at the 0 . 01 level ; * significant at the 0 . 05 level ; † significant at the 0 . 10 level Table 3 . Collaborative Filtering Scores and Ranking Comparison CF Rank a Democratic Vote & Consensus Rank Idea Score Phase 4 Phase 2 ( Initial Idea Ratings ) Phase 3 ( Second Idea Ratings ) Phase 3 b ( Group Consensus ) 9 4 . 2 1 2 3 1 = 18 3 . 07 2 5 1 = 13 2 . 73 3 1 4 16 2 . 65 4 4 1 . 71 5 3 1 5 12 1 . 15 4 10 0 . 77 7 0 . 57 1 = 21 0 . 53 6 0 . 49 5 2 1 = 11 0 . 4 Highlights ideas that were selected by the CF tool and by group consensus a low ranked ideas not reported . b ideas grouped to form a cluster . Despite selecting different ideas , with some overlap , the analysis findings ( Table 4 ) suggest that the average radicalness and benefit scores of ideas selected in each phase did not vary significantly 5 . It is important to note that phase 4 was automated and required much less work than phase 3 and , thus , given the similarity in scores and overlap in ideas selected ( overlap of 3 ideas ) , phase 4 is a more efficient approach . Although it is unlikely to replace the group discussion aspects of phase 3 , integrating the use of the CF tool ( phase 4 ) with the group discussion could increase the efficiency of the group’s convergent processes overall . It is interesting to consider the ideas selected in phase 4 that do not overlap with those selected via group consensus in phase 3 . Idea 13 rated highly on benefit and was considered one of the top five ideas in earlier phases . However , after the initial group discussion , this idea was rated lower overall and had a much higher standard deviation ( i . e . , less agreement ) . Although it was still amongst the top five ideas after the second idea rating , it was not selected by the group . Idea 16 was rated moderately well by individuals and balanced in terms of benefit and radicalness scores in phase 2 but was never considered further . Like idea 13 , it had a relatively high standard deviation , suggesting low agreement . Given the increase in standard deviation in scores in the second round of idea ratings ( phase 3 ) and our observations about ideas 13 and 16 , we examined individual ratings from phase 3 . Specifically , we looked at which ideas each rater assigned his or her highest and second highest scores ( overall dimension ) to better understand differences in opinions ( see Table 5 ) . What is interesting about the individual ratings is that consistent with the group analysis above , we see there is not yet a consensus on which are good ideas , although patterns are emerging . The ideas selected are not uniformly rated highest , but idea 13 is the highest rated idea for five out of the six raters . Rater 5 , who did not stand out as having power over others , did not rate 13 highly , giving it a score of 1 . Thus , all but one rater viewed idea 13 as amongst the best ideas ( i . e . , highest rated ) . We reviewed the findings of the CF tool analysis with the organizational sponsor , also a participant , and discussed whether these findings were useful . Although idea 13 was not explicitly discussed in the final group discussion , the sponsor noted this was indeed a valuable idea , and differed from the selected ideas ; idea 13 was an industry - specific application and consulting opportunity , whereas the selected ideas were broader product development ideas . Thus , idea 13 was quite different from the selected ideas , which formed a logical cluster . The sponsor felt that discussing the CF findings after the group consensus , and highlighting idea 13 as something rated highly , would likely not have changed the group’s selection of ideas but would have highlighted a valuable innovation to be shared with the appropriate group for further development . Without the insights from the CF tool , the sponsor noted that idea 13 might never have come to light as something worth pursuing , leaving a valuable idea “on the table . ” Table 4 . Summary of Top Ideas across Phases Phase Description Radicalness Mean ( Std Dev ) Benefit Mean ( Std Dev ) Phase 2 Initial Idea Ratings ( ideas 13 , 9 , 4 , 12 , 6 ) Democratic ( tally ) vote 7 . 30 ( 0 . 59 ) 7 . 80 ( 0 . 57 ) Phase 3 Second Idea Ratings ( ideas 4 , 6 , 9 , 13 , 18 ) Democratic ( tally ) vote 7 . 33 ( 0 . 56 ) 7 . 77 ( 0 . 60 ) Phase 3 Group Consensus ( ideas 9 , 7 , 6 , 18 , 4 ) Selection and consensus by discussion 7 . 53 ( 0 . 43 ) 7 . 57 ( 0 . 32 ) Phase 4 Collaborative Filter ( ideas 9 , 18 , 13 , 16 , 4 ) Selection by collaborative filter 7 . 57 ( 0 . 70 ) 7 . 53 ( 0 . 83 ) Note : For comparability and to eliminate any confounding effect of choice shift , the collective ratings from phase 2 are reported here . Table 5 . Top Individual Ratings – Overall Dimension Rater 1 Rater 2 Rater 3 Rater 4 Rater 5 Rater 6 Highest Rating 10 8 9 10 10 9 Ideas 4 , 6 , 11 , 13 , 20 , 21 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 12 , 13 9 , 13 4 , 9 , 13 , 16 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 18 , 20 2 , 7 , 13 , 21 2 nd Highest Rating 9 7 8 9 5 8 Ideas 2 , 9 , 14 , 18 , 19 1 , 3 , 11 , 14 12 , 18 6 2 , 5 , 8 , 12 , 15 , 21 4 , 6 , 9 , 12 , 18 a Selected ideas ( ideas 9 , 7 , 6 , 18 , 4 ) in bold . Idea 13 highlighted in red . Discussion To address the group challenges associated with divergent and convergent thinking in an innovation context , we explored using a new approach to providing computer support for creative cognitive processes with an organizational group . Employing an integrated mixed methods design ( Teddlie & Tashakkori , 2009 ) , we developed insights into how two new IT tools and associated processes could address these challenges as well as improve the effectiveness and efficiency of divergent and convergent thinking for the purposes of innovation . Addressing Divergent Thinking Challenges We explored the utility of an NID tool for computer - supported divergent thinking and overcoming the group challenges associated with this phase of the creative process . The NID tool stimulates divergent thinking and creativity by providing external stimuli in the form of novel information – information that is indirectly related to a focal concept ( i . e . , search term ) . We found that an NID tool can be particularly useful in alleviating the challenges associated with divergent thinking . Previous creativity support tools focused on divergent thinking have tended to provide either related or unrelated external stimuli ( e . g . , Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; Hender , et al . , 2002 ) . By providing indirectly related stimuli based on existing information found on the Web , the NID tool triggers retrospective sensemaking to interpret the results and prospective sensemaking to envision possible relationships between the novel information and focal concepts , and possible opportunities this connection affords . The indirect relationship and non - obvious nature of the relationship pushes the individual to generate ideas that are higher in novelty than if the relationships were obvious . Overall comments about the NID tool were quite positive . The organization sponsor circulated the selected ideas within the organization and noted that the ideas were perceived as particularly interesting and valuable . Further , the organization expressed interest in pursuing use of the tool in the organization to support divergent thinking and innovation . More specifically , participant comments provided insights into the utility of the NID tool and how it supported divergent thinking . For instance , participants commented on the aspects of the tool that helped them make sense of the results and assess relevance : “the intermediate cluster keywords and the detailed keywords” and “I found the clusters and the tag cloud useful ways of organizing the information . ” The NID tool helped group members notice potentially important connections between known concepts that they might not have considered otherwise . By supporting individual sensemaking , these features of the NID tool helped make divergent thinking and idea generation more effective . Comments made by participants regarding the speed of using the NID tool to generate ideas suggested efficiency gains as well . Participants also commented on the different ways they used the results to stimulate divergent thinking . For one participant , simply reviewing the descriptive terms helped her make the “leap” and generate novel ideas , seeing the potential relevance between the novel combinations of existing knowledge suggested by the tool . For another , it was the ongoing review and exploration of the results . Further , comments from the debriefing session also suggested the importance of individual knowledge in prospective sensemaking and in understanding the potential value and novelty of an idea . In a group with diverse knowledge , the use of an NID tool for divergent thinking allowed for diverse perspectives on the problem , resulting in a set of unique starting points ( i . e . , search terms ) and sensemaking of the results based on this diverse knowledge . Using external stimuli , in particular novel information , during idea generation appeared to make individuals less invested in the ideas they generated . We propose that because individuals perceived the tool to have helped in the generation process , there was less ego and stake in one’s own ideas , evidenced by the lack of ownership comments . Rather than defending ideas , individuals appeared to be more inclined to consider and filter ideas during the convergent phase . Addressing Convergent Thinking Challenges For convergent thinking processes , we compared two phases of idea ratings and two phases of idea selection , one of which included the use of a CF tool . A comparison of both the top - rated and the selected ideas across the four phases shows that this short list of ideas differed across phases with moderate overlap , suggesting possible synergies between CF tools and the other convergent processes examined in this study . Rather than using it as a standalone tool , a CF tool could be used in conjunction with group discussion with a goal towards achieving consensus . For example , using a CF tool as a decision model and comparing it to a democratic vote may help highlight ideas that may not have come out in the discussion , but are worth discussing further . Idea 13 , for example , selected by the CF tool and rated highly by most participants , appeared to be a very good idea , but was silently dropped from the discussion and not selected in the final group consensus . Comments made about idea 13 in the initial group discussion suggest that it was liked by some and not well - understood by others . The fact that five of the six participants gave idea 13 their highest rating in the final idea rating suggests the majority of the group would have been receptive to discussing this idea further . In addition , reviewing the CF findings with the sponsor indicates that having an additional round to review the CF findings with the group would have reintroduced idea 13 to the group as something worthy of further discussion . The sponsor felt this idea was indeed valuable and should be implemented . In this case , a secondary but manual review of the idea rating results may have also highlighted idea 13 as an idea that was dropped , yet potentially important . Using a CF tool is more efficient than manually reviewing these results and may pick up overlooked ideas that are not as obvious . The CF tool acts as a sensegiving device , akin to an external reviewer , to limit the degree to which the group is blind to valuable and novel ideas . Combining the efficiencies of the CF tool and its ability to bring forward potentially valuable ideas that may have been unintentionally dropped with the facilitated group discussion could help address a broader array of group challenges , as well as provide increased efficiency and effectiveness for convergent thinking . These aspects of the CF tool , particularly its sensegiving potential , are akin to what DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) referred to as level 3 GSS , “characterized by machine - induced group communication patterns and can include expert advice in the selecting and arranging of rules to be applied during a meeting” ( p . 594 ) . In this case , the CF tool ( the machine ) induces the re - examination of certain ideas . Further Insights into Convergent Thinking Challenges An analysis of the choice shifts between the two idea rating phases provided insights into the impact of group discussion . Our findings showed the choice shift was negative between phases 2 and 3 , suggesting that the group discussion influenced individual perceptions and resulted in participants taking a more critical view . However , the increase in standard deviations ( i . e . , less agreement ) between these phases suggests that group members continued to have different interpretations of the ideas , some being more critical than others . There is an interesting exception to this finding . The ideas that were selected by the group after the second idea rating had a positive shift ( i . e . , more favorable ratings ) in the overall dimension scores in contrast to the negative shift for the ideas that were not selected . Thus , participants seemed to have reached an implicit agreement on what were perceived to be the good and the bad ideas . Good ideas had a positive choice shift on average and bad ideas a negative shift . However , the increase in standard deviations suggests there was still some divergence in opinions . Reviewing the individual ratings provided some insight into these differences . The ideas that were ultimately selected were not uniformly rated highest by all raters ( see Table 5 above ) . Idea 6 was the only selected idea to be rated in the highest or second highest ratings for five of the six raters . The only other idea to achieve that same status was idea 13 . However , as discussed above , this idea was silently dropped in the final discussion . Thus , moving into the final discussion , there was still variance in individual opinions about what were good ideas . While the discussion helped the group identify two ideas to pursue further , it seems that this convergence might have been premature given one of the highly rated ideas ( idea 13 ) , as assessed by five of the six raters , was not discussed in the final discussion and not selected . There are several possible explanations for this . The use of a rating system to reach consensus can hamper “the team members from first strengthening and representing their own perspectives and then engaging in a dialogue of perspective taking with each other” ( Boland & Tenkasi , 1995 p . 360 ) . However , the group discussion should have allowed participants to express their views about ideas . Yet , participants did not discuss idea 13 after the second idea rating . The novelty of ideas , and associated cognitive demands , could also explain this finding . Novel ideas involving specialized knowledge could have been ignored due to a lack of common knowledge and language to facilitate a discussion ( e . g . , Carlile , 2002 ; Carlile , 2004 ) . The lengthy explanations required to consider such ideas during the discussion could have resulted in information overload ( Paul & Nazareth , 2010 ) and fatigue , limiting the number of ideas that could be reasonably discussed and processed . As a result , the group may have discussed and developed a shared understanding of very few ideas . Fatigue could explain why the group did not discuss idea 13 in the final discussion . The pressure to contribute to the discussion may have resulted in dual - task interference , a phenomenon similar to production blocking where the need to perform two tasks simultaneously reduces the performance level of both tasks ( Heninger , Dennis , & Hilmer , 2006 ) . Thus , the group discussion itself may have diverted individual cognition and attention from processing more ideas and , more specifically , from processing a highly rated idea such as idea 13 . The group may have inadvertently ignored idea 13 because , as discussed earlier , it was an industry - specific application rather than an internally - focused product development idea . However , this rationale was not explicitly discussed . Similar to this explanation is that the group developed a bias towards certain ideas during their final discussion and ignored all other ideas , including idea 13 . Group interaction can give rise to this type of cognitive passivity , restricting the discussion to a small subset of ideas without deviation ( Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) . Cognitive passivity shows a mindlessness and bias towards certain ideas with a focus on minimizing effort , whereas group choice shift based on partially - shared persuasive arguments describes how opinions change based on “rational” thinking processes . Regardless , to avoid premature convergence , a CF tool may be helpful in pointing out interesting , yet not necessarily universally popular , ideas like idea 13 and overcome issues related to cognitive passivity and overload . In this case , as noted by the sponsor , not using the CF tool would result in a missed innovation opportunity . Limitations Although our findings are promising , there are limitations . Exploring a single case study helped develop insights into how our new approach addressed group challenges in a firm with creativity tool experience and interest in innovating . However , generalizability to other settings may be somewhat limited . In addition , we relied primarily on the subjective comments of the participants to assess this approach and did not directly compare the tools and processes to other approaches . However , our goal was to develop insights into the interactions between IT tools , processes , individuals , and groups when dealing with computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking . This said , as noted by Ackermann ( 2011 ) , it is difficult to use control groups when using real organizational groups . Using experimental methods and student subjects , future research should compare different processes and IT tools to quantify differences in effectiveness and efficiency . Another limitation is that we did not allow the idea rating rounds to run until high levels of agreement were achieved in the ratings . However , as noted in other studies where only moderate consensus was achieved ( Singh , Keil , & Kasi , 2009 ) , there was a concern regarding participant fatigue given the length of the overall session . Lastly , the novelty of the CF tool and already large time commitment on the part of the participants did not allow us to include the CF comparison during the site visit . Further research should examine how groups respond to the CF findings and any shifts in discussion and preferences that ensue . We recognize also that not all researchers have access to NID and CF tools and have therefore highlighted takeaways that are relevant for situations where tool access is limited . We hope that researchers will consider developing their own NID and CF tools . Contributions Our research contributes to three gaps in the group creativity literature , as discussed earlier . We revisit these gaps and this study’s related research contributions , and then discuss our practical contributions . Contributions to Research First , there are few studies that examine both computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking . Instead , there is a predominance of divergent thinking studies . Furthermore , of the studies examining convergent thinking , there is evidence suggesting that individuals and groups perform poorly on convergent tasks ( Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . To that end , the approach examined in this study provides insights into both computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking in the overall group creative process . Going beyond divergent thinking alone , our analysis of convergent phases 2 through 4 , including the triangulation of the qualitative and quantitative findings , provided insights into the challenges associated with convergent thinking in an innovation context . Consistent with other studies , we found that the group initially had different interpretations of what constituted a radical idea ( Stroebe , et al . , 2010 ) . Beyond this , we identified trends in idea ratings and selection after the group resolved their interpretation differences ; we observed issues of cognitive overload resulting in premature convergence in idea selection and the unconscious dropping of a potentially valuable idea . To provide computer - supported convergent thinking in groups , we introduced a new CF tool to help overcome these types of cognitive challenges . This tool departs from the other types of IT tools used to help support convergent thinking , such as process guides , voting tools , and tools with organizing functionality ( Althuizen & Reichel , 2016 ; DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ; Massetti , 1996 ) . The CF tool also reflects a new approach to recommendation agents . Since the scale of the problem is small , this tool is able to take into account all of the available information ( both the variation in ratings and the variation in individuals ) ; it is not limited to computing averages and examining the variations in these averages for either sets of ratings or sets of individuals ( not both ) , a common performance shortcut in large - scale applications . Thus , the CF tool introduced here represents a departure from the typical recommendation agents . There appears to be little research examining how CF tools can be used to support either group or organizational - level convergent processes ( most focus on consumer product choices ( e . g . , Chung , Hsu , & Huang , 2013 ) ) ; however , this represents an area worthy of further research . Shown to be useful in an innovation context , CF may be useful in other contexts and should be examined in greater depth . For example , comparing the use and output of a CF tool to the judgment of experts ( assuming equal weighting ) for creative products may be another valuable line of inquiry . The CF tool differs from approaches to creative product evaluation , which tend to use expert judges ( Amabile , 1983 ; Kaufman , Baer , Cole , & Sexton , 2008 ) . The CF tool weights the ratings of discerning evaluators more heavily , irrespective of whether the individual is an expert or not . Thus , the tool can further distinguish the evaluation skills of each expert within a judging panel , or simply a diverse collection of individuals with varying levels of knowledge and expertise . As another example , since the CF tool’s functionality aligns with the proposed characteristics of a level 3 GSS ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ) , examining it further in a GSS context would be valuable . The second gap refers to the limited attention devoted to how external information can be used in computer - supported divergent thinking as external stimuli ( Li , et al . , 2009 ) and , more generally , to the mixed findings on the impact of remote external stimuli on divergent thinking outcomes ( Agogue , et al . , 2014 ; Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) . We address this gap by highlighting a way for organizations to leverage this external information for innovation purposes . The NID tool examined here provides an approach for combining the deep knowledge within the organization with the broad knowledge available externally , leveraging the benefits of both ( Hwang , et al . , 2014 ; Zhou & Li , 2012 ) . The NID tool addresses the challenges associated with using external knowledge , including overload and constraints on creativity . In addition to the positive comments about the benefits of the NID tool provided by participants in this study and other organizational stakeholders , the ideas generated as a result of the NID tool have been rated as more novel and surprising than those of other IT tools in earlier work ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ) . The indirect nature of the stimuli ( i . e . , remote but with some relationship ) provided by the NID tool may contribute to these positive outcomes . In contrast to completely unrelated or highly related stimuli of other tools examined in the creativity literature ( e . g . , Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) , the indirectly but not completely unrelated stimuli ( novel information ) were helpful in highlighting non - obvious connections between this novel information and the focal subject . The NID tool provided aids to support this sensemaking process . For example , providing intermediate clusters helped participants connect the novel information to the focal topic in order to make sense of and identify the non - obvious connections via retrospective sensemaking . This triggered prospective sensemaking , enabling the user to envision the potential opportunities afforded by the non - obvious connections , resulting in novel ideas . Comparing the NID tool to IT tools used in past research , the NID tool used remote external stimuli from the Web as the primary source of divergent thinking rather than as a supplement to it ( Li , et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , this study provides insights into how remote stimuli can be useful in divergent thinking , shedding light on the mixed findings of past studies . Finally , the third gap notes the calls for research that examines creative processes in field studies in the group and organizational context rather than the laboratory ( Müller - Wienbergen , et al . , 2011 ; Seidel , et al . , 2010 ) . By exploring the use of an NID tool in an organizational context , we extend past research that has focused on evaluating the NID tool’s effectiveness in individual - level experimental and laboratory contexts ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) . Although this is our first study of the CF tool , it helped provide an understanding of the practical problems encountered in convergent thinking and how such a tool could support it . Thus , this study went beyond typical studies that are limited to examining what happens in the laboratory setting , and , as a result , contributed to a richer set of insights . Contributions to Practice From a practice standpoint , our findings suggest that organizations should consider including algorithms and features such as those used in the NID tool in their own creative processes . Not only does the NID tool jumpstart the divergent thinking process and make it more efficient , it also appears to make it more effective . It does so by stimulating thinking using non - obvious connections . Providing group members with a way to highlight these non - obvious connections in broad external data would be valuable in innovation contexts . Feedback from the organizational sponsor , who distributed the resulting ideas to several other interested organizational stakeholders , suggests that the selected ideas were perceived as particularly interesting and worthy of pursuit . Previous evaluations demonstrated that ideas generated by individuals using the NID tool were more radical than those generated using other IT tools ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ) . The fact that the organization expressed interest in using the tool further is additional evidence supporting its effectiveness in practice and the group context . Organizations should consider augmenting their convergent processes with the CF tool we introduce here . Our findings suggest that a CF tool can prompt groups to consider interesting ideas that may not otherwise be discussed because they are not universally popular or are forgotten due to cognitive overload and unconscious biases during the group discussion . The case of idea 13 in this study demonstrates how a CF tool can act as a sensegiving device to stimulate further thinking when this happens . Combined with group discussion , the CF tool helps an organization gain more value from the creative process . Concluding Remarks After summarizing the gaps in the group creativity literature regarding computer - supported divergent and convergent thinking and the inherent challenges faced by groups in these processes , we proposed potential solutions . Specifically , we identified two new IT tools and an overall process that offers a new approach to addressing highly creative and innovation - oriented tasks . Based on our exploratory case study using an integrated mixed methods design , this new approach – a portfolio of IT tools and processes – helps address these cognitive challenges and improves both the efficiency and effectiveness of divergent and Notes 1 All references to the authors’ previous work were blinded for review purposes . 2 For simplicity , in the remainder of the paper we use the term group to refer to interacting groups , as opposed to nominal groups . convergent thinking in groups . As discussed above , this research makes contributions to both research and practice . We hope that other researchers will experiment with creating and studying NID and CF tools , and that business managers will also experiment with their processes and IT tools . As the pressure for organizations to innovate rises ( Elerud - Tryde & Hooge , 2014 ) , so too does the importance of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of group creativity processes . The portfolio of IT tools and processes suggested in this paper has the potential to help groups in this pursuit . Our proposed approach can be further combined with others to help groups and organizations be more effective and efficient in divergent and convergent thinking when novelty and innovation are required . 3 Non - parametric tests were also conducted ( Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for related samples ) and the results were the same . 4 Given that standard deviations are not normally distributed , we used a Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for related samples . 5 Based on a Kruskal - Wallis test , which is valid for small samples and approximates the χ 2 distribution when n for each sample is 5 or larger and there are two or more groups ( Siegel , 1956 ) . References Abbasi , A . , Zhou , Y . , Deng , S . , & Zhang , P . ( 2018 ) . Text analytics to support sense - making in social media : A language - action perspective . MIS Quarterly , 42 ( 2 ) , 427 - 464 . Ackermann , F . , & Eden , C . ( 2011 ) . Negotiation in strategy making teams : Group support systems and the process of cognitive change . Group Decision and Negotiation , 20 ( 3 ) , 293 - 314 . Agogue , M . , Kazakci , A . , Hatchuel , A . , Le Masson , P . , Weil , B . , Poirel , N . , & Cassotti , M . ( 2014 ) . The impact of type of examples on originality : Explaining fixation and stimulation effects . Journal of Creative Behavior , 48 ( 1 ) , 1 - 12 . Allport , F . H . ( 1920 ) . The influence of the group upon association and thought . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 3 ( 3 ) , 159 - 182 . Althuizen , N . , & Reichel , A . ( 2016 ) . The effects of IT - enabled cognitive stimulation tools on creative problem solving : A dual pathway to creativity . Journal of Management Information Systems , 33 ( 1 ) , 11 - 44 . Althuizen , N . , & Wierenga , B . ( 2014 ) . Supporting creative problem solving with a case - based reasoning system . Journal of Management Information Systems , 31 ( 1 ) , 309 - 340 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 ( 2 ) , 357 - 376 . Amabile , T . M . , Conti , R . , Coon , H . , Lazenby , J . , & Herron , M . ( 1996 ) . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of Management Journal , 39 ( 5 ) , 1154 - 1184 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1992 ) . Automaticity and the ACT * theory . American Journal of Psychology , 105 ( 2 ) , 165 - 180 . Barnett , H . G . ( 1953 ) . Innovation : The basis of cultural change . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill Book Company , Inc . Barron , F . , & Harrington , D . M . ( 1981 ) . Creativity , intelligence , and personality . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 ( 1 ) , 439 - 476 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory and Cognition , 11 ( 3 ) , 211 - 227 . Beccerra - Fernandez , I . , Gonzalez , A . , & Sabherwal , R . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge management : Challenges , solutions , and technologies . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall . Benbasat , I . , & Lim , L . - H . ( 1993 ) . The effects of group , task , context , and technology variables on the usefulness of group support systems : A meta - analysis of experimental studies . Small Group Research , 24 ( 4 ) , 430 - 462 . Boland , R . J . , & Tenkasi , R . V . ( 1995 ) . Perspective making and perspective taking in communities of knowing . Organization Science , 6 ( 4 ) , 350 - 372 . Carlile , P . R . ( 2002 ) . A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries : Boundary objects in new product development . Organization Science , 13 ( 4 ) , 442 - 455 . Carlile , P . R . ( 2004 ) . Transferring , translating , transforming : An integrative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries . Organization Science , 15 ( 5 ) , 555 - 568 . Carlile , P . R . , & Rebentisch , E . ( 2003 ) . Into the black box : The knowledge transformation cycle . Management Science , 49 ( 9 ) , 1180 - 1195 . Chen , H . ( 2001 ) . Knowledge management systems : A text mining perspective . Tucson , AZ : The University of Arizona . Chung , C . - Y . , Hsu , P . - Y . , & Huang , S . - H . ( 2013 ) . Βp : A novel approach to filter out malicious rating profiles from recommender systems . Decision Support Systems , 55 ( 1 ) , 314 – 325 . Chung , W . , Chen , H . , & Nunamaker Jr , J . F . ( 2005 ) . A visual framework for knowledge discovery on the Web : An empirical study of business intelligence exploration . Journal of Management Information Systems , 21 ( 4 ) , 57 - 84 . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 128 - 152 . Couger , J . D . ( 1990 ) . Ensuring creative approaches in information system design . Managerial and Decision Economics , 11 ( 5 ) , 281 - 295 . Couger , J . D . , & Dengate , G . ( 1992 ) . Measurement of creativity in I . S . Products . Paper presented at the Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Kauai , HI , pp . 288 - 298 . Couger , J . D . , Higgins , L . F . , & McIntyre , S . C . ( 1993 ) . ( Un ) structured creativity in information systems organizations . MIS Quarterly , 17 ( 4 ) , 375 - 397 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity : Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . New York , NY : Harper Perennial . Dahlin , K . B . , & Behrens , D . M . ( 2005 ) . When is an invention really radical ? Defining and measuring technological radicalness . Research Policy , 34 ( 5 ) , 717 - 737 . Dennis , A . R . , Pinsonneault , A . , Hilmer , K . M . , Barki , H . , Gallupe , R . B . , Huber , M . , & Bellavance , F . ( 2005 ) . Patterns in electronic brainstorming . International Journal of e - Collaboration , 1 ( 4 ) , 38 - 57 . DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , R . B . ( 1987 ) . A foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Management Science , 33 ( 5 ) , 589 - 609 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in idea - generating groups : Tracking down the blocking effects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 ( 3 ) , 392 - 403 . Dubé , L . , & Paré , G . ( 2003 ) . Rigor in information systems positivist case research : Current practices , trends , and recommendations . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 4 ) , 597 - 635 . Eisenhardt , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Building theories from case study research . Academy of Management Review , 14 ( 4 ) , 532 - 550 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Graebner , M . E . ( 2007 ) . Theory building from cases : Opportunities and challenges . Academy of Management Journal , 50 ( 1 ) , 25 - 32 . Elerud - Tryde , A . , & Hooge , S . ( 2014 ) . Beyond the generation of ideas : Virtual idea campaigns to spur creativity and innovation . Creativity and Innovation Management , 23 ( 3 ) , 290 - 302 . Festinger , L . ( 1954 ) . A theory of social comparison processes . Human Relations , 7 ( 2 ) , 117 - 140 . Garfield , M . J . , Taylor , N . J . , Dennis , A . R . , & Satzinger , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Research report : Modifying paradigms - Individual differences , creativity techniques , and exposure to ideas in group idea generation . Information Systems Research , 12 ( 3 ) , 322 - 333 . Ghiselin , B . ( 1952 ) . The creative process . Berkeley : University of California Press . Gioia , D . A . , & Chittipeddi , K . ( 1991 ) . Sensemaking and sensegiving in strategic change initiation . Strategic Management Journal , 12 ( 6 ) , 433 - 448 . Gioia , D . A . , & Mehra , A . ( 1996 ) . Sensemaking in organizations . Academy of Management Review , 21 ( 4 ) , 1226 - 1230 . Girotra , K . , Terwiesch , C . , & Ulrich , K . T . ( 2010 ) . Idea generation and the quality of the best idea . Management Science , 56 ( 4 ) , 591 - 605 . Granovetter , M . S . ( 1973 ) . The strength of weak ties . American Journal of Sociology , 78 ( 6 ) , 1360 – 1380 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1956 ) . The structure of intellect . Psychological Bulletin , 53 ( 4 ) , 267 - 293 . Hall , J . K . , & Martin , M . J . C . ( 2005 ) . Disruptive technologies , stakeholders and the innovation value - added chain : A framework for evaluating radical technology development . R & D Management , 35 ( 3 ) , 273 - 284 . Hargadon , A . B . ( 2002 ) . Brokering knowledge : Linking learning and innovation . Research in Organizational Behaviour , 24 , 41 - 85 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Douglas , Y . ( 2001 ) . When innovations meet institutions : Edison and the design of the electric light . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 ( 3 ) , 476 - 501 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Fanelli , A . ( 2002 ) . Action and possibility : Reconciling dual perspectives of knowledge in organizations . Organization Science , 13 ( 3 ) , 290 - 302 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1997 ) . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 4 ) , 716 - 749 . Hedberg , B . ( 1981 ) . How organizations learn and unlearn ? In P . C . Nystrom & W . H . Starbuck ( Eds . ) , Handbook of organizational design . London : Oxford University Press . Hender , J . M . , Dean , D . L . , Rodgers , T . L . , & Nunamaker , J . F . ( 2002 ) . An examination of the impact of stimuli type and GSS structure on creativity : Brainstorming versus non - brainstorming techniques in a GSS environment . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 4 ) , 59 - 85 . Heninger , W . G . , Dennis , A . R . , & Hilmer , K . M . ( 2006 ) . Individual cognition and dual - task interference in group support systems . Information Systems Research , 17 ( 4 ) , 415 - 424 . Herlocker , J . L . , Konstan , J . A . , Terveen , L . G . , & Riedl , J . T . ( 2004 ) . Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 22 ( 1 ) , 5 - 53 . Hill , C . W . L . , & Rothaermel , F . T . ( 2003 ) . The performance of incumbent firms in the face of radical technological innovation . Academy of Management Review , 28 ( 2 ) , 257 - 274 . Hintzman , D . L . ( 1988 ) . Judgements of frequency and recognition memory in a multiple - trace memory model . Psychological Review , 95 ( 4 ) , 528 - 551 . Hoffman , L . R . ( 1959 ) . Homogeneity of member personality and its effect on group problem solving . The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 58 ( 1 ) , 27 - 32 . Hung , S . - Y . , Lai , H . - M . , Yen , D . C . , & Chen , C . - Y . ( 2017 ) . Exploring the effects of team collaborative norms and team identification on the quality of individuals ' knowledge contribution in teams . The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems , 48 ( 4 ) , 80 - 106 . Hwang , E . H . , Singh , P . V . , & Argote , L . ( 2014 ) . Jack of all , master of some : The contingent effect of knowledge breadth on innovation . Proceedings of the Thirty - Fifth International Conference on Information Systems , Auckland , New Zealand . Jannach , D . , Zanker , M . , Felfernig , A . , & Friedrich , G . ( 2010 ) . Recommender systems : An introduction . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Jenkin , T . A . , Chan , Y . E . , Skillicorn , D . B . , & Rogers , K . W . ( 2013 ) . Individual exploration , sensemaking , and innovation : A design for the discovery of novel information . Decision Sciences , 44 ( 6 ) , 1021 - 1057 . Jennex , M . E . ( 2017 ) . Big data , the internet of things , and the revised knowledge pyramid . The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems , 48 ( 4 ) , 69 - 79 . Kaufman , J . C . , Baer , J . , Cole , J . C . , & Sexton , J . D . ( 2008 ) . A comparison of expert and nonexpert raters using the consensual assessment technique . Creativity Research Journal , 20 ( 2 ) , 171 - 178 . Keum , D . D . , & See , K . E . ( 2017 ) . The influence of hierarchy on idea generation and selection in the innovation process . Organization Science , 28 ( 4 ) , 653 - 669 . Lamm , H . , & Trommsdorff , G . ( 1973 ) . Group versus individual performance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency ( brainstorming ) : A review . European Journal of Social Psychology , 3 ( 4 ) , 361 - 388 . Leifer , R . , McDermott , C . M . , O ' Connor , G . C . , Peters , L . S . , Rice , M . P . , & Veryzer , R . W . ( 2000 ) . Radical innovation . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Li , J . , Zhang , P . , & Cao , J . ( 2009 ) . External concept support for group support systems through Web mining . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 60 ( 5 ) , 1057 - 1070 . Majchrzak , A . , More , P . H . B . , & Faraj , S . ( 2012 ) . Transcending knowledge differences in cross - functional teams . Organization Science , 23 ( 4 ) , 951 - 970 . Massetti , B . ( 1996 ) . An empirical examination of the value of creativity support systems on idea generation . MIS Quarterly , 20 ( 1 ) , 83 - 97 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Mollick , E . , & Nanda , R . ( 2016 ) . Wisdom or madness ? Comparing crowds with expert evaluation in funding the arts . Management Science , 62 ( 6 ) , 1533 - 1553 . Müller - Wienbergen , F . , Müller , O . , Seidel , S . , & Becker , J . ( 2011 ) . Leaving the beaten tracks in creative work - a design theory for systems that support convergent and divergent thinking . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 12 ( 11 ) , 714 - 740 . Mumford , M . D . , & Gustafson , S . B . ( 1988 ) . Creativity syndrome : Integration , application , and innovation . Psychological Bulletin , 103 ( 1 ) , 27 - 43 . Nagasundaram , M . , & Bostrom , R . P . ( 1994 ) . The structuring of creative processes using GSS : A framework for research . Journal of Management Information Systems , 11 ( 3 ) , 87 - 114 . Nagasundaram , M . , & Dennis , A . R . ( 1993 ) . When a group is not a group : The cognitive foundations of group idea generation . Small Group Research , 24 ( 4 ) , 463 - 489 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1962 ) . The processes of creative thinking . In H . E . Gruber , G . Terrell & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking ( pp . 63 - 119 ) . New York , NY : Atherton Press . Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2006 ) . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 10 ( 3 ) , 186 - 213 . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination . New York : Charles Scribner ' s Sons . Parker , M . M . , Benson , R . J . , & Trainor , H . E . ( 1988 ) . Information economics . Linking business performance to information technology . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Paul , S . , & Nazareth , D . L . ( 2010 ) . Input information complexity , perceived time pressure , and information processing in GSS - based work groups : An experimental investigation using a decision schema to alleviate information overload conditions . Decision Support Systems , 49 ( 1 ) , 31 - 40 . Piaget , J . ( 1954 ) . The construction of reality in the child . New York : Basic Books . Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . ( 1995 ) . Information foraging in information access environments . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , Denver , Colorado , pp . 51 - 58 . Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . ( 1999 ) . Information foraging . Psychological Review , 106 ( 4 ) , 643 - 675 . Potter , R . E . , & Balthazard , P . ( 2004 ) . The role of individual memory and attention processes during electronic brainstorming . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 4 ) , 621 - 643 . Roussinov , D . , & Zhao , J . L . ( 2003 ) . Automatic discovery of similarity relationships through Web mining . Decision Support Systems , 35 , 149 - 166 . Ryan , S . D . , & Harrison , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Considering social subsystem costs and benefits in information technology investment decisions : A view from the field on anticipated payoffs . Journal of Management Information Systems , 16 ( 4 ) , 11 - 40 . Santanen , E . L . , Briggs , R . O . , & De Vreede , G . - J . ( 2004 ) . Causal relationships in creative problem solving : Comparing facilitation interventions for ideation . Journal of Management Information Systems , 20 ( 4 ) , 167 - 197 . Scandura , T . A . , & Williams , E . A . ( 2000 ) . Research methodology in management : Current practices , trends , and implications for future research . Academy of Management Journal , 43 ( 6 ) , 1248 - 1264 . Schulz , M . ( 2001 ) . The uncertain relevance of newness : Organizational learning and knowledge flows . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 4 ) , 661 - 681 . Seidel , S . , Müller - Wienbergen , F . , & Becker , J . ( 2010 ) . The concept of creativity in the information systems discipline : Past , present , and prospects . Communications of the Association for Information Systems , 27 ( 14 ) , 217 - 242 . Shneiderman , B . ( 2007 ) . Creativity support tools : Accelerating discovery and innovation . Communications of the ACM , 50 ( 12 ) , 20 - 32 . Sia , C . L . , Tan , B . C . Y . , & Wei , K . K . ( 2002 ) . Group polarization and computer - mediated communication : Effects of communication cues , social presence , and anonymity . Information Systems Research , 13 ( 1 ) , 70 - 90 . Siegel , S . ( 1956 ) . Nonparametric statistics : For the behavioral sciences . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill Book Company . Singh , R . , Keil , M . , & Kasi , V . ( 2009 ) . Identifying and overcoming the challenges of implementing a project management office . European Journal of Information Systems , 18 ( 5 ) , 409 - 427 . Skillicorn , D . B . ( 2007 ) . Understanding complex datasets : Data mining with matrix decompositions . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Skillicorn , D . B . , & Vats , N . ( 2007 ) . Novel information discovery for intelligence and counterterrorism . Decision Support Systems , 43 ( 4 ) , 1375 - 1382 . Steiner , I . D . ( 1972 ) . Group process and productivity . New York , NY : Academic Press . Stigliani , I . , & Ravasi , D . ( 2012 ) . Organizing thoughts and connecting brains : Material practices and the transition from individual to group - level prospective sensemaking . Academy of Management Journal , 55 ( 5 ) , 1232 - 1259 . Stoner , J . A . F . ( 1968 ) . Risky and cautious shifts in group decisions : The influence of widely held values . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 4 ( 4 ) , 442 - 459 . Stroebe , W . , Nijstad , B . A . , & Rietzschel , E . F . ( 2010 ) . Chapter four - Beyond productivity loss in brainstorming groups : The evolution of a question . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 43 , 157 - 203 . Sutton , R . I . , & Hargadon , A . ( 1996 ) . Brainstorming groups in context : Effectiveness in a product design firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 ( 4 ) , 685 – 718 . Teddlie , C . , & Tashakkori , A . ( 2009 ) . Foundations of mixed methods research : Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social and behavioral sciences . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . VanGundy , A . B . ( 1988 ) . Techniques of structured problem solving ( 2nd ed . ) : Springer Netherlands . Venkatesh , V . , Brown , S . A . , & Bala , H . ( 2013 ) . Bridging the qualitative – quantitative divide : Guidelines for conducting mixed methods research in information systems . MIS Quarterly , 37 ( 1 ) , 21 - 54 . Venkatesh , V . , Brown , S . A . , & Sullivan , Y . W . ( 2016 ) . Guidelines for conducting mixed - methods research : An extension and illustration . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 17 ( 7 ) , 435 - 495 . Vinokur , A . ( 1969 ) . Distribution of initial risk levels and group decisions involving risk . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 13 ( 3 ) , 207 - 214 . Vinokur , A . , & Burnstein , E . ( 1974 ) . Effects of partially shared persuasive arguments on group - induced shifts : A group problem - solving approach . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 29 ( 3 ) , 305 - 315 . Wang , W . , Zhang , G . , & Lu , J . ( 2016 ) . Member contribution - based group recommender system . Decision Support Systems , 87 , 80 - 93 . Weick , K . E . ( 1995 ) . Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . Weick , K . E . ( 2006 ) . The role of imagination in the organizing of knowledge . European Journal of Information Systems , 15 ( 5 ) , 446 - 452 . Weick , K . E . , Sutcliffe , K . M . , & Obstfeld , D . ( 2005 ) . Organizing and the process of sensemaking . Organization Science , 16 ( 4 ) , 409 - 421 . Yin , R . K . ( 2009 ) . Case study research : Design and methods . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . Zaltman , G . , Duncan , R . , & Holbeck , J . ( 1973 ) . Innovations and organizations . Chichester , England : Wiley . Zhou , K . Z . , & Li , C . B . ( 2012 ) . How knowledge affects radical innovation : Knowledge base , market knowledge acquisition , and internal knowledge sharing . Strategic Management Journal , 33 ( 9 ) , 1090 - 1102 . About the Authors Tracy A . Jenkin is Associate Professor and Distinguished Faculty Fellow of Management Information Systems at Smith School of Business , Queen’s University . She has published on knowledge discovery and data analytics , IT projects , and environmental sustainability in journals such as Business and Society , Decision Sciences , Information and Organization , Journal of Business Ethics , Journal of Information Technology , and MIS Quarterly . She has a Ph . D . from Queen’s University . David B . Skillicorn is a Professor in the School of Computing at Queen ' s University . His undergraduate degree is from the University of Sydney and his Ph . D . from the University of Manitoba . He is also an Adjunct Professor at the Royal Military College of Canada . He has published extensively in the area of adversarial data analytics and has also been involved in interdisciplinary research on radicalization , terrorism , and fraud . Yolande E . Chan is Associate Dean ( Research and PhD - MSc Programs ) and E . Marie Shantz Professor of MIS at Smith School of Business , Queen’s University . She holds a Ph . D . from Western University , an M . Phil . in Management Studies from Oxford University , and S . M . and S . B . degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from MIT . She is a Rhodes Scholar . Yolande studies IT strategy , knowledge strategy , and innovation , and publishes in leading journals such as MIS Quarterly and Information Systems Research . Yolande has served as an associate editor for several journals and as senior editor for Journal of Strategic Information Systems and MIS Quarterly Executive . She is a Fellow of the AIS . Appendix A : Novel Information Discovery and Collaborative Filtering Tools Summary Background information on how each tool works is provided below for those who may not be familiar with these tools . Novel Information Discovery ( NID ) Tool The NID tool used in this study was developed earlier ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) to address the challenges associated with locating concepts that are non - obviously connected to a focal concept of interest , and helping individuals make sense of the connection between this focal concept and the resulting novel information . As discussed above , this sensemaking process can result in the generation of novel ideas . The NID tool differs from other IT tools , like Google , in that it is divergent , taking a search term ( focal concept ) and searching outwards to locate non - obvious connections to other concepts ( novel information ) . This divergent process , depicted in Figure A . 1 and described below , includes two iterations of the following steps : search , contextualized search , and clustering ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) . • Search : uses search terms ( focal concept ) to retrieve pages of content that are directly connected to that focal concept . By using text and data analytics , the tool clusters these pages by similarity and analyzes them to extract the most important nouns . • Contextualized Search : pairs the most important nouns with the original search terms to broaden the scope of the search yet retain the context of the original search terms . • Cluster : clusters the pages returned from the contextualized search based on similarity , resulting in “intermediate” clusters . To describe each cluster , the NID tool extracts a small number of representative nouns and uses these nouns to repeat these same processes – search , contextualized search , and cluster . The result is a set of " novel " clusters that are non - obviously connected to the original search terms , the focal concept , by way of the intermediate clusters ( i . e . , iteration 1 clusters in Figure A . 1 ) . Figure A . 1 . NID Tool Process ( Jenkin , et al . , 2013 ; Skillicorn & Vats , 2007 ) See Appendix C for a screen shot of a sample results page . Collaborative Filtering ( CF ) Tool Collaborative filtering is a technique used in recommender systems that leverages the known opinions of existing users about objects to infer what objects might be of interest to new and existing users ( Jannach , et al . , 2010 ) . For example , users may be interested in recommendations regarding consumer products , movies , music , etc . Distinguishing Characteristics Most applications of collaborative filtering systems are at the individual level , where the goal is to provide a recommendation for a particular user . To do so requires datasets with sufficient scale : a relatively large number of users and a large number of objects . As discussed earlier , there appears to be little research examining how collaborative filtering ( CF ) tools can be used to support either group or organizational convergent processes : most tools focus on individual consumer product choices ( e . g . , Chung , et al . , 2013 ) and , thus , individual - level convergent thinking processes . CF tools try to assess similarity between users and between objects to infer and predict which object ( s ) each user might like . However , in the CF tool developed in our study , the goal is to provide a global recommendation for a relatively small group , which is a common situation in organizational contexts . Since the scale of the problem we are tackling is small , the CF tool we develop in this paper is able to take into account all of the available information ( both the variation in ratings and the variation in individuals ) . The tool is not limited to computing averages and examining the variations in these averages for either sets of ratings or sets of individuals ( not both ) , a common performance shortcut in large - scale applications with many more users and objects . Another shortcut used for computational efficiency purposes is to find , for a new user who wishes a recommendation , only a few similar users based on a few similar objects . The tool is much more powerful . Another distinguishing characteristic of the CF tool developed here is that the tool evaluates and weights each individual’s ability to judge . Recent work on group recommender systems also assigns weights based on an individual’s representativeness in the group ( Wang , et al . , 2016 ) and although a different characteristic is used for weighting purposes , the overall notion of weighting is similar . The CF tool introduced here goes beyond the typical collaborative - filtering - based recommendation agents to provide support for groups . It does so by using singular value decomposition ( SVD ) , a type of matrix decomposition . SVD is similar to principal components analysis ( PCA ) in that both use eigenvalues and eigenvectors to detect underlying components . PCA analyzes the rows and columns of the matrix , in this case the evaluator and the idea , independently . In contrast , SVD analyzes the rows ( evaluator ) and columns ( idea ) jointly . SVD projects the input data , matrix of evaluators ( rows ) and idea ratings ( columns ) , into an appropriate number of orthogonal dimensions or factors . The singular values are an indication of how much the opinions vary in each dimension . Figure A . 2 provides a depiction of these orthogonal dimensions ( v1 and v2 ) and how to interpret the points projected there . As discussed in the paper above and noted below in Figure A . 2 , we are most interested in the points farthest from the origin . Figure A . 2 . Interpreting Singular Value Decomposition Appendix B : Convergent Phases 2 and 3 – Additional Details In the initial convergent phase ( phase 2 ) , the combined list of ideas generated during the divergent phase ( phase 1 ) were provided to the group to rate . Without discussing the ideas , group members anonymously evaluated all ideas ( initial idea ratings ) using the voting functionality within the organization’s GSS . This provided a useful baseline for analyzing initial individual viewpoints , unbiased by group discussion , and subsequent choice shifts . In phase 3 , the summarized results from the initial idea ratings were displayed in a decision model and a facilitated group discussion ( initial discussion ) was conducted . The debate , discussion , and persuasive arguments were expected to reduce variation in the group , creating a shared understanding and high level of agreement . After this discussion , members anonymously rated all ideas again ( second idea ratings ) , which enabled us to measure choice shift and agreement level . To reach consensus on a final decision ( idea selection by group consensus ) , another round of facilitated group discussion ( final discussion ) was conducted . To facilitate the group discussions in phase 3 ( initial and final discussions ) , tabulated scores were displayed as a decision model , including means and standard deviations of scores for each idea . Results were color - coded to highlight high scores , large standard deviations , and large differences between radical and benefit scores . The facilitator played an active role here , helping participants to consider different trends that might be worth discussing ( e . g . , highly beneficial ideas , highly radical ideas , and ideas with large standard deviations ) . Decision models have been shown to help reduce information overload in the group context ( Paul & Nazareth , 2010 ) . After a consensus was reached , a debriefing session was held with the participants to discuss their experiences and offer insights into how this process compared to previous experiences . Appendix C : Athens Screen Shot Example Figure C . 1 . Athens Screen Shot Example