Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 2452 - 199X / © 2024 The Authors . Publishing services by Elsevier B . V . on behalf of KeAi Communications Co . Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . Enhanced osteochondral regeneration with a 3D - Printed biomimetic scaffold featuring a calcified interfacial layer Di Wu a , 1 , Kaiwen Zheng a , 1 , Wenjing Yin a , 1 , Bin Hu b , Mingzhao Yu a , Qingxiao Yu c , Xiaojuan Wei b , * , Jue Deng d , * * , Changqing Zhang a , * * * a Department of Orthopedic Surgery , Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine , No . 600 Yishan Road , Shanghai , 200233 , China b Institute of Microsurgery on Extremities , Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine , No . 600 Yishan Road , Shanghai , 200233 , China c Shanghai Uniorlechnology Corporation , No . 258 Xinzhuan Road , Shanghai , 201612 , China d Academy for Engineering & Technology , Fudan University , No . 220 Handan Road , Shanghai , 200433 , China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : 3D - printed scaffold Calcified interfacial layer CAV - 1 Osteochondral regeneration Tasquinimod A B S T R A C T The integrative regeneration of both articular cartilage and subchondral bone remains an unmet clinical need due to the difficulties of mimicking spatial complexity in native osteochondral tissues for artificial implants . Layer - by - layer fabrication strategies , such as 3D printing , have emerged as a promising technology replicating the stratified zonal architecture and varying microstructures and mechanical properties . However , the dynamic and circulating physiological environments , such as mass transportation or cell migration , usually distort the pre - confined biological properties in the layered implants , leading to undistinguished spatial variations and subse - quently inefficient regenerations . This study introduced a biomimetic calcified interfacial layer into the scaffold as a compact barrier between a cartilage layer and a subchondral bone layer to facilitate osteogenic – chondro - genic repair . The calcified interfacial layer consisting of compact polycaprolactone ( PCL ) , nano - hydroxyapatite , and tasquinimod ( TA ) can physically and biologically separate the cartilage layer ( TA - mixed , chondrocytes - load gelatin methacrylate ) from the subchondral bond layer ( porous PCL ) . This introduction preserved the as - designed independent biological environment in each layer for both cartilage and bone regeneration , success - fully inhibiting vascular invasion into the cartilage layer and preventing hyaluronic cartilage calcification owing to devascularization of TA . The improved integrative regeneration of cartilage and subchondral bone was validated through gross examination , micro - computed tomography ( micro - CT ) , and histological and immuno - histochemical analyses based on an in vivo rat model . Moreover , gene and protein expression studies identified a key role of Caveolin ( CAV - 1 ) in promoting angiogenesis through the Wnt / β - catenin pathway and indicated that TA in the calcified layer blocked angiogenesis by inhibiting CAV - 1 . 1 . Introduction The management of osteochondral lesions has been a clinical chal - lenge for over a century [ 1 ] , affecting millions of individuals globally due to injury , disease , or aging . Although articular cartilage and sub - chondral bone are anatomically proximate , they significantly diverge in terms of three - dimensional tissue morphologies , mechanical properties , and biological functions [ 2 ] ( Fig . 1a ) . For example , the cartilage tissues lack vasculature and lymphatic structures . They are soft and robust in mechanics , and mature chondrocytes have limited proliferation and migration capabilities . In contrast , the subchondral bones are strong , possess vasculature and lymphatic structures , and are conducive to proliferation and migration . This divergence makes the integrative repair of osteochondral defects particularly challenging . Also , inefficient Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co . , Ltd . * Corresponding author . * * Corresponding author . * * * Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : xjweish @ 126 . com ( X . Wei ) , dengj @ fudan . edu . cn ( J . Deng ) , zhangcq @ sjtu . edu . cn ( C . Zhang ) . 1 These authors have contributed equally to this work . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Bioactive Materials journal homepage : www . keaipublishing . com / en / journals / bioactive - materials https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 2024 . 03 . 004 Received 14 November 2023 ; Received in revised form 4 March 2024 ; Accepted 4 March 2024 Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 318 repair often results in instability , pain , and impaired functionality . Current clinical surgical treatments , including microfracture , autolo - gous stem cell / chondrocyte transplantation , and even arthroplasty , have been proposed for repairing such defects [ 3 , 4 ] . However , these methods have limitations , such as graft deterioration / lack of integra - tion , mechanically insufficient cartilage formation , and donor site morbidity , contributing to unsatisfactory patient outcomes . Moreover , these treatments primarily focus on repairing the articular cartilage tissue , potentially resulting in the formation of fibrocartilage or poor integration with the subchondral bone [ 5 , 6 ] . The development of tissue scaffolds that replicate both the structural and functional characteristics of native tissue is an emerging strategy for osteochondral repair [ 7 – 9 ] . One promising method is multi - material 3D bioprinting technology , which enables the recreation of the stratified zonal architecture through layer - by - layer manufacturing [ 10 – 12 ] . The depth - dependent porosity , stiffness , and geometry can be easily adjusted in the 3D - printed scaffold [ 13 ] . Furthermore , incorporating living cells and bioactive materials into different zones of the scaffold offers distinct microenvironments that promote chondrogenic and osteogenic regen - eration [ 14 – 16 ] . However , when these layered scaffolds are exposed to dynamic and circulating physiological environments , the clear distinc - tion between different layers tends to blur over time , primarily due to mass diffusion and / or cell migration . Consequently , the biological properties of different zones in traditional scaffolds become unified , ultimately reducing the efficiency of osteochondral regeneration , such as heterotopic ossification ( Fig . 1b ) . In contrast , a calcified interfacial layer exists between the native cartilage and the subchondral bone in the nature ( Fig . 1a ) [ 17 ] . This layer acts as a barrier , inhibiting vascular invasion into the cartilage and preventing the calcification of hyaluronic cartilage . Engineering a calcified interfacial layer in the 3D - printed scaffold , inspired by this natural physiological structure , emerges as a promising , yet often overlooked , solution [ 18 , 19 ] . Introducing such a layer makes it possible to restore osteochondral tissues with both func - tional and structural properties and gain a deeper understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms involved . Tasquinimod ( TA ) exerts an anti - angiogenic effect by down - regulating hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 α ( HIF - 1 α ) and vascular endothe - lial growth factor ( VEGF ) , inducing the upregulation of thrombospondin - 1 [ 20 ] . Jin et al . revealed that TA inhibited endothe - lial cell proliferation , migration , and lumen formation [ 21 ] . The present study first used TA to inhibit vascular regeneration in cartilage repair . TA , as a small - molecule drug , was mixed into the bioinks of the cartilage layer and calcified interfacial layer to inhibit neovascularization . Hy - droxyapatite ( HA ) has also been widely studied for bone tissue engi - neering applications due to its good mechanical strength and similarity to the mineralized areas of native bone tissue ; it is designed as an important component of the calcified interfacial layer [ 22 ] . PCL , a Food and Drug Administration – approved synthetic biodegradable polymer , has been widely used for biomedical applications . Many studies have described the development of PCL scaffolds by additive manufacturing owing to their well - assessed melt processing , osteoinductive , and me - chanical properties [ 23 ] . A PCL - HA composite material demonstrated enhanced osteogenic ability in bone repair [ 24 ] . Gelatin methacrylate ( GelMA ) , an ideal photo - crosslinking gelatin - based hydrogel , has been used as a cartilage - regenerating scaffold owing to its biocompatibility and biomimetic properties [ 25 – 27 ] . Furthermore , gelatin - based hydro - gels can provide sustained release of growth factors as well as promote cell attachment and cell differentiation toward cartilage - like tissues [ 28 , 29 ] . In this study , we introduced a biomimetic calcified layer into our scaffold , serving as a compact interface between the top and bottom layers , to facilitate osteogenic – chondrogenic repair . The calcified interfacial layer was composed of compact polycaprolactone ( PCL ) , nano - hydroxyapatite ( nHA ) , and TA , effectively physically and func - tionally separating the top layer ( GelMA with chondrocytes loaded and mixed with TA for cartilage repair ) from the bottom layer ( porous PCL for subchondral bone repair ) ( Fig . 1c ) . The invasion of regenerated cartilage tissue toward the subchondral bone and the vascularization of hyaline cartilage were blocked by the biomimetic calcified layer , which also acted as a compact barrier ( Fig . 1d ) . The incorporation of the calcified interfacial layer preserved the distinct biological environments in each layer , enabling independent cartilage and bone regeneration . It successfully inhibited vascular invasion into the top layer and prevented the calcification of hyaluronic cartilage ( Fig . 1e ) . We conducted thor - ough assessments to validate the improved integrative regeneration of both cartilage and subchondral bone , including gross examination , Fig . 1 . Concept of 3D printed biomimetic scaffold . ( a ) Schematic illustration of native cartilage with the calcified interfacial layer between the articular cartilage and the subchondral bone ; ( b ) Reduced efficiency of cartilage regeneration for the conventional scaffold due to the lack of a calcified interfacial layer ; ( c ) Multi - materials bioprinting of biomimetic scaffold ; ( d ) Cross - section of biomimetic scaffold showing the calcified interfacial layer ; ( e ) Schematic illustration for integrative repair of the biomimetic scaffold in layer - specific chondrogenic and osteogenic induction and regeneration . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 319 micro - computed tomography ( micro - CT ) , and histological and immu - nohistochemical analyses , using an in vivo rat model . Furthermore , our gene and protein expression studies identified a crucial role played by CAV - 1 in promoting angiogenesis through the Wnt / β - catenin pathway . Importantly , our findings indicated that TA in the interfacial calcified layer effectively blocked angiogenesis by inhibiting CAV - 1 , highlighting its significant contribution to the overall success of our approach . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Cells and materials Rat bone marrow – derived mesenchymal stem cells ( BMSCs ) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) were obtained from ATCC ( USA ) and their culture conditions were previously described [ 30 ] . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) , fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and live / dead viability kit were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific . Needles were purchased from BD Biosciences ( USA ) . TA ( Selleck , USA ) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ; Sigma – Aldrich , Shanghai , China ) and stored at (cid:0) 20 ◦ C . GelMA , gelatin , and PCL were purchased from SunP Biotech ( Beijing , China ) . Primary antibodies of anti - COL - I , COL - II , Runx2 , OCN , VEGF , CAV - 1 , β - catenin , GSK - 3 β , and p - GSK - 3 β were purchased from Abcam ( Cambridge , UK ) . Gelatin ( A type , derived from porcine skin ) , photoinitiator ( PI , purity : 98 % ) , alcian blue , and Alizarin Red S ( ARS ) were purchased from Sigma – Aldrich . Methacrylic anhydride ( MA ) was supplied by Shanghai Macklin Bio - Chem Technology Co . , Ltd . ( China ) . nHA was purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Bio - Chem Technology Co . , Ltd . ( China ) . 2 . 2 . Fabrication of the printable scaffolds 2 . 2 . 1 . Synthesis of GelMA GelMA was synthesized by a previously described method [ 31 ] . Briefly , a 10 % w / v solution of gelatin in deionized water was mixed with MA in a 1 : 0 . 6 ( v / v ) ratio at 50 ◦ C for 3 h . MA was added to the gelatin solution at a rate of 0 . 5 mL / min under stirring conditions . The reaction was terminated by adding a sufficient amount of deionized water . The resulting solution was dialyzed in dialysis tubes ( 8 – 14 kDa ) against ul - trapure water at 40 ◦ C for 1 week to remove excess MA . Finally , the GelMA solution was filtered , freeze - dried , and stored at room temper - ature for further use . The GelMA solution was then combined with the photoinitiator . Subsequently , the solution was heated at 37 ◦ C in a water bath , followed by sterilization using a 0 . 22 - μ m filter and then stored at 4 ◦ C . 2 . 2 . 2 . Chondrocyte - loaded GelMA hydrogel bioink preparation Primary rat chondrocytes were isolated from femoral heads and condyles of Sprague – Dawley ( SD ) rats weighing 100 g . The cartilage fragments were minced and digested with 0 . 2 % type II collagenase at 37 ◦ C for 4 h . The cells were then resuspended in DMEM containing 10 % FBS . When cells reached 80 % – 90 % confluence , they were passaged using 0 . 25 % trypsin digestion . All cells used were P2 – P5 and maintained in a humidified incubator containing 5 % CO 2 at 37 ◦ C . The lyophilized GelMA was dissolved in DMEM to obtain 5 % , 10 % , and 15 % ( w / v ) GelMA hydrogels including 0 . 01 wt % PI . Primary rat chondrocytes were incorporated into GelMA at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells / mL before scaffold bioprinting . Crosslinking was accomplished by UV irradiation for 10 s ( λ = 405 nm ) . All operations were performed in a sterile environment . 2 . 2 . 3 . Synthesis of polycaprolactone nano - hydroxyapatite For PCL - nHA composite synthesis , PCL ( average molecular weight = 45 , 000 g / mol ) and 3 wt % nHA ( 20 nm , purity ≥ 99 % ) were mixed in dichloromethane at a ratio of 9 : 1 . After partially volatilizing dichloro - methane , the obtained composites were 3D - printed into a compact scaffold using a fused deposition modeling ( FDM ) 3D printer . Before printing , PCL was adequately melted to ensure a smooth printing pro - cess , and a simple PCL was melted as a control . A 27G needle with an inner diameter of 200 μ m was used . 2 . 2 . 4 . 3D - printed biomimetic scaffolds The biomimetic scaffold design pattern was set to three layers and bioprinted continuously ( Supplementary Video ) . The modeling files ( stl . ) were input into the 3D bioprinter ( Biomaker 2i ; SunP Biotech ) equipped with software for planning the printing path . On the printing platform at 21 ◦ C , one nozzle was used for fused deposition of PCL at 70 ◦ C , and the other nozzle was used to extrude chondrocyte - GelMA bioink at 21 ◦ C . The first step was to print the bottom layer using PCL . Second , PCL , nHA , and TA were mixed and used to print the middle layer / calcified interfacial layer in a compact printing mode . Finally , chondrocytes - GelMA hydrogel mixed with TA was used to coat the top of the biomimetic scaffold . The biomimetic scaffold size was set as a cylinder with a 2 mm diameter and 1 . 5 mm thickness . Specifically , the PCL printed layer was set with a height of 1 . 0 mm ( 10 layers ) , the PCL - HA printed layer was set with a height of 0 . 2 mm ( 2 layers ) , and the chondrocytes - GelMA hydrogel layer was set with a thickness of 0 . 3 mm ( 3 layers ) . Specific printing conditions are listed in Table S1 . Then , the scaffolds were photopolymerized in ultraviolet mold chambers ( XL - 1000 UV Crosslinker ; Spectronics Corporation , NY , USA ) at 3 mW / cm 2 for 1 min to ensure crosslinking . 2 . 3 . Characterization of the composite scaffolds 2 . 3 . 1 . 1 H NMR spectra and structural analysis Gelatin and different concentrations of GelMA hydrogels ( 0 . 01 g ) were dissolved in 0 . 55 mL of D 2 O , and the 1 H NMR spectra of the samples were analyzed using an AVANCE III 400 spectrometer ( Bruker , WI , USA ) . The Fourier - transform infrared spectroscopy ( FTIR ) analysis was conducted on a Fourier - transform infrared spectrometer ( Bruker , WI , USA ) to perform structural analysis , and the scan was performed from 600 to 4000 cm (cid:0) 1 . 2 . 3 . 2 . Viscosity measurements and mechanical testing A rotary rheometer ( Malvern Instruments , Worcestershire , UK ) with a 4 ◦ cone and plate geometry was used to determine the viscous behavior of GelMA ( 5 % , 10 % , and 15 % ) solutions . Viscosity was measured for increasing shear rates between 0 . 01 and 1000 s (cid:0) 1 at 25 ◦ C . The compressive mechanical properties of the GelMA hydrogels ( n = 4 ) were evaluated by performing compression tests . Cylindrical samples with a uniform shape ( diameter : 10 mm , height : 2 mm ) were prepared and tested to reduce measurement error . The cylindrical samples were immersed in PBS from their preparation . A strain rate of 0 . 1 mm / min was applied to the tested samples using a universal testing machine ( Zwick Z020 , Germany ) . The compressive Young ’ s modulus was calcu - lated from the slope of the stress – strain curve in the linear regions . 2 . 3 . 3 . Immersion experiments The crosslinked GelMA hydrogels were immersed in a PBS solution at room temperature for 24 h to assess the water absorption . Excess surface water was removed with filter paper , and different concentrations of GelMA were weighed and recorded as wet weight . The samples were then lyophilized , weighed , and recorded as dry weight . Water absorption = Wet weight (cid:0) Dry weight Dry weight The degradation behaviors of GelMA were evaluated by the im - mersion test in simulated body fluid ( SBF ) . The pH value of the SBF D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 320 solution was adjusted to 7 . 4 ± 0 . 1 , and the samples were weighed daily to record weight losses . The degradation ratio was calculated as the dry weight ratio to the original dry weight at each time point . Each exper - iment contained four replicates . 2 . 3 . 4 . Morphological observations The samples were smeared on a cover glass , air - dried , and coated twice with palladium – platinum alloy at 40 mA . The surface morphology and details of the scaffolds were characterized using a scanning electron microscope ( Hitachi , Tokyo , Japan ) . The surface morphologies of the nHA particles were characterized using a transmission electron micro - scope ( Hitachi ) . 2 . 4 . In vitro biocompatibility tests 2 . 4 . 1 . TA drug screening 1 mg TA powder ( S7617 ; Selleck , TX , USA ) was first soaked in DMSO ( 10 nM ) with shaking at 37 ◦ C for 24 h , and the concentrations of TA in the medium were then diluted to 100 , 10 , 2 , 1 , and 0 . 1 μ g / mL in sequence . The proliferation of chondrocytes was measured using the cell counting kit - 8 ( CCK - 8 ; Dojindo , Tokyo , Japan ) assay . The chondrocytes ( 5 × 10 3 cells / well ) were seeded in the medium containing various concentrations of TA ( 100 , 10 , 2 , 1 , 0 . 1 and 0 μ g / mL ) using 96 - well plates ( each group : n = 4 ) . After culturing for 1 , 3 , 5 , and 7 days , the CCK - 8 reagent was added to the medium , and the absorbance at 450 nm was measured 2 h later . Similarly , HUVECs were co - cultured with different concentrations of TA for determining the cell survival rate . 2 . 4 . 2 . Cell viability The survival rate was assessed following the manufacturer ’ s protocol ( LIVE / DEAD viability / cytotoxicity kit ; Invitrogen , CA , USA ) to quantify chondrocyte viability after incorporating into different concentrations of GelMA . A confocal laser scanning microscope ( Leica SD AF , Leica , amburg , Germany ) was used , in which the living cells were stained green using calcein with excitation at 488 nm , whereas the dead cells were stained red using EthD - 1 with excitation at 561 nm . Five images were randomly captured within the cell - laden scaffolds and collected for quantitative analysis . Live and dead cells were counted automatically using Image - Pro Plus 6 . 0 software on days 1 , 3 , and 7 . 2 . 4 . 3 . Drug - loaded release of materials A key test for assessing the performance of TA - loaded materials is quantifying its drug release capacities . Briefly , GelMA scaffold and PCL - HA scaffold loaded with tasquinimod ( 10 μ mol ) were respectively placed in 10 mL PBS and allowed to release for 14 days . Every 2 days , 100 μ L of the solution from each group were drawn with a pipette , added to a 96 - well plate , and 100 μ L of PBS were added immediately after extraction to supplement the experimental solution . Results were quantified using a microplate reader ( n = 3 ) . 2 . 4 . 4 . Chondrogenesis tests For the chondrogenesis tests , the chondrocytes - incorporating hydrogels were incubated in chondrogenic induction medium ( normal medium supplemented with 40 ng / mL of dexamethasone , 50 mg / mL of ascorbic acid , 6 mg / mL of insulin – transferrin – selenium premix , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , and 0 . 4 mM proline ) ( Sigma – Aldrich , MO , USA ) . Chondrogenesis was assessed by alcian blue staining to verify the efficacy , in which enhanced proteoglycan staining of chondrocytes indicated a positive result . 2 . 4 . 5 . Osteogenesis tests The osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs was initiated 24 h after the incubation of scaffold extracts . Briefly , the original medium was replaced with an osteogenic differentiation medium ( HUXMA - 90021 ; Cyagen Biosciences ) containing FBS , penicillin – streptomycin , dexa - methasone , ascorbic acid , glutamine , and β - glycerophosphate . The PCL scaffold , PCL - GelMA scaffold , and blank groups were prepared for comparison . The prepared scaffold extracts were incubated in the cul - ture medium to assess mineralization , and ARS staining was performed on day 14 of osteoinduction . The cells were stained with a 2 % ARS so - lution ( Sigma – Aldrich ) for 10 min , washed with distilled water , and then quantitatively evaluated for matrix calcification by measuring absorbance at 562 nm after destaining in 10 % cetylpyridinium chloride in 10 mM sodium phosphate for 30 min . 2 . 4 . 6 . Angiogenesis tests The tube formation assay was conducted to evaluate angiogenesis in vitro using a Matrigel basement membrane matrix ( 356 , 234 ; BD Bio - sciences , CA , USA ) following the manufacturer ’ s protocols , and the Transwell assay was conducted to evaluate cell proliferation . Briefly , Matrigel ( 50 μ L / well ) was added to 96 - well plates using cold pipette tips on ice after overnight thawing at 4 ◦ C . Then , the plates were incubated at 37 ◦ C until the Matrigel became solidified . Next , HUVECs ( 5 × 10 4 cells / well ) were co - cultured with the extracts from the PCL scaffold , PCL - GelMA scaffold , or the blank groups . Tube formation was evaluated using an inverted microscope after incubation at 37 ◦ C for 6 h . The total length of the tubes was measured using ImageJ software ( Media Cy - bernetics , MD , USA ) . HUVECs ( 1 × 10 5 cells / well ) were co - cultured with the extracts of PCL scaffold or PCL - GelMA scaffold and seeded in the upper chambers of 24 - well Transwell plates with 8 - μ m pore filters ( Corning , NY , USA ) to perform the Transwell assay . After incubation at 37 ◦ C for 24 h , the cells on the lower surface were stained with 0 . 1 % crystal violet for several minutes after removing the attached cells on the upper surface of the filter membranes . The extent of cell migration was observed using the optical microscope ( Leica , Solms , Germany ) . 2 . 4 . 7 . Quantitative real - time polymerase chain reaction The gene expression analysis was performed via real - time quantita - tive polymerase chain reaction ( RT - qPCR ) on BMSCs co - cultured with PCL scaffold or PCL - GelMA scaffold after 7 and 14 days ( n = 3 ) , on HUVECs after 4 and 7 days ( n = 3 ) , and on chondrocytes co - cultured with GelMA hydrogel of different concentrations after 7 , 14 , and 21 days . The total cellular RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent ( Invi - trogen , CA , USA ) and reverse - transcribed into cDNA with a RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , MA , USA ) . qRT - PCR was conducted using the Applied Biosystems StepOnePlus Real - Time PCR System ( CA , USA ) to evaluate the expression of cartilage - related markers ( COL - II and Aggrecan ) , osteogenic - related markers ( Runx2 and OCN ) , and angiogenic - related markers ( VEGF and ANG - I ) , with the housekeeping gene GAPDH used for normalization . The final results were determined using the 2 (cid:0) ΔΔ Ct method for relative gene expression . The primers used in this study were commercially synthe - sized ( Sangon Biotech , Shanghai , China ) , and the sequences are listed in Table S2 . Degradation ratio ( % ) = ( Original dry weight (cid:0) Dry weight after degradation Original dry weight ) × 100 % D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 321 2 . 5 . In vivo regeneration of osteochondral defects for the designed scaffolds 2 . 5 . 1 . Rat osteochondral defect model and treatment Forty - eight 16 - week - old male rats with a body weight of 352 ± 28 g were chosen to create osteochondral defect models to evaluate the repair efficiency of the designed scaffolds . The rats were randomly categorized into 4 groups with 12 rats per group ( blank , PCL scaffold , PCL - GelMA scaffold , and biomimetic scaffold ) . Each animal was shaved and dis - infected after general anesthesia , and the surgeries were executed in the exposed right knee joint through a medial parapatellar approach . With the knee in maximal flexion , a full - thickness cartilage defect ( 2 . 0 mm in diameter and 1 . 5 mm in depth ) was created in the center of the trochlear groove through the osteochondral cylindrical layer in the femur using an electric drill , as previously described [ 13 ] . Afterward , the scaffolds were implanted into the defects . The rats with osteochondral defects without any treatment were used as the blank group . Then , the joint surface was cleaned with sterile saline , and both the capsule and skin were closed . For the first 3 days after surgery , the rats were injected with penicillin to prevent infection . Six rats from each group were euthanized at 12 and 24 weeks post - surgery , and the right knee joints were collected for gross observation , micro - CT evaluation , histological analyses , and immuno - fluorescence analysis . All the rats used in this study were handled following the approved guidelines of the ethics committee of the Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni - versity School of Medicine ( Permit No . DWLL2023 - 0402 ) . 2 . 5 . 2 . Gross observation and micro - CT evaluation The samples from each group were photographed and blindly assessed at specific time intervals by two independent observers in terms of cartilage repair using the International Cartilage Repair Society ( ICRS ) scoring system . This system evaluated cartilage repair based on criteria such as the extent of defect repair , integration into the border zone , and overall macroscopic appearance . Then , the specimens were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for micro - CT evaluation . This assessment involved obtaining 2D and 3D reconstruction images , as well as deter - mining the ratio of bone volume to tissue volume ( BV / TV ) and trabec - ular thickness ( Tb . Th ) of each collected sample . 2 . 5 . 3 . Histological and immunohistochemical analyses The joint samples were used for histological and immunostaining analyses , followed by micro - CT scanning , and then demineralized for 8 weeks in 10 % EDTA . For the histological analysis , the samples were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde solution , dehydrated with a series of graded ethanol , and embedded in paraffin . The embedded tissues from each group were sectioned ( 5 μ m thick ; Leica , Nussloch , Germany ) and stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) and Safranin - O / Fast Green staining . They were then photographed under an optical microscope and evaluated using the ICRS Visual Histological Assessment Scale ( ICRS - VHAS ) and the O ’ Driscoll score [ 32 , 33 ] . For immunohistochemical analysis , the sections were rehydrated , blocked , and incubated with primary anti - COL - I , anti - COL - II , anti - Runx2 , anti - OCN , and anti - VEGF antibodies ( 1 : 100 ; Abcam ) at 4 ◦ C overnight . After incubation with the secondary antibody ( 1 : 250 ; Abcam ) at room temperature , the stained sections were visualized using the diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) substrate and finally counter - stained using hematoxylin . 2 . 6 . Bioinformatics analysis and molecular mechanism 2 . 6 . 1 . Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling Simultaneous transcriptome and proteome analyses were performed to explore the key regulators responsible for TA inhibiting angiogenesis . The mRNA expression profiles of TA - treated HUVECs and untreated HUVECs were determined by RNA sequencing . Briefly , total RNA was extracted from cells and ligated with 3 ʹ and 5 ʹ end adapters . PCR was performed to synthesize first - strand cDNA and for amplification . The cDNA libraries were sequenced using Illumina - Seq for paired - end sequencing . The protocol described by Trapnell et al . was followed for RNA - seq analysis of the generated data [ 34 ] . Gene Ontology ( GO ) term enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes ( KEGG ) pathway enrichment analyses were performed for candidate target genes whose functions were linked with angiogenesis . Label - free quantification and protein identification were performed to discover the differences in proteomics between the TA - treated and untreated HUVEC groups . Briefly , the total proteins in both groups were purified and digested using a filter - aided sample preparation protocol described by Distler et al . [ 35 ] . The extracted ion chromatograms and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry analysis were used to compare the peak areas to calculate the relative expression levels of each identified protein . The raw files were obtained for analysis by MaxQuant software ( Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , Planegg , Germany ) . GO and KEGG pathway analyses were performed for bioin - formatics analysis . 2 . 6 . 2 . Western blotting The total protein concentrations in cells were determined using a BCA protein assay kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . The cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer ( Millipore Corporation , MA , USA ) , and equal amounts of protein were separated by SDS - PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes ( Merck Millipore , MA , USA ) . The blots were blocked with 5 % skimmed milk in Tris - buffered saline containing 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 for 1 h at room temperature . The membranes were incubated with primary antibodies at 4 ◦ C overnight , followed by incubation with HRP - linked secondary antibodies at 37 ◦ C for 1 h . Western blotting was performed to evaluate the specific protein of interest based on proteomic results and its related proteins in the pathway , including CAV - 1 ( 1 : 1000 ; Abcam ) , β - catenin ( 1 : 1000 ; Abcam ) , p - GSK - 3 β ( 1 : 1000 ; Abcam ) , GSK - 3 β ( 1 : 1000 ; Abcam ) , and VEGF ( 1 : 1000 ; Abcam ) . The immunoreactive bands were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence reagent ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and quantified using ImageJ software . 2 . 6 . 3 . Cell transfection HUVECs seeded in 35 - mm culture dishes were transfected with a final concentration of 50 nM for siRNAs using Lipofectamine 3000 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Subsequent experiments were performed after 48 h of incubation . CAV - 1 siRNA obtained from RiboBio ( Guangzhou , China ) was used to knock down the expression of CAV - 1 in HUVECs to assess whether CAV - 1 knockdown could achieve similar ef - fects on angiogenic function as TA . Briefly , the cells were transfected with si - CAV - 1 or si - NC using Lipofectamine 3000 following the manu - facturer ’ s protocols . 2 . 7 . Statistical analysis All quantitative data were presented as the mean ± standard devi - ation , and statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9 . 0 . The groups were compared using one - way analysis of variance followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc test for multiple comparisons . A P value < 0 . 05 indicated a statistically significant difference . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Fabrication and characterization of 3D - printed biomimetic scaffold A multi - materials 3D printing approach was employed to fabricate the proposed biomimetic scaffold ( Fig . 2a ) . Initially , the FDM 3D printing technique was used to fabricate the PCL scaffold , which served as a bottom layer . A uniform and interconnected porous structure with a pore size of 200 μ m was printed to facilitate the subchondral bone regeneration ( Fig . 2b ) . The Young ’ s modulus of the porous PCL scaffold was measured to be 89 . 3 ± 8 . 74 MPa ( Fig . 2c ) . This modulus was in the D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 322 range of native spongy bone stiffness ( 55 – 480 MPa ) [ 36 ] , making it suitable for promoting osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs [ 37 ] . BMSCs were cultured with porous PCL scaffolds for 7 days to assess the cyto - compatibility of PCL scaffolds and evaluate cell differentiation . The re - sults indicated low cytotoxicity and high biocompatibility , as evidenced by a significant increase in live cells ( green ) on PCL scaffold surfaces ( Fig . S1 ) . To create a biological barrier , TA was introduced in the scaffold and gradually released from the GelMA and calcified interfacial layer . The TA release profile was quantified , showing that 40 % and 100 % of the total loaded drug was released from the calcified interfacial layer and GelMA layer at two weeks , respectively . nHA particles were embedded into the PCL scaffold to establish a calcified interfacial layer serving as a physical barrier between the top and bottom layers . The nHA particles , with 200 – 500 nm length and 20 – 30 nm diameter , were distributed within the PCL scaffold ( Fig . 2e ) , resulting in a compact structure ( Fig . 2f ) . In addition , the compressive modulus of PCL - nHA was slightly higher than that of PCL ( P < 0 . 05 ) , and PCL - nHA also exhibited signif - icant tensile strength ( P < 0 . 01 ) ( Fig . 2c ) . The concentration of TA was further optimized through co - culturing with HUVECs ( Fig . 2g ) and rat primary chondrocytes ( Fig . 2h ) . CCK - 8 assays revealed that the HUVECs treated with 10 μ g / mL TA exhibited significantly decreased cell viability ( Fig . 2g ) . However , no significant differences were observed among all TA groups and the control group ( 0 μ g / mL ) for rat primary chon - drocytes , indicating that TA had no cytotoxic effect on chondrocytes ( Fig . 2h ) . Based on these results , 10 μ g / mL TA was selected for further experiments . Primary rat chondrocytes were first isolated from femoral heads and condyles of SD rats to prepare the bioink for cartilage repair . Lyophilized GelMA was then dissolved in DMEM media and combined with TA and primary rat chondrocytes . The successful chemical functionalization of GelMA was confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance ( 1 H NMR ) and FTIR analysis ( Fig . S2 ) . The concentrations of GelMA in the bioinks were first optimized within 5 % – 15 % range . As the GelMA concentration increased , the bioinks showed enhanced printability with higher shear - thinning and shear - yielding properties ( Fig . 2i ) . The printed top scaffold showed porous networks with a diameter of approximately 200 μ m , enabling cell migration and proliferation ( Fig . 2j ) [ 38 ] . Furthermore , the printed top scaffolds exhibited a lower water absorption , and lower degradation rate as the GelMA concentration increased ( Fig . S3 ) . Live / dead staining was conducted to evaluate the adhesion and viability of the rat primary chondrocytes seeded on the GelMA with different concentrations ( Fig . S4 ) . Cell viability results indicated that 5 % and 10 % GelMA supported chondrocyte growth and demonstrated favorable biocompatibility without significant cytotoxicity . However , 15 % GelMA exhibited reduced viability , suggesting that a higher GelMA concentra - tion decreased cell metabolic activities ( Fig . 2k ) [ 39 ] . Cell - loaded hydrogels were evaluated by alcian blue staining and RT - qPCR to further assess the biological effect of GelMA on the chondro - genic activity of chondrocytes . Alcian blue staining revealed that 10 % GelMA exhibited the highest efficacy in promoting chondrogenesis ( Fig . 2l ) . The gene expression levels of COL - II and Aggrecan were significantly higher in the 5 % GelMA and 10 % GelMA groups compared with the 15 % GelMA group ( P < 0 . 05 ) on day 7 . The 5 % GelMA group showed the highest gene expression , which slightly surpassed that in the 10 % GelMA group on days 14 and 21 ( Fig . S5 ) . Considering printability and physicochemical properties , 10 % GelMA was chosen for further experiments . 3 . 2 . In vitro biocompatibility tests Cell migration and growth are essential aspects of tissue repair and regeneration . The osteogenic and angiogenic regenerative capabilities of the top GelMA and bottom PCL scaffolds were first characterized through in vitro culturing BMSCs and HUVECs , respectively . The control group involved cell culture without the scaffolds . The proliferation of BMSCs showed no significant difference between the PCL - GelMA and PCL scaffolds ( Fig . 3a ) . However , the proliferation of HUVECs was Fig . 2 . Preparation and characterization of the biomimetic scaffold . ( a ) Schematic illustration ( left ) and photograph ( right ) for the biomimetic scaffold ; ( b ) Scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) image of porous bottom layer in the biomimetic scaffold ; ( c ) Young ’ s modulus of the top GelMA layer , the interfacial PCL - nHA layer , and the bottom PCL layer ; ( d ) Drug release profile in the GelMA and PCL - nHA scaffolds ; ( e ) Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) image of the nHA ; ( f ) Macroscopic image of compact calcified interfacial layer ; ( g ) CCK - 8 assay for the proliferation of HUVECs cultured with different concentration of tasquinimod for 7 days ; ( h ) CCK - 8 assay for the proliferation of chondrocytes cultured with the concentrations of tasquinimod for 7 days ; ( i ) Shear viscosity as a function of shear rate for the 5 % , 10 % , and 15 % GelMA , respectively ; ( j ) SEM image of the porous top GelMA layer ; ( k ) Qualification of live / dead staining of chondrocytes co - cultured with different concentrations of GelMA ; ( l ) Alcian blue staining of chondrocytes co - cultured with different concentrations of GelMA . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 323 significantly inhibited in the PCL - GelMA scaffold ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 3b ) . These results indicated that both PCL - GelMA and PCL scaffolds had high osteogenic regenerative capabilities , whereas the PCL - GelMA scaffold exhibited a reduced angiogenic regenerative capability . The gene expression of key osteogenic makers , such as Runt - related transcription factor - 2 ( Runx2 , Fig . 3c ) and osteocalcin ( OCN , Fig . 3d ) , gradually increased over time . Both the PCL - GelMA and PCL scaffolds slightly enhanced the expression of osteogenic genes compared with that in the control group , indicating a high biocompatibility . Additionally , the expression of angiogenic genes , such as VEGF and ANG - I , was substan - tially downregulated in the PCL - GelMA scaffold compared with the PCL scaffold ( Fig . 3e and f ) . Collectively , these findings revealed that both Fig . 3 . In vitro biocompatibility evaluation of scaffolds . a , b ) The proliferation of BMSCs ( a ) and HUVECs ( b ) for control group , PCL scaffold , and PCL - GelMA scaffold ; c - f ) The osteogenic mRNA expression levels of Runx2 ( c ) and OCN ( d ) , and the angiogenic mRNA expression levels of VEGF ( e ) and ANG - I ( f ) for con - trol group , PCL scaffold , and PCL - GelMA scaffold , respectively ; g , h ) Microscropic images ( g ) and quantitative analysis of Alizarin Red S ( h ) of osteogenic differ - entiation after 14 days incubation of BMSCs for control group , PCL scaffold , and PCL - GelMA scaffold , respectively ; i , j ) Microscopic images of tube formation by HUVECs ( i ) and quantitative analysis ( j ) of the average tube length ; k , l ) Transwell assay ( k ) and quantitative analysis ( l ) of the cell migration rate for control group , PCL scaffold , and PCL - GelMA scaffold . ( * * * ) p < 0 . 001 ; ns = no significance . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 324 the PCL - GelMA and PCL scaffolds exhibited osteogenic activity , whereas the PCL - GelMA scaffold inhibited angiogenesis in vitro . For osteogenic differentiation , the results of ARS showed no difference among all groups ( Fig . 3g ) , and the quantitative results further confirmed no significantly more calcium accumulation ( Fig . 3h ) . Transwell and tube formation assays were performed to determine the effects of these scaffolds on pro - angiogenic activity . HUVECs co - cultured with PCL - GelMA scaffold migrated much slower than those co - cultured with PCL scaffold and control group after incubation for 24 h ( P < 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 3i – l ) . Furthermore , HUVECs co - cultured with PCL scaffold could generate more cord - like structures on Matrigel than those co - cultured with PCL - GelMA scaffold . 3 . 3 . Biomimetic scaffold facilitated the regeneration of osteochondral defects in vivo 3 . 3 . 1 . Macroscopic and micro - CT observation Three types of scaffolds , including monolayer scaffold ( porous PCL ) , bilayer scaffold ( PCL - GelMA scaffold without calcified interfacial layer ) , and biomimetic scaffold ( without calcified interfacial layer ) , were implanted into rat osteochondral defects for 12 and 24 weeks to evaluate the role of the calcium interfacial layer in the biomimetic scaffold for integrative osteochondral repair . Macroscopic , 2D and 3D micro - CT observations were conducted to evaluate the efficiency in the three groups , along with a blank control group ( Fig . 4a – d ) . In the blank group , the defects remained unfilled , and a small amount of fibrous tissue with a rough surface was visible at 12 weeks post - implantation ( Fig . S6 ) . Even after 24 weeks , the defects remained concave and showed no signs of repair ( Fig . 4a ) . For PCL and PCL - GelMA scaffolds , the defect sites exhibited a rough surface , and the margins around the defect sites were still obvious ( Fig . 4b and c ) . However , the newly formed tissues were smooth and the margins became indistinct in the biomimetic scaffold group . Notably , the surface cartilage showed slight repair in the PCL - GelMA scaffold group , with a rough surface and distinctive morphology compared with the native cartilage ( Fig . 4c ) . In contrast , the defects in the biomimetic scaffold group were filled with cartilage - like tissues and repaired completely . The newly formed cartilaginous tissues integrated with the surrounding native cartilage without obvious margins ( Fig . 4d ) . Also , a macroscopic grading scale based on ICRS scoring system was used to quantitatively evaluate regeneration effi - ciency . The total score in the biomimetic scaffold group was signifi - cantly higher than that in the other groups in 12 and 24 weeks ( Fig . S7 ) . Similarly , an increased calculation of bone volume fraction ( BV / TV ) in the biomimetic scaffold group confirmed a higher amount of calcified tissue , indicating a more efficient regeneration for the scaffold with a calcified interfacial layer ( Fig . S7 ) . 3 . 3 . 2 . Histological examination The H & E and Safranin - O / Fast Green staining histological analyses were further performed to assess osteochondral repair . In the blank group , partial repair with collagen filling was observed in 12 weeks , whereas the subchondral bone collapsed and disordered , loose , and fibrous tissues covered the surface of defects at 24 weeks . Notably , fibrous tissues rather than bone - like tissues filled the deeper regions of Fig . 4 . In vivo evaluation of the biomimetic scaffold . a - d ) Schematic illustration ( top left ) , gross views ( bottom left ) , 2D ( top right ) and 3D ( bottom right ) micro - CT images of bone formation at 24 weeks post - operation for blank ( a ) , PCL scaffold ( b ) , PCL - GelMA scaffold ( c ) , and biomimetic scaffold ( d ) , respectively ; e - l ) H & E staining and Masson ’ s trichrome staining of osteochondral defects without scaffold implantation ( e , f ) and with the implantation of PCL scaffold ( g , h ) , PCL - GelMA scaffold ( i , j ) , and biomimetic scaffold ( k , l ) for 24 weeks , respectively ; m , n ) International Cartilage Repair Society Visual Histological Assessment Scale ( ICRS - VHAS ) ( m ) and O ’ Driscoll ( n ) score to evaluate the osteochondral regeneration for blank group , PCL scaffold , PCL - GelMA scaffold , and biomimetic scaffold at 12 and 24 weeks post - implantation , respectively . ( * * * ) p < 0 . 001 . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 325 the defects ( Fig . 4e and f ) . For the PCL scaffold , some cancellous bone formation occurred in the subchondral layer of the defects with a small amount of fibrous - cartilage - like tissues on the surface ( Fig . 4g and h ) . In the PCL - GelMA scaffold group , incomplete repair was observed in 12 weeks , with a larger amount of cartilage - like tissue than in the blank and PCL scaffold groups ( Fig . S8 ) . In 24 weeks , newly formed bone tissues were observed in the deeper regions , whereas a limited number of cartilaginous tissues were formed on the surface ( Fig . 4i and j ) . In the biomimetic scaffold group , a gap existed between the repaired tissue and normal cartilage in 12 weeks post - operation , but the repaired tissues were almost completely fused with the normal cartilage in 24 weeks ( Fig . 4k and l ) . The effectiveness of regeneration was further evaluated using the ICRS - VHAS and O ’ Driscoll scores . The biomimetic scaffold group consistently achieved significantly higher scores compared with those in the other groups in both 12 and 24 weeks ( Fig . 4m and n ) . 3 . 3 . 3 . Immunohistochemical assay Immunohistochemical staining was further performed to analyze chondrogenesis and osteogenesis in each group . Positive expression of collagen II , indicative of cartilage formation , was observed exclusively in the newly formed cartilage in the biomimetic scaffold group in 12 weeks post - implantation ( Fig . S9 ) . In both PCL - GelMA and biomimetic scaffold groups , the lower expression of collagen I and higher expression of collagen II were observed on the surface region of the defect sites in 24 weeks post - implantation , suggesting ongoing cartilage development ( Fig . 5a and b ) . Regarding osteogenesis markers , the expression of RUNX2 and OCN was observed in the defect sites of all the groups in 12 weeks ( Fig . S9 ) . However , in 24 weeks , positive expression of RUNX2 was limited on the surface area of the defect sites in the blank and PCL scaffold groups ( Fig . 5c ) . Regarding OCN , positive responses were found in the whole defect area in the PCL scaffold and blank groups . In contrast , positive expression was observed in only the subchondral bone area , but negative expression was reported in the cartilaginous tissue in the PCL - GelMA scaffold and biomimetic scaffold groups ( Fig . 5d ) . The results of immunohistochemical staining were consistent with the findings of Safranin - O / Fast Green staining ( Fig . 4e – 4l ) , suggesting that the biomimetic scaffold enabled further promotion of hyaline cartilage regeneration . The expression of VEGF was assessed to evaluate vessel invasion into the cartilage layer . Interestingly , only the cartilage layer in the biomimetic scaffold group showed negative VEGF expression at both time points ( Fig . 5e ) , suggesting that the calcified interfacial layer suc - cessfully prevented vessel invasion into the cartilage layer in vivo . 3 . 4 . Downregulating CAV - 1 inhibited angiogenesis via Wnt / β - catenin pathway TA was found to have an anti - angiogenic effect [ 20 ] and inhibited endothelial cell proliferation , migration , and lumen formation [ 21 ] . We Fig . 5 . Immunohistochemical analysis of osteochondral regeneration . ( a , b ) Immunohistochemical staining of the chondrogenic marker COL I ( a ) and COL II ( b ) at 24 weeks post - operation , respectively ; ( c , d ) Immunohistochemical staining of the osteogenic marker RUNX2 ( c ) and OCN ( d ) at 24 weeks post - operation , respectively ; ( e ) Immunohistochemical staining of the angiogenic marker VEGF at 24 weeks post - operation . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 326 conducted RNA - sequencing transcriptomic and label - free proteomic analyses on TA - treated HUVECs compared with the non - treated group to investigate the introduction of TA for inhibiting neovascularization and the mechanism of angiogenesis inhibition . This allowed us to identify differentially expressed genes and proteins . The heatmap and volcano plot showed that 35 mRNAs were upregulated while 72 mRNAs were downregulated in the TA - treated group compared with the control group , with log 2 - fold change > 2 or < 0 . 5 and P < 0 . 05 ( Fig . 6a and b ) . GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses of differentially expressed genes are illustrated in Fig . 6c 6d . Simultaneously , 4011 differentially expressed proteins were identified as quantifiable between the two groups , and the heatmap illustrated the top 17 key proteins compara - tively with respect to the log 2 - fold change and P value ( Fig . 6e ) . GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses of differentially expressed proteins are depicted in Fig . 6f and g . The Venn diagram results showed that two genes ( CAV - 1 and IL - 18 ) were obtained after the cross - analysis of genes in RNA - seq , protein profiles , and angiogenesis pathway ( Fig . 6h ) . CAV - 1 interacted with some well - known angiogenic ( pro - angiogenic ) factors , such as VEGF , basic fibroblast growth factor , or hepatocyte growth factor . On the one hand , CAV - 1 activated VEGFR - 2 via a VEGF - dependent pathway , and the removal of caveolin and VEGFR - 2 from caveolae led to the inhibition of endothelial cell migration ; on the other hand , CAV - 1 was also essential for NO ( nitric oxide ) - mediated angiogenesis , and VEGF promoted the production of NO and the for - mation of capillary - like tubules [ 40 ] . Interestingly , some studies re - ported that the knockdown of CAV - 1 expression enhanced osteogenic differentiation through the calcium signaling pathway ; however , no studies indicated the connection between IL - 18 and osteochondral de - fects [ 41 ] . The protein – protein interaction analysis revealed the interaction between CAV - 1 and angiogenic genes ( Fig . 7a ) . RT - qPCR indicated that the level of CAV - 1 significantly reduced when HUVECs were treated with TA ( Fig . 7b ) . We transfected si - CAV - 1 and negative control siRNA ( si - NC ) into HUVECs to verify that silencing CAV - 1 had the same effect as TA on proliferation , migration , and angiogenesis . CAV - 1 was a posi - tive regulator of endothelial cell proliferation , angiogenesis , and migration , along with our loss - of - function assay results ( Fig . 7c – e ) . We confirmed that the TA drug and si - CAV - 1 could inhibit proliferation , angiogenesis , and migration in HUVECs by scratch wound , Transwell , and tube formation assays . Studies showed that CAV - 1 could target VEGF in HUVECs to induce the activation of the Wnt / β - catenin pathway , and the activation of the Wnt / β - catenin signaling pathway could stim - ulate multiple critical steps in angiogenesis [ 42 ] . Western blotting im - ages revealed that both the TA drug and si - CAV - 1 induced significant decreases in β - catenin expression and phosphorylation of GSK - 3 β ( Fig . 7f ) . These findings indicated that TA blocked angiogenesis by inhibiting CAV - 1 in HUVECs , and CAV - 1 promoted angiogenesis via the Wnt / β - catenin pathway ( Fig . 7g ) . The findings from both proteomics and transcriptomics in this study indicated that CAV - 1 played a crucial role in angiogenesis during the repair of osteochondral defects and could be significantly reduced by TA drugs . Knocking down CAV - 1 in HUVECs might inhibit vascularization via the Wnt / β - catenin pathway , subse - quently downregulating VEGF . 4 . Discussion In recent years , the trilayer scaffold has been considered more suit - able for repairing osteochondral defects , as the bilayer scaffold was re - ported to have issues such as excessive cartilage downgrowth into the subchondral bone and insufficient cartilage regeneration in Fig . 6 . RNA - sequencing transcriptomics and label - free proteomics for identification differential genes and proteins . ( a ) Heat map of genes with differential expression between TA and control groups . Blue and red colors indicate downregulation and upregulation , respectively ; ( b ) Volcano plot of RNA sequencing analysis of mRNAs with differential expression between TA and control groups . Blue and red colors indicate downregulation and upregulation , respectively ; ( c , d ) GO analysis ( c ) and KEGG analysis ( d ) of different expressed genes ; ( e ) The heat map of top 17 key proteins for differential expression ; f ) GO enrichment analysis of different expressed proteins according to biologic process , cellular component , and molecular function ; ( g ) KEGG analysis of different expressed proteins ; ( h ) Venn diagram showing that two genes ( CAV - 1 and IL - 18 ) are obtained after cross - analysis of genes in RNA - seq , protein profiles and angiogenesis pathway . TA , tasquinimod ; GO , Gene ontology ; KEGG , Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 327 osteochondral defect repair [ 43 ] . For example , Liu et al . fabricated the nanofibrous membrane unit functioning as the middle layer for mimicking the calcified layer , which was found to be permeable to some molecules with limited molecular weight and could prevent the seeded cells from migrating across the unit [ 44 ] . A similar phenomenon was observed in vivo when the interface layer was absent in our study . However , the invasion of regenerated cartilage tissue toward the sub - chondral bone and the vascularization of hyaline cartilage were blocked by the natural calcified interfacial layer . Some studies showed that the calcified interfacial zone was dense with a “ tooth comb ” shape , coin - ciding with the subchondral bone . The main components were collogen II ( 20 . 16 ± 0 . 96 ) % and hydroxyphosphate ( 65 . 09 ± 2 . 31 ) % . The thickness of the calcified interfacial layer was 104 . 16 ± 20 . 87 μ m , compressive modulus was ( 208 . 6 ± 39 . 7 ) MPa , and tensile modulus was ( 178 . 3 ± 35 . 9 ) MPa , 10 times harder than hyaline cartilage , but 1 / 60 than subchondral bone [ 45 , 46 ] . Given these special morphological characteristics and composition , the mechanical impact attenuated significantly during knee joint motion . More importantly , the shear force of articular cartilage could be converted into compressive stress by the calcified interfacial zone and transferred to the subchondral bone , thus significantly reducing the likelihood of crushing and tearing the articular cartilage [ 47 ] . In addition , the calcified interfacial zone might block the exchange of materials between the articular cartilage and the subchondral bone . As a result , the cartilage and the subchondral bone were separated into relatively independent physiological environments by this thin structure [ 48 ] . In the present study , we fabricated the calcified interfacial layer printed with FDM using nHA and PCL , which enhanced mechanical properties and layer - specific barrier function . Combining TA could completely block angiogenesis in the hyaline cartilage . Similarly , Jia et al . developed a multilayered scaffold with the bone layer 3D - printed with PLGA / TCP . The cartilage layer was a tem - perature gradient – oriented hydrogel , the compact layer was a seamless layer produced using 3D printing , and the intermediate compact inter - facial layer hardly afforded an avascular microenvironment in the upper cartilage layer [ 49 ] . Compared with mono - or bilayer scaffolds , constructing trilayer scaffolds is complicated , as it is challenging to forge three different structures into one construct in a single step . Most trilayer scaffolds were made up of different parts fabricated separately , leading to problems such as changes in mechanical properties and dissociation of multiple layers after implantation [ 50 ] . Zhai et al . used the “ twice freeze - drying ” technique to construct a dense isolation layer with a high concentration of chitosan / gelatin solution [ 51 ] . Qiao et al . designed and fabricated a trilayered stratified scaffold in which a cell - laden GelMA with zone - specific growth factor delivery was combined with fiber organi - zation and networks [ 29 ] . However , these attempts could hardly mimic the connecting manner and mechanical features in native tissue , and each printed construct was assembled discontinuously or in several steps . In our study , we fabricated the trilayer scaffold in one step by switching the nozzles of FDM and extrusion bioprinting . With the development of multi - nozzle printing technology , the range of materials for constructing complex 3D models significantly expanded ; however , coordinating different nozzles and materials still involved many details [ 52 , 53 ] . A few differences based on the type of bioinks and cells were observed in terms of printing cell - laden hydrogels . In this study , various parameters , including the GelMA concentration ratio , the inner table of Fig . 7 . Gene and protein expression analysis revealing CAV - 1 promoted angiogenesis by Wnt / β - catenin pathway . ( a ) The protein - protein interactions analysis revealing the interaction between CAV - 1 and angiogenic genes . ( b ) RT - qPCR confirmation of the low level of CAV - 1 in TA - treated group ; ( c ) Western blotting assay for the protein expression of CAV - 1 , β - catenin , GSK - 3 β , p - GSK - 3 β , and VEGF after transfection with si - CAV - 1 or negative control ( NC ) ; ( d ) Representative images showing the migration ability of HUVECs at 12 h by scratch wound assay ; ( e , f ) Migrated HUVECs using the transwell assay ( e ) , and tube formation in HUVECs ( f ) after transfection with si - CAV - 1 or NC . The white dashed lines are the edges of the cell migration ; ( g ) Schematic illustration of the mechanism showing that TA blocked angiogenesis through inhibiting of CAV - 1 in HUVECs , and CAV - 1 promoted angiogenesis by activating Wnt / β - catenin pathway . ( * * ) p < 0 . 01 . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 328 the nozzles , the printing temperature , and the printing speed , were repeatedly adjusted to ensure high fidelity and high cell viability ( greater than 90 % ) . The key point in the printing of PCL and PCL - nHA was adjusting the printing temperature and speed . The challenge in this study was coordinating the two nozzles and materials well to simultaneously guarantee structural stability and desired mechanical properties . Moreover , GelMA and chondrocytes needed to be protected from the high temperature of 70 ◦ C during the PCL and PCL - nHA printing process , and the hydrogel printing temperature of 21 ◦ C was determined based on the gelatin kinetics . The use of 3D printing for treating osteochondral defects can be categorized into two main approaches : scaffold - based approaches and direct 3D printing approaches [ 54 ] . Scaffold - based approaches involve the fabrication of a 3D scaffold , which is then seeded with cells and biocompatible materials and implanted into the defect . On the contrary , direct 3D printing approaches involve the direct printing of cells , bio - materials , or a combination of both into the defect to form a living tissue construct . Scaffold - based approaches face challenges because the scaf - folds can easily become damaged during implantation , affecting the distribution of cells and biomaterials and resulting in impaired tissue regeneration [ 55 ] . Direct 3D printing approaches have limitations related to the resolution of the printing process , making it difficult to create complex tissue architectures with precise control over cell and biomaterial distribution . In addition , the printing process may cause cell death due to the mechanical stress of the printing process or low oxygen levels in the printed construct [ 13 , 56 ] . In this study , we presented a new hybrid bioprinting approach to build zonally stratified articular carti - lage to mimic the anatomy of native cartilage using primary chon - drocytes . The cell viability and mechanical properties were the preliminary criteria used to verify the success of the 3D - printed multi - phase biological scaffold . The data in this study demonstrated the feasibility of the printing construct and the good cytocompatibility of the materials used . Consistent with previous studies , CAV - 1 si - RNA treatment directly downregulated GSK3 and β - catenin transcriptional activity , thereby inhibiting VEGF , suggesting that CAV - 1 promotes angiogenesis by the Wnt / β - catenin pathway . Notably , CAV - 1 is part of the canonical Wnt pathway and a crucial component of the caveolae machinery [ 57 ] . On the one hand , CAV - 1 activates VEGFR - 2 via a VEGF - dependent pathway and the removal of caveolin and VEGFR - 2 from caveolae leads to the inhibition of endothelial cell migration . On the other hand , CAV - 1 is also essential for nitric oxide ( NO ) - mediated angiogenesis , whereas VEGF promotes the production of NO and the formation of capillary - like tu - bules . Ding et al . transfected antisense CAV - 1 oligonucleotides into HUVECs , resulting in a significant decrease in the number of capillary - like tubules , and NO production did not respond to the addi - tion of VEGF and a nonselective NOS ( NO synthase ) inhibitor [ 58 ] . The results of proteomics and transcriptomics in this study indicated that CAV - 1 was a critical regulator of angiogenesis in repairing osteochon - dral defects , and its expression was significantly reduced by TA drugs . Knocking down CAV - 1 in HUVECs might inhibit vascularization via the Wnt / β - catenin pathway and downregulate VEGF . Several areas warrant further investigation . First , considering the extreme complexity of the osteochondral unit , the trilayer scaffolds used in this study provided a simplified representation . Developing scaffolds that better mimic the complex structure could potentially enhance the effectiveness of osteochondral repair . Second , the multiple extrusion printing methods employed in this study may potentially induce breaks or defects between different layers . More advanced continuous additive manufacturing technologies can be explored to facilitate the fabrication of artificial implants with improved structural integrity . Third , it would be possible to precisely determine the thickness , morphology , and structure of each scaffold layer by leveraging 3D imaging technology to reconstruct the osteochondral defect , thus ensuring a more accurate correspondence to the cartilage defect . Notably , choosing cell sources has always been considered a bottleneck in cartilage repair [ 59 ] . While this study used primary chondrocytes , autologous BMSCs may offer a promising alternative due to their convenient acquisition and ease of expansion in vitro . Exploring the potential mechanism of BMSCs differ - entiating into hyaline cartilage would be a valuable area for future investigation . 5 . Conclusions In this study , a biomimetic scaffold containing a calcified interfacial layer was designed and fabricated to repair osteochondral defects in rats . The combination of chondrogenic and osteogenic regeneration in distinct microenvironments , as a 3D - printed integrated scaffold , was achieved in one step by switching the nozzles of FDM and extrusion bioprinting . This approach resulted in a noticeable synergistic effect , enhancing both chondrogenesis and osteogenesis . At 24 weeks post - operatively , the repair outcome in the biomimetic scaffold group sur - passed those in the PCL scaffold and PCL - GelMA scaffold groups . Our data suggested the essential role of the calcified interfacial layer in this procedure , emphasizing the importance of simulating the natural physiological and mechanical environments during osteochondral defect repair . In addition , TA used in the calcified interfacial layer could block angiogenesis by inhibiting CAV - 1 and inactivating the Wnt / β - catenin signaling pathway . Overall , the 3D - printed biomimetic scaf - fold exhibited useful biological properties and mimicked the spatially varying properties of native osteochondral tissue , both in vitro and in vivo . It demonstrated high performance in the reconstruction of articular cartilage and subchondral bone , providing a promising candidate for functional osteochondral regeneration . Ethics approval and consent to participate All of the rats utilized in this study were treated according to the guidelines approved by the ethics committee of the Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine ( Permit No . DWLL2023 - 0402 ) . CRediT authorship contribution statement Di Wu : Writing – review & editing , Writing – original draft , Meth - odology , Funding acquisition , Formal analysis , Conceptualization . Kai - wen Zheng : Writing – original draft , Methodology , Data curation . Wenjing Yin : Writing – review & editing , Data curation . Bin Hu : Visualization , Validation , Methodology . Mingzhao Yu : Software , Methodology . Qingxiao Yu : Software , Formal analysis . Xiaojuan Wei : Writing – review & editing , Supervision , Investigation , Conceptualiza - tion . Jue Deng : Writing – review & editing , Resources , Project admin - istration . Changqing Zhang : Supervision , Resources , Funding acquisition . Declaration of competing interest There are no conflicts to declare . Acknowledgments This study was supported by the National Natural Science Founda - tion of China ( Grant No . 82202690 ) , the Shanghai Pujiang Program ( 2022PJD051 ) ; the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation ( 2022M712121 ) , and the Basic Science Program of Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital ( Grant No . ynqn202203 ) . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 2024 . 03 . 004 . D . Wu et al . Bioactive Materials 36 ( 2024 ) 317 – 329 329 References [ 1 ] K . Ching , et al . , Hypertension meets osteoarthritis - revisiting the vascular aetiology hypothesis , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 17 ( 9 ) ( 2021 ) 533 – 549 . [ 2 ] S . R . Goldring , M . B . Goldring , Changes in the osteochondral unit during osteoarthritis : structure , function and cartilage - bone crosstalk , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 12 ( 11 ) ( 2016 ) 632 – 644 . [ 3 ] H . Kwon , et al . , Surgical and tissue engineering strategies for articular cartilage and meniscus repair , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 15 ( 9 ) ( 2019 ) 550 – 570 . [ 4 ] E . A . Makris , et al . , Repair and tissue engineering techniques for articular cartilage , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 11 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) 21 – 34 . [ 5 ] C . Madeira , et al . , Advanced cell therapies for articular cartilage regeneration , Trends Biotechnol . 33 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) 35 – 42 . [ 6 ] S . P . Nukavarapu , D . L . Dorcemus , Osteochondral tissue engineering : current strategies and challenges , Biotechnol . Adv . 31 ( 5 ) ( 2013 ) 706 – 721 . [ 7 ] R . Chen , et al . , Multiphasic scaffolds for the repair of osteochondral defects : outcomes of preclinical studies , Bioact . Mater . 27 ( 2023 ) 505 – 545 . [ 8 ] C . Lesage , et al . , Material - assisted strategies for osteochondral defect repair , Adv . Sci . 9 ( 16 ) ( 2022 ) e2200050 . [ 9 ] S . Camarero - Espinosa , et al . , Directed cell growth in multi - zonal scaffolds for cartilage tissue engineering , Biomaterials 74 ( 2016 ) 42 – 52 . [ 10 ] S . M . Hull , L . G . Brunel , S . C . Heilshorn , 3D bioprinting of cell - laden hydrogels for improved biological functionality , Adv . Mater . 34 ( 2 ) ( 2022 ) e2103691 . [ 11 ] C . F . Guimaraes , et al . , Engineering hydrogel - based biomedical photonics : design , fabrication , and applications , Adv . Mater . 33 ( 23 ) ( 2021 ) e2006582 . [ 12 ] S . H . Kim , et al . , 3D bioprinted silk fibroin hydrogels for tissue engineering , Nat . Protoc . 16 ( 12 ) ( 2021 ) 5484 – 5532 . [ 13 ] F . Gao , et al . , Direct 3D printing of high strength biohybrid gradient hydrogel scaffolds for efficient repair of osteochondral defect , Adv . Funct . Mater . 28 ( 13 ) ( 2018 ) . [ 14 ] W . Dang , et al . , 3D printing of Mo - containing scaffolds with activated anabolic responses and bi - lineage bioactivities , Theranostics 8 ( 16 ) ( 2018 ) 4372 – 4392 . [ 15 ] C . Deng , et al . , Bioactive scaffolds for regeneration of cartilage and subchondral bone interface , Theranostics 8 ( 7 ) ( 2018 ) 1940 – 1955 . [ 16 ] F . Pati , et al . , Ornamenting 3D printed scaffolds with cell - laid extracellular matrix for bone tissue regeneration , Biomaterials 37 ( 2015 ) 230 – 241 . [ 17 ] X . Wang , et al . , Identification of an ultrathin osteochondral interface tissue with specific nanostructure at the human knee joint , Nano Lett . 22 ( 6 ) ( 2022 ) 2309 – 2319 . [ 18 ] T . J . Levingstone , et al . , Cell - free multi - layered collagen - based scaffolds demonstrate layer specific regeneration of functional osteochondral tissue in caprine joints , Biomaterials 87 ( 2016 ) 69 – 81 . [ 19 ] P . I . Mapp , D . A . Walsh , Mechanisms and targets of angiogenesis and nerve growth in osteoarthritis , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 8 ( 7 ) ( 2012 ) 390 – 398 . [ 20 ] A . Olsson , et al . , Tasquinimod triggers an early change in the polarization of tumor associated macrophages in the tumor microenvironment , J Immunother Cancer 3 ( 2015 ) 53 . [ 21 ] J . Jin , J . Zhang , S . Bu , Tasquinimod efficacy and S100A9 expression in glucose - treated HREC cells , Int . Ophthalmol . 42 ( 2 ) ( 2022 ) 661 – 676 . [ 22 ] J . Zhang , et al . , Osteoimmunity - regulating biomimetically hierarchical scaffold for augmented bone regeneration , Adv . Mater . 34 ( 36 ) ( 2022 ) e2202044 . [ 23 ] Z . U . Arif , et al . , Recent advances in 3D - printed polylactide and polycaprolactone - based biomaterials for tissue engineering applications , Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 218 ( 2022 ) 930 – 968 . [ 24 ] Y . Wang , et al . , Biomimetic glycopeptide hydrogel coated PCL / nHA scaffold for enhanced cranial bone regeneration via macrophage M2 polarization - induced osteo - immunomodulation , Biomaterials 285 ( 2022 ) 121538 . [ 25 ] B . J . Klotz , et al . , Gelatin - methacryloyl hydrogels : towards biofabrication - based tissue repair , Trends Biotechnol . 34 ( 5 ) ( 2016 ) 394 – 407 . [ 26 ] W . L . Dai , et al . , 3D bioprinting of heterogeneous constructs providing tissue - specific microenvironment based on host - guest modulated dynamic hydrogel bioink for osteochondral regeneration , Adv . Funct . Mater . 32 ( 23 ) ( 2022 ) . [ 27 ] L . W . Zhang , et al . , Multileveled hierarchical hydrogel with continuous biophysical and biochemical gradients for enhanced repair of full - thickness osteochondral defect , Adv . Mater . 35 ( 19 ) ( 2023 ) . [ 28 ] H . Hu , et al . , miR - 23a - 3p - abundant small extracellular vesicles released from Gelma / nanoclay hydrogel for cartilage regeneration , J . Extracell . Vesicles 9 ( 1 ) ( 2020 ) 1778883 . [ 29 ] Z . Qiao , et al . , Bioinspired stratified electrowritten fiber - reinforced hydrogel constructs with layer - specific induction capacity for functional osteochondral regeneration , Biomaterials 266 ( 2021 ) 120385 . [ 30 ] D . Wu , et al . , Exosomes Derived from bone mesenchymal stem Cells with the Stimulation of Fe 3 O 4 Nanoparticles and static magnetic field enhance wound healing through Upregulated miR - 21 - 5p , Int . J . Nanomed . 15 ( 2020 ) 7979 – 7993 . [ 31 ] Y . Han , et al . , Biomimetic injectable hydrogel microspheres with enhanced lubrication and controllable drug release for the treatment of osteoarthritis , Bioact . Mater . 6 ( 10 ) ( 2021 ) 3596 – 3607 . [ 32 ] A . Irem Demir , et al . , Comparison of 3 cell - free matrix scaffolds used to treat osteochondral lesions in a rabbit model , Am . J . Sports Med . 50 ( 5 ) ( 2022 ) 1399 – 1408 . [ 33 ] M . Rutgers , et al . , Evaluation of histological scoring systems for tissue - engineered , repaired and osteoarthritic cartilage , Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 12 – 23 . [ 34 ] C . Trapnell , et al . , Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA - seq experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks , Nat . Protoc . 7 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 562 – 578 . [ 35 ] U . Distler , et al . , Label - free quantification in ion mobility - enhanced data - independent acquisition proteomics , Nat . Protoc . 11 ( 4 ) ( 2016 ) 795 – 812 . [ 36 ] C . Ding , et al . , Regeneration of a goat femoral head using a tissue - specific , biphasic scaffold fabricated with CAD / CAM technology , Biomaterials 34 ( 28 ) ( 2013 ) 6706 – 6716 . [ 37 ] A . J . Engler , et al . , Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification , Cell 126 ( 4 ) ( 2006 ) 677 – 689 . [ 38 ] X . Liu , X . Jin , P . X . Ma , Nanofibrous hollow microspheres self - assembled from star - shaped polymers as injectable cell carriers for knee repair , Nat . Mater . 10 ( 5 ) ( 2011 ) 398 – 406 . [ 39 ] J . Li , et al . , Development and systematic characterization of GelMA / alginate / PEGDMA / xanthan gum hydrogel bioink system for extrusion bioprinting , Biomaterials 293 ( 2023 ) 121969 . [ 40 ] Y . M . Pan , et al . , Caveolin - 1 is important for nitric oxide - mediated angiogenesis in fibrin gels with human umbilical vein endothelial cells , Acta Pharmacol . Sin . 27 ( 12 ) ( 2006 ) 1567 – 1574 . [ 41 ] N . Baker , J . Sohn , R . S . Tuan , Promotion of human mesenchymal stem cell osteogenesis by PI3 - kinase / Akt signaling , and the influence of caveolin - 1 / cholesterol homeostasis , Stem Cell Res . Ther . 6 ( 2015 ) 238 . [ 42 ] N . Bandara , et al . , Molecular control of nitric oxide synthesis through eNOS and caveolin - 1 interaction regulates osteogenic differentiation of adipose - derived stem cells by modulation of Wnt / beta - catenin signaling , Stem Cell Res . Ther . 7 ( 1 ) ( 2016 ) 182 . [ 43 ] N . Sears , et al . , Fabrication of biomimetic bone grafts with multi - material 3D printing , Biofabrication 9 ( 2 ) ( 2017 ) 025020 . [ 44 ] J . Y . Liu , et al . , Chitosan - based nanofibrous membrane unit with gradient compositional and structural features for mimicking calcified layer in osteochondral matrix , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 19 ( 8 ) ( 2018 ) . [ 45 ] Y . Huang , et al . , Scaffold with natural calcified cartilage zone for osteochondral defect repair in minipigs , Am . J . Sports Med . 49 ( 7 ) ( 2021 ) 1883 – 1891 . [ 46 ] R . J . Lories , F . P . Luyten , The bone - cartilage unit in osteoarthritis , Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 7 ( 1 ) ( 2011 ) 43 – 49 . [ 47 ] J . P . St - Pierre , et al . , The incorporation of a zone of calcified cartilage improves the interfacial shear strength between in vitro - formed cartilage and the underlying substrate , Acta Biomater . 8 ( 4 ) ( 2012 ) 1603 – 1615 . [ 48 ] G . M . Cunniffe , et al . , Tissue - specific extracellular matrix scaffolds for the regeneration of spatially complex musculoskeletal tissues , Biomaterials 188 ( 2019 ) 63 – 73 . [ 49 ] S . J . Jia , et al . , Multilayered scaffold with a compact interfacial layer enhances osteochondral defect repair , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 10 ( 24 ) ( 2018 ) 20296 – 20305 . [ 50 ] X . Ding , et al . , Integrated trilayered silk fibroin scaffold for osteochondral differentiation of adipose - derived stem cells , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 6 ( 19 ) ( 2014 ) 16696 – 16705 . [ 51 ] C . Zhai , et al . , Repair of articular osteochondral defects using an integrated and biomimetic trilayered scaffold , Tissue Eng . 24 ( 21 – 22 ) ( 2018 ) 1680 – 1692 . [ 52 ] W . Liu , et al . , Rapid continuous multimaterial extrusion bioprinting , Adv . Mater . 29 ( 3 ) ( 2017 ) . [ 53 ] A . L . Rutz , et al . , A multimaterial bioink method for 3D printing tunable , cell - compatible hydrogels , Adv . Mater . 27 ( 9 ) ( 2015 ) 1607 – 1614 . [ 54 ] C . Wang , et al . , 3D printing of bone tissue engineering scaffolds , Bioact . Mater . 5 ( 1 ) ( 2020 ) 82 – 91 . [ 55 ] A . Ovsianikov , A . Khademhosseini , V . Mironov , The synergy of scaffold - based and scaffold - free tissue engineering strategies , Trends Biotechnol . 36 ( 4 ) ( 2018 ) 348 – 357 . [ 56 ] J . Lee , et al . , Directed regeneration of osteochondral tissue by hierarchical assembly of spatially organized composite spheroids , Adv . Sci . 9 ( 3 ) ( 2022 ) e2103525 . [ 57 ] Q . Y . Huang , et al . , A review of the role of cav - 1 in neuropathology and neural recovery after ischemic stroke , J . Neuroinflammation 15 ( 2018 ) . [ 58 ] Y . M . Pan , et al . , Caveolin - 1 is important for nitric oxide - mediated angiogenesis in fibrin gels with human umbilical vein endothelial cells , Acta Pharmacol . Sin . 27 ( 12 ) ( 2006 ) 1567 – 1574 . [ 59 ] C . Scotti , et al . , Stem cells for cartilage regeneration : a roadmap to the clinic , Stem Cell . Int . 2018 ( 2018 ) 7348560 . D . Wu et al .