J . Design Research , Vol . X , No . Y , xxxx 1 Copyright © 200x Inderscience Enterprises Ltd . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application in conceptual design Georgi V . Georgiev * and Yukari Nagai School of Knowledge Science , Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , 923 - 1292 , Japan E - mail : georgiev @ jaist . ac . jp E - mail : ynagai @ jaist . ac . jp * Corresponding author Toshiharu Taura Department of Mechanical Engineering , Faculty of Engineering , Kobe University , 1 - 1 Rokkodai - cho , Nada - ku , Kobe , 657 - 8501 , Japan E - mail : taura @ kobe - u . ac . jp Abstract : In this paper , we discuss the relations between the viewpoints of users and designers . The main issue in design is that the user’s and designer’s viewpoints do not integrate well . In this study , we integrate the user’s viewpoint into our new proposed design methodology by applying a meaning - based framework in conceptual design . This methodology introduces a user - derived evaluation of ‘structure of meaning elements’ ( SoME ) as part of the user’s viewpoint into the particular design phase . Furthermore , we test the proposed design methodology in a case study . The results outline the feasibility of the framework . This study reveals details of how concepts are formed in design and how concept formation can be achieved using design methodology . The significance of this study for science and practical application lies in the proposed integration of the user - derived evaluation of SoME as a step in the design methodology . Keywords : user’s viewpoint ; designer’s viewpoint ; design method ; design creativity ; conceptual design ; meanings ; search ; evaluation ; meaning elements ; meaning structures ; semantic network ; evaluation tool ; design support . Reference to this paper should be made as follows : Georgiev , G . V . , Nagai , Y . and Taura , T . ( xxxx ) ‘A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application in conceptual design’ , J . Design Research , Vol . X , No . Y , pp . 000 – 000 . Biographical notes : Georgi V . Georgiev received his MS in Mechanical Engineering from the Technical University of Sofia , Bulgaria . He received his PhD in Knowledge Science from the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 2009 . Currently , he is a Post - Doctoral Researcher at JAIST . His interests lie in design knowledge and creative thinking process in design . Yukari Nagai is currently an Associate Professor at the Graduate School of Knowledge Science , Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology . She received her PhDs from Chiba University , Japan ( 2002 ) and University of Technology , Sydney ( 2009 ) . Her research areas of interest are design creativity , design knowledge , and creative cognition . 2 G . V . Georgiev et al . Toshiharu Taura is a Professor at the Graduate School of Engineering , Kobe University , Japan . He received his DrEng from the University of Tokyo in 1991 . He is currently working on several research projects that focus on the creative thought processes in both engineering and industrial design , including interdisciplinary aspects of design science . 1 Introduction In this paper , we discuss the relations and the differences between user’s and designer’s viewpoints , which , in other words , is the stance adopted by the user and designer , respectively , towards artefacts . 1 . 1 User’s and designer’s viewpoints – main issue A number of studies have investigated the user’s viewpoint towards designed artefacts ( Krippendorff , 2006 ; Petiot and Yannou , 2004 ; You and Chen , 2007 ) with the aim of incorporating the findings in developing methodologies for designing artefacts ( Boess and Kanis , 2008 ; Horvath , 2008 ; van Rompay , 2008 ) . This is to aid efforts in integrating the user’s viewpoint into the designer’s viewpoint . The main issue here is that the user’s and designer’s viewpoints do not integrate well ( Boess and Kanis , 2008 ; Krippendorff , 2006 ) . In many practical cases , this integration is not achieved . In engineering design , the evaluation is too far distant from design methodology . The product and industrial design also lack such mutual integration . Further , this integration appears to be difficult and seems to pose as a long - term problem . The aim to understand the user’s viewpoint is evident in many research efforts ; however , the proposed solutions are considered to be incongruent with the design methods ( Demirbilek and Sener 2003 ; Hsiao and Chen , 1997 ; You and Chen , 2007 ) . In this paper , we propose the integration of a part of the user’s viewpoint into a design methodology and we test the methodology in a case study . Our approach is oriented towards conceptual design . The paper is structured as follows . Section 2 defines the main problem . Section 3 discusses the limitations of the existing research with regard to the observed problem . Sections 4 and 5 introduce the goal and method of the research . Sections 6 and 7 introduce the proposed design methodology and the case study testing of the methodology . Finally , Sections 8 and 9 discuss the methodology and the issues in the research to be resolved in the future . 2 Definition of the problem After pointing out the main problems with regard to the user’s and designer’s viewpoints in the previous section , in this section , we focus on the problem and discuss a possible approach in connection with the design methodology ( Figure 1 ) . As shown in Figure 1 , the user’s viewpoint has to be integrated into the designer’s viewpoint and then conveyed in the design methodology . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 3 A gap exists between the viewpoints of the user and designer . Furthermore , it is very difficult to convey the user’s viewpoint in the design methodology . This is quite evident in areas such as conventional engineering design , where the methods for taking the user’s viewpoint into account are not able to directly connect with the design methodology ( Pahl et al . , 2007 ) . The main problem can be summarised as how the user’s viewpoint needs to be integrated into the design methodology . A possible approach to this problem is to integrate a part of the user’s viewpoint directly into the design methodology , thus bridging the gap between the two . Figure 1 Problems with regard to the user’s and designer’s viewpoints in design methodology ( see online version for colours ) 3 Research on user’s and designer’s viewpoints In this section , we discuss the user’s and designer’s viewpoints and the limitations of the previous studies . 3 . 1 Previous approaches Different methodologies investigate the user’s viewpoint or user’s personal preferences . These methodologies quantitatively express the user’s viewpoint in the form of evaluations . An example of such a methodology is the semantic differential ( SD ) method , based on the work of Osgood et al . ( 1957 ) . The SD method focuses on the evaluation of the connotative meanings of designs . Research based on this method has been carried out in different studies . For example , Hsiao and Chen ( 1997 ) proposed a semantic recognition and rule - oriented approach for developing a product design . The user’s viewpoint has been studied as the meaning that an artefact has for the user . Such approaches , where the focus is on the user’s viewpoint , are product semantics ( Boess and Kanis , 2008 ; Butter , 1989 ; Krippendorff , 1989 ) and affordances ( Boess and Kanis , 2008 ; van Rompay , 2008 ; You and Chen , 2007 ) . Product experience bridges product semantics and affordances from the perspective of the user’s apprehension towards the product . Boess and Kanis ( 2008 ) focus on instrumental and denotative product use ; they opine on the consideration that designers can integrate the users’ attribution of meaning with regard to product use into their design methodology . They also outline the problems of product semantics and affordance approaches . For example , clearly identifiable affordances or semantics cannot be designed reliably in real world situations . This view is based on the assumption that the meaning is made in an interaction and not prior to it . In other words , the situatedness of the product use is central . 4 G . V . Georgiev et al . Studies on product expression discuss relationships between the concrete ( product’s actual features ) and the symbolic ( product’s perceived expression ) ( van Rompay , 2008 ) . Van Rompay demonstrates an interactional , embodied approach to product expression . The insights allow designers to relate the abstract and difficult notions to their own experiences while translating the idea into form . The impression - based meanings of a design have been researched using different approaches . These approaches emphasise the user’s requirements for a user - oriented design . This refers to the user’s subjective interpretations of the product based on his / her personal impressions , that is , the user’s cognitive interpretation of the designed product . The emotional design approach manifested from this impression - based perspective . Crilly et al . ( 2004 ) highlight the users’ responses as a part of the communication process , distinguishing between cognitive , affective and behavioural responses . Norman ( 2004 ) highlights the interaction between affect , emotion , and cognition . An emotional response to a product design that agrees with its efficiency is a major attribute for a product’s success . Norman also relates this view with the perceived functional use of the products from the perspective of visual impression . This approach foresees design as a trigger of emotional response ( Demirbilek and Sener , 2003 ) and it could be used to design a product in order to communicate with the user at an emotional level . The product semantics approach , proposed by Krippendorff ( 1989 , 2006 ) , focuses on the user’s subjective impression of the product’s meanings . This approach takes into account the relationship between the user’s cognitive models and the perceivable features of the concerned product . By a sequence of activities , semantic considerations are incorporated into the design process . Some of the activities include establishing the semantics to be communicated , outlining the attributes to be expressed , and searching for the manifestations to project the semantic considerations with regard to shape ( Krippendorff , 1989 ) . This approach is centred on symbolic associations and meanings and is governed by the design features during the design process . 3 . 2 Conceptual design Most of the aforementioned approaches focus on the main design stages or problem - solving perspective . The problem solved by the design need not be a pressing societal requirement , but rather a perceived gap in a user’s experience ( Ulrich , 2007 ) . In recent times , studies focusing on creativity ( Dorst and Cross , 2001 ; Jin and Li , 2007 ) have shifted their focus on the processes of concept generation . These processes include concept processing and combination , which are typical in the early stages of design . Different design theories define ‘concept’ . For example , general design theory ( GDT ) , which has its basis in an axiomatic and mathematical approach to the design process , proposes a design paradigm to represent how humans operate to produce a new entity from the attributes of the existing entities ( Yoshikawa , 1981 ) . In GDT , the entity concept ( natural and artifactual objects ) is modelled as an element , and the abstract concept ( function and attribute ) , as a class ( subset of elements ) ; these concepts are used as design knowledge in topological space . Furthermore , GDT defines the design process as a mapping from function space , where the design requirement is described , to attribute space , where the design solution is sought . Studies on GDT have derived numerous theorems that can explain the characteristics of design knowledge and the design process ( Tomiyama and Yoshikawa , 1987 ) . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 5 Galle ( 1999 ) proposes the design paradigm as a manifestation of a design representation . Designing itself is defined as the production of design representations ; the latter notion – design representation – is analysed in the context of the artefact production process . The definition of ‘design representation’ is formulated in terms of human agents and their actions and ideas , that is , ideas of things or actions intended to exist and occur in the future . The ontological approach is widely adopted in the field of design in order to conceptualise and obtain knowledge in the domain . This approach is used to support functional meanings in conceptual design . Such a methodology has been described by Horvath ( 1998 ) , who focuses on the modelling and representation of concepts for computational support in the design process ; Horvath elaborates on the ontology theory for formalising design concepts . Computer - aided innovation is a systematic approach to improve designer creativity and problem - solving capabilities ( Cascini , 2004 ) . For example , such tools manage functional models as product representation techniques . Semantic processing technology is already being used for enriching the knowledge bases of such systems . Shah et al . ( 2000 ) and Shah and Vargas - Hernandez ( 2002 ) implemented the objective measures of idea effectiveness . They developed outcome - based metrics from the point of view of both design and cognitive psychology , thus contributing to the identification of key ideation components of design methods . The foundation and taxonomy of questioning strategies in design constitute the driving forces for the evolution of meanings in the design process . Aurisicchio et al . ( 2006 ) , Eris ( 2004 ) , and Wang and Zeng ( 2009 ) deal with questions about meanings in design , the relationship between meanings and design , and ways of representing the meanings . For example , Eris shows a class of ‘generative design questions’ ( GDQ ) , which are characteristic of design thinking . The conceptual duality between these questions and decisions are deeply ingrained in the design process . The developed question - centric design thinking model illustrates the integration of the user’s requirements into design concepts through GDQs ( associated with divergent thinking ) and the integration of those concepts into design decisions through deep - reasoning questions ( associated with divergent thinking ) ( Eris , 2004 ) . However , these methodologies suffer from poor connectivity with the design methodology ; this gives rise to the question of how this gap in the design methodology can be addressed . We can summarise the main problem as follows : the methods that take the user’s viewpoints into account cannot be integrated into the design methodology ( they are often contradictory ) . What accounts for this gap ? The user’s viewpoints have various limitations . The following are some of the factors contributing to the problem : • The approaches for obtaining the user’s viewpoint use methods that are different from those used in design methodologies . • The methods for obtaining the user’s viewpoint cannot achieve their purpose in a timely manner vis - à - vis design methodologies . • The user’s viewpoint is from a top - down perspective , while the designer’s viewpoint is from a bottom - up perspective . One can say that they are for a different order of understanding ( Krippendorff , 2006 ) . By analysing the highlighted shortcomings of the existing approaches , a summary of the problematic areas and possible approaches can be outlined . One possible approach will 6 G . V . Georgiev et al . facilitate the integration of the user’s and designer’s viewpoints at the design level in the form of the user - derived evaluation methodology , rather than integrate the user’s viewpoint into that of the designer . The evaluation is necessary in order to correctly ascertain the aspects of the designed artefact . In particular , the evaluation is done with methods different than those used in the design methodology . 3 . 3 The study’s approach The importance of conceptual design lies in the aspect of idea generation and the fact that the idea can be viewed as a ‘prototype creation’ ( Coyne et al . , 1990 ) in industrial design or an ‘original design’ ( Pahl et al . , 2007 ) in product design . In the field of engineering design , as the design processes are represented in a sequential model ( Pahl et al . , 2007 ) , the early phase of the design process – the original design at the conceptual level – is the most creative part in the design process . Many recent studies have focused on conceptual design and concept formation ( Mougenot et al . , 2008 ; Segers et al . 2005 ) . The initial conceptualisation in design allows the integration of the evaluation from the user’s viewpoint because of the following reasons : 1 the concept formation in the conceptual design stage allows flexibility in the ideas regarding the design concept 2 the processes in conceptual design predefine further design endeavours . Therefore , the approach of this study focuses on concept formation in conceptual design . If the evaluation method ( from the viewpoint of the user’s evaluation ) is integrated into the design process we will be able to clarify the gap between the user’s and designer’s viewpoints . That is to say , we will be able to bridge the gap by including the evaluation as a step in the design methodology . 4 Research goals In order to propose a design methodology for bridging the user’s and designer’s viewpoints for conceptual design ; we need to explore what the implications are of integrating the user’s evaluation in the design process . The aims of this study are twofold : 1 to propose a design methodology that integrates user - derived evaluation in conceptual design 2 to test in a case study the proposed design methodology for conceptual design . 5 Research method In this section , we integrate the user’s viewpoint into the design methodology by applying a meaning - based framework in concept formation at the conceptual design stage . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 7 5 . 1 Framework of concept formation ‘Meaning’ can be defined as what an artefact represents for the user . In more particular terms , the meaning element is the most basic part of the meaning . The ‘structure of meaning elements’ ( SoME ) is the relation between the various meaning elements of an artefact . Therefore , the meaning of the artefact includes meaning elements and the SoME ( see Figure 2 ) . In this study , we explore concept formation as the process of building the SoME . The framework of this study is built on the idea that the design can be conceived as the creation of the SoME by the designer . This is a dynamic process which leads to the creation of the SoME . This framework corresponds to the concept formation process in conceptual design . Figure 2 Understanding conceptual design as the creation of the ‘SoME’ using the example of a beetle car ( see online version for colours ) In this paper , we refer to the term ‘concept’ as a design concept with an abstract notion . The framework of meaning elements is derived from the understanding of ‘notion’ as ‘an abstract idea or mental image , which corresponds to some distinct entity or class of entities , or to its essential features , or determines the application of a term ( especially a predicate ) , and thus plays a part in the use of reason or language’ ( Gärdenfors , 2000 ) . It should be pointed out that the SoME of an artefact is perceived as the ‘meaning’ of the artefact as a whole . A set of single meaning elements are put together in a way that it forms a particular whole meaning of an artefact . In other words , during the conceptual design , the meaning of the artefact – a beetle car in this case – is structured from the meaning elements of ‘car’ , ‘friend’ , ‘ladybug’ , and ‘cute’ to the meaning elements of ‘eco’ , ‘difference’ , ‘car’ , and ‘happy’ , and the structure of the latter constructs the meaning of the whole entity , that is , ‘beetle car’ . The whole meaning of the artefact can be represented as ‘a different car that is ecological and which makes me happy’ . The conceptual design is a process of exploration and evaluation of the meaning elements as a part of the SoME . The conceptual design results in a design concept with a structured meaning in the form of the beetle car . This framework refers to the SoME in a sense that is different from the structure of meaning discussed by Osgood et al . ( 1957 ) . While Osgood et al . refer to the structure of meaning as the way these meanings are mentally represented and hierarchically 8 G . V . Georgiev et al . connected , the framework of the SoME in this study refers to the way meanings ( meaning elements ) are mentally represented and structured in conceptual design . 5 . 2 Semantic network tools Nevertheless , the process of structuring non - structured meaning elements into a whole design concept and its meaning should be clarified . This can be done through a semantic network method . In this framework , we need tools to create effective abstract representations in the form of concepts . These concepts represent meaning elements derived from or expressed in the designed product . However , words can represent meaning elements at the lexical level . Moreover , concepts and words can be represented by semantic networks . The concept of semantic networks originates in the field of psychology [ Boden , ( 2004 ) , p . 107 ] . Semantic networks depict human memory as an associative system wherein a single idea can lead to many other ideas . As computational structures , these networks represent the field of meaning and can be used to model conceptual associations ( Boden , 2004 ) . In the domain of design support , there already exists research in which the concept of semantic network has been used . Segers ( 2004 ) uses a semantic network , that is , WordNet ( Miller et al . , 1990 ) , to understand how words contribute to the enhancement of creativity and help break the designers’ mental fixations in the early stages of architectural design . The feedback provided by the semantic network was found to be useful for increasing the number of ideas and concepts generated by a designer . Word graphs ( Segers et al . 2005 ) showed the effectiveness of language stimuli for idea generation in design . Chiu and Shu ( 2007 , 2008 ) investigate a different aspect and use a language - based stimulus method for concept generation . Their work discusses verb - based stimuli in different engineering design situations and their role in concept generation . These studies have proven the importance of semantic networks in the stages of conceptual design . In a different approach , semantic network was used to analyse and evaluate the ‘language of design’ in design team conversations ( Dong , 2006 ) . The results showed high accuracy with regard to human evaluations and were also effective for conducting analysis in real time . This study shows the potential of a natural language processing approach in analysing the performance of a design team . A tool that analyses and evaluates the meaning elements in design should have two requirements : it should allow searches and facilitate the evaluations of meaning elements . The tool used in the aforementioned studies , WordNet ( Miller et al . , 1990 ) , represents knowledge in the form of a structured interconnected semantic network dictionary that can be used for design support . The WordNet database satisfies all the basic requirements for the implementation of a tool that uses such a methodology . 5 . 3 Evaluation from the user’s viewpoint in design methodology Existing studies ( Georgiev et al . 2010 ) have used an approach towards the user’s viewpoint which was developed on the basis of considered discovery of meaning in design examples . The 86 participants indicated all the meanings they could derive from the provided design examples . A seven - point scale , ranging from ‘poor’ to ‘excellent’ , was used independently by each participant to evaluate the design examples . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 9 The indicated meanings were explored as meaning elements . The evaluation scores and the meaning elements were further analysed . The results of the path analysis showed that the average degree of relations between the meaning elements , measured with a semantic network , positively contributes to the evaluation of the design example . In other words , the closer the relations between the indicated meaning elements are , the higher is the evaluation of the provided design examples . This result gives the idea for the integration of an evaluation into the design methodology . This average degree of relations between the meaning elements is described as the main evaluation method in the next chapter of this study . We are now posed with the question of how these findings can be used to develop a new design methodology . This study addresses this question . Further , we develop a design methodology for implementing the findings and defining it as the SoME . The SoME represents the process of constructing the meaning in conceptual design . Studies have observed the implementation of exploration ( search ) methods in conceptual design ( de Vries et al . , 2004 ; Segers et al . 2005 ) . The original idea of the current research is to complement the exploration method with evaluation , which is based on the user’s viewpoint . 5 . 4 Exploration and generation of meaning elements The exploration of meaning elements can be enhanced by the use of concepts with similar meanings . Conceptually connected words , for example , word graphs , facilitate the exploration and idea generation in conceptual design ( de Vries et al . , 2004 ) . The generation of concepts is based on the relation between the hierarchy and processing of concepts . The hierarchy of concepts represents human judgement with regard to why those concepts are judged as dissimilar . For instance , the similarity of concepts has an effect on the generation of new concepts ( Wilkenfeld and Ward , 2001 ; Wisniewski , 1997 ) . 6 Design methodology In this section , we propose a design methodology for conceptual design by integrating user - derived evaluation . From the viewpoint of creativity , the processes of exploration , synthesis , searching and finding ( Finke , 1996 ; Nagai and Taura , 2006 ) of meaning elements are critical for design achievements . For the purpose of clarifying these processes we refine the ‘Geneplore model’ of Finke ( 1996 ) , as shown in Figure 3 . The model represents creative design process regarding meaning elements , adding the perspective of design methodology . The processes of generation and exploration are related to the processes of the search , judgement and evaluation of meaning elements . The components of the ‘Geneplore model’ are shown in italics . Generation and explorations are related by focusing or expanding concept processes and are restricted by the constraints of the design task . Thus far , the search and evaluation of meaning elements in the conceptual stage of design are dependent solely on the ability of the designer . Often , these abilities are not sufficient for an objective search and evaluation of meaning elements ; moreover , they are not entirely effective for conceptual design . Therefore , support for the designer’s 10 G . V . Georgiev et al . personal thinking process is essential . The processes involved in the aforementioned model need to be elaborated in design methodology . Figure 3 Model based on the ‘Geneplore model’ ( see online version for colours ) Source : Developed from Finke ( 1996 ) 6 . 1 SoME – framework considerations Here , we describe the proposed design methodology of the SoME adopted during conceptual design , which is the focus of this study . Figure 4 The steps in the developed design methodology which focuses on meaning elements ( see online version for colours ) The design methodology employs the following procedures for the searches and evaluations of meaning elements ( Figure 4 ) . Stage A involves the set of meaning elements derived from the design task ; Stage B entails building the SoME using searches and evaluations ; and Stage C involves the generation of the SoME . The steps are as follows : • deriving the set , which is the starting point of the initial meaning elements that relate to the design task and the abstracted meaning elements from the task ( A ) • performing searches with these meaning elements by using a semantic network ( B1 ) • visualising a semantic network of related ‘searched - for’ meaning elements ( example is provided in Figure 5 ) ( B2 ) A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 11 • the designer selects new meaning elements from this neighbourhood network ( B3 ) • evaluating new meaning elements based on the average degree of relations between the meaning elements ( convergence ) ( B4 ) 6 . 2 Search method The basic aim of the search for meaning elements ( B1 ) is to find more applicable meaning elements on the basis of those of the input , which is judged by the designer . The semantic network WordNet release 2 . 1 ( 2006 ) is used for the exploration of meaning elements associated with the concept that was initially subjected to the search . The result of the WordNet search facilitates the designer’s choice of meaning elements and his / her search for an adequate meaning element or concept . Figure 5 Visual representation of the semantic network for the word ‘meaning’ ( see online version for colours ) Such a search can be conducted by using the Visuwords 2 . 02 ( 2008 ) visualisation ( B2 ) of WordNet , as shown in Figure 5 . This search is limited to the representation of the network neighbourhood of the word ; that is , the search is limited to words that are directly connected to the word that is initially typed into the search field . Nodes represent words ( meaning elements ) and the different connections represent different dependencies between the words . The designer judges and selects the meaning elements from this visual representation that are evaluated with the help of the method described in the next section . 6 . 3 Evaluation method In order to deal with the SoME , the degrees of relation and convergence are adopted as the factors of the structure . We further describe these proposed objective measures . The process of evaluating the SoME ( B4 ) is based on the measures implemented in WordNet : : Similarity software release 2 . 01 ( 2006 ) . Similarity by path is the most general , and it is based on the principle of counting the edges between concepts ( Pedersen et al . , 2004 ) . It is a relatively simple measure in WordNet’s noun hierarchy . Similarity can be defined as follows : 12 G . V . Georgiev et al . The similarity S is a real number between 0 and 1 as defined in equation ( 1 ) . With m 1 denoting meaning 1 and m 2 denoting meaning 2 , the path p is measured in steps in the WordNet database : 1 2 1 ( , ) S m m p = ( 1 ) The measure evaluates the degree of similarity between two meaning elements . Although it has the advantage of being relatively simple , its use is restricted to nouns and ‘is – a’ relations . Our methodology uses this measure as the evaluation criteria ( B5 ) of the set of meaning elements . Since similarity refers to the degree of similarity between a pair of words , it can be used as a comparative criterion between the word pairs . Thus , convergence , R , can be defined as the evaluation of the similarity of a limited set of meaning elements , defined as the average value [ equation ( 2 ) ] of all meaning similarities , S , by the shortest path in the WordNet database ( n is the number of meaning relations between individual meaning elements ) : 1 1 n i i R S n = = ∑ ( 2 ) This research uses the semantic network WordNet to search for meaning elements and the WordNet : : Similarity tool for evaluating the degree of relations between the meaning elements . WordNet is used as an explicit complex knowledge - based representation of the human mind . The convergence is adopted as the objective measure of the SoME . In order to understand the processes , we investigate the applicability of the proposed methodology in conceptual design . To break down the process into its basic elements , we need to focus on the simplest processing activities associated with the meaning elements . 7 Case study The case study was carried out as a test of the proposed design methodology . 7 . 1 Method of the case study The method used in our study comprised the following steps : • Conducting an observation study on the SoME using the methodology described above . A ‘within - subject design’ with a single subject was used with the aim of conducting an in - depth analysis to identify the features of the subjects’ activity . The variables include measurements taken continually from the subject . • Evaluating the steps and results of the SoME process and the further use of the SoME in the conception process . The goal is to integrate this structuring process into the designers’ thinking process . The case study uses language stimuli , without displaying pictures , because language stimuli are used in the idea generation process in design ( Chiu and Shu , 2007 ; Segers et al . 2005 ) . The process begins when the subject is assigned the word pairs and then tasked A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 13 to design a new concept ; the combined words are considered to enhance the creative ideas in design . For example , Wilkenfeld and Ward ( 2001 ) used language stimuli based on experimental techniques for eliciting mental imagery in creative invention tasks . The approach is based on creative cognition ( Finke , 1996 ) . The conceptual stage of design is associated with the cognitive models of similarity judgements and idea generation . From the viewpoint of creativity , the concept creation phase in design is considered as a core process of design thinking . One designer who had graduated from engineering design major and worked in the field of engineering and machine design for three years participated in the experiment . We focused on the SoME in conceptual design , while elaborating on meaning elements derived from nouns . We used meaning element pairs with different degrees of relations . 7 . 2 Procedure The procedure was as following : • The designer was provided with instructions and training on how to use the system ( 20 minutes ) . • Each task was explained to the participant ( five minutes for the explanation of each task ) . • Four design sessions were carried out in the presence of a guide . Each design session lasted for a maximum of 25 minutes ; this involved the participant using the system and a sketch conception session . All the sessions were video and audio recorded for further analysis . 7 . 3 Conceptual task The instructions provided to the participant were as follows . Design a product or come up with a creative idea by doing the following : • Use the word pair ( different for every session ) . • Use the system to explore these words to help develop your idea or design . You can make as many choices as you like and can perform as many searches as you desire . On request , you will be provided with feedback ( evaluation ) on the idea . • Verbalise your design process as much as possible ; in other words , state your ideas and choices . Write down and describe your idea in detail using sketches and comments . The input meaning element pairs ( word pairs ) are shown in Table 1 . The selected pairs had different degrees of relations . We took two such pairs from the results of the analysis carried out in other studies ( Georgiev et al . 2010 ) , while the other two were taken from Wilkenfeld and Ward ( 2001 ) . The pairs ranged from being highly similar ( ‘computer’ – ’ski’ ) to highly dissimilar ( ‘violin’ – ’sea’ ) . The order of the sessions was as numbered in column 1 of Table 1 . The word pair in Session 1 was helicopter – blanket ( Wilkenfeld and Ward , 2001 ) . The resulting design was described as follows : ‘Helicopter cargo net can be made as a blanket using tangled threads and knots . It is easy to produce and very strong’ ( Figure 6 ) . 14 G . V . Georgiev et al . Table 1 Similarity measures of the meaning element pairs used in the case study Relations between meaning element pairs Meaning element pairs Convergence ( value of similarity measure by path range : ~ 0 – 1 ) Classification of degree of relation 4 Computer – ski 0 . 2 High 3 Cat – piano 0 . 1429 Intermediate 1 Helicopter – blanket 0 . 1 Low 2 Violin – sea 0 . 0769 Very low Figure 6 Sketches of the conceptual designs in the four sessions A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 15 The word pair in Session 2 was violin – sea ( taken from the results of an earlier analysis ( Georgiev et al . 2010 ) . Idea at the early stage of design : ‘Wave - shaped chin rest’ . The resulting design : ‘Design of a wave - shaped violin with different elements also shaped like a wave’ ( Figure 6 ) . The word pair in Session 3 was cat – piano ( taken from a previous analysis , Georgiev et al . , 2010 ) . Idea at the early stage of design : ‘Tale - shaped note holder’ . The resulting design : ‘Cat - shaped educational table for kids . Have keys that play explanations for different aspects of cats’ behaviour , habits’ ( Figure 6 ) . The word pair in Session 4 was computer – ski ( Wilkenfeld and Ward , 2001 ) . Idea at the early stage of design : ‘Programmed practice for skiing or snowboarding’ . The resulting design : ‘Ski device for an impaired person , controlled by a computer . Person is in a bobsleigh - like seat and is using a computer to direct the ski’ ( Figure 6 ) . The results were analysed as follows . The designer’s process in the four cases is outlined in Table 2 . The meaning elements indicated in bold were used in the evaluation , and the meaning elements shown in italics were attributed by the designer and were independent from the system . Table 2 Analysis of the process Meaning element pairs Main steps involved in finding meaning elements 4 Computer – ski Computer (cid:198) Computer (cid:198) Computer (cid:198) Computer Ski (cid:198) Water ski (cid:198) Wedel (cid:198) Ski / Disabled 3 Cat – piano Cat (cid:198) Whip (cid:198) Sound CAD / Tail Cat shape (cid:198) Cat - shaped Piano (cid:198) Piano keyboard (cid:198) Keyboard (cid:198) Key Holder 1 Helicopter – blanket Helicopter (cid:198) Vane / Cargo Sky hook Hook Helicopter (cid:198) Hook Blanket (cid:198) Shield Blanket Net 2 Violin – sea Violin (cid:198) Chinrest (cid:198) Chin (cid:198) Shape (cid:198) Shape Sea (cid:198) Wave (cid:198) Wave Table 3 provides a quantified summary of the processes involved . The analysis of the results is provided in Table 4 . The resulting design ideas were evaluated by two experts on the criteria of practicality and originality ( the first is concerned with actual use rather than theoretical possibilities , and the second is concerned with the quality of being new and original and not derived from something else ) ( Table 4 ) . This method has been used in other studies as well ( Finke , 1996 ) . Using the degree of relations calculated in Table 4 , Figure 7 shows a comparison between the convergence of the initial and resulting designs with regard to the meaning elements . A lower convergence of meaning elements in the initial designs resulted in a higher convergence of the various meaning elements in the proposed design . The difference between the convergence of the task and that of the resulting designs is greater with the lower convergence of the meaning element pairs of the tasks . 16 G . V . Georgiev et al . Table 3 Summary of processes Meaning element pairs Total time ( to the final idea ) min Number of words explored ( unique words ) Number of accepted ideas ( rejected ideas ) Number of requested feedback 4 Computer – ski 26 ( 17 ) 15 ( 10 ) 2 ( 2 ) 1 3 Cat – piano 21 ( 20 ) 10 ( 7 ) 2 ( 4 ) 2 1 Helicopter – blanket 10 ( 9 ) 6 ( 6 ) 1 ( 1 ) 0 2 Violin – sea 17 ( 7 ) 5 ( 4 ) 2 ( 1 ) 1 Table 4 Analysis of results Meaning element pairs Originality of the idea ( evaluated by experts on a scale of 1 – 5 ) Practicality of the idea ( evaluated by experts on a scale of 1 – 5 ) Task ( initial ) convergence of meaning element pairs Convergence of immediate meaning elements 4 Computer – ski 2 4 . 5 0 . 2 0 . 2 3 Cat – piano 4 . 5 4 . 5 0 . 1429 0 . 2 1 Helicopter – blanket 1 . 5 3 . 5 0 . 1 0 . 1429 2 Violin – sea 3 . 5 3 . 5 0 . 0769 0 . 1667 Meaning element pairs Convergence of rejected design ideas ( if applicable ) Convergence of resulting design idea Change ( task and resulting ) 4 Computer – ski 0 . 2 0 . 15 – 0 . 05 3 Cat – piano 0 . 1667 0 . 2 + 0 . 057 1 Helicopter – blanket - 0 . 3333 + 0 . 233 2 Violin – sea 0 . 0769 0 . 25 + 0 . 173 Figure 7 Convergence of the meaning elements of tasks and the resulting designs in four sessions ( see online version for colours ) A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 17 8 Discussions 8 . 1 Proposed design methodology In this study , we integrated a method of user - derived evaluation of the SoME in the design methodology . This new methodology bridges the gap between the user’s viewpoint and the design method . The user - derived evaluation is integrated as a part the design methodology in conceptual design . Therefore , the originality of this study lies in the basic ideas about the proposed integration of the user’s evaluation as a step in the design methodology . 8 . 2 Case study The case study tests the proposed design methodology in conceptual design . The conceptual design was tested as the SoME and led to successful design concept formation . The case study is limited in terms of the number of formed concepts and elaborated tools . However , as a test , the methodology allowed the formation of the design concept with the aid of an integrated user - derived evaluation . The design methodology is feasible as a tool for computer - aided concept formation . 8 . 3 General discussion The case study reveals the processes of the SoME through the use of a semantic network database and the measures of the relations of meaning elements . In these key stages , the designer deals with the meaning elements in an explicit and systematic manner . The designer creates the SoME at the design conceptual level . In other words , the design process is expressed as a process involving the building of a structure from related meaning elements . The dissimilar concepts are regarded as being connected to creativity ( Finke , 1996 ; Nagai and Taura , 2006 ; Wisniewski , 1997 ) . Thus , the methodology might aid the exploration process involved in the creativity by providing feedback on the convergence . The utility of the existing visual representation is limited by its general features . On two occasions during the sessions , the designer reported that the graph contained too much information . Therefore , excluding some of the information might improve the exploration process . Adding features that stimulate the processes in conceptual design ( providing suggestions by comparing the shapes of the two meaning elements and using ‘shape of’ constructions , e . g . , ‘cat shaped piano’ ) can positively influence the design . However , the results indicated that the evaluation was successfully integrated into the design methodology . There are certain differences between this study and other related ones . Segers et al . ( 2005 ) showed that word stimuli affect designers in the early stages of architectural design . Word graphs were evaluated as being helpful in breaking the designers’ mental fixations and enhancing creativity . In our study , we used pre - designated word pairs along with word graph generation . Chiu and Shu ( 2007 ) focused on verb stimuli in predefined tasks . Verb stimuli have been successfully used to solve functional problem statements . In another study , Chiu and Shu ( 2008 ) showed that conceptual stimuli with opposite relations played a role in solving functional problems . Thus , we can state that verb stimuli contribute to functional 18 G . V . Georgiev et al . problem - solving tasks . Action concepts also play an important role in the creative design process ( Nagai et al . , 2006 ) . Breaking down the process into its basic elements allowed us to focus on the simplest processing activities associated with the meaning elements . In other words , we can correspond the view that the SoME as congruent with basic theories of creative design , for example , GDT ( Yoshikawa , 1981 ) . Our study defines only the meaning elements and the relationships between them , but not the task , which is why we focus on nouns . Various studies have outlined the importance of the conceptual processing of nouns for the generation of creative ideas in the early stages of design ( Finke , 1996 ; Nagai and Taura , 2006 ; Wilkenfeld and Ward , 2001 ; Wisniewski , 1997 ) . For example , the analysis of nouns in existing research indicates that nouns are associated with the performance of design teams ( Mabogunje and Leifer , 1997 ) . Noun assessment was shown to be a possible measure of performance in the design process . 9 Conclusions and open issues This study introduced a formal approach to explore and evaluate the SoME in conceptual design . This approach integrates an evaluation from the user’s perspective into the design methodology intended for conceptual design . The results increase the possibility of aiding the designer in constructing the SoME . Furthermore , these results provide suggestions for the development of a support method that focuses on the conceptual design process . Such a support system can aid the formation of concept of the design by providing dynamic feedback of meaning elements with intended SoME . This approach facilitates the understanding of the underlying creative processes at the conceptual design stage . The creation of meaning structures complements our knowledge of the role of dissimilar concepts for the creativity of the created design concepts , by adding a viewpoint not only in the initial stages but also to the processes appearing in the particular design phase . This is a step towards our comprehension and enhancement of creative processes in the early design stage . The significance of this study for science and practical application lies in the proposed integration of the user - derived evaluation as a step in the design methodology . This study reveals details of how concepts are formed in design and how this can be achieved with design methodology . The approach is not limited to a specific area of design or a certain type of conceptual design task . However , this initial exploration of the SoME in conceptual design ( the design phase from the beginning to the formation of the concept of design ) needs to be further investigated , and the tools involved in this process need to be further developed . The proposed method has several foreseeable limitations with regard to the complexity of the designed artefacts and SoME involved . First , the approach is only applicable to the design of relatively simple artefacts , that is , in the case of non - interrelated SoME ; therefore , the scale of the SoME has a limitation . Further , the approach of the SoME is a restrictive one . It is possible that humans in real design situations are more dynamic . Further research needs to be conducted to develop an extensive research method and to provide support to designers with regard to both functional - based and impression - based meanings , which are not based solely on nouns . Furthermore , the support of product design necessarily involves ( and considering its functional aspect , A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 19 possibly , should focus on ) the role of verbs and adjectives in the formation of design concepts . References Aurisicchio , M . , Bracewell , R . H . and Wallace , K . M . ( 2006 ) ‘Characterising in detail the information requests of engineering designers’ , Paper presented at the ASME IDETC’06 , 10 – 13 September 2006 , Philadelphia , USA . Boden , M . ( 2004 ) The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , Routledge , London . Boess , S . and Kanis , H . ( 2008 ) ‘Meaning in product use : a design perspective’ , in Schifferstein , H . and Hekkert , P . ( Eds . ) : Product Experience , Elsevier . Butter , R . ( 1989 ) ‘Putting theory into practice : an application of product semantics to transportation design’ , Design Issues , Spring , Vol . 5 , No . 2 , pp . 51 – 67 . Cascini , G . ( 2004 ) ‘State of the art and trends of computer aided innovation tools , towards the integration within the product development cycle’ , in R . Jacquart ( Ed . ) : Building the Information Society , Kluwer Academy Publishers , Dordrecht . Chiu , I . and Shu , L . ( 2007 ) ‘Using language as related stimuli for concept generation’ , Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , Vol . 21 , No . 2 , pp . 103 – 121 . Chiu , I . and Shu , L . ( 2008 ) ‘Effects of dichotomous lexical stimuli in concept generation’ , Paper presented at the ASME IDETC / CIE’08 , 3 – 6 August 2008 , New York , USA . Coyne , R . D . , Roseman , M . A . , Radford , A . D . , Balachandran , M . and Gero , J . S . ( 1990 ) Knowledge - Based Design Systems , Addison - Wesley , New York . Crilly , N . , Moultrie , J . and Clarkson , P . ( 2004 ) ‘Seeing things : consumer response to the visual domain in product design’ , Design Studies , Vol . 25 , No . 6 , pp . 547 – 577 . de Vries , B . , Segers , N . , Jessurun , A . and Achten , H . ( 2004 ) ‘Word graphs in architectural design’ , in Gero , J . S . ( Ed . ) : Proceedings International Conference on Design Computing and Cognition , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , pp . 541 – 556 . Demirbilek , O . and Sener , B . ( 2003 ) ‘Product design , semantics and emotional response’ , Ergonomics , Vol . 46 , Nos . 13 – 14 , pp . 1346 – 1360 . Dong , A . ( 2006 ) ‘Concept formation as knowledge accumulation : a computational linguistics study’ , Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , Vol . 20 , No . 1 , pp . 35 – 53 . Dorst , K . and Cross , N . ( 2001 ) ‘Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem - solution’ , Design Studies , Vol . 22 , No . 5 , pp . 425 – 437 . Eris , O . ( 2004 ) Effective Inquiry for innovative engineering design , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Stanford University . Finke , R . ( 1996 ) ‘Imagery , creativity and emergent structure’ , Consciousness and Cognition , Vol . 5 , No . 3 , September 1996 , pp . 381 – 393 . Galle , P . ( 1999 ) ‘Design as intentional action : a conceptual analysis’ , Design Studies , Vol . 20 , pp . 57 – 81 . Gärdenfors , P . ( 2000 ) Conceptual Spaces : The Geometry of Thought , MIT Press . Georgiev , G . V . , Nagai , Y . and Taura , T . ( 2010 ) ‘A conceptual network approach to structuring of meanings in design’ , The Bulletin of Japan Society of the Science of Design ( JSSD ) , Vol . 56 , No . 5 , 10pp . ( in press ) . Horvath , I . ( 1998 ) ‘Development and application of design concept ontologies for contextual conceptualization’ , Paper presented at the ASME DETC’98 , September , Atlanta , Georgia . Horvath , I . ( 2008 ) ‘Differences between ‘research in design context’ and ‘design inclusive research’ in the domain of industrial design engineering’ , Journal of Design Research , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , pp . 61 – 83 . 20 G . V . Georgiev et al . Hsiao , S - W . and Chen , C - H . ( 1997 ) ‘A semantic and shape grammar based approach for product design’ , Design Studies , July , Vol . 18 , No . 3 , pp . 275 – 296 . Jin , Y . and Li , W . ( 2007 ) ‘Design concept generation : a hierarchical coevolutionary approach’ , Journal of Mechanical Design , Vol . 129 , No . 10 , pp . 1012 – 1022 . Krippendorff , K . ( 1989 ) ‘On the essential contexts of artifacts or on the proposition that ‘design is making sense ( of things ) ’ , Design Issues , Spring , Vol . 5 , No . 2 , pp . 9 – 39 . Krippendorff , K . ( 2006 ) The Semantic Turn : A New Foundation for Design , Ch . 2 , Taylor and Francis , New York . Mabogunje , A . and Leifer , L . ( 1997 ) ‘Noun phrases as surrogates for measuring early phases of the mechanical design process’ , Paper Presented at the 9th International Conference on Design Theory and Methodology , ASME , Sacramento , California . Miller , G . , Beckwith , R . , Fellbaum , C . , Gross , D . and Miller , K . ( 1990 ) ‘Introduction to WordNet : an on - line lexical database’ , International Journal of Lexicography , Vol . 3 , No . 4 , pp . 235 – 244 . Mougenot , C . , Bouchard , C . , Aoussat , A . and Westerman , S . ( 2008 ) ‘Inspiration , images and design : an investigation of designers’ information gathering strategies’ , Journal of Design Research , Vol . 7 , No . 4 , pp . 331 – 351 . Nagai , Y . and Taura , T . ( 2006 ) ‘Formal description of concept - synthesizing process for creative design’ , Gero , J . S . ( Ed . ) : Design Computing and Cognition , Part 6 , pp . 443 – 460 , Springer , Netherlands . Nagai , Y . , Taura , T . , Edmonds , E . , Candy , L . and Okada , R . ( 2006 ) ‘Study of concept synthesis in design creativity – role of action concept in design creative process’ , Paper Presented at the DRS International Conference ‘WonderGround’ , 1 – 4 November 2006 , Lisbon , Portugal . Norman , D . ( 2004 ) Emotional Design : Why We Love ( or Hate ) Everyday Things , Basic Books , New York . Osgood , C . E . , Suci , G . and Tannenbaum , P . ( 1957 ) The Measurement of Meaning , University of Illinois Press , Urbana , Illinois . Pahl , G . , Beitz , W . , Feldhusen , J . and Grote , K . ( 2007 ) Engineering Design : A Systematic Approach , 3rd ed . , Springer - Verlag , New York . Pedersen , T . , Patwardhan , S . and Michelizzi , J . ( 2004 ) ‘WordNet : : Similarity – measuring the relatedness of concepts’ , Proceedings of Nineteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , No . 19 , pp . 1024 – 1025 . Petiot , J - F . and Yannou , B . ( 2004 ) ‘Measuring consumer perceptions for a better comprehension , specification and assessment of product semantics’ , International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics , Vol . 33 , pp . 507 – 525 . Segers , N . ( 2004 ) ‘Computational representations of words in architectural design : development of a system supporting creative design’ , PhD - thesis , Eindhoven University of Technology , Eindhoven , The Netherlands . Segers , N . , de Vries , B . and Achten , H . ( 2005 ) ‘Do word graphs stimulate design ? ’ , Design Studies , Vol . 26 , No . 6 , pp . 625 – 647 . Shah , J . and Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2002 ) ‘Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness’ , Design Studies , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , pp . 111 – 134 . Shah , J . , Kulkarni , S . and Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2000 ) ‘Evaluation of idea generation methods for conceptual design : effectiveness metrics and design of experiments’ , Journal of Mechanical Design , Vol . 12 , pp . 377 – 384 . Tomiyama , T . and Yoshikawa , H . ( 1987 ) ‘Extended general design theory’ , in H . Yoshikawa and E . A . Warman ( Eds . ) : Design Theory for CAD – Proceedings of the IFIP Working Group 5 . 2 Working Conference , pp . 95 – 124 . Ulrich , K . ( 2007 ) Design Creation of Artifacts in Society , available at http : / / opim . wharton . upenn . edu / ~ ulrich / designbook . html , accessed on 15 January 2010 . A method for the evaluation of meaning structures and its application 21 van Rompay , T . ( 2008 ) ‘Product expression : bridging the gap between the symbolic and the concrete’ , in Schifferstein , H . and Hekkert , P . ( Eds . ) : Product Experience , Elsevier . Visuwords release 2 . 02 ( 2008 ) ‘The logical octopus’ available at http : / / www . visuwords . com / , accessed on 1 March 2009 . Wang , M . and Zeng , Y . ( 2009 ) ‘Asking the right questions to elicit product requirements’ , International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing , Vol . 22 , No . 4 , pp . 283 – 293 . Wilkenfeld , M . J . and Ward , T . B . ( 2001 ) ‘Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination’ , Journal of Memory and Language , Vol . 45 , pp . 21 – 38 . Wisniewski , E . ( 1997 ) ‘When concepts combine’ , Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , Vol . 4 , pp . 107 – 183 . WordNet release 2 . 1 ( 2006 ) available at http : / / wordnet . princeton . edu / , accessed on 15 January 2010 , Cognitive Science Lab , Princeton University . WordNet : : Similarity release 1 . 03 ( 2006 ) available at http : / / search . cpan . org / dist / WordNet - Similarity / , accessed on 15 January 2010 . Yoshikawa , H . ( 1981 ) ‘General design theory and a CAD system’ , in T . Sata and E . A . Warman ( Eds . ) : Man - Machine Communication in CAD / CAM – Proceedings of the IFIP Working Group 5 . 2 - 5 . 3 Working Conference , pp . 35 – 53 . You , H - C . and Chen , K . ( 2007 ) ‘Applications of affordance and semantics in product design’ , Design Studies , Vol . 28 , No . 1 , pp . 23 – 38 .