1 Investigating Disagreement in the Scientific Literature 1 Wout S . Lamers ( 0000 - 0001 - 7176 - 9579 ) , 2 Kevin Boyack ( 0000 - 0001 - 7814 - 8951 ) , 3 Vincent Larivière ( 0000 - 0002 - 2733 - 0689 ) , 4 Cassidy R . Sugimoto ( 0000 - 0001 - 8608 - 3203 ) , 1 Nees Jan van Eck ( 0000 - 0001 - 8448 - 4521 ) , 1 Ludo Waltman ( 0000 - 0001 - 8249 - 1752 ) , 5 Dakota Murray ( 0000 - 0002 - 7119 - 0169 ) * 1 Centre for Science and Technology Studies , Leiden University , Leiden , Netherlands 2 SciTech Strategies , Inc . , Albuquerque , NM , USA 3 École de bibliothéconomie et des sciences de l’information , Université de Montréal , Canada 4 School of Public Policy , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA , USA 5 School of Informatics , Computing , and Engineering , Indiana University Bloomington , IN , USA * Corresponding author , dakmurra @ iu . edu Keywords : Disagreement ; Citation analysis ; Natural Language Processing ; Metascience Abstract Disagreement is essential to scientific progress . However , the extent of disagreement in science , its evolution over time , and the fields in which it happens , remains poorly understood . Leveraging a massive collection of English - language scientific texts , we develop a cue - phrase based approach to identify instances of disagreement citations across more than four million scientific articles . Using this method , we construct an indicator of disagreement across scientific fields over the 2000 - 2015 period . In contrast with black - box text classification methods , our framework is transparent and easily interpretable . We reveal a disciplinary spectrum of disagreement , with higher disagreement in the social sciences and lower disagreement in physics and mathematics . However , detailed disciplinary analysis demonstrates heterogeneity across sub - fields , revealing the importance of local disciplinary cultures and epistemic characteristics of disagreement . Paper - level analysis reveals notable episodes of disagreement in science , and illustrates how methodological artifacts can confound analyses of scientific texts . These findings contribute to a broader understanding of disagreement and establish a foundation for future research to understanding key processes underlying scientific progress . 2 Introduction Disagreement is a common phenomenon in science . The history of science is ripe with histories of famous discoveries , which are often embroiled in debates , controversies , and disputes . Dialectic discourse emerged in ancient Greece , whereby the truth was thought to emerge from the arguments and counterarguments of scholars engaged in dialogue . The modern scientific method arose from a similar dialogue 350 years ago , as two individuals—Robert Boyle and Thomas Hobbes—debated over the meaning of experimental results obtained with the newly - invented air pump ( Shapin & Schaffer , 2011 ) . Disagreement anchors much of the lore surrounding major scientific discoveries . For example , Alfred Wegener’s theory of plate tectonics was initially rejected by the scientific community , and physics endured a decades - long dispute over the existence of gravitational waves ( Collins , 2017 ) and the value of the Hubble constant ( Castelvecchi , 2020 ) . Other conflicts are influenced by forces external to science , such as the controversies on the link between cigarette and lung cancer or between greenhouse gas and climate change ( Oreskes & Conway , 2011 ) . Disagreement features prominently in key theories of science , such as Popper’s falsifiability ( Popper , 1963 ) , Kuhn’s paradigm shifts ( Kuhn , 1996 ) , and Kitcher’s scientific division of labor ( Kitcher , 1995 ) . Despite its importance to science , however , there is little empirical evidence of how much disagreement exists , where it is most common , and its consequences . Quantitative measures can be valuable tools to better understand the role and extent of disagreement across fields of science . Previous research has focused on consensus as evidenced by citation networks ( Bruggeman et al . , 2012 ; Shwed & Bearman , 2010 , 2012 ) ; on concepts related to disagreement in scientific texts such as negative citations , disputing citations , and uncertainty ( Catalini et al . , 2015 ; Chen et al . , 2018 ; Nicholson et al . , 2021 ) ; and on word - count based approaches ( Bertin et al . , 2016 ) . Studying disagreement is challenging , given the lack of a widely accepted theoretical framework for conceptualizing disagreement combined with major challenges in its operationalization , for instance , the limited availability of large - scale collections of scientific texts . This paper proposes an operationalization of disagreement in scientific articles that captures direct disagreement between two papers , as well as statements indicative of disagreement within the community . We describe a methodological approach to generate and manually - validate cue - phrases that reliably match to citation sentences ( citances ) to represent valid instances of disagreement . We then use this approach to quantify the extent of disagreement across more than four million publications in the Elsevier ScienceDirect database , and investigate the rate of disagreement across fields of science . Literature Review It is widely acknowledged that disagreement plays a fundamental role in scientific progress ( Balietti et al . , 2015 ; Sarewitz , 2011 ; “The Power of Disagreement , ” 2016 ) . However , few studies have tried to quantify the level of disagreement in the scientific literature . Part of this may be explained by the fact that disagreement is difficult to both define and measure . There have been , however , attempts to assess consensus or uncertainty in the literature . Much of the early work on consensus attempted at characterizing differences between so - called hard and soft sciences . Cole ( 1983 ) described a series of experiments done in several fields , finding no evidence of differences in cognitive consensus along the hierarchy of sciences ( Comte , 1856 ) . Hargens ( 1988 ) claimed that fields having journals with higher rejection rates had lower consensus . This claim was contested by Cole and colleagues ( 1988 ) , who argued that other variables accounted for the differences , and that reviewer’s assessments would be a better measure of consensus than rejection rates . Fanelli ( 2010 ) found that positive results—support for the paper’s hypotheses—was far higher in the social sciences than the physical sciences , which is argued to reflect higher ambiguity , and thus lower consensus , in the social sciences . 3 Recent studies on scientific consensus have made use of citations and text . Through a series of case studies , Shwed and Bearman ( 2010 ) used network modularity to claim that divisions in the citation network decreased over time , corresponding to increased consensus . Nicolaisen and Frandsen ( 2012 ) used a Gini index calculated over bibliographic coupling count distributions to approximate consensus , and found that physics papers showed more consensus on average than psychology papers . Using a corpus of nearly 168 , 000 papers , Evans et al . ( 2016 ) calculated the Shannon entropy of language in a set of eight fields , and found more evidence that consensus was higher in the hard sciences than the social sciences . Other studies developed methods to identify uncertainty in text , a concept that is related to disagreement , and a potential indicator of consensus . For example , Szarvas et al . ( 2012 ) interpreted uncertainty as a ‘lack of information’ and created a cue - word based uncertainty detection model based on three annotated datasets ( BioScope , WikiWeasel , and Fact Bank ) . Their results suggest that while domain - specific cues are useful , there remain cues that can reasonably identify uncertainty across domains . Similarly , Yang et al . ( 2012 ) developed a classifier based on manually annotated uncertainty cues and conditional random fields , and conducted a series of experiments to assess the performance of their method . Chen , Song and Heo ( 2018 ) later extended these approaches and applied them to an empirical study of uncertainty across science . They first introduced a conceptual framework to study uncertainty that incorporates epistemic status and perturbation strength , and then measured uncertainty in 24 high - level scientific fields , and finally created an expanded set of uncertainty cues to support further analysis ( Note that these rates included all types of uncertainty , whether they be theoretical , conceptual , or experimental , and within or between studies ) . The reported rate of uncertainty closely mirrored consensus , highest in the social sciences , followed by the medical sciences , environmental sciences , and engineering . Many of the cues used as a starting point by Chen et al . ( 2018 ) are hedging terms , which are commonly used in scientific writing to express possibility rather than certainty ( Hyland , 1998 ) . In addition to being field - dependent , hedging rates have also been found to depend on whether a paper is primarily methodological . Recent work by Small and colleagues ( Small , 2018 ; Small et al . , 2019 ) showed that citing sentences ( i . e . , citances ) with the word ‘may’ occur more frequently when citing method papers than non - method papers . More recently , Bornmann , Wray and Haunschild ( 2020 ) used a similar method to investigate uncertainty associated with specific concepts in the context of highly cited works . While some might equate uncertainty or hedging with disagreement , they are not the same . As mentioned by Small , when citing another work , “hedging does not assert that the paper is wrong , but only suggests that uncertainty surrounds some aspect of the ideas put forward” ( Small et al . , 2019 , p . 8 ) . Here , we attempt to explicitly identify and measure scientific disagreement by using a large set of citances across all fields and by developing a set of cues validated by expert assessment . Other studies of disagreement have been performed in the context of classification schemes of citation function . In an early attempt to categorize types of citations , disagreement was captured as “juxtapositional” and “negational” citations ( Moravcsik & Murugesan , 1975 ) . However , this scheme was manually developed using a limited sample of papers and citations , and so the robustness and validity of the categories cannot be easily assessed . More recently , scholars have used larger datasets and machine learning techniques to scale citation classifications , often including categories of citations similar or inclusive of disagreement . For example , Teufel et al . , ( 2006 ) developed a four - category scheme in which disagreement might be captured under their “weakness” or “contrast” citation types . Bertin and colleagues ( 2016 ) used n - grams to study location of negative and positive citations , and showed that that the word “ disagree * ” was much less likely to occur than the world “ agree * ” , irrespective of papers’ sections . In another study that aimed to identify meaningful citations , Valenzuela et al . ( 2015 ) captured disagreement under the “comparison” citation type . Others have sought more coarse categories : Catalini et al . ( 2015 ) classified over 750 , 000 references made by papers published in the Journal of Immunology as either positive or negative , finding that negative references comprised about two percent of all references made . However , 4 while these machine learning approaches are useful for analyzing large text data , they are also black boxes which can obfuscate issues and limit interpretation of their results . Building on these studies , we propose a novel approach for the study of disagreement based on a set of manually - validated cue - phrases . We conduct one of the first empirical investigations into the specific notion of disagreement in science , and our inclusive definition allows us to capture explicit disagreement between specific papers as well as traces of disagreement within a field . Our cue - phrase based approach is more transparent and reproducible than black - box machine learning methodologies commonly employed in citation classification , and also extensively validated using over 3 , 000 citation sentences representing a range of fields . We extend the scale of past analyses , identifying instances of disagreement across more than four million scientific publications . Materials and Methods Data We sourced data from an Elsevier ScienceDirect corpus that was also used in a previous study ( Boyack et al . , 2018 ) and that is hosted at the Centre for Science and Technology Studies ( CWTS ) at Leiden University . This corpus contains the full - text information of nearly five million English - language research articles , short communications , and review articles published in Elsevier journals between 1980 and 2016 . The corpus comprises articles from nearly 3 , 000 Elsevier journals . Given that Elsevier is the largest publisher in the world , this corpus is one of the largest multidisciplinary sources of full - text scientific articles currently available , with coverage of both natural sciences , medical sciences , as well as the social sciences and humanities . We focus our analysis on sentences containing in - text citations ( citances ) . These citances were extracted from the full - text of articles following the procedure outlined in previous work ( Boyack et al . , 2018 ) . The Elsevier ScienceDirect corpus that was used was constructed in the following way . First , the Crossref REST API was used to identify all articles published by Elsevier . The full - text of these articles was subsequently downloaded from the Elsevier ScienceDirect API ( Article Retrieval API ) in XML format . Each XML full - text record was parsed to identify major sections and paragraphs ( using XML tags ) , and sentences ( using a sentence - splitting algorithm ) . In - text citations in the main text were identified by parsing the main text ( excluding those in footnotes and figure and table captions ) . XML records without in - text citations were discarded , and publications from before 1998 were omitted from analysis due to poor availability of full - text records before that year . The resulting dataset consisted of 4 , 776 , 340 publications containing a total of 145 , 351 , 937 citances , ranging from 1998 to 2016 . To facilitate analysis at the level of scientific fields , articles in Elsevier ScienceDirect as well as the references cited in these articles were matched with records in the Web of Science 1 database based on their DOI ( where available ) and a combination of publication year , volume number , and first page number . We used an existing classification of research articles and review articles in the Web of Science created at CWTS . In this hierarchical classification , each article published between 2000 and 2015 and indexed in the Web of Science was algorithmically assigned to a single micro - level scientific field , each of which are in turn members of one of 817 meso - level fields . It is at this meso - level that we perform our most detailed analyses , the categories being fine - grained enough to provide insights into local communities while also large enough to contain a sufficient number of citances . A further benefit of this approach to clustering is that each meso - level field , and each individual publication , can be directly grouped into one of five broad 1 The Web of Science database used by CWTS includes the Science Citation Index Expanded , the Social Sciences Citation Index , and the Arts & Humanities Citation Index . Other Web of Science citation indices were not included . 5 fields : Biomedical and Health Sciences , Life and Earth Sciences , Mathematics and Computer Science , Physical Sciences and Engineering , and Social Sciences and Humanities . Linking our dataset to this classification system resulted in a subset of 3 , 883 , 563 papers containing 118 , 012 , 368 citances , spanning 2000 to 2015 . The classification was created algorithmically based on direct citation links between articles , using the methodology introduced by Waltman and Van Eck ( 2012 ) and Traag et al . ( 2019 ) . A visualization of the meso - level classification was created using the VOSviewer software ( van Eck & Waltman , 2010 ) . Operationalizing disagreement Researchers can disagree for many reasons , sometimes over data and methodologies , but more often because of differences in interpretation ( Dieckmann & Johnson , 2019 ) . Some of these disagreements are explicitly hostile and adversarial , whereas others are more subtle , such as contrasting findings with past results and theories . We introduce an inclusive definition of disagreement that captures explicit textual instances of disagreement , controversy , dissonance , or lack of consensus between scientific publications , including cases where citing authors are not taking an explicit stance themselves . Our definition distinguishes between two kinds of disagreement , which together capture the diversity of obvious and subtle disagreement in the scientific literature : paper - level disagreement and community - level disagreement . The first , paper - level disagreement , occurs when one publication offers a finding or perspective that is ( at least partly ) incompatible with the perspective of another ( even though there may be no explicit contradiction ) . Consider the following example of a citation sentence explicitly disagreeing with the conclusion of a past study : > We find that coffee does not cause cancer , contrary to the finding of < ref > that coffee does cause cancer . Paper - level disagreement can also be more subtle . For example , in the following two disagreement sentences , although they do not resolutely contradict one another , the citing and cited publications use models that are based on incompatible assumptions ( first sentence ) , or observe different effects from different data ( second sentence ) : > Assuming that coffee increases the probability of cancer by 50 % , the predicted life expectancy for the Dutch population is 80 years , in contrast to the 85 years proposed by models that assumed coffee does not increase the risk of cancer < ref > . > Contrary to previous studies that did not observe evidence to support the hypothesis that coffee causes cancer < ref > , our data suggests that drinking coffee increases the probability of cancer by 50 % . Community - level disagreement , in contrast , refers to the situation in which a citing publication , without explicitly disagreeing with a cited publication , instead draws attention to a controversy or lack of consensus in the larger body of literature . Including community - level disagreement allows us to identify indirect traces of disagreement in a field , even in the absence of explicit disagreement between the referenced authors , or between the citing and cited papers . Consider the following examples of community - level disagreement ; the first notes the disagreement between the referenced studies , and the second cites a single review article indicating disagreement within the field : > There remains controversy in the scientific literature over whether or not coffee is associated with an increased risk of cancer < refs > . > A recent review of studies assessing the potential link between coffee consumption and cancer risk has observed continued controversy < ref > . 6 Here , we do not differentiate between paper - level or community - level disagreement , including both under our operationalization of disagreement . Signal and filter terms We compose cue - phrases of signal terms and filter terms . A variety of approaches can be used to generate these terms , and our approach is not dependent on any particular strategy . Here , we create a preliminary set of signal terms through an intensive iterative process of manually identifying , classifying , validating , and deliberating on strategies for identifying instances of disagreement . This took place over several meetings , utilizing multiple strategies to generate signal words , including sourcing cues used in related work ( e . g . , Bertin et al . , 2016 ; Chen et al . , 2018 ) , expanding this list with synonyms from online thesauruses , and ranking them by their frequency among citation sentences . This inductive process included several rounds of deliberation , manual annotation , and tests of inter - rater reliability in order to generate a robust list of candidate signal terms . The terms are intended to have high validity , but are not considered comprehensive . We queried the database for citances containing each of these signal terms ( case insensitive ) , using wildcards to provide for possible variants of terms ( e . g . , “challenge” , “challenged” , and “challenges” ) , excluding generic negation phrases ( “no” , “not” , “cannot” , “nor” and “neither” to exclude phrases such as “no conflict” ) , and for some signal terms excluding citances containing words associated with disciplinary jargon or methods , such as for the signal term “disagreement” , which often appears with Likert - scale descriptions ( e . g . , “scale” , “agreement” , or “kappa” ) for survey - heavy fields . The modifications for the signal terms were derived after several rounds of review and validation . In total , citances returned by signal phrase queries comprise 3 . 10 % ( n = 145 , 351 , 937 ) of the database , though their relative occurrence varied dramatically , with the most coming from the “ differ * ” signal term , and the least from “ disprove * ” ( see Table 1 ) . Table 1 . Specific terms comprising each of the thirteen signal term sets and specific exceptions . The “ * ” symbol ( wildcard ) captures possible variants . Signal term Variants Exclusions Results challenge * 405 , 613 conflict * 212 , 246 contradict * 115 , 375 contrary 171 , 711 contrast * 1 , 257 , 866 controvers * 154 , 608 debat * “parliament * debat * ” , “congress * debat * ” , “senate * debat * ” , “polic * debat * ” , “politic * debat * ” , “public * debat * ” , “societ * debat * ” 150 , 617 differ * “different * ” 2 , 003 , 677 disagree * “not agree * ” , “no agreement” “range” , “scale” , “kappa” , “likert” , “agree * ” and / or “disagree” within a ten - word range of each other . 52 , 615 7 disprov * “prove * ” and “disprove * ” within a ten - word range 2 , 938 no consensus “lack of consensus” “consensus sequence” , “consensus site” 16 , 632 questionable 24 , 244 refut * “refutab * ” 10 , 322 total 4 , 578 , 464 In order to more precisely capture valid instances of disagreement and to understand their function within the literature , we also queried for citances containing both the signal terms along with at least one of four sets of filter terms , with no more than four words separating signal and filter . As with signal terms , filter terms were derived from iterative manual efforts of the authors to identify terms most associated with valid instances of disagreement . Four distinct sets of terms were identified , corresponding to explicit mentions of terms relating to past studies , ideas , methods , and results ( see Table 2 ) . As with signal phrases alone , the relative incidence of signal and filter phrase combinations varies widely ( Table SI 1 ) . Queries were constructed for each combination of signal term ( 13 total ) and filter term ( 4 total ) , producing 52 combined queries , alongside 13 queries consisting only of standalone signal terms unrestricted by filter terms , for a total of 65 queries . Table 2 . Specific terms comprising each of the four filter term sets studies studies ; study ; previous work ; earlier work ; literature ; analysis ; analyses ; report ; reports ideas idea * ; theory ; theories ; assumption * ; hypothesis ; hypotheses methods model * , method * , approach * ; technique * results result * ; finding * ; outcome * ; evidence ; data ; conclusion * ; observation * Query Validation From each set of results returned by the 65 queries , we selected 50 sentences for validation using simple random sampling without replacement ( only 40 citances existed for “no consensus” + ”ideas” ) , resulting in over 3 , 000 queried sentences . For each query , two coders were randomly selected from among the seven authors on this paper to manually annotate each citance as a valid or invalid instance of disagreement . The label was chosen based only on the text in the citation sentence , without knowledge on the citing paper’s title , authors , field of study , or the surrounding text . Consider the following four example sentences listed below ( where ( … ) indicates the position of cited references and [ … ] indicates additional text not quoted here ) . The first is invalid because the signal term , “conflict” , refers to an object of study , and not a scientific dispute ; the second sentence is also invalid because the term “conflicting” refers to results within a single study , not between studies ; the third sentence is invalid because “challenge” appears while quoting the cited study ; the fourth and fifth sentence are both 8 examples of sentences that would be marked as valid . Similar patterns can be observed for other signal terms , such as challenge * ( Table SI 2 ) . 1 . Invalid : “To facilitate conflict management and analysis in Mcr ( … ) , the Graph Model for Conflict Resolution ( GMCR ) ( … ) was used . ” 2 . Invalid : “The 4 - year extension study provided ambiguous [ … ] and conflicting post hoc [ … ] results . ” 3 . Invalid : “Past studies ( . . . ) review the theoretical literature and concludes that future empirical research should ‘ challenge the assumptions and analysis of the theory’ . ” 4 . Valid : “These observations are rather in contradiction with Smith et al . ’s [ … ] . ” 5 . Valid : “Although there is substantial evidence supporting this idea , there are also recent conflicting reports ( … ) . ” We assessed the labels for each signal / filter term combination with two measures : percent agreement ( % agree ) and percent valid ( % valid ) . Percent agreement is the proportion of annotated citances in which both coders agreed on the same label of valid or invalid ; this measure provides a simple measure of coder’s consensus . Here , percent agreement is justified over more complicated measures such as Cohen’s kappa due to the small sample of data per signal / filter term combination , and given that there are only two categories and coders . Most signal / filter term combinations had high agreement ( Figure 1a ) . The overall percentage agreement between coders was high , at 85 . 5 percent ( and Cohen’s kappa of 0 . 66 ) . Given the difficulty of interpreting academic texts , this high percentage agreement demonstrates the robustness of our operationalization of disagreement . The signal term with the highest average agreement was no consensus ( 95 . 8 percent ) . There were only a few combinations with very low percentage agreement , mostly regarding the signal term questionable , which had an average lowest average percent agreement ( 64 percent ) ; the nature of sentences returned from the questionable keyword tended to constitute marginal cases of disagreement . There was virtually no variance between the average percent agreement aggregated across filter terms . However , certain combinations of signal and filter terms were notable in resulting in higher or lower performance . For example , the difference between the highest agreement , differ * _ standalone _ ( 100 percent ) , and differ * + methods ( 74 percent ) is 26 points—the addition of filter terms can dramatically impact the kinds of citances returned by the query . We calculate the percent valid as the percentage of citances annotated as valid by both coders ; this provides an intuitive measure of the validity and reliability of a query . Signal / filter term combinations that best capture disagreement should have both high percent agreement and high percent validity . Not all signal / filter term combinations were found to be sufficiently valid ( Figure 1b ) . Overall , 61 . 6 percent of all citances were coded as valid , with large variance between the most valid ( 100 percent ) , and the least valid ( 0 percent ) combinations . The signal term with the highest average validity regardless of filter term was no consensus ( 94 . 9 percent ) , followed by controvers * ( 88 . 8 percent ) and debat * ( 82 . 4 percent ) . Unlike with percent agreement , average validity differs drastically between filter terms , with all having higher average validity than _ standalone _ . The combinations with highest validity are no consensus + studies ( 98 percent ) , no consensus + methods ( 98 percent ) , and no consensus _ standalone _ ( 94 percent ) For specific signal terms , the presence of a filter term can have a drastic impact of coded validity ; for example , the validity of contrast * + ideas ( 80 percent ) is four times greater than of contrast * _ standalone _ and contrast + methods ( 20 percent ) . The queries that best capture instances of disagreement are those with the highest validity . We choose a validity threshold of 80 percent and exclude queries with lower validity from subsequent analysis . We also consider several adjustments to the threshold to assess the robustness of our empirical findings . 23 queries sit above this the 80 percent threshold ( Figure 1c ) , including all five no consensus and controvers * queries , 9 four debat * queries , two disagree * and contradict * queries , and one query each for contrary * , contrast * , conflict * , disprove * , and questionable . Because we prioritized precision , these 23 queries comprise only a fraction of total citances : 455 , 625 , representing 0 . 31 % of all citances in our dataset . We note that citances returned by queries are not exclusive ; for example , a citance containing both controvers * and no consensus * would count towards both signal phrases . Similarly , a citance returned with the query controvers * + methods would also be returned by the controvers * . Naturally , more general queries , such as differ * and contrast * returned a much greater number of citances . Among queries above the 80 percent threshold , the controvers * and debat * produce the highest number of citances ( 154 , 608 and 150 , 617 respectively , Figure 1d ) . The 455 , 625 citances returned by our queries as well as relevant publication and query details are available in Zenodo ( Lamers & Van Eck , 2021 ) . 10 Figure 1 , Agreement and validity of signal and filter term combination . Measures calculated from 50 randomly - sampled citances for each combination annotated as valid or invalid instances of disagreement by two independent coders . a . Percentage agreement , or the proportion of citances for which coders independently agreed on the label . b . Percentage validity , or the proportion of citances which both coders labeled as valid . Averages are shown by row and column . c . Percentage agreement and validity of each signal / filter term combination , ordered from highest percent validity ( top ) to lowest percent validity ( bottom ) . Numbers on the right are the total number of citances returned by querying using the signal / filter term combination , and are colored according to their log - transformed value . d . Log - transformed count of citances returned by each query combination , colored by the ( log - transformed ) 11 number of citances . Citance counts are non - exclusive , meaning that citances of the form debat * + studies will also be counted towards debat * _ standalone _ . As a confirmation of overall validity , we measure the rate of disagreement by instances of self - citation and non - self - citation . We expect that authors will be less likely to cite their own work within the context of disagreement . Indeed , we find that the rate of disagreement for non - self - citations is 2 . 4 times greater than for self - citations ( Figure SI 3 ) , demonstrating that our indicator of disagreement affirms expectations . Results Instances of disagreement , operationalized using the 23 validated queries , accounted for approximately 0 . 31 percent of all citation sentences ( citances ) extracted from indexed papers published between 2000 and 2015 ( Figure 2a ) . Disagreement was highest in the Social Sciences and Humanities ( Soc & Hum , 0 . 61 percent ) , followed by Biomedical and Health Sciences ( Bio & Health , 0 . 41 percent ) , Life and Earth Sciences ( Life & Earth , 0 . 29 percent ) , Physical Sciences and Engineering ( Phys & Engr , 0 . 15 percent ) , and Mathematics and Computer Science ( Math & Comp , 0 . 06 percent ) . Our measure shows that disagreement has been relatively constant over time ( Figure 2b ) , decreasing at an average rate of about 0 . 0005 percentage points per year . This is driven by falling disagreement in Phys & Engr ( - 0 . 0045 points per year ) , Soc & Hum ( - 0 . 0033 points per year ) , and Math & Comp ( - 0 . 0019 points per year ) . Phys & Engr stands out not only for its stable decrease each year , but also for its relative size ; given a starting rate of one disagreement signal per 529 citances in 2000 , by 2015 the rate of disagreement in Physics fell to one disagreement per 809 citances , a 35 percent decrease , compared to a 24 percent decrease for Math & Comp and only a 5 percent decrease in Soc & Hum . In contrast , disagreement has tended to increase somewhat in Bio & Health ( + 0 . 0017 points per year ) and Life & Earth ( + 0 . 0018 points per year ) . These trends are likely not the result of uses of individual queries ; for example , disagree * queries are over - represented in Phys & Engr ( Figure SI 2 ) , yet the incidence of these terms is falling or remaining stable ( Figure SI 1 ) . Similarly , debat * was over - represented in Soc & Hum and has increased in usage despite slight falling disagreement in the field . That these changes are not confined to any single query suggests that field - level differences represent changes in the level of disagreement within a field rather than linguistic or methodological artifacts . These findings are also consistent at a lower , 70 % validity threshold for disagreement queries , which includes 13 new queries that bring the total number of disagreement citances to over 650 , 000 ( see Supporting Information ) . Figure 2 . Disagreement reflects a hierarchy of fields . ( a ) Percent of all citances in each field that contain signals of disagreement , meaning they were returned by one of the 23 queries with validity of 80 percent or higher . Fields marked by lower consensus , such as in Soc & Hum , had a greater proportion of disagreement . ( b ) Percent of disagreement by field and over time , showing little change overall , but some changes by field . Text indicates the average percentage - point change per - year by field . 12 Figure 3 . Heterogeneity in disagreement across meso - fields . Fine - grained view across 817 meso - level fields , each a cluster of publications grouped and positioned based on their citation links derived from the Web of Science database ( see Materials & Methods ) , 2000 - 2015 . The area of each point is proportional to the number of disagreement citances in that field . Overlapping points are an artifact of their position and size , and bear no additional meaning . Color maps to the log ratio of the share of disagreement citances given the mean share across all fields , truncated at 4x greater and 4x lower than the mean . Soc & Hum tends to have a greater proportion of disagreement citances , and Math & Comp the least . Other panels show the same data , but highlight the meso - fields in each high - level field . Meso - fields of interest are highlighted , and labels show a selection of journals in which papers in each field are published . Journals listed in labels are representative of each meso - field in the Web of Science , and is not limited to those represented in the Elsevier ScienceDirect data . An interactive version of this visualization is available online at https : / / tinyurl . com / disagreement - meso - fields . 13 The more fine - grained meso - fields reveal heterogeneity within the larger fields ( Figure 3 ) . Overall , meso - field disagreement followed the same pattern as Figure 2 , with higher scores in Soc & Hum and lower in Math & Comp . However , some meso - fields stand out . For example , some of the highest rates of disagreement found in the Bio & Health meso - field was in more social journals such as Quality of Life Research , Value in Health , and Pharmacoeconomics . Similarly , in Math & Comp , the meso - field with the most disagreement contained journals relating to transportation science , a technical field which draws on management studies and other social science literature . This pattern held in Life & Earth , in which a meso - field with a relatively high share of disagreement contained papers in journals such as Marine Policy , Ecology & Society , and Forest Policy & Economics . The high disagreement in these meso - fields lends support to the hypothesis that regardless of the high - level field , more socially - oriented topics generate a higher level of disagreement . Also notable is that , in Life & Earth , several large fields with relatively high disagreement study the distant geological past or other inaccessible objects of studies , comprised of papers in journals such as the Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology , Cretaceous Research , and Sedimentary Research . A similar observation can be made in Phys & Engr , where astronomy - related fields featuring journals such as Planetary and Space Science and Theoretical Biology exhibit above - average rates of disagreement , along with fields pertaining to research into superconductivity . Field - level results must be interpreted cautiously , however , as our signal terms may mis - classify citances based on disciplinary keywords and jargon ( see Supporting Information ) . In addition to these quantitative results , we perform a qualitative investigation of the individual papers that issued the most disagreement citations , and which were cited most often in the context of disagreement . First , we examine the citing paper perspective , that is those papers that issued the most citances ( Table SI 6 ) . These top papers demonstrate how methodological artifacts can contribute to these more extreme examples . For example , one of these papers considers the pedagogical and evaluative potential of debates in the classroom ( Doody & Condon , 2012 , Table SI 6 ) ; the “debat * ” signal term incorrectly classifies several citations included in this paper as evidence of scientific disagreement . However , other papers offer interesting instances of disagreement , and exemplify lessons that should be considered when quantifying disagreement . For instance , one such paper concerns meteorite impact structures ( French & Koeberl , 2010 , Table SI 6 ) and includes discussion on the controversies in the field . Another is a review article arguing for multi - target agents for treating depressive states ( Millan , 2006 , Table SI 6 ) , and catalogs the controversies around the topic . Yet another is a book on Neurotoxicology and Teratology , misclassified as a research article , and illustrates how the length of an article can contribute to its likelihood of issuing a disagreement citation ( Kalter , 2003 , Table SI 6 ) . Considering the cited paper perspective—those papers that received the most paper - level disagreement citations or were referenced the most in the context of community disagreement—reveals clear instances of disagreement in the literature . Many of the studies receiving the most disagreement citances ( Table SI 7 ) relate to a single longstanding scientific controversy in the Earth sciences concerning the formation of the North Chinese Cranton , a tectonic structure spanning Northern China , Inner Mongolia , the Yellow Sea , and North Korea . This list of most - disagreed - with papers also includes a literature review that is cited as an exemplar of controversy , here regarding the existence of “lipid rafts” in cells ( Munro , 2003 , Table SI 7 ) , and a paper on fMRI research that is heralded as a methodological improvement in the field , and is often cited to draw a contrast with other methods ( Murphy et al . , 2009 , Table SI 7 ) . A more thorough discussion of papers that issue and receive the most disagreement can be found in the Supporting Information . We also investigated the extent to which other factors relate to a paper’s being cited in the context of disagreement . Younger papers ( relative to the citing paper ) are more likely to receive a disagreement citance than older ones ( Figure SI 4 ) , which may indicate that the role of cited literature varies based on its age ( He & Chen , 2018 ) . Author demographics do not appear to play a strong role ; here , we observe little difference in disagreement based on the gender of the citing author ( Figure SI 6 ) . We also explore whether disagreement relates to citation impact ; whereas previous analysis revealed a positive relationship between 14 conflict and citation ( Radicchi , 2012 ) , our preliminary results do not find evidence of increased citation , at least in the years immediately following the disagreement ( See Supporting Information ) . Papers that themselves contain disagreement citances , however , tend to receive more citations over their lifespan . Discussion When it comes to defining scientific disagreement , scholars disagree . Rather than staking out a specific definition , we adopt a broad operationalization of disagreement that incorporates elements of Kuhn’s accumulation of anomalies ( Kuhn , 1996 ) , Latour’s controversies ( Latour , 1988 ) , and more recent notions of uncertainty ( Chen et al . , 2018 ) and negative citations ( Catalini et al . , 2015 ) . By bridging these past theories , we quantify the rate of disagreement across science . Roughly 0 . 31 percent of all citances in our dataset are instances of disagreement , a share that has remained relatively stable over time . However , this number is much smaller than in past studies—such as the 2 . 4 percent for so - called “negative” references ( Catalini et al . , 2015 ) , and the estimated 0 . 8 percent for “disputing” citations ( Nicholson et al . , 2021 ) . This is explained by our operationalization of disagreement , which although conceptually broader than negative or disputing citations , is narrowed to only 23 queries to prioritize precision . Moreover , studies differ in corpus used , most often covering only one journal or field , compared to our large multidisciplinary corpus . The strength of our analysis is not the absolute incidence of disagreement , but its relative differences across disciplinary and social contexts . Disagreement across fields can be interpreted using several theoretical frameworks . Differences in disagreement might stem from the epistemic characteristics of fields and their topics of study . For example , Auguste Comte’s hierarchy of sciences model ( Comte , 1856 ) proposed that fields are organized based on the inherent complexity of their subject matter . We reinforce this model , finding that disagreement is highest in fields at the top of the hierarchy , such as the social sciences and humanities , and lowest in fields at the bottom of the hierarchy , such as physics and mathematics . While the hierarchy of sciences model is well - grounded theoretically ( Cole , 1983 ) and bibliometrically ( Fanelli , 2010 ; Fanelli & Glänzel , 2013 ) , other frameworks may be equally useful in understanding disagreement across fields . For example , the structural characteristics of fields may explain their differences in disagreement . One such characteristic is how reliant the field is on Kuhnian paradigms ( Kuhn , 1996 ) ; so - called “hard” sciences , such as physics , may have strong theoretical paradigms and greater consensus ( less disagreement ) than “soft” sciences such as those in the social sciences and humanities ( Biglan , 1973 ) . Changes in these structural characteristics may also contribute to the temporal evolution of disagreement . For instance , the decrease of disagreement in physics and engineering may be due to a transition into a period of “normal” science ( Kuhn , 1996 ) , as it has been previously argued for certain sub - fields ( Smolin , 2007 ) . Increase in collaboration ( Wuchty et al . , 2007 ) may also affect the trends , as consensus has to be reached among a larger body of individuals during the research process . Social sciences and humanities have other characteristics that might be associated with more common or more intense conflicts , including low centralization of resources and control over research agendas , high diversity in their audiences and stakeholders , and limited standardization of methods and theories ( Whitley , 2000 ) . A field’s cultural characteristics also play a role in its norms of disagreement . Fields have different norms when it comes to consensus formation and the settling of disputes ( Cetina , 1999 ) , and some fields even value disagreement as an important element of scholarship . For instance , a cultural norm of “agonism” , or ritualized adversarialism , is common in many humanities fields , wherein one’s arguments are framed in direct opposition to past arguments ( Tannen , 2002 ) . Fields also have distinct cultures of evaluation , which shapes how they judge each other’s work and impacts whether they are likely to reach consensus ( Lamont , 2009 ) . Of course , epistemic , structural , and cultural characteristics of fields are all inter - related—cultural practices emerge in part from structural characteristics of a field , such as access to expensive instruments , which in turn are related to the epistemic aspects of the object of study . 15 Our data does not allow us to disentangle these relationships or argue which is most appropriate , but each offers a useful lens for understanding why disagreement might differ between fields . Expanding our analysis into a more fine - grained classification of fields reveals greater detail into where disagreement happens in science . We observed that socially - oriented meso - level fields tended to have a higher rate of disagreement , no matter their main field . For example , meso - fields concerning healthcare policy had higher rates of disagreement than others in Biomedical & Health Sciences , whereas the meso - field concerning transportation science had a higher rate of disagreement than all others in Math & Computer science . Though these fields draw on the expertise of traditionally hard - science fields , they do so in order to study social processes and address social questions . In Life & Earth Sciences , disagreement was especially high in meso - fields that study the earth’s geological and paleontological history . In these fields , much like in the social sciences , researchers cannot easily design experiments , and so progress instead comes from debate over competing theories using limited evidence and reconstructed historical records . This is exemplified by paleontology , in which a 2017 paper sparked controversy and forced a re - interpretation of the fossil record and a 130 - year - old theory of dinosaur evolution ( Baron et al . , 2017 ; Langer et al . , 2017 ) . Similarly , our approach identified a major controversy in the earth sciences—the formation of the North Chinese Cranton—again illustrating how reliance on historical records might exacerbate disagreement . These cases illustrate the heterogeneity of disagreement in science , and illustrate that existing theoretical frameworks , such as the hierarchy of science , can oversimplify the diversity of cultural norms and epistemic characteristics that manifest at more fine - grained levels of analysis . Our approach comes with limitations . First , our method captures only a fraction of textual disagreements in science . This is partly due to our prioritization of precision over recall , having removed cue - phrases with low validity . Our lists of signal and filter terms are also non - exhaustive , and so their extension in future research would identify more instance of disagreement . Given our focus on citances , we are not able to identify traces of disagreements that occur without explicit reference to past literature , or those that can only be classified as disagreement with surrounding sentences as context . Some disagreements may also be too subtle , or rely on technical jargon , such that they cannot be identified with our general signal terms . Moreover , our measure does not capture non - explicit disagreements , or scientific disagreements occurring outside of citances , such as in conferences , books , social media , or in interpersonal interactions . For these reasons , our measure of disagreement may over - or under - represent disagreement in particular fields , and should be considered when evaluating results . Second , in spite of its overall precision , our approach returns many false positives in particular disciplinary contexts . For example , the signal term conflict * matches to topics of study and theories in the fields of sociology and international relations ( e . g . , “ethnic conflicts” , “Conflict theory” ) . In other instances , a signal term can even match an author’s name ( as in the surname “Debat” ) . We also find that these artifacts are over - represented among the papers that issued the most disagreement citances , and those that were most often cited in the context of disagreement ( see Supporting Information ) . However , given our extensive validation , these artifacts remain a small minority of all disagreement sentences identified , though they should be considered when interpreting disagreement in small sub - fields . Finally , our inclusive definition of disagreement homogenizes disagreement into a single category , whereas there are many kinds of disagreement in science . For example , the ability to differentiate between paper - level and community - level disagreement could lend insight into how conflict and controversy manifest in different fields . This definition could also be developed to differentiate further between types of disagreement : for example , past citation classification schemes have differentiated between “juxtaposition” and “negational” citations ( Moravcsik & Murugesan , 1975 ) , or between “weakness” and “contrast” citations ( Teufel et al . , 2006 ) . Despite these limitations , our framework and study have several advantages . First , in contrast to keyword - based analyses , our approach provides a nuanced view of disagreement in science , revealing the differences in disagreement not only between signal terms , but also based on filter terms . This drives the second advantage of our approach—that its inherent transparency allows us to easily identify confounding artifacts 16 such as when a signal term is an object of study ( i . e . , “international conflicts ” , “public debate” ) , when it relates to disciplinary jargon ( i . e . , “ disproving theorems” in Mathematics , or “strongly disagree” in survey studies that use Likert scales ) or when the keyword is part of a proper name ( i . e . , “work by Debatin et al . , ” ) . These issues are a concern for any automated analysis of scientific texts across disciplines—the usage and meaning of words varies across fields . In contrast to black - box style machine learning approaches , ours is transparent and can easily be validated , interpreted , replicated , and extended . Finally , by being open and transparent , our approach is easily adjustable to different contexts . Our initial identification of keywords was the result of an iterative process of exploration and validation , which eventually resulted in a non - exhaustive set of signal terms , filter terms , exclusions , and then a final set of validated queries . Any step of this process can be tuned , extended , and improved to facilitate further studies of scientific disagreement— new signals or filters can be introduced , queries can be modified to be even more precise , and the threshold of validity changed ; here , for example , we assessed our results by setting a more inclusive threshold for which queries constitute disagreement , and find the results remain robust ( see Supporting Information ) . To assist in further efforts to validate and extend our work , we have made annotated sentences and code that can reproduce this analysis publicly available at github . com / murrayds / sci - text - disagreement . Whereas black - box machine learning approach have many strengths ( e . g . Rife et al . , 2021 ) , ours is transparent and intuitive . Its transparency allows to easily identify terms that have field - specific meanings , which may be obfuscated in black - box approaches . Our approach is also reproducible and can be refined and extended with additional signal and filter terms . The portability of our queries also mean that they can readily be applied to other full - text data . The general method of generating and manually validating signal and filter terms can also be applied to other scientific phenomena , such as detecting uncertainty ( Chen et al . , 2018 ) , negativity ( Catalini et al . , 2015 ) , discovery ( Small et al . , 2017 ) , or an expanded framework of disagreement ( Moravcsik & Murugesan , 1975 ) . Future research could refine and extend these existing queries and link them to different conceptual perspectives on disagreement in science . Such work could build on our analyses of the factors that may affect disagreement , including gender , paper age , and citation impact . Disagreement is an essential aspect of knowledge production , and understanding its social , cultural , and epistemic characteristics will reveal fundamental insights into science in the making . Acknowledgements We thank Yong - Yeol Ahn , Staša Milojević , Alessandro Flammini , Filippo Menczer , Dashun Wang , Lili Miao , and participants of the A scientometric analysis of disagreement in science seminar held at CWTS at Leiden University for their helpful comments . We are grateful to Elsevier for making the full - text data available to us . 17 Author Contributions Wout S . Lamers : Conceptualization ; Formal analysis ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Software ; Visualization ; Writing – original draft ; Writing – review & editing Kevin Boyack : Conceptualization ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Writing – original draft ; Writing – review & editing Vincent Larivière : Conceptualization ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Writing – review & editing Cassidy R . Sugimoto : Conceptualization ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Writing – review & editing Nees Jan van Eck : Conceptualization ; Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Software ; Visualization ; Writing – review & editing Ludo Waltman : Investigation ; Methodology ; Writing – review & editing Dakota Murray : Conceptualization ; Formal analysis ; Investigation ; Methodology ; Project administration ; Software ; Visualization ; Writing – original draft ; Writing – review & editing Funding Information Dakota Murray is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550 - 19 - 1 - 039 . Vincent Larivière acknowledges funding from the Canada Research Chairs program . Data Availability Statement The Elsevier full - text data and the Web of Science bibliographic data used in this study were obtained from proprietary data sources . We are not allowed to share the raw data on which our study is based . We do have permission from Elsevier to share a data set containing the 455 , 625 citing sentences identified using our disagreement queries . This data set is available in Zenodo ( Lamers & Van Eck , 2021 ) . 18 References Alén , E . , Domínguez , T . , & de Carlos , P . ( 2015 ) . University students׳ perceptions of the use of academic debates as a teaching methodology . Journal of Hospitality , Leisure , Sport & Tourism Education , 16 , 15 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jhlste . 2014 . 11 . 001 Balietti , S . , Mäs , M . , & Helbing , D . ( 2015 ) . On Disciplinary Fragmentation and Scientific Progress . PLOS ONE , 10 ( 3 ) , e0118747 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0118747 Baron , M . G . , Norman , D . B . , & Barrett , P . M . ( 2017 ) . A new hypothesis of dinosaur relationships and early dinosaur evolution . Nature , 543 ( 7646 ) , 501 – 506 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature21700 Bertin , M . , Atanassova , I . , Sugimoto , C . R . , & Lariviere , V . ( 2016 ) . The linguistic patterns and rhetorical structure of citation context : An approach using n - grams . Scientometrics , 109 ( 3 ) , 1417 – 1434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 016 - 2134 - 8 Biglan , A . ( 1973 ) . The characteristics of subject matter in different academic areas . Journal of Applied Psychology , 57 ( 3 ) , 195 – 203 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0034701 Bornmann , L . , Wray , K . B . , & Haunschild , R . ( 2020 ) . Citation concept analysis ( CCA ) : A new form of citation analysis revealing the usefulness of concepts for other researchers illustrated by exemplary case studies including classic books by Thomas S . Kuhn and Karl R . Popper . Scientometrics , 122 ( 2 ) , 1051 – 1074 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 019 - 03326 - 2 Boyack , K . W . , van Eck , N . J . , Colavizza , G . , & Waltman , L . ( 2018 ) . Characterizing in - text citations in scientific articles : A large - scale analysis . Journal of Informetrics , 12 ( 1 ) , 59 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2017 . 11 . 005 19 Bruggeman , J . , Traag , V . A . , & Uitermark , J . ( 2012 ) . Detecting Communities through Network Data . American Sociological Review , 77 ( 6 ) , 1050 – 1063 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0003122412463574 Bruschke , J . , & Divine , L . ( 2017 ) . Debunking Nixon’s radio victory in the 1960 election : Re - analyzing the historical record and considering currently unexamined polling data . The Social Science Journal , 54 ( 1 ) , 67 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . soscij . 2016 . 09 . 007 Castelvecchi , D . ( 2020 ) . Mystery over Universe’s expansion deepens with fresh data . Nature , 583 ( 7817 ) , 500 – 501 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / d41586 - 020 - 02126 - 6 Catalini , C . , Lacetera , N . , & Oettl , A . ( 2015 ) . The incidence and role of negative citations in science . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112 ( 45 ) , 13823 – 13826 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1502280112 Cetina , K . K . ( 1999 ) . Epistemic Cultures : How the Sciences Make Knowledge . Harvard University Press . Chen , C . , Song , M . , & Heo , G . E . ( 2018 ) . A Scalable and Adaptive Method for Finding Semantically Equivalent Cue Words of Uncertainty . Journal of Informetrics , 12 ( 1 ) , 158 – 180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2017 . 12 . 004 Cole , S . ( 1983 ) . The Hierarchy of the Sciences ? American Journal of Sociology , 89 ( 1 ) , 111 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 227835 Cole , S . , Simon , G . , & Cole , J . R . ( 1988 ) . Do Journal Rejection Rates Index Consensus ? American Sociological Review , 53 ( 1 ) , 152 – 156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2095740 Collins , H . ( 2017 ) . Gravity’s Kiss : The Detection of Gravitational Waves ( 1st edition ) . The MIT Press . 20 Colston , N . M . , & Vadjunec , J . M . ( 2015 ) . A critical political ecology of consensus : On “Teaching Both Sides” of climate change controversies . Geoforum , 65 , 255 – 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . geoforum . 2015 . 08 . 006 Comte , A . ( 1856 ) . The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte . Calvin Blanchard . Debat , P . , Nikiéma , S . , Mercier , A . , Lompo , M . , Béziat , D . , Bourges , F . , Roddaz , M . , Salvi , S . , Tollon , F . , & Wenmenga , U . ( 2003 ) . A new metamorphic constraint for the Eburnean orogeny from Paleoproterozoic formations of the Man shield ( Aribinda and Tampelga countries , Burkina Faso ) . Precambrian Research , 123 ( 1 ) , 47 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 9268 ( 03 ) 00046 - 9 Dieckmann , N . F . , & Johnson , B . B . ( 2019 ) . Why do scientists disagree ? Explaining and improving measures of the perceived causes of scientific disputes . PLOS ONE , 14 ( 2 ) , e0211269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0211269 Doody , O . , & Condon , M . ( 2012 ) . Increasing student involvement and learning through using debate as an assessment . Nurse Education in Practice , 12 ( 4 ) , 232 – 237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nepr . 2012 . 03 . 002 Ersoy , A . F . ( 2010 ) . Social studies teacher candidates’ views on the controversial issues incorporated into their courses in Turkey . Teaching and Teacher Education , 26 ( 2 ) , 323 – 334 . Evans , E . , Gomez , C . , & McFarland , D . ( 2016 ) . Measuring Paradigmaticness of Disciplines Using Text . Sociological Science , 3 , 757 – 778 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15195 / v3 . a32 Fanelli , D . ( 2010 ) . “Positive” Results Increase Down the Hierarchy of the Sciences . PLOS ONE , 5 ( 4 ) , e10068 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0010068 21 Fanelli , D . , & Glänzel , W . ( 2013 ) . Bibliometric Evidence for a Hierarchy of the Sciences . PLOS ONE , 8 ( 6 ) , e66938 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0066938 French , B . M . , & Koeberl , C . ( 2010 ) . The convincing identification of terrestrial meteorite impact structures : What works , what doesn’t , and why . Earth - Science Reviews , 98 ( 1 ) , 123 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . earscirev . 2009 . 10 . 009 Hargens , L . L . ( 1988 ) . Scholarly Consensus and Journal Rejection Rates . American Sociological Review , 53 ( 1 ) , 139 – 151 . He , J . , & Chen , C . ( 2018 ) . Temporal Representations of Citations for Understanding the Changing Roles of Scientific Publications . Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics , 3 , 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / frma . 2018 . 00027 Hyland , K . ( 1998 ) . Hedging in Scientific Research Articles ( Vol . 54 ) . John Benjamins Publishing Company . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1075 / pbns . 54 Kalter , H . ( 2003 ) . Teratology in the 20th century : Environmental causes of congenital malformations in humans and how they were established . Neurotoxicology and Teratology , 25 ( 2 ) , 131 – 282 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0892 - 0362 ( 03 ) 00010 - 2 Kitcher , P . ( 1995 ) . Advancement of Science : Science Without Legend , Objectivity Without Illusions . Oxford University Press . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1996 ) . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions ( 3rd edition ) . University of Chicago Press . Kusky , T . M . ( 2011 ) . Geophysical and geological tests of tectonic models of the North China Craton . Gondwana Research , 20 ( 1 ) , 26 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . gr . 2011 . 01 . 004 22 Kusky , T . M . , & Li , J . ( 2003 ) . Paleoproterozoic tectonic evolution of the North China Craton . Journal of Asian Earth Sciences , 22 ( 4 ) , 383 – 397 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1367 - 9120 ( 03 ) 00071 - 3 Lamers , W . S . , & Van Eck , N . J . ( 2021 ) . Measuring Disagreement in Science [ Data set ] . Zenodo . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 5148058 Lamont , M . ( 2009 ) . How Professors Think : Inside the Curious World of Academic Judgment . Harvard University Press . Langer , M . C . , Ezcurra , M . D . , Rauhut , O . W . M . , Benton , M . J . , Knoll , F . , McPhee , B . W . , Novas , F . E . , Pol , D . , & Brusatte , S . L . ( 2017 ) . Untangling the dinosaur family tree . Nature , 551 ( 7678 ) , E1 – E3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature24011 Larivière , V . , Ni , C . , Gingras , Y . , Cronin , B . , & Sugimoto , C . R . ( 2013 ) . Bibliometrics : Global gender disparities in science . Nature News , 504 ( 7479 ) , 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 504211a Latour , B . ( 1988 ) . Science in Action : How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society ( Reprint edition ) . Harvard University Press . Li , Z . X . , Bogdanova , S . V . , Collins , A . S . , Davidson , A . , De Waele , B . , Ernst , R . E . , Fitzsimons , I . C . W . , Fuck , R . A . , Gladkochub , D . P . , Jacobs , J . , Karlstrom , K . E . , Lu , S . , Natapov , L . M . , Pease , V . , Pisarevsky , S . A . , Thrane , K . , & Vernikovsky , V . ( 2008 ) . Assembly , configuration , and break - up history of Rodinia : A synthesis . Precambrian Research , 160 ( 1 ) , 179 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . precamres . 2007 . 04 . 021 Millan , M . J . ( 2006 ) . Multi - target strategies for the improved treatment of depressive states : Conceptual foundations and neuronal substrates , drug discovery and therapeutic 23 application . Pharmacology & Therapeutics , 110 ( 2 ) , 135 – 370 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2005 . 11 . 006 Miranda , R . , & Garcia - Carpintero , E . ( 2018 ) . Overcitation and overrepresentation of review papers in the most cited papers . Journal of Informetrics , 12 ( 4 ) , 1015 – 1030 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2018 . 08 . 006 Moravcsik , M . J . , & Murugesan , P . ( 1975 ) . Some Results on the Function and Quality of Citations . Social Studies of Science , 5 ( 1 ) , 86 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 030631277500500106 Munro , S . ( 2003 ) . Lipid Rafts : Elusive or Illusive ? Cell , 115 ( 4 ) , 377 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00882 - 1 Murphy , K . , Birn , R . M . , Handwerker , D . A . , Jones , T . B . , & Bandettini , P . A . ( 2009 ) . The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations : Are anti - correlated networks introduced ? NeuroImage , 44 ( 3 ) , 893 – 905 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2008 . 09 . 036 Nam , C . W . ( 2014 ) . The effects of trust and constructive controversy on student achievement and attitude in online cooperative learning environments . Computers in Human Behavior , 37 , 237 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2014 . 05 . 007 Nicholson , J . M . , Mordaunt , M . , Lopez , P . , Uppala , A . , Rosati , D . , Rodrigues , N . P . , Grabitz , P . , & Rife , S . C . ( 2021 ) . scite : A smart citation index that displays the context of citations and classifies their intent using deep learning . BioRxiv , 2021 . 03 . 15 . 435418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 03 . 15 . 435418 24 Nicolaisen , J . , & Frandsen , T . F . ( 2012 ) . Consensus formation in science modeled by aggregated bibliographic coupling . Journal of Informetrics , 6 ( 2 ) , 276 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2011 . 08 . 001 North China Craton . ( 2020 ) . In Wikipedia . https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = North _ China _ Craton & oldid = 992585145 Oreskes , N . , & Conway , E . M . ( 2011 ) . Merchants of Doubt : How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Climate Change ( Reprint edition ) . Bloomsbury Publishing . Popper , K . ( 1963 ) . Conjectures and Refutations : The Growth of Scientific Knowledge ( 2nd edition ) . Routledge . Radicchi , F . ( 2012 ) . In science “there is no bad publicity” : Papers criticized in comments have high scientific impact . Scientific Reports , 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep00815 Rife , S . C . , Rosati , D . , & Nicholson , J . M . ( 2021 ) . scite : The next generation of citations . Learned Publishing . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / leap . 1379 Sarewitz , D . ( 2011 ) . The voice of science : Let’s agree to disagree . Nature , 478 ( 7367 ) , 7 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 478007a Shapin , S . , & Schaffer , S . ( 2011 ) . Leviathan and the Air - Pump : Hobbes , Boyle , and the Experimental Life . Princeton University Press . Shwed , U . , & Bearman , P . S . ( 2010 ) . The Temporal Structure of Scientific Consensus Formation . American Sociological Review , 75 ( 6 ) , 817 – 840 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0003122410388488 Shwed , U . , & Bearman , P . S . ( 2012 ) . Symmetry Is Beautiful . American Sociological Review , 77 ( 6 ) , 1064 – 1069 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0003122412463018 25 Small , H . ( 2018 ) . Characterizing highly cited method and non - method papers using citation contexts : The role of uncertainty . Journal of Informetrics , 12 ( 2 ) , 461 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2018 . 03 . 007 Small , H . , Boyack , K . W . , & Klavans , R . ( 2019 ) . Citations and certainty : A new interpretation of citation counts . Scientometrics , 118 ( 3 ) , 1079 – 1092 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 019 - 03016 - z Small , H . , Tseng , H . , & Patek , M . ( 2017 ) . Discovering discoveries : Identifying biomedical discoveries using citation contexts . Journal of Informetrics , 11 ( 1 ) , 46 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2016 . 11 . 001 Smolin , L . ( 2007 ) . The Trouble With Physics : The Rise of String Theory , The Fall of a Science , and What Comes Next by Lee Smolin . Mariner Books . Stepanova , O . , & Bruckmeier , K . ( 2013 ) . The relevance of environmental conflict research for coastal management . A review of concepts , approaches and methods with a focus on Europe . Ocean & Coastal Management , 75 , 20 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ocecoaman . 2013 . 01 . 007 Szarvas , G . , Vincze , V . , Farkas , R . , Móra , G . , & Gurevych , I . ( 2012 ) . Cross - Genre and Cross - Domain Detection of Semantic Uncertainty . Computational Linguistics , 38 ( 2 ) , 335 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / COLI _ a _ 00098 Tannen , D . ( 2002 ) . Agonism in academic discourse . Journal of Pragmatics , 34 ( 10 ) , 1651 – 1669 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0378 - 2166 ( 02 ) 00079 - 6 Teufel , S . , Siddharthan , A . , & Tidhar , D . ( 2006 ) . Automatic Classification of Citation Function . Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 103 – 110 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1610075 . 1610091 26 The power of disagreement . ( 2016 ) . Nature Methods , 13 ( 3 ) , 185 – 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3798 Valenzuela , M . , Ha , V . , & Etzioni , O . ( 2015 ) . Identifying Meaningful Citations . AAAI Workshop : Scholarly Big Data . van Eck , N . J . , & Waltman , L . ( 2010 ) . Software survey : VOSviewer , a computer program for bibliometric mapping . Scientometrics , 84 ( 2 ) , 523 – 538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 009 - 0146 - 3 Whitley , R . ( 2000 ) . The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences ( 2nd edition ) . Oxford University Press . Wilde , S . A . , Zhao , G . , & Sun , M . ( 2002 ) . Development of the North China Craton During the Late Archaean and its Final Amalgamation at 1 . 8 Ga : Some Speculations on its Position Within a Global Palaeoproterozoic Supercontinent . Gondwana Research , 5 ( 1 ) , 85 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1342 - 937X ( 05 ) 70892 - 3 Wuchty , S . , Jones , B . F . , & Uzzi , B . ( 2007 ) . The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of Knowledge . Science , 316 ( 5827 ) , 1036 – 1039 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1136099 Yang , H . , Roeck , A . D . , Gervasi , V . , Willis , A . , & Nuseibeh , B . ( 2012 ) . Speculative requirements : Automatic detection of uncertainty in natural language requirements . 2012 20th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference ( RE ) , 11 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RE . 2012 . 6345795 Zhai , M . - G . , & Santosh , M . ( 2011 ) . The early Precambrian odyssey of the North China Craton : A synoptic overview . Gondwana Research , 20 ( 1 ) , 6 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . gr . 2011 . 02 . 005 27 Zhao , G . , Sun , M . , Wilde , S . A . , & Sanzhong , L . ( 2005 ) . Late Archean to Paleoproterozoic evolution of the North China Craton : Key issues revisited . Precambrian Research , 136 ( 2 ) , 177 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . precamres . 2004 . 10 . 002 Zhao , G . , Wilde , S . A . , Cawood , P . A . , & Sun , M . ( 2001 ) . Archean blocks and their boundaries in the North China Craton : Lithological , geochemical , structural and P – T path constraints and tectonic evolution . Precambrian Research , 107 ( 1 ) , 45 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 9268 ( 00 ) 00154 - 6 28 Supporting Information S1 Text : Disciplinary artifacts in queries The incidence of citation sentences returned by each query are not uniform across all signal and filter term combinations . There are far more publications from the Biomedical and Health Sciences ( Bio & Health ) than in other fields , accounting for a total of 47 . 5 % of all publications indexed in the Web of Science Database ; in contrast , publications in Math and Computer Sciences ( Math & Comp ) comprise a far smaller proportion of the database , accounting for only 3 . 1 percent . Even accounting for the different number of publications per field , we still observe that some signal terms appear more in certain fields than expected , often as a result of differences in disciplinary jargon , topics , and norms ( Figure SI 2b ) . For example , there are more conflict * citances than expected in Social Sciences and Humanities ( Soc & Hum ) , where it often appears in relation to conflict as a topic of study , such as the study of international conflict , conflict theory , or other interpersonal conflicts ( Table SI 3 , I ) . Similarly , disprov * citances appear more often in Math & Comp , where disprove is often used in relation to proving or disproving theorems and other mathematical proofs ( Table SI 3 , II ) . Other notable differences are controvers * citances appearing more often in Bio & Health , debat * appearing most often in the Life and Earth Sciences ( Life & Earth ) , and disagree * appearing most in Physical Sciences and Engineering ( Phys & Engr ) . Filter terms are also non - randomly distributed across fields ( Figure SI 2c ) . For example , the + ideas filter term appears more often than expected in Soc & Hum , possibly as a result of disciplinary norms around use and discussion of abstract theories and concepts ( Table SI 3 , III ) . In contrast , + methods is over - represented in Phys & Engr and Math & Comp , likely a result of these field’s focus on methods and technique ( Table SI 3 , IV ) . Notably , + studies and + results are under - represented among Math & Comp publications , whereas + ideas and + methods are underrepresented among papers in the Biomedical and Health Sciences . The complexity of disciplinary differences between queries is made apparent when examining combinations of signal and filter phrases ( Figure SI 2d ) . While there are no obvious or consistent patterns between fields , there are particular differences by field . For example , compared to all other fields contravers * citances are over - represented in Bio & Health ( Table SI 3 , V ) , except for contravers + ideas , which is instead slightly over - represented in Life & Earth . In contrast , disagree * citances are under - represented in Bio & Health , but over - represented in Life & Earth and Phys & Engr ( Table SI 3 , VI ) . In some cases , the specific signal + filter term combination has a massive effect , such as no consensus + ideas , which is heavily over - represented in Soc & Hum ( Table SI 3 , VII ) , whereas all other signal and filter term combinations are under - represented . Similarly , contradict * + ideas and contradict * + methods are over - represented in Math & Comp ( Table SI 3 , VIII ) , whereas + results and + studies are underrepresented . Similar intricacies abound across the 325 combinations of signal term , filter term , and field , and demonstrate the importance that field plays in the utility and significance of our signal and filter terms . Especially at the fine - grained field level , methodological artifacts can drive differences we observe between meso - fields . For example , in Soc & Hum , one of the meso - fields with the most disagreement was composed of papers from journals such as “ Political Studies” and “ International Relations” —journals and fields for which “debates” and “conflicts” are objects of study , which could confound the debat * and conflict * signal terms . This is demonstrated by the following invalid citation sentences : 1 . “Since the late - 1990s , there has been even less room for debate within the party ( . . . ) . ” 2 . “Indeed , this whole idea harkens back to the badges of slavery of the 13th Amendment and the debate in ( . . . ) . ” 3 . “In political behaviour literature , we refer to such conflictive opinions as “ambivalence” ( . . . ) . ” 29 4 . “In politics as usual , people often do not like to see the conflicts and disagreements common to partisan debate ( . . . ) . ” Even though terms such as “public debate” , and “parliamentary debate” were excluded ( Table 1 ) , the debat * signal terms were over - represented in Soc & Hum ( Figure SI 2 ) ; conflict * was also overrepresented to a lesser extent . Interpretation of the results for main and meso - fields needs to be moderated by these , and other confounding artifacts ( see the Supporting Information for further discussion ) . S2 Text : Robustness To test the robustness of our results , we compare findings using the 23 queries with greater than 80 % validity to those using the 36 queries with greater than 70 % validity . The new queries include c ontradict * _ standalone _ , contrary + studies , contrary + methods , conflict * + results , disagree * + methods , disagree * + ideas , disprov * + methods , disprov * + ideas , refut * + studies , refut * + results , refut * + ideas , debat * + ideas , and questionable + ideas . Queries above the 80 % validity cutoff account for 455 , 625 citances ; the addition of 13 queries above the 70 % cutoff bring this total to 574 , 020 . We find that our findings are robust whether using an 80 % or 70 % validity cutoff . Relaxing the validity cutoff results in including more citances , inflating the share of disagreement across all results . However , the qualitative interpretation of these results does not change ( Table SI 4 ) . The 80 % and 70 % cutoffs both produce the same ordering of fields from most to least disagreement . Similarly , the ordering of fields from high - to - low disagreement holds between the 80 % and 70 % cutoff for all quantities presented here , including the average change per year , the ratio of disagreement between non - self - citation and self - citation , and the average change in disagreement per age bin . Some fields gain more from these new queries more than others , manifesting in more or less intense field differences in findings . For example , Soc & Hum gains a full 17 percentage points in overall disagreement with the 70 % threshold , with the increase across all fields at only 8 points . Similarly , the ratio of non - self - citation to self - citation is 2 . 2x for Math & Comp with the 80 % cutoff , but only 1 . 3x for the 70 % cutoff . This likely stems from the relative skew of the added queries to certain fields , leading to larger gains in disagreement . S3 Text : Disagreement by contextual factors Paper age Other contextual factors may relate to disagreement . For example , authors may disagree with more recent papers at different rates than older ones . We quantify disagreement based on the age of a cited paper , relative to the citing paper . Following a brief bump , or increase in disagreement ( at 05 - 09 years ) , older papers tend to be receive fewer disagreement citances ( Figure SI 4 ) , a pattern driven by field differences . Low consensus , high complexity fields such as Soc & Hum and Bio & Health both exhibit a clear decreasing pattern , with falling disagreement as the paper ages . Life & Earth , in the middle of the hierarchy , repeats this pattern , but only after a period of stability in disagreement in the first ten years . Disagreement instead steadily increases over time in high consensus and low complexity fields such as Phys & Engr and Math & Comp . Position in the paper Disagreement is not equally likely to occur throughout a paper . Investigating the distribution of disagreement citances across papers , we find that they are far more likely to occur in the beginning of a paper , likely in the introduction , and then towards the end , likely the discussion section ( Figure SI 5 ) , corresponding to previous observations of disagreement cue phrases in PLoS journals ( Bertin et a . , 2016 ) , and likely indicating a unique argumentative role of disagreement . The precise patterns differ by field . For example , in Soc & Hum , disagreement citances are more evenly distributed through the first 40 percent of the paper , whereas in Bio & Health and Life & Earth disagreement citations are more likely to appear near the end of a paper . While these field level differences may reflect differences in how fields use citations , 30 they are more likely the result of distinct article formats across fields ( i . e . , long literature reviews in Soc & Hum ) . Gender of citing - paper author Men and women authors may be more likely disagree at different rates . To test this , we infer a gender for the first and last authors of papers with a disagreement citance published after 2008 , determined based on the author’s first name as in past work ( Larivière et al . , 2013 ) . Overall , there is little difference in the rate of disagreement between men and women first and last authors ( Figure SI 6 ) . The one exception is Math and Computer science , where women last authors disagree 1 . 2 times more often than men , though the rate of disagreement is small , and driven by a small number of instances . Self - citation We investigate the extent to which disagreement differs based on self - citation , that is when there is in the presence of overlap between the authors in a citing and the cited papers . We would expect that authors will be less likely to cite their own work in the context of disagreement , which is affirmed by our indicator . Overall , the rate of disagreement among non - self - citing papers is 2 . 4 times greater than for self - citation citances ( Figure SI 3 ) . The field with the largest difference is Bio & Health ( 2 . 5 times greater ) , followed by Phys & Engr ( 2 . 2 times greater ) , Math & Comp ( 2 . 2 times greater ) , Life & Earth ( 1 . 9 times greater ) , and finally , Soc & Hum ( 1 . 6 times greater ) . S4 Text : Papers with most disagreement citances While the extensive manual validation of our queries and results ensures the robustness of our analysis at an aggregate scale , the list of publications issuing most disagreement citations does reveal that it remains difficult to separate research object from commentary on cited material . Table SI 6 shows the papers that issue the most disagreement citations ; going through these papers reveals several artifacts . “Debating” and “debates” are , for example , the object of study in Alén et al . ( 2015 ) and Doody & Condon ( 2012 ) , and the citances in the paper reflect this , e . g . “students also seem to both enjoy debates and recognise their value” and “debate is effective in helping students learn a discipline and demonstrate the ability to read and write critically . ” Controversy , likewise , is the subject in Ersoy ( 2010 ) , Nam ( 2014 ) , and Colston & Vadjunec ( 2015 ) , as are environmental conflicts in Stepanova & Bruckmeier ( 2013 ) . Bruschke & Divine ( 2017 ) makes frequent mention of the first televised US presidential debate . This leaves French & Koeberl ( 2010 ) , Kalter ( 2003 ) and Millan ( 2006 ) , three publications that do not immediately appear focused on subjects that would trigger our queries . French & Koeberl ( 2010 ) discusses methods for identifying meteorite impact structures on earth , “as well as an overview of doubtful criteria or ambiguous lines of evidence that have erroneously been applied in the past” , and this paper indeed cites many sources in the context of controversy , e . g . “the identification of such glasses as impact or non - impact products is difficult and commonly controversial , ” “the impact origin for many glasses still remains controversial and unconfirmed , ” “there are also debates about the formation of maskelynite itself” and “the nature , characteristics , and causes of these changes have been widely studied and are still being debated . ” Kalter ( 2003 ) , while classified as a full - length article , is a book that was also included in a special issue of the journal Neurotoxicology and Teratology . Considered a pillar in the study of congenital abnormalities , its exceptional length may account in part for its high number of disagreement citances . One of these citances describes “a discussion—debate better characterizes it—that took place in 1953 , ” but many others indeed refer to scientific disagreements within the field of study , e . g . “a Mayo Clinic study seemed to agree , despite conflicting evidence , ” “a contrary finding came from Scotland , another high - risk region , ” “an early analysis , as well as a later one , disagreed” and “earlier retrospective and prospective studies had been contradictory . ” 31 Millan ( 2006 ) is a review article making a case for multi - target agents to treat depressive states . It likewise introduces a number of citances that indeed signify disagreement in the scientific literature , e . g . “the gravity of cognitive impairment in young patients is still debated , ” “this notion remains somewhat controversial , ” “its precise degree of efficacy in this regard is still debated” and “for recent critical discussions of these controversial issues – from a variety of viewpoints – see [ … ] . ” However , a few false positives also occur , when citing the work of an author by the name of DeBattisa , whose name was caught by our debate query . S5 Text : papers most often cited in the context of disagreement We also examine disagreement form the cited paper perspective , that is , by looking at those papers that received the most paper - level disagreement citations and which were most often cited in the context of community - level disagreement . Table SI 7 lists these papers , and again we reveal issues with methodological artifacts , but also highlight interesting instances of controversy in the literature . The majority of these publications relate to plate tectonics , and in particular , the North China Craton . These papers include Zhao , Sun , Wilde , and Sanzhong ( 2005 ) , Kusky and Li ( 2003 ) , Zhao , Wilde , Cawood , and Sun ( 2001 ) , Zhai and Santosh ( 2011 ) ¸ Wilde , Zhao , and Sun ( 2002 ) and Kusky ( 2011 ) . Li et al . ( 2008 ) also appears to be closely related . Several of these publications have authors in common , notably Zhao ( 3 ) , Wilde ( 3 ) , Sun ( 3 ) , Kusky ( 2 ) and Li ( 2 ) . Zhai and Santosh ( 2011 ) summarizes the situation as follows : “A long controversy and debate surround the evolution of the NCC , particularly the timing and tectonic processes involved in the amalgamation of the Eastern ( Yanliao ) and Western ( Ordos and Yinshan ) Blocks along the Central Orogenic Belt . One school of thought proposes an east - directed subduction of an old ocean , with final collision between the two blocks at ~ 1 . 85 Ga < several citations to Zhao’s work > . In contrast , some others suggest a westward subduction , with final collision between the two blocks to form the NCC at ~ 2 . 5 Ga < several citations to Kusky’s work > . ” The majority of disagreement citances to these papers also mention this long - standing scientific controversy , including phrases such as ,  “the number of continental blocks and the mechanism by which they were welded together to form the coherent basement remain controversial , ”  “tectonic history of this central region is in debate , ”  “it is currently debated how the collisional processes proceeded , ”  “controversy still remains as to the timing and tectonic processes involved , ”  “it still remains controversial as to how the craton should be subdivided and where the collisional boundaries are located , ”  “models that evaluate the Paleoproterozoic crustal evolution of the NCC remain controversial , ”  “the timing of the collision between these blocks remains controversial , ”  “this controversy is also reflected in various tectonic models for the NCC ' ' and  “the time of the amalgamation between the Eastern Block and the Western block is still debated , ” These phrases are often accompanied by a large number of citations to papers by Zhao and Kusky , with both authors either explicitly posed as opposing one another like in the example from Zhai & Santosh ( 2011 ) above , or citations to their papers grouped together as if to present a large body of conflicting literature . It is clear that this scientific controversy dominates scholarship on the North China Cranton , to the point that even Wikipedia mentions it extensively ( “North China Craton , ” 2020 ) . It should be noted that the works by Zhao and Kusky also receive a fair share of citations that mention their empirical and theoretical contributions , without the context of disagreement , making material research contributions to both their 32 preferred model and the research on the cranton at large . The high share of disagreement citances to these papers appears to stem from the highly divided nature of their research field . The three remaining papers cover different topics . Munro ( 2003 ) reviews literature on lipids in cell membranes of eukaryotic cells and discusses the ( non ) existence of lipid rafts . It points out that , regardless of enthusiasm for the lipid raft model in the research community , observations of these raft structures are problematic and several factors exist that cast doubt on the model . The existence of lipid rafts should therefore be treated as hypothetical rather than established fact . Citances that mention this paper in the context of disagreement also appear to use it as an exemplar of controversy in the field , with phrasing such as ,  “the entity of lipid microdomains is controversial , ”  “the existence of noncaveolar lipid rafts in vivo is still debated , ”  “this early operative definition of lipid rafts was subject of much debate , ”  “the lipid raft concept has been controversial since it was introduced several decades ago” and  “a number of points have been recently debated in the literature . ” Even many citances that do not qualify as disagreement per our operationalization appear to still signal it , e . g .  “rafts still remain a hypothesis , ”  “evidence that lipid rafts exist in living cells remains elusive , ”  “the classical perception of rafts as stable entities within the fluid bilayer has provoked some opposition , ”  “the biological substrate for this notion is not clearly defined” and  “isolation of DRM or lipid rafts is however a delicate matter . ” This paper , specifically , serves as a focal point of controversy within the community researching lipid rafts precisely because its primary purpose appears to be to create this controversy ; raising concerns about the lipid raft model and calling for a reevaluation of its canonicity in the face of shaky foundational evidence of the existence of these rafts . This is different from the North China Cranton papers , where controversy is long established in the field . Murphy et al . ( 2009 ) focuses on a pre - processing method used in low - frequency fMRI research , called global signal regression . This paper alleges that the method is inadequate and “may cause spurious findings of negatively correlated regions in the brain . ” This paper appears to have heralded a change in how data is handled in this research field , with many citances mentioning it to explain why data was processed differently , e . g .  “the global signal was not regressed out due to its controversial biological interpretations , ”  “given the controversy of removing the global signal in the preprocessed rs - fMRI data , we did not regress the global signal out in the present study , ”  “global signal regression is a somewhat controversial part of the preprocessing pipeline for resting state MRI data , and was not performed in this study” and  “given the controversy of removing the global signal in the preprocessing of R - fMRI data [ … ] , we did not regress the global signal out . ” Other citances in the context of disagreement simply point out this controversy , e . g . 33  “there is ongoing debate as to the nature of anti - correlations introduced by global signal regression”  “in recent years there has been an ongoing debate on global signal removal in the preprocessing . ” As with the lipid raft paper , many citances that do not qualify as disagreement also embrace the controversy , as evident in phrasing such as “global - signal was not included in the model for its effects on brain – behavior correlations” and “we decided against this approach as several recent studies showed that global signal regression may significantly bias connectivity analyses . ” Finally , Debat et al . ( 2003 ) is another example of a false positive result of our approach , in which the lead author’s name activated the debate query . While this is unfortunate , our extensive manual validation of our query results shows that despite this prominent false positive , there were no large systemic flaws in our approach that might otherwise color our analysis at the aggregate level . While eliminating cited author names from citances at scale is not trivial , this example serves to stress the importance of text pre - processing . S6 Text : Disagreement and citation impact To address whether publications cited in the context of disagreement citation were cited at different rates than their counterparts , we compared the number of citations received in year t + 1 for papers that featured in a disagreement citance for the first time in year t , with the average number of citations received in year t + 1 by papers that received the exact same number of citations in year t . This over - or undercitation of individual papers that encountered disagreement can then be aggregated to arrive at the average under - or overcitation of ‘disagreed - with’ papers in general . We define t as the time in years since publication and c as the number of citations a paper received at time t . We calculate for each combination of t and c the number of papers 𝑝 𝑐 , 𝑡 that were first cited in the context of disagreement at time t when they held c citations . Using these , we calculate the number of citations received by these papers in the year following publication , averaged across all combinations of t and c , 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 = ∑ ∑ 𝑝 𝑐 , 𝑡 ∗ 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 , 𝑐 , 𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 ∑ ∑ 𝑝 𝑐 , 𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 In the same way , we also calculate the expected number of citations , defined using the average number of citations received by papers that received c citations in year t , regardless of whether they were cited by a disagreement citation . 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 = ∑ ∑ 𝑝 𝑐 , 𝑡 ∗ 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 , 𝑐 , 𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 ∑ ∑ 𝑝 𝑐 , 𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 We calculated d as the ratio of these two values . When greater than one , it indicates that papers received more citations than expected in the year after having been cited in the context of disagreement . A value less than one indicates that papers with a disagreement citation received fewer citations in the year following . 𝑑 = 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐̅ 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 The results of this analysis ( Table SI 5 ) show that being cited in a context of disagreement has little to no effect on the citations received by papers in the year following their citation ( or not ) in the context of disagreement . Extending the analysis to citations received in year t + 2 and t + 3 yielded similar results . We also investigate whether disagreement relates to the number of citations a paper receives . First , we examine the citing paper perspective , identifying the 3 . 5 percent ( n = 126 , 250 ) of publications that contain 34 at least one disagreement citance in their text . Across all publications , those with at least one disagreement citance tended to receive more citations than those without disagreement in the first four years , beginning with one additional citation in the first year following publication , and expanding to a difference of about 4 . 7 citations by the fourth year ( Figure SI 7 ) , an effect that varies , yet is qualitatively consistent across all fields . This effect may be confounded by article type—for example , review articles are over - represented in terms of disagreement—24 . 6 percent of all review articles contain a disagreement citance—and review articles are also known to be more highly cited ( Miranda & Garcia - Carpintero , 2018 ) . While excluding review articles does shrink this gap , the citation count for full research articles ( 85 percent of all publications ) remains 2 . 5 citations higher for those with a disagreement than for those without . We note that these results are confounded by our umbrella definition of disagreement , which does not differentiate between paper - level and community - level disagreement . Paper - level disagreement , that is when the author of the citing paper explicitly contrasts their study with another , is a straightforward example of issuing ( by the citing paper ) and receiving ( by the cited paper ) disagreement . Community - level disagreement , in contrast , either involves a citing author rhetorically positioning two or more papers as being in disagreement , or citing a past paper , such as a review , as evidence of the controversy surrounding a topic . While these two cases offer evidence of disagreement in the field , their potential for identifying specific , controversial papers , as in Radicchi ( 2012 ) , is less clear . Future research should aim to disentangle paper - level and community - level disagreement , and understand their varying relationship to citation impact . 35 Figure SI 1 . Percent of all citances returned by each of the 23 queries with validity over 80 percent . Each panel corresponds to the signal phrase , and lines within each panel to filter phrases . 36 Figure SI 2 . Distribution of citances returned by signal / filter term queries . Callouts ( I , II , … , VIII ) map to examples in Table SI 3 . a . Distribution of all disagreement citances appearing in papers across five fields : Biomedical and Health Sciences , Life and Earth sciences , Physical Sciences and Engineering , Social Sciences and Humanities , and Math and Computer Science . b - d . Percentage change between the actual number of citances per field and signal / filter term combination compared to the expected given the disciplinary distribution ( from a ) . The red line corresponds to 0 percent increase between the actual and expected . White dots indicate that the citances for that signal / filter term are under - represented ( lower than expected , ratio less than zero ) , whereas black dots indicate that citances are over - represented ( more than expected ) . Shown aggregated across signal terms ( b ) , filter terms ( c ) , and for all signal / filter term combinations ( d ) . 37 Figure SI 3 . Authors disagree less when citing their own work . Percentage of disagreement citances among instances of non - self and self - citation , 2000 - 2015 . A citance is defined as a self - citation when the citing and cited paper have at least one name in common . Results are shown by field . Numbers below each bar are the number of disagreement citances . Overall , disagreement is 2 . 4 times more common for non - self citation than for self - citation , with variance between major fields . 38 Figure SI 4 . On average , older papers are less likely to receive a disagreement citance , though this trend does not hold for the “hard” sciences . Percentage of disagreement citances by the relative age of the citing to the cited paper , in years , and high - level field , for papers published between 2000 and 2015 . Intensity of color corresponds to the age category of the cited paper . 39 Figure SI 5 . Distribution of citances by their position in the text of the manuscript , and by field . Shown for all citances ( solid line ) and disagreement citances ( dotted line ) . For example , about 15 % of disagreement citances in Physical Sciences and Engineering appear in the first 0 - 5 percent of the sentences in documents . 40 Figure SI 6 . Little difference in disagreement between men and women . Percentage of disagreement citances by gender of the citing - paper author , their authorship position ( first or last ) , and the high - level field . Numbers above each bar corresponds to the ratio difference between the percentage of disagreement between women and men . The number below each bar corresponds to the number of disagreement citances . we infer a gender for the first and last authors of papers with a disagreement citance published after 2008 , determined based on the author’s first name as in past work ( Larivière et al . , 2013 ) . 41 Figure SI 7 . Full research articles with a disagreement citance are cited more . The y - axis shows the difference in average citation counts for papers containing at least one disagreement citance , and for papers without . Positive values indicate that publications with disagreement received more citations than those without . Values are shown for the population of publications in each year following publication ( x - axis ) . Shown here for only articles labeled in the Web of Science database as full research articles . 42 Table SI 1 . Number of citances in the Elsevier ScienceDirect database containing signal term ( rows ) and filter term ( columns ) combination . For some signal terms , variants are excluded ; for example , “not contradict” is not matched . For filter terms , “ _ standalone _ ” indicates that only the signal term was used to query . The remaining columns , + studies , + ideas , + methods , and + results correspond to sets of filter terms outlined in Table SI 2 . _ standalone _ + studies + ideas + methods + results challenge * 405 , 613 16 , 120 7 , 114 13 , 806 15 , 352 conflict * 212 , 246 22 , 190 3 , 603 5 , 560 49 , 961 contradict * 115 , 375 19 , 509 5 , 482 2 , 793 52 , 648 contrary 171 , 711 17 , 207 3 , 651 4 , 699 27 , 273 contrast * 1 , 257 , 866 116 , 450 7 , 774 37 , 372 119 , 181 controvers * 154 , 608 12 , 187 1 , 840 3 , 028 15 , 473 debat * 150 , 617 8 , 509 1 , 774 2 , 678 4 , 663 differ * 2 , 003 , 677 100 , 764 9 , 531 85 , 309 110 , 599 disagree * 52 , 615 5 , 724 1 , 142 1 , 682 12 , 459 disprov * 2 , 938 278 528 100 358 no consensus 16 , 632 1 , 424 37 830 421 questionable 24 , 244 1 , 045 852 1 , 175 2 , 050 refut * 10 , 322 1 , 399 1 , 564 338 2 , 262 43 Table SI 2 . Examples of valid and invalid citances returned for " challenge * " and filter term combinations . Signal terms are bolded and underlined , whereas relevant filter terms are underlined but not bolded . Filter term Valid Sentence Reference _ standalone _ Yes Although phosphorus has traditionally been seen as the limiting nutrient in freshwater ecosystems ( e . g . Blake et al . , 1997 ; Karl , 2000 ) , more recent evidence has begun to challenge this view and has demonstrated that both nitrogen and phosphorus can limit , or at least co - limit , primary production in freshwaters ( e . g . Elser et al . , 2007 ; Francoeur , 2001 ) . Smith et al . , 2009 _ standalone _ No Analogs of these molecules have shown up to 1000 - fold higher activity but are a great challenge to delivery because of their extreme hydrophobicity [ 33 ] . Brannon - Peppas & Blanchette , 2004 + studies Yes However , recent studies have challenged this survival benefit in comparison with current usual care . 4 - 6 Gottlieb et al . , 2015 + studies No The low affinity with which volatile general anesthetics bind to macromolecules has made conclusive identification of the in vivo targets by direct binding studies a challenge [ 1 ] . Zhang & Johansson , 2005 + ideas Yes This result challenges AUM theory ( Gudykunst , 2005 ) and some prior research ( e . g . Gao & Gudykunst , 1990 ) . Rui & Wang , 2015 + ideas No The description of the resonant electron capture by molecules connected with the formation of negative ions represents still the challenge for the theory [ 1 ] . Papp et al . , 2013 + methods Yes This model has since been challenged by claims that Helderberg formation boundaries are isochronous across the basin ( Anderson et al . , 1984 ; Demicco and Smith , 2009 ) . Husson et al . , 2015 + methods No Subsequent studies in the human challenge model have also supported the role of NA - specific antibody in protection . [ 34 ] Treanor , 2015 + results Yes It has been reported that the prevalence of autoimmune disorders in celiac disease is related to the duration of exposure to gluten [ 34 ] , although this result has been challenged [ 35 ] . Skovbjerg et al . , 2004 + results No Some of the larger challenges identified in Africa include data collection , access and management , infrastructure and capacity ( Han et al . , 2014 ) . Stephenson et al . , 2017 44 Table SI 3 . Examples of citances from notable signal / filter phrase combinations labeled in Figure XYZ . “ [ … ] ” has been used in places of reference names or numbers . Relevant signal terms have been bolded and underlined , whereas relevant filter terms have only been underlined . Label Signal Filter Valid Example I conflict * None No “For instance , [ … ] study conflicts based on ethnicity where ethnic identity works as a device to enforce coalition membership . ” II disprove * None No “These techniques are typically used to confirm or disprove an a priori hypothesized model , i . e . to test the statistical adequacy of a proposed causal model [ … ] ” III challenge * + ideas Yes “Reversal theory challenges the idea of personality traits in suggesting that people fluctuate between metamotivational states that are opposite and mutually exclusive [ … ] ” IV contradict * + methods Yes “The existence of topological singularities is in contradiction with [ … ] ’s method of continuous transformations of a rectangular Cartesian frame of coordinates into a curvilinear grid without singularities [ … ] . ” V controvers * + ideas Yes “There is still a considerable controversy about the idea of homology between specific areas of rat and primate PFC [ … ] . ” 45 VI disagree * + results Yes “These results were in disagreement with much of the literature , where there is consensus that , H2 is almost exclusively catalyzed by SRB at low COD / SO42 - ratios [ … ] ” VII no consensus + ideas Yes “Because of the controversial data collected , no consensus about this theory has been reached to date [ … ] . ” VIII contradict * + methods Yes “Thus , the approach is somewhat contradictory to certain approaches in robotics that strive to develop highly autonomous robots capable of performing independent decisions based on sensory data [ … ] . ” 46 Table SI 4 . Results are robust to both the 80 % and 70 % validity cutoffs . Quantities of interest using the 23 queries above the 80 % validity cutoff , and the 36 queries above the 70 % validity cutoff . Shown are the overall rates of disagreement and the change in the share of disagreement per year . Quantity Validity cutoff All Fields Soc & Hum Bio & Health Life & Earth Phys & Engr Math & Comp Overall 80 % 0 . 32 % 0 . 61 % 0 . 41 % 0 . 29 % 0 . 15 % 0 . 06 % 70 % 0 . 40 % 0 . 78 % 0 . 50 % 0 . 36 % 0 . 20 % 0 . 15 % Change per year 80 % - 0 . 0005 - 0 . 0033 + 0 . 0017 + 0 . 0018 - 0 . 0045 - 0 . 0019 70 % - 0 . 0005 - 0 . 0042 + 0 . 0022 + 0 . 0019 - 0 . 0061 - 0 . 0028 47 Table SI 5 . Being cited in the context of disagreement has little impact on citations in the year following . For each field , shown are the number of cited papers , as well as for t + 1 , t + 2 and t + 3 with t being the year in which a cited paper first featured in the context of disagreement , its average number of received citations , expected number of received citations , and d the ratio between these two values . When d is greater than one , papers cited in the context of disagreement receive more citations in the following year than expected . When d is less than one , they receive fewer citations than expected . Scientific field # Records Avg . citations , t + 1 following disagreement Expected citations , t + 1 following disagreement 𝑑 𝑡 + 1 Avg . citations , t + 2 Expected citations , t + 2 𝑑 𝑡 + 2 Avg . citations , t + 3 Expected citations , t + 3 𝑑 𝑡 + 3 All 109 , 545 3 . 03 3 . 08 0 . 983 3 . 02 3 . 05 0 . 990 2 . 96 2 . 98 0 . 993 Bio & Health 60 , 707 2 . 73 2 . 81 0 . 969 2 . 68 2 . 75 0 . 974 2 . 56 2 . 65 0 . 966 Life & Earth 20 , 581 3 . 43 3 . 35 1 . 023 3 . 55 3 . 42 1 . 038 3 . 63 3 . 44 1 . 056 Math & Comp 770 3 . 36 3 . 34 1 . 005 3 . 54 3 . 28 1 . 080 3 . 29 2 . 97 1 . 109 Phys & Engr 18 , 011 3 . 55 3 . 52 1 . 006 3 . 48 3 . 44 1 . 010 3 . 43 3 . 34 1 . 027 Soc & Hum 9 , 476 3 . 04 3 . 11 0 . 979 3 . 20 3 . 28 0 . 975 3 . 30 3 . 40 0 . 971 48 Table SI 6 . Papers that introduced the most disagreement citances Total citances Disagreement citances Publication Title Document type 50 27 Alén , Domínguez , & De Carlos ( 2015 ) University students ' perceptions of the use of academic debates as a teaching methodology Full - length Article 400 27 French & Koeberl ( 2010 ) The convincing identification of terrestrial meteorite impact structures : What works , what doesn ' t , and why Review Article 66 26 Doody & Condon ( 2012 ) Increasing student involvement and learning through using debate as an assessment Full - length Article 64 25 Ersoy ( 2010 ) Social studies teacher candidates ' views on the controversial issues incorporated into their courses in Turkey Full - length Article 91 24 Nam ( 2014 ) The effects of trust and constructive controversy on student achievement and attitude in online cooperative learning environments Full - length Article 1292 23 Kalter ( 2003 ) Teratology in the 20th century Environmental causes of congenital malformations in humans and how they were established Full - length Article 1708 23 Millan ( 2006 ) Multi - target strategies for the improved treatment of depressive states : Conceptual foundations and neuronal substrates , drug discovery and therapeutic application Review Article 50 21 Bruschke & Divine ( 2017 ) Debunking Nixon’s radio victory in the 1960 election : Re - analyzing the historical record and considering currently unexamined polling data Full - length Article 107 21 Stepanova & Bruckmeier ( 2013 ) The relevance of environmental conflict research for coastal management . A review of concepts , approaches and methods with a focus on Europe Review Article 74 20 Colston & Vadjunec ( 2015 ) A critical political ecology of consensus : On “Teaching Both Sides” of climate change controversies Full - length Article 49 Table SI 7 . Publications that were most cited in the context of disagreement . Total citances Disagreement citances Publication Title Document type 389 99 Munro ( 2003 ) Lipid Rafts Elusive or Illusive ? Review Article 477 99 Murphy et al . ( 2009 ) The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations : Are anti - correlated networks introduced ? Full - length Article 1753 83 Zhao , Sun , Wilde , & Sanzhong ( 2005 ) Late Archean to Paleoproterozoic evolution of the North China Craton : key issues revisited Full - length Article 1344 69 Li et al . ( 2008 ) Assembly , configuration , and break - up history of Rodinia : A synthesis Full - length Article 663 65 Kusky & Li ( 2003 ) Paleoproterozoic tectonic evolution of the North China Craton Full - length Article 1377 64 Zhao , Wilde , Cawood , & Sun ( 2001 ) Archean blocks and their boundaries in the North China Craton : lithological , geochemical , structural and P – T path constraints and tectonic evolution Full - length Article 972 51 Zhai & Santosh ( 2011 ) The early Precambrian odyssey of the North China Craton : A synoptic overview Full - length Article 50 45 Debat et al . ( 2003 ) A new metamorphic constraint for the Eburnean orogeny from Paleoproterozoic formations of the Man shield ( Aribinda and Tampelga countries , Burkina Faso ) Full - length Article 448 45 Wilde , Zhao , & Sun ( 2002 ) Development of the North China Craton During the Late Archaean and its Final Amalgamation at 1 . 8 Ga : Some Speculations on its Position Within a Global Palaeoproterozoic Supercontinent Full - length Article 247 43 Kusky ( 2011 ) Geophysical and geological tests of tectonic models of the North China Craton Full - length Article