International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review Coﬁlin - 1 and Other ADF / Coﬁlin Superfamily Members in Human Malignant Cells Sergey Shishkin 1 , 2 , * , Lidia Eremina 1 , 2 , Natalya Pashintseva 1 , Leonid Kovalev 1 and Marina Kovaleva 1 1 Laboratory of Biomedical Research , Bach Institute of Biochemistry , Research Center of Biotechnology of the Russian Academy of Sciences , Leninsky Prospekt , 33 , bld . 2 , 119071 Moscow , Russia ; lidia _ eryomina @ mail . ru ( L . E . ) ; pashintseva2009 @ yandex . ru ( N . P . ) ; kovalyov @ inbi . ras . ru ( L . K . ) ; m1968 @ mail . ru ( M . K . ) 2 Department of Biochemistry , Medical Institute , Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia , Miklukho - Maklaya Street , 6 , 117198 Moscow , Russia * Correspondence : sergeyshishkin @ yandex . ru ; Tel . : + 7 - 495 - 952 - 5886 Academic Editor : William Chi - shing Cho Received : 30 September 2016 ; Accepted : 1 December 2016 ; Published : 22 December 2016 Abstract : Identiﬁcation of actin - depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) domains in the structures of several related proteins led ﬁrst to the formation of the ADF / coﬁlin family , which then expanded to the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily . This superfamily includes the well - studied coﬁlin - 1 ( Cﬂ - 1 ) and about a dozen different human proteins that interact directly or indirectly with the actin cytoskeleton , provide its remodeling , and alter cell motility . According to some data , Cﬂ - 1 is contained in various human malignant cells ( HMCs ) and is involved in the formation of malignant properties , including invasiveness , metastatic potential , and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs . The presence of other ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins in HMCs and their involvement in the regulation of cell motility were discovered with the use of various OMICS technologies . In our review , we discuss the results of the study of Cﬂ - 1 and other ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins , which may be of interest for solving different problems of molecular oncology , as well as for the prospects of further investigations of these proteins in HMCs . Keywords : coﬁlin - 1 ; ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins ; cell motility ; human malignant cells 1 . Introduction The key features of malignant neoplasms include uncontrolled proliferation , as well as the ability to invade surrounding tissues ( invasion ) and to spread locally and regionally or even to distant parts of the body ( metastasis ) . These features are the basis for ideas ( which appeared in the 19th century ) about the common origin of malignant tumors from stem cells [ 1 , 2 ] and for revealing typical patterns that are associated with tumor phenotypes [ 3 ] , in particular , by using different OMICS technologies [ 4 ] . Nevertheless , malignant tumors vary by tissues of origin and types of differentiation . Moreover , there is a body of evidence that the majority of malignant tumors have intratumoral cell heterogeneity , i . e . , are composed of multiple clonal subpopulations of tumor cells with heterogenic morphology that differ on functional properties , in particular on invasive and metastatic potential . Accordingly , malignant tumors can signiﬁcantly differ by gene expression patterns , including those that are involved in the regulation of proliferation , invasion and metastasis [ 5 – 7 ] . The invasion and metastasis are considered to be caused by the dysregulation of motility of malignant cells ( see , e . g . , Bravo - Cordero et al . [ 8 ] and Martin et al . [ 9 ] ) . The accumulated data suggests that changes in cell motility can be triggered by certain actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) which provide the formation , function , and restructuring of the actin cytoskeleton [ 10 – 13 ] . The detection of these Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms18010010 www . mdpi . com / journal / ijms Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 2 of 27 changes allows the clariﬁcation of the molecular basis of malignant transformation and the role of certain proteins ( in particular , ABPs ) in this process [ 11 – 13 ] , and , in addition , allows the list of potential tumor biomarkers to expand [ 14 – 16 ] . Over the past ten years coﬂin - 1 ( Cﬂ - 1 ) has attracted special attention among ABPs [ 14 , 16 , 17 ] , along with other members of the actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin superfamily [ 18 , 19 ] . In particular , in our previous studies of the proteomic proﬁles of different human malignant cells ( HMCs ) , Cﬂ - 1 was almost always found as one of the major proteins [ 15 ] , and that fact is reﬂected in the Russian proteomic databases [ 20 , 21 ] . As a consequence , it is interesting to analyze some current trends in the study of ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members . 2 . Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Coﬁlin Superfamily 2 . 1 . From First Actin - Depolymerizing Proteins to Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Coﬁlin Superfamily In the 1980s , several different proteins with actin - depolymerizing activity were identiﬁed in vertebrates [ 22 , 23 ] . According to various authors , actin - depolymerizing proteins were characterized by molecular weight ( MW ) ~ 19 kDa [ 22 ] or ~ 93 kDa [ 23 ] . Almost at the same time proteins with MW ~ 19 kDa became known as coﬁlins for their ability to form coﬁlaments with actin [ 24 ] . A similar protein with low MW was termed destrin ( destroys F - actin ; Dstn ) , or ADF ( e . g . , Vartiainen et al . [ 25 ] and UniProt P60981 ) . An actin - depolymerizing protein with MW ~ 93 kDa proved to be gelsolin [ 23 , 26 ] . Confusingly , the alternative name ADF is sometimes used for gelsolin as well as for destrin ( UniProt P06396 ) . Three closely related actin - depolymerizing proteins that are usually identiﬁed in most vertebrates , Cﬂ - 1 , Cﬂ - 2 , andDstn ( ADF ) , are often referred to as traditional coﬁlins . In the late 1990s , traditional coﬁlins and some related proteins found in different species began to be regarded as a special family , called the ADF / coﬁlin family [ 25 , 27 , 28 ] . At the turn of the 20th – 21st centuries Lappalainen et al . found special actin - binding modules of about 150 amino acid residues in polypeptide chains of ADF / coﬁlins [ 29 ] . These modules formed speciﬁc three - dimensional structures with six - stranded mixed β - sheets . The abovementioned modules were named actin - depolymerizing factor homology domains , or ADF - H domains ( Figure 1 ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 2 of 27 detection of these changes allows the clarification of the molecular basis of malignant transformation and the role of certain proteins ( in particular , ABPs ) in this process [ 11 – 13 ] , and , in addition , allows the list of potential tumor biomarkers to expand [ 14 – 16 ] . Over the past ten years coflin - 1 ( Cfl - 1 ) has attracted special attention among ABPs [ 14 , 16 , 17 ] , along with other members of the actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin superfamily [ 18 , 19 ] . In particular , in our previous studies of the proteomic profiles of different human malignant cells ( HMCs ) , Cfl - 1 was almost always found as one of the major proteins [ 15 ] , and that fact is reflected in the Russian proteomic databases [ 20 , 21 ] . As a consequence , it is interesting to analyze some current trends in the study of ADF / cofilin superfamily members . 2 . Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Cofilin Superfamily 2 . 1 . From First Actin - Depolymerizing Proteins to Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Cofilin Superfamily In the 1980s , several different proteins with actin - depolymerizing activity were identified in vertebrates [ 22 , 23 ] . According to various authors , actin - depolymerizing proteins were characterized by molecular weight ( MW ) ~ 19 kDa [ 22 ] or ~ 93 kDa [ 23 ] . Almost at the same time proteins with MW ~ 19 kDa became known as cofilins for their ability to form cofilaments with actin [ 24 ] . A similar protein with low MW was termed destrin ( destroys F - actin ; Dstn ) , or ADF ( e . g . , Vartiainen et al . [ 25 ] and UniProt P60981 ) . An actin - depolymerizing protein with MW ~ 93 kDa proved to be gelsolin [ 23 , 26 ] . Confusingly , the alternative name ADF is sometimes used for gelsolin as well as for destrin ( UniProt P06396 ) . Three closely related actin - depolymerizing proteins that are usually identified in most vertebrates , Cfl - 1 , Cfl - 2 , andDstn ( ADF ) , are often referred to as traditional cofilins . In the late 1990s , traditional cofilins and some related proteins found in different species began to be regarded as a special family , called the ADF / cofilin family [ 25 , 27 , 28 ] . At the turn of the 20th – 21st centuries Lappalainen et al . found special actin - binding modules of about 150 amino acid residues in polypeptide chains of ADF / cofilins [ 29 ] . These modules formed specific three - dimensional structures with six - stranded mixed β - sheets . The abovementioned modules were named actin - depolymerizing factor homology domains , or ADF - H domains ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Structure of human cofilin - 1 ( Cfl - 1 ) . ( A ) Scheme of secondary structural elements identified in the actin - depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) domain ( amino acid residues 4 – 153 ) of human Cfl - 1 . The dashed boxes show the regions corresponding to β - strands . ( B ) Ribbon diagram of the human Cfl - 1 structure ( adapted from PDBsum [ 30 ] , PDB ID : 1q8x ) . Figure 1 . Structure of human coﬁlin - 1 ( Cﬂ - 1 ) . ( A ) Scheme of secondary structural elements identiﬁed in the actin - depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) domain ( amino acid residues 4 – 153 ) of human Cﬂ - 1 . The dashed boxes show the regions corresponding to β - strands . ( B ) Ribbon diagram of the human Cﬂ - 1 structure ( adapted from PDBsum [ 30 ] , PDB ID : 1q8x ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 3 of 27 Lappalainen et al . used the results of genome sequencing of different species that appeared in public databases in order to search for proteins containing ADF - H domains [ 29 ] . They identiﬁed 39 proteins with sequence similarity to ADF / coﬁlins . The analysis of primary structures of these proteins showed that they could be subdivided into three structurally distinct classes : ADF / coﬁlins , twinﬁlins , and developmentally regulated brain proteins ( drebrins ) / actin - binding proteins 1 ( Abp1s ) [ 29 ] . In addition to three traditional coﬁlins , the ﬁrst class included actin - depolymerizing protein ( depactin ) from Asterias amurensis [ 31 ] , coactosin from Dictyostelium discoideum [ 32 ] and actophorin from Acanthamoeba [ 33 ] . The second class consisted of proteins which were named by Lappalainen et al . as twinﬁlins due to the fact that their amino acid sequences contained two ADF - H domains [ 29 ] . Twinﬁlin genes were originally published in 1994 and 1997 as genes encoding A6 protein tyrosine kinases . In 1998 , the protein was initially identiﬁed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , and its sequence homology to ADF / coﬁlin proteins was demonstrated [ 29 , 34 ] . Later , twinﬁlin homologues were found in other eukaryotes , except in plants . The third class was composed of drebrins and Abp1s . Drebrins [ 35 ] were initially found in chick brain and considered as neuron - speciﬁc F - actin - binding proteins able to provide the plasticity of cytoskeleton and to serve as intracellular regulators of morphogenesis [ 36 ] . Abp1s are the proteins initially found in yeast . At the beginning of the 21st century the presence of Abp1s in mammals , including humans , was shown [ 37 , 38 ] . Analysis of the sequence alignments of the ADF - H domains allowed the production of the ﬁrst phylogenetic trees for three classes of ADF - H domain proteins , which indicated the existence of their common ancestral protein and ancestral gene [ 25 , 29 ] . Further investigations resulted in a considerable extension of data on ADF - H domain proteins . In the 2000s , new ADF - H domain protein was detected in the tissues of some vertebrates and became known as glia maturation factor ( GMF ) [ 39 ] . Nakano et al . referred GMF and related proteins to the GMF - family [ 40 ] . The ﬁrst proteins from this family became known in the 1970s – 1980s [ 41 , 42 ] . They had capacity to serve as a growth regulator for neurons and glia . In the 1990s with the use of DNA technologies , genes and transcripts encoding proteins closely related to the GMF were discovered in humans . These proteins were called glia maturation factors beta ( GMF - B ) and γ ( GMF - G ) ( UniProt P60983 , O60234 ) . In 2010 , Nakano et al . proposed the consideration of all ADF - H domain proteins as members of a single protein superfamily [ 40 ] , the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily . These authors built a new expanded phylogenetic tree for four protein families and one individual group of ADF - H domain proteins . This phylogenetic tree was created based on structural and functional data and , in particular , on the ability to bind monomeric G - actin and polymeric F - actin . 2 . 2 . Classiﬁcation , Structure , and Actin - Binding Properties Classiﬁcation of ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members relies on their structural ( amino acid sequences , ADF - H domains ) and functional ( actin binding ) features . According to Nakano et al . [ 40 ] , there are ﬁve groups of ADF - H domain proteins . Two of these groups—twinﬁlins ( bind to G - actin and cap the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments ) and drebrin / Abp1s ( only bind to F - actin ) —fully coincided with two classes described previously by Lappalainen et al . [ 29 ] . Unlike Lappalainen et al . [ 29 ] , Nakano et al . [ 40 ] additionally described the group of GMF - family members ( GMF - G can bind F - actin ) and did not include coactosin and coactosin - like proteins , which only bind to F - actin , in the group of ADF / coﬁlins ( that bind to both F - and G - actin and promote actin depolymerization ) . The ﬁrst group ( ADF / coﬁlins ) consists of proteins that were identiﬁed in different organisms ranging from S . cerevisiae to Homo sapiens . It includes traditional coﬁlins ( Cﬂ - 1 , Cﬂ - 2 , Dstn ) , depactin , and actophorin . These proteins with a MW of about 20 kDa have a signiﬁcant structural similarity . Each of them consists of ADF - H domain with a few additional amino acid residues ( including initiatory methionine ) at the N - terminus of the polypeptide chain and about ten amino acid residues at the C - terminus ( according to UniProt ; Table 1 ) . The proteins referred to as traditional coﬁlins have been detected in a variety of vertebrates and are the most studied members of the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily . For human coﬁlins the tissue speciﬁcity has been demonstrated . Cﬂ - 1 encoded by CFL1 gene is widely Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 4 of 27 distributed in various tissues and is named non - muscle isoform ( UniProt P23528 ) . Cﬂ - 2—muscle isoform—may exist in at least two variants due to alternative splicing of a single gene CFL2 [ 43 ] . One of these isoforms ( Cﬂ - 2b ) is present in skeletal muscle and heart , and the other ( Cﬂ - 2a ) has been revealed in various tissues ( see also UniProt Q9Y281 ) . Dstn encoded by DSTN gene is also widely distributed in various tissues ( UniProt P60981 ) . ADF / coﬁlins can bind F - actin and sever actin ﬁlaments . On the one hand , severing of the actin ﬁlament causes actin depolymerization . On the other hand , it can lead to actin polymerization directly or indirectly by producing free barbed ends [ 44 ] . Along with binding of F - actin , ADF / coﬁlins have the ability to bind G - actin in a 1 : 1 ratio [ 24 , 29 ] . It is currently believed that the molecules of the traditional ADF / coﬁlins have two distinct actin - binding sites , the G / F - site located in the C - terminus and the F - site located in the N - terminus . The F - site is involved in the binding of F - actin , and the G / F - site is required for binding to both the G - actin and the F - actin [ 45 ] . The functionally important amino acid residues at the N - terminal end of the human coﬁlins are shown in Figure 2 . ADF / coﬁlins bind preferably to ADP - forms of G - or F - actin and use energy from ATP hydrolysis in actin polymerization [ 46 ] . It has been demonstrated that coﬁlin can directly bind not only to actin , but also to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) [ 47 ] and to serine / threonine - protein kinase LIMK1 [ 48 ] . ADF / coﬁlins from vertebrates are found to contain nuclear localization sequences ( see Figure 2 and UniProt P23528 ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 4 of 27 Cfl - 2—muscle isoform—may exist in at least two variants due to alternative splicing of a single gene CFL2 [ 43 ] . One of these isoforms ( Cfl - 2b ) is present in skeletal muscle and heart , and the other ( Cfl - 2a ) has been revealed in various tissues ( see also UniProt Q9Y281 ) . Dstn encoded by DSTN gene is also widely distributed in various tissues ( UniProt P60981 ) . ADF / cofilins can bind F - actin and sever actin filaments . On the one hand , severing of the actin filament causes actin depolymerization . On the other hand , it can lead to actin polymerization directly or indirectly by producing free barbed ends [ 44 ] . Along with binding of F - actin , ADF / cofilins have the ability to bind G - actin in a 1 : 1 ratio [ 24 , 29 ] . It is currently believed that the molecules of the traditional ADF / cofilins have two distinct actin - binding sites , the G / F - site located in the C - terminus and the F - site located in the N - terminus . The F - site is involved in the binding of F - actin , and the G / F - site is required for binding to both the G - actin and the F - actin [ 45 ] . The functionally important amino acid residues at the N - terminal end of the human cofilins are shown in Figure 2 . ADF / cofilins bind preferably to ADP - forms of G - or F - actin and use energy from ATP hydrolysis in actin polymerization [ 46 ] . It has been demonstrated that cofilin can directly bind not only to actin , but also to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) [ 47 ] and to serine / threonine - protein kinase LIMK1 [ 48 ] . ADF / cofilins from vertebrates are found to contain nuclear localization sequences ( see Figure 2 and UniProt P23528 ) . Figure 2 . N - termini of human traditional cofilins Cfl - 1 , Cfl - 2 and destrin ( Dstn ) according to UniProt ( P23528 , Q9Y281 , P60981 , respectively ) . Red “S” indicate serine residues which can be phosphorylated . Identical regions of amino acid sequences are framed . Nuclear localization signals are labeled in yellow . Repeating hydrophobic amino acid residues are labeled in green . Repeating positively charged amino acid residues are labeled in blue . Repeating negatively charged amino acid residues are labeled in gray . Starting parts of ADF - H domains ( see below ) are shown by the dotted red lines . The proteins from the second group ( twinfilins ) have two tandem ADF - H domains that are located near the N - terminus of the polypeptide chain and are separated by a linker area of several dozen amino acid residues . Typical twinfilins have a MW of about 40 kDa . It has been shown that at least in humans , mice , and S . cerevisiae , twinfilins are presented by two isoforms , each of which are encoded by their own gene ( e . g . , TWF1 and TWF2 in human , according to UniProt Q12792 and Q6IBS0 ) . Additionally , in mice , an alternative promoter is responsible for production of two proteins : TWF - 2b in striped muscles ( heart and skeletal muscles ) and TWF - 2a mainly in non - muscle tissues and organs [ 49 ] . Twinfilins can interact with G - actin forming 1 : 1 complexes , and some of the twinfilins can bind F - actin , as well . In mammals , two ADF - H domains of twinfilins allow both capping of the barbed end of actin filaments and sequestering of actin monomers [ 50 ] . The third group is composed of drebrins and Abp1s , proteins with a single ADF - H domain , but with higher MW ( ~ 70 kDa ) than the traditional cofilins and twinfilins . Drebrins are typical for vertebrates . Three isoforms—embryonic ( E1 and E2 ) , and adult ( A ) —have been found to be generated by alternative splicing from a single gene DBN1 . In humans , drebrins are presented in brain neurons and also in the heart , placenta , skeletal muscle , kidney , pancreas , peripheral blood Figure 2 . N - termini of human traditional coﬁlins Cﬂ - 1 , Cﬂ - 2 and destrin ( Dstn ) according to UniProt ( P23528 , Q9Y281 , P60981 , respectively ) . Red “S” indicate serine residues which can be phosphorylated . Identical regions of amino acid sequences are framed . Nuclear localization signals are labeled in yellow . Repeating hydrophobic amino acid residues are labeled in green . Repeating positively charged amino acid residues are labeled in blue . Repeating negatively charged amino acid residues are labeled in gray . Starting parts of ADF - H domains ( see below ) are shown by the dotted red lines . The proteins from the second group ( twinﬁlins ) have two tandem ADF - H domains that are located near the N - terminus of the polypeptide chain and are separated by a linker area of several dozen amino acid residues . Typical twinﬁlins have a MW of about 40 kDa . It has been shown that at least in humans , mice , and S . cerevisiae , twinﬁlins are presented by two isoforms , each of which are encoded by their own gene ( e . g . , TWF1 and TWF2 in human , according to UniProt Q12792 and Q6IBS0 ) . Additionally , in mice , an alternative promoter is responsible for production of two proteins : TWF - 2b in striped muscles ( heart and skeletal muscles ) and TWF - 2a mainly in non - muscle tissues and organs [ 49 ] . Twinﬁlins can interact with G - actin forming 1 : 1 complexes , and some of the twinﬁlins can bind F - actin , as well . In mammals , two ADF - H domains of twinﬁlins allow both capping of the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments and sequestering of actin monomers [ 50 ] . The third group is composed of drebrins and Abp1s , proteins with a single ADF - H domain , but with higher MW ( ~ 70 kDa ) than the traditional coﬁlins and twinﬁlins . Drebrins are typical for vertebrates . Three isoforms—embryonic ( E1 and E2 ) , and adult ( A ) —have been found to be Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 5 of 27 generated by alternative splicing from a single gene DBN1 . In humans , drebrins are presented in brain neurons and also in the heart , placenta , skeletal muscle , kidney , pancreas , peripheral blood lymphocytes including T - cells ( see [ 51 ] and UniProt Q16643 ) . Abp1 proteins have a slightly lower MW than drebrins , but a similar primary structure . Abp1s have been found in mammals , including humans [ 37 , 38 ] . The human Abp1 protein has a MW of 48 kDa and the structure of the polypeptide chain which is very similar to the structure of typical drebrins . This fact has served as the basis for the recommended name of this protein— drebrin - like protein ( synonyms hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 - interacting protein of 55 kDa ( HIP - 55 ) , drebrin - F ) ( UniProt Q9UJU6 ) . Drebrins and Abp1s have a single ADF - H domain in their N - termini , followed by a nonconserved central region and a C - terminal region . These proteins have been shown to bind F - actin and stabilize actin ﬁlaments . Some proteins of this group ( but not human drebrin ) have a C - terminal Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain [ 50 ] . The fourth group is presented by the GMF - family proteins . These proteins have a small MW ( 14 – 17 kDa ) . GMF has been found in the tissues of some vertebrates . Despite the presence of ADF - H domain , GMF is not able to directly bind actin . GMF - B that is present in the brain of all vertebrates is also not able to bind actin ( UniProt P60983 ) . GMF - G is present predominantly in lung , heart , and placenta ( e . g . , [ 52 ] and UniProt O60234 ) . It has structural similarity to GMF - B ; however , unlike GMF - B , it was found to interact with F - actin [ 52 , 53 ] . Goroncy et al . analyzed the structure of ADF - H domains of GMF proteins . The authors obtained recombinant mouse GMF - B and GMF - G proteins , and studied their structures using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy [ 39 ] . Both GMF structures displayed two additional β - strands in one of the loops . These β - strands were not seen in the protein structures of other ADF - H classes , thus , according to Goroncy et al . [ 39 ] , these β - strands may be a class - deﬁning feature . Both GMF - B and - G can interact with the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex , inhibit its activity and induce actin disassembly [ 40 ] . Another member of GMF - family , GMF1 , the yeast protein discovered by Nakano et al . [ 40 ] , is also able to interact with the Arp2 / 3 protein complex and to suppress its activity . The ﬁfth , separate , group includes coactosin from D . discoideum and coactosin - like proteins ( from different species including that of H . sapiens —UniProt Q14019 ) . These proteins are entirely composed of a single ADF - H domain and have a MW ( about 17 kDa ) similar to the MW of traditional coﬁlins . However , unlike ADF / coﬁlins , coactosin and coactosin - like proteins bind only F - actin and do not promote actin depolymerization [ 40 , 50 ] . Moreover , some antagonistic relations between the traditional coﬁlins and coactosin - like 1 protein have been reported [ 54 ] . Interestingly , coactosin from Entamoeba histolytica has been recently described as an unusual type of coactosin which binds both F - and G - actins [ 55 ] . Some characteristics of the main human ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members are summarized in Table 1 . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 6 of 27 Table 1 . Characteristics of the main human actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin superfamily members according to [ 56 – 63 ] and UniProt . Protein Name , Gene Symbol ( UniProt Number ) Length ( Positions * ) Domains , Length ( Positions ) Motifs , Signals Binding Partners Coﬁlin - 1 , CFL1 ( P23528 ) 165 * ( 2 – 166 ) ADF - H , 150 ( 4 – 153 ) Nuclear localization signal F - and G - actin ( actin depolymerization and polymerization ) , PIP2 , cortactin , LIMK1 Coﬁlin - 2 , CFL2 * * ( Q9Y281 ) 165 * ( 2 – 166 ) ADF - H , 150 ( 4 – 153 ) Nuclear localization signal F - and G - actin ( actin depolymerization and polymerization ) , PIP2 Destrin , DSTN ( P60981 ) 164 * ( 2 – 165 ) ADF - H , 150 ( 4 – 153 ) Nuclear localization signal F - and G - actin ( actin depolymerization and polymerization ) , PIP2 Twinﬁlin - 1 , TWF1 * * ( Q12792 ) 349 * ( 2 – 350 ) ADF - H 1 , 138 ( 2 – 139 ) G - actin and F - actin ( barbed - end - capping activity ) ADF - H 2 , 139 ( 175 – 313 ) Twinﬁlin - 2 , TWF2 ( Q6IBS0 ) 348 * ( 2 – 349 ) ADF - H 1 , 136 ( 4 – 139 ) G - actin and F - actin ( barbed - end - capping activity ) ADF - H 2 , 137 ( 177 – 313 ) Drebrin , DBN1 * * ( Q16643 ) 648 * ( 2 – 649 ) ADF - H , 130 ( 3 – 134 ) Proline - rich , proﬁlin - binding motif F - actin ( actin stabilization ) , cyclin - dependent kinase 5 , connexin 43 and other proteins Drebrin - like protein , DBNL * * ( Q9UJU6 ) 430 ( 1 – 430 ) ADF - H , 130 ( 4 – 133 ) Proline - rich , Ser269 / Thr291 - phospho - sensor motif F - actin ( actin stabilization ) , SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains proteins SH3 , 60 ( 371 – 430 ) Glia maturation factor beta , GMFB ( P60983 ) 141 * ( 2 – 142 ) ADF - H , 136 ( 4 – 139 ) Proteins of Arp2 / 3 complex ( actin disassembly ) Glia maturation factor gamma , GMFG ( O60234 ) 141 * ( 2 – 142 ) ADF - H , 136 ( 4 – 139 ) F - actin , proteins of Arp2 / 3 complex ( actin disassembly ) Coactosin - like protein , COTL1 ( Q14019 ) 141 * ( 2 – 142 ) ADF - H , 129 ( 2 – 130 ) F - actin ( actin stabilization ) * After removing initiator methionine ; * * Expression with alternative splicing and formation of different transcripts . PIP2 : phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; LIMK1 : LIM domain kinase 1 ; F - actin : ﬁlamentous actin ; G - actin : globular actin ; SH3 : Src homology 3 domain ; Arp2 / 3 : Actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 7 of 27 2 . 3 . Biological Functions Traditional coﬁlins , the most well - studied members of the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily , are known to modulate actin dynamics by catalyzing actin depolymerization or polymerization through the severing of actin ﬁlaments . The effect of coﬁlins on actin ﬁlaments ( assembly or disassembly ) depends on the concentration of active coﬁlins , the relative concentration of G - actin , and some protein factors . In low concentrations , ADF / coﬁlins sever the actin ﬁlaments and promote depolymerization . High concentration of coﬁlins is suggested to promote actin nucleation and polymerization [ 64 ] . Coﬁlins can contribute to actin polymerization producing free barbed ends and supplying actin monomers . Cﬂ - 1 is currently understood to modulate actin nucleation and ﬁlament branching through synergy or competition with the Arp2 / 3 complex . The Arp2 / 3 protein complex is a seven - subunit complex of actin - related proteins that enables binding to actin , providing nucleation and formation of actin branches [ 65 , 66 ] . The formation of actin branches is one of the key events of the production of lamellipodia , which are essential for cell motility . Cﬂ - 1 and Arp2 / 3 have been shown to work in synergy ( i . e . , with a cooperative effect ) producing free barbed ends for actin polymerization [ 67 ] . In parallel , Cﬂ - 1 can reduce the afﬁnity of the Arp2 / 3 complex for ﬁlaments and promote dissociation of old actin branches [ 68 ] . Cﬂ - 1 and Cﬂ - 2 have also been shown to regulate the assembly of actomyosin complex blocking the binding of tropomyosin and myosin II to actin ﬁlaments [ 24 , 69 ] . It was found that , in vivo , coﬁlins participated in the reorganization of actin cytoskeleton in response to stresses and different cell stimuli [ 70 ] . Overexpression of coﬁlins leads to the formation of stress ﬁbers , contractile actin bundles that have been found in non - muscle cells and shown to play an important role in cellular contractility , providing cell adhesion , migration ( including assembly of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ) , and morphogenesis [ 71 ] . Due to this function , coﬁlins are regarded as molecular regulators of development processes . Cﬂ - 1 and destrin are required for ureteric bud branching morphogenesis [ 72 ] . According to Sparrow et al . [ 73 ] , Cﬂ - 1 is necessary for dynamic changes in the cytoskeleton needed for axon engagement and is essential for Schwann cell myelination . Evidence for the involvement of Cﬂ - 1 ( and the Arp2 / 3 - complex ) in the regulation of axonal growth cones has been recently reviewed by Dumpich et al . [ 74 ] . Coﬁlin can also participate in regulation of cell proliferation in response to mechanical stresses . In mammalian epithelial cells it inhibits through the cytoskeleton remodeling activity of Yes - associated protein 1 ( YAP1 ) and Translin - associated zinc ﬁnger protein 1 ( TAZ1 ) , mediators of Hippo signaling pathway and organ growth , thus inhibiting cell proliferation [ 75 ] . Numerous data on the participation of Cﬂ - 1 in development are summarized in review [ 76 ] . To sum up , ADF / coﬁlins play an essential role in the controlling of actin dynamics . They have a dual effect on actin ﬁlaments and may contribute to cellular contractility through both the local actin depolymerization and the formation of stress ﬁbers , and therefore they are important for morphogenesis and development . In addition , coﬁlins have also functions in cells that are not directly related to the regulation of actin dynamics . The ﬁrst is that coﬁlins can provide transport of actin molecules ( which do not contain the nuclear localization signals ) to the nucleus [ 77 ] . Using immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , Ono et al . revealed ADF ( Dstn ) and coﬁlin in nuclei of cultured myogenic cells and demonstrated the colocalization of ADF and coﬁlin in intranuclear actin rods [ 78 ] . G - actin which is transported to the nucleus by means of Cﬂ - 1 may act as a key player for nuclear structure and function regulating both chromosome organization and gene activity ( e . g . , see [ 79 ] ) . Coﬁlin has been characterized as a connecting link between T - cell co - stimulation and actin translocation to the nucleus [ 80 , 81 ] . Co - stimulatory signals from ligand attachment to accessory receptors like the cluster of differentiation 2 ( CD - 2 ) are required for the production of the T - cell growth factor interleukin 2 ( IL - 2 ) and cell proliferation . In T lymphocytes , coﬁlin is a component of the costimulatory signaling pathways : CD - 2 stimulation leads to dephosphorylation of coﬁlin , binding to G - actin and translocation into the nucleus [ 80 , 82 ] . In addition to G - actin , Cﬂ - 1 is also able to transport to the nucleus various regulatory proteins that affect the processes of transcription ( e . g . , Runt - related transcription factor 2 ( Runx2 ) ) and cell differentiation [ 83 ] . The other function of coﬁlins that is not related to the regulation of actin Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 8 of 27 dynamics is their participating in apoptosis . Coﬁlin oxidation and translocation to the mitochondrion has been found to induce apoptosis through the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore and release of cytochrome c [ 84 ] . At last , Cﬂ - 1 has been shown to directly activate phospholipase D1 which is important for cell migration [ 85 , 86 ] . The essential roles of traditional coﬁlins ( Cﬂ - 1 , Cﬂ - 2 and Dstn ) in mammals have been proved by experiments on coﬁlin / ADF - knockout mouse strains [ 87 – 89 ] . In such experiments , the homozygous mice Cﬂ - 1 − / − were embryonic lethal while heterozygous mice Cﬂ - 1 + / − were viable . It was shown that Cﬂ - 1 was not essential for the extensive morphogenetic movements during gastrulation , because the other proteins ( e . g . , Dstn ) can provide cellular contractility instead of Cﬂ - 1 at this stage of embryogenesis . However , the Cﬂ - 1 knockout at later stages dramatically altered the processes of neuronal development . Although Dstn was overexpressed in mutant embryos Cﬂ - 1 − / − , this could not compensate for the lack of Cﬂ - 1 , suggesting that these proteins might have a different function in embryonic development . Mice lacking ADF were viable and had no alterations during embryonic development [ 87 ] . The Cﬂ - 2 knockout led to severe protein aggregate myopathy in a mouse model [ 89 ] . The various cellular functions of traditional coﬁlins including those in regulation of nuclear integrity and transcriptional activity , apoptosis , nuclear actin monomer transfer , and lipid metabolism are discussed in recent review of Kanellos and Frame [ 90 ] . A schematic model summarizing the Cﬂ - 1 functions in vertebrates is shown in Figure 3 . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 8 of 27 translocation to the mitochondrion has been found to induce apoptosis through the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore and release of cytochrome c [ 84 ] . At last , Cfl - 1 has been shown to directly activate phospholipase D1 which is important for cell migration [ 85 , 86 ] . The essential roles of traditional cofilins ( Cfl - 1 , Cfl - 2 and Dstn ) in mammals have been proved by experiments on cofilin / ADF - knockout mouse strains [ 87 – 89 ] . In such experiments , the homozygous mice Cfl - 1 − / − were embryonic lethal while heterozygous mice Cfl - 1 + / − were viable . It was shown that Cfl - 1 was not essential for the extensive morphogenetic movements during gastrulation , because the other proteins ( e . g . , Dstn ) can provide cellular contractility instead of Cfl - 1 at this stage of embryogenesis . However , the Cfl - 1 knockout at later stages dramatically altered the processes of neuronal development . Although Dstn was overexpressed in mutant embryos Cfl - 1 − / − , this could not compensate for the lack of Cfl - 1 , suggesting that these proteins might have a different function in embryonic development . Mice lacking ADF were viable and had no alterations during embryonic development [ 87 ] . The Cfl - 2 knockout led to severe protein aggregate myopathy in a mouse model [ 89 ] . The various cellular functions of traditional cofilins including those in regulation of nuclear integrity and transcriptional activity , apoptosis , nuclear actin monomer transfer , and lipid metabolism are discussed in recent review of Kanellos and Frame [ 90 ] . A schematic model summarizing the Cfl - 1 functions in vertebrates is shown in Figure 3 . Figure 3 . Schematic model summarizing Cfl - 1 functions in vertebrates . Regulating factors ( green ) and regulating factors ( red ) refer to different signaling pathways , leading to Cfl - 1 dephosphorylation ( activation ) or phosphorylation ( inactivation ) , respectively . p - Cfl - 1 : phospho - Cfl - 1 ; SSH1 : Slingshot protein phosphatase 1 ; PP2A : Protein phosphatase 2A ; LIMK1 : LIM domain kinase 1 . Similarly to cofilins , twinfilins are also involved in the regulation of actin dynamics and can participate in formation of cellular protrusions such as lamellipodia and filopodia in collaboration with other actin binding proteins ( Arp2 / 3 , cortactin , etc . ) [ 91 ] . In Drosophila twinfilin is required for cell migration and endocytosis . In mammalian cells , TWF - 1 is also involved in endocytosis and migration , and participates in cell morphogenesis [ 50 ] . TWF - 2a is shown to be involved in the morphogenesis of neurons . TWF - 2a knockout mice developed normally without any abnormalities , due to the fact that it is typically co - expressed in the same tissues with TWF - 1 and has similar function [ 92 ] . The specific role of TWF - 2b , which is expressed exclusively in heart and skeletal muscles , is currently unclear . Figure 3 . Schematic model summarizing Cﬂ - 1 functions in vertebrates . Regulating factors ( green ) and regulating factors ( red ) refer to different signaling pathways , leading to Cﬂ - 1 dephosphorylation ( activation ) or phosphorylation ( inactivation ) , respectively . p - Cﬂ - 1 : phospho - Cﬂ - 1 ; SSH1 : Slingshot protein phosphatase 1 ; PP2A : Protein phosphatase 2A ; LIMK1 : LIM domain kinase 1 . Similarly to coﬁlins , twinﬁlins are also involved in the regulation of actin dynamics and can participate in formation of cellular protrusions such as lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in collaboration with other actin binding proteins ( Arp2 / 3 , cortactin , etc . ) [ 91 ] . In Drosophila twinﬁlin is required for cell migration and endocytosis . In mammalian cells , TWF - 1 is also involved in endocytosis and migration , and participates in cell morphogenesis [ 50 ] . TWF - 2a is shown to be involved in the morphogenesis of neurons . TWF - 2a knockout mice developed normally without any abnormalities , due to the fact that it Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 9 of 27 is typically co - expressed in the same tissues with TWF - 1 and has similar function [ 92 ] . The speciﬁc role of TWF - 2b , which is expressed exclusively in heart and skeletal muscles , is currently unclear . Drebrin and Abp1 have been shown to regulate actin ﬁlament organization , especially during development of neuronal cells . Drebrin E is highly abundant in the developing brain . This protein may modulate actomyosin interaction within dendritic spines and alter spine shape [ 93 ] . Similarly , drebrin ( isoform E ) is involved in the regulation of axonal growth through actin - myosin interactions [ 94 ] . Drebrin E regulates neuroblast migration in the postnatal mammalian brain [ 95 ] . Drebrin A predominates in neurons of the adult forebrain . Neuronal drebrin ( isoform A ) inhibits coﬁlin - induced severing of F - actin due to direct competition between these two proteins for F - actin binding [ 96 ] . Drebrin ( E2 isoform ) has been also found in various non - neuronal cells , including ﬁbroblasts , stomach and kidney epithelia [ 97 ] , and keratinocytes [ 98 ] , where it plays a role in , for example , adhering junctions . Abp1 is shown to be implicated in endocytotic processes . It uses C - terminal SH3 domain to bind various proteins including regulators of endocytosis . Particularly , it associates with dynamin , a large GTPase essential for vesicle ﬁssion [ 99 ] . Due to its ability to interconnect the actin cytoskeleton and participate in endocytosis , Abp1 regulates lymphocyte and leukocyte responses [ 38 , 50 , 100 ] . GMF does not bind actin , but binds Arp2 / 3 complex and suppress its activity which results in stimulation of ﬁlament debranching and inhibition of actin nucleation [ 101 ] . Nakano et al . described the blocking of the Arp2 / 3 complex by GMF1 protein as a reason for the modulatory effect of GMF1 on the yeast actin cytoskeleton [ 40 ] . GMF has been shown to regulate lamellipodial protrusion dynamics and cell migration [ 102 ] . GMF - B including the human one is also not able to bind actin . To date , it has been established that GMF - B induces synthesis of some proinﬂammatory cytokines , as well as inﬂuences the differentiation and aging of various cells of the nervous system in normal and pathological conditions ( e . g . , see [ 103 , 104 ] and UniProt P60983 ) . In ﬁbroblasts , GMF - B controls branched actin content and lamellipodial dynamics [ 105 ] . The main function of GMF - G is still unclear . This protein found predominantly in lung , heart , and placenta is capable of interacting with F - actin and inﬂuencing cell motility [ 52 , 53 ] . Functions of coactosin and coactosin - like proteins are insufﬁciently understood . It has been shown that coactosin inhibits barbed end capping of actin ﬁlament and is involved in actin polymerization . The knockdown of coactosin has resulted in the disruption of actin polymerization and of neural crest cell migration [ 106 ] . In chick embryos , coactosin was expressed during morphogenetic movement and associated with actin stress ﬁbers in cultured neural crest cells [ 107 ] . In vitro studies demonstrated that coactosin - like protein can protect F - actin from coﬁlin - mediated depolymerization [ 54 ] . Additionally , coactosin - like protein is known to support the activity of 5 - lipoxygenase , an enzyme involved in leukotriene biosynthesis . Coactosin - like protein binds 5 - lipoxygenase and translocates it from cytosol to the nucleus . In coactosin - like protein knockdown human monocytic cell line , the activity of 5 - lipoxygenase is decreased , but not absent [ 108 ] . 2 . 4 . Regulaton The activity of ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members is regulated by various mechanisms . ADF / coﬁlins are shown to be regulated by pH , phosphatidylinositols , protein kinases , and phosphatases , as well as some other proteins . Moreover , their activities can depend on cellular redox status . It is well known that F - actin binding and depolymerizing activity of coﬁlins depends on pH . Yonezawa et al . reported that in vitro , in an F - actin containing model system , at pH < 7 . 3 the concentration of monomeric actin ( G - actin ) was less than 1 µ M , even with an excess of coﬁlin added [ 109 ] . However , at pH > 7 . 3 the concentration of G - actin increased proportionally to the concentration of coﬁlin added , until the complete depolymerization of F - actin . The authors formed the conclusion that coﬁlin is capable of reversibly controlling actin polymerization and depolymerization in a pH - sensitive manner . Later , pH was demonstrated to modulate coﬁlin activity in vivo [ 110 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 10 of 27 However , pH sensitivity is apparently not a common feature of all ADF / coﬁlins in all species . For example , mouse Cﬂ - 1 unlike human has been shown to be pH - independent , as well as mouse Cﬂ - 2 [ 25 ] . Membrane phosphoinositides , particularly PIP2 , are also known to regulate ADF / coﬁlin activity . Coﬁlins can directly bind phosphatidilinositols , and PIP2 - binding area on the surface of the coﬁlin molecule overlaps with the actin - binding site [ 47 ] . Therefore , binding to PIP2 leads to inhibition of ability to bind to actin . Changes in PIP2 density of the cellular membrane can regulate a balance between membrane - bound and free active ADF / coﬁlins [ 111 ] . Phosphorylation of Cﬂ - 1 on a serine residue ( Ser3 ) inhibits its binding to F - and G - actin [ 112 ] . Similar data were obtained for Dstn [ 113 ] . Only dephosphorylated ( active ) coﬁlin can carry out the functions associated with binding of actin and protein translocations to the nucleus and mitochondrion . In contrast , phosphorylated coﬁlin is required to activate phospholipase D1 [ 114 ] . The regulation of coﬁlins by phosphorylation / dephosphorylation is performed via signaling pathways involving kinases and phosphatases in response to extracellular signals and changes in microenvironment [ 14 , 17 , 115 ] . In mammals , Cﬂ - 1 has been shown to be phosphorylated and inactivated by LIM - kinases ( LIMK1 , LIMK2 ) and testicular protein kinases ( TESK1 , TESK2 ) . Conversely , coﬁlin is dephosphorylated and activated by slingshot protein phosphatases ( SSH1 , SSH2 , SSH3 ) , protein phosphatases 1 and 2A ( PP1 , PP2A ) , and chronophin ( CIN ) ( for a review , see [ 75 ] ) . Reactions of the phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of coﬁlins have a signiﬁcant impact on modulation of actin dynamics , thus inﬂuencing cell motility and morphogenesis in vertebrates [ 116 , 117 ] . For this reason , kinases and phosphatases of coﬁlins may play a crucial role in the development . The overexpression of LIMK1 or inactivation of SSH1 results in abnormal accumulation of F - actin and incorrect cytogenesis during mitosis [ 118 ] . Since LIMK1 inactivates coﬁlin , it has been thought to downregulate lamellipodium formation and inhibit cell migration [ 119 ] . However , treatment of Jurkat T cells with LIMK1 inhibitor has been shown to block stromal cell - derived factor ( SDF ) 1 α - induced chemotaxis of T cells [ 120 ] . It has been assumed that LIMK1 - catalyzed phosphorylation of coﬁlin is essential for chemotactic response of T lymphocytes , but the results from Condeelis’ group , who showed that non - phosphorylatable mutant coﬁlin provides the generation of protrusions and determines the direction of cell migration , have contradicted the fact that phosphorylation and inactivation of coﬁlin are crucial for cell motility [ 121 ] . Nevertheless , further experiments conﬁrmed the positive role of LIMK1 in migration of chemokine - stimulated Jurkat T cells . The cell migration turned out to be suppressed by LIMK1 knockdown , whereas knockdown of SSH1 causes the formation of lamellipodia around the periphery of the cell after cell stimulation [ 122 ] . Thus , it has been proposed that LIMK is required for generation of multiple lamellipodia in the initial stages of the cell response , and SSH1 is needed to restrict lamellipodial protrusions for directional cell migration [ 123 ] . In fact , although LIMK seems to be a positive regulator of cell migration , mechanisms for this regulation are still not completely understood . Apart from the kinases and phosphatases already described , the interaction of ADF / coﬁlins with actin can be directly or indirectly regulated by a wide range of other proteins . The binding of coﬁlin to cortactin is one of the mechanisms of coﬁlin inactivation which is typical for podosomes and invadopodia , actin - based dynamic protrusions produced by invasive cancer cells , vascular cells , and macrophages [ 124 , 125 ] . Actin - interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) and cyclase - associated protein 1 ( CAP1 ) promote the disassembly of coﬁlin - bound actin ﬁlaments [ 126 , 127 ] . Coronin provides recruiting coﬁlin to ﬁlament sides and thus enhances actin ﬁlament severing [ 128 ] . The Rho GTPases are important regulators of actin dynamics , including stress ﬁber formation , and are involved in the regulation of ADF / coﬁlins via LIMK . RhoA activates Rho - associated coiled - coil forming kinase ( ROCK ) which can phosphorylate and activate LIMK . Thus , RhoA stabilizes the stress ﬁbers and prevents depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments through the phosphorylation of coﬁlin , and Rho – ROCK – LIMK – coﬁlin pathway modulates actin assembly in various cell types in response to extracellular stimuli [ 76 ] . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) has been shown to inﬂuence coﬁlin through the LIMK pathway or phospholipase C - mediated hydrolysis of PIP2 and release of coﬁlin from Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 11 of 27 membrane sequestering [ 129 ] . The mechanisms which include activation of coﬁlin and generation of free barbed ends for lamellipodial extension in response to EGF stimulation have been described mainly for migrating malignant cells [ 129 , 130 ] . However , the increase of coﬁlin - dependent severing activity after stimulation with EGF does not always correlate with the level of dephosphorylated coﬁlin [ 131 ] , indicating a more complex regulatory mechanism than previously thought . The cellular redox state may play an important role in regulating ADF / coﬁlins . This regulation is performed by oxidative post - translational modiﬁcations of Cys residues including S - glutathionylation [ 132 ] , disulﬁde bonds [ 133 ] , and S - nitrosylation [ 134 ] . Redox - related modiﬁcations inﬂuence coﬁlin activity and signaling pathways with its participation . Coﬁlin is found to be a target of oxidation under oxidative stress in T cells . Coﬁlin oxidation leads to formation of intramolecular disulﬁde bonds and to dephosphorylation at Ser3 . Although dephosphorylated oxidized coﬁlin is still able to bind to F - actin , it cannot perform actin depolymerizing function , and the F - actin level increases [ 133 ] . Instead , oxidized coﬁlin acquires the ability to translocate actin to the mitochondria , where it induces cytochrome c release by opening of the permeability transition pore . As a result , mitochondrial damage and apoptosis are induced [ 84 ] . Thus , the cellular microenvironment ( namely pH , phosphoinositides and proteins including enzymes ) can essentially inﬂuence coﬁlin functions . The other members of the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily have been shown to share some of these aspects of regulation . However , there are few available data addressing possible mechanisms of their regulation . Twinﬁlins have been demonstrated to promote ﬁlament severing in a pH - dependent manner . As opposed to ADF / coﬁlins , TWF - 1 severs actin ﬁlaments in vitro at pH below 6 . 0 [ 135 ] . Twinﬁlins can bind PIP2 similarly to ADF / coﬁlins , and this interaction down - regulates the actin binding , ﬁlament severing , and actin monomer sequestering activities [ 91 , 92 , 135 ] . TWF - 1 and TWF - 2 bind to capping protein ( CP ) , which has been shown to inhibit directly the severing activity of TWF - 1 [ 135 ] . The small GTPases Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 ( Rac1 ) and cell division control protein 42 homolog ( Cdc42 ) induce the localization of TWF - 1 to membrane rufﬂes and cell - cell contacts , but do not affect the localization of TWF - 2 [ 91 ] . Drebrin phosphorylation by cyclin - dependent kinase 5 ( Cdk5 ) regulates cytoskeletal reorganization associated with neuronal migration . Drebrin E can be phosphorylated on Ser142 , and drebrin A on Ser142 or Ser342 [ 136 ] . Localization of drebrin to the distal part of axonal ﬁlopodia and branching in drebrin overexpressing neurons are negatively regulated by myosin II [ 137 ] . Likewise ADF / coﬁlins , GMF - family proteins have been shown to be regulated by phosphorylation . GMF - G phosphorylation at Tyr104 by Abelson tyrosine - protein kinase 1 leads to the dissociation of GMF - G from Arp2 / 3 , reduction of actin disassembly and facilitation of smooth muscle contraction [ 138 ] . The subfamily of the Rho GTPases , Rac , is involved in regulation of coactosin activity . In response to Rac signaling , coactosin is recruited to lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , promoting actin polymerization and neural crest cell migration [ 106 ] . As a whole , ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins play a multifaceted role in cells . Since they are involved in proliferation and migration of mammalian cells , they can also be implicated in various pathological processes , including tumor growth , invasion , and metastasis . The study of the possible contribution of these proteins to malignant phenotype of cancer cells is an important task of molecular oncology . 3 . Members of the Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Coﬁlin Superfamily in Human Malignant Cells 3 . 1 . ADF / Coﬁlins To our knowledge , the ﬁrst report on detection of Cﬂ - 1 protein in HMCs was published by Stierum et al . [ 139 ] . Using proteomic technologies ( two - dimensional electrophoresis ( 2 - DE ) and mass - spectrometric identiﬁcation ) the authors revealed that Cﬂ - 1 was involved in processes of cell differentiation in colorectal adenocarcinoma ( Caco - 2 ) cell line . Later , Cﬂ - 1 was identiﬁed in different tumor cell lines and tissues including adenocarcinomas [ 15 , 140 – 143 ] , osteosarcoma [ 144 ] , lymphoid Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 12 of 27 tissue neoplasms [ 145 ] , astrocytoma [ 146 ] , glioma [ 147 ] , and neuroblastoma [ 148 ] . Accordingly , it is possible to think that Cﬂ - 1 is a common participant in various tumor phenotypes . In particular , the results of identiﬁcation of Cﬂ - 1 in various HMCs are presented in the multi - level information database “Proteomics of malignant cells” [ 21 ] . These results for Cﬂ - 1 in several carcinomas and sarcomas cell lines are shown in Figure 4 . Cﬂ - 1 is present on 2 - DE gels in high quantity ( since it is detected by routine Comassie R - 250 staining ) and can be attributed to 200 of the most abundant proteins of HMCs . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 12 of 27 sarcomas cell lines are shown in Figure 4 . Cfl - 1 is present on 2 - DE gels in high quantity ( since it is detected by routine Comassie R - 250 staining ) and can be attributed to 200 of the most abundant proteins of HMCs . The increased mRNA and protein levels of Cfl - 1 in comparison with control ( nonmalignant ) cells have been shown in various HMCs including those from breast [ 140 ] , lung [ 142 ] , prostate [ 149 ] etc . Overexpression of Cfl - 1 has been mainly associated with tumor cell proliferation , invasion , and metastasis [ 14 , 140 , 150 , 151 ] . It has also been suggested that dephosphorylated , active cofilin is increased in HMCs [ 77 , 151 ] . However , there are a few opposing reports . For example , the overexpression of Cfl - 1 suppressed growth and invasion of non - small cell lung cancer [ 152 ] , and the phosphorylation of cofilin was elevated in bladder cancer samples compared with the normal bladder tissues [ 153 ] . Many authors have considered Cfl - 1 protein as a diagnostic / prognostic tumor biomarker [ 145 , 154 , 155 ] . Zheng et al . found reliable increasing of Cfl - 1 in blood samples obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinoma compared to healthy control [ 156 ] . Cfl - 1 can be a target for chemotherapeutic treatment . It has been shown that docetaxel induces the apoptosis of prostate cancer cells via suppression of the cofilin signaling pathways [ 157 ] . The increased level of Cfl - 1 in HMCs is often associated with poor prognosis which can be related with cofilin - dependent drug resistance of cancer cells [ 142 , 150 , 158 ] . Cfl - 1 has been upregulated in multidrug resistant malignant cells compared with non - drug resistant malignant cells [ 142 ] . High Cfl - 1 levels have been correlated with cisplatin resistance in lung adenocarcinomas [ 158 ] . Cfl - 1 may serve as a predictor of poor response to platinum - based chemotherapy in human ovarian cancer cells [ 143 ] and in astrocytomas cells [ 146 ] . Figure 4 . Fragments of two - dimensional electrophoregramms of human malignant cells ( HMCs ) derived from prostate adenocarcinoma ( LNCaP , PC - 3 , Du - 145 ) , renal adenocarcinoma ( A498 , 769 - P , OKP - GS ) and sarcoma ( U - 2 OS—osteosarcoma ; RD—rhabdomyosarcoma ; SK - UT - 1B—leiomyosarcoma ) cells lines . The red arrow shows the identified Cfl - 1 fraction , and the brown dotted arrow shows the profilin fraction as a reference spot . The molecular mechanisms of Cfl - 1 involvement in the formation of malignant phenotype of cancer cells are still being investigated . In tumor cells , the actin dynamics and cell motility are initiated in response to stimuli in the microenvironment . EGF , as well as transforming growth factor - α ( TGF α ) , stromal cell - derived factor 1 ( SDF1 ) and heregulin have been demonstrated to be involved in stimulation of cell migration and correlated with progression of various tumors [ 14 ] . Figure 4 . Fragments of two - dimensional electrophoregramms of human malignant cells ( HMCs ) derived from prostate adenocarcinoma ( LNCaP , PC - 3 , Du - 145 ) , renal adenocarcinoma ( A498 , 769 - P , OKP - GS ) and sarcoma ( U - 2 OS—osteosarcoma ; RD—rhabdomyosarcoma ; SK - UT - 1B—leiomyosarcoma ) cells lines . The red arrow shows the identiﬁed Cﬂ - 1 fraction , and the brown dotted arrow shows the proﬁlin fraction as a reference spot . The increased mRNA and protein levels of Cﬂ - 1 in comparison with control ( nonmalignant ) cells have been shown in various HMCs including those from breast [ 140 ] , lung [ 142 ] , prostate [ 149 ] etc . Overexpression of Cﬂ - 1 has been mainly associated with tumor cell proliferation , invasion , and metastasis [ 14 , 140 , 150 , 151 ] . It has also been suggested that dephosphorylated , active coﬁlin is increased in HMCs [ 77 , 151 ] . However , there are a few opposing reports . For example , the overexpression of Cﬂ - 1 suppressed growth and invasion of non - small cell lung cancer [ 152 ] , and the phosphorylation of coﬁlin was elevated in bladder cancer samples compared with the normal bladder tissues [ 153 ] . Many authors have considered Cﬂ - 1 protein as a diagnostic / prognostic tumor biomarker [ 145 , 154 , 155 ] . Zheng et al . found reliable increasing of Cﬂ - 1 in blood samples obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinoma compared to healthy control [ 156 ] . Cﬂ - 1 can be a target for chemotherapeutic treatment . It has been shown that docetaxel induces the apoptosis of prostate cancer cells via suppression of the coﬁlin signaling pathways [ 157 ] . The increased level of Cﬂ - 1 in HMCs is often associated with poor prognosis which can be related with coﬁlin - dependent drug resistance of cancer cells [ 142 , 150 , 158 ] . Cﬂ - 1 has been upregulated in multidrug resistant malignant cells compared with non - drug resistant malignant cells [ 142 ] . High Cﬂ - 1 levels have been correlated with cisplatin resistance in lung adenocarcinomas [ 158 ] . Cﬂ - 1 may serve as a predictor of poor response to platinum - based chemotherapy in human ovarian cancer cells [ 143 ] and in astrocytomas cells [ 146 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 13 of 27 The molecular mechanisms of Cﬂ - 1 involvement in the formation of malignant phenotype of cancer cells are still being investigated . In tumor cells , the actin dynamics and cell motility are initiated in response to stimuli in the microenvironment . EGF , as well as transforming growth factor - α ( TGF α ) , stromal cell - derived factor 1 ( SDF1 ) and heregulin have been demonstrated to be involved in stimulation of cell migration and correlated with progression of various tumors [ 14 ] . Dephosphorylation and activation of Cﬂ - 1 upon EGF stimulation increases F - actin - severing activity of coﬁlin and generation of free barbed ends that are required for lamellipodial extension and chemotaxis to EGF , leading to invasion and metastasis [ 129 , 159 ] . Thus , excess of dephosphorylated Cﬂ - 1 may be implicated in malignant phenotype of cells . This concept has been supported by a number of authors [ 151 , 160 , 161 ] . Particularly , Nagai et al . showed that overexpression of non - phosphorylatable coﬁlin mutant ( coﬁlin - S3A ) in astrocytoma cells resulted in more highly invasive phenotype than those xenographs expressing wild - type coﬁlin [ 151 ] . Nuclear translocation of dephosphorylated Cﬂ - 1 can also contribute to malignant phenotype of cells . Dephosphorylated Cﬂ - 1 provides transport of G - actin to the nucleus . Nuclear actin can be involved in chromatin remodeling , transcription , RNA processing , intranuclear transport , nuclear export , and maintenance of the nuclear architecture [ 162 ] . Correspondingly , the gene expression changes during cancer progression can be mediated by Cﬂ - 1 through actin transport . Another mechanism contributing to malignant phenotype of cells and related with Cﬂ - 1 dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation was described by Samstag and colleagues [ 80 , 82 ] . In untransformed T lymphocytes , coﬁlin is part of a costimulatory pathway that is important for the induction of T - cell proliferation ( i . e . , for production of IL - 2 ) . In response to ligand attachment to accessory receptors like CD - 2 , coﬁlin undergoes dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation . In malignant T lymphoma cells , dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of coﬁlin occur spontaneously through constitutive activation of serine protein phosphatase . These events lead to T - cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis [ 80 , 82 ] . Coﬁlin activation / inactivation are modulated by changes in balance of kinases , phosphatases and other coﬁlin upstream regulatory proteins . These changes are responsible for initiation of the early steps of cancer cell motility and metastasis [ 119 ] . SSH1 is the most well - studied coﬁlin phosphatase which has been found to be upregulated in various invasive cancer cells . Wang et al . have revealed that overexpression of slingshot - 1L ( SSH1L ) in pancreatic cancer contributes to tumor cell migration [ 163 ] . This enzyme is activated by F - actin which is formed in high quantity during lamellipodial assembly in malignant cells [ 164 ] . Phosphorylation and inhibition of SSH1L by protein kinase D ( PDK ) suppress cancer cell migration [ 165 ] . The role of protein kinase LIMK1 in tumor invasion and metastasis is still under discussion , similarly to its role in cell migration . According to various authors , LIMK1 caused either a decrease [ 119 , 159 ] or an increase [ 122 , 166 , 167 ] in invasion and metastasis . In metastatic rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells , the expression of the kinase domain of LIMK1 , resulting in the near total phosphorylation of coﬁlin , completely inhibited the appearance of barbed ends and lamellipodia protrusion in response to EGF stimulation [ 119 ] . Overexpression of LIMK1 suppressed EGF - induced membrane protrusion and locomotion in rat mammary carcinoma cells [ 159 ] . In contrast , the increased activity of LIMK1 led to human breast cancer progression [ 166 ] . The level and activity of endogenous LIMK1 was increased in invasive breast and prostate cancer cell lines in comparison with less invasive cells [ 167 ] . The knockdown of LIMK1 has suppressed chemokine - induced lamellipodium formation and migration of Jurkat T cells [ 122 ] . These data about the positive role of LIMK1 in tumor cell migration at ﬁrst seem to contradict the mechanism of tumor progression related to Cﬂ - 1 dephosphorylation . Thus , some researchers have suggested that LIMK1 may play a role in regulating tumor progression via other mechanisms , independent of coﬁlin . For example , Bagheri - Yarmand et al . proposed that LIMK1 increases tumor metastasis of human breast cancer cells through stimulation of urokinase - type plasminogen activator system and degradation of the extracellular matrix by the serine protease urokinase type plasminogen activator [ 168 ] . However , there is a body of evidence that LIMK1 can inﬂuence the metastatic phenotype of tumor cells via regulation of coﬁlin activity , and Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 14 of 27 the controversial effects of LIMK1 expression on migration and metastasis of cancer cells require an explanation . Wang et al . suggested that LIMK1 expression alone does not determine the motility and invasion status of carcinoma cells , and the collective activity and the output ( barbed end production ) of the LIMK1 / coﬁlin pathways should be estimated [ 159 ] . Besides that , the contradictory results from different groups may be caused by different cell types used in these studies . It has been shown that oncoproteins and tumor suppressor proteins have effect on invasive and metastatic potential of tumors through coﬁlin - regulating pathways . One of the most known oncoproteins , tyrosine - protein kinase transforming protein of Rous sarcoma virus ( v - Src ) can disrupt the functioning of the Rho – ROCK – LIM kinase pathway resulting in dephosporylation of Cﬂ - 1 and increased level of active Cﬂ - 1 [ 169 ] . The tumor suppressor protein phosphoinositide phosphatase and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) may inactivate coﬁlin in cancer cells , while loss of PTEN and activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) caused differential activation of the coﬁlin regulators , LIMK1 and SSH1L , and coﬁlin dephosphorylation , that promote microtentacles formation and enhance metastatic risk [ 170 ] . In addition , it was shown that the tumor suppressor Ras association domain - containing protein 1 ( RASSF1A ) blocks tumor growth by stimulating coﬁlin / PP2A - mediated dephosphorylation [ 161 ] . Thus , the role of Cﬂ - 1 as an important participant of various signaling pathways in HMCs requires further investigation . The contributions of Cﬂ - 1 to the malignant phenotype are schematically presented in Figure 5 . Obviously , the results of its study might be interesting in designing new approaches to early diagnostics and to rational treatment . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 14 of 27 It has been shown that oncoproteins and tumor suppressor proteins have effect on invasive and metastatic potential of tumors through cofilin - regulating pathways . One of the most known oncoproteins , tyrosine - protein kinase transforming protein of Rous sarcoma virus ( v - Src ) can disrupt the functioning of the Rho – ROCK – LIM kinase pathway resulting in dephosporylation of Cfl - 1 and increased level of active Cfl - 1 [ 169 ] . The tumor suppressor protein phosphoinositide phosphatase and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) may inactivate cofilin in cancer cells , while loss of PTEN and activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) caused differential activation of the cofilin regulators , LIMK1 and SSH1L , and cofilin dephosphorylation , that promote microtentacles formation and enhance metastatic risk [ 170 ] . In addition , it was shown that the tumor suppressor Ras association domain - containing protein 1 ( RASSF1A ) blocks tumor growth by stimulating cofilin / PP2A - mediated dephosphorylation [ 161 ] . Thus , the role of Cfl - 1 as an important participant of various signaling pathways in HMCs requires further investigation . The contributions of Cfl - 1 to the malignant phenotype are schematically presented in Figure 5 . Obviously , the results of its study might be interesting in designing new approaches to early diagnostics and to rational treatment . Figure 5 . Simplified scheme showing changes in Cfl - 1 functions in HMCs . This scheme does not consider , for example , the possible positive role of LIMK1 overexpression in invasion and metastasis . Alterations in regulation ( green ) and alterations in regulation ( red ) refer to changes in signaling pathways that lead to increased Cfl - 1 dephosphorylation ( activation ) or decreased phosphorylation ( inactivation ) , respectively . There are few publications about the presence of Cfl - 2 in HMCs and cancer tissues . The muscle isoform of Cfl - 2 ( Cfl - 2b ) is considered as a biomarker of muscle differentiation [ 171 ] and has been identified in high quantity in well - differentiated leiomyosarcomas compared to undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas [ 172 ] . The expression level of Cfl - 2 has prognostic significance in primary leiomyosarcomas independent of the histopathological type of tumor , and its expression correlates with improved disease - specific survival [ 172 ] . Cfl - 2 has also been identified in HMCs of non - muscle origin [ 173 – 176 ] . Cfl - 2 has been overexpressed in aggressive breast cancer cell lines , and its expression has been correlated with tumor grade in primary breast cancer tissue [ 175 ] . Significant upregulation of Cfl - 1 and downregulation of Cfl - 2 has been observed in pancreatic adenocarcinomas compared to non - cancerous tissues [ 173 ] . Dstn is the third traditional member of ADF / cofilins family that has also been identified in HMCs , mainly in different adenocarcinomas [ 6 , 18 , 143 , 177 ] . Likewise Figure 5 . Simpliﬁed scheme showing changes in Cﬂ - 1 functions in HMCs . This scheme does not consider , for example , the possible positive role of LIMK1 overexpression in invasion and metastasis . Alterations in regulation ( green ) and alterations in regulation ( red ) refer to changes in signaling pathways that lead to increased Cﬂ - 1 dephosphorylation ( activation ) or decreased phosphorylation ( inactivation ) , respectively . There are few publications about the presence of Cﬂ - 2 in HMCs and cancer tissues . The muscle isoform of Cﬂ - 2 ( Cﬂ - 2b ) is considered as a biomarker of muscle differentiation [ 171 ] and has been identiﬁed in high quantity in well - differentiated leiomyosarcomas compared to undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas [ 172 ] . The expression level of Cﬂ - 2 has prognostic signiﬁcance in primary Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 15 of 27 leiomyosarcomas independent of the histopathological type of tumor , and its expression correlates with improved disease - speciﬁc survival [ 172 ] . Cﬂ - 2 has also been identiﬁed in HMCs of non - muscle origin [ 173 – 176 ] . Cﬂ - 2 has been overexpressed in aggressive breast cancer cell lines , and its expression has been correlated with tumor grade in primary breast cancer tissue [ 175 ] . Signiﬁcant upregulation of Cﬂ - 1 and downregulation of Cﬂ - 2 has been observed in pancreatic adenocarcinomas compared to non - cancerous tissues [ 173 ] . Dstn is the third traditional member of ADF / coﬁlins family that has also been identiﬁed in HMCs , mainly in different adenocarcinomas [ 6 , 18 , 143 , 177 ] . Likewise Cﬂ - 1 , Dstn can be a potentional biomarker of resistance to platinum - based agents [ 143 ] . The structural and functional similarities of traditional coﬁlins ( in particular , the ability to undergo phosphorylation - dephosphorylation on Ser3 ) suggest that Cﬂ - 1 , Cﬂ - 2 and Dstn may also be involved in the same pathways . Overexpression of LIMK1 , Cﬂ - 1 , and Cﬂ - 2 has been associated with low expression of mitogen - activated protein kinase MAPK1 ( which is involved in cell growth and proliferation ) , and with enhanced survival of the patients with glioblastoma multiforme [ 174 ] . Dstn like Cﬂ - 1 promotes tumor cell migration and invasiveness , but in general the activities of Dstn and Cﬂ - 1 are non - overlapping [ 6 , 177 ] . 3 . 2 . Other Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Coﬁlin Superfamily Proteins Data on the expression of twinﬁlins in HMCs have been initially obtained using transcriptomics approaches . It has been shown that twinﬁlin might be a key determinant of lymphoma progression through regulation of actin dynamics . Moreover , twinﬁlin suppressed the action of the front - line chemotherapeutic agent vincristine in E µ - myc lymphoma cells [ 178 ] . In prostate cancer cells , an osteoblast master transcription factor Runx2 is aberrantly expressed and promotes metastatic phenotype of cells through up - regulation of twinﬁlin gene and other genes with cancer associated functions [ 179 ] . TWF1 has been detected as a target for microRNA - 206 ( miR - 206 ) which is referred to microRNAs , fundamental post - transcriptional regulators inhibiting gene expression . Blocking TWF1 by miR - 206 in human xenograft models of breast cancer can suppress tumor invasion and metastasis by inhibiting the actin cytoskeleton dynamics [ 180 ] . Drebrins are considered as brain - speciﬁc intracellular regulators of morphogenesis [ 36 , 181 ] . The ﬁrst report on drebrin detection in HMCs was published by Asada et al . , who detected drebrin ( namely , drebrin E2 ) in cultured neuroblastoma cells [ 182 ] . Later , data on the presence of drebrins in non - neuronal tumor tissues , especially in gliomas and malignant epithelial tumors , were published . The level of this protein in glioma cell lines varies and is equivalent or higher in comparison with the normal cells [ 183 ] . High expression level of this protein in glioma U87 cells transfected with a drebrin expression construct induces increased invasiveness and provides cell motility . On the contrary , knockdown of DBN1 in glioma cells by small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) leads to decrease of cell migration and invasiveness [ 183 ] . It has been demonstrated that basal cell carcinomas are rich in drebrin , while keratinocytes of normal epidermis contain almost no drebrin , and that drebrin has potential value in diagnosis of basal cell carcinomas [ 98 ] . Drebrin has also been assumed as a potential biomarker for bladder cancer [ 184 ] . This protein can be considered a prognostic marker in patients with small lung cancer [ 185 ] . Proteomic analysis of colorectal cancer cell lines revealed drebrin to be overexpressed during liver metastasis [ 186 ] . The exact role of drebrin in epithelial tumor growth and formation of invasive and metastatic cell phenotype is still unclear . In urothelial carcinoma cell lines , drebrin has been shown to be critical for progranulin - dependent activation of the Akt and MAPK pathways and to modulate motility , invasion and anchorage - independent growth of tumor [ 184 ] . The drebrin - like protein ( synonyms : mAbp1 , HIP - 55 ) known as the mammalian homologue of the yeast Abp1 has been poorly studied in HMCs , and the studies provide contradictory results . It was found that mAbp1 was upregulated or downregulated in several types of tumor tissues , and the highest expression was shown in lung cancer tissues . This protein increased the viability and decreased the apoptosis of lung cancer A549 cells treated with the anticancer agent etoposide [ 187 ] . It has been also reported that mAbp1 interacts with transcription regulator FHL - 2 ( four and a half Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 16 of 27 LIM domains protein 2 ) and participates in negative regulation of Rho signaling and breast cancer cell invasion [ 188 ] . The GMF - B protein was initially characterized as a protein of neural tissue of vertebrates , which is able to affect the growth of normal and malignant glial cells in vitro and in vivo [ 41 , 42 , 189 ] . The molecular effects of GMF - B on HMCs of neuronal origin are diverse and contribute to contradictory results of studies . In particular , this protein was shown to stimulate DNA synthesis and proliferation of glioma cells and hybrid cells derived from glioma and neuroblastoma ( NG108 - 15 ) cells , but had no effect on neuroblastoma cells [ 189 ] . In glioma cell lines of rodent and human origin , GMF - B promoted the initial growth of cell lines , but limited the proliferation by contact inhibition at the next steps [ 42 ] . In rat glioma cells , after transfection with GMF - B the enhanced expression of neurotrophic factors including nuclear factor - κ B was detected [ 190 ] . These results suggest a cytoprotective role for endogenous GMF in glial cells . In parallel , GMF - B was demonstrated to cause glioma progression via promoting neovascularization [ 191 ] . Finally , it was found that induced overexpression of GMF - B protein in neuroblastoma cells caused the cytotoxicity and loss viability via activation of glycogen synthase kinase - 3 β and caspase - 3 [ 192 ] . GMF - B has been also found in non - brain tumors . Screening using retroviral expression libraries allowed detection of GMF - B encoding gene among genes involved in ovarian carcinogenesis [ 193 ] . The GMF - B protein was signiﬁcantly overexpressed in serous ovarian carcinoma compared to normal epithelium , benign serous adenoma and borderline serous adenoma tissues , and high expression of GMF - B was associated with poor disease - free survival and overall survival [ 194 ] . There is only one report about identiﬁcation of GMF - G in HMCs . Recently , Zuo et al . showed that the high GMF - G expression correlates with poor prognosis and promotes cell migration and invasion in epithelial ovarian cancer [ 195 ] . Human coactosin - like protein ( COTL - 1 ) has not been very actively studied in HMCs . The ﬁrst reports on identiﬁcation of COTL - 1 in HMCs were published by Nakatsura et al . [ 196 ] . COTL - 1 was detected by the serological expression cloning method ( SEREX ) in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines among a number of other pancreatic cancer antigens . The authors assumed that peptides from COTL - 1 might be appropriate vaccine candidates for peptide - based immunotherapy of prostate cancer patients [ 196 ] . Later , proteomic analysis of PaCa44 pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line treated with a chemoterapeutic agent , 5 - aza - 2 (cid:48) - deoxycytidine ( DAC ) , revealed the 22 - fold decreased expression of COTL - 1 along with silence of coﬁlin and proﬁlin 1 [ 197 ] . After that , Oh et al . using 2 - DE with mass spectrometric identiﬁcation revealed COTL - 1 as a differentiation - related cytoskeleton protein in neuroblastoma cells [ 198 ] . Hou et al . also reported detection of COTL - 1 in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells [ 106 ] . Moreover , COTL - 1 may also present in poorly differentiated cells , for example , in the case of high aggressive small cell lung cancer [ 199 ] . The comparison of small cell lung cancer tissues with normal bronchial epithelium showed more than 2 - fold upregulation of this protein in cancer specimens . COTL - 1 was immunohistochemically detected in 93 % of small cell lung cancer tissue specimens and only in 16 % of non - small cell lung cancer samples . On this basis authors assumed that COTL - 1 may be a biomarker or a therapeutic target for patients with small cell lung cancer [ 199 ] . To sum up , despite the deﬁnite role in tumors , the mechanisms involving twinﬁlins , drebrin and drebrin - like protein , GMFs , and coactosin - like protein in malignant phenotype are still unclear . Consequently , new studies are needed to clarify their roles in tumors . 4 . Conclusions Coﬁlin - 1 is found in all vertebrates and in many other organisms and plays an essential role in actin ﬁlament dynamics and reorganization through severing actin ﬁlaments . This function of Cﬂ - 1 is regulated by several mechanisms including phosphorylation on Ser3 . Active ( dephosphorylated ) Cﬂ - 1 , in addition to the main function , is able to provide transport of G - actin and some other proteins to the nucleus which is accompanied by changes in gene expression . Phospho - Cﬂ - 1 , considered by many authors as inactive , has been found to have its own function , namely , direct activation of phospholipase D1 . Thus , Cﬂ - 1 can be considered as a multifunctional protein which is involved Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 17 of 27 in several signaling pathways regulating cell motility and development . HMCs of different origin contain Cﬂ - 1 as one of the most abundant proteins . The expression level of Cﬂ - 1 is often increased in HMCs , which underlines its contribution to malignant phenotype . There are several mechanisms involving Cﬂ - 1 in tumor proliferation , invasion , and metastasis that are realized mainly through changes in the balance of kinases , phosphatases , and other proteins involved in coﬁlin - regulating pathways . Coﬁlin phosphatase SSH1 has been found to be upregulated in various invasive cancer cells . Coﬁlin kinase LIMK1 has also shown to play a pivotal role in cell motility . However , some studies provide contradictory data concerning the inﬂuence of the expression level of LIMK1 on cell migration , invasion , and metastasis . The characteristic structural feature of Cﬂ - 1 is the presence of special ADF - H domain in its structure . The ADF - H domains have also been identiﬁed in a number of other proteins that can directly or indirectly interact with actin cytoskeleton and provide its remodeling . These proteins , differing in size and functionality , are currently referred to as ADF / coﬁlin superfamily . Almost all of these proteins are direct or indirect regulators of cell motility . In addition , drebrin , drebrin - like protein , and glia maturation factors are characterized as regulators of cellular differentiation . Therefore , all ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members can contribute to malignant phenotypes of HMCs . However , available data on the functions and presence of many ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins in HMCs are still limited and conﬂicting . For instance , conﬂicting results were obtained concerning the role of mAbp1 and GMF - B in invasion and metastasis . The controversial data on the role of dephosphorylated Cﬂ - 1 , LIMK1 , mAbp1 , and GMF - B in cell motility , invasion and metastasis may have several possible reasons including different cell types used in the studies , intratumoral cell heterogeneity , distinct functions of studied proteins at different stages of development or tumor progression , cellular background , etc . All these factors should be taken into account , and the collective activity of coﬁlin - regulating pathways should be estimated for evaluation of the invasive and metastatic potential of HMCs . With due consideration of these factors , further studies of ADF / coﬁlin superfamily proteins in HMCs can be a very promising research direction , which may extend the understanding of the molecular basis of tumor phenotypes and provide new protein targets for molecular and clinical oncology . Acknowledgments : This work did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public , commercial , or not - for - proﬁt sectors . Author Contributions : Sergey Shishkin conceived the concept for this paper . All authors ( Sergey Shishkin , Lidia Eremina , Natalya Pashintseva , Leonid Kovalev and Marina Kovaleva ) collected and analyzed data from the available literature . Sergey Shishkin , Lidia Eremina and Natalya Pashintseva contributed to the writing of this paper . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . References 1 . Sell , S . ; Pierce , G . B . Maturation arrest of stem cell differentiation is a common pathway for the cellular origin of teratocarcinomas and epithelial cancers . Lab . Investig . 1994 , 70 , 6 – 22 . [ PubMed ] 2 . Hardavella , G . ; George , R . ; Sethi , T . Lung cancer stem cells - characteristics , phenotype . Transl . Lung Cancer Res . 2016 , 5 , 272 – 279 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Paszek , M . J . ; Zahir , N . ; Johnson , K . R . ; Lakins , J . N . ; Rozenberg , G . I . ; Gefen , A . ; Reinhart - King , C . A . ; Margulies , S . S . ; Dembo , M . ; Boettiger , D . ; et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 2005 , 8 , 241 – 254 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Boja , E . S . ; Rodriguez , H . Proteogenomic convergence for understanding cancer pathways and networks . Clin . Proteom . 2014 , 11 , 22 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Carpenter , R . L . ; Lo , H . W . Hedgehog pathway and GLI1 isoforms in human cancer . Discov . Med . 2012 , 13 , 105 – 113 . [ PubMed ] 6 . Tahtamouni , L . H . ; Shaw , A . E . ; Hasan , M . H . ; Yasin , S . R . ; Bamburg , J . R . Non - overlapping activities of ADF and coﬁlin - 1 during the migration of metastatic breast tumor cells . BMC Cell Biol . 2013 , 5 , 14 – 45 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 18 of 27 7 . Kojima , M . ; Higuchi , Y . ; Yokota , M . ; Ishii , G . ; Saito , N . ; Aoyagi , K . ; Sasaki , H . ; Ochiai , A . Human subperitoneal ﬁbroblast and cancer cell interaction creates microenvironment that enhances tumor progression and metastasis . PLoS ONE 2014 , 9 , e88018 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . ; Hodgson , L . ; Condeelis , J . S . Spatial regulation of tumor cell protrusions by RhoC . Cell Adhes . Migr . 2014 , 8 , 263 – 267 . [ CrossRef ] 9 . Martin , S . K . ; Kamelgarn , M . ; Kyprianou , N . Cytoskeleton targeting value in prostate cancer treatment . Am . J . Clin . Exp . Urol . 2014 , 2 , 15 – 26 . [ PubMed ] 10 . Weaver , A . M . Cortactin in tumor invasiveness . Cancer Lett . 2008 , 265 , 157 – 166 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 11 . Albiges - Rizo , C . ; Destaing , O . ; Fourcade , B . ; Planus , E . ; Block , M . R . Actin machinery and mechanosensitivity in invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 2009 , 122 , 3037 – 3049 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 12 . Madsen , C . D . ; Hooper , S . ; Tozluoglu , M . ; Bruckbauer , A . ; Fletcher , G . ; Erler , J . T . ; Bates , P . A . ; Thompson , B . ; Sahai , E . STRIPAK components determine mode of cancer cell migration and metastasis . Nat . Cell Biol . 2015 , 17 , 68 – 80 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Gau , D . M . ; Lesnock , J . L . ; Hood , B . L . ; Bhargava , R . ; Sun , M . ; Darcy , K . ; Luthra , S . ; Chandran , U . ; Conrads , T . P . ; Edwards , R . P . ; et al . BRCA1 deﬁciency in ovarian cancer is associated with alteration in expression of several key regulators of cell motility—A proteomics study . Cell Cycle 2015 , 14 , 1884 – 1892 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 14 . Wang , W . ; Eddy , R . ; Condeelis , J . The coﬁlin pathway in breast cancer invasion and metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2007 , 7 , 429 – 440 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 15 . Shishkin , S . ; Kovaleva , M . ; Ivanov , A . ; Eryomina , L . ; Lisitskaya , K . ; Toropugin , I . ; Kovalev , L . ; Okhritz , V . ; Loran , O . Comparative proteomic study of proteins in prostate cancer and benign hyperplasia cells . J . Cancer Sci . Ther . 2011 , S1 . [ CrossRef ] 16 . Huang , L . ; Kuwahara , I . ; Matsumoto , K . EWS represses coﬁlin 1 expression by inducing nuclear retention of coﬁlin 1 mRNA . Oncogene 2014 , 33 , 2995 – 3003 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Chang , C . Y . ; Leu , J . D . ; Lee , Y . J . The actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin signaling pathway and DNA damage responses in cancer . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2015 , 16 , 4095 – 4120 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 18 . Estornes , Y . ; Gay , F . ; Gevrey , J . C . ; Navoizat , S . ; Nejjari , M . ; Scoazec , J . Y . ; Chayvialle , J . A . ; Saurin , J . C . ; Abello , J . Differential involvement of destrin and coﬁlin - 1 in the control of invasive properties of Isreco1 human colon cancer cells . Int . J . Cancer 2007 , 121 , 2162 – 2171 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 19 . Bockhorn , J . ; Yee , K . ; Chang , Y . F . ; Prat , A . ; Huo , D . ; Nwachukwu , C . ; Dalton , R . ; Huang , S . ; Swanson , K . E . ; Perou , C . M . ; et al . MicroRNA - 30c targets cytoskeleton genes involved in breast cancer cell invasion . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . 2013 , 137 , 373 – 382 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 20 . Multi - Level Information Database “Proteomics of Prostate Cancer” . Available online : http : / / ef . inbi . ras . ru ( accessed on 30 September 2016 ) . 21 . Multi - Level Information Database “Proteomics of Malignant Cells” . Available online : http : / / ef2 . inbi . ras . ru ( accessed on 30 September 2016 ) . 22 . Bamburg , J . R . ; Harris , H . E . ; Weeds , A . G . Partial puriﬁcation and characterization of an actin depolymerizing factor from brain . FEBS Lett . 1980 , 121 , 178 – 182 . [ CrossRef ] 23 . Thorstensson , R . ; Sterky , C . ; Norberg , R . Preparation of highly puriﬁed F - actin - depolymerizing factor of human serum . Eur . J . Biochem . 1985 , 147 , 637 – 640 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Nishida , E . ; Maekawa , S . ; Sakai , H . Coﬁlin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin ﬁlaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 1984 , 23 , 5307 – 5313 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 25 . Vartiainen , M . K . ; Mustonen , T . ; Mattila , P . K . ; Ojala , P . J . ; Thesleff , I . ; Partanen , J . ; Lappalainen , P . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlins evolved to fulﬁll cell - type - speciﬁc requirements for actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 2002 , 13 , 183 – 194 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Li , G . H . ; Arora , P . D . ; Chen , Y . ; McCulloch , C . A . ; Liu , P . Multifunctional roles of gelsolin in health and diseases . Med . Res . Rev . 2012 , 32 , 999 – 1025 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 27 . Moon , A . ; Drubin , D . G . The ADF / coﬁlin proteins : stimulus - responsive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 1995 , 6 , 1423 – 1431 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 28 . Ono , S . ; Baillie , D . L . ; Benian , G . M . UNC - 60B , an ADF / coﬁlin family protein , is required for proper assembly of actin into myoﬁbrils in Caenorhabditis elegans body wall muscle . J . Cell Biol . 1999 , 145 , 491 – 502 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 29 . Lappalainen , P . ; Kessels , M . M . ; Cope , M . J . ; Drubin , D . G . The ADF homology ( ADF - H ) domain : A highly exploited actin - binding module . Mol . Biol . Cell 1998 , 9 , 1951 – 1959 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 19 of 27 30 . PDBsum : Pictorial Database of 3D Structures in the Protein Data Bank . Available online : http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / thornton - srv / databases / pdbsum ( accessed on 30 September 2016 ) . 31 . Takagi , T . ; Konishi , K . ; Mabuchi , I . Amino acid sequence of starﬁsh oocyte depactin . J . Biol . Chem . 1988 , 263 , 3097 – 3102 . [ PubMed ] 32 . De Hostos , E . L . ; Bradtke , B . ; Lottspeich , F . ; Gerisch , G . Coactosin , a 17 kDa F - actin binding protein from Dictyostelium discoideum . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 1993 , 26 , 181 – 191 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 33 . Leonard , S . ; Gittis , A . ; Petrella , E . ; Pollard , T . ; Lattman , E . Crystal structure of the actin - binding protein actophorin from Acanthamoeba . Nat . Struct . Biol . 1997 , 4 , 369 – 373 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 34 . Goode , B . L . ; Drubin , D . G . ; Lappalainen , P . Regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast by twinﬁlin , a ubiquitous actin monomer - sequestering protein . J . Cell Biol . 1998 , 142 , 723 – 733 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 35 . Park , H . ; Yamada , K . ; Kojo , A . ; Sato , S . ; Onozuka , M . ; Yamamoto , T . Drebrin ( developmentally regulated brain protein ) is associated with axo - somatic synapses and neuronal gap junctions in rat mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus . Neurosci . Lett . 2009 , 461 , 95 – 99 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Shirao , T . The roles of microﬁlament - associated proteins , drebrins , in brain morphogenesis : A review . J . Biochem . 1995 , 117 , 231 – 236 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Goode , B . L . ; Rodal , A . A . ; Barnes , G . ; Drubin , D . G . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin ﬁlament binding protein Abp1p . J . Cell Biol . 2001 , 153 , 627 – 634 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 38 . Le Bras , S . ; Foucault , I . ; Foussat , A . ; Brignone , C . ; Acuto , O . ; Deckert , M . Recruitment of the actin - binding protein HIP - 55 to the immunological synapse regulates T cell receptor signaling and endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 15550 – 15560 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 39 . Goroncy , A . K . ; Koshiba , S . ; Tochio , N . ; Tomizawa , T . ; Sato , M . ; Inoue , M . ; Watanabe , S . ; Hayashizaki , Y . ; Tanaka , A . ; Kigawa , T . ; et al . NMR solution structures of actin depolymerizing factor homology domains . Protein Sci . 2009 , 18 , 2384 – 2392 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Nakano , K . ; Kuwayama , H . ; Kawasaki , M . ; Numata , O . ; Takaine , M . GMF is an evolutionarily developed Adf / coﬁlin - super family protein involved in the Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Cytoskeleton 2010 , 67 , 373 – 382 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 41 . Lim , R . ; Nakagawa , S . ; Arnason , B . G . ; Turriff , D . E . Glia maturation factor promotes contact inhibition in cancer cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1981 , 78 , 4373 – 4377 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 42 . Lim , R . ; Hicklin , D . J . ; Ryken , T . C . ; Han , X . M . ; Liu , K . N . ; Miller , J . F . ; Baggenstoss , B . A . Suppression of glioma growth in vitro and in vivo by glia maturation factor . Cancer Res . 1986 , 46 , 5241 – 5247 . [ PubMed ] 43 . Thirion , C . ; Stucka , R . ; Mendel , B . ; Gruhler , A . ; Jaksch , M . ; Nowak , K . J . ; Binz , N . ; Laing , N . G . ; Lochmüller , H . Characterization of human muscle type coﬁlin ( CFL2 ) in normal and regenerating muscle . Eur . J . Biochem . 2001 , 268 , 3473 – 3482 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . ; Magalhaes , M . A . ; Eddy , R . J . ; Hodgson , L . ; Condeelis , J . Functions of coﬁlin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2013 , 14 , 405 – 415 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Shukla , V . K . ; Kabra , A . ; Maheshwari , D . ; Yadav , R . ; Jain , A . ; Tripathi , S . ; Ono , S . ; Kumar , D . ; Arora , A . Solution structures and dynamics of ADF / coﬁlins UNC - 60A and UNC - 60B from Caenorhabditis elegans . Biochem . J . 2015 , 465 , 63 – 78 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 46 . Carlier , M . F . ; Laurent , V . ; Santolini , J . ; Melki , R . ; Didry , D . ; Xia , G . X . ; Hong , Y . ; Chua , N . H . ; Pantaloni , D . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : Implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 1997 , 136 , 1307 – 1322 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 47 . Yonezawa , N . ; Homma , Y . ; Yahara , I . ; Sakai , H . ; Nishida , E . A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide binding and actin binding activities of coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 1991 , 266 , 17218 – 17221 . [ PubMed ] 48 . Ivanovska , J . ; Tregubova , A . ; Mahadevan , V . ; Chakilam , S . ; Gandesiri , M . ; Benderska , N . ; Ettle , B . ; Hartmann , A . ; Söder , S . ; Ziesché , E . ; et al . Identiﬁcation of DAPK as a scaffold protein for the LIMK / coﬁlin complex in TNF - induced apoptosis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 2013 , 45 , 1720 – 1729 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 49 . Nevalainen , E . M . ; Skwarek - Maruszewska , A . ; Braun , A . ; Moser , M . ; Lappalainen , P . Two biochemically distinct and tissue - speciﬁc twinﬁlin isoforms are generated from the mouse Twf2 gene by alternative promoter usage . Biochem . J . 2009 , 417 , 593 – 600 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 20 of 27 50 . Poukkula , M . ; Kremneva , E . ; Serlachius , M . ; Lappalainen , P . Actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain : A conserved fold performing diverse roles in cytoskeletal dynamics . Cytoskeleton 2011 , 68 , 471 – 490 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 51 . Pérez - Martínez , M . ; Gordón - Alonso , M . ; Cabrero , J . R . ; Barrero - Villar , M . ; Rey , M . ; Mittelbrunn , M . ; Lamana , A . ; Morlino , G . ; Calabia , C . ; Yamazaki , H . ; et al . F - actin - binding protein drebrin regulates CXCR4 recruitment to the immune synapse . J . Cell Sci . 2010 , 123 , 1160 – 1170 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 52 . Ikeda , K . ; Kundu , R . K . ; Ikeda , S . ; Kobara , M . ; Matsubara , H . ; Quertermous , T . Glia maturation factor - gamma is preferentially expressed in microvascular endothelial and inﬂammatory cells and modulates actin cytoskeleton reorganization . Circ . Res . 2006 , 99 , 424 – 433 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . Lippert , D . N . ; Wilkins , J . A . Glia maturation factor gamma regulates the migration and adherence of human T lymphocytes . BMC Immunol . 2012 , 13 , 21 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . Kim , J . ; Shapiro , M . J . ; Bamidele , A . O . ; Gurel , P . ; Thapa , P . ; Higgs , H . ; Hedin , K . E . ; Shapiro , V . S . ; Billadeau , D . D . Coactosin - like 1 antagonizes coﬁlin to promote lamellipodial protrusion at the immune synapse . PLoS ONE 2014 , 9 , e85090 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 55 . Kumar , N . ; Somlata ; Mazumder , M . ; Dutta , P . ; Maiti , S . ; Gourinath , S . EhCoactosin stabilizes actin ﬁlaments in the protist parasite Entamoeba histolytica . PLoS Pathog . 2014 , 10 , 1004362 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 56 . Paavilainen , V . O . ; Hellman , M . ; Helfer , E . ; Bovellan , M . ; Annila , A . ; Carlier , M . F . ; Permi , P . ; Lappalainen , P . Structural basis and evolutionary origin of actin ﬁlament capping by twinﬁlin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2007 , 104 , 3113 – 3118 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . Takacs - Kollar , V . ; Nyitrai , M . ; Hild , G . The effect of mouse twinﬁlin - 1 on the structure and dynamics of monomeric actin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2016 , 1864 , 840 – 846 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . Peitsch , W . K . ; Hofmann , I . ; Prätzel , S . ; Grund , C . ; Kuhn , C . ; Moll , I . ; Langbein , L . ; Franke , W . W . Drebrin particles : Components in the ensemble of proteins regulating actin dynamics of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2001 , 80 , 567 – 579 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 59 . Worth , D . C . ; Daly , C . N . ; Geraldo , S . ; Oozeer , F . ; Gordon - Weeks , P . R . Drebrin contains a cryptic F - actin - bundling activity regulated by Cdk5 phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 2013 , 202 , 793 – 806 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 60 . Gordon - Weeks , P . R . The role of the drebrin / EB3 / Cdk5 pathway in dendritic spine plasticity , implications for Alzheimer’s disease . Brain Res . Bull . 2016 , 126 Pt 3 , 293 – 299 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 61 . Ambrosi , C . ; Ren , C . ; Spagnol , G . ; Cavin , G . ; Cone , A . ; Grintsevich , E . E . ; Sosinsky , G . E . ; Sorgen , P . L . Connexin43 Forms Supramolecular Complexes through Non - Overlapping Binding Sites for Drebrin , Tubulin , and ZO - 1 . PLoS ONE 2016 , 11 , e0157073 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 62 . Cortesio , C . L . ; Perrin , B . J . ; Bennin , D . A . ; Huttenlocher , A . Actin - binding protein - 1 interacts with WASp - interacting protein to regulate growth factor - induced dorsal rufﬂe formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 2010 , 21 , 186 – 197 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 63 . Li , Z . ; Park , H . R . ; Shi , Z . ; Li , Z . ; Pham , C . D . ; Du , Y . ; Khuri , F . R . ; Zhang , Y . ; Han , Q . ; Fu , H . Pro - oncogenic function of HIP - 55 / Drebrin - like ( DBNL ) through Ser269 / Thr291 - phospho - sensor motifs . Oncotarget 2014 , 5 , 3197 – 3209 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 64 . Andrianantoandro , E . ; Pollard , T . D . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 2006 , 24 , 13 – 23 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 65 . Dos Remedios , C . G . ; Chhabra , D . ; Kekic , M . ; Dedova , I . V . ; Tsubakihara , M . ; Berry , D . A . ; Nosworthy , N . J . Actin Binding Proteins : Regulation of Cytoskeletal Microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 2003 , 83 , 433 – 473 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 66 . Winder , S . J . ; Ayscough , K . R . Actin - binding proteins . J . Cell Sci . 2005 , 118 , 651 – 654 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 67 . Tania , N . ; Condeelis , J . ; Edelstein - Keshet , L . Modeling the synergy of coﬁlin and Arp2 / 3 in lamellipodial protrusive activity . Biophys . J . 2013 , 105 , 1946 – 1955 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 68 . Chan , C . ; Beltzner , C . C . ; Pollard , T . D . Coﬁlin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin ﬁlaments . Curr . Biol . 2009 , 19 , 537 – 545 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 69 . Nakashima , K . ; Sato , N . ; Nakagaki , T . ; Abe , H . ; Ono , S . ; Obinata , T . Two mouse coﬁlin isoforms , muscle - type ( MCF ) and non - muscle type ( NMCF ) , interact with F - actin with different efﬁciencies . J . Biochem . 2005 , 138 , 519 – 526 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 21 of 27 70 . Yahara , I . ; Aizawa , H . ; Moriyama , K . ; Iida , K . ; Yonezawa , N . ; Nishida , E . ; Hatanaka , H . ; Inagaki , F . A role of coﬁlin / destrin in reorganization of actin cytoskeleton in response to stresses and cell stimuli . Cell Struct . Funct . 1996 , 21 , 421 – 424 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 71 . Tojkander , S . ; Gateva , G . ; Lappalainen , P . Actin stress ﬁbers—Assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J . Cell Sci . 2012 , 125 , 1855 – 1864 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 72 . Kuure , S . ; Cebrian , C . ; Machingo , Q . ; Lu , B . C . ; Chi , X . ; Hyink , D . ; D’agati , V . ; Gurniak , C . ; Witke , W . ; Costantini , F . Actin depolymerizing factors coﬁlin1 and destrin are required for ureteric bud branching morphogenesis . PLoS Genet . 2010 , 6 , e1001176 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 73 . Sparrow , N . ; Manetti , M . E . ; Bott , M . ; Fabianac , T . ; Petrilli , A . ; Bates , M . L . ; Bunge , M . B . ; Lambert , S . ; Fernandez - Valle , C . The actin - severing protein coﬁlin is downstream of neuregulin signaling and is essential for Schwann cell myelination . J . Neurosci . 2012 , 32 , 5284 – 5297 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 74 . Dumpich , M . ; Mannherz , H . G . ; Theiss , C . VEGF Signaling Regulates Coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 - complex within the Axonal Growth Cone . Curr . Neurovasc . Res . 2015 , 12 , 293 – 307 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 75 . Aragona , M . ; Panciera , T . ; Manfrin , A . ; Giulitti , S . ; Michielin , F . ; Elvassore , N . ; Dupont , S . ; Piccolo , S . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 2013 , 154 , 1047 – 1059 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Ohashi , K . Roles of coﬁlin in development and its mechanisms of regulation . Dev . Growth Differ . 2015 , 57 , 275 – 290 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 77 . Nebl , G . ; Meuer , S . C . ; Samstag , Y . Dephosphorylation of serine 3 regulates nuclear translocation of coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 1996 , 271 , 26276 – 26280 . [ CrossRef ] 78 . Ono , S . ; Abe , H . ; Nagaoka , R . ; Obinata , T . Colocalization of ADF and coﬁlin in intranuclear actin rods of cultured muscle cells . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 1993 , 14 , 195 – 204 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 79 . Percipalle , P . Co - transcriptional nuclear actin dynamics . Nucleus 2013 , 4 , 43 – 52 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 80 . Samstag , Y . ; Eckerskorn , C . ; Wesselborg , S . ; Henning , S . ; Wallich , R . ; Meuer , S . C . Costimulatory signals for human T - cell activation induce nuclear translocation of pp19 / coﬁlin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1994 , 91 , 4494 – 4498 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 81 . Lee , K . H . ; Meuer , S . C . ; Samstag , Y . Coﬁlin : A missing link between T cell co - stimulation and rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . Eur . J . Immunol . 2000 , 30 , 892 – 899 . [ CrossRef ] 82 . Samstag , Y . ; Dreizler , E . M . ; Ambach , A . ; Sczakiel , G . ; Meuer , S . C . Inhibition of constitutive serine phosphatase activity in T lymphoma cells results in phosphorylation of pp19 / coﬁlin and induces apoptosis . J . Immunol . 1996 , 156 , 4167 – 4173 . [ PubMed ] 83 . Sen , B . ; Xie , Z . ; Uzer , G . ; Thompson , W . R . ; Styner , M . ; Wu , X . ; Rubin , J . Intranuclear Actin Regulates Osteogenesis . Stem Cells 2015 , 33 , 3065 – 3076 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 84 . Klamt , F . ; Zdanov , S . ; Levine , R . L . ; Pariser , A . ; Zhang , Y . ; Zhang , B . ; Yu , L . R . ; Veenstra , T . D . ; Shacter , E . Oxidant - induced apoptosis is mediated by oxidation of the actin - regulatory protein coﬁlin . Nat . Cell Biol . 2009 , 11 , 1241 – 1246 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 85 . Han , L . ; Stope , M . B . ; de Jesús , M . L . ; Oude Weernink , P . A . ; Urban , M . ; Wieland , T . ; Rosskopf , D . ; Mizuno , K . ; Jakobs , K . H . ; Schmidt , M . Direct stimulation of receptor - controlled phospholipase D1 by phospho - coﬁlin . EMBO J . 2007 , 26 , 4189 – 4202 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 86 . Gomez - Cambronero , J . Phospholipase D in cell signaling : from a myriad of cell functions to cancer growth and metastasis . J . Biol . Chem . 2014 , 289 , 22557 – 22566 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 87 . Gurniak , C . B . ; Perlas , E . ; Witke , W . The actin depolymerizing factor n - coﬁlin is essential for neural tube morphogenesis and neural crest cell migration . Dev . Biol . 2005 , 278 , 231 – 241 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 88 . Bellenchi , G . C . ; Gurniak , C . B . ; Perlas , E . ; Middei , S . ; Ammassari - Teule , M . ; Witke , W . N - coﬁlin is associated with neuronal migration disorders and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex . Genes Dev . 2007 , 21 , 2347 – 2357 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 89 . Gurniak , C . B . ; Chevessier , F . ; Jokwitz , M . ; Jonsson , F . ; Perlas , E . ; Richter , H . ; Matern , G . ; Boyl , P . P . ; Chaponnier , C . ; Furst , D . ; et al . Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2014 , 93 , 252 – 266 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 90 . Kanellos , G . ; Frame , M . C . Cellular functions of the ADF / coﬁlin family at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 2016 , 129 , 3211 – 3218 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 22 of 27 91 . Vartiainen , M . K . ; Sarkkinen , E . M . ; Matilainen , T . ; Salminen , M . ; Lappalainen , P . Mammals have two twinﬁlin isoforms whose subcellular localizations and tissue distributions are differentially regulated . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 , 34347 – 34355 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 92 . Nevalainen , E . M . ; Braun , A . ; Vartiainen , M . K . ; Serlachius , M . ; Andersson , L . C . ; Moser , M . ; Lappalainen , P . Twinﬁlin - 2a is dispensable for mouse development . PLoS ONE 2011 , 6 , e22894 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 93 . Hayashi , K . ; Shirao , T . Change in the shape of dendritic spines caused by overexpression of drebrin in cultured cortical neurons . J . Neurosci . 1999 , 19 , 3918 – 3925 . [ PubMed ] 94 . Mizui , T . ; Kojima , N . ; Yamazaki , H . ; Katayama , M . ; Hanamura , K . ; Shirao , T . Drebrin E is involved in the regulation of axonal growth through actin - myosin interactions . J . Neurochem . 2009 , 109 , 611 – 622 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 95 . Sonego , M . ; Oberoi , M . ; Stoddart , J . ; Gajendra , S . ; Hendricusdottir , R . ; Oozeer , F . ; Worth , D . C . ; Hobbs , C . ; Eickholt , B . J . ; Gordon - Weeks , P . R . ; et al . Drebrin regulates neuroblast migration in the postnatal mammalian brain . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0126478 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 96 . Grintsevich , E . E . ; Reisler , E . Drebrin inhibits coﬁlin - induced severing of F - actin . Cytoskeleton 2014 , 71 , 472 – 483 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 97 . Keon , B . H . ; Jedrzejewski , P . T . ; Paul , D . L . ; Goodenough , D . A . Isoform speciﬁc expression of the neuronal F - actin binding protein , drebrin , in specialized cells of stomach and kidney epithelia . J . Cell Sci . 2000 , 113 , 325 – 336 . [ PubMed ] 98 . Peitsch , W . K . ; Hofmann , I . ; Bulkescher , J . ; Hergt , M . ; Spring , H . ; Bleyl , U . ; Goerdt , S . ; Franke , W . W . Drebrin , an actin - binding , cell - type characteristic protein : Induction and localization in epithelial skin tumors and cultured keratinocytes . J . Investig . Dermatol . 2005 , 125 , 761 – 774 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 99 . Mise - Omata , S . ; Montagne , B . ; Deckert , M . ; Wienands , J . ; Acuto , O . Mammalian actin binding protein 1 is essential for endocytosis but not lamellipodia formation : Functional analysis by RNA interference . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 2003 , 301 , 704 – 710 . [ CrossRef ] 100 . Schymeinsky , J . ; Sperandio , M . ; Walzog , B . The mammalian actin - binding protein 1 ( mAbp1 ) : a novel molecular player in leukocyte biology . Trends Cell . Bio . 2011 , l21 , 247 – 255 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 101 . Gandhi , M . ; Smith , B . A . ; Bovellan , M . ; Paavilainen , V . ; Daugherty - Clarke , K . ; Gelles , J . ; Lappalainen , P . ; Goode , B . L . GMF is a coﬁlin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr . Biol . 2010 , 20 , 861 – 867 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 102 . Poukkula , M . ; Hakala , M . ; Pentinmikko , N . ; Sweeney , M . O . ; Jansen , S . ; Mattila , J . ; Hietakangas , V . ; Goode , B . L . ; Lappalainen , P . GMF promotes leading - edge dynamics and collective cell migration in vivo . Curr . Biol . 2014 , 24 , 2533 – 2540 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Zaheer , S . ; Thangavel , R . ; Sahu , S . K . ; Zaheer , A . Augmented expression of glia maturation factor in Alzheimer’s disease . Neuroscience 2011 , 194 , 227 – 233 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 104 . Zaheer , S . ; Thangavel , R . ; Wu , Y . ; Khan , M . M . ; Kempuraj , D . ; Zaheer , A . Enhanced expression of glia maturation factor correlates with glial activation in the brain of triple transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mice . Neurochem . Res . 2013 , 38 , 218 – 225 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 105 . Haynes , E . M . ; Asokan , S . B . ; King , S . J . ; Johnson , H . E . ; Haugh , J . M . ; Bear , J . E . GMF β controls branched actin content and lamellipodial retraction in ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 2015 , 209 , 803 – 812 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 106 . Hou , X . ; Katahira , T . ; Ohashi , K . ; Mizuno , K . ; Sugiyama , S . ; Nakamura , H . Coactosin accelerates cell dynamism by promoting actin polymerization . Dev . Biol . 2013 , 379 , 53 – 63 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 107 . Hou , X . ; Katahira , T . ; Kimura , J . ; Nakamura , H . Expression of chick Coactosin in cells in morphogenetic movement . Dev . Growth Differ . 2009 , 51 , 833 – 840 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 108 . Basavarajappa , D . ; Wan , M . ; Lukic , A . ; Steinhilber , D . ; Samuelsson , B . ; Rådmark , O . Roles of coactosin - like protein ( CLP ) and 5 - lipoxygenase - activating protein ( FLAP ) in cellular leukotriene biosynthesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2014 , 111 , 11371 – 11376 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 109 . Yonezawa , N . ; Nishida , E . ; Sakai , H . pH control of actin polymerization by coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 1985 , 260 , 14410 – 14412 . [ PubMed ] 110 . Bernstein , B . W . ; Painter , W . B . ; Chen , H . ; Minamide , L . S . ; Abe , H . ; Bamburg , J . R . Intracellular pH modulation of ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 2000 , 47 , 319 – 336 . [ CrossRef ] 111 . Zhao , H . ; Hakala , M . ; Lappalainen , P . ADF / coﬁlin binds phosphoinositides in a multivalent manner to act as a PIP ( 2 ) - density sensor . Biophys . J . 2010 , 98 , 2327 – 2336 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 23 of 27 112 . Moriyama , K . ; Iida , K . ; Yahara , I . Phosphorylation of Ser - 3 of coﬁlin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells 1996 , 1 , 73 – 86 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 113 . Agnew , B . J . ; Minamide , L . S . ; Bamburg , J . R . Reactivation of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identiﬁcation of the regulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 1995 , 270 , 17582 – 17587 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 114 . Bernstein , B . W . ; Bamburg , J . R . ADF / coﬁlin : A functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 2010 , 20 , 187 – 195 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 115 . Tomasella , A . ; Blangy , A . ; Brancolini , C . A receptor - interacting protein 1 ( RIP1 ) - independent necrotic death under the control of protein phosphatase PP2A that involves the reorganization of actin cytoskeleton and the action of coﬁlin - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 2014 , 289 , 25699 – 25710 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 116 . Abe , H . ; Obinata , T . ; Minamide , L . ; Bamburg , J . R . Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin : A phosphorylation - regulated protein essential for development . J . Cell Biol . 1996 , 132 , 871 – 885 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 117 . Obinata , T . ; Nagaoka - Yasuda , R . ; Ono , S . ; Kusano , K . ; Mohri , K . ; Ohtaka , Y . ; Yamashiro , S . ; Okada , K . ; Abe , H . Low molecular - weight G - actin binding proteins involved in the regulation of actin assembly during myoﬁbrillogenesis . Cell Struct . Funct . 1997 , 22 , 181 – 189 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 118 . Davila , M . ; Jhala , D . ; Ghosh , D . ; Grizzle , W . E . ; Chakrabarti , R . Expression of LIM kinase 1 is associated with reversible G1 / S phase arrest , chromosomal instability and prostate cancer . Mol . Cancer 2007 , 8 , 6 – 40 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 119 . Zebda , N . ; Bernard , O . ; Bailly , M . ; Welti , S . ; Lawrence , D . S . ; Condeelis , J . S . Phosphorylation of ADF / coﬁlin abolishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subsequent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 2000 , 151 , 1119 – 1128 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 120 . Nishita , M . ; Aizawa , H . ; Mizuno , K . Stromal cell - derived factor 1alpha activates LIM kinase 1 and induces coﬁlin phosphorylation for T - cell chemotaxis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2002 , 22 , 774 – 783 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 121 . Ghosh , M . ; Song , X . ; Mouneimne , G . ; Sidani , M . ; Lawrence , D . S . ; Condeelis , J . S . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymerization and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 2004 , 304 , 743 – 746 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 122 . Nishita , M . ; Tomizawa , C . ; Yamamoto , M . ; Horita , Y . ; Ohashi , K . ; Mizuno , K . Spatial and temporal regulation of coﬁlin activity by LIM kinase and Slingshot is critical for directional cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 2005 , 171 , 349 – 359 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 123 . Mizuno , K . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal . 2013 , 25 , 457 – 469 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 124 . Beaty , B . T . ; Condeelis , J . Digging a little deeper : The stages of invadopodium formation and maturation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2014 , 93 , 438 – 444 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 125 . Zalli , D . ; Neff , L . ; Nagano , K . ; Shin , N . Y . ; Witke , W . ; Gori , F . ; Baron , R . The Actin - Binding Protein Coﬁlin and Its Interaction With Cortactin Are Required for Podosome Patterning in Osteoclasts and Bone Resorption In Vivo and In Vitro . Bone Miner . Res . 2016 , 31 , 1701 – 1712 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 126 . Nomura , K . ; Hayakawa , K . ; Tatsumi , H . ; Ono , S . Actin - interacting Protein 1 Promotes Disassembly of Actin - depolymerizing Factor / Coﬁlin - bound Actin Filaments in a pH - dependent Manner . J . Biol . Chem . 2016 , 291 , 5146 – 5156 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 127 . Zhou , G . L . ; Zhang , H . ; Field , J . Mammalian CAP ( Cyclase - associated protein ) in the world of cell migration : Roles in actin ﬁlament dynamics and beyond . Cell Adhes . Migr . 2014 , 8 , 55 – 59 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 128 . Mikati , M . A . ; Breitsprecher , D . ; Jansen , S . ; Reisler , E . ; Goode , B . L . Coronin Enhances Actin Filament Severing by Recruiting Coﬁlin to Filament Sides and Altering F - Actin Conformation . J . Mol . Biol . 2015 , 427 , 3137 – 3147 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 129 . Mouneimne , G . ; Soon , L . ; DesMarais , V . ; Sidani , M . ; Song , X . ; Yip , S . C . ; Ghosh , M . ; Eddy , R . ; Backer , J . M . ; Condeelis , J . Phospholipase C and coﬁlin are required for carcinoma cell directionality in response to EGF stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 2004 , 166 , 697 – 708 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 130 . Chan , A . Y . ; Bailly , M . ; Zebda , N . ; Segall , J . E . ; Condeelis , J . S . Role of coﬁlin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 2000 , 148 , 531 – 542 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 131 . Song , X . ; Chen , X . ; Yamaguchi , H . ; Mouneimne , G . ; Condeelis , J . S . ; Eddy , R . J . Initiation of coﬁlin activity in response to EGF is uncoupled from coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Sci . 2006 , 119 , 2871 – 2881 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 24 of 27 132 . Fratelli , M . ; Demol , H . ; Puype , M . ; Casagrande , S . ; Eberini , I . ; Salmona , M . ; Bonetto , V . ; Mengozzi , M . ; Dufﬁeux , F . ; Miclet , E . ; et al . Identiﬁcation by redox proteomics of glutathionylated proteins in oxidatively stressed human T lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2002 , 99 , 3505 – 3510 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 133 . Klemke , M . ; Wabnitz , G . H . ; Funke , F . ; Funk , B . ; Kirchgessner , H . ; Samstag , Y . Oxidation of coﬁlin mediates T cell hyporesponsiveness under oxidative stress conditions . Immunity 2008 , 29 , 404 – 413 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 134 . Zhang , H . H . ; Wang , W . ; Feng , L . ; Yang , Y . ; Zheng , J . ; Huang , L . ; Chen , D . B . S - nitrosylation of Coﬁlin - 1 Serves as a Novel Pathway for VEGF - Stimulated Endothelial Cell Migration . J . Cell . Physiol . 2015 , 230 , 406 – 417 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 135 . Moseley , J . B . ; Okada , K . ; Balcer , H . I . ; Kovar , D . R . ; Pollard , T . D . ; Goode , B . L . Twinﬁlin is an actin - ﬁlament - severing protein and promotes rapid turnover of actin structures in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 2006 , 119 Pt 8 , 1547 – 1557 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 136 . Tanabe , K . ; Yamazaki , H . ; Inaguma , Y . ; Asada , A . ; Kimura , T . ; Takahashi , J . ; Taoka , M . ; Ohshima , T . ; Furuichi , T . ; Isobe , T . ; et al . Phosphorylation of drebrin by cyclin - dependent kinase 5 and its role in neuronal migration . PLoS ONE 2014 , 9 , e92291 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 137 . Ketschek , A . ; Spillane , M . ; Dun , X . P . ; Hardy , H . ; Chilton , J . ; Gallo , G . Drebrin coordinates the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton during the initiation of axon collateral branches . Dev . Neurobiol . 2016 , 76 , 1092 – 1110 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 138 . Wang , T . ; Cleary , R . A . ; Wang , R . ; Tang , D . D . Glia maturation factor - γ phosphorylation at Tyr - 104 regulates actin dynamics and contraction in human airway smooth muscle . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 2014 , 51 , 652 – 659 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 139 . Stierum , R . ; Gaspari , M . ; Dommels , Y . ; Ouatas , T . ; Pluk , H . ; Jespersen , S . ; Vogels , J . ; Verhoeckx , K . ; Groten , J . ; van Ommen , B . Proteome analysis reveals novel proteins associated with proliferation and differentiation of the colorectal cancer cell line Caco - 2 . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2003 , 1650 , 73 – 91 . [ CrossRef ] 140 . Zhang , Y . ; Tong , X . Expression of the actin - binding proteins indicates that coﬁlin and fascin are related to breast tumour size . J . Int . Med . Res . 2010 , 38 , 1042 – 1048 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 141 . Neely , B . A . ; Wilkins , C . E . ; Marlow , L . A . ; Malyarenko , D . ; Kim , Y . ; Ignatchenko , A . ; Sasinowska , H . ; Sasinowski , M . ; Nyalwidhe , J . O . ; Kislinger , T . ; et al . Proteotranscriptomic Analysis Reveals Stage Speciﬁc Changes in the Molecular Landscape of Clear - Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma . PLoS ONE 2016 , 11 , e0154074 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 142 . Wei , R . ; Zhang , Y . ; Shen , L . ; Jiang , W . ; Li , C . ; Zhong , M . ; Xie , Y . ; Yang , D . ; He , L . ; Zhou , Q . Comparative proteomic and radiobiological analyses in human lung adenocarcinoma cells . Mol . Cell . Biochem . 2012 , 359 , 151 – 159 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 143 . Yan , X . D . ; Pan , L . Y . ; Yuan , Y . ; Lang , J . H . ; Mao , N . Identiﬁcation of platinum - resistance associated proteins through proteomic analysis of human ovarian cancer cells and their platinum - resistant sublines . J . Proteome Res . 2007 , 6 , 772 – 780 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 144 . Zhang , H . S . ; Zhao , J . W . ; Wang , H . ; Zhang , H . Y . ; Ji , Q . Y . ; Meng , L . J . ; Xing , F . J . ; Yang , S . T . ; Wang , Y . LIM kinase 1 is required for insulin - dependent cell growth of osteosarcoma cell lines . Mol . Med . Rep . 2014 , 9 , 103 – 108 . [ PubMed ] 145 . Jiang , N . ; Kham , S . K . ; Koh , G . S . ; Suang Lim , J . Y . ; Arifﬁn , H . ; Chew , F . T . ; Yeoh , A . E . Identiﬁcation of prognostic protein biomarkers in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( ALL ) . J . Proteom . 2011 , 74 , 843 – 857 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 146 . Yan , H . ; Yang , K . ; Xiao , H . ; Zou , Y . J . ; Zhang , W . B . ; Liu , H . Y . Over - expression of coﬁlin - 1 and phosphoglycerate kinase 1 in astrocytomas involved in pathogenesis of radioresistance . CNS Neurosci . Ther . 2012 , 18 , 729 – 736 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 147 . Du , H . Q . ; Chen , L . ; Wang , Y . ; Wang , L . J . ; Yan , H . ; Liu , H . Y . ; Xiao , H . Increasing radiosensitivity with the downregulation of coﬁlin - 1 in U251 human glioma cells . Mol . Med . Rep . 2015 , 11 , 3354 – 3360 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 148 . Patil , K . S . ; Basak , I . ; Pal , R . ; Ho , H . P . ; Alves , G . ; Chang , E . J . ; Larsen , J . P . ; Møller , S . G . A Proteomics Approach to Investigate miR - 153 - 3p and miR - 205 - 5p Targets in Neuroblastoma Cells . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0143969 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 149 . Lu , L . ; Fu , N . I . ; Luo , X . U . ; Li , X . Y . ; Li , X . P . Overexpression of coﬁlin 1 in prostate cancer and the corresponding clinical implications . Oncol . Lett . 2015 , 9 , 2757 – 2761 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 25 of 27 150 . Yang , Z . L . ; Miao , X . ; Xiong , L . ; Zou , Q . ; Yuan , Y . ; Li , J . ; Liang , L . ; Chen , M . ; Chen , S . CFL1 and Arp3 are biomarkers for metastasis and poor prognosis of squamous cell / adenosquamous carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of gallbladder . Cancer Investig . 2013 , 31 , 132 – 139 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 151 . Nagai , S . ; Moreno , O . ; Smith , C . A . ; Ivanchuk , S . ; Romagnuolo , R . ; Golbourn , B . ; Weeks , A . ; Seol , H . J . ; Rutka , J . T . Role of the coﬁlin activity cycle in astrocytoma migration and invasion . Genes Cancer 2011 , 2 , 859 – 869 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 152 . Tsai , C . H . ; Lin , L . T . ; Wang , C . Y . ; Chiu , Y . W . ; Chou , Y . T . ; Chiu , S . J . ; Wang , H . E . ; Liu , R . S . ; Wu , C . Y . ; Chan , P . C . ; et al . Over - expression of coﬁlin - 1 suppressed growth and invasion of cancer cells is associated with up - regulation of let - 7 microRNA . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2015 , 1852 , 851 – 861 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 153 . Chung , H . ; Kim , B . ; Jung , S . H . ; Won , K . J . ; Jiang , X . ; Lee , C . K . ; Lim , S . D . ; Yang , S . K . ; Song , K . H . ; Kim , H . S . Does phosphorylation of coﬁlin affect the progression of human bladder cancer ? BMC Cancer 2013 , 13 , 45 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 154 . Peng , X . C . ; Gong , F . M . ; Zhao , Y . W . ; Zhou , L . X . ; Xie , Y . W . ; Liao , H . L . ; Lin , H . J . ; Li , Z . Y . ; Tang , M . H . ; Tong , A . P . Comparative proteomic approach identiﬁes PKM2 and coﬁlin - 1 as potential diagnostic , prognostic and therapeutic targets for pulmonary adenocarcinoma . PLoS ONE 2011 , 6 , e27309 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 155 . Guan , M . ; Chen , X . ; Ma , Y . ; Tang , L . ; Guan , L . ; Ren , X . ; Yu , B . ; Zhang , W . ; Su , B . MDA - 9 and GRP78 as potential diagnostic biomarkers for early detection of melanoma metastasis . Tumour Biol . 2015 , 36 , 2973 – 2982 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 156 . Zheng , Y . ; Fang , Y . ; Li , S . ; Zheng , B . Detection of plasma coﬁlin protein for diagnosis of lung cancer . Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao 2013 , 33 , 1551 – 1553 . [ PubMed ] 157 . Xiao , P . ; Ma , T . ; Zhou , C . ; Xu , Y . ; Liu , Y . ; Zhang , H . Anticancer effect of docetaxel induces apoptosis of prostate cancer via the coﬁlin - 1 and paxillin signaling pathway . Mol . Med . Rep . 2016 , 13 , 4079 – 4084 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 158 . Becker , M . ; de Bastiani , M . A . ; Muller , C . B . ; Markoski , M . M . ; Castro , M . A . ; Klamt , F . High coﬁlin - 1 levels correlate with cisplatin resistance in lung adenocarcinomas . Tumour Biol . 2014 , 35 , 1233 – 1238 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 159 . Wang , W . ; Mouneimne , G . ; Sidani , M . ; Wyckoff , J . ; Chen , X . ; Makris , A . ; Goswami , S . ; Bresnick , A . R . ; Condeelis , J . S . The activity status of coﬁlin is directly related to invasion , intravasation , and metastasis of mammary tumors . J . Cell Biol . 2006 , 173 , 395 – 404 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 160 . Ito , T . ; Taniguchi , H . ; Fukagai , K . ; Okamuro , S . ; Kobayashi , A . Inhibitory mechanism of FAT4 gene expression in response to actin dynamics during Src - induced carcinogenesis . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0118336 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 161 . Dubois , F . ; Keller , M . ; Calvayrac , O . ; Soncin , F . ; Hoa , L . ; Hergovich , A . ; Parrini , M . C . ; Mazieres , J . ; Vaisse - Lesteven , M . ; Camonis , J . ; et al . RASSF1A Suppresses the Invasion and Metastatic Potential of Human Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells by Inhibiting YAP Activation through the GEF - H1 / RhoB Pathway . Cancer Res . 2016 , 76 , 1627 – 1640 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 162 . Migocka - Patrzałek , M . ; Makowiecka , A . ; Nowak , D . ; Mazur , A . J . ; Hofmann , W . A . ; Malicka - Błaszkiewicz , M . β - and γ - Actins in the nucleus of human melanoma A375 cells . Histochem . Cell Biol . 2015 , 144 , 417 – 428 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 163 . Wang , Y . ; Kuramitsu , Y . ; Kitagawa , T . ; Baron , B . ; Yoshino , S . ; Maehara , S . ; Maehara , Y . ; Oka , M . ; Nakamura , K . Coﬁlin - phosphatase slingshot - 1L ( SSH1L ) is over - expressed in pancreatic cancer ( PC ) and contributes to tumor cell migration . Cancer Lett . 2015 , 360 , 171 – 176 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 164 . Kurita , S . ; Watanabe , Y . ; Gunji , E . ; Ohashi , K . ; Mizuno , K . Molecular dissection of the mechanisms of substrate recognition and F - actin - mediated activation of coﬁlin - phosphatase Slingshot - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 2008 , 283 , 32542 – 32552 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 165 . Peterburs , P . ; Heering , J . ; Link , G . ; Pﬁzenmaier , K . ; Olayioye , M . A . ; Hausser , A . Protein kinase D regulates cell migration by direct phosphorylation of the coﬁlin phosphatase slingshot 1 like . Cancer Res . 2009 , 69 , 5634 – 5638 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 166 . McConnell , B . V . ; Koto , K . ; Gutierrez - Hartmann , A . Nuclear and cytoplasmic LIMK1 enhances human breast cancer progression . Mol . Cancer 2011 , 10 , 75 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 167 . Yoshioka , K . ; Foletta , V . ; Bernard , O . ; Itoh , K . A role for LIM kinase in cancer invasion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 7247 – 7252 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 26 of 27 168 . Bagheri - Yarmand , R . ; Mazumdar , A . ; Sahin , A . A . ; Kumar , R . LIM kinase 1 increases tumor metastasis of human breast cancer cells via regulation of the urokinase - type plasminogen activator system . Int . J . Cancer 2006 , 118 , 2703 – 2710 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 169 . Pawlak , G . ; Helfman , D . M . MEK mediates v - Src - induced disruption of the actin cytoskeleton via inactivation of the Rho - ROCK - LIM kinase pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 , 26927 – 26933 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 170 . Vitolo , M . I . ; Boggs , A . E . ; Whipple , R . A . ; Yoon , J . R . ; Thompson , K . ; Matrone , M . A . ; Cho , E . H . ; Balzer , E . M . ; Martin , S . S . Loss of PTEN induces microtentacles through PI3K - independent activation of coﬁlin . Oncogene 2013 , 32 , 2200 – 2210 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 171 . Beck , A . H . ; Lee , C . H . ; Witten , D . M . ; Gleason , B . C . ; Edris , B . ; Espinosa , I . ; Zhu , S . ; Li , R . ; Montgomery , K . D . ; Marinelli , R . J . ; et al . Discovery of molecular subtypes in leiomyosarcoma through integrative molecular proﬁling . Oncogene 2010 , 29 , 845 – 854 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 172 . Demicco , E . G . ; Boland , G . M . ; Brewer Savannah , K . J . ; Lusby , K . ; Young , E . D . ; Ingram , D . ; Watson , K . L . ; Bailey , M . ; Guo , X . ; Hornick , J . L . ; et al . Progressive loss of myogenic differentiation in leiomyosarcoma has prognostic value . Histopathology 2015 , 66 , 627 – 638 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 173 . Wang , Y . ; Kuramitsu , Y . ; Ueno , T . ; Suzuki , N . ; Yoshino , S . ; Iizuka , N . ; Zhang , X . ; Oka , M . ; Nakamura , K . Differential expression of up - regulated coﬁlin - 1 and down - regulated coﬁlin - 2 characteristic of pancreatic cancer tissues . Oncol . Rep . 2011 , 26 , 1595 – 1599 . [ PubMed ] 174 . Erkutlu , I . ; Cigiloglu , A . ; Kalender , M . E . ; Alptekin , M . ; Demiryurek , A . T . ; Suner , A . ; Ozkaya , E . ; Ulasli , M . ; Camci , C . Correlation between Rho - kinase pathway gene expressions and development and progression of glioblastoma multiforme . Tumour Biol . 2013 , 34 , 1139 – 1144 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 175 . Luo , D . ; Wilson , J . M . ; Harvel , N . ; Liu , J . ; Pei , L . ; Huang , S . ; Hawthorn , L . ; Shi , H . A systematic evaluation of miRNA : mRNA interactions involved in the migration and invasion of breast cancer cells . J . Transl . Med . 2013 , 11 , 57 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 176 . Schwickert , A . ; Weghake , E . ; Bruggemann , K . ; Engbers , A . ; Brinkmann , B . F . ; Kemper , B . ; Seggewi , J . ; Stock , C . ; Ebnet , K . ; Kiesel , L . ; et al . MicroRNA miR - 142 - 3p Inhibits Breast Cancer Cell Invasiveness by Synchronous Targeting of WASL , Integrin Alpha V , and Additional Cytoskeletal Elements . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0143993 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 177 . Klose , T . ; Abiatari , I . ; Samkharadze , T . ; de Oliveira , T . ; Jäger , C . ; Kiladze , M . ; Valkovskaya , N . ; Friess , H . ; Michalski , C . W . ; Kleeff , J . The actin binding protein destrin is associated with growth and perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer . Pancreatology 2012 , 12 , 350 – 357 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 178 . Meacham , C . E . ; Ho , E . E . ; Dubrovsky , E . ; Gertler , F . B . ; Hemann , M . T . In vivo RNAi screening identiﬁes regulators of actin dynamics as key determinants of lymphoma progression . Nat . Genet . 2009 , 41 , 1133 – 1137 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 179 . Baniwal , S . K . ; Khalid , O . ; Gabet , Y . ; Shah , R . R . ; Purcell , D . J . ; Mav , D . ; Kohn - Gabet , A . E . ; Shi , Y . ; Coetzee , G . A . ; Frenkel , B . Runx2 transcriptome of prostate cancer cells : Insights into invasiveness and bone metastasis . Mol . Cancer 2010 , 9 , 258 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 180 . Samaeekia , R . ; Adorno - Cruz , V . ; Bockhorn , J . ; Chang , Y . F . ; Huang , S . ; Prat , A . ; Ha , N . ; Kibria , G . ; Huo , D . ; Zheng , H . ; et al . MicroRNA - 206 inhibits stemness and metastasis of breast cancer by targeting MKL1 / IL11 pathway . Clin . Cancer Res . 2016 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 181 . Ishikawa , R . ; Hayashi , K . ; Shirao , T . ; Xue , Y . ; Takagi , T . ; Sasaki , Y . ; Kohama , K . Drebrin , a development - associated brain protein from rat embryo , causes the dissociation of tropomyosin from actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 1994 , 269 , 29928 – 29933 . [ PubMed ] 182 . Asada , H . ; Uyemura , K . ; Shirao , T . Actin - binding protein , drebrin , accumulates in submembranous regions in parallel with neuronal differentiation . J . Neurosci . Res . 1994 , 38 , 149 – 159 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 183 . Terakawa , Y . ; Agnihotri , S . ; Golbourn , B . ; Nadi , M . ; Sabha , N . ; Smith , C . A . ; Croul , S . E . ; Rutka , J . T . The role of drebrin in glioma migration and invasion . Exp . Cell Res . 2013 , 319 , 517 – 528 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 184 . Xu , S . Q . ; Buraschi , S . ; Morcavallo , A . ; Genua , M . ; Shirao , T . ; Peiper , S . C . ; Gomella , L . G . ; Birbe , R . ; Belﬁore , A . ; Iozzo , R . V . ; et al . A novel role for drebrin in regulating progranulin bioactivity in bladder cancer . Oncotarget 2015 , 6 , 10825 – 10839 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 185 . Mitra , R . ; Lee , J . ; Jo , J . ; Milani , M . ; McClintick , J . N . ; Edenberg , H . J . ; Kesler , K . A . ; Rieger , K . M . ; Badve , S . ; Cummings , O . W . ; et al . Prediction of postoperative recurrence - free survival in non - small cell lung cancer by using an internationally validated gene expression model . Clin . Cancer Res . 2011 , 17 , 2934 – 2946 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 10 27 of 27 186 . Lin , Q . ; Tan , H . T . ; Lim , T . K . ; Khoo , A . ; Lim , K . H . ; Chung , M . C . iTRAQ analysis of colorectal cancer cell lines suggests Drebrin ( DBN1 ) is overexpressed during liver metastasis . Proteomics 2014 , 14 , 1434 – 1443 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 187 . Yang , C . ; Li , Z . ; Shi , Z . ; He , K . ; Tian , A . ; Wu , J . ; Zhang , Y . ; Li , Z . Regulation of cell survival by the HIP - 55 signaling network . Mol . Biosyst . 2014 , 10 , 1393 – 1399 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 188 . Boateng , L . R . ; Bennin , D . ; de Oliveira , S . ; Huttenlocher , A . Mammalian Actin - binding Protein - 1 / Hip - 55 Interacts with FHL2 and Negatively Regulates Cell Invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 2016 , 291 , 13987 – 13998 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 189 . Higashida , H . ; Kato , T . ; Kano - Tanaka , K . ; Okuya , M . ; Miyake , A . ; Tanaka , T . Proliferation and synapse formation of neuroblastoma glioma hybrid cells : Effects of glia maturation factor . Brain Res . 1981 , 214 , 287 – 299 . [ CrossRef ] 190 . Lim , R . ; Zaheer , A . ; Yorek , M . A . ; Darby , C . J . ; Oberley , L . W . Activation of nuclear factor - kappaB in C6 rat glioma cells after transfection with glia maturation factor . J . Neurochem . 2000 , 74 , 596 – 602 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 191 . Kuang , X . Y . ; Jiang , X . F . ; Chen , C . ; Su , X . R . ; Shi , Y . ; Wu , J . R . ; Zhang , P . ; Zhang , X . L . ; Cui , Y . H . ; Ping , Y . F . ; et al . Expressions of glia maturation factor - β by tumor cells and endothelia correlate with neovascularization and poor prognosis in human glioma . Oncotarget 2015 . [ CrossRef ] 192 . Zaheer , A . ; Knight , S . ; Zaheer , A . ; Ahrens , M . ; Sahu , S . K . ; Yang , B . Glia maturation factor overexpression in neuroblastoma cells activates glycogen synthase kinase - 3beta and caspase - 3 . Brain Res . 2008 , 1190 , 206 – 214 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 193 . Wada , T . ; Yamashita , Y . ; Saga , Y . ; Takahashi , K . ; Koinuma , K . ; Choi , Y . L . ; Kaneda , R . ; Fujiwara , S . ; Soda , M . ; Watanabe , H . ; et al . Screening for genetic abnormalities involved in ovarian carcinogenesis using retroviral expression libraries . Int . J . Oncol . 2009 , 35 , 973 – 976 . [ PubMed ] 194 . Li , Y . L . ; Ye , F . ; Cheng , X . D . ; Hu , Y . ; Zhou , C . Y . ; Lü , W . G . ; Xie , X . Identiﬁcation of glia maturation factor beta as an independent prognostic predictor for serous ovarian cancer . Eur . J . Cancer 2010 , 46 , 2104 – 2118 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 195 . Zuo , P . ; Ma , Y . ; Huang , Y . ; Ye , F . ; Wang , P . ; Wang , X . ; Zhou , C . ; Lu , W . ; Kong , B . ; Xie , X . High GMFG expression correlates with poor prognosis and promotes cell migration and invasion in epithelial ovarian cancer . Gynecol . Oncol . 2014 , 132 , 745 – 751 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 196 . Nakatsura , T . ; Senju , S . ; Ito , M . ; Nishimura , Y . ; Itoh , K . Cellular and humoral immune responses to a human pancreatic cancer antigen , coactosin - like protein , originally deﬁned by the SEREX method . Eur . J . Immunol . 2002 , 32 , 826 – 836 . [ CrossRef ] 197 . Cecconi , D . ; Astner , H . ; Donadelli , M . ; Palmieri , M . ; Missiaglia , E . ; Hamdan , M . ; Scarpa , A . ; Righetti , P . G . Proteomic analysis of pancreatic ductal carcinoma cells treated with 5 - aza - 2 (cid:48) - deoxycytidine . Electrophoresis 2003 , 24 , 4291 – 4303 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 198 . Oh , J . E . ; Karlmark Raja , K . ; Shin , J . H . ; Pollak , A . ; Hengstschläger , M . ; Lubec , G . Cytoskeleton changes following differentiation of N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cell line . Amino Acids 2006 , 31 , 289 – 298 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 199 . Jeong , H . C . ; Kim , G . I . ; Cho , S . H . ; Lee , K . H . ; Ko , J . J . ; Yang , J . H . ; Chung , K . H . Proteomic analysis of human small cell lung cancer tissues : Up - regulation of coactosin - like protein - 1 . J . Proteome Res . 2011 , 10 , 269 – 276 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2016 by the authors ; licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC - BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .