Information Architecture for the Web : The IA Matrix Approach to Designing Children’s Portals Andrew Large , Jamshid Beheshti , and Charles Cole Graduate School of Library and Information Studies , McGill University , 3459 McTavish Street , Montreal , Quebec , Canada H3A 1Y1 . E - mail : andrew . large @ mcgill . ca The article presents a matrix that can serve as a tool for designing the information architecture of a Web portal in a logical and systematic manner . The information archi - tect begins by inputting the portal’s objective , target user , and target content . The matrix then determines the most appropriate information architecture attributes for the portal by ﬁlling in the Applied Information Architec - ture portion of the matrix . The article discusses how the matrix works using the example of a children’s Web portal to provide access to museum information . Introduction There is growing interest in enhancing users’ experi - ences of seeking information on the Web via traditional , general purpose search engines ( Greenman , 2001 , p . E3 ) . Concurrently there is a trend towards separating - out infor - mation spaces on the Internet for speciﬁcgroups of infor - mation seekers . In both instances Web entry is via a gate - way portal . These portals may be divided into two broad categories : speciﬁc - interestportals , sometimes referred to as vertical portals ( Information Architecture Glossary , 2000 ) , and all - purpose portals such as Yahoo ! , either called a directory , or horizontal portal ( www . clienthelpdesk . com ) . Designing effective , user - centered information architecture ( IA ) for either type of portal is difﬁcult . The ideal solution is to develop a tool that will ( a ) design a portal’s IA automatically and systematically to suit the requirements of special interest portals , and ( b ) allow individual users to a general - interest portal to personalize their visit , making the IA of the site speciﬁcto their needs . The authors recently developed an attribute IA Matrix that could be used as a blueprint for the design of a chil - dren’s educational portal . The IA Matrix attempts to oper - ationally deﬁnethe information architecture of such a portal by dividing 51 identiﬁedattributes into three broad design categories . This article describes the IA Matrix , and dem - onstrates how it can be used to design the information architecture of a children’s portal whose purpose is to facilitate children’s exploration of an information space when they are in an early , conceptualization stage of re - searching a topic for a class project . The portal will serve as a children’s gateway to Canadian museums and heritage sites , although the IA Matrix is intended to be useful to other portal designers . It is intended to assist the information architect in deﬁninga portal’s purpose and to serve as a template for any kind of Web portal . Information Architecture and the Portal Wenarrowly deﬁnehere a speciﬁc - interestWebportal as a self - contained , virtual world within the Webbut with links to the rest of the Web ; this virtual world is constructed for a speciﬁcpurpose and speciﬁcuser group . Speciﬁc - interest portals create an information space that is carved out of the entire Web by constructing a central core of linked pages developed by the portal designers , and then constructing hyperlinks to an outer core of hundreds , even thousands of Web pages . The inner and outer cores are linked by a common purpose that is maintained through continuous monitoring by the portal designers . Rosenfeld once deﬁnedinformation architecture ( IA ) as “helpingpeople ﬁndinformation , ”but because people using Web sites have other goals besides information ( e . g . , enter - tainment ) , he has since widened his deﬁnitionto : “Theart and science of structuring and organizing information en - vironments to help people achieve their goals” ( Rosenfeld , 2000 , p . 21 ) . This deﬁnitionis user - centered . In an alterna - tive , system - based deﬁnition , Ritchey deﬁnesIA as “the practice of creating plans that describe the underlying or - ganizational structure for a system of content and interac - tions” ( Ritchey , 2000 , p . 18 ) . For our purposes , we deﬁne information architecture as the means by which the portal developer and the information architect communicate the portal’s purpose to the portal user . The IA Matrix The IA Matrix described here is derived from the re - search undertaken by the authors on the Web - based infor - © 2002 WileyPeriodicals , Inc . ● Published online 20 May 2002 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi . 10095 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY , 53 ( 10 ) : 831 – 838 , 2002 mation - seeking behaviors of primary school students in support of class projects ( Large & Beheshti , 2000 ; Large , Beheshti , & Moukdad , 1999 ; Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) , and especially on four focus groups held with stu - dents aged 10 to 13 to ascertain their evaluation criteria for children’s portals ( Large , Beheshti & Rahman , in press ) . This research revealed differences in reactions to and use of portals according to both age and gender . The matrix model presented is an attempt to formulate a process by which a portal might mold itself to the requirements of speciﬁc user groups , thereby catering more effectively to their informa - tion - seeking requirements . The IA Matrix as originally envisaged is shown in Figure 1 . In this article , however , to simplify the exposition only the major attributes are discussed . The IA Matrix is divided into two parts : the Framework constituting the top portion , and the Applied Information Architecture in the bottom portion . The Framework attributes , once deﬁned and ﬁlled - in by the information architect , control the Applied Infor - mation Architecture attributes in the bottom section of the FIG . 1 . IA matrix . 832 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 IA Matrix , which contains the structural attributes of the portal . The Framework The Framework section of the design matrix is shown in Figure 2 . The Framework controls or deﬁnes the portal purpose and thus its architecture . It contains three broad categories with a total of 17 attributes , of which 11 are discussed here . The portal’s objective A portal can have three possible objectives : information , education , or entertainment , although any portal can aspire to more than one objective ( Rosenfeld & Morville , 1998 ) . The distinction between an entertainment objective and either an educational or informational objective is reason - ably clear in theory ( if not always in practice ) . The objective of an entertainment portal is leisure and fun . An educational or information portal , however , has a learning or informing objective respectively , both of which require thinking on the part of the user . Brieﬂy , education places objective facts and events inside a learning context that has an objective struc - ture ( i . e . , determined outside the user ) . Information , on the other hand , comprises objective facts and events that are placed within a subjective structure constructed by the in - dividual user ( the user’s knowledge structure ) for some kind of intended use . This portal Objective attribute is placed at the head of the matrix table as it determines to a very considerable degree the remaining attributes . The children in our focus groups could easily distinguish an entertain - ment objective from an informational / educational objective ( the precise distinction between these latter two objectives being more difﬁcult for them to disentangle ) . In general , they appreciated ﬁnding both an entertainment and an in - formation objective in the same portal , although their con - cept of the former varied according to age more than did their concept of the latter . Users In their evaluations of Web portals , children revealed differences based on gender and age , even within the narrow age and socio - economic cohort used in the study , that is , middle - class children aged 10 – 13 ( Large , Beheshti , & Rah - man , in press ) . In previous research , we had observed the importance of the user’s task when seeking information , which determined how the user both sought and processed the information ( Cole , 2000 ; Spink & Cole , 2001 ) . In ad - dition , differences in seeking and understanding informa - tion have been reported ( for adults , at least ) as a result of heterogeneous social backgrounds ( Bandura , 1986 ) , as well as different levels of expertise in computer and information use . Studies of children’s searches of electronic databases provide evidence that their information seeking depends on the domain and topic knowledge ( Borgman , Hirsh , Walter , & Gallagher , 1995 ; Hanna , Risden , Dzerwinski , & Alex - ander , 1998 ; Hirsh , 1997 ; Moore , 1995 ; Solomon , 1993 ) , although not all researchers agree ( Bilal , 2000 ) . Although there may well be other categories of user differences , the ﬁve included in the matrix are likely to be useful in the initial phase of developing the IA Matrix . Content The subject content of the Web portal is an important factor in determining its IA because different subjects re - quire a different structure of entry points . For example , health information is based on symptoms , diagnosis , and treatments , while ﬁlm information is based on ﬁlm genre , directors and actors , country of origin , chronology , and so on . The inherent structure of the subject content represented by the Web portal must be built into the portal design , even if the typical portal user does not understand the subject structure . In a certain sense , the subject content structure itself gives the domain novice a key to subject entry : “ . . . so that the person can map his or her knowledge of the topic into the system” ( Denning , Shuttleworth , & Smith , 1998 , p . 17 ) . The best solution is to “allow users to impose their own organizational schemes on the data” ( Chicurel , 2000 , p . 832 ) , but the structure of the subject content in a more objective sense must be built into the portal at least as its default structure . To begin the process of encapsulating the structure of different subjects , we incorporate an objective - subject sub - ject continuum into the IA Matrix , a method of dividing academic subjects suggested by ( among others ) Line ( 1971 , p . 420 ) . Subject disciplines on the Objective end of the continuum ( like chemistry and medicine ) are expressed in terminology on which there is general agreement and which can be relatively easily matched against a data store . At the Subjective end , in contrast , it is more difﬁcult to encapsulate concepts unambiguously and consistently in queries that can then be matched against a data store . This difference has major implications for a portal’s IA . There is evidence that this dichotomy between objective content disciplines and subjective content disciplines holds FIG . 2 . Top section of the IA matrix : the framework . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 833 true for children as well as adults . Bilal ( 2000 ) studied the ability of middle school children using the Web to handle fact - based queries in the objective science domain . She believes that the high percentage of keyword searching ( in contrast to selections from hierarchically organized subject directories ) undertaken by the students was due to the factual nature of the task they were given , with the assign - ment containing concrete keywords . Subject content , then , inﬂuenced the relative importance of searching rather than browsing as a means of ﬁnding information . Applied Information Architecture The matrix can be deﬁned as a system ; the top half , which controls the matrix , is linked via algorithms to the bottom half , where the portal’s information architecture is actually deﬁned in a structure comprising various attributes . Once the Framework is determined , the information archi - tecture attributes of the bottom half of the matrix can be ﬁlled in automatically by the system , thus determining the architecture criteria for the particular portal being designed ( see Fig . 3 ) . Interface Metaphor Metaphors are tools that have the potential to reduce cognitive overload and help users utilize their own mental models . Fleming ( 1998 ) describes them as one of the most powerful ( though also one of the most misused ) tools avail - able to an architect . Metaphors must be based on familiar mental models so as to reduce cognitive effort rather than increase it . They may be used to provide a unifying frame - work for design as well as to facilitate learning by allowing users to draw on prior knowledge , such as the now standard shopping cart metaphor for on - line shopping ( Nielsen , 1999 ) . In the IA Matrix , we encapsulate subject content differ - ences according to Rosenfeld and Morville’s ( 1998 ) typol - ogy of metaphor for use in Web design : organizational , functional , and visual . An organizational metaphor presents the interface in terms of the organizational structure of the information content : an example might be a library’s Web site that employs the metaphor of a catalog room , a refer - ence room , a music room , and so on as the means of providing access to the stored content . A functional meta - phor might reproduce the characteristics of a real - world setting in the interface ; the best - known example is the metaphor of a desk top , with in and out trays , ﬁling drawers , etc . A visual metaphor for a children’s portal gives the designer special freedom to connect with the children in a nonliteral or nonlinear way ( cf . Paolini , Barbieri , Loiudice , Alonzo , Zanti , & Gaia , 2000 ) . Lycos Zone ( a Web portal speciﬁcally designed for children ) uses the visual metaphor of space zones ; Ask Jeeves for Kids ( another children’s Web portal ) uses the visual metaphor of an English ﬁctional butler , called Jeeves . These two metaphors , respectively , suggest exploring , freedom , and adventure , and an accessi - ble but wise man who can ﬁnd you answers no matter how tricky the questions . The young people in our focus groups ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , in press ) appreciated metaphors but only if they were readily intelligible to them . The metaphor of an elderly butler assisting them to ﬁnd information ( as in Ask Jeeves for Kids ) failed miserably , as none of them had encountered this literary ﬁgure from P . G . Wodehouse’s novels , and in fact , acted as a distraction rather than a focusing tool . The metaphor of zones of information and entertainment , as suggested by LycosZone , was more readily apparent to them . Metaphors are related to age and , as the Jeeves example suggests , cultures . A matrix should control meta - phor selection to ensure that it plays a positive rather than a negative role in user orientation . Navigation A portal can offer three main navigation structures : the vertical or hierarchical model where the user starts at the broad end of a subject spectrum and step - by - step focuses in on more speciﬁc information ; the horizontal model where the user jumps from Web site to Web site through hyper - links ; and the bottom - up or relational database model of navigation structure design . There is some evidence that for a child using a Web portal in the exploratory , prefocus phase of researching a school assignment , the most appro - priate navigation structure is vertical ( top - down ) , hierarchi - cal browsing , because hyperlinking is likely to confuse ( Spool , 1997 ) . Hypertext navigation , according to Liebscher and Marchionini ( 1991 ) , is a learned analytical strategy that can prove disorienting to novice users . The relational model , on the other hand , is most suitable for homogenous information items collected together within a broader Web site . Interactiveness The degree and type of interactivity built into the portal’s IA should be based on the user characteristics as listed in the Framework top - half of the IA Matrix . The children in all the focus groups , regardless of age , expressed a desire when seeking information on the Web for class projects to mini - FIG . 3 . Bottom half of the IA matrix : applied information architecture . 834 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 mize interaction ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , in press ) . They wanted to ﬁnd the necessary information as quickly as possible . A major criticism of one children’s portal , Ask Jeeves for Kids , was that instead of answering their question with the information , it typically responded to them with a new question that they must then answer . Like the busy corporate executive , children with homework assignments have little time to spare for leisurely interactions . In con - trast , if the portal is to be used for entertainment the children would welcome high levels of interactivity and the conse - quent control as well as guidance that they believe this gives them . Style : physical continuum The physical continuum may be deﬁned as the format and style in which information is presented in a children’s portal . The physical continuum runs from simple unformat - ted text at one end of the scale to sophisticated multimedia presentations at the other end . Sound , still images , anima - tion , video , and live feeds form the content of the continuum as we move from text to multimedia , in order of increasing complexity ( Heller & Martin , 1999 ) . In our studies children invariably enjoyed sound , still images , and especially animation features in a portal , and were critical of any portal that did not exhibit such features . Although demonstrating a strong preference for such a multimedia presence , however , they also had very clear views on what they did and not like when shown speciﬁc examples . To an extent , of course , taste was individualistic , but its was possible to identify both age and gender group - ings when assessing reactions . A matrix that can match such user characteristics against a multimedia stockpile is likely to produce a more effective portal than one that attempts to cater for a broad audience . Retrieval Information on the Web—text , images or sound sequenc - es—can be retrieved using two strategies : a search can be conducted to match an information query against the stored information ; or alternatively , information can be located by browsing the store via a subject category index . In a pure search engine , the search box is made available to the user ; while in a pure directory , the user is shown some sort of classiﬁcation scheme of the subject matter . Browsing tends to be effective when users are pursuing less well - deﬁned information objectives ( Borgman et al . , 1995 ) . It places lower cognitive burdens on seekers , and offers possibilities of serendipitous discovery . A portal for children should have the capabilities of providing both these retrieval tools . Our own evidence ( Large & Beheshti , 2000 ; Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 1999 , in press ) strongly suggests that children utilize both approaches . The reasons for their choices require further investigation , but appear to be related to factors such as query concept complexity ( as measured by the number of concepts incorporated within the query ) , the position of the subject on the objective - subjective continuum , the relative prominence in the interface of the search box compared to the subject directory , and prior knowledge of the topic . An Example To illustrate how the IA Matrix works , we give the example of a portal being designed for children aged be - tween 10 and 13 who are in the exploration phase of seeking information for a class project , and are seeking this infor - mation from a museum collection database . We will deﬁne museum information as largely humanities - type informa - tion . The children come from middle class backgrounds with average computer literacy ( i . e . , a computer in the home ) and low information literacy ( i . e . , they are not adept at seeking or using information ) . The user / task characteris - tics of the children in this example constitute the Frame - work attributes in the top half of the IA Matrix . The effect of the Framework characteristics in determining the Applied Information Architecture attributes in the bottom half of the IA Matrix is based on assumptions about how the children in our example seek information : We assume these children are ( a ) capable of critical thinking and conceptualizing abstractly , in a similar fashion to adults who are also subject domain novices , which means ( b ) they acquire knowledge about an unfamiliar topic by constructing knowledge structures ( Ackermann , 1991 ) in stages , akin to the stages described in Kuhlthau’s ( 1991 , 1993 ) Six - Stage Information Search Process ( ISP ) model . For the children in this example , the portal’s IA should emphasize for two reasons a browsing search strategy using a subject directory approach rather than a search box . First , the museum database contains humanities - type informa - tion—a collection of subject disciplines from the so - called soft end of the continuum . Queries to IR systems in the humanities are conceptual , and less well deﬁned than sub - ject terms in , say , medicine or chemistry . Second , the chil - dren in the example are at the exploration phase of seeking information for their class project , which also favors a browsing search strategy . We assume the children in the example would best be served if the portal’s IA used a functional metaphor from Rosenfeld and Morville’s ( 1998 ) typology of three types of metaphor : Organizational , Functional , and Visual . A func - tional metaphor , based on the child’s task , will keep the child anchored in the task so that she is exploring the subject in a useful manner . For the same reason , the most appro - priate navigation structure for these children should be hierarchical ( top - down ) , not hypertext ( horizontal ) or rela - tional ( bottom - up ) . We assume that the most appropriate interactiveness model for the portal’s IA is based on the Situationalist support model as described by Shneiderman ( 2000 ) , be - cause children do not have the social and intellectual con - text necessary to process interaction based on Shneider - man’s Inspirationalist or Structuralist support models . The JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 835 Structuralist support model emphasizes tools for self - learn - ing , which is more suitable for older children than our age group . The Inspirationalist support model emphasizes cre - ative , free - association learning , which is more suitable for adults . The Situational support model emphasizes teacher approval , consultation , and collaboration with others , a suit - able paradigm for children . Finally , for the children in the example , the most appro - priate part of the physical continuum is the complex end because abstract concepts in the humanities are best per - ceived multidimensionally . The physical continuum refers to the format and style in which the subject content is presented to the child . A portal based on simple elements such as plain text is at one end of the continuum , while a portal with complex elements such as sound , images , ani - mation and video is at the other end of this continuum . We assume that multimedia and complex portal design are appropriate for the museum database our children are using , and that such a design will encourage associative thinking and metonymic reasoning as the children explore their sub - ject area ( Lakoff , 1987 ) . In Figures 4 and 5 , we illustrate how the matrix works . The Framework ( Fig . 4 ) , located in the top half of the matrix , is ﬁlled in by the portal information architects to encode the portal’s intended message to its users . In the bottom half of the matrix ( Fig . 5 ) , the Applied Information Architecture attributes , the Interface , and Re - trieval attributes are determined by the system . To illustrate how the matrix works , in Figure 5 we have made links from the framework control section to the ap - plied attributes section of the matrix that are based on assumptions as well as research evidence about children’s Web - seeking behavior . The example shown is for a hypothetical 12 - year - old girl using a children’s portal for subjective content type infor - mation in an exploratory phase of researching a class topic . By the time that the girl arrives at the museum portal , her teacher has already input the appropriate characteristics in the Framework section of the IA Matrix , which in turn , determines the IA for the portal for this particular user . The girl types in her classroom password and the ﬁrst screen appears . The portal’s homepage interface uses a functional metaphor as an organizing principle , based on the child’s task which requires her to write a two - page opinion piece on art in the Middle Ages . The style of the IA is highly complex because of the abstractness of the girl’s topic . The screen divides into sections ; some are highlighted , and others incorporate movement into their presentation . In one part of the screen , the situational model of interactiveness immediately supplies her with an on - line form that outlines what she has to do to write an opinion piece . A navigation tree giving her a hierarchical representation of the Middle Ages appears on the right of the screen , and it will remain there throughout her visit to the portal . Parts of this tree will change color when she visits these Web pages or sites . There are no hyperlinks to other pages or sites within any text ( these have been eliminated by the IA Matrix because the girl’s characteristics have invoked the hierarchical nav - igation model ) . The girl must access all links through the tree directory on the right - hand side of the screen . For FIG . 4 . Framework control ﬁlled in by information architect . FIG . 5 . Applied information architecture ﬁlled in by the system . 836 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 example , when the portal prompts her to ﬁnd background geographical and historical information on the Middle Ages , she clicks on these parts of the navigation / directory tree to ﬁnd this information . Conclusion The matrix described in this article is a device for linking a portal’s purpose and its design objectives with its design architecture . The matrix encodes the message the portal wants to communicate to its users , in a form that permits the system to use it to deﬁne that message in a logical and systematic way through its architecture . The matrix also permits easy changes to the portal , if the developers so wish . The matrix is in a preliminary phase of construction . The next stage is to apply various combinations of framework attributes to determine how they should be selected for all possible attribute combinations and permutations . The concept of the matrix is based upon three assump - tions . The ﬁrst is that no matter how well conceptualized and designed might be any portal , it is unlikely that it can function equally effectively for all users , all content , and all needs . Design effort should be expended upon producing a set of ideals attributes ( or tools ) from which an optimal personalized portal can then be built . Fleming ( 1998 ) dis - cusses the importance of knowing the goal , audience , ex - pectations , and standard of success before designing a Web site , because these will differ from case to case . The second assumption is that designers need and want advice on how to match these attributes to any user / content / need . After all , it is one thing to recognize that any given portal might not suit equally well all occasions , and another thing to know how to refocus it so that it optimizes effectiveness . The ﬁnal assumption is that a matrix model can be built that will assist the in this very optimization . It is also possible that eventually users themselves may be able to ﬁll in the Frame - work part of the matrix to personalize their portal visit based on their own assessment of their characteristics and infor - mation needs . Acknowledgments The authors wish to acknowledge support from the Ca - nadian Heritage Information Network ( CHIN ) , a Canadian Government organization dedicated to facilitating access to Canada’s heritage . References Ackermann , E . ( 1991 ) . From decontextualized to situated knowledge : Revisiting Piaget’s water - level experiment . In I . Harel & S . Papert ( Eds . ) , Constructionism : Research reports and essays , 1985 – 1990 . Nor - wood , NJ : Ablex . Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Bilal , D . ( 2000 ) . Children’s use of Yahooligans ! Web search engine : 1 . Cognitive , physical and affective behaviors on fact - based search tasks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 51 ( 7 ) , 646 – 665 . Borgman , C . L . , Hirsh , S . G . , Walter , V . A . , & Gallagher , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Children’s searching behavior on browsing and keyword online cata - logues : the science library catalogue project . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 46 , 663 – 684 . Chicurel , M . ( 2000 ) . Databasing the brain . Nature , 496 ( 6798 ) , 822 – 825 . Cole , C . ( 2000 ) . Name collection by Ph . D . history students : Inducing expertise . The Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 51 ( 5 ) , 444 – 455 . Denning , R . , Shuttleworth , M . , & Smith , P . ( 1998 ) . Interface design concepts in the development of a Web - based information retrieval system . Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science , 24 ( 4 ) , 17 – 20 . Greenman , C . ( 2001 ) . Google search engine reaches into Usenet . New York Times , Thursday February 15 , p . E3 . Fleming , J . ( 1998 ) . Web navigation : Designing the user experience . Se - bastopol , CA : O’Reilly . Hanna , L . , Risden , K . , Czerwinski , M . , & Alexander , K . J . ( 1998 ) . The role of usability research in designing children’s computer products . http : / / www . research . microsoft . com / users / marvcz / druin98 . htm . Heller , R . S . , & Martin , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Multimedia taxonomy for design and evaluation . In Furht , B . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of multimedia computing ( pp . 3 – 16 ) . New York : CRC Press . Hirsh , S . G . ( 1997 ) . How do children ﬁnd information on different types of tasks ? Children’s use of the Science Library Catalog . Library Trends , 45 , 725 – 745 . The Information Architecture Glossary . ( March 2000 ) . Ann Arbor , MI : Argus Center for Information Architecture ( Argus Associates ) . Kuhlthau , C . ( 1991 ) . Inside the search process : Information seeking from the user’s perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 42 , 361 – 371 . Kuhlthau , C . ( 1993 ) . Seeking meaning : A process approach to library and information services . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing . Lakoff , Y . ( 1987 ) . Women , ﬁre , and dangerous things : What categories reveal about the mind . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Large , A . , & Beheshti , J . ( 2000 ) . The Web as a classroom resource : Reactions from the users . Journal of the American Society for Informa - tion Science , 51 ( 12 ) , 1069 – 1080 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Moukdad , H . ( 1999 ) . Information seeking on the Web : Navigational skills of grade - sis primary school students . Proceedings of the 62nd ASIS Annual Meeting ( pp . 84 – 97 ) . Wash - ington , DC , 31 October – 4 November 1999 . Medford : Information Today . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Rahman , T . ( 2002 ) . Gender and information seeking : Grade - six students on the Web . Information Processing and Management , 38 ( 3 ) , 427 – 443 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Rahman , T . ( in press ) . Design criteria for children’s Web Portals : The users speak out . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology . Liebscher , P . , & Marchionini , G . ( 1991 ) . Performance in electronic encyclopedias : Implications for adaptive systems . In J . M . Grifﬁths ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science Annual meeting , vol . 28 ( pp . 39 – 48 ) . Medford , NJ : Learned Infor - mation . Line , M . B . ( 1971 ) . The information uses and needs of social scientists : An overview of INFROSS . Aslib Proceedings , 23 ( August ) , 412 – 434 . Moore , P . A . ( 1995 ) . Information problem solving : A wider view of library skills . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 20 , 1 – 31 . Nielsen , J . ( 1999 ) . Designing web usability . Indianapolis , IN : New Riders Publishing . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002 837 Paolini , P . , Barbieri , T . , Loiudice , P . , Alonzo , F . , Zanti , M . , & Gaia , G . ( 2000 ) . Visiting a museum together : How to share a visit to a virtual world . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 51 ( 1 ) , 33 – 38 . Ritchey , S . ( 2000 ) . Information architecture practice : An interview with Steven Ritchey , Sapient . Bulletin of the American Society for Informa - tion Science , 26 , 16 – 18 . Rosenfeld , L . ( 2000 ) . Information architecture practice : An interview with Lou Rosenfeld , Argus Associates , Inc . Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science , 26 , 19 – 21 . Rosenfeld , L . , & Morville , P . ( 1998 ) . Information architecture for the World Wide Web . Sebastopol , CA : O’Reilly . Shneiderman , B . ( 2000 ) . Creating creativity : User interfaces for supporting innovation . ACM Transactions on Computer – Human Interaction , 7 ( 1 ) , 114 – 138 . Solomon , P . ( 1993 ) . Children’s information retrieval behavior . A case analysis of an OPAC . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 44 , 245 – 264 . Spink , A . , & Cole , C . ( 2001 ) . Information and poverty : Information - seeking channels used by African American low - income households . Library & Information Science Research , 23 , 45 – 65 . Spool , J . ( 1997 ) . Web site usability : A designer’s guide . North Andover , MA : User Interface Engineering . 838 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—August 2002