58 COMPUTER Published by the IEEE Computer Society 0018 - 9162 / 14 / $ 31 . 00 © 2014 IEEE COVER FEATURE Research shows that people frequently try to search for information with other people . The fact that no user interface for collaborative searching has yet caught fire suggests that the best parts of the design space have yet to be investigated . I t is fair to say that , according to the literature , tools dedicated to collaborative information seeking have not enjoyed widespread success to date . 1 , 2 Surveys , interviews , and observations show that although now even more than ever , people are searching in pairs and in larger groups , they are doing so without the benefit of specialized search tools . 3 Instead , they are making do by coordinating via out - of - channel use of communication tools , especially email , texting , phone calls , and social media communication . 1 , 2 , 4 While a recent study by Meredith ( “Merrie” ) Ringel Morris found that users were generally satisfied with their most recent collaborative search , 2 the results also showed that there is much room for improvement . Participants expressed a need to increase group awareness of mutual activities , which is a functionality that has been addressed in collaborative search research systems 5 , 6 , 7 as well as com - mercial systems . Other participants requested ( i ) the ability to compare results with others in real time , and ( ii ) a way to reduce redundant work . Furthermore , there may be specific categories of tasks that were not uncovered in the study by Morris , 2 in part because participants reported only their most recent use of collaborative search . The “open answer” portion of the survey suggested that users do desire more , such as support for complex tasks or tasks that extend over longer periods of time . Research tools that allow for shared content and shared presence in both real time and asynchronous collabora - tion include SearchTogether , 6 Coagmento , 5 CollabSearch , 7 and Results Space . 8 These tools allow participants to find , save , and share documents , and see the activities of others in the collaboration group . A study by Chirag Shah 5 compared an interface in which pairs of participants could not see any status information , could see their own personal action history , or could see both their own and the action histories of their search partner . This work found that while the different condi - tions did not change the final search outcome in terms of quantitative evaluation metrics , awareness of the partner’s search history did reduce the number of coordination mes - sages that needed to be exchanged after the search was completed . Similarly , the work of Hans - Christian Jetter and his col - leagues 9 introduced a highly novel interface for finding hotel reservations in a group , setting constraints via a com - bination of visualization and haptic displays . A key feature of this interface was that it allowed individuals to set con - straints “privately” in one corner of a tabletop display and then combine the constraints in the group publicly in the central view . Conflicts among the constraints were then What’s Missing from Collaborative Search ? Marti A . Hearst , University of California , Berkeley r3hea . indd 58 2 / 21 / 14 1 : 41 PM MARCH 2014 59 adjusted collaboratively until a set of hotels that met some subset of the constraints could be agreed upon . This ap - proach was compared to a standard Web - based faceted interface . The overall outcomes were not distinguishable by the standard metrics , but the communication patterns were seen as having less “noise” when using the interface that was tailored to collaboration , because it was easier to keep track of system state and individual preferences . Merrie Morris and Eric Horvitz 6 discussed the friction in - herent in having to switch from tools currently being used to a special purpose new tool . To date , people just do not seem willing to move from a standard search tool to an - other tool for collaborative search . The reason for this may be that there must be enough additional value as yet in the tools offered , and / or they may not yet be easy enough to use , to justify using a specialized tool . If that is the case , the question is , what , if anything , can a collaborative search tool offer that would make it worthwhile to switch to a dif - ferent tool , or add in a new plug - in ? There is reason to hope that with the right approach , a tool could be developed to support collaborative search successfully . There are some recent prominent examples of new user interface solutions arising and becoming very widely adopted for long - standing problems in coordina - tion and collaboration . For example , for many years there was no popular Web - based way to schedule small - group meetings among people who did not share a calendaring tool ; instead , people made use of email chains to sched - ule meetings . Now online Web polls such as Doodle are a standard solution . 10 As another example , for years there were no simple , high - usability tools available for an organization , such as a government agency , to use to put out a request for ideas and have thousands of lay people participate with comments and votes . The rise of online comment and mod - eration tools such as UserVoice and Google Moderator , not to mention the rise of third - generation question – answer forum tools such as StackExchange and Quora , show that it is possible to make progress in this space . WHAT ARE KEY MISSING FEATURES ? The question is , what should the next generation of collab - orative search tools be focused on ? Below , we consider the special properties of three use cases in which collaboration is likely to be needed in a search task , and what therefore needs to be supported in a collaborative search tool above and beyond what existing tools have already successfully implemented . SCENARIO 1 : SELECTING A FEW FROM MANY SIMILAR CHOICES Sometimes when people collaborate , it is because they need to make a decision together to meet the various group members’ desires . The classic example is travel planning : Johnny wants a hotel with a good bar , Khoa wants to be near the beach , Pat does not want to pay very much , Sonali cannot come until the third day , and so on . Or some people engage in “competitive shopping , ” in which they split up the work when looking at many similar items offered at different venues to try to negotiate best prices . For this case , a collaborative search tool should offer structure to let individuals define what their personal con - straints or preferences are in some manner , as they search . People should not be required to specify this information up front , as that requires too much cognitive overhead and because the process of searching is likely to be what reveals reasonable values for those constraints in the first place . Perhaps as the searchers find important constraints , double - clicking on them or swiping them into a special lo - cation turns them into a tag that is visible to all in the group as something to pay attention to ( price , near - the - beach ) in further searches . A smart search engine will eventually learn what the common ones are and automatically recog - nize these across users , and populate the constraints when search results are retrieved , perhaps using XML microfor - mats or some other common representation . Research by Kristie Fisher and her colleagues has shown that people can build on simple representations that have already been begun by others , 11 and if a search tool can recognize when such a representation is being built , it could suggest it as an organizing tool , or simply match the structure being built with those already seen to make more intelligent suggestions . SCENARIO 2 : COVERING A TOPIC THOROUGHLY The PhD student researching his or her dissertation work or a paralegal looking through a document trove trying to find all instances of some concept exemplify classic infor - mation retrieval challenge problems . 12 Collaborative search should be especially useful for this problem , since it should be amenable to “divide - and - conquer” techniques and since it can be implemented in special - purpose search tools such as academic reference search 4 and legal document search . But there are several fundamental functionalities that are missing from current collaborative search tools . For one , the tool should be aware both of what has already been stashed away in the bibliography and what has been viewed by anyone in the group of searchers . It should rerank based on this information , hiding what has already There is some friction inherent in switching from a standard search tool to another tool for collaborative search . r3hea . indd 59 2 / 21 / 14 1 : 41 PM 60 COMPUTER COVER FEATURE been assessed ( but allowing users to override this setting ) . Prior research systems , including Querium 13 and Results Space , 8 have made collaborators’ explicit ratings visible , but assessments of these tools are done in laboratories in which users explicitly set up their tasks at fixed starting times , over fixed document collections . Open questions remain about what to do with leftover ratings , implicit in - formation , 14 and new group members joining and leaving the collaboration . It may be useful to allow a trio of searchers to work to - gether , with one doing triage using a general query and a general ranking algorithm , another looking at promis - ing documents in more detail , and classifying those that are relevant using a set of agreed - upon categories or tags , and a third using a different ranking algorithm to further search within one of the refined categories , perhaps along the lines suggested by Jeremy Pickens and his colleagues . 15 Such a tool should have a clear depiction of the land - scape covered and the landscape yet to be looked at , organized by predetermined categories as well as user - defined keywords , and sortable by citations or usage where available . Searchers should be able to achieve a feeling of accomplishment , of walking over the landscape and having their bearing on the terrain as they work , and be able to strategize about who is to do what next over that map . SCENARIO 3 : DISCOVERING UNKNOWN INFORMATION By far the most challenging search task is that of trying to help people make a new discovery , such as solving the mystery of why honeybees are dying in North America . For a problem like this , search over known materials is only one part of a multifaceted , wide - ranging collaborative effort . But it is worth considering the role of collaborative search for this type of problem . Any collaborative search tool should always be comparing what has already been added to a community collection to what is currently being viewed to see if the information is redundant . Text - mining algorithms have long been proposed as an aid to discovery of new information , 16 but data - mining and knowledge - discovering algorithms have not emphasized collaboration for the most part . Collaborative challenges— such as the DARPA Red Balloon Challenge , in which teams had 10 hours to collaboratively discover the physical po - sition of 10 red weather balloons released before dawn across the continental US , 17 or the Polymath Project , 18 , 19 in which the world was invited to collaboratively solve a dif - ficult mathematics proof , and the goal was achieved by 27 people in a matter of months using comments on blogging and wiki platforms—suggest directions forward . B ecause people are searching together on a regular basis , there is a need for support for this activity in search user interfaces . The fact that no such interface has caught fire does not suggest there is no need for such a design—but , rather , that the best parts of the design space have not been investigated fully yet . What they are and how to present them remain open questions ; this article has made a few suggestions about directions for exploration . References 1 . M . R . Morris , “A Survey of Collaborative Web Search Practices , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 08 ) , 2008 , pp . 1657 – 1660 . 2 . M . R . Morris , “Collaborative Search Revisited , ” Proc . 2013 Conf . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW 13 ) , 2013 , pp . 1181 – 1192 . 3 . M . Twidale and D . Nichols , “Collaborative Browsing and Visualisation of the Search Process , ” Proc . Assoc . Information Management ( ISTCT ) , vol . 48 , nos . 7 – 8 , 1996 , pp . 177 – 182 ; http : / / eprints . lancs . ac . uk / 53455 / 1 / twidale _ aslib _ 96 . pdf . 4 . R . Capra et al . , “Tools - at - Hand and Learning in Multi - Session , Collaborative Search , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 10 ) , 2010 , pp . 951 – 960 . 5 . C . Shah , “Effects of Awareness on Coordination in Collaborative Information Seeking , ” J . Am . Soc . Information Science and Technology , vol . 64 , no . 6 , 2013 , pp . 1122 – 1143 . 6 . M . R . Morris and E . Horvitz , “SearchTogether : and Interface for Collaborative Web Search , ” Proc . 20th Ann . ACM Symp . on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST 07 ) , 2007 , pp . 3 – 12 . 7 . Z . Yue , S . Han , and D . He , “An Investigation of Search Processes in Collaborative Exploratory Web Search , ” Proc . Am . Soc . Information Science and Technology ( ASIST 12 ) , vol . 49 , no . 1 , 2012 , pp . 1 – 4 . 8 . R . Capra et al . , “Design and Evaluation of a System to Support Collaborative Search , ” Proc . Am . Soc . Information Science and Technology ( ASIST 12 ) , vol . 49 , no . 1 , 2012 , pp . 1 – 10 . 9 . H . - C . Jetter et al . , “Materializing the Query with Facet - Streams : A Hybrid Surface for Collaborative Search Searchers should be able to achieve a feeling of accomplishment , of walking over the landscape and having their bearing on the terrain as they work , and be able to strategize about who is to do what next over that map . r3hea . indd 60 2 / 21 / 14 1 : 41 PM MARCH 2014 61 on Tabletops , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 07 ) , 2011 , pp . 3013 – 3022 . 10 . K . Reinecke et al . , “Doodle around the World : Online Scheduling Behavior Reflects Cultural Differences in Time Perception and Group Decision - making , ” Proc . 2013 Conf . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW 13 ) , 2013 , pp . 45 – 54 . 11 . K . Fisher , S . Counts , and A . Kittur , “Distributed Sensemaking : Improving Sensemaking by Leveraging the Efforts of Previous Users , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 12 ) , 2012 , pp . 247 – 256 . 12 . D . C . Blair and M . Maron , “An Evaluation of Retrieval Effectiveness for a Full - Text Document - Retrieval System , ” Comm . ACM , vol . 28 , no . 3 , 1985 , pp . 289 – 299 . 13 . G . Golovchinsky , A . Diriye , and T . Dunnigan , “The Future Is in the Past : Designing for Exploratory Search , ” Proc . 4th Information Interaction in Context Symp . ( IIiX 12 ) , 2012 , pp . 52 – 61 . 14 . S . Fox et al . , “Evaluating Implicit Measures to Improve Web Search , ” ACM Trans . Information Systems , vol . 23 , no . 2 , 2005 , pp . 147 – 168 . 15 . J . Pickens et al . , “Algorithmic Mediation for Collaborative Exploratory Search , ” Proc . 31st Ann . Int’l ACM SIGIR Conf . on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR 08 ) , 2008 , pp . 315 – 322 . 16 . M . A . Hearst , “Untangling Text Data Mining , ” Proc . 37th Annual Meeting Assoc . Computational Linguistics ( ACL 99 ) , 1999 , pp . 3 – 10 . 17 . J . C . Tang , “Reflecting on the DARPA Red Balloon Challenge , ” Comm . ACM , vol . 54 , no . 4 , 2011 , pp . 78 – 85 . 18 . T . Gowers and M . Nielsen , “Massively Collaborative Mathematics , ” Nature , vol . 461 , 2009 , pp . 879 – 881 . 19 . J . Cranshaw and A . Kittur , “The Polymath Project : Lessons from a Successful Online Collaboration in Mathematics , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 11 ) , 2011 , pp . 1865 – 1874 . Marti A . Hearst is a professor in the School of Information at the University of California , Berkeley , with an affiliate ap - pointment in the Computer Science Division . Her primary research interests are user interfaces for search engines , information visualization , natural language processing , and improving MOOCs . Hearst received a PhD in computer science from the University of California , Berkeley . She is an ACM Fellow and has received an NSF CAREER award , an IBM Faculty Award , two Google Research Awards , an Okawa Foundation Fellowship , and two Excellence in Teach - ing Awards . Contact her at hearst @ berkeley . edu • Our bloggers keep you up on the latest Cloud , Big Data , Programming , Enterprise and Software strategies . • Our multimedia , videos and articles give you technology solutions you can use . • Our professional development information helps your career . Visit ComputingNow . computer . org . Your resource for technical development and leadership . Visit http : / / computingnow . computer . org GET HOT TOPIC INSIGHTS FROM INDUSTRY LEADERS Selected CS articles and columns are available for free at http : / / ComputingNow . computer . org . r3hea . indd 61 2 / 21 / 14 1 : 41 PM