fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 1 REVIEW published : 23 August 2019 doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2019 . 00023 Edited by : John F . Wesseling , Institute of Neurosciences of Alicante ( IN ) , Spain Reviewed by : Thomas A . Blanpied , University of Maryland , Baltimore , United States Natali Lujan Chanaday Ricagni , Vanderbilt University , United States * Correspondence : Soﬁia Reshetniak soﬁia . reshetniak @ med . uni - goettingen . de Received : 06 June 2019 Accepted : 02 August 2019 Published : 23 August 2019 Citation : Reshetniak S and Rizzoli SO ( 2019 ) Interrogating Synaptic Architecture : Approaches for Labeling Organelles and Cytoskeleton Components . Front . Synaptic Neurosci . 11 : 23 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2019 . 00023 Interrogating Synaptic Architecture : Approaches for Labeling Organelles and Cytoskeleton Components Soﬁia Reshetniak 1 , 2 * and Silvio O . Rizzoli 1 1 Institute for Neuro - and Sensory Physiology , Center for Biostructural Imaging of Neurodegeneration ( BIN ) , University Medical Center Göttingen , Göttingen , Germany , 2 International Max Planck Research School for Molecular Biology , Göttingen , Germany Synaptic transmission has been studied for decades , as a fundamental step in brain function . The structure of the synapse , and its changes during activity , turned out to be key aspects not only in the transfer of information between neurons , but also in cognitive processes such as learning and memory . The overall synaptic morphology has traditionally been studied by electron microscopy , which enables the visualization of synaptic structure in great detail . The changes in the organization of easily identiﬁed structures , such as the presynaptic active zone , or the postsynaptic density , are optimally studied via electron microscopy . However , few reliable methods are available for labeling individual organelles or protein complexes in electron microscopy . For such targets one typically relies either on combination of electron and ﬂuorescence microscopy , or on super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . This review focuses on approaches and techniques used to speciﬁcally reveal synaptic organelles and protein complexes , such as cytoskeletal assemblies . We place the strongest emphasis on methods detecting the targets of interest by afﬁnity binding , and we discuss the advantages and limitations of each method . Keywords : synapse , vesicles , cytoskeleton , actin , nanoscopy , super - resolution INTRODUCTION Chemical synapses support neurotransmission by releasing neurotransmitter from the presynaptic side , and responding to it on the postsynaptic side . The presynaptic bouton , or terminal , has here a highly dynamic role , since it responds to activation via plasma membrane depolarization by forcing the fusion of synaptic vesicles to the membrane , which is followed by the diﬀusion of the neurotransmitter molecules to postsynaptic receptors . The synaptic vesicles , deﬁned as small organelles with an outer diameter of approximately 40 nm which contain neurotransmitters and fuse to the plasma membrane upon stimulation ( Schikorski and Stevens , 1997 ) , are highly enriched in synaptic boutons , and are , in principle , not functional elsewhere . Along with vesicles , the boutons also contain several other organelles that are not necessarily speciﬁc for synapses , such as endosome - like structures ( with which synaptic vesicles as well as other endocytic vesicles fuse and where , presumably , their cargo undergoes sorting ) ( Heuser and Reese , 1973 ) , ribosomes ( Crispino et al . , 1997 ) , smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , and mitochondria ( Lysakowski et al . , 1999 ; Figure 1A ) . While the constant presence of endosomes and components of the protein - synthesizing and - sorting machineries ( endoplasmic reticulum , ribosomes ) in pre - synaptic terminals throughout synaptic development is still heavily debated ( Akins et al . , 2009 ) , the presence of mitochondria here has been well - established since the ﬁrst electron microscopy observations of Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 1 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 2 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture FIGURE 1 | Synaptic organelles and speciﬁcity of probes directed toward recycling membranes . ( A ) Schematic representation of main organelles present at the synapses . The pH level of endosomal components is visualized with different shades of blue . The different pHs aid in differential labeling by membrane probes , as shown in ( B ) . ( B ) Membranes that are labeled by different membrane - labeling tools highlighted in green , the identity of the organelles preserved from ( A ) . synapses ( Palay , 1956 ) . Large mushroom spines tend to contain a specialized compartment , composed of multiple membrane stacks , known as the spine apparatus ( Spacek and Harris , 1997 ; Figure 1A ) . Apart from synaptic vesicles , two non - membrane bound structures can be considered synapse - speciﬁc organelles : the active zone and the post - synaptic density ( Figure 1A ) . The active zone ( AZ ) of presynaptic terminals contains multiple proteins , including molecules involved in cellular adhesion , voltage - gated calcium channels , scaﬀold proteins , and multiple exocytosis co - factors . The AZ proteins regulate the docking , priming and fusion of synaptic vesicles ( Südhof , 2012 ) . AZs are apposed to post - synaptic densities ( PSDs ) , which are protein - rich structures containing adhesion molecules , neurotransmitter receptors , adaptors ( such as the PSD95 family proteins ) , and signaling proteins ( Kaizuka and Takumi , 2018 ) . Cytoskeletal proteins found in the synapses include tubulin , actin , and septin ( Wilhelm et al . , 2014 ) . Microtubules are known to form bundles along axons and bind presynaptic mitochondria ( Chan and Bunt , 1978 ; Perkins et al . , 2010 ; Graﬀe et al . , 2015 ) , synaptic vesicles ( Bird , 1976 ) , and to be positioned close to the plasma membrane and the active zone in the synaptic boutons ( Gordon - Weeks et al . , 1982 ) . Actin is the most predominant component of the cytoskeleton and in presynaptic terminals two distinct populations of actin ﬁlaments are described . First , F - actin was shown to be a component of the active zone cytomatrix ( Bloom et al . , 2003 ) , where it may form a barrier for vesicle release ( Morales et al . , 2000 ) . Second , it has been also shown to surround synaptic vesicle clusters ( Sankaranarayanan et al . , 2003 ; Richards et al . , 2004 ) , where it is thought to contribute to vesicle recycling . In post - synapses actin forms a network of long linear and short branched ﬁlaments ( Korobova and Svitkina , 2009 ) that reach the PSD where they may stabilize postsynaptic proteins ( Allison et al . , 1998 ; Kuriu et al . , 2006 ) . Many synaptic components were discovered and studied using electron microscopy . The main advantage of this technique is its high resolving power that allows examining ﬁne structures with nanometer precision . A crucial drawback , however , is its inability to reveal the identity of the structures . This has been addressed by labeling structures of interest using gold - conjugated antibodies raised against target proteins ( immunoelectron microscopy ) but such stainings often result in relatively low labeling densities . A widely used approach to speciﬁcally visualize cellular components is to use genetically encoded ﬂuorescent tags [ such as green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) and its derivatives ] fused to proteins of interest with consequent imaging with ﬂuorescent microscopy . This requires protein overexpression or genome editing but results in a high labeling density , and enables live cell imaging of tagged molecules . The common problem associated with such an approach is impaired targeting or traﬃcking of tagged proteins , which can lead to a diﬀerent behavior , and diﬀerent subcellular localization , for the chimeric proteins when compared to native ones . Nevertheless , the properties of most ﬂuorescent proteins , in terms of intensity or stability during imaging , are sub - optimal , when compared to chemical dyes . This has raised substantially the interest in ﬂuorescent probes that speciﬁcally bind to molecules of interest , and that can be conjugated to speciﬁc chemical dyes . Such elements are commonly used to visualize endogenous cellular components at their native locations , and enable investigators to exploit recent advances in super - resolution microscopy , thereby combining the two main advantages of the methods described above : labeling of cellular components with high speciﬁcity and eﬃciency , and nanometer resolution ( Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ; Hofmann et al . , 2005 ; Rust et al . , 2006 ; Sharonov and Hochstrasser , 2006 ) . Fluorescently labeled antibodies are the most commonly used tool in this approach , but many other probes have been developed for Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 2 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 3 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture labeling of diﬀerent cellular organelles and components . In the following section we will discuss the most prominent ones , their mechanisms of action , main advantages , and disadvantages . MATERIALS AND METHODS Super - Resolution Microscopy Techniques The probes we will discuss here were developed to be used in combination with light microscopy to speciﬁcally visualize certain organelles and structures . However , conventional imaging techniques have a signiﬁcant disadvantage of not being able to resolve objects that are positioned closer than ∼ 200 nm to each other , due to the diﬀraction limit . Two types of approaches have been developed to overcome the diﬀraction barrier . First , the coordinate - targeted approach , which uses a patterned light beam to determine the coordinates from which ﬂuorophores are permitted to emit . This approach is used by the stimulated emission depletion microscopy family ( STED ; Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ) , and the saturated structured illumination microscopy family ( SIM ; Gustafsson , 2005 ) . SIM currently reaches resolutions of ∼ 60 – 100 nm , while most STED applications in biology reach ∼ 40 – 50 nm . Second , the single - molecule based approach , which is based on the determination of the positions of single ﬂuorophores that are allowed to emit randomly . This approach is typical of concepts such as photo - activated localization microscopy ( PALM ; Betzig et al . , 2006 ) , stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM and dSTORM ; Rust et al . , 2006 ; van de Linde et al . , 2011 ) , or ground state depletion microscopy followed by individual molecule return ( GSDIM ; Testa et al . , 2010 ) . This approach can reach a higher spatial resolution , typically of ∼ 20 – 30 nm in biological samples . Even higher resolution has been obtained with the MINFLUX concept ( maximally informative luminescence excitation ; Balzarotti et al . , 2017 ) . This technique combines a coordinate - targeted approach , such as used in STED microscopy , with single - molecule localization , as in PALM or STORM , and enables resolutions of ∼ 1 – 4 nm . Finally , super - resolution can also be achieved through physically expanding the specimen after embedding into a swellable gel ( Chen et al . , 2015 ) . Resolutions of ∼ 20 – 70 nm have been attained with this approach ( Chen et al . , 2015 ; Chang et al . , 2017 ; Truckenbrodt et al . , 2018a ) . Visualizing Synaptic Organelles Using Non - speciﬁc Membrane - Labeling Tools With synaptic vesicles and endosomes being the most prominent and important organelles of the pre - synapse , many tools exists for their visualization ( Figure 1B ) . These labels are often hydrophobic molecules capable to incorporate into or permeate the plasma membrane . One classical example is styryl dyes such as FM 1 – 43 . They are molecules that are highly ﬂuorescent in a hydrophobic environment of cellular membranes and have signiﬁcantly lower quantum yield in aqueous solutions such as extracellular medium ( Betz et al . , 1992 ) . Their ability to reversibly incorporate into outer leaﬂet of the plasma membrane but not to penetrate it makes them a perfect tool to study endo - and exocytosis in live cells . Upon addition to cells , FM dye molecules incorporate into the plasma membrane and some of them get internalized via endocytosis . When cells are washed and all FM dye molecules that remained in the outer leaﬂet of the plasma membrane are gone , the only source of ﬂuorescence is the internalized vesicles whose recycling can be now followed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . When these vesicles undergo exocytosis following stimulation , the ﬂuorescence is lost again due to FM dye leaving the membrane for the aqueous extracellular solution ( Figure 2A ) . An interesting application of FM dyes has exploited the diﬀerent molecular structures of these probes . Both FM 1 - 43 and FM 2 - 10 are green dyes , but the former is a larger molecule , and inserts more strongly into membranes . This renders it more diﬃcult to wash from synaptic membranes ( Pyle et al . , 2000 ; Richards et al . , 2000 ) . A comparison between the wash - oﬀ ( destaining ) kinetics of the dyes can reveal endocytosis intermediates , such as infoldings , that remain open on the plasma membrane after stimulation . Such intermediates lose FM 2 – 10 , as this dyes is easily washed oﬀ , but not FM 1 – 43 ( Richards et al . , 2000 ) . The FM 1 – 43 retained in vesicles or in endocytosis intermediates can be quenched by adding to the buﬀers small molecules such as bromphenol blue ( Harata et al . , 2006 ) , thereby providing further information on the diﬀerent vesicle recycling modalities . In addition to ﬂuorescent properties , FM dyes can be used in electron microscopy due to their ability to undergo photoconvertion ( or photo - oxydation ) . Upon strong illumination in the presence of diaminobenzidine , a dark precipitate is formed where FM dye is located making it visible in electron microscopy . This allows even higher resolution for imaging of structures labeled with FM dye ( Denker et al . , 2009 , 2011 ; Hoopmann et al . , 2012 ) . The chemical structure of FM dyes does not allow them to be ﬁxed by aldehyde - based ﬁxatives , which renders it problematic to use them in combination with immunostainings ( Figure 2B ) . They are often lost from traﬃcking organelles , and can even be trapped in other cellular compartments after ﬁxation ( Revelo et al . , 2014 ) . Fixable variants of FM dyes containing single amine functional groups were developed to overcome this diﬃculty ( e . g . , FM 1 – 43FX ) , but they are still poorly ﬁxed by common ﬁxatives , and are also not optimized for use in super - resolution microscopy . These problems have beed solved with development of the membrane - binding ﬂuorophorecysteine - lysine - palmitoyl group ( mCLING ) . mCLING consists of a ﬂuorophore bridged to a palmitoyl tail by an octapeptide . Six lysines of the peptide allow the probe to be ﬁxed by aldehydes thus preventing its loss from the membrane or mislocalization post - ﬁxation ( Revelo et al . , 2014 ) . Both styryl dyes and mCLING have a common disadvantage : they are not speciﬁc for any particular organelle and stain all vesicles that undergo recycling of membranes , as well as the plasma membrane ( Figure 1B ) . This issue can be partially solved by usage of lipid - based pH - sensitive labels . Dyes such as cypHer5E are highly ﬂuorescent in acidic environments and are quenched at a neutral pH . If conjugated to phospholipids Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 3 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 4 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture + + + + + washed away A B Dye incorporation into the PM Endocytosis Exocytosis FM 1 - 43 FM 1 - 43FX mCLING fluorescent FM dye molecule non - fluorescent FM dye molecule FIGURE 2 | Tools for visualizing recycling vesicles . ( A ) The mechanism of styryl dyes action . Colored and gray shapes represent ﬂuorescent and non - ﬂuorescent FM molecules , respectively . Upon addition to cellular medium , FM dye incorporates into the outer leaﬂet of the PM and becomes ﬂuorescent . Following endocytosis , these ﬂuorescent molecules are trapped in recycling vesicles , while unspeciﬁc signal from the PM can be eliminated by washing the cells . Since FM dye incorporation into the membrane is reversible , after the vesicle is fused with the PM during exocytosis , the ﬂuorescent signal is lost again . ( B ) Chemical structures of FM 1 – 43 , FM 1 – 43FX , and mCLING . they can get incorporated into the plasma membrane just like FM dyes , but remain non - ﬂuorescent there . Only after the dye is internalized and reaches a lumen of an acidic organelle such as a late endosome or a synaptic vesicle , it becomes ﬂuorescent allowing visualization of the organelle ( Kahms and Klingauf , 2018 ) . As soon as the vesicle undergoes exocytosis exposing the pH - sensitive dye to a neutral environment of the extracellular ﬂuid , the ﬂuorescence disappears again . While allowing the investigator to diﬀerentiate between the plasma membrane , coated vesicles , and endo - lysosomal system or synaptic vesicles , this approach is unable to distinguish diﬀerent organelles that have the same luminal pH ( Figure 1B ) . One note of caution in using lipid dyes that insert in the plasma membrane , as the ones presented here , is that they could , in principle , aﬀect membrane tension , and may therefore inﬂuence synaptic vesicle fusion . One study suggested this for FM 4 – 64 ( Zhu and Stevens , 2008 ) , by comparing synaptic release in presence and in absence of the dye . However , the eﬀects noted were mild , and could also be attributed to a Förster Resonance Energy Transfer ( FRET ) eﬀect taking place between the green reporter used here to measure exocytosis and the red FM 4 – 64 . Overall , this suggests that such dyes are relatively “safe” tools to use for synaptic investigations , albeit one should aim to use low concentrations . Low concentrations are also useful in reducing phototoxicity . The FM dyes have a low photostability , which renders them excellent tools for photo - oxydation , as mentioned above , but reduces their applicability to long - term live imaging . Complex live imaging experiments , such as measurements of single - vesicle dynamics , can be performed ( Zenisek et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) , but long imaging periods should be avoided , especially as photodamage to the cells takes place several minutes before signiﬁcant photobleaching can be observed , in our experience . Increasing Speciﬁcity by Using Antibodies Directed to Epitopes Exposed on the Cell Surface To speciﬁcally visualize particular organelles one can turn to aﬃnity tools . A classical approach of labeling synaptic vesicles is use of ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies against luminal domain of synaptotagmin ( Matteoli et al . , 1992 ) . High speciﬁcity and aﬃnity of antibodies to the target proteins ensure speciﬁc labeling of desired organelles even after they undergo membrane recycling . Usage of antibodies against a luminal domain of the protein allows tracking vesicle traﬃcking in live cells , as the antibodies can be added to the cellular medium and internalized via endocytosis . The antibodies can be coupled to various ﬂuorophores to ﬁt requirements for speciﬁc experiment and microscopy method used . For example , the pH - sensitive dye cypHer5E , which we described above , can be used to follow synaptic vesicle when coupled to a luminal domain of a synaptic vesicle protein synaptotagmin ( Figures 1B , 3 ) . Since cypHer5E is only ﬂuorescent in the acidic environment of synaptic vesicles and is quenched at the neutral pH of extracellular medium , it can speciﬁcally reveal the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles when bound to a synaptic vesicle protein ( Martens et al . , 2008 ; Hua et al . , 2011 ) . It is important to note , however , that some antibodies might aﬀect protein distribution and traﬃcking in live cells . Thus , rabbit polyclonal antibodies against the luminal domain of Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 4 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 5 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Endocytosis Exocytosis Lumen acidification Extracellular medium pH ~ 7 . 4 H + pH ~ 5 . 5 synaptic vesicle protein cypHer5E - labeled antibody FIGURE 3 | CypHer5E as a tool to visualize the synaptic vesicle cycle . CypHer5E is a pH - sensitive ﬂuorophore that can be coupled to antibodies against the luminal domain of synaptic vesicle proteins . Following exocytosis , the luminal domains of the antibodies are exposed to the extracellular medium and the antibodies can bind them . At the neutral pH of the extracellular medium , the ﬂuorophore is quenched . When the luminal pH is lowered after endocytosis , the ﬂuorophores bound to the synaptic vesicle proteins through respective antibodies become ﬂuorescent and allow visualization of internalized vesicles . When such a vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane during synaptic activity , the ﬂuorescence is lost again . synaptotagmin 1 have been suggested to alter synaptic function ( Afuwape et al . , 2017 ) . At the same time , mouse antibodies against the same target , which are usually used for vesicle tracking experiments ( Matteoli et al . , 1992 ; Kraszewski et al . , 1995 ; Sara et al . , 2005 ; Fernández - Alfonso et al . , 2006 ; Wienisch and Klingauf , 2006 ; Hua et al . , 2010 ) , have not been reported to have such an eﬀect , and do not perturb vesicle traﬃcking even when used for several days ( Truckenbrodt et al . , 2018b ) . Strong and selective binding of antibodies to the target proteins makes them also a useful tool for long - term imaging . When labeled with a bright and photo - stable reporter such as a quantum dot , they can be used for prolonged observation of organelles ( Park et al . , 2012 ) or even single molecules such as postsynaptic receptors ( Dahan et al . , 2003 ; Groc et al . , 2004 ) . To visualize the organelles , quantum dots must be coupled to the antibodies against the luminal domains of the synaptic vesicle proteins , as in the case of cypHer5E - labeled antibodies . This is often achieved through usage of biotinylated secondary antibodies and streptavidin - coated quantum dots . Alternatively , quantum dots can be directly coated with secondary antibodies . When the luminal domain of the synaptic vesicle protein faces the extracellular medium after exocytosis , the antibodies and the quantum dots can label the inside of the vesicle . They are then internalized together with the target protein , resulting in the newly formed synaptic vesicle being loaded with the quantum dot . This has been used to visualize endocytosis ( Hoopmann et al . , 2010 ) as well as single exocytic events ( Zhang et al . , 2009 ; Park et al . , 2012 ) . To track plasma membrane proteins , quantum dots are coupled to antibodies against extracellular domains of the target proteins . This allows following diﬀusion of single post - synaptic receptors in the plasma membrane of a live neuron ( Tardin et al . , 2003 ; Howarth et al . , 2005 ; Bannai et al . , 2006 ; Chang et al . , 2012 ; Wang et al . , 2016 ; Taylor et al . , 2018 ) . Physical and optical properties of quantum dots allow the observation of the labeled structures for minutes without considerable photobleaching , what is usually diﬃcult to achieve with the use of most organic dyes and especially genetically encoded ﬂuorophores such as GFP . Additionally , since quantum dots are electron - dense , they can , in principle , be used for the visualization of the structure of interest in the electron microscopy . By their nature , quantum dots are hydrophobic and also toxic to the cell , so have to be coated with shells of polar substances to make them water - soluble and compatible with biological specimens ( Dubertret et al . , 2002 ) . In addition to these shells , quantum dots have to be covered with streptavidin and antibodies layers , increasing their size substantially . While the ﬂuorescent core might be as small as 2 nm , the total size of the label can reach 20 – 40 nm ( Michalet et al . , 2005 ) , which is comparable with the width of the synaptic cleft and the synaptic vesicle diameter ( Figure 4 ) . This limits quantum dots’ ability to penetrate synaptic cleft , resulting in labeling of mainly extrasynaptic population of membrane proteins , and can aﬀect diﬀusion of the labeled proteins ( Lee et al . , 2017 ; Delgado and Selvin , 2018 ) . Hence , special care must be taken when designing an experiment with the use of quantum dot labeling , to ensure that the quantum dots are of a suitable size to eﬀectively label proteins in the desired compartment , and to avoid causing signiﬁcant changes to the location and traﬃcking of the proteins . Identifying Organelles by Speciﬁc Cell - Permeable Labels All probes discussed above bind at the outer surface of the plasma membrane and must be endocytosed to label organelles of interest , where they remain attached to the luminal surface of the membrane . This approach cannot be used to visualize organelles that are not involved in direct membrane exchange with the plasma membrane , such as lysosomes or mitochondria . Cell - permeable labels that accumulate in the organelles of interest were developed to label these . To label lysosomes , acidotropic dyes such as neutral red , acridine orange , DAMP ( N - ( 3 - [ 2 , 4 - dinitrophenyl amino ] propyl ) - N - ( 3 - aminopropyl ) methylamine ) , and LysoTracker can be used . They are able to penetrate cellular membranes , but after getting protonated at acidic pH of lysosomes they lose this ability and are unable to escape the organelle ( Wiederschain , 2011 ) . Similarly to pH - sensitive dyes , most acidotropic molecules cannot discriminate between diﬀerent organelles and accumulate in any organelle that has low pH . Additionally , DAMP is not ﬂuorescent , and therefore has to be visualized by ﬂuorophore - coupled antibodies , thus making it unsuitable for live cell studies . LysoTracker R (cid:13) ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) is the most commonly Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 5 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 6 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Synaptic vesicle Synaptic cleft 20 - 25 nm 40 nm Bungarotoxin5 nm Quantum dot 20 nm FM1 - 43 < 3 nm Antibody15 nm FIGURE 4 | Comparison of the size of quantum dots with synaptic structures and other probes used to label the plasma membrane , recycling membranes , or membrane receptors in the synapse . Realistic sizes are presented for all labels . For quantum dots we assume that their core is covered by a streptavidin layer , to which antibodies are then attached . used tool for labeling lysosomes and is commercially available in various colors , making it suitable for multi - color imaging . While LysoTracker can be used for live imaging , it induces lysosomes’ alkylation following longer incubation periods and thus can only be used for shorter periods of time . Similar to LysoTracker , LysoSensor TM probes ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) also accumulate in acidic organelles , but , additionally , they also exhibit changes in ﬂuorescence intensity in reaction to changes in pH , making it possible to observe lysosomes dynamic and biogenesis ( Diwu et al . , 1999 ) . For labeling of mitochondria , membrane - potential - dependent dyes such as rhodamine 123 , tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester ( TMRM ) , and tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester ( TMRE ) can be used . They are cell - permeable dyes that accumulate in mitochondria in response to mitochondrial transmembrane potential . These dyes are highly ﬂuorescent in the inner mitochondrial membrane but are self - quenched in mitochondrial lumen . Since their retention in mitochondria depends on the membrane potential , they can only be sequestered by active mitochondria and are washed away from dead and ﬁxed cells ( Scaduto and Grotyohann , 1999 ) . MitoTracker R (cid:13) ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) is a similar label that has an additional chloromethyl moiety , which reacts with thiols in mitochondria keeping MitoTracker associated with mitochondria even after ﬁxation ( Poot et al . , 1996 ) . Similar membrane - permeable probes for labeling of endoplasmic reticulum have also been developed . Commercially available ER - Tracker TM Green and Red ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) contain glibenclamide moieties that bind to the sulfonylurea receptors of ATP - sensitive K + channels ( Hambrock et al . , 2002 ) , commonly found in ER ( Smith et al . , 2007 ) , while ER - Tracker Blue - White DPX selectively labels ER through an unexplained mechanism . All of these labels penetrate cellular membranes and have been used to image ER in live neurons ( Bannai et al . , 2004 ; Choi et al . , 2006 ; Gallego - Sandín et al . , 2009 ; Tucker et al . , 2016 ) . Another probe , called ER Thermo Yellow enables ER staining in live and ﬁxed cells and , in addition , enables monitoring temperature changes inside ER ( Arai et al . , 2014 ) . Fluorescent ﬂavonoids have been also shown to be a potential tool for ER visualization with minimal toxicity ( McDonald et al . , 2016 ) , but have gained little popularity so far . Finally , NH 2 - BODIPY is a new probe that can be used for labeling of ER in both live and ﬁxed cells and imaged with STED microscopes ( Sekhar et al . , 2019 ) , providing a valuable option for super - resolution studies of ER in ﬁxed cells , without the need to express ER markers fused to ﬂuorescent proteins or immunostainings . Visualisation of Other Synapse - Speciﬁc Structures All discussed above probes for the visualization of membranous compartments rely on binding to epitopes as they are exposed during the fusion of the compartments to the plasma membrane , or become trapped in the respective compartments due to their speciﬁc transmembrane potentials or luminal pH values . Synapse - speciﬁc structures from the cytosol , such as the AZ and PSD , cannot be labeled by a similar approach , and their visualization remains limited to the use of antibodies or GFP chimeras . AZs are often visualized by labeling scaﬀold proteins RIM1 , Piccolo and Bassoon ( Dani et al . , 2010 ; Nishimune et al . , 2016 ; Schoen et al . , 2016 ; Truckenbrodt et al . , 2018a ; Heller et al . , 2019 ) . In the case of PSD , the most commonly targeted soluble proteins are scaﬀolds PSD - 95 , Shank and Homer proteins . By employing super - resolution imaging and antibody stainings or ﬂuorescent protein fusions , they can be visualized in ﬁxed or live cells to report the localization and organization of the PSD ( Dani et al . , 2010 ; MacGillavry et al . , 2013 ; Tao - Cheng et al . , 2014 ; Broadhead et al . , 2016 ) . Other commonly labeled epitopes include the cytosol - exposed or extracellular domains of neuroligins and of postsynaptic AMPA , NMDA , GABA , and Glycin receptors . They can be labeled by antibodies , or monomeric streptavidin [ when tagged with a biotinylation substrate peptide ( Liu et al . , 2013 ; Chamma et al . , 2016a ; Lee et al . , 2017 ) ] . Many can be also targeted in live cells ( Schapitz et al . , 2010 ; Ladepeche et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2013 ; Nair et al . , 2013 ; Specht et al . , 2013 ; Bannai et al . , 2015 ; Chamma et al . , 2016a ; Jézéquel et al . , 2017 ; Lee et al . , 2017 ; Mikasova et al . , 2017 ; Patrizio et al . , 2017 ; Choquet , 2018 ; Haas et al . , 2018 ) . ER in dendritic spines can be revealed if actin binding protein synaptopodin , which is also known to be associated with the spine apparatus , Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 6 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 7 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture is targeted by ﬂuorescent protein fusion or immunostaining ( Mundel et al . , 1997 ; Deller et al . , 2000 ; Orth et al . , 2005 ; Vlachos et al . , 2009 ) . In addition to antibodies , an increasing selection of smaller probes , including nanobodies ( Vincke and Muyldermans , 2012 ) , becomes available for improved imaging of synaptic proteins with super - resolution microscopy . Nanobodies against SNAP25 , syntaxin 1 , Homer 1 , gephyrin , alpha - synuclein , vGLUT and several other proteins have been developed ( Lynch et al . , 2008 ; Schenck et al . , 2017 ; Dong et al . , 2019 ; Maidorn et al . , 2019 ) , enabling labeling of these proteins in cells without the need to overexpress them . Probing Synaptic Structure by Using Natural or Chemically Derived Toxins An alternative to antibodies that allows very speciﬁc recognition and hence makes eﬀective labeling of target proteins in the synapse possible is neurotoxins . Naturally used by venomous predators to paralyze or kill their prey as quick as possible , neurotoxins evolved to bind strongly and highly selectively to their targets , making them a useful tool for visualization of these proteins . Some neurotoxins and their chemical analogs have been used for investigation of postsynaptic receptors for decades ( Adams and Olivera , 1994 ) . One such an example is bungarotoxin – a short protein toxin found in the venom of snakes from the genus Bungarus . Kappa - bungarotoxin is a variant speciﬁc to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in neurons , which , when appropriately labeled , can reveal localization of the acetylcholine receptors in the post synaptic terminals ( Chiappinelli , 1983 ) . Fluorescently labeled alpha - bungarotoxin is commonly used for imaging of the alpha - subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in neuromuscular junctions ( Anderson and Cohen , 1977 ; Borodinsky and Spitzer , 2007 ; Fricker et al . , 2013 ) and is commercially available in variety of colors from diﬀerent manufacturers . It has also been shown to bind the acetylcholine receptor in post - synapses of neurons ( Colquhoun and Patrick , 1997 ) and used for imaging of the receptors in vivo ( McCann and Lichtman , 2008 ) . Besides acetylcholine receptors , alpha - bungarotoxin was also used for studying AMPA receptor and GABA receptors localization and traﬃcking in neurons ( Sekine - Aizawa and Huganir , 2004 ; Wilkins et al . , 2008 ; Brady et al . , 2014 ) . In the latter studies , the alpha - bungarotoxin - binding site was fused to the proteins of interest , to enable the toxin to recognize receptors it usually does not bind to . This makes the bungarotoxin - binding site an aﬃnity tag which , in principle , can be used for speciﬁc visualization of any membrane protein as long as adding this tag does not change the receptor targeting and traﬃcking . Another group of neurotoxins that started to be used for postsynaptic receptor visualization more recently is conotoxins – small peptides of 10 – 30 amino acids found in the venom of the Conum snails . Various types of conotoxins were identiﬁed , each having a high aﬃnity to a diﬀerent target protein , including nicotinic acetylcholine receptors ( Nicke et al . , 2004 ) , voltage - gated sodium channels ( Leipold et al . , 2005 ) , potassium channels ( Shon et al . , 1998 ) , and calcium channels ( Nielsen et al . , 2000 ) . These small peptides can be conjugated chemically to ﬂuorescent dyes and used as small probes to label respective proteins ( Vishwanath and McIntosh , 2006 ) . Very similar in structure , a component of deathstalker scorpion venom chlorotoxin has high aﬃnity for chloride channels ( DeBin et al . , 1993 ) . Many other scorpion venom components are used to study channels and receptors and can also be produced as recombinant ﬂuorescent proteins to be used in microscopy ( Kuzmenkov et al . , 2016 ) . While these toxins provide very high aﬃnity and speciﬁcity , working in nano - and picomolar concentrations and being able to distinguish between very similar classes of receptors , their small size often makes it diﬃcult and expensive to label them with ﬂuorescent reporters , thus limiting their use . Labeling Proteins With Small Afﬁnity Tags When no speciﬁc binder exists for a target protein , and fusion with a ﬂuorescent protein has to be avoided , small peptide tags can be used to speciﬁcally visualize such proteins . They are short sequences of several amino acids that can be fused to any protein of interest and then targeted by a strong speciﬁc binder . The FLAG - , HA - , and myc - tags ( Evan et al . , 1985 ; Hopp et al . , 1988 ; Wilson et al . , 2005 ) are ones of the most commonly used aﬃnity tags in imaging . Due to their small size ( ∼ 1 . 1 kDa ) they are not expected to drastically aﬀect the proteins’ traﬃc or function , and can be visualized by any imaging method following a staining with antibodies labeled with a suitable ﬂuorophore . To increase the brightness of labeling , several copies of one tag can be fused to a protein , resulting in several antibodies binding to one target . When expressed on the extracellular domains of the plasma membrane proteins , these tags can be used for live cell imaging and tracking , as in the case of discussed above bungarotoxin - binding sites . However , the bivalency of the antibodies might introduce artifacts caused by protein clusters formation . The large size of the antibodies also restricts their ability to penetrate into conﬁned and crowded environments , and can aﬀect protein traﬃcking when applied to live cells . To solve these issues , smaller monovalent binders can be used . One possible alternative is monomeric streptavidin ( Chamma et al . , 2016a ) . To be recognized by streptavidin , the target protein must be fused to a 15 amino acid biotinylation substrate peptide ( AP - tag ) . When biotin and biotin ligase are added to the cellular medium , the AP - tag is biotinylated and can be speciﬁcally bound by streptavidin . In addition to having an advantage of not cross - linking the target proteins , monomeric streptavidin is also substantially smaller in size compared to antibodies or monovalent streptavidin , decreasing the inﬂuence of large label on protein traﬃcking . This approach has been used to visualize several synaptic proteins including neuroligin , neurexin , stargazin , and LRRTM2 ( Liu et al . , 2013 ; Chamma et al . , 2016a , b ) . Small tags that are detected by nanobodies directly , without the use of biotin , have also been developed recently ( for example Virant et al . , 2018 ) . Visualizing Synapse Volume and Activity Most labels described above allow to speciﬁcally reveal distinct organelles or proteins . To visualize the overall synapse Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 7 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 8 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture morphology and volume , probes with lower speciﬁcity can be used . Calcium imaging is a classical approach , since it does not speciﬁcally label any of the synaptic components , but allows visualizing both the synaptic volume and synaptic activity . Synaptic physiology relies heavily on the calcium concentration : in the presynapse it triggers synaptic vesicle exocytosis , while in the post - synapse it regulates synaptic plasticity . Calcium imaging allows monitoring intracellular changes in the calcium concentration by the use of calcium indicators – molecules whose ﬂuorescence changes upon binding to calcium ( reviewed in Grienberger and Konnerth , 2012 ) . Calcium indicators can be a useful tool to visualize synapse volume since due to not being speciﬁc to any organelles , they ﬁll the whole synapse , eﬀectively illuminating the total synaptic volume . Many calcium indicators with diﬀerent modes of action exist and can be divided into two groups : genetically encoded and synthetic indicators . The ﬁrst indicator to be used was the bioluminescent protein aequorin , which emits blue light upon binding to calcium without the need of excitation by light ( Shimomura et al . , 1962 ) . Multiple diﬀerent genetically encoded calcium sensors exist ( Lin and Schnitzer , 2016 ) . Some , such as Yellow Cameleon , rely on Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) to function . Yellow Cameleon is a chimeric protein consisting of a calcium - bindng protein calmodulin , a calmodulin - binding peptide and to two ﬂuorescent proteins : ECFP and Venus . Upon binding to calcium , calmodulin undergoes conformational changes that bring ECFP and Venus close enough to enable FRET , eﬀectively shifting emitted light from blue to green ( Nagai et al . , 2004 ) . The second group of genetically encoded calcium indicators includes proteins with a single ﬂuorophore . One example is GCaMP family of proteins . These proteins consist of EGFP ﬂanked on diﬀerent sides by calmodulin and a calmodulin - binding peptide . Conformational changes in presence of calcium lead to an increase of the ﬂuorescence intensity ( Nakai et al . , 2001 ) . Newer genetically encoded calcium sensors have been developed to provide wider color selection and smaller size . Most genetically encoded calcium dyes emit green light , but a few variants with other wavelengths also exist , such as blue B - GECO ( Zhao et al . , 2011 ) , red R - CaMP2 ( Inoue et al . , 2015 ) , R - GECO ( Zhao et al . , 2011 ) , jRCaMP1 and jRGECO1 ( Dana et al . , 2016 ) , and near - infrared NIR - GECO1 ( Qian et al . , 2019 ) and GAF - CaMP2 ( Subach et al . , 2019 ) . NTnC is a recently developed small and bright calcium indicator that combines the sensing part of FRET sensors with reporting domain of single ﬂuorophore sensors ( Barykina et al . , 2016 ) . Genetically encoded calcium sensors can be used for calcium imaging in cultured cells following transfection , or in transgenic animals where their expression can be speciﬁcally targeted to neural cells and can be maintained over long time periods . However , creating and maintaining such transgenic lines can be time - consuming and expensive . Synthetic indicators are small chemicals that consist of a chelating site which is binding calcium ions , and ﬂuorescent chromophore part which emits light . Examples of such indicators include Quin , Fura , Oregon Green and Fluo calcium dyes . Upon binding to calcium these indicators display changes in ﬂuorescence intensity and / or shift in peak excitation or emission wavelength ( Paredes et al . , 2008 ) . Ratiometric indicators such as Fura - 2 show a change in the excitation wavelength upon calcium binding and allow quantitatively measurements of intracellular calcium concentration that are not aﬀected by the probe concentration . Synthetic calcium dyes are available in a large variety of spectral characteristics and diﬀerent aﬃnities to calcium ( Takahashi et al . , 1999 ) , do not require transfection to be delivered in the cells and thus allow for faster experimental procedures , however , are usually expelled from the cells during long experiments and hence are diﬃcult to use for long - term imaging , as well as cannot be targeted to a speciﬁc cell type ( Paredes et al . , 2008 ) . An important point of consideration when using both genetically encoded and synthetic calcium dyes is their possible cytotoxicity . Due to their binding to calcium , calcium sensors act as calcium buﬀers , eﬀectively decreasing the free calcium concentration in the cells , which can lead to signiﬁcant changes in the cellular physiology , especially in the context of synaptic activity where calcium plays crucial role ( McMahon and Jackson , 2018 ) . Apart from calcium imaging , multiple approaches were developed to visualize synaptic activity ( Lin and Schnitzer , 2016 ; Deo and Lavis , 2018 ) . These include voltage , neurotransmitter and vesicle fusion sensors . To monitor changes in the membrane potential , both small organic molecules such as cyanine dyes ( Miller , 2016 ) or VoltageFluor ( Woodford et al . , 2015 ) , and genetically encoded sensors ( for example based on a voltage - sensitive phosphatase , St - Pierre et al . , 2015 ) can be used . Molecules that display an increase in the ﬂuorescence intensity upon binding to a neurotransmitter ( e . g . , ExoSensor , Klockow et al . , 2013 ) or genetically encoded sensors containing a neurotransmitter - binding domains of natural proteins ( e . g . , FLIPE , Okumoto et al . , 2005 ) are employed to directly detect neurotransmitters . Alternatively , synaptic vesicle exocytosis can be visualized as a measure of synaptic activity . This is achieved through usage of FM dyes or of ﬂuorescent neurotransmitters . The latter mimic natural neurotransmitters , are loaded into the synaptic vesicles , and are released during synaptic activity . By following the ﬂuorescence of these false neurotransmitters one can visualize synaptic vesicle release , just as for the FM dyes ( Gubernator et al . , 2009 ) . The most commonly used tools for measuring synaptic release are currently pH - sensitive variants of GFP ( pHluorins ) . Synapto - pHluorin is a pHluorin sensor based on synaptic vesicle protein VAMP2 , and is ∼ 10 - fold more ﬂuorescent at neutral pH than in the acidic environment of the synaptic vesicles . Synapto - pHluorin localizes to the synaptic vesicles and emits light only after the vesicle is exocytosed , when the ﬂuorescent protein is exposed to the neutral pH of the extracellular medium ( Sankaranarayanan et al . , 2000 ; Figure 1B ) . Visualizing the Synaptic Cytoskeleton : Afﬁnity Tools Widely used for other cellular components , GFP fusions and antibody stainings have been less eﬀective for visualization of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments . The common major problem is that both approaches result in labeling of both monomers and cytoskeletal ﬁlaments ( Figures 5A , C ) , decreasing the apparent signal to noise ratio . This problem is relatively easily solved Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 8 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 9 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture A E F - a c t i n Overexpressed actin - GFP Endogeneous actin M o n o m e r s B F G С Chemically labeled actin H D Labeled anti - actin antibody 6 n m ~ 15 n m ~ 30 n m 20 - 30 nm ( STORM , ExM ) 30 - 40 nm ( STED ) Fluorescently labeled phalloidin Chemically labeled Lifeact SiR - actin ( on / off ) / frame 1 frame 2 multiple frames collected filaments reconstructed 1 - 5 nm ( MINFLUX ) > 50 n m GMARPRGAGPCSPGLERAPRRSVGELRLLFEARCAAVAAAA AAG - GFP Overexpressed F - tractin - GFP FIGURE 5 | Commonly used actin probes . Green shapes represent ﬂuorescent moieties ; all molecules shown in different shades of gray are non - ﬂuorescent and hence are invisible under ﬂuorescent microscope . Size differences of the shapes approximately represent size differences of the molecules . ( A ) Ectopically expressed actin - GFP partially incorporates into actin ﬁlaments but also contributes to background ﬂuorescence from monomeric actin - GFP molecules and increases the concentration of the monomers . ( B ) Due to small size of dyes , chemically labeled actin has higher polymerization ability , however , still displays signiﬁcant background ﬂuorescence from monomers and also increases the concentration of actin monomers . ( C ) Density of antibody labeling depends on epitope accessibility and is signiﬁcantly restricted by large size of antibody molecules , which also introduces large linkage errors ; background ﬂuorescence observed from antibodies bound to actin monomers in solution . ( D ) Comparison of ﬂuorophore displacement from targeted epitope caused by common immunostaining procedures with resolution abilities of modern super resolution methods . When a combination of primary and secondary antibodies is used to image an actin ﬁlament , ﬂuorophores of antibodies that recognize neighboring actin subunits might be located more than 50 nm apart ( 10 times larger distance then a thickness of an actin ﬁlament ) . Modern microscopy techniques can resolve objects that are as close as few nanometers apart , so usage of such large probes leads to signiﬁcant loss of advantages super - resolution methods can offer . ( E ) Phalloidin is a small chemical that binds exclusively F - actin with high speciﬁcity and afﬁnity , shows high density of labeling and low background signal . ( F ) Genetically encoded actin binders ( F - tractin illustrated as an example ) fused to GFP bind F - actin in vivo . Unbound molecules contribute to background ﬂuorescence , but the concentration of actin monomers is not changed . ( G ) Low afﬁnity of Lifeact binding to F - actin can be used for certain types of super resolution microscopy . Here Lifeact coupled to a dye acts as an exchangeable probe . Multiple frames are collected with Lifeact molecules having different locations in different frames . Post - imaging processing allows reconstructing F - actin architecture from all individual Lifeact locations . ( H ) SiR - actin is cell membrane - permeable , speciﬁcally labels F - actin and additionally has low ﬂuorescence when not bound to F - actin ( off state ) but cannot be ﬁxed by aldehydes . for antibody stainings in ﬁxed samples by detergent treatments that remove most soluble proteins , but is prominent when overexpression of monomers fused to ﬂuorescent proteins is used , since chimeric proteins are less likely to get incorporated in the ﬁlaments ( Westphal et al . , 1997 ) . As a result , signiﬁcant fraction of the ﬂuorescence comes from the free monomers , while cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are only partially labeled as they mainly consist of native proteins that are not labeled by the ﬂuorescent protein ( Figure 5A ) . To increase polymerization ability and decrease eﬀects of bulky GFP , the monomers can be coupled to small chemical ﬂuorophores instead of overexpression as GFP fusion ( Kellogg et al . , 1988 ) . This approach requires technically challenging microinjections to be performed to deliver labeled monomers into the cells and does not result in high density of labeling since ﬂuorophore - coupled monomers just like the ones labeled with ﬂuorescent proteins are less likely to polymerize than native endogenous proteins ( Figure 5B ; Kovar et al . , 2006 ) . In addition , both approaches change the native concentration of actin monomers in the cell , while most physiological processes requiring actin polymerization still rely on buﬀering by endogenous unmodiﬁed actin . Multiple eﬀects of GFP fusions on actin dynamics have been reported ( Aizawa et al . , 1997 ; Feng et al . , 2005 ; Deibler et al . , 2011 ) , rendering live - cell measurements of actin dynamics based on labeled actin monomers to some extent unrepresentative of the physiological situation . Nonetheless , it remained to be one of the most popular approaches to visualize actin in live cells for years since it’s easy to perform , and many insights in cytoskeleton dynamics were Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 9 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 10 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture obtained by utilizing fusions with ﬂuorescent proteins ( Doyle and Botstein , 1996 ; Westphal et al . , 1997 ; Lorenz et al . , 2004 ; Dovas et al . , 2009 , 2011 ; Flynn et al . , 2009 ; Oser et al . , 2009 ; Francis et al . , 2011 ; Koskinen and Hotulainen , 2014 ; Lei et al . , 2017 ) . To make GFP - based labeling more speciﬁc to cytoskeletal structures , ﬁlament - binding proteins can be targeted instead of cytoskeletal proteins themselves . This is a common approach to label F - actin and GFP - fusions of actin - binding domains are often used to reveal actin cytoskeleton . Examples of such domains will be discussed in detail later . Similarly , to track microtubule dynamics , it is common to label plus - end - tracking proteins with GFP instead of tubulin itself ( Stepanova et al . , 2003 ; Yau et al . , 2016 ) . Also , targeting with antibodies native proteins that bind cytoskeletal elements , but do not form ﬁlaments , can be useful for the visualization of some features of cytoskeleton . Thus , anti - spectrin antibodies are commonly used for visualization of the neural membrane - associated periodic skeleton ( Xu et al . , 2013 ; D’Este et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; He et al . , 2016 ; Vassilopoulos et al . , 2019 ) , and expression of spectrin - GFP allowed to visualize this structure in live cells ( Zhong et al . , 2014 ) . While immunostained microtubules can be imaged well with diﬀraction limited imaging techniques , many observations of microtubules with super resolution microscopy revealed that antibodies are not able to provide suﬃciently high quality of staining . The density of labeling achieved by antibodies is low enough for modern imaging techniques to resolve single ﬂuorophores along the microtubules . This results in a single microtubule appearing as a row of separate aligned objects instead of one continuous ﬁlament or creates an impression of microtubules being interrupted ( Bossi et al . , 2008 ; Huang et al . , 2008 ; Heilemann et al . , 2009 ; Wildanger et al . , 2009a ; Gould et al . , 2011 ) . The same is also observed in the case of neuroﬁlaments ( Hell , 2007 ; Wildanger et al . , 2009b ) which are in some cases cannot even be seen as rows of aligned objects but rather a set of randomly placed dots , making it impossible to make any conclusions about neuroﬁlament cytoskeleton architecture ( Donnert et al . , 2006 ; Rankin et al . , 2008 ) . Even conventional imaging can show that most neuroﬁlament antibodies do not provide a high quality of staining . In contrast , many anti - tubulin antibodies are known to have high aﬃnity and speciﬁcity for tubulin . Their low labeling density can be attributed to the large size of the antibodies , which does not allow them to bind many of the epitopes , due to steric hindrance . Another crucial drawback of the antibodies caused by their large size is the fact that they introduce a substantial linkage error what makes them unsuitable for super - resolution studies of such ﬁne structures as cytoskeletal ﬁlaments . Actin ﬁlaments , for example , have a diameter of ∼ 5 nm , while conventional antibodies have a size of ∼ 15 nm , placing the ﬂuorophore at a several - fold larger than the thickness of the ﬁlament itself distance from the ﬁlament . With recent super resolution microscopy methods oﬀering nanometer resolution ( Balzarotti et al . , 2017 ) , the usage of such large labels might lead to erroneous conclusions about protein locations and the shapes and sizes of the structures under investigation ( Figure 5D ) . For example , based on electron microscopy observations , microtubules are known to have a diameter of 25 nm ( Theg , 1964 ) . After a conventional immunostaining procedure , the perceived thickness of the microtubules is increased approximately 2 . 5 - fold due to the size of primary and secondary antibodies now decorating the microtubules . While this increase is not noticeable in diﬀraction limited microscopy since the resulting thickness is still less than 200 nm , it can be observed using super resolution technics and can be substantially reduced if smaller labels are used ( Ries et al . , 2012 ; Pleiner et al . , 2018 ) . Also , co - localization of proteins can be underestimated at high resolutions ( Xu et al . , 2016 ) , an eﬀect that would be increased when additional linkage error is introduced by antibodies , as has been shown for SNAP25 and syntaxin 1 clusters ( Maidorn et al . , 2019 ) . Additionally , antibodies cannot be used for live imaging of cytoskeleton unless delivered through microinjections . As an alternative to classical antibodies , derivatives of single chain camelid antibodies – nanobodies – can be used . Their considerably smaller size ( < 5 nm ) makes nanobodies a better probe to be used with super resolution microscopy as they allow to overcome many of the problems discussed above . Since nanobodies consist of only one protein chain , they can also be fused to ﬂuorescent proteins and expressed in cells , allowing live cell imaging . A commercially available Actin - Chromobody R (cid:13) ( Chromotek , Germany ) have been used to track actin dynamics in plants , zebraﬁsh , and nuclei of mammalian cells ( Rocchetti et al . , 2014 ; Panza et al . , 2015 ; Plessner et al . , 2015 ) as well as for super resolution live imaging of actin in neurons ( Wegner et al . , 2017 ) and for correlative light electron microscopy , where chromobodies were labeled with anti - GFP and gold - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Abdellatif et al . , 2019 ) . A stable cell line expressing Actin - Chromobody has been generated , allowing tracking actin dynamics without the need of transfections ( Keller et al . , 2019 ) . While ectopic expression of ﬂuorescent protein leads to relatively high background coming from the unbound molecules , Actin - Chromobodies oﬀer an advantage over direct actin - GFP fusion since they do not increase the total amount of actin molecules in the cell and report localization and dynamics of endogenous actin . Nevertheless , some studies report that at high expression levels Actin - Chromobodies can aﬀect actin morphology in neurons ( Wegner et al . , 2017 ) , presumably due to the chromobodies modifying either the dynamics of monomeric actin , by increasing the mass and size of the molecule , or the polymerization process , through steric hindrance . Synthetic anti - actin nanobodies have been also developed for use in staining of ﬁxed cells ( Moutel et al . , 2016 ) , however , their performance in super resolution imaging was not tested , and they are only compatible with methanol ﬁxation – a ﬁxation method that is usually avoided when actin cytoskeleton is targeted , and often destroys epitopes for classical antibodies , making co - immunostaining with other proteins challenging . Anti - tubulin nanobodies have also been developed , allowing to visualize some structures that cannot be resolved using conventional antibodies at all . The spacing between microtubules in densely packed bundles , which are found in axons , is ∼ 20 – 70 nm ( Chen et al . , 1992 ) . When microtubules are labeled with antibodies each having size of 15 nm , signals from Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 10 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 11 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture ﬂuorescent labels on antibodies merge together . This does not allow resolving individual microtubules in such bundles despite high resolution power of modern microscopes – a problem that has been solved with application of anti - tubulin nanobodies ( Mikhaylova et al . , 2015 ) . Chemically labeled anti - tubulin nanobodies allow nanometer resolution in ﬁxed cells ( Mikhaylova et al . , 2015 ; Fabricius et al . , 2018 ) , but have not been tested in live cells as fusions to ﬂuorescent proteins so far . As an alternative to nanobodies , aﬃmers , which are similar in size , can be also used . Aﬃrmers binding both actin and tubulin were recently developed , allowing visualization of these cytoskeletal elements in ﬁxed cells and in vivo ( Tiede et al . , 2017 ; Lopata et al . , 2018 ) . Visualizing the Synaptic Actin Cytoskeleton : Actin - and Tubulin - Speciﬁc Toxins and Other Small Labels While immunostainings and GFP fusions remain to be the main approaches to visualize some of the cytoskeletal components such as neuroﬁlaments and septin ﬁlaments , multiple small probes were developed to overcome above - described diﬃculties associated with direct actin coupling to ﬂuorophore or immunostainings to make both live and super resolution imaging of actin cytoskeleton possible . A classical tool for actin labeling is phalloidin – a toxin from Amanita phalloides that binds F - actin and prevents actin depolymerization ( Wulf et al . , 1979 ) . Phalloidin is a small cyclopeptide with a size of ∼ 6 Å , it has high aﬃnity and speciﬁcity to actin ﬁlaments , shows no binding to actin monomers , and provides high labeling density and signal to noise ratio in ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 5E ) . It has been used for actin visualization for decades and majority of information on actin distribution in neurons was obtained from phalloidin stainings ( Drenckhahn et al . , 1984 ; Bernstein and Bamburg , 1992 ; Morales et al . , 2000 ; Shupliakov et al . , 2002 ; Bleckert et al . , 2012 ; Blunk et al . , 2014 ) . It is a great choice for super resolution light microscopy when labeled with suitable ﬂuorophore as been shown by multiple groups in recent years that used it in STED ( Mace and Orange , 2012 ; D’Este et al . , 2015 ; Neupane et al . , 2015 ; Bär et al . , 2016 ; Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ) , single molecule localization microscopy including STORM and dSTORM ( van den Dries et al . , 2013 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ; Ganguly et al . , 2015 ; Leyton - Puig et al . , 2016 ; Hauser et al . , 2018 ; Pan et al . , 2018 ) , and structured illumination microscopy ( Guizetti et al . , 2011 ; Zobel and Bogdan , 2013 ) . It cannot , however , be used for live cell experiments as it does not readily penetrate the plasma membrane , is toxic if delivered intracellularly , and alters actin polymerization even at small concentrations , making studies of actin dynamics impossible ( Wehland et al . , 1977 ; Coluccio and Tilney , 1984 ; Cooper , 1987 ; Visegrády et al . , 2004 ) . Toxin - based labels are also used for microtubules visuali - zation . Paclitaxel ( also known as taxol ) , a drug that induces tubulin assembly ( Caplow et al . , 1994 ) , is one such example . It can be used as a constantly ﬂuorescent derivative ( Abal et al . , 2001 ; Lillo et al . , 2002 ; Barasoain et al . , 2010 ) or as a modiﬁed reagent that only attains ﬂuorescence inside the cell – known as Tubulin Tracker TM ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , available with green and deep - red ﬂuorophores ( Grau et al . , 2013 ; Zarrouk et al . , 2015 ; Gao et al . , 2018 ; Wang et al . , 2018 ) . These derivatives are membrane - permeable and can label microtubules in live cells when simply added to the cellular medium , but cannot be used in ﬁxed samples or for long - term imaging as they are not retained well inside the cells . A similar taxol - based probe ViaFluor ( Biotum ) allows imaging for up to 72 h , and is available with SIM and STED - compatible ﬂuorescent label . Newer actin labels make live imaging possible precluding mentioned above problems associated with use of direct actin labeling . One common approach is usage of genetically encoded actin labels based on actin - binding proteins . These labels typically consist of an actin - binding domain of a naturally occurring protein fused to a ﬂuorescent protein and can be expressed in the cell allowing tracking of actin ﬁlaments in live . GFP - labeled actin - binding domains have a number of advantages over direct actin - GFP fusions or GFP - nanobodies : they predominantly bind to actin ﬁlaments and not actin monomers , allowing to visualize the ﬁlaments with less background ; do not impair actin polymerization as toxins targeting actin do , better preserving native cytoskeleton architecture and allowing to study its dynamics ; and do not change the total concentration of actin monomers in the cell , what could otherwise aﬀect cellular physiology through sequestering of actin - binding proteins , initiation of polymerization or other mechanisms ( Figure 5F ) . Three such labels became popular in recent years : UtrCH , F - tractin , and Lifeact ( Schell et al . , 2001 ; Burkel et al . , 2007 ; Riedl et al . , 2008 ) . UtrCH , a label consisting of the ﬁrst 261 amino acids of human actin - binding protein Utrophin and a ﬂuorescent protein , does not stabilize F - actin in vitro ( Burkel et al . , 2007 ) and have been used for live imaging of actin in neurons ( Ganguly et al . , 2015 ; Balasanyan et al . , 2017 ) . F - tractin , a 43 amino acids long fragment of rat inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase A ( Johnson and Schell , 2009 ) , has also been used for live imaging in neurons ( Johnson and Schell , 2009 ; Merriam et al . , 2013 ; Winans et al . , 2016 ) as well as other cell types ( Yi et al . , 2012 ) . Lifeact , derived from yeast F - actin - binding protein Abp140 , is the most commonly used genetically encoded actin label . Unlike other actin - binding domains , Lifeact does not have homologs in higher eukaryotes , and is also the smallest of the available genetically encoded labels , consisting of only 17 amino acids ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) , which contributed to the growing popularity of this label . Lifeact has been extensively used for live imaging in various cell types including neurons ( Li et al . , 2008 ; Vidali et al . , 2009 ; Jang et al . , 2010 ; Römer et al . , 2010 ; Deinhardt et al . , 2011 ; Dupin et al . , 2011 ; Huang et al . , 2012 ; Kerr and Blanpied , 2012 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ; Merriam et al . , 2013 ; Torregrosa - Hetland et al . , 2013 ; Kronlage et al . , 2015 ; Lu et al . , 2015 ) , as well as for super resolution , including live - PALM ( Fuchs et al . , 2010 ; Izeddin et al . , 2011 ) , live - RESOLFT and STED of living brain slices ( Urban et al . , 2011 ; Testa et al . , 2012 ) , and structured illumination microscopy ( Rego et al . , 2012 ; Li et al . , 2015 ) . Transgenic mice expressing Lifeact fused to mRFPruby2 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 11 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 12 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture or EGFP were also generated , allowing live studies of actin dynamics without the need of transfections ( Riedl et al . , 2010 ) . Lifeact can be used for super - resolution microscopy in both live and ﬁxed cells . For live imaging it is usually fused to a far - red ﬂuorescent protein ( e . g . , mNeptune2 ) and expressed in neurons for subsequent visualization with live super resolution techniques ( Urban et al . , 2011 ; Testa et al . , 2012 ; Wegner et al . , 2017 ) . To achieve even higher resolution , instead of ectopic expression with a ﬂuorescent protein , puriﬁed Lifeact can be labeled with a chemical dye and used for staining of ﬁxed and permeabilized cells . Since Lifeact has low aﬃnity to F - actin ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) , its transient association with actin ﬁlaments can be visualized with single molecule localization techniques based on probe exchange such as IRIS ( Kiuchi et al . , 2015 ; Figure 5G ) . Low aﬃnity of puriﬁed Lifeact binding to F - actin makes it unsuitable for usage in stainings of ﬁxed cells in combination with many other super resolution techniques , since most of them do not rely on probe exchange , but require strong binding to the structure of interest . Although the small labels discussed here are not expected to have such drastic eﬀects on F - actin morphology and dynamics as actin overexpression or phalloidin , their potential inﬂuence on cytoskeletal dynamics must be considered , as growing evidence suggests that they do aﬀect some of the aspects of actin physiology . UtrCH , for example , has been shown to perturb actin assembly dynamics in vitro ( Belin et al . , 2013 ) , increase dendritic branching in cultured neurons ( Patel et al . , 2017 ) , cause cortical actin breakdown and female sterility during Drosophila oogenesis ( Spracklen et al . , 2014 ) , and stabilize vesicle - actin network in oocytes if expressed at high levels ( Holubcová et al . , 2013 ) . Its short variant ( Utr230 ) can induce the formation of various actin aggregates in both cell nuclei and cytoplasm ( Du et al . , 2015 ) . The latter work has reported that Lifeact can also induce actin polymerization , albeit this eﬀect was restricted to cell nuclei and resulted only in ﬁlamentous arrangements ( Du et al . , 2015 ) . Other studies showed that Lifeact has concentration - depended eﬀects on actin nucleation , elongation and coﬁlin - induced severing , as well as on the length of neurites , dendritic spine morphology and overall morphology of mesenchymal stem cells ( Courtemanche et al . , 2016 ; Patel et al . , 2017 ; Wegner et al . , 2017 ; Flores et al . , 2019 ) . These eﬀects diﬀer depending on position and identity of the fused ﬂuorescent reporter , the promoter used , and the resulting protein abundance ( Courtemanche et al . , 2016 ; Patel et al . , 2017 ; Flores et al . , 2019 ) . F - tractin has been reported to induce formation of long ﬁlopodia and to perturb the overall morphology of Xenopus XTC cells ( Belin et al . , 2014 ) and cause abnormal spine elongation ( Johnson and Schell , 2009 ) , but did not alter actin dynamics during Drosophila oogenesis ( Spracklen et al . , 2014 ) . Both Lifeact - mEGFP and F - tractin - EGFP , expressed under control of the CMV promoter , have only minor eﬀects on neuronal morphology in primary hippocampal neurons ( Patel et al . , 2017 ) . Transgenic mice expressing Lifeact were viable and had a normal phenotype , with the primary neurons derived from these mice also demonstrating normal development and morphology ( Riedl et al . , 2010 ) . To avoid problems caused by ﬂuorescent protein fusions and protein overexpression , membrane - permeable cytoskeleton labels can be used , such as SiR - actin and SiR - tubulin . SiR - actin is one of the newest probes developed that can be used for live imaging of actin without the need of transfection . It is a silicon - rhodamine based derivative of an actin ﬁlament - stabilizing toxin jasplakinolide . It has minimal cytotoxicity , permeates the plasma membrane , and shows an ∼ 100 - fold increase in ﬂuorescence intensity upon binding to F - actin ( Figure 5H ; Lukinaviˇcius et al . , 2014 ) . SiR - actin has been used in a number of studies focused on super resolution imaging of actin cytoskeleton in neurons ( D’Este et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Gokhin et al . , 2015 ; Qu et al . , 2016 ; Hoyle et al . , 2017 ) and appears to be the easiest tool to label actin so far : its usage does not require transfection , cell membrane permeabilization or other manipulations to deliver the probe in the cell . A conjugate of silicon - rhodamine and microtubule - stabilizing drug docetaxel , named SiR - tubulin ( Lukinaviˇcius et al . , 2014 ) , can be used for visualization of microtubules ( Robison et al . , 2016 ; Dmitrieﬀ et al . , 2017 ; Magliocca et al . , 2017 ; Larsson et al . , 2018 ; Paknikar et al . , 2019 ) . Other similar ﬂuorogenic probes based on STED - compatible dyes ( such as 510R , 580CP , GeR ) and tubulin - binding drugs cabazitaxel and larotaxel have been also developed recently ( Lukinaviˇcius et al . , 2018 ) . Fluorogenic character of these labels allows using them without any washing steps , and their spectral characteristics and high photostability make them suitable for super resolution imaging such as STED . While originally described to have low cytotoxicity , SiR - actin and SiR - tubulin are derivatives of F - actin - and microtubule - stabilizing compounds , hence their potential eﬀects on cytoskeleton dynamics and morphology should be thoroughly investigated before they can be considered safe to use for studying actin and tubulin dynamics in vivo . Additionally , since SiR - actin and SiR - tubulin have no primary amines it their structures , it is not possible to ﬁx them with commonly used aldehyde - based ﬁxatives , what makes their use in co - immunostainings with other proteins problematic . In addition to all the individual disadvantages of described probes , they are usually not able to stain all cytoskeletal structures . For example the actin “gold standard” phalloidin as well as Lifeact are not able to bind actin polymers decorated with actin - binding protein coﬁlin such as for example stress - induced ﬁbers ( McGough et al . , 1997 ; Munsie et al . , 2009 ; Sanders et al . , 2013 ) . Both Lifeact and actin - GFP label actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia , but not in ﬁlopodia or lamella ( Belin et al . , 2014 ) . Interestingly , in mesenchyme cells Lifeact only labels proximal regions of the cytoplasmic protrusions , but not the distal tips ( Sanders et al . , 2013 ) . UtrCH , on the contrary , binds to ﬁlaments in lamella and much less in lamellipodia ( Belin et al . , 2014 ) . While UtrCH is excluded from Arp2 / 3 - induced structures , GFP - tagged actin is often excluded from formin - generated ﬁlaments ( Chen et al . , 2012 ; Belin et al . , 2014 ) . Utr230 , a short variant of UtrCH , predominantely binds to the most stable actin structures such as stress - induced ﬁbers and cortical networks , and also stains structures that cannot be visualized with phalloidin such as Golgi - associated ﬁlaments ( Belin et al . , 2014 ) . Anti - actin aﬃmers demonstrate diﬀerences in their aﬃnity to stable or dynamic actin ﬁlaments ( Lopata et al . , 2018 ) . Importantly , ﬂuorescent reporters and their positions can also aﬀect the structures that probes can bind ( Lemieux et al . , 2014 ) , Thus , mEGFP - Lifeact visualized Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 12 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 f n s y n - 11 - 00023 A u g u s t 22 , 2019 T i m e : 17 : 44 # 13 R e s h e t n i a k a n d R i zz o li I n t e rr og a t i n g S y n a p t i c A r c h i t ec t u r e TABLE 1 | Probes to speciﬁcally label synaptic structures and their potential uses . Compatible with Membrane - Label Speciﬁcity Chemical nature MW / size Live imaging Super resolution EM aldehyde ﬁxation permeable Antibodies Almost any protein Multi - chain proteins ∼ 150 kDa Only for proteins exposed on the PM surface Yes , but reduce performance of techniques capable of resolution < 40 nm Yes Yes No FM1 – 43 PM , recycling membranes Styryl dye 0 . 61 kDa Yes No Yes No No FM1 - 43FX PM , recycling membranes Styryl dye 0 . 56 kDa Yes No Yes Yes No mCLING PM , recycling membranes Palmitoylated octapeptide 1 . 2 kDa Yes Yes No Yes No DMPE - cypHer5E Membranes of acidic organelles Phospholipid conjugated to pH - sensitive organic dye 1 . 4 kDa Yes No No No No Quantum dots Depends on antibody / streptavidin coating , can be directed to PM proteins or luminal domains of vesicular proteins Inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals , have to be covered with layers of organic molecules 10 – 40 nm Yes Yes Yes Yes No Acridine orange Lysosomes Fluorescent cationic dye 0 . 3 kDa Yes No No No Yes DAMP Lysosomes Non - ﬂuorescent weakly basic amine 0 . 4 kDa No Yes , when labeled by antibodies No ∗∗ Yes Yes LysoTracker Lysosomes Fluorophore linked to a weak base 0 . 4 kDa Yes Difﬁcult Yes No Yes Rhodamine 123 Mitochondria Membrane - potential - sensitive organic dye 0 . 4 kDa Yes Difﬁcult No No Yes TMRM Mitochondria Membrane - potential - sensitive dye 0 . 5 kDa Yes Yes No No Yes TMRE Mitochondria Membrane - potential - sensitive dye 0 . 5 kDa Yes Difﬁcult No No Yes MitoTracker Mitochondria Membrane - potential - sensitive dye with a thiol - reactive moiety 0 . 5 kDa Yes Yes ( for red - shifted variants ) No Yes Yes ER - Tracker ER Small ﬂuorescently labeled organic molecule ∼ 1 kDa Yes Yes ( for red - shifted variants ) No Partially Yes ER thermo yellow ER Small ﬂuorescently labeled organic molecule 0 . 6 kDa Yes No No Yes Yes NH 2 - BODIPY ER Small ﬂuorescently labeled organic molecule 0 . 5 kDa Yes Yes No Yes Yes Certain neurotoxins Various post - synaptic receptors Peptides and short proteins 1 . 3 – 10 kDa Yes Yes No Yes No Actin - Chromobody Actin Anti - actin nanobody fused to a ﬂuorescent protein 42 kDa Yes Yes No ∗∗ Yes No , but can be expressed in the cells hs2dAb anti - actin Actin Synthetic single domain antibody 14 kDa No Yes No No No Anti - tubulin nanobody Tubulin Camelid single domain antibody ∼ 14 kDa Potentially yes ∗ Yes No Yes No Phalloidin F - actin F - actin - stabilizing toxin 0 . 8 kDa No Yes No ∗∗ Yes No Tubulin Tracker Microtubules Fluorescently labeled mictotubule - stabilizing toxin ∼ 1 . 3 kDa Yes No No No Yes ( Continued ) F r o n t i e r s i n S y n a p t i c N e u r o s c i e n ce | www . f r o n t i e r s i n . o r g 13 A u g u s t 2019 | V o l u m e 11 | A r t i c l e 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 14 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture T A B L E 1 | C o n t i nu e d C o m p a t i b l e w i t h M e m b r a n e - L a b e l S p ec i ﬁ c i t y C h e m i ca l n a t u r e M W / s i z e L i v e i m a g i n g S u p e r r e s o l u t i o n E M a l d e h y d e ﬁ x a t i o n p e r m ea b l e V i a F l u o r M i c r o t u b u l e s F l u o r e s ce n t l y l a b e l e d m i c t o t u b u l e - s t a b ili z i n g t o x i n ∼ 1 . 3 k D a Y e s Y e s N o N o Y e s U t r CH F - ac t i n A c t i n - b i n d i n g d o m a i n o f U t r o p h i n 261 aa Y e s P o t e n t i a ll y y e s ∗ N o Y e s N o , b u t ca n b e e x p r e ss e d i n t h e ce ll s F - t r ac t i n F - ac t i n A c t i n - b i n d i n g d o m a i n o f i n o s i t o l 1 , 4 , 5 - t r i s p h o s p h a t e 3 - k i n a s e A 43 aa Y e s P o t e n t i a ll y y e s ∗ N o Y e s N o , b u t ca n b e e x p r e ss e d i n t h e ce ll s L i f eac t F - ac t i n A c t i n - b i n d i n g d o m a i n o f A bp 140 17 aa Y e s Y e s N o Y e s N o , b u t ca n b e e x p r e ss e d i n t h e ce ll s S i R - ac t i n F - ac t i n F l u o r og e n i c d e r i v a t i v e o f a n ac t i n ﬁ l a m e n t - s t a b ili z i n g t o x i n ∼ 1 . 3 k D a Y e s Y e s N o N o Y e s S i R - t u b u li n M i c r o t u b u l e s F l u o r og e n i c d e r i v a t i v e o f a m i c r o t u b u l e - s t a b ili z i n g t o x i n ∼ 1 . 3 k D a Y e s Y e s N o N o Y e s ∗ T h e n a t u r e o f t h e l a b e l i s c o m p a t i b l e w i t h t h e c o rr e s p o n d i n g m e t h o d , b u t i t s p e r f o r m a n ce h a s n o t b ee n t e s t e d y e t ; ∗∗ t h e l a b e l i t s e l f i s n o t v i s i b l e i n E M , b u t ca n b e v i s u a li z e d w i t h go l d - c o u p l e d a n t i b o d i e s a g a i n s t t h e ﬂ u o r o p h o r e ( e i t h e r o r g a n i c d y e o r ﬂ u o r e s ce n t p r o t e i n ) . lamellipodia well , while TagRFP - Lifeact is excluded from the same structures ( DesMarais et al . , 2019 ) . Even small dyes attached to the classical phalloidin can change the quality of staining . For example , staining with Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 488 results in more detailed labeling than with Phalloidin - iFluor TM 405 , Phalloidin – Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 488 , Phalloidin – Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 555 or Phalloidin – Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 647 ( DesMarais et al . , 2019 ) . Similarly , diﬀerent clones of commonly used antibodies recognize diﬀerent populations of actin cytoskeleton ( DesMarais et al . , 2019 ) . Taken together , this illustrates a strong inﬂuence of multiple factors on labels ability to recognize cytoskeletal structures . Consequently , diﬀerences in the preferences of the labels for actin structures decorated with certain actin binding proteins should be considered in relation to actin - binding proteins distribution . For example , it is known that in dendritic spines the actin cytoskeleton forms a stable core in the center of the spine , and a more dynamic shell at the periphery . The dynamics of the latter shell is maintained by the actin - depolymerizing factor coﬁlin , while actin branching Abp2 / 3 complex is localized closer to the stable core ( Rácz and Weinberg , 2013 ) . This diﬀerential distribution of actin binding proteins would result in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent staining patterns produced by UtrCH and Lifeact , which are excluded from Arp2 / 3 - or coﬁlin - bound structures , respectively . It is highly likely that less commonly used actin probes , such as F - tractin and SiR - actin , also reveal only a subpopulation of the actin cytoskeleton , and therefore the choice of a label would often depend on speciﬁc actin cytoskeleton components one wants to investigate . Problems and Solutions in Visualizing the Cytoskeleton in Fixed Cells Apart from a choice of label , another crucial issue in cytoskeleton visualization is preservation of its structure in ﬁxed cells . While thick stress ﬁbers are preserved well by most ﬁxatives , many ﬁne components of actin cytoskeleton are sensitive to physical and chemical perturbations and are damaged , destroyed or not completely preserved by commonly used ﬁxation procedures . Paraformaldehyde has been shown not to be able to preserve thin actin bundles and structures ( Whelan and Bell , 2015 ; Bachmann et al . , 2016 ) and 0 . 5 – 3 % glutaraldehyde is commonly used as ﬁxative to preserve actin cytoskeleton , as it provides more eﬀective cross - linking . Nonetheless , even after ﬁxation with glutaraldehyde , actin cytoskeleton can still be severely damaged by following procedures routinely used for visualization of other structures such as osmium tetroxide staining for transmission electron microscopy ( Maupin - Szamier and Pollard , 1978 ) , highlighting the need for careful choice of treatment procedures when imaging actin cytoskeleton . To stabilize actin cytoskeleton , speciﬁc buﬀers containing MgCl 2 and EGTA are used during ﬁxation ( Small , 1988 ) . Additionally , most cytoskeleton ﬁxation procedures involve extraction of all other cellular components before strong ﬁxation of the ﬁlaments . This is usually done by adding relatively high amounts on detergents and leads to loss of all cellular membranes and most soluble proteins ( Rinnerthaler et al . , 1988 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ) . This results in better actin staining and reduced background signal , Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 14 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 15 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture however , makes in very diﬃcult to image actin cytoskeleton at the same time with other proteins as ( a ) most proteins are washed away after the extraction and ( b ) many conventional antibody epitopes get destroyed by glutaraldehyde ﬁxation signiﬁcantly reducing the eﬀectiveness of immunostainings . Paraformaldehyde ﬁxation in actin - stabilizing buﬀer with no extraction can be used when actin co - staining with other proteins is required . This results in less eﬀective preservation of actin ultrastructure , but might still be suﬃcient to visualize certain structures ( Xu et al . , 2013 ) . In addition to actin - stabilizing buﬀers , paraformaldehyde ﬁxation can be further improved if performed at 37 ◦ C , illustrating that temperature can also aﬀect the quality of ﬁxation ( Leyton - Puig et al . , 2016 ; Pereira et al . , 2019 ) . In general , the choice of ﬁxation procedure , just like the choice of a label to use , still largely depends on structures one aims to image and other speciﬁc requirements of the experiments and no universal method have been developed yet ( Richter et al . , 2017 ) . Combining Genetic Encoding With Chemical Labeling : Enzymatic Tagging and Click Chemistry As described above , usage of both genetically encoded labels and chemically labeled probes have some disadvantages . The most prominent ones are low ﬂuorescence intensity of ﬂuorescent proteins and often high background / non - speciﬁc binding of aﬃne probes . To solve these problems , techniques combining genetic encoding and chemical labeling have been developed . These techniques usually involve genetic manipulation of the protein of interest , resulting in attachment of a tag sequence to it . This tag is then speciﬁcally recognized and covalently bound to chemical ﬂuorophores of choice . This results in highly speciﬁc labeling of only proteins containing the tag with highly ﬂuorescent chemical ﬂuorophores . Two examples where such an approach is used are SNAP and Halo tags . The SNAP tag is a 182 amino acids long polypeptide that can be fused to a protein of interest , generating a chimeric protein that is not ﬂuorescent . The SNAP tag is derived from O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA alkyltransferase , whose natural function is to transfer the alkyl group of O 6 - alkylated guanine in DNA to a cysteine residue in the alkyltransferase active center after which the alkyltransferase is permanently inactivated . Mutations introduced to generate SNAP tag changed its speciﬁcity to benzylguanine derivatives of type 1 ( Keppler et al . , 2003 ) , which can be generated from many common ﬂuorophores . When such ﬂuorescent derivatives are added to cells expressing SNAP tag , the latter catalyzes self - labeling with the ﬂuorophore by covalently attaching the ﬂuorophore with the benzyl group to a cysteine residue in SNAP tag sequence . The reaction is highly speciﬁc and can be highly eﬀective , resulting in nearly all present SNAP tags labeling , but recent studies report much lower eﬃciency ( Thevathasan et al . , 2019 ) . The labeling reaction can be triggered in live cells when membrane permeable dyes such as tetramethyl - rhodamine - Star or 647 - SiR are used . The HaloTag is a similar self - labeling polypeptide generated from bacterial haloalkane dehalogenase ( Los et al . , 2008 ) . Similar to SNAP tag , HaloTag it is a non - ﬂuorescent tag that catalyzes transfer of reactive compounds ( species modiﬁed to be recognizable by the HaloTag – HaloTag ligands ) to itself ( Los et al . , 2008 ) . Available HaloTag ligands include cell - permeable dyes tetramethylrhodamine , diacetyl derivative of ﬂuorescein , rhodamine 110 and Oregon Green , as well as cell - impermeable ones Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 488 and Alexa Fluor R (cid:13) 660 . While these tags provide fast , speciﬁc and eﬃcient protein labeling in cells , an obvious disadvantage is rather large size of the tags ( 19 . 4 and 33 kDa for SNAP and Halo tags , respectively ) . Similar to labeling with ﬂuorescent proteins , in some cases attachment of such a tag might impede the natural targeting and traﬃcking of the protein . This problem can be solved by substituting a large polypeptide tag with a small moiety , which can interact quickly and speciﬁcally with another small compound , eﬀectively conjugating them . Such process is referred to as click chemistry and in general is represented by multiple reactions with diﬀerent mechanisms . One example of such a reaction is copper - mediated azide – alkyne cycloaddition . It can be used to speciﬁcally label proteins with chemical dyes without the need to introduce a large tag . Instead , a single amino acid containing an alkyne group has to be incorporated in the protein of interest . A dye with an azide moiety can be added to the specimen and bound covalently to the alkyne , labeling the protein with the ﬂuorophore ( Milles et al . , 2012 ) . While oﬀering an advantage of a small tag that should not interfere with protein’s localization and functioning , this is a rather challenging and labor - demanding approach . Since it requires the presence of unnatural amino acids in the protein of interest , a relatively complicated genetic setup has to be used to provide machinery for inclusion of the unnatural amino acid in the normal protein translation . CONCLUSION Over the years multiple methods and approaches were developed to label synaptic organelles and structures ( Table 1 ) . Many of these rely on naturally evolved compounds such as intrinsically ﬂuorescent proteins or natural toxins , while others employ rational design and chemical synthesis or modiﬁcations . Respectively , they all have their own advantages and preferred uses , and none of the available labels suits every experiment . The ﬁrst point of consideration should always be whether selected label can introduce biological artifacts that would lead to erroneous conclusions . For example , while the use of GFP - actin chimeras might not result in high signal to noise ratio when imaging actin dynamics , it would still be a preferred method compared to use of toxins altering actin dynamics , such as phalloidin . This would not be a problem when ﬁxed cells are imaged . At the same time , the optical characteristics of GFP might not be suitable for some super resolution techniques , and chemically labeled phalloidin would be preferred there . Similarly , while quantum dot - conjugated antibodies provide high speciﬁcity and photostability , the size of the quantum dots might limit the structures that can be eﬀectively visualized . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 15 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 16 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Although speciﬁcity of labeling is the main concern when imaging synaptic organelles , the compatibility of the labels with specimen preparation should be also carefully considered . This is an especially important point when imaging cytoskeletal elements , as those are not preserved by many commonly used procedures . With the wide selection of diﬀerent labels for synaptic organelles , the perfect use still depends on speciﬁc experimental requirements and novel imaging techniques often require novel probes to be developed . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Both authors took part in designing and writing the manuscript . FUNDING In this work , SOR was supported by grants from the German Research Foundation , SFB1190 / P09 and SFB1286 / B2 . REFERENCES Abal , M . , Souto , A . A . , Amat - Guerri , F . , Acuña , A . U . , Andreu , J . M . , andBarasoain , I . ( 2001 ) . Centrosome and spindle pole microtubules are main targets of a ﬂuorescent taxoid inducing cell death . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 49 , 1 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 1016 Abdellatif , M . E . A . , Hipp , L . , Plessner , M . , Walther , P . , and Knöll , B . ( 2019 ) . Indirect visualization of endogenous nuclear actin by correlative light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) using an actin - directed chromobody . Histochem . Cell Biol . 152 , 133 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 019 - 01795 - 3 Adams , M . E . , and Olivera , B . M . ( 1994 ) . Neurotoxins : overview of an emerging researchtechnology . TrendsNeurosci . 17 , 151 – 155 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0166 - 2236 ( 94 ) 90092 - 2 Afuwape , O . A . T . , Wasser , C . R . , Schikorski , T . , andKavalali , E . T . ( 2017 ) . Synaptic vesicle pool - speciﬁc modiﬁcation of neurotransmitter release by intravesicular free radical generation . J . Physiol . 595 , 1223 – 1238 . doi : 10 . 1113 / JP273115 Aizawa , H . , Sameshima , M . , and Yahara , I . ( 1997 ) . A green ﬂuorescent protein - actin fusion protein dominantly inhibits cytokinesis , cell spreading , and locomotion in Dictyostelium . Cell Struct . Funct . 22 , 335 – 345 . doi : 10 . 1247 / csf . 22 . 335 Akins , M . R . , Berk - Rauch , H . E . , and Fallon , J . ( 2009 ) . Presynaptic translation : stepping out of the postsynaptic shadow . Front . Neural Circuits 3 : 17 . doi : 10 . 3389 / neuro . 04 . 017 . 2009 Allison , D . W . , Gelfand , V . I . , Spector , I . , and Craig , A . M . ( 1998 ) . Role of actin in anchoringpostsynapticreceptorsinculturedhippocampalneurons : diﬀerential attachment of NMDA versus AMPA receptors . J . Neurosci . 18 , 2423 – 2436 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 18 - 07 - 02423 . 1998 Anderson , M . J . , and Cohen , M . W . ( 1977 ) . Nerve - induced and spontaneous redistributionofacetylcholinereceptorsonculturedmusclecells . J . Physiol . 268 , 757 – 773 . doi : 10 . 1113 / jphysiol . 1977 . sp011880 Arai , S . , Lee , S . - C . , Zhai , D . , Suzuki , M . , and Chang , Y . T . ( 2014 ) . A Molecular ﬂuorescent probe for targeted visualization of temperature at the endoplasmic reticulum . Sci . Rep . 4 : 6701 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep06701 Bachmann , M . , Fiederling , F . , and Bastmeyer , M . ( 2016 ) . Practical limitations of superresolution imaging due to conventional sample preparation revealed by a direct comparison of CLSM , SIM and dSTORM . J . Microsc . 262 , 306 – 315 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jmi . 12365 Balasanyan , V . , Watanabe , K . , Dempsey , W . P . , Lewis , T . L . , Trinh , L . A . , and Arnold , D . B . ( 2017 ) . Structure and function of an actin - based ﬁlter in the proximal axon . Cell Rep . 21 , 2696 – 2705 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2017 . 11 . 046 Balzarotti , F . , Eilers , Y . , Gwosch , K . C . , Gynnå , A . H . , Westphal , V . , Stefani , F . D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Nanometer resolution imaging and tracking of ﬂuorescent molecules with minimal photon ﬂuxes . Science 355 , 606 – 612 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aak9913 Bannai , H . , Inoue , T . , Nakayama , T . , Hattori , M . , and Mikoshiba , K . ( 2004 ) . Kinesin dependent , rapid , bi - directional transport of ER sub - compartment in dendrites of hippocampal neurons . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 163 – 175 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00854 Bannai , H . , Lévi , S . , Schweizer , C . , Dahan , M . , and Triller , A . ( 2006 ) . Imaging the lateral diﬀusion of membrane molecules with quantum dots . Nat . Protoc . 1 , 2628 – 2634 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 429 Bannai , H . , Niwa , F . , Sherwood , M . W . , Shrivastava , A . N . , Arizono , M . , Miyamoto , A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Bidirectional control of synaptic GABAAR clustering by glutamate and calcium . Cell Rep . 13 , 2768 – 2780 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2015 . 12 . 002 Bär , J . , Kobler , O . , van Bommel , B . , and Mikhaylova , M . ( 2016 ) . Periodic F - actin structures shape the neck of dendritic spines . Sci . Rep . 6 : 37136 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep37136 Barasoain , I . , Díaz , J . F . , and Andreu , J . M . ( 2010 ) . Fluorescent taxoid probes for microtubule research . Methods Cell Biol . 95 , 353 – 372 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 10 ) 95019 - X Barykina , N . V . , Subach , O . M . , Doronin , D . A . , Sotskov , V . P . , Roshchina , M . A . , Kunitsyna , T . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . A new design for a green calcium indicator with a smaller size and a reduced number of calcium - binding sites . Sci . Rep . 6 : 34447 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep34447 Belin , B . J . , Cimini , B . A . , Blackburn , E . H . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2013 ) . Visualization of actin ﬁlaments and monomers in somatic cell nuclei . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 982 – 994 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 09 - 0685 Belin , B . J . , Goins , L . M . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2014 ) . Comparative analysis of tools for live cell imaging of actin network architecture . Bioarchitecture 4 , 189 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19490992 . 2014 . 1047714 Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1992 ) . Actin in emerging neurites is recruited from a monomer pool . Mol . Neurobiol . 6 , 95 – 106 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF027 80546 Betz , W . J . , Mao , F . , and Bewick , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Activity - dependent ﬂuorescent staining and destaining of living vertebrate motor nerve terminals . J . Neurosci . 12 , 363 – 375 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 12 - 02 - 00363 . 1992 Betzig , E . , Patterson , G . H . , Sougrat , R . , Lindwasser , O . W . , Olenych , S . , Bonifacino , J . S . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127344 Bird , M . M . ( 1976 ) . Microtubule – synapticvesicleassociationsinculturedratspinal cord neurons . Cell Tissue Res . 168 , 101 – 115 . Bleckert , A . , Photowala , H . , and Alford , S . ( 2012 ) . Dual pools of actin at presynaptic terminals . J . Neurophysiol . 107 , 3479 – 3492 . doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00789 . 2011 Bloom , O . , Evergren , E . , Tomilin , N . , Kjaerulﬀ , O . , Löw , P . , Brodin , L . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Colocalization of synapsin and actin during synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 737 – 747 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200212140 Blunk , A . D . , Akbergenova , Y . , Cho , R . W . , Lee , J . , Walldorf , U . , Xu , K . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Postsynaptic actin regulates active zone spacing and glutamate receptor apposition at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 0 , 241 – 254 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mcn . 2014 . 07 . 005 Borodinsky , L . N . , and Spitzer , N . C . ( 2007 ) . Activity - dependent neurotransmitter - receptor matching at the neuromuscular junction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 335 – 340 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0607450104 Bossi , M . , Fölling , J . , Belov , V . N . , Boyarskiy , V . P . , Medda , R . , Egner , A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Multicolor far - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence nanoscopy through isolated detection of distinct molecular species . NANO Lett . 8 , 2463 – 2468 . doi : 10 . 1021 / nl801471d Brady , M . L . , Moon , C . E . , and Jacob , T . C . ( 2014 ) . Using an α - bungarotoxin binding site tag to study GABA A receptor membrane localization and traﬃcking . J . Vis . Exp . 2014 : 51365 . doi : 10 . 3791 / 51365 Broadhead , M . J . , Horrocks , M . H . , Zhu , F . , Muresan , L . , Benavides - Piccione , R . , DeFelipe , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . PSD95 nanoclusters are postsynaptic building blocks in hippocampus circuits . Sci . Rep . 6 : 24626 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep24626 Burkel , B . M . , von Dassow , G . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2007 ) . Versatile ﬂuorescent probes for actin ﬁlaments based on the actin - binding domain of utrophin . Cell Motil . 64 , 822 – 832 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20226 Caplow , M . , Shanks , J . , and Ruhlen , R . ( 1994 ) . How taxol modulates microtubule disassembly . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 23399 – 23402 . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 16 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 17 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Chamma , I . , Letellier , M . , Butler , C . , Tessier , B . , Lim , K . - H . , Gauthereau , I . , et al . ( 2016a ) . Mapping the dynamics and nanoscale organization of synaptic adhesion proteins using monomeric streptavidin . Nat . Commun . 7 : 10773 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms10773 Chamma , I . , Levet , F . , Sibarita , J . - B . , Sainlos , M . , and Thoumine , O . ( 2016b ) . Nanoscale organization of synaptic adhesion proteins revealed by single - molecule localization microscopy . Neurophotonics 3 : 041810 . doi : 10 . 1117 / 1 . NPh . 3 . 4 . 041810 Chan , K . Y . , and Bunt , A . H . ( 1978 ) . An association between mitochondria and microtubules in synaptosomes and axon terminals of cerebral cortex . J . Neurocytol . 7 , 137 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1007 / bf01217913 Chang , J . - B . , Chen , F . , Yoon , Y . - G . , Jung , E . E . , Babcock , H . , Kang , J . S . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Iterativeexpansionmicroscopy . Nat . Methods 14 , 593 – 599 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4261 Chang , J . C . , Kovtun , O . , Blakely , R . D . , and Rosenthal , S . J . ( 2012 ) . Labeling of neuronal receptors and transporters with quantum dots . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Nanomed . Nanobiotechnol . 4 , 605 – 619 . doi : 10 . 1002 / wnan . 1186 Chen , F . , Tillberg , P . W . , and Boyden , E . S . ( 2015 ) . Expansion microscopy . Science 347 , 543 – 548 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1260088 Chen , J . , Kanai , Y . , Cowan , N . J . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 1992 ) . Projection domains of MAP2 and tau determine spacings between microtubules in dendrites and axons . Nature 360 , 674 – 677 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 360674a0 Chen , Q . , Nag , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2012 ) . Formins ﬁlter modiﬁed actin subunits during processive elongation . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 32 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 10 . 005 Chiappinelli , V . A . ( 1983 ) . Kappa - bungarotoxin : aprobefortheneuronalnicotinic receptor in the avian ciliary ganglion . Brain Res . 277 , 9 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0006 - 8993 ( 83 ) 90902 Choi , Y . M . , Kim , S . H . , Chung , S . , Uhm , D . Y . , and Park , M . K . ( 2006 ) . Regional interactionofendoplasmicreticulumCa2 + signalsbetweensomaanddendrites through rapid luminal Ca2 + diﬀusion . J . Neurosci . 26 , 12127 – 12136 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3158 - 06 . 2006 Choquet , D . ( 2018 ) . Linking nanoscale dynamics of AMPA receptor organization to plasticity of excitatory synapses and learning . J . Neurosci . 38 , 9318 – 9329 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2119 - 18 . 2018 Colquhoun , L . M . , and Patrick , J . W . ( 1997 ) . Pharmacology of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes . Adv . Pharmacol . San Diego Calif 39 , 191 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s1054 - 3589 ( 08 ) 60072 - 1 Coluccio , L . M . , and Tilney , L . G . ( 1984 ) . Phalloidin enhances actin assembly by preventing monomer dissociation . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 529 – 535 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 99 . 2 . 529 Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Eﬀects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 105 . 4 . 1473 Courtemanche , N . , Pollard , T . D . , and Chen , Q . ( 2016 ) . Avoiding artefacts when countingpolymerizedactininlivecellswithlifeactfusedtoﬂuorescentproteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 676 – 683 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3351 Crispino , M . , Kaplan , B . B . , Martin , R . , Alvarez , J . , Chun , J . T . , Benech , J . C . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Active polysomes are present in the large presynaptic endings of the synaptosomal fraction from squid brain . J . Neurosci . Oﬀ . J . Soc . Neurosci . 17 , 7694 – 7702 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 17 - 20 - 07694 . 1997 Dahan , M . , Lévi , S . , Luccardini , C . , Rostaing , P . , Riveau , B . , and Triller , A . ( 2003 ) . Diﬀusiondynamicsofglycinereceptorsrevealedbysingle - quantumdot tracking . Science 302 , 442 – 445 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1088525 Dana , H . , Mohar , B . , Sun , Y . , Narayan , S . , Gordus , A . , Hasseman , J . P . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Sensitive red protein calcium indicators for imaging neural activity . ELIFE 5 : e12727 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 12727 Dani , A . , Huang , B . , Bergan , J . , Dulac , C . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2010 ) . Superresolution imaging of chemical synapses in the brain . Neuron 68 , 843 – 856 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2010 . 11 . 021 DeBin , J . A . , Maggio , J . E . , and Strichartz , G . R . ( 1993 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization of chlorotoxin , a chloride channel ligand from the venom of the scorpion . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 264 , C361 – C369 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 1993 . 264 . 2 . C361 Deibler , M . , Spatz , J . P . , and Kemkemer , R . ( 2011 ) . Actin fusion proteins alter the dynamics of mechanically induced cytoskeleton rearrangement . PLoS One 6 : e22941 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0022941 Deinhardt , K . , Kim , T . , Spellman , D . S . , Mains , R . E . , Eipper , B . A . , Neubert , T . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Neuronal growth cone retraction relies on proneurotrophin receptor signaling through rac . Sci . Signal . 4 , ra82 – ra82 . doi : 10 . 1126 / scisignal . 2002060 Delgado , J . Y . , and Selvin , P . R . ( 2018 ) . A revised view on the role of surface AMPAR mobility in tuning synaptic transmission : limitations , tools , and alternative views . Front . Synaptic Neurosci . 10 : 21 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2018 . 00021 Deller , T . , Merten , T . , Roth , S . U . , Mundel , P . , and Frotscher , M . ( 2000 ) . Actin - associated protein synaptopodin in the rat hippocampal formation : localization in the spine neck and close association with the spine apparatus of principal neurons . J . Comp . Neurol . 418 , 164 – 181 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( sici ) 1096 - 9861 ( 20000306 ) 418 : 2 < 164 : : aid - cne4 > 3 . 0 . co ; 2 - 0 Denker , A . , Bethani , I . , Kröhnert , K . , Körber , C . , Horstmann , H . , Wilhelm , B . G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . A small pool of vesicles maintains synaptic activity in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 17177 – 17182 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1112688108 Denker , A . , Kröhnert , K . , and Rizzoli , S . O . ( 2009 ) . Revisiting synaptic vesicle pool localization in the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . J . Physiol . 587 , 2919 – 2926 . doi : 10 . 1113 / jphysiol . 2009 . 170985 Deo , C . , and Lavis , L . D . ( 2018 ) . Synthetic and genetically encoded ﬂuorescent neural activity indicators . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 50 , 101 – 108 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . conb . 2018 . 01 . 003 DesMarais , V . , Eddy , R . J . , Sharma , V . P . , Stone , O . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2019 ) . Optimizing leading edge F - actin labeling using multiple actin probes , ﬁxation methods and imaging modalities . BioTechniques 66 , 113 – 119 . doi : 10 . 2144 / btn - 2018 - 0112 D’Este , E . , Kamin , D . , Göttfert , F . , El - Hady , A . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2015 ) . STED nanoscopy reveals the ubiquity of subcortical cytoskeleton periodicity in living neurons . Cell Rep . 10 , 1246 – 1251 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2015 . 02 . 007 D’Este , E . , Kamin , D . , Velte , C . , Göttfert , F . , Simons , M . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Subcortical cytoskeleton periodicity throughout the nervous system . Sci . Rep . 6 : 22741 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep22741 Diwu , Z . , Chen , C . S . , Zhang , C . , Klaubert , D . H . , and Haugland , R . P . ( 1999 ) . A novel acidotropic pH indicator and its potential application in labeling acidic organelles of live cells . Chem . Biol . 6 , 411 – 418 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s1074 - 5521 ( 99 ) 80059 - 3 Dmitrieﬀ , S . , Alsina , A . , Mathur , A . , and Nédélec , F . J . ( 2017 ) . Balance of microtubule stiﬀness and cortical tension determines the size of blood cells with marginal band across species . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 4418 – 4423 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1618041114 Dong , J . X . , Lee , Y . , Kirmiz , M . , Palacio , S . , Dumitras , C . , Moreno , C . M . , et al . ( 2019 ) . A toolbox of nanobodies developed and validated for diverse neuroscience research applications . bioRxiv 631762 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 631762 Donnert , G . , Keller , J . , Medda , R . , Andrei , M . A . , Rizzoli , S . O . , Lührmann , R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Macromolecular - scaleresolutioninbiologicalﬂuorescencemicroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 11440 – 11445 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0604965103 Dovas , A . , Gevrey , J . - C . , Grossi , A . , Park , H . , Abou - Kheir , W . , and Cox , D . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of podosome dynamics by WASp phosphorylation : implication in matrixdegradationandchemotaxisinmacrophages . J . CellSci . 122 , 3873 – 3882 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 051755 Dovas , A . , Gligorijevic , B . , Chen , X . , Entenberg , D . , Condeelis , J . , and Cox , D . ( 2011 ) . Visualization of actin polymerization in invasive structures of macrophages and carcinoma cells using photoconvertible β - actin – dendra2 fusion proteins . PLoS One 6 : e16485 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0016485 Doyle , T . , and Botstein , D . ( 1996 ) . Movement of yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton visualized in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 3886 – 3891 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 93 . 9 . 3886 Drenckhahn , D . , Frotscher , M . , and Kaiser , H . W . ( 1984 ) . Concentration of F - actin in synaptic formations of the hippocampus as visualized by staining with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . Brain Res . 300 , 381 – 384 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0006 - 8993 ( 84 ) 90851 - 5 Du , J . , Fan , Y . - L . , Chen , T . - L . , and Feng , X . - Q . ( 2015 ) . Lifeact and Utr230 induce distinct actin assemblies in cell nuclei . Cytoskelet . 72 , 570 – 575 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21262 Dubertret , B . , Skourides , P . , Norris , D . J . , Noireaux , V . , Brivanlou , A . H . , and Libchaber , A . ( 2002 ) . In vivo imaging of quantum dots encapsulated in phospholipid micelles . Science 298 , 1759 – 1762 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1077194 Dupin , I . , Sakamoto , Y . , and Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2011 ) . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments mediate actin - driven positioning of the nucleus . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 865 – 872 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 076356 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 17 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 18 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Evan , G . I . , Lewis , G . K . , Ramsay , G . , and Bishop , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Isolation of monoclonalantibodiesspeciﬁcforhumanc - mycproto - oncogeneproduct . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 , 3610 – 3616 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 5 . 12 . 3610 Fabricius , V . , Lefèbre , J . , Geertsema , H . , Marino , S . F . , and Ewers , H . ( 2018 ) . Rapid and eﬃcient C - terminal labeling of nanobodies for DNA - PAINT . J . Phys . Appl . Phys . 51 : 474005 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1361 - 6463 / aae0e2 Feng , Z . , Ning Chen , W . , Vee Sin Lee , P . , Liao , K . , and Chan , V . ( 2005 ) . The inﬂuence of GFP - actin expression on the adhesion dynamics of HepG2 cells on a model extracellular matrix . Biomaterials 26 , 5348 – 5358 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2005 . 01 . 069 Fernández - Alfonso , T . , Kwan , R . , and Ryan , T . A . ( 2006 ) . Synaptic vesicles interchange their membrane proteins with a large surface reservoir during recycling . Neuron 51 , 179 – 186 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2006 . 06 . 008 Flores , L . R . , Keeling , M . C . , Zhang , X . , Sliogeryte , K . , and Gavara , N . ( 2019 ) . Lifeact - GFP alters F - actin organization , cellular morphology and biophysical behaviour . Sci . Rep . 9 : 3241 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w Flynn , K . C . , Pak , C . W . , Shaw , A . E . , Bradke , F . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Growth cone - like waves transport actin and promote axonogenesis and neurite branching . Dev . Neurobiol . 69 , 761 – 779 . doi : 10 . 1002 / dneu . 20734 Francis , R . , Xu , X . , Park , H . , Wei , C . - J . , Chang , S . , Chatterjee , B . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Connexin43 modulates cell polarity and directional cell migration by regu - lating microtubule dynamics . PLoS One 6 : e26379 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0026379 Fricker , F . R . , Antunes - Martins , A . , Galino , J . , Paramsothy , R . , LaRussa , F . , Perkins , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Axonal neuregulin 1 is a rate limiting but not essential factor for nerve remyelination . Brain 136 , 2279 – 2297 . doi : 10 . 1093 / brain / awt148 Fuchs , J . , Böhme , S . , Oswald , F . , Hedde , P . N . , Krause , M . , Wiedenmann , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . A photoactivatable marker protein for pulse - chase imaging with superresolution . Nat . Methods 7 , 627 – 630 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1477 Gallego - Sandín , S . , Rodríguez - García , A . , Alonso , M . T . , and García - Sancho , J . ( 2009 ) . The endoplasmic reticulum of dorsal root ganglion neurons contains functional TRPV1 channels . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 32591 – 32601 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 019687 Ganguly , A . , Tang , Y . , Wang , L . , Ladt , K . , Loi , J . , Dargent , B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . A dynamic formin - dependent deep F - actin network in axons . J . Cell Biol . 210 , 401 – 417 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201506110 Gao , Y . , Anthony , S . M . , Yu , Y . , Yi , Y . , and Yu , Y . ( 2018 ) . Cargos rotate at microtubule intersections during intracellular traﬃcking . Biophys . J . 114 , 2900 – 2909 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2018 . 05 . 010 Gokhin , D . S . , Nowak , R . B . , Khoory , J . A . , Piedra Ade , L . , Ghiran , I . C . , and Fowler , V . M . ( 2015 ) . Dynamic actin ﬁlaments control the mechanical behavior of the human red blood cell membrane . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 1699 – 1710 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 12 - 1583 Gordon - Weeks , P . R . , Burgoyne , R . D . , and Gray , E . G . ( 1982 ) . Presynaptic microtubules : organisation and assembly / disassembly . Neuroscience 7 , 739 – 749 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0306 - 4522 ( 82 ) 90079 - 3 Gould , T . J . , Myers , J . R . , and Bewersdorf , J . ( 2011 ) . Total internal reﬂection STED microscopy . Opt . Express 19 , 13351 – 13357 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 19 . 013351 Graﬀe , M . , Zenisek , D . , andTaraska , J . W . ( 2015 ) . Amarginalbandofmicrotubules transports and organizes mitochondria in retinal bipolar synaptic terminals . J . Gen . Physiol . 146 , 109 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1085 / jgp . 201511396 Grau , M . B . , Curto , G . G . , Rocha , C . , Magiera , M . M . , Sousa , P . M . , Giordano , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Tubulin glycylases and glutamylases have distinct functions in stabilization and motility of ependymal cilia . J . Cell Biol . 202 , 441 – 451 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201305041 Grienberger , C . , and Konnerth , A . ( 2012 ) . Imaging calcium in neurons . Neuron 73 , 862 – 885 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 02 . 011 Groc , L . , Heine , M . , Cognet , L . , Brickley , K . , Stephenson , F . A . , Lounis , B . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Diﬀerential activity - dependent regulation of the lateral mobilities of AMPA and NMDA receptors . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 695 – 696 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn1270 Gubernator , N . G . , Zhang , H . , Staal , R . G . W . , Mosharov , E . V . , Pereira , D . B . , Yue , M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Fluorescent false neurotransmitters visualize dopamine release from individual presynaptic terminals . Science 324 , 1441 – 1444 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1172278 Guizetti , J . , Schermelleh , L . , Mäntler , J . , Maar , S . , Poser , I . , Leonhardt , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III – dependent ﬁlaments . Science 331 , 1616 – 1620 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1201847 Gustafsson , M . G . L . ( 2005 ) . Nonlinear structured - illumination microscopy : wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence imaging with theoretically unlimited resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S A . 102 , 13081 – 13086 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 040687 7102 Haas , K . T . , Compans , B . , Letellier , M . , Bartol , T . M . , Grillo - Bosch , D . , Sejnowski , T . J . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Pre - post synaptic alignment through neuroligin - 1 tunes synaptic transmission eﬃciency . ELIFE 7 : e31755 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 31755 Hambrock , A . , Löﬄer - Walz , C . , and Quast , U . ( 2002 ) . Glibenclamide binding to sulphonylurea receptor subtypes : dependence on adenine nucleotides . Br . J . Pharmacol . 136 , 995 – 1004 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjp . 0704801 Harata , N . C . , Choi , S . , Pyle , J . L . , Aravanis , A . M . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Frequency - dependent kinetics and prevalence of kiss - and - run and reuse at hippocampal synapses studied with novel quenching methods . Neuron 49 , 243 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 12 . 018 Hauser , M . , Yan , R . , Li , W . , Repina , N . A . , Schaﬀer , D . V . , and Xu , K . ( 2018 ) . The spectrin - actin - based periodic cytoskeleton as a conserved nanoscale scaﬀold and ruler of the neural stem cell lineage . Cell Rep . 24 , 1512 – 1522 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2018 . 07 . 005 He , J . , Zhou , R . , Wu , Z . , Carrasco , M . A . , Kurshan , P . T . , Farley , J . E . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Prevalent presence of periodic actin – spectrin - based membrane skeleton in a broad range of neuronal cell types and animal species . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , 6029 – 6034 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1605707113 Heilemann , M . , Dedecker , P . , Hofkens , J . , andSauer , M . ( 2009 ) . Photoswitches : key molecules for subdiﬀraction - resolution ﬂuorescence imaging and molecular quantiﬁcation . Laser Photonics Rev . 3 , 180 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1002 / lpor . 20081 0043 Hell , S . W . ( 2007 ) . Far - ﬁeld optical nanoscopy . Science 316 , 1153 – 1158 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1137395 Hell , S . W . , and Wichmann , J . ( 1994 ) . Breaking the diﬀraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated - emission - depletion ﬂuorescence microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 , 780 – 782 . Heller , J . P . , Odii , T . , Zheng , K . , and Rusakov , D . A . ( 2019 ) . Imaging tripartite synapses using super - resolution microscopy . Methods doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2019 . 05 . 024 [ Epub ahead of print ] . Heuser , J . E . , and Reese , T . S . ( 1973 ) . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membraneduringtransmitterreleaseatthefrogneuromuscularjunction . J . Cell Biol . 57 , 315 – 344 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 57 . 2 . 315 Hofmann , M . , Eggeling , C . , Jakobs , S . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2005 ) . Breaking the diﬀraction barrier in ﬂuorescence microscopy at low light intensities by using reversibly photoswitchable proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 17565 – 17569 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0506010102 Holubcová , Z . , Howard , G . , and Schuh , M . ( 2013 ) . Vesicles modulate an actin network for asymmetric spindle positioning . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 937 – 947 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2802 Hoopmann , P . , Punge , A . , Barysch , S . V . , Westphal , V . , Bückers , J . , Opazo , F . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Endosomal sorting of readily releasable synaptic vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 19055 – 19060 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1007037107 Hoopmann , P . , Rizzoli , S . O . , and Betz , W . J . ( 2012 ) . FM dye photoconversion for visualizing synaptic vesicles by electron microscopy . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2012 , 84 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot067611 Hopp , T . P . , Prickett , K . S . , Price , V . L . , Libby , R . T . , March , C . J . , Cerretti , D . P . , et al . ( 1988 ) . A short polypeptide marker sequence useful for recombinant protein identiﬁcation and puriﬁcation . BioTechnology 6 , 1204 – 1210 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt1088 - 1204 Howarth , M . , Takao , K . , Hayashi , Y . , and Ting , A . Y . ( 2005 ) . Targeting quantum dots to surface proteins in living cells with biotin ligase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 7583 – 7588 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0503125102 Hoyle , N . P . , Seinkmane , E . , Putker , M . , Feeney , K . A . , Krogager , T . P . , Chesham , J . E . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Circadian actin dynamics drive rhythmic ﬁbroblast mobilization during wound healing . Sci . Transl . Med . 9 , eaal2774 . doi : 10 . 1126 / scitranslmed . aal2774 Hua , Y . , Sinha , R . , Martineau , M . , Kahms , M . , and Klingauf , J . ( 2010 ) . A common origin of synaptic vesicles undergoing evoked and spontaneous fusion . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 1451 – 1453 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 2695 Hua , Y . , Sinha , R . , Thiel , C . S . , Schmidt , R . , Hüve , J . , Martens , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . A readily retrievable pool of synaptic vesicles . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 833 – 839 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 2838 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 18 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 19 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Huang , B . , Wang , W . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2008 ) . Three - dimensional super - resolution imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy . Science 319 , 810 – 813 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1153529 Huang , J . , Huang , Y . , Yu , H . , Subramanian , D . , Padmanabhan , A . , Thadani , R . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Nonmedially assembled F - actin cables incorporate into the actomyosin ring in ﬁssion yeast . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 831 – 847 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201209044 Inoue , M . , Takeuchi , A . , Horigane , S . , Ohkura , M . , Gengyo - Ando , K . , Fujii , H . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Rational design of a high - aﬃnity , fast , red calcium indicator R - CaMP2 . Nat . Methods 12 , 64 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3185 Izeddin , I . , Specht , C . G . , Lelek , M . , Darzacq , X . , Triller , A . , Zimmer , C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Super - resolution dynamic imaging of dendritic spines using a low - aﬃnity photoconvertible actin probe . PLoS One 6 : e15611 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015611 Jang , K . - J . , Kim , M . S . , Feltrin , D . , Jeon , N . L . , Suh , K . - Y . , and Pertz , O . ( 2010 ) . Two distinct ﬁlopodia populations at the growth cone allow to sense nanotopographical extracellular matrix cues to guide neurite outgrowth . PLoS One 5 : e15966 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015966 Jézéquel , J . , Johansson , E . M . , Dupuis , J . P . , Rogemond , V . , Gréa , H . , Kellermayer , B . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Dynamic disorganization of synaptic NMDA receptors triggered by autoantibodies from psychotic patients . Nat . Commun . 8 : 1791 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01700 - 3 Johnson , H . W . , and Schell , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Neuronal IP3 3 - kinase is an f - actin – bundling protein : role in dendritic targeting and regulation of spine morphology . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 5166 – 5180 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 01 - 0083 Kahms , M . , andKlingauf , J . ( 2018 ) . NovelpH - sensitivelipidbasedexo - endocytosis tracers reveal fast intermixing of synaptic vesicle pools . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 12 : 18 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncel . 2018 . 00018 Kaizuka , T . , and Takumi , T . ( 2018 ) . Postsynaptic density proteins and their involvement in neurodevelopmental disorders . J . Biochem . 163 , 447 – 455 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jb / mvy022 Keller , B . - M . , Maier , J . , Weldle , M . , Segan , S . , Traenkle , B . , and Rothbauer , U . ( 2019 ) . A strategy to optimize the generation of stable chromobody cell lines for visualization and quantiﬁcation of endogenous proteins in living cells . Antibodies 8 : 10 . doi : 10 . 3390 / antib8010010 Kellogg , D . R . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Alberts , B . M . ( 1988 ) . Behaviour of microtubulesandactinﬁlamentsinliving Drosophilaembryos . Dev . Camb . Engl . 103 , 675 – 686 . Keppler , A . , Gendreizig , S . , Gronemeyer , T . , Pick , H . , Vogel , H . , and Johnsson , K . ( 2003 ) . A general method for the covalent labeling of fusion proteins with small molecules in vivo . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 86 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt765 Kerr , J . M . , and Blanpied , T . A . ( 2012 ) . Subsynaptic AMPA receptor distribution is acutely regulated by actin - driven reorganization of the postsynaptic density . J . Neurosci . 32 , 658 – 673 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2927 - 11 . 2012 Kiuchi , T . , Higuchi , M . , Takamura , A . , Maruoka , M . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2015 ) . Multitarget super - resolution microscopy with high - density labeling by exchangeable probes . Nat . Methods 12 , 743 – 746 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3466 Klockow , J . L . , Hettie , K . S . , and Glass , T . E . ( 2013 ) . ExoSensor 517 : a dual - analyte ﬂuorescent chemosensor for visualizing neurotransmitter exocytosis . ACS Chem . Neurosci . 4 , 1334 – 1338 . doi : 10 . 1021 / cn400128s Korobova , F . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2009 ) . Molecular architecture of synaptic actin cytoskeleton in hippocampal neurons reveals a mechanism of dendritic spine morphogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 165 – 176 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e09 - 07 - 0596 Koskinen , M . , andHotulainen , P . ( 2014 ) . MeasuringF - actinpropertiesindendritic spines . Front . Neuroanat . 8 : 74 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnana . 2014 . 00074 Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaﬀy , R . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 11 . 038 Kraszewski , K . , Mundigl , O . , Daniell , L . , Verderio , C . , Matteoli , M . , andDeCamilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Synaptic vesicle dynamics in living cultured hippocampal neurons visualized with CY3 - conjugated antibodies directed against the lumenal domain of synaptotagmin . J . Neurosci . Oﬀ . J . Soc . Neurosci . 15 , 4328 – 4342 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 15 - 06 - 04328 . 1995 Kronlage , C . , Schäfer - Herte , M . , Böning , D . , Oberleithner , H . , and Fels , J . ( 2015 ) . Feeling for ﬁlaments : quantiﬁcation of the cortical actin web in live vascular endothelium . Biophys . J . 109 , 687 – 698 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 06 . 066 Kuriu , T . , Inoue , A . , Bito , H . , Sobue , K . , and Okabe , S . ( 2006 ) . Diﬀerential control of postsynaptic density scaﬀolds via actin - dependent and - independent mechanisms . J . Neurosci . 26 , 7693 – 7706 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0522 - 06 . 2006 Kuzmenkov , A . I . , Nekrasova , O . V . , Kudryashova , K . S . , Peigneur , S . , Tytgat , J . , Stepanov , A . V . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Fluorescent protein - scorpion toxin chimera is a convenient molecular tool for studies of potassium channels . Sci . Rep . 6 : 33314 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep33314 Ladepeche , L . , Dupuis , J . P . , Bouchet , D . , Doudnikoﬀ , E . , Yang , L . , Campagne , Y . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Single - molecule imaging of the functional crosstalk between surface NMDA and dopamine D1 receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 18005 – 18010 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1310145110 Larsson , V . J . , Jaﬀerali , M . H . , Vijayaraghavan , B . , Figueroa , R . A . , and Hallberg , E . ( 2018 ) . Mitotic spindle assembly and γ - tubulin localisation depend on the integral nuclear membrane protein samp1 . J . Cell Sci . 131 : jcs211664 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 211664 Lee , S . H . , Jin , C . , Cai , E . , Ge , P . , Ishitsuka , Y . , Teng , K . W . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Super - resolution imaging of synaptic and Extra - synaptic AMPA receptors with diﬀerent - sized ﬂuorescent probes . ELIFE 6 : e27744 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 27744 Lei , W . , Myers , K . R . , Rui , Y . , Hladyshau , S . , Tsygankov , D . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2017 ) . Phosphoinositide - dependent enrichment of actin monomers in dendritic spines regulates synapse development and plasticity . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 2551 – 2564 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201612042 Leipold , E . , Hansel , A . , Olivera , B . M . , Terlau , H . , and Heinemann , S . H . ( 2005 ) . Molecular interaction of δ - conotoxins with voltage - gated sodium channels . FEBS Lett . 579 , 3881 – 3884 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2005 . 05 . 077 Lemieux , M . G . , Janzen , D . , Hwang , R . , Roldan , J . , Jarchum , I . , and Knecht , D . A . ( 2014 ) . Visualization of the actin cytoskeleton : diﬀerent F - actin - binding probes tell diﬀerent stories . Cytoskeleton 71 , 157 – 169 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21160 Leyton - Puig , D . , Kedziora , K . M . , Isogai , T . , van den Broek , B . , Jalink , K . , and Innocenti , M . ( 2016 ) . PFA ﬁxation enables artifact - free super - resolution imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and associated proteins . Biol . Open 5 , 1001 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1242 / bio . 019570 Li , D . , Shao , L . , Chen , B . - C . , Zhang , X . , Zhang , M . , Moses , B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics . Science 349 : aab3500 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aab 3500 Li , H . , Guo , F . , Rubinstein , B . , and Li , R . ( 2008 ) . Actin - driven chromosomal motility leads to symmetry breaking in mammalian meiotic oocytes . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1301 – 1308 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1788 Lillo , M . P . , Cañadas , O . , Dale , R . E . , and Acuña , A . U . ( 2002 ) . Location and properties of the taxol binding center in microtubules : a picosecond laser study with ﬂuorescent taxoids . Biochemistry 41 , 12436 – 12449 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi0261793 Lin , M . Z . , and Schnitzer , M . J . ( 2016 ) . Genetically encoded indicators of neuronal activity . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1142 – 1153 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 4359 Liu , D . S . , Loh , K . H . , Lam , S . S . , White , K . A . , andTing , A . Y . ( 2013 ) . Imagingtrans - cellularneurexin - neuroligininteractionsbyenzymaticprobeligation . PLoSOne 8 : e52823 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0052823 Lopata , A . , Hughes , R . , Tiede , C . , Heissler , S . M . , Sellers , J . R . , Knight , P . J . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Aﬃmer proteins for F - actin : novel aﬃnity reagents that label F - actin in live and ﬁxed cells . Sci . Rep . 8 : 6572 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 24953 - 4 Lorenz , M . , DesMarais , V . , Macaluso , F . , Singer , R . H . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Measurement of barbed ends , actin polymerization , and motility in live carcinoma cells after growth factor stimulation . Cell Motil . 57 , 207 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 10171 Los , G . V . , Encell , L . P . , McDougall , M . G . , Hartzell , D . D . , Karassina , N . , Zimprich , C . , et al . ( 2008 ) . HaloTag : a novel protein labeling technology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 , 373 – 382 . doi : 10 . 1021 / cb800025k Lu , H . , Fagnant , P . M . , Bookwalter , C . S . , Joel , P . , and Trybus , K . M . ( 2015 ) . Vascular disease - causing mutation R258C in ACTA2 disrupts actin dynamics and interaction with myosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , E4168 – E4177 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1507587112 Lukinaviˇcius , G . , Mitronova , G . Y . , Schnorrenberg , S . , Butkevich , A . N . , Barthel , H . , Belov , V . N . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Fluorescent dyes and probes for super - resolution microscopyofmicrotubulesandtracheolesinlivingcellsandtissues . Chem . Sci . 9 , 3324 – 3334 . doi : 10 . 1039 / C7SC05334G Lukinaviˇcius , G . , Reymond , L . , D’Este , E . , Masharina , A . , Göttfert , F . , Ta , H . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Fluorogenic probes for live - cell imaging of the cytoskeleton . Nat . Methods 11 , 731 – 733 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2972 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 19 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 20 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Lynch , S . M . , Zhou , C . , and Messer , A . ( 2008 ) . An scFv intrabody against the nonamyloid component of alpha - synuclein reduces intracellular aggregation and toxicity . J . Mol . Biol . 377 , 136 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2007 . 11 . 096 Lysakowski , A . , Figueras , H . , Price , S . D . , and Peng , Y . - Y . ( 1999 ) . Dense - cored vesicles , smooth endoplasmic reticulum , and mitochondria are closely associated with non - specialized parts of plasma membrane of nerve terminals : implications for exocytosis and calcium buﬀering by intraterminal organelles . J . Comp . Neurol . 403 , 378 – 390 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( sici ) 1096 - 9861 ( 19990118 ) 403 : 3 < 378 : : aid - cne7 > 3 . 0 . co ; 2 - x Mace , E . M . , and Orange , J . S . ( 2012 ) . Dual channel STED nanoscopy of lytic granules on actin ﬁlaments in natural killer cells . Commun . Integr . Biol . 5 , 184 – 186 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cib . 18818 MacGillavry , H . D . , Song , Y . , Raghavachari , S . , and Blanpied , T . A . ( 2013 ) . Nanoscale scaﬀolding domains within the postsynaptic density concentrate synaptic AMPA receptors . Neuron 78 , 615 – 622 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2013 . 03 . 009 Magliocca , V . , Petrini , S . , Franchin , T . , Borghi , R . , Niceforo , A . , Abbaszadeh , Z . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Identifying the dynamics of actin and tubulin polymerization in iPSCs and in iPSC - derived neurons . Oncotarget 8 , 111096 – 111109 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 22571 Maidorn , M . , Olichon , A . , Rizzoli , S . O . , and Opazo , F . ( 2019 ) . Nanobodies reveal an extra - synaptic population of SNAP - 25 and Syntaxin 1A in hippocampal neurons . MABS 11 , 305 – 321 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19420862 . 2018 . 1551675 Martens , H . , Weston , M . C . , Boulland , J . - L . , Grønborg , M . , Grosche , J . , Kacza , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Unique luminal localization of VGAT - C terminus allows for selective labeling of active cortical GABAergic synapses . J . Neurosci . 28 , 13125 – 13131 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3887 - 08 . 2008 Matteoli , M . , Takei , K . , Perin , M . S . , Südhof , T . C . , and Camilli , P . D . ( 1992 ) . Exo - endocytotic recycling of synaptic vesicles in developing processes of cultured hippocampal neurons . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 849 – 861 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 117 . 4 . 849 Maupin - Szamier , P . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1978 ) . Actin ﬁlament destruction by osmium tetroxide . J . Cell Biol . 77 , 837 – 852 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 77 . 3 . 837 McCann , C . M . , and Lichtman , J . W . ( 2008 ) . In vivo imaging of presynaptic terminals and postsynaptic sites in the mouse submandibular ganglion . Dev . Neurobiol . 68 , 760 – 770 . doi : 10 . 1002 / dneu . 20621 McDonald , L . , Liu , B . , Taraboletti , A . , Whiddon , K . , Shriver , L . P . , Konopka , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Fluorescent ﬂavonoids for endoplasmic reticulum cell imaging . J . Mater . Chem . B Mater . Biol . Med . 4 , 7902 – 7908 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c6tb02 456d McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes the twist ofF - Actin : implicationsforactinﬁlamentdynamicsandcellularfunction . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 4 . 771 McMahon , S . M . , and Jackson , M . B . ( 2018 ) . An inconvenient truth : calcium sensors are calcium buﬀers . Trends Neurosci . 41 , 880 – 884 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tins . 2018 . 09 . 005 Merriam , E . B . , Millette , M . , Lumbard , D . C . , Saengsawang , W . , Fothergill , T . , Hu , X . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Synaptic regulation of microtubule dynamics in dendritic spines by calcium . F - Actin , and Drebrin . J . Neurosci . 33 , 16471 – 16482 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0661 - 13 . 2013 Michalet , X . , Pinaud , F . F . , Bentolila , L . A . , Tsay , J . M . , Doose , S . , Li , J . J . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Quantum dots for live cells , in vivo imaging , and diagnostics . Science 307 , 538 – 544 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1104274 Mikasova , L . , Xiong , H . , Kerkhofs , A . , Bouchet , D . , Krugers , H . J . , and Groc , L . ( 2017 ) . Stress hormone rapidly tunes synaptic NMDA receptor through membrane dynamics and mineralocorticoid signalling . Sci . Rep . 7 : 8053 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 08695 - 3 Mikhaylova , M . , Cloin , B . M . C . , Finan , K . , van den Berg , R . , Teeuw , J . , Kijanka , M . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Resolving bundled microtubules using anti - tubulin nanobodies . Nat . Commun . 6 : 7933 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8933 Miller , E . W . ( 2016 ) . Small molecule ﬂuorescent voltage indicators for studying membrane potential . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 33 , 74 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cbpa . 2016 . 06 . 003 Milles , S . , Tyagi , S . , Banterle , N . , Koehler , C . , VanDelinder , V . , Plass , T . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Click strategies for single - molecule protein ﬂuorescence . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 134 , 5187 – 5195 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja210587q Morales , M . , Colicos , M . A . , and Goda , Y . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent regulation of neurotransmitter release at central synapses . Neuron 27 , 539 – 550 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 00064 - 67 Moutel , S . , Bery , N . , Bernard , V . , Keller , L . , Lemesre , E . , de Marco , A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . NaLi - H1 : a universal synthetic library of humanized nanobodies providing highly functional antibodies and intrabodies . Elife 5 : e16228 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 16228 Mundel , P . , Heid , H . W . , Mundel , T . M . , Krüger , M . , Reiser , J . , and Kriz , W . ( 1997 ) . Synaptopodin : an actin - associated protein in telencephalic dendrites and renal podocytes . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 193 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 139 . 1 . 193 Munsie , L . N . , Caron , N . , Desmond , C . R . , and Truant , R . ( 2009 ) . Lifeact cannot visualize some forms of stress - induced twisted F - actin . Nat . Methods 6 : 317 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth0509 - 317 Nagai , T . , Yamada , S . , Tominaga , T . , Ichikawa , M . , and Miyawaki , A . ( 2004 ) . Expanded dynamic range of ﬂuorescent indicators for Ca2 + by circularly permuted yellow ﬂuorescent proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 10554 – 10559 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0400417101 Nair , D . , Hosy , E . , Petersen , J . D . , Constals , A . , Giannone , G . , Choquet , D . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Super - resolution imaging reveals that AMPA receptors inside synapses are dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95 . J . Neurosci . 33 , 13204 – 13224 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2381 - 12 . 2013 Nakai , J . , Ohkura , M . , and Imoto , K . ( 2001 ) . A high signal - to - noise Ca 2 + probe composed of a single green ﬂuorescent protein . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 , 137 – 141 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 84397 Neupane , B . , Jin , T . , Mellor , L . F . , Loboa , E . G . , Ligler , F . S . , and Wang , G . ( 2015 ) . Continuous - wave stimulated emission depletion microscope for imaging actin cytoskeleton in ﬁxed and live cells . Sensors 15 , 24178 – 24190 . doi : 10 . 3390 / s150924178 Nicke , A . , Wonnacott , S . , and Lewis , R . J . ( 2004 ) . α - Conotoxins as tools for the elucidation of structure and function of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes . Eur . J . Biochem . 271 , 2305 – 2319 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1432 - 1033 . 2004 . 04145 . x Nielsen , K . J . , Schroeder , T . , and Lewis , R . ( 2000 ) . Structure – activity relationships of ω - conotoxins at N - type voltage - sensitive calcium channels . J . Mol . Recognit . 13 , 55 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( sici ) 1099 - 1352 ( 200003 / 04 ) 13 : 2 < 55 : : aid - jmr488 > 3 . 0 . co ; 2 - o Nishimune , H . , Badawi , Y . , Mori , S . , and Shigemoto , K . ( 2016 ) . Dual - color STED microscopy reveals a sandwich structure of bassoon and Piccolo in active zones of adult and aged mice . Sci . Rep . 6 : 27935 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep27935 Okumoto , S . , Looger , L . L . , Micheva , K . D . , Reimer , R . J . , Smith , S . J . , andFrommer , W . B . ( 2005 ) . Detection of glutamate release from neurons by genetically encoded surface - displayed FRET nanosensors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 8740 – 8745 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0503274102 Orth , C . B . , Vlachos , A . , Turco , D . D . , Burbach , G . J . , Haas , C . A . , Mundel , P . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Lamina - speciﬁc distribution of synaptopodin , an actin - associated molecule essential for the spine apparatus , in identiﬁed principal cell dendrites of the mouse hippocampus . J . Comp . Neurol . 487 , 227 – 239 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cne . 20539 Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mader , C . C . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Arias , M . , Chen , X . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Cortactin regulates coﬁlin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 571 – 587 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200812176 Paknikar , A . K . , Eltzner , B . , and Köster , S . ( 2019 ) . Direct characterization of cytoskeletal reorganization during blood platelet spreading . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 144 , 166 – 176 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . pbiomolbio . 2018 . 05 . 001 Palay , S . L . ( 1956 ) . Synapses in the central nervous system . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 2 , 193 – 202 . Pan , L . , Yan , R . , Li , W . , and Xu , K . ( 2018 ) . Super - resolution microscopy reveals the native ultrastructure of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton . Cell Rep . 22 , 1151 – 1158 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2017 . 12 . 107 Panza , P . , Maier , J . , Schmees , C . , Rothbauer , U . , and Söllner , C . ( 2015 ) . Live imaging of endogenous protein dynamics in zebraﬁsh using chromobodies . Development 142 , 1879 – 1884 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 118943 Paredes , R . M . , Etzler , J . C . , Watts , L . T . , and Lechleiter , J . D . ( 2008 ) . Chemical calcium indicators . Methods 46 , 143 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2008 . 09 . 025 Park , H . , Li , Y . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2012 ) . Inﬂuence of synaptic vesicle position on release probability and exocytotic fusion mode . Science 335 , 1362 – 1366 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1216937 Patel , S . , Fok , S . Y . Y . , Stefen , H . , Tomani´c , T . , Pari´c , E . , Herold , R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Functional characterisation of ﬁlamentous actin probe expression in neuronal cells . PLoS One 12 : e0187979 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187979 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 20 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 21 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Patrizio , A . , Renner , M . , Pizzarelli , R . , Triller , A . , and Specht , C . G . ( 2017 ) . Alpha subunit - dependent glycine receptor clustering and regulation of synaptic receptor numbers . Sci . Rep . 7 : 10899 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 11264 - 3 Pereira , P . M . , Albrecht , D . , Culley , S . , Jacobs , C . , Marsh , M . , Mercer , J . , etal . ( 2019 ) . Fix your membrane receptor imaging : actin cytoskeleton and CD4 membrane organization disruption by chemical ﬁxation . Front . Immunol . 10 : 675 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2019 . 00675 Perkins , G . A . , Tjong , J . , Brown , J . M . , Poquiz , P . H . , Scott , R . T . , Kolson , D . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . The micro - architecture of mitochondria at active zones : electron tomography reveals novel anchoring scaﬀolds and cristae structured for high - rate metabolism . J . Neurosci . 30 , 1015 – 1026 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 1517 - 09 . 2010 Pleiner , T . , Bates , M . , and Görlich , D . ( 2018 ) . A toolbox of anti – mouse and anti – rabbit IgG secondary nanobodies . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 1143 – 1154 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201709115 Plessner , M . , Melak , M . , Chinchilla , P . , Baarlink , C . , and Grosse , R . ( 2015 ) . Nuclear F - actin formation and reorganization upon cell spreading . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 11209 – 11216 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 627166 Poot , M . , Zhang , Y . Z . , Krämer , J . A . , Wells , K . S . , Jones , L . J . , Hanzel , D . K . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Analysis of mitochondrial morphology and function with novel ﬁxable ﬂuorescent stains . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 , 1363 – 1372 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 44 . 12 . 8985128 Pyle , J . L . , Kavalali , E . T . , Piedras - Rentería , E . S . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2000 ) . Rapid reuse of readily releasable pool vesicles at hippocampal synapses . Neuron 28 , 221 – 231 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 00098 - 2 Qian , Y . , Piatkevich , K . D . , Mc Larney , B . , Abdelfattah , A . S . , Mehta , S . , Murdock , M . H . , etal . ( 2019 ) . Ageneticallyencodednear - infraredﬂuorescentcalciumion indicator . Nat . Methods 16 , 171 – 174 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 018 - 0294 - 6 Qu , Y . , Hahn , I . , Webb , S . E . D . , Pearce , S . P . , and Prokop , A . ( 2016 ) . Periodic actin structures in neuronal axons are required to maintain microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 296 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e16 - 10 - 0727 Rácz , B . L . , and Weinberg , R . J . ( 2013 ) . Microdomains in forebrain spines : an ultrastructural perspective . Mol . Neurobiol . 47 , 77 – 89 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12035 - 012 - 8345 - y Rankin , B . R . , Kellner , R . R . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2008 ) . Stimulated - emission - depletion microscopy with a multicolor stimulated - Raman - scattering light source . Opt . Lett . 33 , 2491 – 2493 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OL . 33 . 002491 Rego , E . H . , Shao , L . , Macklin , J . J . , Winoto , L . , Johansson , G . A . , Kamps - Hughes , N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Nonlinear structured - illumination microscopy with a photoswitchable protein reveals cellular structures at 50 - nm resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , E135 – E143 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1107547108 Revelo , N . H . , Kamin , D . , Truckenbrodt , S . , Wong , A . B . , Reuter - Jessen , K . , Reisinger , E . , et al . ( 2014 ) . A new probe for super - resolution imaging of membranes elucidates traﬃcking pathways . J . Cell Biol . 205 , 591 – 606 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201402066 Richards , D . A . , Guatimosim , C . , and Betz , W . J . ( 2000 ) . Two endocytic recycling routes selectively ﬁll two vesicle pools in frog motor nerve terminals . Neuron 27 , 551 – 559 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 00065 - 9 Richards , D . A . , Rizzoli , S . O . , and Betz , W . J . ( 2004 ) . Eﬀects of wortmannin and latrunculinaonslowendocytosisatthefrogneuromuscularjunction . J . Physiol . 557 , 77 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1113 / jphysiol . 2004 . 062158 Richter , K . N . , Revelo , N . H . , Seitz , K . J . , Helm , M . S . , Sarkar , D . , Saleeb , R . S . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Glyoxal as an alternative ﬁxative to formaldehyde in immunostaining and super - resolution microscopy . EMBO J . 37 , 139 – 159 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201695709 Riedl , J . , Crevenna , A . H . , Kessenbrock , K . , Yu , J . H . , Neukirchen , D . , Bista , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1220 Riedl , J . , Flynn , K . C . , Raducanu , A . , Gärtner , F . , Beck , G . , Bösl , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat . Methods 7 , 168 – 169 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth0310 - 168 Ries , J . , Kaplan , C . , Platonova , E . , Eghlidi , H . , and Ewers , H . ( 2012 ) . A simple , versatile method for GFP - based super - resolution microscopy via nanobodies . Nat . Methods 9 , 582 – 584 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1991 Rinnerthaler , G . , Geiger , B . , and Small , J . V . ( 1988 ) . Contact formation during ﬁbroblast locomotion : involvement of membrane ruﬄes and microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 747 – 760 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 106 . 3 . 747 Robison , P . , Caporizzo , M . A . , Ahmadzadeh , H . , Bogush , A . I . , Chen , C . Y . , Margulies , K . B . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Detyrosinated microtubules buckle and bear load in contracting cardiomyocytes . Science 352 : aaf0659 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaf0659 Rocchetti , A . , Hawes , C . , and Kriechbaumer , V . ( 2014 ) . Fluorescent labelling of the actin cytoskeleton in plants using a cameloid antibody . Plant Methods 10 : 12 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1746 - 4811 - 10 - 12 Römer , W . , Pontani , L . - L . , Sorre , B . , Rentero , C . , Berland , L . , Chambon , V . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 01 . 010 Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2006 ) . Sub - diﬀraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 , 793 – 795 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth929 Sanders , T . A . , Llagostera , E . , and Barna , M . ( 2013 ) . Specialized ﬁlopodia direct long - range transport of SHH during vertebrate tissue patterning . Nature 497 , 628 – 632 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12157 Sankaranarayanan , S . , Atluri , P . P . , and Ryan , T . A . ( 2003 ) . Actin has a molecular scaﬀolding , not propulsive , role in presynaptic function . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 127 – 135 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn1002 Sankaranarayanan , S . , De Angelis , D . , Rothman , J . E . , and Ryan , T . A . ( 2000 ) . The use of pHluorins for optical measurements of presynaptic activity . Biophys . J . 79 , 2199 – 2208 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 00 ) 76 468 - X Sara , Y . , Virmani , T . , Deák , F . , Liu , X . , and Kavalali , E . T . ( 2005 ) . An isolated pool of vesicles recycles at rest and drives spontaneous neurotransmission . Neuron 45 , 563 – 573 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2004 . 12 . 056 Scaduto , R . C . , and Grotyohann , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Measurement of mitochondrial membrane potential using ﬂuorescent rhodamine derivatives . Biophys . J . 76 , 469 – 477 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 99 ) 77214 - 0 Schapitz , I . U . , Behrend , B . , Pechmann , Y . , Lappe - Siefke , C . , Kneussel , S . J . , Wallace , K . E . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Neuroligin 1 is dynamically exchanged at postsynaptic sites . J . Neurosci . 30 , 12733 – 12744 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0896 - 10 . 2010 Schell , M . J . , Erneux , C . , and Irvine , R . F . ( 2001 ) . Inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - Kinase a associates with f - actin and dendritic spines via its N terminus . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 37537 – 37546 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M104101200 Schenck , S . , Kunz , L . , Sahlender , D . , Pardon , E . , Geertsma , E . R . , Savtchouk , I . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Generation and characterization of anti - VGLUT nanobodies acting as inhibitors of transport . Biochemistry 56 , 3962 – 3971 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acs . biochem . 7b00436 Schikorski , T . , and Stevens , C . F . ( 1997 ) . Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of hippocampal excitatory synapses . J . Neurosci . 17 , 5858 – 5867 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 17 - 15 - 05858 . 1997 Schoen , M . , Reichel , J . M . , Demestre , M . , Putz , S . , Deshpande , D . , Proepper , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Super - resolution microscopy reveals presynaptic localization of the ALS / FTD related protein fus in hippocampal neurons . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 9 : 496 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncel . 2015 . 00496 Sekhar , A . R . , Mallik , B . , Kumar , V . , and Sankar , J . ( 2019 ) . A cell - permeant small molecule for the super - resolution imaging of the endoplasmic reticulum in live cells . Org . Biomol . Chem . 17 , 3732 – 3736 . doi : 10 . 1039 / C9OB00408D Sekine - Aizawa , Y . , and Huganir , R . L . ( 2004 ) . Imaging of receptor traﬃcking by using α - bungarotoxin - binding - site - tagged receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 17114 – 17119 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0407563101 Sharonov , A . , and Hochstrasser , R . M . ( 2006 ) . Wide - ﬁeld subdiﬀraction imaging by accumulated binding of diﬀusing probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 18911 – 18916 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0609643104 Shimomura , O . , Johnson , F . H . , and Saiga , Y . ( 1962 ) . Extraction , puriﬁcation and properties of aequorin , a bioluminescent protein from the luminous hydromedusan , aequorea . J . Cell . Comp . Physiol . 59 , 223 – 239 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 1030590302 Shon , K . - J . , Stocker , M . , Terlau , H . , Stühmer , W . , Jacobsen , R . , Walker , C . , et al . ( 1998 ) . κ - conotoxin pviia is a peptide inhibiting theshaker K + channel . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 33 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 1 . 33 Shupliakov , O . , Bloom , O . , Gustafsson , J . S . , Kjaerulﬀ , O . , Low , P . , Tomilin , N . , etal . ( 2002 ) . Impaired recycling of synaptic vesicles after acute perturbation of the presynaptic actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 14476 – 14481 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 212381799 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 21 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 22 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Sidenstein , S . C . , D’Este , E . , Böhm , M . J . , Danzl , J . G . , Belov , V . N . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Multicolour multilevel STED nanoscopy of actin / spectrin organization at synapses . Sci . Rep . 6 : 26725 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep26725 Small , J . V . ( 1988 ) . The actin cytoskeleton . Electron Microsc . Rev . 1 , 155 – 174 . Smith , A . J . , Taneja , T . K . , Mankouri , J . , and Sivaprasadarao , A . ( 2007 ) . Molecular cell biology of KATP channels : implications for neonatal diabetes . Expert Rev . Mol . Med . 9 , 1 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S1462399407000403 Spacek , J . , and Harris , K . M . ( 1997 ) . Three - dimensional organization of smooth endoplasmic reticulum in hippocampal CA1 dendrites and dendritic spines of the immature and mature rat . J . Neurosci . 17 , 190 – 203 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 17 - 01 - 00190 . 1997 Specht , C . G . , Izeddin , I . , Rodriguez , P . C . , ElBeheiry , M . , Rostaing , P . , Darzacq , X . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Quantitative nanoscopy of inhibitory synapses : counting gephyrin molecules and receptor binding sites . Neuron 79 , 308 – 321 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2013 . 05 . 013 Spracklen , A . J . , Fagan , T . N . , Lovander , K . E . , and Tootle , T . L . ( 2014 ) . The pros and cons of common actin labeling tools for visualizing actin dynamics during Drosophila oogenesis . Dev . Biol . 393 , 209 – 226 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2014 . 06 . 022 Stepanova , T . , Slemmer , J . , Hoogenraad , C . C . , Lansbergen , G . , Dortland , B . , De Zeeuw , C . I . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Visualization of microtubule growth in cultured neurons via the use of EB3 - GFP ( end - binding protein 3 - green ﬂuorescent protein ) . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2655 – 2664 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 23 - 07 - 02655 . 2003 St - Pierre , F . , Chavarha , M . , andLin , M . Z . ( 2015 ) . Designsandsensingmechanisms of genetically encoded ﬂuorescent voltage indicators . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 27 , 31 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cbpa . 2015 . 05 . 003 Subach , O . M . , Barykina , N . V . , Anokhin , K . V . , Piatkevich , K . D . , and Subach , F . V . ( 2019 ) . Near - infraredgeneticallyencodedpositivecalciumindicatorbased on GAF - FP bacterial phytochrome . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 20 : E3488 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms20143488 Südhof , T . C . ( 2012 ) . The presynaptic active zone . Neuron 75 , 11 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 06 . 012 Takahashi , A . , Camacho , P . , Lechleiter , J . D . , and Herman , B . ( 1999 ) . Measurement ofintracellularcalcium . Physiol . Rev . 79 , 1089 – 1125 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 1999 . 79 . 4 . 1089 Tao - Cheng , J . - H . , Thein , S . , Yang , Y . , Reese , T . S . , and Gallant , P . E . ( 2014 ) . Homer is concentrated at the postsynaptic density and does not redistribute after acute synaptic stimulation . Neuroscience 266 , 80 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroscience . 2014 . 01 . 066 Tardin , C . , Cognet , L . , Bats , C . , Lounis , B . , and Choquet , D . ( 2003 ) . Direct imaging of lateral movements of AMPA receptors inside synapses . EMBO J . 22 , 4656 – 4665 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg463 Taylor , M . J . , Lampe , M . , and Merriﬁeld , C . J . ( 2012 ) . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 10 : e1001302 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001302 Taylor , R . D . , Heine , M . , Emptage , N . J . , and Andreae , L . C . ( 2018 ) . Neuronal receptors display cytoskeleton - independent directed motion on the plasma membrane . iScience 10 , 234 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . isci . 2018 . 12 . 001 Testa , I . , Urban , N . T . , Jakobs , S . , Eggeling , C . , Willig , K . I . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2012 ) . Nanoscopy of living brain slices with low light levels . Neuron 75 , 992 – 1000 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 07 . 028 Testa , I . , Wurm , C . A . , Medda , R . , Rothermel , E . , von Middendorf , C . , Fölling , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . multicolor ﬂuorescence nanoscopy in ﬁxed and living cells by exciting conventional ﬂuorophores with a single wavelength . Biophys . J . 99 , 2686 – 2694 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 012 Theg , D . E . ( 1964 ) . Cytoplasmic microtubules in diﬀerent animal cells . J . Cell Biol . 23 , 265 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 23 . 2 . 265 Thevathasan , J . V . , Kahnwald , M . , Cie´sliñski , K . , Hoess , P . , Peneti , S . K . , Reitberger , M . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Nuclear pores as versatile reference standards for quantitative superresolution microscopy . bioRxiv 582668 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 582668 Tiede , C . , Bedford , R . , Heseltine , S . J . , Smith , G . , Wijetunga , I . , Ross , R . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Aﬃmer proteins are versatile and renewable aﬃnity reagents . ELIFE 6 : e24903 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 24903 Torregrosa - Hetland , C . J . , Villanueva , J . , Garcia - Martínez , V . , Expósito - Romero , G . , Francés , M . , del , M . , etal . ( 2013 ) . CorticalF - actinaﬀectsthelocalizationand dynamics of SNAP - 25 membrane clusters in chromaﬃn cells . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 45 , 583 – 592 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2012 . 11 . 021 Truckenbrodt , S . , Maidorn , M . , Crzan , D . , Wildhagen , H . , Kabatas , S . , and Rizzoli , S . O . ( 2018a ) . X10 expansion microscopy enables 25 - nm resolution on conventional microscopes . EMBO Rep . 19 : e45836 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embr . 201845836 Truckenbrodt , S . , Viplav , A . , Jähne , S . , Vogts , A . , Denker , A . , Wildhagen , H . , et al . ( 2018b ) . Newly produced synaptic vesicle proteins are preferentially used in synaptic transmission . EMBO J . 37 : e98044 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 2017 98044 Tucker , K . R . , Cavolo , S . L . , and Levitan , E . S . ( 2016 ) . Elevated mitochondria - coupled NAD ( P ) H in endoplasmic reticulum of dopamine neurons . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 3214 – 3220 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 07 - 0479 Urban , N . T . , Willig , K . I . , Hell , S . W . , and Nägerl , U . V . ( 2011 ) . STED nanoscopy of actin dynamics in synapses deep inside living brain slices . Biophys . J . 101 , 1277 – 1284 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 07 . 027 van de Linde , S . , Löschberger , A . , Klein , T . , Heidbreder , M . , Wolter , S . , Heilemann , M . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy with standard ﬂuorescent probes . Nat . Protoc . 6 , 991 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 336 van den Dries , K . , Schwartz , S . L . , Byars , J . , Meddens , M . B . , Bolomini - Vittori , M . , Lidke , D . S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Dual - color superresolution microscopy reveals nanoscale organization of mechanosensory podosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 2112 – 2123 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 12 - 0856 Vassilopoulos , S . , Gibaud , S . , Jimenez , A . , Caillol , G . , and Leterrier , C . ( 2019 ) . Ultrastructure of the axonal periodic scaﬀold reveals a braid - like organization of actin rings . bioRxiv 636217 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 636217 Vidali , L . , Rounds , C . M . , Hepler , P . K . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2009 ) . Lifeact - mEGFP reveals a dynamic apical F - Actin network in tip growing plant cells . PLoS One 4 : e5744 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0005744 Vincke , C . , and Muyldermans , S . ( 2012 ) . Introduction to heavy chain antibodies and derived Nanobodies . Methods Mol . Biol . 911 , 15 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 61779 - 968 - 6 _ 2 Virant , D . , Traenkle , B . , Maier , J . , Kaiser , P . D . , Bodenhöfer , M . , Schmees , C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . A peptide tag - speciﬁc nanobody enables high - quality labeling for dSTORM imaging . Nat . Commun . 9 : 930 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 03191 - 2 Visegrády , B . , Lorinczy , D . , Hild , G . , Somogyi , B . , andNyitrai , M . ( 2004 ) . Theeﬀect of phalloidin and jasplakinolide on the ﬂexibility and thermal stability of actin ﬁlaments . FEBS Lett . 565 , 163 – 166 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2004 . 03 . 096 Vishwanath , V . A . , and McIntosh , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Synthesis of ﬂuorescent analogs of α - conotoxin MII . Bioconjug . Chem . 17 , 1612 – 1617 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bc060163y Vlachos , A . , Korkotian , E . , Schonfeld , E . , Copanaki , E . , Deller , T . , and Segal , M . ( 2009 ) . Synaptopodin regulates plasticity of dendritic spines in hippocampal neurons . J . Neurosci . 29 , 1017 – 1033 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 5528 - 08 . 2009 Wang , L . , Dumoulin , A . , Renner , M . , Triller , A . , and Specht , C . G . ( 2016 ) . The role of synaptopodin in membrane protein diﬀusion in the dendritic spine neck . PLoS One 11 : e0148310 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0148310 Wang , L . L . , Lee , K . - T . , Jung , K . - W . , Lee , D . - G . , and Bahn , Y . - S . ( 2018 ) . The novel microtubule - associated CAP - glycine protein Cgp1 governs growth , diﬀerentiation , andvirulenceof Cryptococcusneoformans . Virulence 9 , 566 – 584 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 21505594 . 2017 . 1423189 Wegner , W . , Ilgen , P . , Gregor , C . , vanDort , J . , Mott , A . C . , Steﬀens , H . , etal . ( 2017 ) . In vivo mouse and live cell STED microscopy of neuronal actin plasticity using far - red emitting ﬂuorescent proteins . Sci . Rep . 7 : 11781 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 11827 - 4 Wehland , J . , Osborn , M . , and Weber , K . ( 1977 ) . Phalloidin - induced actin polymerizationinthecytoplasmofculturedcellsinterfereswithcelllocomotionandgrowth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 74 , 5613 – 5617 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 74 . 12 . 5613 Westphal , M . , Jungbluth , A . , Heidecker , M . , Mühlbauer , B . , Heizer , C . , Schwartz , J . - M . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Microﬁlament dynamics during cell movement and chemotaxismonitoredusingaGFP – actinfusionprotein . Curr . Biol . 7 , 176 – 183 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 97 ) 70088 - 5 Whelan , D . R . , and Bell , T . D . M . ( 2015 ) . Image artifacts in single molecule localization microscopy : why optimization of sample preparation protocols matters . Sci . Rep . 5 : 7924 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep07924 Wiederschain , G . Ya . ( 2011 ) . The molecular probes handbook . A guide to ﬂuorescent probes and labeling technologies . Biochem . Mosc . 76 , 1276 – 1276 . doi : 10 . 1134 / S0006297911110101 Wienisch , M . , and Klingauf , J . ( 2006 ) . Vesicular proteins exocytosed and subsequently retrieved by compensatory endocytosis are nonidentical . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 1019 – 1027 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn1739 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 22 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23 fnsyn - 11 - 00023 August 22 , 2019 Time : 17 : 44 # 23 Reshetniak and Rizzoli Interrogating Synaptic Architecture Wildanger , D . , Bückers , J . , Westphal , V . , Hell , S . W . , and Kastrup , L . ( 2009a ) . A STED microscope aligned by design . Opt . Express 17 , 16100 – 16110 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 17 . 016100 Wildanger , D . , Medda , R . , Kastrup , L . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2009b ) . A compact STED microscope providing 3D nanoscale resolution . J . Microsc . 236 , 35 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2009 . 03188 . x Wilhelm , B . G . , Mandad , S . , Truckenbrodt , S . , Kröhnert , K . , Schäfer , C . , Rammner , B . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Composition of isolated synaptic boutons reveals the amounts of vesicle traﬃcking proteins . Science 344 , 1023 – 1028 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1252884 Wilkins , M . E . , Li , X . , and Smart , T . G . ( 2008 ) . Tracking Cell Surface GABAB receptors using an α - bungarotoxin tag . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 34745 – 34752 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M803197200 Wilson , N . R . , Kang , J . , Hueske , E . V . , Leung , T . , Varoqui , H . , Murnick , J . G . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Presynaptic regulation of quantal size by the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT1 . J . Neurosci . 25 , 6221 – 6234 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3003 - 04 . 2005 Winans , A . M . , Collins , S . R . , andMeyer , T . ( 2016 ) . Wavesofactinandmicrotubule polymerization drive microtubule - based transport and neurite growth before single axon formation . ELIFE 5 : e12387 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 12387 Woodford , C . R . , Frady , E . P . , Smith , R . S . , Morey , B . , Canzi , G . , Palida , S . F . , et al . ( 2015 ) . ImprovedPeTmoleculesforopticallysensingvoltageinneurons . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 137 , 1817 – 1824 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja510602z Wulf , E . , Deboben , A . , Bautz , F . A . , Faulstich , H . , and Wieland , T . ( 1979 ) . Fluorescent phallotoxin , a tool for the visualization of cellular actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 76 , 4498 – 4502 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 76 . 9 . 4498 Xu , K . , Zhong , G . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2013 ) . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science 339 , 452 – 456 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1232251 Xu , L . , Rönnlund , D . , Aspenström , P . , Braun , L . J . , Gad , A . K . B . , and Widengren , J . ( 2016 ) . Resolution , target density and labeling eﬀects in colocalization studies - suppression of false positives by nanoscopy and modiﬁed algorithms . FEBS J . 283 , 882 – 898 . doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 13652 Yau , K . W . , Schätzle , P . , Tortosa , E . , Pagès , S . , Holtmaat , A . , Kapitein , L . C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Dendrites in vitro and in vivo contain microtubules of opposite polarity and axon formation correlates with uniform plus - end - out microtubule orientation . J . Neurosci . 36 , 1071 – 1085 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2430 - 15 . 2016 Yi , J . , Wu , X . S . , Crites , T . , and Hammer , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Actin retrograde ﬂow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 834 – 852 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e11 - 08 - 0731 Zarrouk , A . , Nury , T . , Dauphin , A . , Frère , P . , Riedinger , J . - M . , Bachelet , C . - M . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Impact of C24 : 0 on actin - microtubule interaction in human neuronal SK - N - BE cells : evaluation by FRET confocal spectral imaging microscopy after dual staining with rhodamine - phalloidin and tubulin tracker green . Funct . Neurol . 30 , 33 – 46 . Zenisek , D . , Steyer , J . A . , and Almers , W . ( 2000 ) . Transport , capture and exocytosis of single synaptic vesicles at active zones . Nature 406 , 849 – 854 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35022500 Zenisek , D . , Steyer , J . A . , Feldman , M . E . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . A membrane marker leaves synaptic vesicles in milliseconds after exocytosis in retinal bipolar cells . Neuron 35 , 1085 – 1097 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 02 ) 00896 - 6 Zhang , Q . , Li , Y . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2009 ) . The dynamic control of kiss - and - run and vesicular reuse probed with single nanoparticles . Science 323 , 1448 – 1453 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1167373 Zhao , Y . , Araki , S . , Wu , J . , Teramoto , T . , Chang , Y . - F . , Nakano , M . , et al . ( 2011 ) . An expanded palette of genetically encoded Ca2 + indicators . Science 333 , 1888 – 1891 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1208592 Zhong , G . , He , J . , Zhou , R . , Lorenzo , D . , Babcock , H . P . , Bennett , V . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Developmental mechanism of the periodic membrane skeleton in axons . ELIFE 3 , e04581 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04581 Zhu , Y . , and Stevens , C . F . ( 2008 ) . Probing synaptic vesicle fusion by altering mechanical properties of the neuronal surface membrane . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 18018 – 18022 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0809714105 Zobel , T . , andBogdan , S . ( 2013 ) . Ahighresolutionviewoftheﬂyactincytoskeleton lackingafunctionalWAVEcomplex . J . Microsc . 251 , 224 – 231 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jmi . 12020 Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2019 Reshetniak and Rizzoli . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 23 August 2019 | Volume 11 | Article 23