Mechanisms and Future of Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Metastasis Tianhao Zhu 1 , 2 ‡ , Xunxia Bao 3 †‡ , Mingyu Chen 4 , Rui Lin 5 , Jianan Zhuyan 2 , Timing Zhen 3 , Kaichen Xing 3 , Wei Zhou 6 * and Sibo Zhu 1 * † 1 School of Life Sciences , Fudan University , Shanghai , China , 2 Shanghai Starriver Bilingual School , Shanghai , China , 3 Cinoasia Institute , Shanghai , China , 4 Department of Neurosurgery , Huashan Hospital , Shanghai , China , 5 Department of General Surgery , Tongji Hospital , School of Medicine , Tongji University Medical School , Shanghai , China , 6 Department of Emergency , Souths Campus , Renji Hospital , School of Medicine , Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Shanghai , China Lung cancer , renowned for its fast progression and metastatic potency , is rising to become a leading cause of death globally . It has been long observed that lung cancer is particularly ept in spawning distant metastasis at its early stages , and it can readily colonize virtually any human organ . In recent years , cancer research has shed light on why lung cancer is endowed with its exceptional ability to metastasize . In this review , we will take a comprehensive look at the current research on lung cancer metastasis , including molecular pathways , anatomical features and genetic traits that make lung cancer intrinsically metastatic , as we go from lung cancer ’ s general metastatic potential to the particular metastasis mechanisms in multiple organs . We highly concerned about the advanced discovery and development of lung cancer metastasis , indicating the importance of lung cancer speci ﬁ c gene mutations , heterogeneity or biomarker discovery , and discussing potential opportunities and challenges . We will also introduce some current treatments that targets certain metastatic strategies of non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) . Advances made in these regards could be critical to our current knowledge base of lung cancer metastasis . Keywords : non - small cell lung cancer , metastasis , treatment , mechanism , systematic literature review INTRODUCTION Lung cancer is notoriously known for its ability to spread readily in its early stages , as well as its potency to spread to a wide range of organs of vastly different anatomy and physiology . Since lung cancer patients are often diagnosed at an advanced stage , multiple metastases would have already developed , making targeted therapy extremely dif ﬁ cult and systemic therapy less effective . In recent years , studies conducted to uncover mechanisms behind lung cancer are rapidly increasing in numbers . We have learned that lung cancer cells often resist or even thrive under hypoxia , immune cells may be inactivated and manipulated by tumor cells , tumor cells can migrate through various ways , and the different mechanisms underlying lung metastasis of nearly every possible site . All the evidence piece together to reveal how complicated the concept of lung cancer metastasis is due to the numerous pathways involved in the process . In this review , we will discuss the general mechanisms of metastasis including hypoxia , immunocompromise , tumor cell migration . Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 1 Edited by : Antonella Zannetti , Italian National Research Council , Italy Reviewed by : Kuang - Ming Liao , Chi Mei Medical Center , Taiwan Eswari Dodagatta - Marri , University of California , San Francisco , United States * Correspondence : Sibo Zhu sibozhu @ fudan . edu . cn Wei Zhou zwsyn @ 126 . com † ORCID : Xunxia Bao orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 6085 - 7319 Sibo Zhu orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 4800 - 8987 ‡ These authors have contributed equally to this work Specialty section : This article was submitted to Molecular and Cellular Oncology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Oncology Received : 20 July 2020 Accepted : 14 October 2020 Published : 11 November 2020 Citation : Zhu T , Bao X , Chen M , Lin R , Zhuyan J , Zhen T , Xing K , Zhou W and Zhu S ( 2020 ) Mechanisms and Future of Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Metastasis . Front . Oncol . 10 : 585284 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2020 . 585284 REVIEW published : 11 November 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2020 . 585284 We shall track non - small - cell lung cancer from its primary tumor to its metastasis in the brain , the bone and the liver , which are the three most frequent sites of lung cancer metastasis . Pathology , molecular pathways and genetic characteristics of lung cancer metastasis to these organs form the bulk of our discussion . While current work of lung cancer metastasis will be reviewed with considerable depth , inferences and connections will also be frequently made to propose possible patterns of lung cancer metastasis . This review shall provide updated progress of lung cancer metastasis research , and give directions about relevant further studies . RESULTS General Metastatic Potential Once a cancerous cell mass has established itself , it must address a variety of environmental stress in order to support its rapid expansion as well as initiating processes that can potentially lead to metastasis . Such environmental stress includes a hypoxic stroma , a multitude of immune responses , and antagonistic local cell types that hinders its invasion . Then , tumor cells need to intravasate and survive the circulation to spawn metastasis in various organs . Through manipulation and cooperation , lung cancer cells are able to attain resistance to its hostile surroundings , even converting certain negative in ﬂ uences into signals bene ﬁ cial to its development , enemy into allies . Hypoxia Resilience Cancer cells , being relatively metabolically active , have a certain oxygen demand . If a tumor tissue is deprived of oxygen for a prolonged period of time , it could undergo necrosis . Unfortunately , due to their low level of vascularization , tumors are generally less oxygenated compared to their surrounding tissues when they ﬁ rst arise , which invariably leads to intratumor hypoxia . Hypoxia is one of the de ﬁ ning characteristics of lung cancer and indicates poor survival ( 1 ) . Although low oxygen availability in tumors reduces the effect of radiotherapy , it is also a limiting factor that severely limits tumor growth . It is estimated that tumor cells can only survive within 100 to 150 m M from a blood vessel , given that cells beyond this distance often suffer necrosis ( 2 ) . To overcome this limitation , lung cancer cells use several regulation mechanisms to avoid lethal hypoxia , while reaping the bene ﬁ ts of low - grade hypoxia which boosts metastasis potential . An intuitive approach for tumors to obtain adequate oxygen supply is by improving vascularization within the tumor mass through the process of angiogenesis . Several factors that facilitate this process has been identi ﬁ ed , some of which are frequently associated with lung cancer . Vascular endothelial growth factors ( VEGFs ) , for instance , can be secreted by tumor cells to stimulate blood vessel formation within the tumor mass . It was observed that hypoxia inducible factor ( HIF ) 1 a expression is positively correlated with VEGF expression , and the upregulation of HIF1 a and VEGF often implies poor prognosis in liver cancer ( 3 ) . Discovered in 1992 , HIF has been put under the spotlight as 2019 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine had recently been revealed , and emerges as a promising target for cancer therapy . Among the subtypes of VEGFs , VEGF - A is currently the most extensively studied and well understood . While it can form vasculatures in tumors to compensate for the oxygen demand , newly formed blood vessels are often abnormal in shape and function . Vessels are not neatly divided into arterioles , venules , and capillaries , and are shown to be leaky , even hemorrhagic in all stages of tumor ( 4 ) . Though the tumor is only getting a suboptimal supply of oxygen and nutrition , this slightly hypoxic environment does yield bene ﬁ ts for tumor cells . Furthermore , since newly formed vasculature is leaky , presumably because of VEGF1 - A ’ s participation in vascular permeability regulation , there ’ s an increased likelihood for tumor cells to enter these abnormal vessels early on in tumor progression , especially with increased interstitial pressure accompanied with hemorrhagic leakage . This helps explain why metastasis through blood circulation often occurs at an early stage in lung cancer . As demonstrated above , angiogenesis can only ful ﬁ ll a portion of a tumor ’ s oxygen demand . While tumors display signi ﬁ cant heterogeneity concerning spatial distribution of hypoxic regions , the vast majority of tumor cells are subsisting under non - lethal hypoxia ( 5 ) . This characteristic of the tumor microenvironment is shown to facilitate an array of processes contributive to enhanced metastatic potential . It is observed that Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition ( EMT ) is profoundly increased in hypoxic tumor tissues , and various mechanisms had been proposed since to explain this phenomenon . Beta - catenin is found to be accumulating in hypoxic tumor cell nucleus and is pinpointed as an agent that increases the expression of EMT - related genes ( 6 ) . One previous study reveals that beta - catenin enhances HIF - 1 mediated transcriptions , promoting tumor survival . This study also con ﬁ rms that beta - catenin signaling is Abbreviations : AKT , activation of protein kinase ; ALI , acute lung injury ; APC , antigen - presenting cell ; BBB , blood – brain barrier ; BMM , bone marrow macrophages ; CAA , cancer - associated adipocytes ; CAM , cellular adhesion molecules ; CLDN5 , claudin - 5 ; CTSK , cathepsin k ; CYLD , cylindromatosis ; DC , dendritic cells ; DDR1 , discoidin domain receptor 1 ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; ERG , ETS - related gene ; EMT , epithelial – mesenchymal transition ; ETosis , extracellular trap cell death ; FASN , fatty acid synthase ; HIF , hypoxia inducible factor ; HLA - E , human leukocyte antigen e ; IFN , interferons ; IL , interleukins ; IMA , invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma ; JAM , junctional adhesion molecules ; KP - 10 , kisspeptin - 10 ; LPS , lipopolysaccharide ; LSEC , liver sinusoidal endothelial cells ; MF , myo ﬁ broblasts ; miRNA , Micro - RNAs ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; MMP , metalloproteinases ; MSC , mesenchymal stem cells ; MAOA , monoamine oxidase A ; NACOS , N - acetylated COS ; NSCLC , non - small cell lung cancer ; NK , natural killer cells ; NO , nitric oxide ; OBs , osteoblasts ; OC , osteoclasts ; PD , polydatin ; PDL1 , programmed death - ligand 1 ; PD1 , programmed death receptor 1 ; p - PTEN , phosphorylation of the PTEN C - terminus ; PGE2 , prostaglandin E2 ; PTHrP , parathyroid hormone - related protein ; RA , reactive astrocytes ; ROS , reactive oxygen species ; RANKL , RANK ligand ; SCFA , short - chain fatty acids ; SDF - 1 , stromal cell - derived factor 1 ; SNX9 , nexin 9 ; Sfrps , secreted frizzled - related proteins ; sRNA , small RNA ; TADC , tumor - associated DCs ; TAM , tumor - associated macrophages ; TGF , tumor growth factors ; TJ , tight junctions ; TME , tumor microenvironment ; TNF , tumor necrosis factors ; Tregs , regulatory T cells ; TSP , thrombospondin ; VCAM - 1 , vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1 ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factors ; YY1 , yin yang 1 . Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 2 aberrant under hypoxia ( 7 ) . Recent studies have attempted to explain beta - catenin ’ s EMT inducing potential , and a link has been drawn between beta - catenin and Wnt pathway , known as Wnt / beta - catenin signaling . Through stabilizing beta - catenin and translocating it into the nucleus , hypoxia in adenocarcinoma cells in lungs eventually results in enhanced Wnt signaling activity . Research had shown that a disruption in regulated Wnt / beta - catenin ( 8 ) signaling could induce EMT in tumor cells , and it is proposed that it is caused by the loss of E - cadherin , which is detrimental to the maintenance of epithelial integrity ( 9 ) . Alternative mechanisms have also been proposed . A study in 2016 concludes that PTEN phosphatase activity can be altered under persistent hypoxia . PTEN phosphatase appears to inhibit EMT in tumor progression , while phosphorylation of the PTEN C - terminus ( p - PTEN ) leads to diminishing activity of PTEN phosphatase . Lung cancer cells exposed to hypoxia demonstrated sharp decrease in PTEN phosphatase and increase in p - PTEN , which accompanies a high rate of EMT ( 10 ) . TWIST , recently recognized as another crucial mediator of cancer metastasis , is shown to be in ﬂ uenced by a hypoxic microenvironment . TWIST negatively correlates with E - cadherin expression , while positively correlates with HIF1 - a expression . It is considered that HIF - 1 a derived from hypoxic environment enhances TWIST expression ( 11 ) . High - level expression of HIF - 1 a and TWIST , therefore , indicate increased EMT occurrence , metastasis likelihood and a poor prognosis ( 12 ) . EMT grants cancer cells higher mobility and stem - cell properties which both facilitate distant metastasis . Given how fundamental EMT is to most metastasis , hypoxia evidently contributes to the metastasis potential of lung cancer , possibly through multiple signaling pathways . Immunocompromise Aside from having to adapt to unfavorable oxygen status , tumor cells also need to fend off another major threat . Recognizing tumor cells as foreign , a myriad of immune cells will actively attack them upon contact , reducing the tumor ’ s capabilities to expand . In fact , the immune system is so ef ﬁ cient in performing its antitumoral functions that , if a detectable tumor does arise , its cells must have evaded local immunity ( 13 ) . Tumor cells develop specialized tactics against each component of the local immune system . The following paragraphs will explore the mechanisms tumor cells use to either evade or cooperate with various immune cells . Given the fact that cancer cells are still bodily cells in nature , they are most prone to attacks launched by members of cell - mediated immunity . One such attack is initiated by cytotoxic T cells ( CD8 + ) . CD8 + tumor - in ﬁ ltrating lymphocytes ( CD8 + TILs ) can in ﬁ ltrate into tumors and induce cytotoxic effects through secretion of cytokines , which triggers in ﬂ ammation and immune responses ( 14 ) . They can also secrete substances such as granzymes and perforins for immediate cytotoxic effect . Its presence is correlated with a better prognosis , but its function can be suppressed by several factors ( 15 ) . Programmed death - ligand 1 ( PDL1 ) - Programmed death receptor 1 ( PD1 ) pathway is shown to promote dysfunction in tumor - responding T cells in lung cancer patients ( 16 ) . Tumors cells expressed PDL1 can bind to PD1 on the surface of CD8 T cells , reducing its antitumoral effectiveness ( 17 ) . Immunomodulation therapies targeting this interaction in non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) shows promise to enhance therapeutic effects ( 18 ) . Apart from directly manipulating CD8 T cell functionality , tumor cells also utilize many indirect mechanisms with the end goal of suppressing CD8 T cell activity . Dendritic cells ( DC ) , a potent antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) is shown to play a role in immune suppression in lung cancer . DCs isolated from NSCLC display increased secretion of immunosuppressing molecules such as the aforementioned PDL1 ( 19 ) . DCs are heterogeneous in nature , which can be subdivided into tumor - associated DCs ( TADC ) , which orchestrates T cell antitumoral processes , and regulatory DCs , which accelerates tumor growth by immunosuppression ( 20 ) . Tumor cells take advantage of DCs ’ heterogeneity as well as its plasticity to alter the composition of DC pool , impairing the overall antigen - presenting ability of DCs while magnifying its protumorigenic effects ( 21 ) . Research also suggests that certain regulatory DCs also inhibit helper T cells ( CD4 + ) activity , which disable another antigen - presenting pathway , reducing CD8 + T cell activity further ( 22 ) . Regulatory T cells ( Tregs ) , which normally function as an immunosuppressing agent through expression of FOXP3 , acquire enhanced effectiveness in the tumor microenvironment ( TME ) . Similar to DCs , Tregs exhibit high heterogeneity and plasticity , constituting another pool of immune cells tumor can turn to its favor ( 23 ) . Tumors seem to possess the ability to chemically attract a subtype of Tregs known as FOXP3 ( + ) CD25 ( + ) CD4 ( + ) Treg , which differentiates into a subpopulation that suppresses effector T cells functions ( 24 ) . This is exempli ﬁ ed by a study involving 92 patients with NSCLC , which discovered increased Treg activity in intratumoral regions , including the overexpression of FOXP3 mRNA ( 25 ) . Increased level of FOXP3 is shown to enhance the viability and invasiveness of tumors in NSCLCs , thus Treg can be yet another link in immunity which lung cancer might exploit to promote its growth ( 26 ) . In conclusion , diminishing effect of CD8 + T cells caused by various mechanisms corresponds to greater invasiveness of lung cancer , giving it access to more capillary beds in the lungs , which increases likelihood of blood mediated metastasis . CD8 + T cells are not alone in the frontline battle against cancer . Natural Killer ( NK ) cells , which constitute a major part of the innate immune system , also have antitumorigenic capabilities . Unlike CD8 + T cells , which requires a round of clonal expansion before unleashing its cytotoxic effects , NK cells can directly kill tumor cells , such as through the secretion of TNF a . A study conducted on mice subjects concluded that lung resident NK cells have a dominant role in suppressing metastatic tumor growth in the lungs ( 27 ) . Numerous factors had been studied to establish pathways leading to NK cell exhaustion . Prostaglandin E2 ( PGE2 ) secreted by lung cancer cells is attributed to diminishing effect of NK cells in one study , which shows that a range of soluble factors including PGE2 can inhibit the release of perforins and granzymes produced by NK cells ( 28 ) . The loss of interleukin 2 ( IL2 ) is also considered as a Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 3 suppressive factor since IL2 is critical to triggering cytolytic activities in NK cells ( 29 ) . Human leukocyte antigen E ( HLA - E ) , a ligand overexpressed in tumor cells , can bind to inhibitory receptor NKG2A which dampens NK cell response to malignant growth ( 30 ) . In cisplatin - resistant lung cancer cases , a speci ﬁ c pathway is unmasked . Higher expression of fatty acid synthase ( FASN ) in cisplatin - resistant tumor cells signals the downstream molecule TGF b 1 , resulting in elevated PD - L1 expression that suppresses NK cell functions ( 31 ) . In short , through multiple signaling pathways , lung cancer cells evade the cytolytic effects of NK cells , potentially giving it a greater chance to survive at distant sites surveilled by NK cells . The last type of immune cells that will be discussed in this section are macrophages . Macrophages make up the majority of tumor - in ﬁ ltrating immune cells , often triggering local in ﬂ ammation ( 32 ) . The dual role of macrophage has been observed in tumor masses . Early on in tumor emergence , macrophages either engulf individual tumor cells or act as APCs to provoke immune response from CD8 + T cells . When CD8 + T cells eventually fail to mount an immune effect on the tumor , tumor - associated macrophages ( TAMs ) promote tumor growth by secreting growth factors or facilitating angiogenesis ( 33 ) . Although alternative classi ﬁ cations have been proposed , a binary system is still widely used , which subdivides macrophages into M1 and M2 types ( 34 ) . Inhibition of NOTCH - 1 is proposed as a possible pathway that enhances M2 differentiation in tumors . When notch - 1 is inhibited , enhanced M2 differentiation is observed ( 35 ) . One study clari ﬁ es individual effects M1 and M2 has on lung cancer development . Using lung cancer cell A549 , their experiments showed that M2 subtype promotes A549 invasion , while the M1 subtype inhibits angiogenesis in tumors ( 36 ) . The M2 subtype ’ s protumorigenic function is further proven in an experiment that uses b - elemene to inhibit M2 activity , resulting in suppressed tumor growth ( 37 ) . M2 macrophages are shown to have angiogenesis effects that M1 macrophages do not possess . FGF signaling for M2a and PlGF signaling for M2c are proposed as possible mechanisms behind the angiogenic effect of M2 macrophages ( 38 ) . Not only do M2 macrophages stimulate angiogenesis and suppress immune responses , they also prepare target organs for metastasis , as well as promoting intravasation of tumor cells ( 39 ) . Macrophages are also associated with EMT in tumor cells , since in ﬂ ammation is shown to be a key factor in inducing EMT . Given that certain macrophages , like M1 macrophages , are proin ﬂ ammatory , they might increase EMT occurrence in cancerous cells ( 40 ) . Another 2017 research concludes that M2 macrophages can induce EMT through the TGF - b / Smad2 signaling pathway . M2 macrophages secrete large amounts of TGF - b , which can induce EMT in lung alveolar epithelial cells . Speci ﬁ c changes in genetic expression include heightened a - SMA and lowered E - cadherin and CK18 , which contributes to cell mobility and the loss of epithelial adhesion ( 41 ) . Another Chinese team con ﬁ rms that E - cadherin level does correlate with TAMs density , and reveals that TAMs promote a certain type of EMT in lung adenocarcinoma through FUT4 / LeY - mediated fucosylation ( 42 ) . With angiogenetic and EMT capabilities combined , macrophages are a major candidate for facilitating lung cancer growth and metastasis . Cell Motility and Migration Rather than remaining stationary , many tumor cells turned to a nomadic lifestyle . Tumor cell migration often depends on the crosstalk of different mechanisms . In order to move around in its extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , tumor cells must make changes to themselves and cooperate with other cell types present in the local microenvironment . Better cell motility grants malignant cells enhanced potency to invade normal tissues , as well as a heightened chance of entering vasculature ( 43 ) . Tumor cells are not endowed with the ability to move on themselves at an early stage . Therefore , tumor cells must undergo signi ﬁ cant changes to enable movement . Cell membrane protrusion is one of the ﬁ rst characteristics of migratory tumor cells acquire . The formation of these protrusions , such as lamellipodia and invadopodia , is driven by the interaction between several proteins and cytoplasmic structures , one of them being the actin cytoskeleton ( 44 ) . The actin cytoskeleton requires actin - binding proteins to function , and some of these actin - binding proteins are shown to be correlated with cancer progression . A study in 2017 discovered that cortactin , an action - binding protein , is often overexpressed in tumors . Cortactin promotes tumor cell invasiveness by forming invadopodia and degrading surrounding ECM . It is believed that the overexpression of cortactin is caused by the ampli ﬁ cation of a chromosomal band ( 45 ) . Another study postulated that since actin and actin - binding protein are observed to be accumulating in tumor cell nucleus , they may alter gene expression , which could potentially explain the genetic ampli ﬁ cation observed in the previous study ( 46 ) . Actin has been linked to the formation of multiple membrane protrusions . One research suggests that cortactin and dynamin - 2 stabilize F - actin bundles in ﬁ lopodia in lung cancer cell line H1299 ( 47 ) . Furthermore , cortactin is also shown to participate in invadopodia formation . Inhibiting cortactin by miR - 182 negatively impacted invadopodia formation ( 48 ) . Cortactin is not the only protein that facilitates the acquisition of cell motility through membrane protrusions . The range of proteins participating in forming membrane protrusions is inconceivably large . Tks5 , an adapter protein that contributes to invadopodia formation , is shown to have increased expression in lung carcinoma . The overexpression of Tks5 is correlated with increased metastatic potential and worsened prognosis ( 49 ) . Another study in 2014 also identi ﬁ es Tks5 as a critical factor for invadopodia maturation , while pointing to cortactin and Tks4 for invadopodia initiation and function , respectively ( 50 ) . A study concerning invadopodia pinpointed b 3 integrin as indispensable to invadopodia ’ s formation and its ability to degrade the surrounding ECM . Increased b 3 integrin expression often indicate a greater probability of metastasis in lung cancer ( 51 ) . A decrease in nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) in invadopodia in NSCLC is correlated with tumor invasiveness . SNX9 normally inhibits invadopodia function by binding to TKS5 , therefore the depletion of Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 4 SNX9 result in increased degradation of ECM ( 52 ) . As demonstrated above , lung cancer cells may utilize a range of protein regulation to enhance its motility through the formation of membrane protrusions . Tumor cells can also steer cells in the ECM into their favor . Myo ﬁ broblasts ( MF ) , which normally participate in tissue repair , may cooperate with cancer and promote tumor cell migration ( 53 ) . TGF - b is shown to be involved in the creation of MF . One study established a positive feedback signaling loop formed by TGF - b and IL - 6 / JAK2 / STAT3 signaling pathways , which mediates interactions between MF and tumor cells ( 54 ) . Although TGF - b can exist in soluble form , it is also found on surfaces of exosomes produced by tumor cells , which might explain why MF presence is heightened in tumor ECM ( 55 ) . Exosomal TGF - b also has greater potency in signaling myo ﬁ broblastic differentiation . When exosomes are eliminated from cancer cell secretome , myo ﬁ broblastic differentiation ceases , leading to failure of stroma - assisted tumor growth ( 56 ) . MF express metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) , which can alter matrix proteins . Studies show that MMPs are highly expressed in lung tumors and are actively involved in ECM degradation ( 57 ) . A study performed on A549 NSCLC cells demonstrates that upregulation of MMP - 9 promotes tumor cell migration and increases invasiveness ( 58 ) . Moreover , using ECM degradation techniques such as MMPs , lung cancer cells can also degrade basement membrane of capillaries to intravasate . In conclusion , through cooperating with cells like MF , lung cancer cells can attain greater ef ﬁ ciency in degrading its surrounding ECM , allowing it to migrate with increased pace . Going Organ - Speci ﬁ c Lung cancer is distinctive from many other types of cancer regarding the wide range of organs it could metastasize to . The nervous system , bone , liver , respiratory system , and adrenal gland , ranked by overall incidence rate , are all colonizable by lung cancer metastasis , and such metastasis all foretell a worsened prognosis ( 59 ) . Understanding the mechanisms behind such a width of potential metastasis of lung cancer can unlock new therapeutic strategies to prevent the formation of metastasis . The following sections will concern less about why lung cancer metastasize frequently in general , but rather focus more on mechanisms that facilitate metastasis formation in individual organs favored by lung metastasis . Although the colonization of tumor cells in these organs follow a similar pattern , they involve vastly different molecular pathways based on their immediate surroundings ( Figure 1 ) . Brain Being one of the most protected organs in the body , the brain is surprisingly prone to lung cancer metastasis . There has been some advancement on decrypting the homing mechanisms used by tumor cells . CD15 is a cell adhesion molecule found overexpressed in metastatic NSCLC cells . Its binding counterpart , E - selectin ( CD62E ) , is also found overexpressed in hCMEC / D3 human brain endothelial cells through activation by TGF - a . This increases the chance for metastatic NSCLC cells to bind to the brain endothelium , which opens the gateway for tumor cell intrusion ( 60 ) . The effect of TGF - a can be dampened by EGFR speci ﬁ c tyrosine kinase inhibitor ( 61 ) , and is shown to be downregulated by Yin Yang 1 ( YY1 ) , a potential therapeutic target ( 62 ) . CD15 - CD62E interaction is exclusively found at adhesion sites of tumor cells and brain endothelium while blocking this interaction signi ﬁ cantly reduces cancer cell ’ s ability to attach to the brain endothelium ( 63 ) . Another study suggests that metastasizing lung cancer cells might secrete substances that damage endothelial glycocalyx . The glycocalyx serves as a protective covering of brain endothelium , which can have various adhesive interactions with tumor cells ( 64 ) . its degradation is correlated with enhanced E - selectin - mediated adhesion ( 65 ) . FIGURE 1 | Non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) metastasis stages . Tumors cells gain mobility and intravasate into bloodstream , where they will travel to distant organs and extravasate . Once in the target organ tissues , tumor cells adapt to their surroundings by resisting local immune attacks and cooperating with different cells . Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 5 Many other cellular adhesion molecules ( CAMs ) have also been identi ﬁ ed as relevant to brain metastasis , such as ALCAM / ALCAM and VLA - 4 / VCAM - 1 interactions identi ﬁ ed in a 2014 study ( 66 ) . Regardless of the strategy lung tumor cells use to adhere to brain endothelium , it now must breach it in order to get access to brain tissue . The endothelium , being part of the blood - brain - barrier ( BBB ) , relies on tight junctions ( TJs ) between endothelial cells to provide an isolated environment for the brain . Occludin , claudins , and junctional adhesion molecules ( JAMs ) are all proteins present in TJs ( 67 ) . Among those proteins , claudin – 5 ( CLDN5 ) is marked as pivotal in regulating BBB permeability . Reinforced expression of CLDN5 enhances BBB integrity and hinders invasion of lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells ( 68 ) . Some mechanisms have been proposed to explain the downregulation of CLDN5 expression frequently found associated with lung cancer brain metastasis . One study identi ﬁ es CLDN5 as a downstream target of ETS - related gene ( ERG ) . ERG normally reduces endothelial permeability , but its function can be repressed by in ﬂ ammatory signals , which could be secreted into circulation by tumors . ERG repression results in CLDN5 downregulation , increasing BBB permeability ( 69 ) . One such in ﬂ ammatory signal has been identi ﬁ ed . In ﬂ ammatory cytokine TNF - a acts through NF k B signaling to downregulate CLDN5 expression ( 70 ) . A multitude of natural product extracts , such as terpenes and phenolic compounds , were shown to be TNF - a inhibitors ( 71 ) . Asiaticoside , a triterpenoid , enhances endothelial integrity of blood vessels , reducing their permeability through inhibiting TNF - a ( 72 ) ( Figure 2 ) . After tumor cells breach the BBB , they enter the brain parenchyma densely packed with astrocytes and patrolled by microglia . Similar to their tactics used in invading lung tissues , tumor cells either evade or cooperate with local cell types . Astrocytes , glial cells specialized in nourishing neurons and maintaining ECM , secrete plasmin which suppresses brain metastasis . Tumors cells from metastatic lung cancers are found to express high levels of neuroserpins and serpin b 2 , which neutralizes death paracrine signals sent out by astrocytes ( 73 ) . Astrocytes aid metastasis formation mainly through two methods : Substance secretion and gap junction interactions ( 74 ) . A range of molecules secreted by reactive astrocytes ( RAs ) has been shown to correlate with lung cancer brain metastasis progression . Hyaluronic acid is found to promote lung cancer cell growth through the activation of protein kinase B ( AKT ) / mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) ( 75 ) . Endothelin - 1 ( ET - 1 ) also activates the AKT / MAPK pathway . Its expression is enhanced in astrocytes by the upregulation of IL - 6 and IL - 8 expression in tumor cells ( 76 ) . Polydatin ( PD ) inhibits MAPK , PI3K / AKT , and NF - k B pathways , and can also inhibit certain pro - in ﬂ ammatory cytokines , such as TNF - a , IL - 4 , IL - 1 b , and IL - 8 ( 77 ) . Benzyl sulforaphane and Macrolactin F show potential in suppressing AKT / MAPK pathway in the liver and the bone , respectively ( 78 , 79 ) . Previous research also con ﬁ rms that RAs produce IL - 6 , tumor necrosis factor - a ( TNF - a ) , and IL - 1 b , all of which promote lung cancer brain metastasis ( 80 ) . In another study , RAs secrete interferon - a ( IFN - a ) and tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) , which activates the STAT1 and NF - k B pathways in lung cancer cells residing in the brain ( 81 ) . Astrocytes can also directly alter its ECM under in ﬂ uence of cancer cells . MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 secreted by astrocytes are found responsible for facilitating lung and breast cancer brain metastasis progression , presumably by making the EMC more favorable for tumor cells ( 82 ) . Gap junctions formed between RAs and tumor cells also facilitates tumor growth . Survival genes such as GSTA5 , BCL2L1 , and TWIST1 are found to be upregulated in lung tumor cells that have formed gap junctions with astrocytes . The upregulation of these genes increases the chance of tumor cell survival and grants resistance to chemotherapy ( 83 ) . The mechanism behind such regulation via gap junction is revealed in a 2016 study , which discovered that small RNA ( sRNA ) is tranferred between cells through gap junctions , marking sRNA as possible agents released by astrocytes that upregulates survival genes in tumor cells ( 84 ) . Similar to astrocytes , microglia , immune cells found exclusively in the central nervous system , are also capable of FIGURE 2 | Blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) penetration . Lung cancer cells must breach BBB in order to access the brain parenchyma . The three general steps shown in this ﬁ gure are glycocalyx degradation , epithelial adhesion , and tight junction downregulation . Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 6 both tumorigenic and cytotoxic effects . Microglia can be broadly divided into pro - in ﬂ ammatory and anti - in ﬂ ammatory subtypes . Proin ﬂ ammatory microglia suppress metastasis formation , while its counterpart increases metastatic tumor burden ( 85 ) . Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) - activated microglia are cytotoxic to lung cancer cells by inducing apoptosis in them ( 86 ) . Its activation is also correlated with increased production of proin ﬂ ammatory cytokines ( 87 ) . Cancer cells counteract the threat posed by microglia by suppressing its pro - in ﬂ amotory properties . Studies show that Wnt pathways are central to the regulation of microglial functions . Some Wnt pathways were once considered proin ﬂ ammatory and thus unfavored for tumor growth . A 2011 study suggests that Wnt - 3A stimulation triggers IL - 6 , IL - 12 , and tumor necrosis factor a production in microglia , which are all strong proin ﬂ ammatory factors ( 88 ) . However , multiple subsequent studies reach differing conclusions . Wnt - 3A pathway is found to trigger the induction of M2 phenotype in microglia , which are anti - in ﬂ ammatory and favor tumorigenesis ( 89 ) . It is recognized as an oncogene , and its activation is correlated with Wnt - catenin pathway . Knocking down Wnt - 1 and Wnt - 3A suppresses tumor proliferation ( 90 ) . Other than Wnt - 3A , Wnt - 5A has also been shown to correlate with increased presence of TAMs , though the effect of WNT - 5A seems to be also pro - in ﬂ ammatory ( 91 ) . This complication of Wnt - 3A and Wnt - 5A effects can be potentially explained by a 2013 study . While Wnt - 3A and WNT - 5A alone upregulate proin ﬂ ammatory responses , the combination of Wnts and LPS serves anti - in ﬂ ammatory functions ( 92 ) . Tumor cells likely utilize this characteristic to favor their own growth by upregulating multiple Wnt pathways , amplifying the anti - in ﬂ ammatory and tumorigenic effects of microglia . Furthermore , Wnt / b - catenin signaling pathway , which has been discussed earlier in section 1 , play a pivotal role in microglia function in brain metastasis . Through Gastrodin mediation , Wnt / b - catenin signaling pathway can downregulate multiple in ﬂ ammatory factors such as TNF - a ( 93 ) . Given that Wnt / b - catenin interaction is highly pronounced in lung cancer cells , lung cancer cells might gain an advantage by using this interaction to cooperate with microglia , resulting in higher metastatic potential in the brain . Secreted frizzled - related proteins ( Sfrps ) demonstrate differential inhibition of Wnt - 3a activity ( 94 ) . A study in 2011 found that SFRP - 1 and the SFRP - like molecule V3Nter can inhibit b - catenin - activated tumor cells growth in vivo , though another study argues that sFRPs have dual effects on Wnt / b - catenin signaling depending on various factors ( 95 , 96 ) . With more research currently underway , much more will be uncovered about microglia ’ s role in lung cancer brain metastasis in the future ( Figure 3 ) . Bone At 39 % , bone metastasis is the most frequent site of metastasis of adenocarcinoma . The presence of bone metastasis also signals worse prognosis compared to other metastasis sites ( 59 ) . Multiple homing mechanisms have been revealed in lung cancer that metastasizes to the bone . In breast and prostate cancers , stromal cell - derived factor 1 ( SDF - 1 ) and its receptor CXCR4 are responsible for attracting tumor cells to the bone marrow ( 97 ) . This coincides with a study recently published in 2019 , which observed increased expression of CXCR4 in lung carcinoma ( 98 ) . It is not impossible that the overexpression of CXCR4 in lung cancer cells enabled better attachment of tumor cells to the bone . Kisspeptin - 10 ( KP - 10 ) can inhibit tumor cell invasion and EMT induced by SDF - 1 through down - regulating CXCR - 4 expression ( 99 ) . Recent studies also reveal that certain CXCR4 - targeting nanobodies inhibit CXCR4 - related functions , which may yet unravel another treatment option ( 100 ) . With striking resemblance to the aforementioned CXCR4 / SDF - 1 homing mechanism , CXCL10 / CXCR3 also emerge as a FIGURE 3 | Astrocyte and microglia . To survive and colonize the brain , lung cancer cells must interact with surrounding glial cells such as astrocytes and microglia . Through various mechanisms , cancer cells are able to withstand the threats and cooperate with glial cells . Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 7 potential homing mechanism used by lung adenocarcinoma . A 2012 study demonstrates that CXCL10 attracts CXCR3 - expressing tumor cells to the bone , though omitting its connection with lung cancer ( 101 ) . A French team discovered that a CXCL10 / CXCR3 - A autocrine loop exists in invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma ( IMA ) , in which CXCL10 upregulates CXCR3 - A ( 102 ) . It is thus possible that CXCL10 in the bone stroma may upregulate CXCR3 production in lung cancer cells , which in turn became more attracted to the bone . One con ﬁ rmed homing mechanism used by lung adenocarcinoma cells is discoidin domain receptor 1 ( DDR1 ) . DDR1 is a cell surface receptor that can bind to several types of collagens and enhance cell adhesion . It was observed back in 2010 that DDR1 upregulation is a frequent occurrence in invasive lung adenocarcinoma . Its upregulation is correlated with increased tumor invasiveness and worse prognosis , although the precise mechanisms were elusive ( 103 ) . The upregulation of DDR1 is found to be inducible by collagen I , which is a major component of osteons in the bone ( 104 ) . Lung cancer cells may express DDR1 when induced by collagen I in the bone , which completes its homing process . Disrupting DDR1 pathway signi ﬁ cantly reduced tumor - bone engagement , lowering cancer cell ’ s potential to metastasize to the bones ( 105 ) , and multiple means of doing so has been discovered . Tetrahydroisoquinoline - 7 - carboxamide based DDR1 inhibitor 7ae developed to treat acute lung injury ( ALI ) bind tightly to DDR1 , reducing its kinase activity ( 106 ) . Other studies reveal that celastrol downregulates E2F1 ( 107 ) , while E2F1 silencing downregulates the expression of DDR1 ( 108 ) . However , these studies are primarily concerned with osteosarcomas and hepatocellular carcinoma , therefore their existence in lung cancer bone metastasis awaits further validation . Maintenance of bone tissues requires cooperation between osteoblasts ( OBs ) and osteoclasts ( OCs ) . Cancer cells often hijack either OB or OC , forming osteoblastic or osteolytic lesions in bone tissues . Since osteoblastic lesions are infrequent in NSCLC bone metastasis , it will not be discussed in this article . In osteoclastic bone metastasis , which is most common in NSCLC , a “ tumor - OC cooperation ” is found . Tumor cells secrete pro - osteoclastogenic substances , while osteolysis generates substances that bene ﬁ t tumor growth ( 109 ) . One initiator of such a vicious circle is RANK ligand ( RANKL ) . RANKL has been demonstrated to be essential to osteolytic activities induced by NSCLC cells . The inhibition of RANKL reduced osteoclastogenesis stimulated by NSCLC cells , and metastasis progression is slowed , possibly due to fewer growth factors yielded from osteolysis ( 110 ) . A 2018 study con ﬁ rms this discovery using mouse models . RANKL expression is found in NSCLC in primary lung cancer , and it is correlated with enhanced tumor growth ( 111 ) . It is thus possible that NSCLC tumor cells present in the bones express RANKL , which enables osteolytic activities . With such a critical role in bone metastasis formation , RANKL is by far one of the most accurate predictors of bone response in patients with bone metastasis ( 112 ) . Multiple factors that are associated with RANKL expression in lung tumor cells have also been identi ﬁ ed . Thrombospondin ( TSP ) - 2 knockdown is correlated with the inhibition of osteolytic metastasis of lung cancer . It is proposed that TSP - 2 enhances osteoclastogenesis through RANKL dependent pathways ( 113 ) . RANKL can also upregulate Basigin - 2 , which induces MMPs and VEGF expression , contributing to lung cancer bone metastasis through osteoclastogenesis ( 114 ) . Extensive research has yielded numerous treatments that target RANKL , most of which are conducted quite recently . Estrogens and androgens are shown to inhibit OB - driven osteoclastogenesis ( 115 ) . A myriad of drugs , such as Baricitinib , Matrine , and Sciadopitysin all suppress RANKL - mediated osteoclastogenesis ( 116 – 118 ) . With extensive osteolysis underway , a range of tumor trophic substances will be released , one of which being transforming growth factor beta ( TGF b ) . TGF b is dysregulated in malignant cells , including lung cancer , and upregulation of TGF b in the ECM of lung cancer promotes NSCLC progression and invasion ( 119 ) . Not only does TGF b promote tumor cell proliferation , it also contributes to the vicious cycle by encouraging osteolysis . TGF b upregulates Gli2 , which in turn promotes osteolysis through increased secretion of osteolytic factors such as parathyroid hormone - related protein ( PTHrP ) ( 120 ) . In osteoclastic bone metastasis , micro - RNAs ( miRNAs ) also play an important role , acting as key regulators in bone metastasis progression . Most miRNAs discovered are found to be inhibitory , and very few are shown to be pro - metastasis . One such miRNA is miR - 326 , which is found to correlate strongly with tumor burden in lung cancer bone metastasis ( 121 ) . Serum microRNA - 139 - 5p expression in mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) , progenitors of OBs , is sharply reduced when exposed to lung cancer cells A549 and L9981 . The downregulation of microRNA - 139 - 5p is correlated to increased osteolysis ( 122 ) . miR - 33a , which suppresses bone metastasis , is downregulated in lung cancer cells . Decreased miR - 33a expression is correlated with increased PTHrP expression and RANKL production , both of which contribute to osteolysis ( 123 ) . In conclusion , NSCLC cells manipulate OCs through secretion of pro - osteoclastogenesis substances and regulation of various miRNAs , allowing it to form bone metastasis . Besides osteoclasts , adipocytes and macrophages also participate in bone metastasis formation . Adipocytes store fat , which can be used by lung cancer cells as an energy source . Compared to non - malignant lung cells , lung cancer cell A549 has twenty times more lipid droplets in its cytoplasm , suggesting that it is capable of using lipid as an alternative energy source to glucose ( 124 ) . When fatty acid production in vivo or in vitro is inhibited , NSCLC growth is also hindered , suggesting cancer cell ’ s reliance on fatty acid synthesized and stored in adipocytes ( 125 ) . Cancer - associated adipocytes ( CAAs ) release fatty acids through lipolysis , while cancer cells can harvest the energy in them using b - oxidation ( 126 ) . Moreover , CAAs can produce leptin , which has been demonstrated to promote EMT changes in A549 lung cancer cells , contributing to tumor cell mobility and consequently their invasiveness in the bone ( 127 ) . Macrophages are also correlated with bone metastasis . A reduction in the number of macrophages is accompanied by the inhibition of bone metastasis ( 128 ) . Rac2 , a small GTPase , controls M1 to M2 Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 8 differentiation in macrophages , which suppresses in ﬂ ammatory responses ( 129 ) . IL - 13 - induced phosphorylation of STAT6 has also been identi ﬁ ed as a major pathway leading to macrophage M2 polarization ( 130 ) . Furthermore , bone marrow macrophages ( BMMs ) are the major source of cathepsin K ( CTSK ) , which promotes tumor progression in bones ( 131 ) . Although substantial progress is made regarding the roles of adipocytes and macrophages in bone metastasis , very few researches have explored their interactions with lung cancer cells in particular . That being said , more effort should be invested in clarifying the connections between adipocytes , macrophages , and invading lung cancer cells . In essence , lung cancer bone metastasis involves a unique homing mechanism , a osteoclastic invasion , and diverse tumor - bone interactions . Liver Compared to NSCLC metastasis in the brain and the bone , metastasis in the liver is less frequent , but still at a high occurrence . It is estimated that 16 . 7 % of metastasized NSCLC patients develop liver metastasis ( 132 ) . With an average median survival time of 4 months , liver metastasis in NSCLC confers a worse prognosis than lung , brain , and bone metastasis according to a recent study ( 133 ) . NSCLC liver metastasis often predicts poor progression - free survival with treatments underway , including Nivolumab ( 134 ) and erlotinib targeted therapy ( 135 ) . When tumor cells enter the liver through the hepatic artery or portal vein , they will encounter the sinusoid , which endothelium is composed of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells ( LSECs ) . LSECs have dual roles in metastasis formation . When tumor cells obstruct the sinusoid , in ﬂ ammatory response will be triggered by LSECs , leading to production of various substances inhibiting metastasis ( 136 ) . Among these substances is TNF - a , capable of inducing apoptosis in tumor cells . Lung cancer cells , however , often express phenotypes that resist the effect of TNF - a . A study dating back to 2000 suggests that NF - k B activation increases lung cancer cells ’ resistance to TNF - a ( 137 ) . Cylindromatosis ( CYLD ) is considered to positively correlate with the apoptotic effect of TNF - a . Its expression in lung cancer cells is low , suggesting that lung cancer cells may downregulate CYLD in order to prevent TNF - a induced apoptosis ( 138 ) . The effect of TNF - a can only be realized when it binds to TNF - a receptor ( TNFR1 ) , which contains TNFR1 promoter - 223 / - 29 in lung cancer cells . The downregulation of TNFR1 is associated with decreased effectiveness of TNF - a , pointing to a potential mechanism lung cancer cells may use to evade TNF - a ( 139 ) . Tumor cells may even bene ﬁ t from exposure to TNF - a . One study concluded that through the upregulation of MMP - 13 , TNF - a promotes tumor growth in lung cancer cells ( 140 ) . Signi ﬁ cant progress is made to inhibit cancer growth through manipulating TNF - a expression . Highly N - acetylated COS ( NACOS ) inhibits TNF - alpha - induced E - selectin expression in ECs via the JNK / NF - k B pathways , potentially attenuates tumor cell adhesion with ECs ( 141 ) . A research conducted in 2013 proposed that Acacetin can also inhibit TNF - a - induced E - selectin expression , as well as the activation of NF - k B by TNF - a ( 142 ) . ZLJ - 6 inhibits a range of adhesion molecules including E - selectin , ICAM - 1 , and VCAM - 1 , and , although it was once believed that the COX / 5 - LOX pathway underlies its effect , was found to be independent of this pathway and is rather mediated by NF - k B ( 143 ) . Other than TNF - a , LSECs also produce IFN - g . IFN - g induces extracellular trap cell death ( ETosis ) in A549 lung cancer cells . Reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , another substance LSECs secrete , regulates IFN - g - induced mimic ETosis in lung cancer cells ( 144 ) . This mechanism , however , has been found to be defective in many lung cancer cells . PC14PE6 / AS2 human lung cancer cells were shown to be unsusceptible to IFN - g - induced autophagy ( 145 ) . PC14PE6 / AS2 human lung adenocarcinoma cells are presented with reduced responsiveness in IFN - g signaling , possibly due to natural PTEN loss . PTEN silenced A549 cells also demonstrate reduced susceptibility to IFN - g through ROS / SHP2 signaling ( 146 ) . It is also suggested that IFN - g alone may not be able to inhibit lung cancer proliferation , as only PD - L1 + lung carcinomas are affected by IFN - g . Thus PDL1 - lung cancer cells may be immune to IFN - g induced ETosis ( 147 ) . Possible mechanisms have been proposed . IL - 10 and IL - 10R are found to be overexpressed in cells surrounding NSCLC cells in the lungs , and confer resistance to IFN - g through regulation of the PD1 / PD - L1 pathway , although such phenomenon has not been studied in the liver ( 148 ) . LSECs contribute to the formation of liver metastasis by expressing various adhesion molecules . Early studies have shown that the presence of tumor cells in hepatic circulation can trigger a rapid induction of E - selectin expression in LSECs , which could serve as adhesive molecules that facilitate tumor cell colonization ( 149 ) . Blocking E - selectin expression causes a 97 % reduction in liver metastasis compared to the control group ( 150 ) . Tumor growth is also suppressed when E - selectin expression in LSECs is inhibited through the prevention of angiogenesis , suggesting E - selectin ’ s importance in metastasis progression in the liver ( 151 ) . Vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1 ( VCAM - 1 ) is also found expressed in LSECs , which participates in tumor - stromal interactions ( 152 ) . Downregulation of VCAM - 1 is correlated with suppressed lung cancer cell growth ( 153 ) , while VCAM - 1 knockdown reduces A549 cells ’ ability to migrate ( 154 ) . Furthermore , since LSECs are fenestrated , tumor cells can directly interact with the basement membrane underneath ( 155 ) . One type of the receptors present on the surface of basement membrane matrix is integrin receptors ( 156 ) . Integrins a v , a 5 , b 1 , b 3 , and b 5 are shown to promote survival and metastasis of lung cancer cells through either providing mechanical attachment to ECM , or the generation of various cell signals stimulating metastasis formation ( 157 ) . Suppressing metastasis - related integrins such as integrin a v and integrin b 3 in lung cancer inhibits motility of tumor cells ( 158 ) . Interestingly , nitric oxide ( NO ) , which is released by LSECs , is demonstrated to increase the expression of integrin a v and b 1 in three types of NSCLC cell lines . Focal adhesion kinase , active RhoA , and active cell division control 42 , all of which are migration associated proteins , are downstream targets of these two integrins ( 159 ) . Integrin b 4 is also found overexpressed in NSCLC cells , which Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 9 increases venous invasion and correlates with a poor prognosis ( 160 ) . Inhibiting integrin expression may serve as a new therapeutic strategy to suppress liver metastasis . E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 , for example , was demonstrated to be an effective inhibitor of integrin expression ( 161 ) . After tumor cells extravasate from sinusoid , they will encounter hepatocytes , the main cells of the liver . There has been evidence pointing to the presence of tumor cell - hepatocytes interactions . Claudin - 2 level is elevated in breast cancer liver metastasis , and it is responsible for adhering breast cancer cells to hepatocytes ( 162 ) . Although such interaction is not yet studied between lung adenocarcinoma cells and hepatocytes , there are clues that suggest the existence of this interaction . Claudin - 2 is highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma and is linked to increased tumor cell proliferation ( 163 ) , and another study in the same year also concluded that decreased claudin - 2 hinders lung carcinoma development ( 164 ) . Therefore , it is not impossible that lung cancer cells may employ a similar technique to better adhere to hepatocytes . Hepatocytes also alter E - cadherin expression in cancer cells . E - cadherin expression is critical in EMT and EMrT , which are essential in metastatic processes . p0071 / E - cadherin interaction in lung cancer cells is shown to increase their metastatic potential ( 165 ) . The downregulation of E - cadherin in A549 cells induces cancer stem cell properties , which are necessary for metastasis . The upregulation of E - cadherin , in contrast , causes cancer stem cells to diminish ( 166 ) . Therefore , when lung cancer stem cells reach liver tissues , they must upregulate E - cadherin levels to perform EMrT , which trades their stem cell features with epithelial features , invasiveness . Hepatocytes have the ability to upregulate E - cadherin expression in tumor cells in prostate cancer liver metastasis , which seemed to be regulated by lowering epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) signaling ( 167 ) . Since EGFR mutation is relatively common in lung cancer , this mechanism found between prostate cancer cells and hepatocyte may also be used by lung cancer cells , although currently it is not thoroughly studied . New Treatment Strategy and Molecular Mechanisms of NSCLC Metastasis In recent years , many new drugs have been put into clinical trials for the treatment of metastatic NSCLC to verify their toxicity and ef ﬁ cacy to enrich the treatment ﬁ rst - line options for patients . Several carcinogenic drivers including EGFR have been identi ﬁ ed and studied . The development of new therapies , including targeted therapy and immunotherapy , has shown encouraging results in prolonging the survival of patients with NSCLC . For example , inhibitors targeting the PD - 1 / PD - L1 immune checkpoint have been developed as an effective immunotherapy for metastatic NSCLC . In NSCLC cells , the binding of PD - 1 and PD - L1 promotes T - cell tolerance and escape from host immunity . Pembrolizumab , nivolumab , and cemiplimab are anti - PD - 1 inhibitors , and atezolizumab , durvalumab , and avelumab are anti - PD - L1 inhibitors ( 168 ) . PD - 1 inhibitors offer enhanced survival bene ﬁ ts and fewer adverse events than PD - L1 inhibitors ( 169 ) . As mentioned above , any malignant transformation of EGFR may lead to the spread of lung cancer ( 170 ) , so EGFR as a target has become the main research scheme to inhibit the metastasis of NSCLC . For example , from 2003 to 2019 , ﬁ rst - generation drugs ( erlotinib , ge ﬁ tinib ) , second - generation drugs ( afatinib , dacomitinib ) , third - generation drugs ( osimertinib , rociletinib ) , combination therapy ( docetaxel + pemetrexed ) , and fourth - generation drugs ( EAI001 and EAI045 ) were successively developed ( 171 ) . Although many drugs have been proved to be effective in clinical trials , some patients will have drug resistance and complex toxicity after a period of treatment . Therefore , it is still necessary to further study the molecular mechanism of NSCLC metastasis and explore potential biomarkers for the development of new therapeutic strategies HER2 overexpression has been observed in 3 % – 38 % of NSCLC , while strong HER2 protein overexpression is found in 2 . 5 % of NSCLC ( 172 ) . Leeza Shrestha et al . , designed a peptidomimetic ( compound 18 ) that binds to domain IV of the HER2 receptor , disrupts the homo / heterodimerization of HER2 , and inhibits downstream signaling for cellular proliferation and growth , hence , can be used as a potential therapeutic agent for the treatment of NSCLC ( 173 ) . A study from China suggests that traditional Chinese herbal medicine may play a role in antimetastasis of malignant tumors . Chinese herbal medicine Wenxia Changfu formula reverses cell adhesion - mediated drug resistance in lung cancer . Xiaoai Jiedu recipe can inactivate p38 MAPK signaling pathway in NSCLC cells to inhibit its proliferation and metastasis ( 174 ) . Recent studies have found that CERS6 has important roles in lung cancer migration and metastasis , which proves that the miR - 101 - CERS6 pathway can be targeted , with potential bene ﬁ ts provided for affected patients ( 175 ) . High expression of monoamine oxidase A ( MAOA ) in NSCLC is related to EMT and the development of clinicopathological features of NSCLC ( 176 ) . The potential MAOA inhibitor G11 may inhibit paclitaxel ‐ resistant NSCLC metastasis and growth by impacting on p ‐ AKT , VEGF , HIF1 a , and MMP2 or MMP9 . These ﬁ ndings have established MAOA as a promising therapeutic target in drug - resistant NSCLC and provide a feasible method of MAOA - targeted combined therapeutics ( 177 ) . The combination of chemical and mechanical signals should also be considered in the new direction of drug development . Baicalein inhibited the formation of protrusive structures and leader cells by the combined effects that decreased both ezrin S - nitrosylation ( chemical signaling ) and ezrin tension transduction ( mechanical signaling ) , and hampered NSCLC invasion and metastasis . Future sudy and improved clinical prospects for patients with NSCLC will depend on continued focus on combination of basic discovery and clinical translational research . DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVE As showcased in this review , a substantial amount of effort has already been devoted to unraveling mechanisms behind NSCLC ’ s high metastasis potency as well as the wide range of Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 10 potential organs for colonization that make NSCLC stand out from the majority of cancers . The chronological distribution of the references indicates that discoveries in this ﬁ eld have been made at an ever - increasing pace . Through studying the numerous molecular pathways involved in NSCLC metastasis , we are starting to ﬁ nd patterns that may one day ﬁ t into the puzzle of NSCLC metastasis containment and management . Many novel pathways identi ﬁ ed to be essential to NSCLC metastasis had yielded new treatment options , and many of these targeted therapies were shown to be effective in restricting NSCLC metastasis . Still , for every question clari ﬁ ed , dozens of confusions arise . As demonstrated by this extensive review , lung cancer metastasis is an extremely complicated event and is further complicated by the type of lung cancer , metastatic organ , and more . Here , we list out some inquiries and topics that may be worth further investigation , including the limitations and unsolved enigmas of current research . Advances made in these regards could be critical to our current knowledge base of NSCLC metastasis . (cid:129) In many organs studied for cancer metastasis , such as the bone , very few researches studied lung cancer metastasis in these organs . As a result , extrapolation might be frequently used in an attempt to apply progress in other cancer types to NSCLC . These inferences are usually made by ﬁ nding similarities between the discussed cancer types and lung cancer , and then suggest that lung cancer could utilize a similar mechanism . These inferences , being extrapolations , have the factor of conjecture . In order to clarify whether these suggestions are valid in NLCSC , we encourage more studies to be done to either validate or dismiss the existence of these mechanisms . (cid:129) Cancer progression can be viewed as a failure of the immune system to identify and eradicate cancer cells . Thus , many immune cells are associated with cancer , some actively involved in cancer invasion and metastasis . Each part of the human body has a unique blend of different immune cells , such as BMM in the bone and microglia in the brain . Most of the works currently available explain how cancer cells evade a certain immune cell ’ s immune response . Few works , however , studied whether one mechanism cancer cell used to fend off a certain type of immune cell might be involved in another interaction between cancer cells and a different type of immune cell . Since there are plenty of overlaps between the molecules secreted by or the signal pathways involved in different immune cells , it may be worth the effort to identify these overlaps to discover treatment options that can simultaneously attack multiple tumor cell - immune cell interactions , yielding a better prognosis . (cid:129) When tumor cells arrive at a distant organ , it can instantaneously spawn a new metastasis , but it can also enter a period of dormancy and become activated at a later time . The latter have been ﬁ rst discovered in the bone marrow , but it is now evident that many organs including the liver can house dormant tumor cells . These dormant cells can survive chemotherapy since it is not hyper - proliferating nor over metabolically active , thus they may spawn new metastasis even though all visible tumors have been eradicated . This mechanism has been extensively studied in the bone , but fewer studies are devoted to other organs such as the liver , and even few of them use NSCLC as their cancer type . A better understanding of this mechanism can be promising to the invention of therapies that prevent cancer recurrence . Looking at only the tip of an iceberg of NSCLC metastasis , there is obviously still a quite formidable amount of knowledge to be discovered . However , with the progress made with high pace fueled by new generations of biotechnology , preventing NSCLC metastasis , or even curing NSCLC , may became reality in the future not far away . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS TZhu , XB , MC , RL , JZ , TZhe , and KX wrote the original draft . TZhu , XB , WZ , and SZ wrote , reviewed , and edited the manuscript . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING This work was supported by the Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Commission ( grant number : 19441904500 ) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation ( 2019M651376 ) . This work was supported in part by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China ( 2015AA020104 ) , the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31471239 and 31671368 ) , and the 111 Project ( B13016 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Salem A , Asselin MC , Reymen B , Jackson A , Lambin P , West CML , et al . Targeting Hypoxia to Improve Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Outcome . J Natl Cancer Inst ( 2018 ) 110 ( 1 ) : 14 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jnci / djx160 2 . Brown JM . Tumor hypoxia in cancer therapy . Methods Enzymol ( 2007 ) 435 : 297 – 321 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 07 ) 35015 - 5 3 . Guo LY , Zhu P , Jin XP . Association between the expression of HIF - 1alpha and VEGF and prognostic implications in primary liver cancer . Genet Mol Res ( 2016 ) 15 ( 2 ) : gmr8107 . doi : 10 . 4238 / gmr . 15028107 4 . Carmeliet P . VEGF as a key mediator of angiogenesis in cancer . Oncology ( 2005 ) 69 Suppl 3 : 4 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000088478 5 . Vaupel P , Mayer A . Tumor Hypoxia : Causative Mechanisms , Microregional Heterogeneities , and the Role of Tissue - Based Hypoxia Markers . Adv Exp Med Biol ( 2016 ) 923 : 77 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 38810 - 6 _ 11 6 . Liu KH , Tsai YT , Chin SY , Lee WR , Chen YC , Shen SC . Hypoxia Stimulates the Epithelial - to - Mesenchymal Transition in Lung Cancer Cells Through Accumulation of Nuclear beta - Catenin . Anticancer Res ( 2018 ) 38 ( 11 ) : 6299 – 308 . doi : 10 . 21873 / anticanres . 12986 Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 11 7 . Kaidi A , Williams AC , Paraskeva C . Interaction between beta - catenin and HIF - 1 promotes cellular adaptation to hypoxia . Nat Cell Biol ( 2007 ) 9 ( 2 ) : 210 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1534 8 . Hong CF , Chen WY , Wu CW . Upregulation of Wnt signaling under hypoxia promotes lung cancer progression . Oncol Rep ( 2017 ) 38 ( 3 ) : 1706 – 14 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or . 2017 . 5807 9 . Ghahhari NM , Babashah S . Interplay between microRNAs and WNT / beta - catenin signalling pathway regulates epithelial - mesenchymal transition in cancer . Eur J Cancer ( 2015 ) 51 ( 12 ) : 1638 – 49 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejca . 2015 . 04 . 021 10 . Kohnoh T , Hashimoto N , Ando A , Sakamoto K , Miyazaki S , Aoyama D , et al . Hypoxia - induced modulation of PTEN activity and EMT phenotypes in lung cancers . Cancer Cell Int ( 2016 ) 16 : 33 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12935 - 016 - 0308 - 3 11 . Wei L , Sun JJ , Cui YC , Jiang SL , Wang XW , Lv LY , et al . Twist may be associated with invasion and metastasis of hypoxic NSCLC cells . Tumour Biol ( 2016 ) 37 ( 7 ) : 9979 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s13277 - 016 - 4896 - 2 12 . Yang MH , Wu MZ , Chiou SH , Chen PM , Chang SY , Liu CJ , et al . Direct regulation of TWIST by HIF - 1alpha promotes metastasis . Nat Cell Biol ( 2008 ) 10 ( 3 ) : 295 – 305 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1691 13 . Gajewski TF , Schreiber H , Fu YX . Innate and adaptive immune cells in the tumor microenvironment . Nat Immunol ( 2013 ) 14 ( 10 ) : 1014 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni . 2703 14 . Ribas A . Adaptive Immune Resistance : How Cancer Protects from Immune Attack . Cancer Discov ( 2015 ) 5 ( 9 ) : 915 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 15 - 0563 15 . Rashed HE , Abdelrahman AE , Abdelgawad M , Balata S , Shabrawy ME . Prognostic Signi ﬁ cance of Programmed Cell Death Ligand 1 ( PD - L1 ) , CD8 + Tumor - In ﬁ ltrating Lymphocytes and p53 in Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer : An Immunohistochemical Study . Turk Patoloji Derg ( 2017 ) 1 ( 1 ) : 211 – 22 . doi : 10 . 5146 / tjpath . 2017 . 01398 16 . Prado - Garcia H , Romero - Garcia S , Puerto - Aquino A , Rumbo - Nava U . The PD - L1 / PD - 1 pathway promotes dysfunction , but not “ exhaustion ” , in tumor - responding T cells from pleural effusions in lung cancer patients . Cancer Immunol Immunother ( 2017 ) 66 ( 6 ) : 765 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00262 - 017 - 1979 - x 17 . Nowicki TS , Akiyama R , Huang RR , Shintaku IP , Wang X , Tumeh PC , et al . In ﬁ ltration of CD8 T Cells and Expression of PD - 1 and PD - L1 in Synovial Sarcoma . Cancer Immunol Res ( 2017 ) 5 ( 2 ) : 118 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 2326 - 6066 . CIR - 16 - 0148 18 . Guilleminault L , Carmier D , Heuze - Vourc ’ h N , Diot P , Pichon E . [ Immunotherapy in non - small cell lung cancer : inhibition of PD1 / PDL1 pathway ] . Rev Pneumol Clin ( 2015 ) 71 ( 1 ) : 44 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . pneumo . 2014 . 11 . 004 19 . Upham JW , Xi Y . Dendritic Cells in Human Lung Disease : Recent Advances . Chest ( 2017 ) 151 ( 3 ) : 668 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chest . 2016 . 09 . 030 20 . Keirsse J , Van Damme H , Van Ginderachter JA , Laoui D . Exploiting tumor - associated dendritic cell heterogeneity for novel cancer therapies . J Leukoc Biol ( 2017 ) 102 ( 2 ) : 317 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 4MR1116 - 466R 21 . Tang M , Diao J , Cattral MS . Molecular mechanisms involved in dendritic cell dysfunction in cancer . Cell Mol Life Sci ( 2017 ) 74 ( 5 ) : 761 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 016 - 2317 - 8 22 . Liu Q , Zhang C , Sun A , Zheng Y , Wang L , Cao X . Tumor - educated CD11bhighIalow regulatory dendritic cells suppress T cell response through arginase I . J Immunol ( 2009 ) 182 ( 10 ) : 6207 – 16 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0803926 23 . Whiteside TL . FOXP3 + Treg as a therapeutic target for promoting anti - tumor immunity . Expert Opin Ther Targets ( 2018 ) 22 ( 4 ) : 353 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14728222 . 2018 . 1451514 24 . Nishikawa H , Sakaguchi S . Regulatory T cells in cancer immunotherapy . Curr Opin Immunol ( 2014 ) 27 : 1 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . coi . 2013 . 12 . 005 25 . Akimova T , Zhang T , Negorev D , Singhal S , Stadanlick J , Rao A , et al . Human lungtumorFOXP3 + Tregsupregulatefour “ Treg - locking ” transcriptionfactors . JCI Insight ( 2017 ) 2 ( 16 ) : e94075 . doi : 10 . 1172 / jci . insight . 94075 26 . Peng J , Yu Z , Xue L , Wang J , Li J , Liu D , et al . The effect of foxp3 - overexpressing Treg cells on non - small cell lung cancer cells . Mol Med Rep ( 2018 ) 17 ( 4 ) : 5860 – 8 . doi : 10 . 3892 / mmr . 2018 . 8606 27 . Yamamoto Y , Miyazato K , Takahashi K , Yoshimura N , Tahara H , Hayakawa Y . Lung - resident natural killer cells control pulmonary tumor growth in mice . Cancer Sci ( 2018 ) 109 ( 9 ) : 2670 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cas . 13703 28 . Hodge G , Barnawi J , Jurisevic C , Moffat D , Holmes M , Reynolds PN , et al . Lung cancer is associated with decreased expression of perforin , granzyme B and interferon ( IFN ) - gamma by in ﬁ ltrating lung tissue T cells , natural killer ( NK ) T - like and NK cells . Clin Exp Immunol ( 2014 ) 178 ( 1 ) : 79 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cei . 12392 29 . Balkhi MY , Ma Q , Ahmad S , Junghans RP . T cell exhaustion and Interleukin 2 downregulation . Cytokine ( 2015 ) 71 ( 2 ) : 339 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cyto . 2014 . 11 . 024 30 . Lo Monaco E , Tremante E , Cerboni C , Melucci E , Sibilio L , Zingoni A , et al . Human leukocyte antigen E contributes to protect tumor cells from lysis by natural killer cells . Neoplasia ( 2011 ) 13 ( 9 ) : 822 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1593 / neo . 101684 31 . Shen M , Tsai Y , Zhu R , Keng PC , Chen Y , Chen Y , et al . FASN - TGF - beta1 - PD - L1 axis contributes to the development of resistance to NK cell cytotoxicity of cisplatin - resistant lung cancer cells . Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids ( 2018 ) 1863 ( 3 ) : 313 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbalip . 2017 . 12 . 012 32 . Conway EM , Pikor LA , Kung SH , Hamilton MJ , Lam S , Lam WL , et al . Macrophages , In ﬂ ammation , and Lung Cancer . Am J Respir Crit Care Med ( 2016 ) 193 ( 2 ) : 116 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1164 / rccm . 201508 - 1545CI 33 . Lamagna C , Aurrand - Lions M , Imhof BA . Dual role of macrophages in tumor growth and angiogenesis . J Leukoc Biol ( 2006 ) 80 ( 4 ) : 705 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 1105656 34 . Aras S , Zaidi MR . TAMeless traitors : macrophages in cancer progression and metastasis . Br J Cancer ( 2017 ) 117 ( 11 ) : 1583 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1038 / bjc . 2017 . 356 35 . Singla DK , Wang J , Singla R . Primary human monocytes differentiate into M2 macrophages and involve Notch - 1 pathway . Can J Physiol Pharmacol ( 2017 ) 95 ( 3 ) : 288 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1139 / cjpp - 2016 - 0319 36 . Yuan A , Hsiao YJ , Chen HY , Chen HW , Ho CC , Chen YY , et al . Opposite Effects of M1 and M2 Macrophage Subtypes on Lung Cancer Progression . Sci Rep ( 2015 ) 5 : 14273 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep14273 37 . Yu X , Xu M , Li N , Li Z , Li H , Shao S , et al . beta - elemene inhibits tumor - promoting effect of M2 macrophages in lung cancer . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2017 ) 490 ( 2 ) : 514 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2017 . 06 . 071 38 . Jetten N , Verbruggen S , Gijbels MJ , Post MJ , De Winther MP , Donners MM . Anti - in ﬂ ammatory M2 , but not pro - in ﬂ ammatory M1 macrophages promote angiogenesis in vivo . Angiogenesis ( 2014 ) 17 ( 1 ) : 109 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10456 - 013 - 9381 - 6 39 . Qian BZ , Pollard JW . Macrophage diversity enhances tumor progression and metastasis . Cell ( 2010 ) 141 ( 1 ) : 39 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 03 . 014 40 . Suarez - Carmona M , Lesage J , Cataldo D , Gilles C . EMT and in ﬂ ammation : inseparable actors of cancer progression . Mol Oncol ( 2017 ) 11 ( 7 ) : 805 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 1878 - 0261 . 12095 41 . Zhu L , Fu X , Chen X , Han X , Dong P . M2 macrophages induce EMT through the TGF - beta / Smad2 signaling pathway . Cell Biol Int ( 2017 ) 41 ( 9 ) : 960 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cbin . 10788 42 . Wang A , Lu C , Ning Z , Gao W , Xie Y , Zhang N , et al . Tumor - associated macrophages promote Ezrin phosphorylation - mediated epithelial - mesenchymal transition in lung adenocarcinoma through FUT4 / LeY up - regulation . Oncotarget ( 2017 ) 8 ( 17 ) : 28247 – 59 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 16001 43 . Yamaguchi H , Wyckoff J , Condeelis J . Cell migration in tumors . Curr Opin Cell Biol ( 2005 ) 17 ( 5 ) : 559 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 08 . 002 44 . Yamaguchi H , Condeelis J . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in cancer cell migration and invasion . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 2007 ) 1773 ( 5 ) : 642 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2006 . 07 . 001 45 . Yin M , Ma W , An L . Cortactin in cancer cell migration and invasion . Oncotarget ( 2017 ) 8 ( 50 ) : 88232 – 43 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 21088 46 . Izdebska M , Zielinska W , Grzanka D , Gagat M . The Role of Actin Dynamics and Actin - Binding Proteins Expression in Epithelial - to - Mesenchymal Transition and Its Association with Cancer Progression and Evaluation of Possible Therapeutic Targets . BioMed Res Int ( 2018 ) 2018 : 4578373 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 4578373 47 . Yamada H , Takeda T , Michiue H , Abe T , Takei K . Actin bundling by dynamin 2 and cortactin is implicated in cell migration by stabilizing ﬁ lopodia in human non - small cell lung carcinoma cells . Int J Oncol ( 2016 ) 49 ( 3 ) : 877 – 86 . doi : 10 . 3892 / ijo . 2016 . 3592 48 . Li Y , Zhang H , Gong H , Yuan Y , Li Y , Wang C , et al . Liu H et al : miR - 182 suppresses invadopodia formation and metastasis in non - small cell lung Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 12 cancer by targeting cortactin gene . J Exp Clin Cancer Res ( 2018 ) 37 ( 1 ) : 141 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13046 - 018 - 0824 - 1 49 . Stylli SS , Luwor RB , Kaye AH , I ST , Hovens CM , Lock P . Expression of the adaptor protein Tks5 in human cancer : prognostic potential . Oncol Rep ( 2014 ) 32 ( 3 ) : 989 – 1002 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or . 2014 . 3310 50 . Leong HS , Robertson AE , Stoletov K , Leith SJ , Chin CA , Chien AE , et al . Invadopodia are required for cancer cell extravasation and are a therapeutic target for metastasis . Cell Rep ( 2014 ) 8 ( 5 ) : 1558 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2014 . 07 . 050 51 . Pelaez R , Morales X , Salvo E , Garasa S , Ortiz de Solorzano C , Martinez A , et al . beta3 integrin expression is required for invadopodia - mediated ECM degradation in lung carcinoma cells . PloS One ( 2017 ) 12 ( 8 ) : e0181579 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0181579 52 . Bendris N , Stearns CJ , Reis CR , Rodriguez - Canales J , Liu H , Witkiewicz AW , etal . Sortingnexin9negativelyregulatesinvadopodiaformationandfunctionin cancer cells . J Cell Sci ( 2016 ) 129 ( 14 ) : 2804 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 188045 53 . Darby IA , Zakuan N , Billet F , Desmouliere A . The myo ﬁ broblast , a key cell in normal and pathological tissue repair . Cell Mol Life Sci ( 2016 ) 73 ( 6 ) : 1145 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 015 - 2110 - 0 54 . Shi J , Feng J , Xie J , Mei Z , Shi T , Wang S , et al . Cheng X et al : Targeted blockade of TGF - beta and IL - 6 / JAK2 / STAT3 pathways inhibits lung cancer growth promoted by bone marrow - derived myo ﬁ broblasts . Sci Rep ( 2017 ) 7 ( 1 ) : 8660 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 09020 - 8 55 . Webber J , Steadman R , Mason MD , Tabi Z , Clayton A . Cancer exosomes trigger ﬁ broblast to myo ﬁ broblast differentiation . Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 70 ( 23 ) : 9621 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 10 - 1722 56 . Webber JP , Spary LK , Sanders AJ , Chowdhury R , Jiang WG , Steadman R , et al . Differentiation of tumour - promoting stromal myo ﬁ broblasts by cancer exosomes . Oncogene ( 2015 ) 34 ( 3 ) : 290 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2013 . 560 57 . Merchant N , Nagaraju GP , Rajitha B , Lammata S , Jella KK , Buchwald ZS , et al . Matrix metalloproteinases : their functional role in lung cancer . Carcinogenesis ( 2017 ) 38 ( 8 ) : 766 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1093 / carcin / bgx063 58 . An J , Xue Y , Long M , Zhang G , Zhang J , Su H . Targeting CCR2 with its antagonist suppresses viability , motility and invasion by downregulating MMP - 9 expression in non - small cell lung cancer cells . Oncotarget ( 2017 ) 8 ( 24 ) : 39230 – 40 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 16837 59 . Riihimaki M , Hemminki A , Fallah M , Thomsen H , Sundquist K , Sundquist J , et al . Metastatic sites and survival in lung cancer . Lung Cancer ( 2014 ) 86 ( 1 ) : 78 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lungcan . 2014 . 07 . 020 60 . Jassam SA , Maherally Z , Smith JR , Ashkan K , Roncaroli F , Fillmore HL , et al . TNF - alpha enhancement of CD62E mediates adhesion of non - small cell lung cancer cells to brain endothelium via CD15 in lung - brain metastasis . Neuro Oncol ( 2016 ) 18 ( 5 ) : 679 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1093 / neuonc / nov248 61 . Karki P , Johnson JJr . , Son DS , Aschner M , Lee E . Transcriptional Regulation of Human Transforming Growth Factor - alpha in Astrocytes . Mol Neurobiol ( 2017 ) 54 ( 2 ) : 964 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12035 - 016 - 9705 - 9 62 . El - Obeid A , Hesselager G , Westermark B , Nister M . TGF - alpha - driven tumor growth is inhibited by an EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2002 ) 290 ( 1 ) : 349 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2001 . 6210 63 . Jassam SA , Maherally Z , Smith JR , Ashkan K , Roncaroli F , Fillmore HL , et al . CD15s / CD62E Interaction Mediates the Adhesion of Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells on Brain Endothelial Cells : Implications for Cerebral Metastasis . Int J Mol Sci ( 2017 ) 18 ( 7 ) : 1474 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms18071474 64 . Kutuzov N , Flyvbjerg H , Lauritzen M . Contributions of the glycocalyx , endothelium , and extravascular compartment to the blood - brain barrier . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2018 ) 115 ( 40 ) : E9429 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1802155115 65 . Rai S , Nejadhamzeeigilani Z , Gutowski NJ , Whatmore JL . Loss of the endothelial glycocalyx is associated with increased E - selectin mediated adhesion of lung tumour cells to the brain microvascular endothelium . J Exp Clin Cancer Res ( 2015 ) 34 : 105 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13046 - 015 - 0223 - 9 66 . Soto MS , Serres S , Anthony DC , Sibson NR . Functional role of endothelial adhesion molecules in the early stages of brain metastasis . Neuro Oncol ( 2014 ) 16 ( 4 ) : 540 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1093 / neuonc / not222 67 . Jia W , Lu R , Martin TA , Jiang WG . The role of claudin - 5 in blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) and brain metastases ( review ) . Mol Med Rep ( 2014 ) 9 ( 3 ) : 779 – 85 . doi : 10 . 3892 / mmr . 2013 . 1875 68 . Ma SC , Li Q , Peng JY , Zhouwen JL , Diao JF , Niu JX , et al . Claudin - 5 regulates blood - brain barrier permeability by modifying brain microvascular endothelial cell proliferation , migration , and adhesion toprevent lung cancer metastasis . CNS Neurosci Ther ( 2017 ) 23 ( 12 ) : 947 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cns . 12764 69 . Yuan L , Le Bras A , Sacharidou A , Itagaki K , Zhan Y , Kondo M , et al . ETS - related gene ( ERG ) controls endothelial cell permeability via transcriptional regulation of the claudin 5 ( CLDN5 ) gene . J Biol Chem ( 2012 ) 287 ( 9 ) : 6582 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 300236 70 . Aslam M , Ahmad N , Srivastava R , Hemmer B . TNF - alpha induced NFkappaB signaling and p65 ( RelA ) overexpression repress Cldn5 promoter in mouse brain endothelial cells . Cytokine ( 2012 ) 57 ( 2 ) : 269 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cyto . 2011 . 10 . 016 71 . Verma PK , Bala M , Kumar N , Singh B . Therapeutic potential of natural products from terrestrial plants as TNF - alpha antagonist . Curr Top Med Chem ( 2012 ) 12 ( 13 ) : 1422 – 35 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 156802612801784425 72 . Fong LY , Ng CT , Zakaria ZA , Baharuldin MT , Arifah AK , Hakim MN , et al . Asiaticoside Inhibits TNF - alpha - Induced Endothelial Hyperpermeability of Human Aortic Endothelial Cells . Phytother Res ( 2015 ) 29 ( 10 ) : 1501 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ptr . 5404 73 . Valiente M , Obenauf AC , Jin X , Chen Q , Zhang XH , Lee DJ , et al . Brogi E et al : Serpins promote cancer cell survival and vascular co - option in brain metastasis . Cell ( 2014 ) 156 ( 5 ) : 1002 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 01 . 040 74 . Wasilewski D , Priego N , Fustero - Torre C , Valiente M . Reactive Astrocytes in Brain Metastasis . Front Oncol ( 2017 ) 7 : 298 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2017 . 00298 75 . Stevens LE , Cheung WKC , Adua SJ , Arnal - Estape A , Zhao M , Liu Z , et al . Extracellular Matrix Receptor Expression in Subtypes of Lung Adenocarcinoma Potentiates Outgrowth of Micrometastases . Cancer Res ( 2017 ) 77 ( 8 ) : 1905 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 16 - 1978 76 . KimSW , ChoiHJ , LeeHJ , HeJ , WuQ , LangleyRR , etal . Roleoftheendothelin axisinastrocyte - andendothelialcell - mediatedchemoprotectionofcancercells . Neuro Oncol ( 2014 ) 16 ( 12 ) : 1585 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1093 / neuonc / nou128 77 . Ye J , Piao H , Jiang J , Jin G , Zheng M , Yang J , et al . Li L et al : Polydatin inhibits mast cell - mediated allergic in ﬂ ammation by targeting PI3K / Akt , MAPK , NF - kappaB and Nrf2 / HO - 1 pathways . Sci Rep ( 2017 ) 7 ( 1 ) : 11895 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 12252 - 3 78 . Ren J , Yuan L , Wang Y , Chen G , Hu K . Benzyl sulforaphane is superior to sulforaphane in inhibiting the Akt / MAPK and activating the Nrf2 / ARE signalling pathways in HepG2 cells . J Pharm Pharmacol ( 2018 ) 70 ( 12 ) : 1643 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jphp . 13015 79 . Li L , Sapkota M , Gao M , Choi H , Soh Y . Macrolactin F inhibits RANKL - mediated osteoclastogenesis by suppressing Akt , MAPK and NFATc1 pathways and promotes osteoblastogenesis through a BMP - 2 / smad / Akt / Runx2 signaling pathway . Eur J Pharmacol ( 2017 ) 815 : 202 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejphar . 2017 . 09 . 015 80 . Seike T , Fujita K , Yamakawa Y , Kido MA , Takiguchi S , Teramoto N , et al . Interaction between lung cancer cells and astrocytes via speci ﬁ c in ﬂ ammatory cytokines in the microenvironment of brain metastasis . Clin Exp Metastasis ( 2011 ) 28 ( 1 ) : 13 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10585 - 010 - 9354 - 8 81 . Chen Q , Boire A , Jin X , Valiente M , Er EE , Lopez - Soto A , et al . Carcinoma - astrocyte gap junctions promote brain metastasis by cGAMP transfer . Nature ( 2016 ) 533 ( 7604 ) : 493 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature18268 82 . Wang L , Cossette SM , Rarick KR , Gershan J , Dwinell MB , Harder DR , et al . Astrocytes directly in ﬂ uence tumor cell invasion and metastasis in vivo . PloS One ( 2013 ) 8 ( 12 ) : e80933 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0080933 83 . Kim SJ , Kim JS , Park ES , Lee JS , Lin Q , Langley RR , et al . Weihua Z et al : Astrocytes upregulate survival genes in tumor cells and induce protection from chemotherapy . Neoplasia ( 2011 ) 13 ( 3 ) : 286 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1593 / neo . 11112 84 . Menachem A , Makovski V , Bodner O , Pasmanik - Chor M , Stein R , Shomron N , et al . Intercellular transfer of small RNAs from astrocytes to lung tumor cells induces resistance to chemotherapy . Oncotarget ( 2016 ) 7 ( 11 ) : 12489 – 504 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 7273 85 . Andreou KE , Soto MS , Allen D , Economopoulos V , de Bernardi A , Larkin JR , et al . Anti - in ﬂ ammatory Microglia / Macrophages As a Potential Therapeutic Target in Brain Metastasis . Front Oncol ( 2017 ) 7 : 251 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2017 . 00251 86 . He BP , Wang JJ , Zhang X , Wu Y , Wang M , Bay BH , et al . Differential reactions of microglia to brain metastasis of lung cancer . Mol Med ( 2006 ) 12 ( 7 - 8 ) : 161 – 70 . doi : 10 . 2119 / 2006 - 00033 . He Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 13 87 . Awada R , Saulnier - Blache JS , Gres S , Bourdon E , Rondeau P , Parimisetty A , et al . Autotaxin downregulates LPS - induced microglia activation and pro - in ﬂ ammatory cytokines production . J Cell Biochem ( 2014 ) 115 ( 12 ) : 2123 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 24889 88 . Halleskog C , Mulder J , Dahlstrom J , Mackie K , Hortobagyi T , Tanila H , et al . WNT signaling in activated microglia is proin ﬂ ammatory . Glia ( 2011 ) 59 ( 1 ) : 119 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1002 / glia . 21081 89 . Matias D , Dubois LG , Pontes B , Rosario L , Ferrer VP , Balca - Silva J , et al . GBM - Derived Wnt3a Induces M2 - Like Phenotype in Microglial Cells Through Wnt / beta - Catenin Signaling . Mol Neurobiol ( 2019 ) 56 ( 2 ) : 1517 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12035 - 018 - 1150 - 5 90 . Kaur N , Chettiar S , Rathod S , Rath P , Muzumdar D , Shaikh ML , et al . Wnt3a mediated activation of Wnt / beta - catenin signaling promotes tumor progression in glioblastoma . Mol Cell Neurosci ( 2013 ) 54 : 44 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mcn . 2013 . 01 . 001 91 . Dijksterhuis JP , Arthofer E , Marinescu VD , Nelander S , Uhlen M , Ponten F , et al . High levels of WNT - 5A in human glioma correlate with increased presence of tumor - associated microglia / monocytes . Exp Cell Res ( 2015 ) 339 ( 2 ) : 280 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2015 . 10 . 022 92 . Halleskog C , Schulte G . WNT - 3A and WNT - 5A counteract lipopolysaccharide - induced pro - in ﬂ ammatory changes in mouse primary microglia . J Neurochem ( 2013 ) 125 ( 6 ) : 803 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jnc . 12250 93 . Yao YY , Bian LG , Yang P , Sui Y , Li R , Chen YL , et al . Gastrodin attenuates proliferation and in ﬂ ammatory responses in activated microglia through Wnt / beta - catenin signaling pathway . Brain Res ( 2019 ) 1717 : 190 – 203 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2019 . 04 . 025 94 . Galli LM , Barnes T , Cheng T , Acosta L , Anglade A , Willert K , et al . Differential inhibition of Wnt - 3a by Sfrp - 1 , Sfrp - 2 , and Sfrp - 3 . Dev Dyn ( 2006 ) 235 ( 3 ) : 681 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 20681 95 . Lavergne E , Hendaoui I , Coulouarn C , Ribault C , Leseur J , Eliat PA , et al . Blocking Wnt signaling by SFRP - like molecules inhibits in vivo cell proliferation and tumor growth in cells carrying active beta - catenin . Oncogene ( 2011 ) 30 ( 4 ) : 423 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2010 . 432 96 . Xavier CP , Melikova M , Chuman Y , Uren A , Baljinnyam B , Rubin JS . Secreted Frizzled - related protein potentiation versus inhibition of Wnt3a / beta - catenin signaling . Cell Signal ( 2014 ) 26 ( 1 ) : 94 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2013 . 09 . 016 97 . Hirbe AC , Morgan EA , Weilbaecher KN . The CXCR4 / SDF - 1 chemokine axis : a potential therapeutic target for bone metastases ? Curr Pharm Des ( 2010 ) 16 ( 11 ) : 1284 – 90 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 138161210791034012 98 . Liang T , Wang B , Li J , Liu Y . LINC00922 Accelerates the Proliferation , Migration and Invasion of Lung Cancer Via the miRNA - 204 / CXCR4 Axis . Med Sci Monit ( 2019 ) 25 : 5075 – 86 . doi : 10 . 12659 / MSM . 916327 99 . Grundker C , Bauerschmitz G , Knapp J , Schmidt E , Olbrich T , Emons G . Inhibition of SDF - 1 / CXCR4 - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition by kisspeptin - 10 . Breast Cancer Res Treat ( 2015 ) 152 ( 1 ) : 41 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10549 - 015 - 3463 - 7 100 . Van Hout A , Klarenbeek A , Bobkov V , Doijen J , Arimont M , Zhao C , et al . CXCR4 - targeting nanobodies differentially inhibit CXCR4 function and HIV entry . Biochem Pharmacol ( 2018 ) 158 : 402 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bcp . 2018 . 10 . 015 101 . Lee JH , Kim HN , Kim KO , Jin WJ , Lee S , Kim HH , et al . CXCL10 promotes osteolyticbonemetastasisbyenhancingcanceroutgrowthandosteoclastogenesis . Cancer Res ( 2012 ) 72 ( 13 ) : 3175 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 12 - 0481 102 . Duruisseaux M , Rabbe N , Antoine M , Vieira T , Poulot V , Cadranel J , et al . Pro - tumoural CXCL10 / CXCR3 - A autocrine loop in invasive mucinous lung adenocarcinoma . ERJ Open Res ( 2017 ) 3 ( 1 ) : 00047 – 2016 . doi : 10 . 1183 / 23120541 . 00047 - 2016 103 . Yang SH , Baek HA , Lee HJ , Park HS , Jang KY , Kang MJ , et al . Discoidin domain receptor 1 is associated with poor prognosis of non - small cell lung carcinomas . Oncol Rep ( 2010 ) 24 ( 2 ) : 311 – 9 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or _ 00000861 104 . Miao L , Zhu S , Wang Y , Li Y , Ding J , Dai J , et al . Discoidin domain receptor 1 is associated with poor prognosis of non - small cell lung cancer and promotes cell invasion via epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Med Oncol ( 2013 ) 30 ( 3 ) : 626 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12032 - 013 - 0626 - 4 105 . Valencia K , Ormazabal C , Zandueta C , Luis - Ravelo D , Anton I , Pajares MJ , et al . Inhibition of collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor - 1 ( DDR1 ) reduces cell survival , homing , and colonization in lung cancer bone metastasis . Clin Cancer Res ( 2012 ) 18 ( 4 ) : 969 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 11 - 1686 106 . Wang Z , Zhang Y , Bartual SG , Luo J , Xu T , Du W , et al . Tetrahydroisoquinoline - 7 - carboxamide Derivatives as New Selective Discoidin Domain Receptor 1 ( DDR1 ) Inhibitors . ACS Med Chem Lett ( 2017 ) 8 ( 3 ) : 327 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acsmedchemlett . 6b00497 107 . Ma L , Peng L , Fang S , He B , Liu Z . Celastrol downregulates E2F1 to induce growth inhibitory effects in hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells . Oncol Rep ( 2017 ) 38 ( 5 ) : 2951 – 8 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or . 2017 . 5971 108 . Wang Z , Sun X , Bao Y , Mo J , Du H , Hu J , et al . E2F1 silencing inhibits migration and invasion of osteosarcoma cells via regulating DDR1 expression . Int J Oncol ( 2017 ) 51 ( 6 ) : 1639 – 50 . doi : 10 . 3892 / ijo . 2017 . 4165 109 . Guise TA . The vicious cycle of bone metastases . J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact ( 2002 ) 2 ( 6 ) : 570 – 2 . 110 . Miller RE , Jones JC , Tometsko M , Blake ML , Dougall WC . RANKL inhibition blocks osteolytic lesions and reduces skeletal tumor burden in models of non - small - cell lung cancer bone metastases . J Thorac Oncol ( 2014 ) 9 ( 3 ) : 345 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1097 / JTO . 0000000000000070 111 . Faget J , Contat C , Zangger N , Peters S , Meylan E . RANKL Signaling Sustains Primary Tumor Growth in Genetically Engineered Mouse Models of Lung Adenocarcinoma . J Thorac Oncol ( 2018 ) 13 ( 3 ) : 387 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtho . 2017 . 11 . 121 112 . Ibrahim T , Ricci M , Scarpi E , Bongiovanni A , Ricci R , Riva N , et al . RANKL : A promising circulating marker for bone metastasis response . Oncol Lett ( 2016 ) 12 ( 4 ) : 2970 – 5 . doi : 10 . 3892 / ol . 2016 . 4977 113 . Wang M , Chao CC , Chen PC , Liu PI , Yang YC , Su CM , et al . Thrombospondin enhances RANKL - dependent osteoclastogenesis and facilitates lung cancer bone metastasis . Biochem Pharmacol ( 2019 ) 166 : 23 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bcp . 2019 . 05 . 005 114 . Liao CG , Yao L , Xie W , Liu L , Wu SD , Lu N , et al . Basigin - 2 upregulated by receptor activator of NF - kappaB ligand enhances lung cancer - induced osteolytic lesions . Cancer Cell Int ( 2016 ) 16 : 28 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12935 - 016 - 0302 - 9 115 . Martin A , Yu J , Xiong J , Khalid AB , Katzenellenbogen B , Kim SH , et al . Estrogens and androgens inhibit association of RANKL with the pre - osteoblast membrane through post - translational mechanisms . J Cell Physiol ( 2017 ) 232 ( 12 ) : 3798 – 807 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 25862 116 . Murakami K , Kobayashi Y , Uehara S , Suzuki T , Koide M , Yamashita T , et al . A Jak1 / 2 inhibitor , baricitinib , inhibits osteoclastogenesis by suppressing RANKL expression in osteoblasts in vitro . PloS One ( 2017 ) 12 ( 7 ) : e0181126 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0181126 117 . Chen X , Zhi X , Pan P , Cui J , Cao L , Weng W , et al . Matrine prevents bone loss in ovariectomized mice by inhibiting RANKL - induced osteoclastogenesis . FASEB J ( 2017 ) 31 ( 11 ) : 4855 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 201700316R 118 . Cao J , Lu Q , Liu N , Zhang YX , Wang J , Zhang M , et al . Sciadopitysin suppresses RANKL - mediated osteoclastogenesis and prevents bone loss in LPS - treated mice . Int Immunopharmacol ( 2017 ) 49 : 109 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intimp . 2017 . 05 . 029 119 . Eser PO , Janne PA . TGFbeta pathway inhibition in the treatment of non - small cell lung cancer . Pharmacol Ther ( 2018 ) 184 : 112 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2017 . 11 . 004 120 . Johnson RW , Nguyen MP , Padalecki SS , Grubbs BG , Merkel AR , Oyajobi BO , et al . TGF - beta promotion of Gli2 - induced expression of parathyroid hormone - related protein , an important osteolytic factor in bone metastasis , is independent of canonical Hedgehog signaling . Cancer Res ( 2011 ) 71 ( 3 ) : 822 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 10 - 2993 121 . Valencia K , Martin - Fernandez M , Zandueta C , Ormazabal C , Martinez - Canarias S , Bandres E , et al . miR - 326 associates with biochemical markers of bone turnover in lung cancer bone metastasis . Bone ( 2013 ) 52 ( 1 ) : 532 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bone . 2012 . 10 . 033 122 . Xu S , Yang F , Liu R , Li X , Fan H , Liu J , et al . Serum microRNA - 139 - 5p is downregulated in lung cancer patients with lytic bone metastasis . Oncol Rep ( 2018 ) 39 ( 5 ) : 2376 – 84 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or . 2018 . 6316 123 . Kuo PL , Liao SH , Hung JY , Huang MS , Hsu YL . MicroRNA - 33a functions as a bone metastasis suppressor in lung cancer by targeting parathyroid hormone related protein . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 2013 ) 1830 ( 6 ) : 3756 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2013 . 02 . 022 Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 14 124 . Chowdhury R , Amin MA , Bhattacharyya K . Intermittent Fluorescence Oscillations in Lipid Droplets in a Live Normal and Lung Cancer Cell : Time - Resolved Confocal Microscopy . J Phys Chem B ( 2015 ) 119 ( 34 ) : 10868 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jp5120042 125 . Svensson RU , Parker SJ , Eichner LJ , Kolar MJ , Wallace M , Brun SN , et al . Inhibition of acetyl - CoA carboxylase suppresses fatty acid synthesis and tumor growth of non - small - cell lung cancer in preclinical models . Nat Med ( 2016 ) 22 ( 10 ) : 1108 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 4181 126 . Nieman KM , Romero IL , Van Houten B , Lengyel E . Adipose tissue and adipocytes support tumorigenesis and metastasis . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 2013 ) 1831 ( 10 ) : 1533 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbalip . 2013 . 02 . 010 127 . Feng H , Liu Q , Zhang N , Zheng L , Sang M , Feng J , et al . Leptin promotes metastasis by inducing an epithelial - mesenchymal transition in A549 lung cancer cells . Oncol Res ( 2013 ) 21 ( 3 ) : 165 – 71 . doi : 10 . 3727 / 09650401 4X13887748696662 128 . Hiraoka K , Zenmyo M , Watari K , Iguchi H , Fotovati A , Kimura YN , et al . Inhibition ofbone and muscle metastases of lung cancer cells by a decrease in the number of monocytes / macrophages . Cancer Sci ( 2008 ) 99 ( 8 ) : 1595 – 602 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1349 - 7006 . 2008 . 00880 . x 129 . Joshi S , Singh AR , Zulcic M , Bao L , Messer K , Ideker T , et al . Rac2 controls tumor growth , metastasis and M1 - M2 macrophage differentiation in vivo . PloS One ( 2014 ) 9 ( 4 ) : e95893 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0095893 130 . Tariq M , Zhang JQ , Liang GK , He QJ , Ding L , Yang B . Ge ﬁ tinib inhibits M2 - like polarization of tumor - associated macrophages in Lewis lung cancer by targeting the STAT6 signaling pathway . Acta Pharmacol Sin ( 2017 ) 38 ( 11 ) : 1501 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1038 / aps . 2017 . 124 131 . Herroon MK , Rajagurubandara E , Rudy DL , Chalasani A , Hardaway AL , Podgorski I . Macrophage cathepsin K promotes prostate tumor progression in bone . Oncogene ( 2013 ) 32 ( 12 ) : 1580 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2012 . 166 132 . Tamura T , Kurishima K , Nakazawa K , Kagohashi K , Ishikawa H , Satoh H , et al . Speci ﬁ c organ metastases and survival in metastatic non - small - cell lung cancer . Mol Clin Oncol ( 2015 ) 3 ( 1 ) : 217 – 21 . doi : 10 . 3892 / mco . 2014 . 410 133 . Wu B , Wei S , Tian J , Song X , Hu P , Cui Y . [ Comparison of the Survival Time in the Non - small Cell Lung Cancer Patients with Different Organ Metastasis ] . Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi ( 2019 ) 22 ( 2 ) : 105 – 10 . doi : 10 . 3779 / j . issn . 1009 - 3419 . 2019 . 02 . 05 134 . Funazo T , Nomizo T , Kim YH . Liver Metastasis Is Associated with Poor Progression - Free Survival in Patients with Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated with Nivolumab . J Thorac Oncol ( 2017 ) 12 ( 9 ) : e140 – 1 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtho . 2017 . 04 . 027 135 . He Y , Wang Y , Zhang S , Ren S , Li J , Zhou C . Hepatic metastasis is a poor predictive marker for erlotinib in lung adenocarcinoma . Med Hypotheses ( 2016 ) 94 : 20 – 2 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mehy . 2016 . 06 . 009 136 . Clark AM , Ma B , Taylor DL , Grif ﬁ th L , Wells A . Liver metastases : Microenvironments and ex - vivo models . Exp Biol Med ( Maywood ) ( 2016 ) 241 ( 15 ) : 1639 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1535370216658144 137 . Kim JY , Lee S , Hwangbo B , Lee CT , Kim YW , Han SK , et al . NF - kappaB activation is related to the resistance of lung cancer cells to TNF - alpha - induced apoptosis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2000 ) 273 ( 1 ) : 140 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2000 . 2909 138 . Lin X , Chen Q , Huang C , Xu X . CYLD Promotes TNF - alpha - Induced Cell Necrosis Mediated by RIP - 1 in Human Lung Cancer Cells . Mediators In ﬂ ammation ( 2016 ) 2016 : 1542786 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2016 / 1542786 139 . You BR , Han BR , Park WH . Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid increases anti - cancer effect of tumor necrosis factor - alpha through up - regulation of TNF receptor 1 in lung cancer cells . Oncotarget ( 2017 ) 8 ( 11 ) : 17726 – 37 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 14628 140 . Yan HQ , Zhang D , Shi YY , You X , Shi L , Li Q , et al . Ataxia - telangiectasia mutated activation mediates tumor necrosis factor - alpha induced MMP - 13 up - regulation and metastasis in lung cancer cells . Oncotarget ( 2016 ) 7 ( 38 ) : 62070 – 83 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 11386 141 . Lin CW , Chen LJ , Lee PL , Lee CI , Lin JC , Chiu JJ . The inhibition of TNF - alpha - induced E - selectin expression in endothelial cells via the JNK / NF - kappaB pathways by highly N - acetylated chitooligosaccharides . Biomaterials ( 2007 ) 28 ( 7 ) : 1355 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2006 . 11 . 006 142 . Tanigawa N , Hagiwara M , Tada H , Komatsu T , Sugiura S , Kobayashi K , et al . Acacetin inhibits expression of E - selectin on endothelial cells through regulation of the MAP kinase signaling pathway and activation of NF - kappaB . Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol ( 2013 ) 35 ( 4 ) : 471 – 7 . doi : 10 . 3109 / 08923973 . 2013 . 811596 143 . Chen L , Zhao Q , Wang XL , You R , Zhang YH , Ji H , et al . ZLJ - 6 , a novel COX / 5 - LOX inhibitor , attenuates TNF - alpha - induced endothelial E - selectin , ICAM - 1 and VCAM - 1 expression and monocyte - endothelial interactions via a COX / 5 - LOX - independent mechanism . Vascul Pharmacol ( 2011 ) 55 ( 5 - 6 ) : 135 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . vph . 2011 . 07 . 003 144 . Lin CF , Chen CL , Chien SY , Tseng PC , Wang YC , Tsai TT . Oxidative Stress Facilitates IFN - gamma - Induced Mimic Extracellular Trap Cell Death in A549 Lung Epithelial Cancer Cells . PloS One ( 2016 ) 11 ( 8 ) : e0162157 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0162157 145 . Lin CF , Chien SY , Chen CL , Hsieh CY , Tseng PC , Wang YC . IFN - gamma Induces Mimic Extracellular Trap Cell Death in Lung Epithelial Cells Through Autophagy - Regulated DNA Damage . J Interferon Cytokine Res ( 2016 ) 36 ( 2 ) : 100 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1089 / jir . 2015 . 0011 146 . ChenCL , ChiangTH , TsengPC , WangYC , LinCF . LossofPTENcausesSHP2 activation , making lung cancer cells unresponsive to IFN - gamma . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2015 ) 466 ( 3 ) : 578 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2015 . 09 . 085 147 . GaoY , YangJ , CaiY , FuS , ZhangN , FuX , etal . IFN - gamma - mediatedinhibition of lung cancer correlates with PD - L1 expression and is regulated by PI3K - AKT signaling . Int J Cancer ( 2018 ) 143 ( 4 ) : 931 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 31357 148 . Vahl JM , Friedrich J , Mittler S , Trump S , Heim L , Kachler K , et al . Interleukin - 10 - regulated tumour tolerance in non - small cell lung cancer . Br J Cancer ( 2017 ) 117 ( 11 ) : 1644 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / bjc . 2017 . 336 149 . Khatib AM , Kontogiannea M , Fallavollita L , Jamison B , Meterissian S , Brodt P . Rapid induction of cytokine and E - selectin expression in the liver in response to metastatic tumor cells . Cancer Res ( 1999 ) 59 ( 6 ) : 1356 – 61 . 150 . Brodt P , Fallavollita L , Bresalier RS , Meterissian S , Norton CR , Wolitzky BA . Liver endothelial E - selectin mediates carcinoma cell adhesion and promotes liver metastasis . Int J Cancer ( 1997 ) 71 ( 4 ) : 612 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0215 ( 19970516 ) 71 : 4 < 612 : : AID - IJC17 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - D 151 . Borentain P , Carmona S , Mathieu S , Jouve E , El - Battari A , Gerolami R . Inhibition of E - selectin expression on the surface of endothelial cells inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma growth by preventing tumor angiogenesis . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol ( 2016 ) 77 ( 4 ) : 847 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00280 - 016 - 3006 - x 152 . Chen Q , Massague J . Molecular pathways : VCAM - 1 as a potential therapeutic target in metastasis . Clin Cancer Res ( 2012 ) 18 ( 20 ) : 5520 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 11 - 2904 153 . Chen M , Peng W , Hu S , Deng J . miR - 126 / VCAM - 1 regulation by naringin suppresses cell growth of human non - small cell lung cancer . Oncol Lett ( 2018 ) 16 ( 4 ) : 4754 – 60 . doi : 10 . 3892 / ol . 2018 . 9204 154 . KimMR , JangJH , ParkCS , Kim TK , Kim YJ , ChungJ , etal . AHumanAntibody That Binds to the Sixth Ig - Like Domain of VCAM - 1 Blocks Lung Cancer Cell Migration In Vitro . Int J Mol Sci ( 2017 ) 18 ( 3 ) : 566 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms18030566 155 . Enomoto K , Nishikawa Y , Omori Y , Tokairin T , Yoshida M , Ohi N , et al . Cell biology and pathology of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells . Med Electron Microsc ( 2004 ) 37 ( 4 ) : 208 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00795 - 004 - 0261 - 4 156 . PascoS , RamontL , MaquartFX , MonboisseJC . Controlofmelanomaprogression by various matrikines from basementmembrane macromolecules . Crit Rev Oncol Hematol ( 2004 ) 49 ( 3 ) : 221 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . critrevonc . 2003 . 09 . 006 157 . Aksorn N , Chanvorachote P . Integrin as a Molecular Target for Anti - cancer Approaches in Lung Cancer . Anticancer Res ( 2019 ) 39 ( 2 ) : 541 – 8 . doi : 10 . 21873 / anticanres . 13146 158 . Petpiroon N , Sritularak B , Chanvorachote P . Phoyunnanin E inhibits migration of non - small cell lung cancer cells via suppression of epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition and integrin alphav and integrin beta3 . BMC Complement Altern Med ( 2017 ) 17 ( 1 ) : 553 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12906 - 017 - 2059 - 7 159 . Saisongkorh V , Maiuthed A , Chanvorachote P . Nitric oxide increases the migratory activity of non - small cell lung cancer cells via AKT - mediated integrin alphav and beta1 upregulation . Cell Oncol ( Dordr ) ( 2016 ) 39 ( 5 ) : 449 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s13402 - 016 - 0287 - 3 160 . Stewart RL , West D , Wang C , Weiss HL , Gal T , Durbin EB , et al . Elevated integrin alpha6beta4 expression is associated with venous invasion and decreased overall survival in non - small cell lung cancer . Hum Pathol ( 2016 ) 54 : 174 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . humpath . 2016 . 04 . 003 161 . Wei X , Wang X , Zhan J , Chen Y , Fang W , Zhang L , et al . Smurf1 inhibits integrin activation by controlling Kindlin - 2 ubiquitination and degradation . J Cell Biol ( 2017 ) 216 ( 5 ) : 1455 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201609073 Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 15 162 . Tabaries S , Dupuy F , Dong Z , Monast A , Annis MG , Spicer J , et al . Claudin - 2 promotes breast cancer liver metastasis by facilitating tumor cell interactions with hepatocytes . Mol Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 32 ( 15 ) : 2979 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00299 - 12 163 . Hichino A , Okamoto M , Taga S , Akizuki R , Endo S , Matsunaga T , et al . Down - regulation of Claudin - 2 Expression and Proliferation by Epigenetic Inhibitors in Human Lung Adenocarcinoma A549 Cells . J Biol Chem ( 2017 ) 292 ( 6 ) : 2411 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M116 . 762807 164 . Sonoki H , Tanimae A , Endo S , Matsunaga T , Furuta T , Ichihara K , et al . Kaempherol and Luteolin Decrease Claudin - 2 Expression Mediated by Inhibition of STAT3 in Lung Adenocarcinoma A549 Cells . Nutrients ( 2017 ) 9 ( 6 ) : 597 . doi : 10 . 3390 / nu9060597 165 . Zhao H , Zhang D , Yang L , Wang E . p0071 interacts with E - cadherin in the cytoplasm so as to promote the invasion and metastasis of non - small cell lung cancer . Mol Carcinog ( 2018 ) 57 ( 1 ) : 89 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1002 / mc . 22734 166 . Farmakovskaya M , Khromova N , Rybko V , Dugina V , Kopnin B , Kopnin P . E - Cadherin repression increases amount of cancer stem cells in human A549 lung adenocarcinoma and stimulates tumor growth . Cell Cycle ( 2016 ) 15 ( 8 ) : 1084 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15384101 . 2016 . 1156268 167 . Yates CC , Shepard CR , Stolz DB , Wells A . Co - culturing human prostate carcinoma cells with hepatocytes leads to increased expression of E - cadherin . Br J Cancer ( 2007 ) 96 ( 8 ) : 1246 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6603700 168 . Hsu PC , Jablons DM , Yang CT , You L . Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor ( EGFR ) Pathway , Yes - Associated Protein ( YAP ) and the Regulation of Programmed Death - Ligand 1 ( PD - L1 ) in Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer ( NSCLC ) . Int J Mol Sci ( 2019 ) 20 ( 15 ) : 3821 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms20153821 169 . Li ZQ , Yan HC , Gu JJ , Yang YL , Fang XJ , Zhang MK . Comparative ef ﬁ cacy and safety of PD - 1 / PD - L1 Inhibitors versus platinum - based chemotherapy for the ﬁ rst - line treatment of advanced non - small cell lung cancer : a meta analysis of randomized controlled trials . Pharmacol Res ( 2020 ) 160 : 105194 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . phrs . 2020 . 105194 170 . Carcereny E , Moran T , Capdevila L , Cros S , Vila L , de Los Llanos Gil M , et al . The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGRF ) in lung cancer . Transl Respir Med ( 2015 ) 3 : 1 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s40247 - 015 - 0013 - z 171 . Maity S , Pai KSR , Nayak Y . Advances in targeting EGFR allosteric site as anti - NSCLC therapy to overcome the drug resistance . Pharmacol Rep ( 2020 ) 72 ( 4 ) : 799 – 813 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s43440 - 020 - 00131 - 0 172 . Oh DY , Bang YJ . HER2 - targeted therapies - a role beyond breast cancer . Nat Rev Clin Oncol ( 2020 ) 17 ( 1 ) : 33 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41571 - 019 - 0268 - 3 173 . Shrestha L , Singh SS , Parajuli P , Dahal A , Mattheolabakis G , Meyer S , et al . In vivo studies of a peptidomimetic that targets EGFR dimerization in NSCLC . J Cancer ( 2020 ) 11 ( 20 ) : 5982 – 99 . doi : 10 . 7150 / jca . 46320 174 . Wang Y , Xu C , Xu B , Li L , Li W , Wang W , et al . Xiaoai Jiedu Recipe Inhibits Proliferation and Metastasis of Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells by Blocking the P38 Mitogen - Activated Protein Kinase ( MAPK ) Pathway . Med Sci Monit ( 2019 ) 25 : 7538 – 46 . doi : 10 . 12659 / MSM . 917115 175 . Suzuki M , Cao K , Kato S , Mizutani N , Tanaka K , Arima C , et al . CERS6 required for cell migration and metastasis in lung cancer . J Cell Mol Med ( 2020 ) 24 ( 20 ) : 11949 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcmm . 15817 176 . Shih JC . Monoamine oxidase isoenzymes : genes , functions and targets for behavior and cancer therapy . J Neural Transm ( Vienna ) ( 2018 ) 125 ( 11 ) : 1553 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00702 - 018 - 1927 - 8 177 . Yang X , Zhao D , Li Y , Li Y , Cui W , Li Y , et al . Potential monoamine oxidase A inhibitor suppressing paclitaxel - resistant non - small cell lung cancer metastasis and growth . Thorac Cancer ( 2020 ) 11 ( 10 ) : 2858 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1759 - 7714 . 13617 Con ﬂ ict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁ nancial relationships that could be construed as a potential con ﬂ ict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Zhu , Bao , Chen , Lin , Zhuyan , Zhen , Xing , Zhou and Zhu . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Zhu et al . Mechanisms of Lung Cancer Metastasis Frontiers in Oncology | www . frontiersin . org November 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 585284 16