Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Task and Time Decomposition in Electronic Brainstorming Alan Dennis , Jay Aronson , Bill Heninger , Ed Walker ' Terry College of Business , University of Georgia , . Athens , GA 30602 Abstract One aspect of brainstorming that has received little research attention is how the brainstorming task should be presented to the group , whether as one all - encompassing question or as a series of separate questions each focusing on one aspect of the task . This paper reports the results of an experiment in which groups electronically brainstormed on intact tasks ( where all parts of the task were presented simultaneously ) or on decomposed tasks ( where three subcategories of the task were presented to the groups ) . We also examined the effects of decomposing the time periods in which groups worked , either one time period or several shorter ones . Groups in the decomposed task condition generated 40 % more ideas , but there were no time effects . We attribute these differences to the ability of task decomposition to refocus members ' attention more evenly across the entire task solution space . Introduction In recent years , many organizations have begun using group support systems for electronic brainstorming ( EBS ) [ see 161 . These EBS systems enable group members to interact electronically by exchanging typed ideas , rather than taking turns speaking . Empirical research suggests that EBS groups may be quite effective idea generators . Recent studies have found electronic brainstorming groups to generate more ideas than verbally interacting groups and more than nominal groups for larger group sizes [ 7 , 10 , 11 , 271 . One aspect of brainstorming that has received little research attention is how the group works on the brainstorming task . Rosch and colleagues [ 20 , 251 theorize that most tasks have a hierarchical , or tree - like , structure . The highest element in the structure , or its root , is called the " superordinate " level . This superordinate level can be decomposed into a set of more specific categories called the * * basic ' * level , which in turn can be deconnposed into even more specific categories called the " sulbordinate " level . Of course , these levels are relative , as one level in an organization may view the superordinate level as the highest level , while another , higher , organizational level may see it as simply a subordinate level in a more complex task . The question of interest in this study is which leads to more ideas , posing a task to a brainstorming group at the highest level as one all - encompassing question , or at the basic level as a series of distinct questions each addressing one subcategory of the overall task which are addressed sequentially or simultaneously ? Research on individual problem solving suggests that task decomposition may overcome the limitations of human information ] processing [ 131 , while studies of group interaction suggests that shorter time periods may increase the slpeed of group work [ 19 ] , both of which may result in more ideas . This paper reports the results of an experiment testing whether group brainstorming produces more ideas when the task is presented as one a1Lencompasr ; ing question or as a series of questions addressed sequentially or simultaneously . Theory and Research Group braiinstorming is influenced by both cognitive phenomena within individual group members and social ( or group ) plhenomena 12 11 . While social phenomena have tended to dominate previous research , we believe that cognitive factors are also important . We first consider cognitive phenomena and then social factors that arise from task decomposition , and then consider how time may play a role in influencing the generation of ideas . * The last three authors contributed equally and are listed in random order . 1060 - 3425 / 96 $ 5 . 00 0 1996 IEEE 51 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - I996 Task Decomposition Theory suggests that when presented with an all - encompassing task , individuals will produce a set of related ideas focusing on only a small set of task sub - categories . Anderson [ l , 21 argues that cognitive behavior is controlled by production rules - - rules specifling the steps of cognition - - that produce ideas when activated . Rules are activated automatically by input stimuli , without conscious control [ 3 ] . For any given stimuli , there are often several rules that could be activated . Each rule has a certain strength ( i . e . , likelihood of being activated ) based on past experiences . The ideas generated by an individual member of the group depend upon the stimuli , and the relative strengths of the individual ' s production rules . As activation spreads through memory , rules that are more closely related to the stimuli and to each other have the greatest strength and are most likely to be activated . These closely related rules will likely lead to the production of closely related ideas . Thus an uninterrupted stream of ideas will tend follow a consistent train of thought in a set of semantically similar subcategories , because related stimuli activate related production rules . This will result in a focus on a narrow subset of the task space , with many promising subcategories overlooked . There is no direct empirical evidence on group brainstorming to support Anderson ' s [ 11 theory , but there is abundant empirical evidence from individual problem solving research . Individuals presented with an all - encompassing task tend to focus only on a small fraction of the potential solution space , yet believe themselves to have to produced a very complete set of solutions [ e . g . , 13 , 14 , 241 . They explore a few related subcategories in greater depth rather than considering a broader range of subcategories in the overall task . The result is that individual problem solving often misses key solution opportunities from this narrow focus . One solution is to adopt a process structuring technique that attempts to change an individual ' s focus on the task , either by decomposing it into subcategories or expanding it into a higher level task [ 28 ] . Volkema [ 28 ] provides some evidence that task expansion can improve the nuniber of solutions identified . There is also evidence that task decomposition - - breaking the task into a set of subcategories which are considered separately - - improves performance by encouraging individuals to devote attention more evenly to the entire set of categories [ e . g . , 4 , 241 . Samson [ 26 , p . 571 argues that even some modest amount of decomposition - - perhaps three or four categories - - should lead to better performance . For example , if the objective is to solve a campus parking task , one might pose the task as one question : " How can we solve the parking problem ? " Conversely , one might break the task into several sub - questions before presenting it to the group : " How could we solve the parking problem by providing more parking , and by reducing demand for parking through alternate forms of transportation ? " Part of the reason for forming a group is to provide a diversity of approaches to the task to offset the potential narrowness of any one individual ' s perception . Thus what decomposition does for individual problem solving may be partially achieved by forming a group . Nonetheless , a similar phenomenon to that seen in individual research has been observed in groups . Group brainstorming can suffer from cognitive inertia , the tendency of group discussion to focus a few lines of thought in one subcategory [ 17 ] . As group members interact , they may consciously or unconsciously adopt behavior norms . These norms or structures can constrain behavior [ 15 ] . One of the structures typically found in group interaction is one of " not changing the subject " [ 17 , p . 3821 . Repeatedly changing the subject to focus on new ideas becomes socially undesirable . While members may think of unrelated ideas , social structures may inhibit the contribution of these ideas to the discussion . Members are motivated to focus on one train of thought in a narrow set of related subcategories [ 181 . Thus groups also constrain their attention to a narrow set of subcategories when faced with one all - encompassing task statement . Such behavior has also been observed in electronic brainstorming ( EBS ) , and has been associated with the generation of fewer ideas [ SI . In summary , we would anticipate task decomposition to produce more ideas . First , cognitive factors encourage individuals to focus on only a few subcategories of the task , thus overlooking other areas . Second , social factors encourage group members to work on the same subcategory rather than exploring many different parts simultaneously . Task decomposition should overcome both of these shortcomings by encouraging a more complete exploration of the task solution space . This will result in more ideas , and because previous research has found the number of ideas to be a reliable predictor of overall quality [ 9 , 271 , we anticipate that it will lead to greater overall idea quality . Therefore , we hypothesized : HI : The multiple question formulation will stimulate groups to produce more ideas of higher quality than the single question formulation . 52 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Effects of Time There is evidence that the pace of group work is affected by externally imposed time constraints [ 12 ] . McGrath , Kelly and Machatka [ 19 ] , for example , found that when groups had short time limits imposed , they solved tasks faster than when they had more time . In other words , work expands to fill the time available for it [ 23 ] . Therefore , breaking the time available to work on a task into several distinct time periods may encourage the group to work faster because they perceive tighter time constraints , which in turn may lead to more ideas . Therefore : H2 : The multiple time period formulation will stimulate groups to produce more ideas of higher quality than the single time period formulation . We also anticipate an interaction effect . Decomposing the overall task into a set of subcategories that are addressed sequentially , and instructing groups to only work on one subcategory at a time may heighten the perceived time pressure , If group members do not contribute their ideas about one sub - category in the short time period allotted to it , they may feel that they have “lost” their opportunity to work on it . This may induce a greater sense of urgency to contribute or lose the opportunity to do so . Therefore : H3 : The combination of the multiple task formulation and the multiple time period formulation will stimulate groups to produce more ideas of higher quality than either alone . Method Subjects Subjects were junior and senior undergraduate students enrolled in a general management course at a large southern university . Four hundred students participated as members of forty 10 - member groups which were randomly assigned to the treatments . About 43 % were female . Average age was 21 . 2 years . Tasks The experimental task asked subjects to generate ideas to improve the environment . It asked them to generate ideas to “improve air quality , water quality , and land quality . ” They were instructed to think broadly and to be creative in their ideas . Independent ’Variables The two independent variables were task decomposition ( single question or multiple question ) and time decomposition ( one time period , multiple time periods ) . Groups working in the single time period condition welt given one 30 - minute time period to complete the task . Groups in the multiple time period condition were given three 10 - minute time periods in which to complete the task . Groups walrking in the single question condition were given the task ; as stated above . Groups in the multiple question condition were given each of the three subcategories separately ( air quality , water quality , land quality ) . In Ithe multiple questiodmultiple time period condition , each of the three subcategories were presented to the groups in turn , and the groups were instructed to work only on the task subcategory presented to them during that 10 - minute period . Groups in the multiple questiodsingle time period condition were presented with all three subcategories simultaneously , and were instructed to allocate their time and effort across the three subcategories as they wished . Software The EBS software used in this study ( GroupSystems : [ 22 ] ) presente : d the user with a screen split horizontally , with the brainstorming question and the ideas of others displayed across the top , and a window in which to type their ideas on the lower half of the screen . In all conditions except the multiple questiodsingle time period condition , all ideas were placed in the same list so that all group members could see all ideas at the same time , by scrolling up and down through them . In the multiple question / singl , e time period condition , the ideas were organized into three separate lists ( one for each of the three subcategories ) , all of which were available to the subjects by selecting the list they wanted to read or contribute to ; there were no restrictions on which list the subjects could1 access . Measures Idea generation performance was first measured by counting the number of unique ideas . Output from each group was printed and coded by a rater ( a business graduate stud , ent ; see [ ll ] ) . The rater was instructed to identifl all unique ( i . e . , non - redundant ) ideas proposed in the transcrip1 . s from each group . An idea was counted only once for each group even if it appeared multiple times in the same or several time periods or question lists . A second rater ( another business graduate student ) . 53 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 independently coded the output of 10 randomly selected groups ( 25 % ) . Inter - rater reliability was adequate ( ~ . 9 9 ) . Our second major dependent variable was idea quality . The quality of each idea was assessed by the first rater using a l = Very Poor Quality to 5 = Very Good Quality scale . The second rater independently assessed the quality of 25 % of the ideas . Inter - rater reliability was adequate ( r = . 95 ) . These quality assessments can be combined to produce several possible measures of quality ; Diehl and Stroebe [ 9 ] discuss a variety of quality measures , all of which are some function of the number of ideas . We used three measures of quality . The first was total quality , which has proven to be the most consistently reliable measure across most studies . Total quality was calculated by summing the quality scores for each unique idea generated by each group . This measure rewards groups for all ideas they produce , even very poor ideas with low quality scores . For example , a group with five very poor ideas ( each rated a 1 ) would have the same quality score as a group generating one very good idea ( rated a 5 ) . The second measure was mean quality , which has proven to be unreliable across studies . Mean quality , as the name suggests , was the average quality of ideas generated by each group ( i . e . , total quality divided by the number of ideas ) . This measure rewards groups that generate high quality ideas and penalizes those that produce less than perfect ideas . For example , a group generating one very good idea ( rated a 5 ) would have a higher mean quality than a group with three very good ideas ( rated 5 ) and one neutral quality idea ( rated a 3 ) . The third measure was the quality of the good ideas only . The quality of good ideas was calculated in the same manner as total quality , but using only those ideas rated of quality 3 or higher . This measure attempts to strike a balance between total quality and mean quality so that groups are rewarded for all ideas they produce , except those that are poor ( i . e . , rated less than 3 ) . A post - session questionnaire assessed subjects ' perceptions of effectiveness ( 5 items , alpha = . 83 ) , satisfaction ( 5 items , alpha = . 79 ) , idea diversity ( 6 items , alpha = . 83 ) , and whether they had sufficient time ( 4 items , alpha = . 73 ) . These measures were adapted from previous research and are presented in the Appendix . All used a 1 - 7 scale , with 1 meaning low ( or insufficient time ) and 7 meaning high ( or sufficient time ) . Results The means and standard deviations for all measures are shown in Table 1 . The results of the statistical analyses are shown in Table 2 . There was a main effect for task decomposition on the number of unique ideas generated : groups in the multiple question treatments generated more unique ideas ( F ( 1 , 36 ) = 8 . 19 , p = . 007 ) . There were no effects due to time and no interaction effects . There was also a main effect for task decomposition on total quality and the quality of good ideas : groups in the multiple question treatments had higher total quality ( F ( 1 , 36 ) = 7 . 49 , p . 010 ) and higher quality of good ideas ( F ( 1 , 36 ) = 4 . 21 , p = . O48 ) . There were no effects due to time and no interaction effects for either measure . The pattern for mean quality was different , with no main effects but an interaction effect : groups in the single time period / multiple question condition generated ideas with the highest mean quality , and those in the multiple time peridmultiple question condition generated ideas with the lowest mean quality . Therefore H1 is supported , but H2 and H3 are not supported . Subjects in all treatment conditions reported similar perceived effectiveness and satisfaction , except that those in the single questiodmultiple time period condition reported significantly lower effectiveness and satisfaction ( see Tables 1 and 2 , Tukey , alpha = . 05 ) . Subjects in all conditions were equally likely to report that they had had sufficient time , except for those in the multiple questiodmultiple time period condition , who were less likely to report that they had sufkient time ( see Tables 1 and 2 , Tukey , alpha = . 05 ) . There was a main effect for time decomposition on idea diversity : subjects in the single time period conditions reported greater diversity ( see Tables 1 and 2 , Tukey , alpha = . 05 ) . Discussion The results from this experiment suggest that decomposing an idea - generating task into subcategories and directing subjects to work on each subcategory simultaneously or sequentially results in more ideas of greater total quality . In this study , the groups working on the decomposed task generated about 40 % more ideas on average than those working on the intact task , with greater total quality and quality of good ideas . There were no differences in subjects ' satisfaction or perceived effectiveness between these approaches , although subjects 54 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 working on the same task in multiple time periods were less satisfied and perceived themselves to have been less effective ( which was , in fact , accurate ) . These findings have obvious implications for practice : organizational groups generating ideas should decompose the task into several subcategories before beginning to work . Subjects in the multiple questiodmultiple time period condition felt greater time pressure . As they were instructed to work on each task subcategory for only 10 minutes , this is not surprising . However , contrary to our hypothesis , it did not encourage them to work faster and generate more ideas . This may indicate no effect , because the subjects in this condition were actually under no more time pressure than those in other treatments ( it was simply perceptual ) . Or it may simply suggest that the perceived time pressure was not suffciently strong to induce changes . The pattern in perceived idea diversity is more difficult to interpret . We had expected it to be greater in the multiple question conditions , due to our theoretical arguments that multiple questions would induce a greater diversity in topics discussed . However , there were effects due to time decomposition , not task decomposition : subjects in the two multiple time period conditions perceived less idea diversity than those in the two single time period conditions . We offer two explanations . First , subjects in the multiple time peridsingle question condition actually generated fewer ideas . It may be that they perceived less diversity because there truly was less diversity in this condition . Second , the subjects in the multiple time periodmultiple question condition may have reported less diversity because they worked in three highly compartmentalized sessions , separated both by time and subject from each other . It may be that they reported less diversity because within each time period , their work was highly focused on a single , narrow subcategory , and they interpreted the questionnaire items to mean within rather than across the three time periods . One question that remains is how far decomposition can usefully go . Would the decomposition yield further gains if " air quality " was further subdivided into " automobile emissions , " " factory emissions " , and so on . Further decompositions are obviously possible , virtually indefinitely . Presumably there is some level of decomposition beyond which performance degrades with further decomposition . Our evidence here is that this optimal point appears to be at a finer level of division than the original , superordinate form of the task initially developed . Exactly how deep decomposition can be usefully done clearly depends upon the group and the task , but the key point is that some moderate level of decomposition produced better results than no decomposition . However , when the solution space for a task is small or when the task is complex , decomposition may not be an appropriate strategy . For small tasks , a group may be easily able to exhaust the solution space without decomposition . For complex tasks , it may be impossible to create feasible solutions without considering all subcategories of the task simultaneously . For example , ideas developed by focusing on one subcategory , may violate a constraint imposed by some other aspect of the task and thus be infeasible [ e . g . , see 51 . One of the himitations of this study is that we used a strong form iof decomposition ( subjects spent specified times on specified subcategories of the task ) . Would we have found similar results if we had not specifred the specific task decompositions and permitted each group ( or each member individually ) to identify their own decomposition ( i . e . , set of subcategories ) before beginning to work on the task ? Our focus was on improving idea generation , but it is important to note that the decision making process usually does not end with idea generation . While the generation of more ideas should lead to better decisions , there is some evidence that groups do not process all the ideas and information they produce [ 6 ] . This too is an area for future research . Our results have a clear message for managers and practitioners ] performing brainstorming . If the task offers an opportuniity for modest decomposition , it should be taken , with time and effort allocated across the various subcategories . Nonetheless , concerns clearly remain as to the generalizability of the findings . The result appears robust and of substantial size - - on the order of 40 % more ideas . An etfect of this size can be usefully employed in practical applications while theoretical research probes more deeply into the limits of its effectiveness . There are many other questions for future research . References 1 . Anderson , J . R . The Architecture of Cognition . Cambridg , e , MA : Harvard University Press , 1983 . 2 . Anderson , J . R . Skill Acquisition : Compilation of Weak - Method Problem Solutions . Psychological Review , 92 , 1987 , 192 - 210 . 3 . Anderson , J . R . Automaticity and the ACT * Theory . American Journal of Psychology , 105 , ( 1992 ) , 165 - 180 . 55 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 4 . Armstrong , J . S . , Denniston , W . B . & Gordon , M . M . The use of the decomposition principle in making judgments . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 14 ( 1975 ) , 257 - 263 . 5 . Campbell , D . J . Task complexity : A review and analysis . Academy of Management Review , 13 6 . Dennis , A . Information exchange in group decision making : You can lead a group to information but you can ' t make it think . Best Paper Proceedings of the Academy of Management Meeting , Atlanta , GA 7 . Dennis , A . R . , & Valacich , J . S . Computer brainstorms : More heads are better than one . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 ( 1993 ) , 53 1 - 537 . 8 . Dennis , A . R . , & Valacich , J . S . , Group , Sub - Group , and Nominal Group Brainstorming : New Rules for a New Media ? Journal of Management , 20 , ( 1994 ) , 9 . Diehl , M . & Stroebe , W . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social 10 . Gallupe , R . B . , Bastianutti , L . M . & Cooper , W . H . Unblocking brainstorms . Journal of Applied 11 . Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Bastianutti , L . M . & Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . Group size and electronic brainstorming . Academy uf Management Journal , 35 ( 1992 ) , 350 - 369 . 12 . Gersick , C . J . G . " Time and Transition in Work Teams : Toward a New Model of Group Development , " Academy of Management Journal , 13 . Gettys , C . F . & Fisher , S . Hypothesis plausibility and hypothesis generation . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 24 ( 1979 ) , 93 - 1 10 . 14 . GetUys , C . F . , Pliske , R . M . , Manning , C . , & Casey , J . T . An evaluation of human act generation performance . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 39 ( 1987 ) , 23 - 31 . 15 . Giddens , A . The Constitution of Society : Outline of the Theory of Structure . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press , 1984 . ( 1988 ) , 40 - 52 . ( 1993 ) , 283 - 287 . 723 - 736 . psycho lo ^ , 53 ( 1987 ) , 497 - 509 . psycho lo ^ , 76 ( 1991 ) , 137 - 142 . 31 ( 1988 ) , 9 - 41 . 16 . Jessup . L . M . & Valacich , J . S . ( Eds . ) . Group Support Systems : New Perspectives . New York , NY : Macmillan . 1993 . 17 . Lamm , H . & TrommsdorlT , G . Group versus Individual Performance on Tasks Requiring Ideational Proficiency ( Brainstorming ) : A Review . European Journal of Social Psychology , ( 1973 ) , 18 . Maier , N . R . F . Problem Solving and Creativity , Pacific Grove , CA : BrooksKole , 1970 . 19 . McGrath J . E . , Kelly , J . R . , & Machatka , D . E . " The Social Psychology of Time : Entrainment of Behavior in Social and Organizational Settings , " in S . Oskamp ( ed . ) Applied Social Psychology Annual , 5 , 21 - 44 , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . 1984 . 20 . Mervis , C . B . & Rosch , E . Categorization of natual objects . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 1981 , 89 - 115 . 21 . Nagasundaram , M . & Dennis , A . R . When a group is not a group : The cognitive foundation of group idea generation . Small Group Research , 24 ( 1993 ) , 463 - 489 . 22 . Nunamaker , Jr . , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , & George , J . F . Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work . Communications of theACM , 34 ( 7 ) , 1991 , 40 - 61 . 23 . Parkinson , C . N . Parkinson ' s Law Cambridge MA : Riverdale Press , 1957 . 24 . Pitz , G . F . , Sachs , N . J . & Heerboth , J . Procedures for eliciting choices in the analysis of individual decisions . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 26 ( 1980 ) , 396 - 408 . 25 . Rosch , E . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Journal of Experinrental Psychology : General , 104 , ( 1975 ) , 192 - 233 26 . Samson , D . Managerial Decision Analysis . Homewood , E : Irwin . 1988 . 27 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . & Connolly , T . Idea generation in computer - based groups : A new ending to an old story . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 , ( 1994 ) , 448 - 467 . 28 . Volkema , R . J . Problem Formulation in Planning and Design . Management Science , 29 , ( 1983 ) , 639 - 652 . 361 - 387 . 56 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conferenc ' e on System Sciences - 1996 Time Questions Unique Ideas Total Quality Mean Quality Good Idea Quality Effectiveness Satisfaction Idea Diversity Sufficient Time Unique Ideas Total Quality Mean Quality Good Idea Quality Effectiveness Satisfaction Idea Diversity Sufficient Time 1 Time 1 Question Mean Std 122 . 4 64 . 4 203 . 0 105 . 1 1 . 64 0 . 20 67 . 9 42 . 3 4 . 89 1 . 27 5 . 40 1 . 10 4 . 36 0 . 61 6 . 15 1 . 07 n 40 Groups 40 Groups 40 Groups 40 Groups 400 Subjects 400 Subjects 400 Subjects 400 Subjects TABLE 1 Means and Standard Deviations 1 Time 3 Questions Mean Std 141 . 6 29 . 6 261 . 3 81 . 2 1 . 87 0 . 52 127 . 1 96 . 8 4 . 97 1 . 27 5 . 42 1 . 02 4 . 25 0 . 51 6 . 08 1 . 21 3 Time 1 Question Mean Std 87 . 4 26 . 9 152 . 3 48 . 8 1 . 73 0 . 12 55 . 61 24 . 4 4 . 14 1 . 50 4 . 81 1 . 37 4 . 361 0 . 64 6 . 04 . 1 . 20 TABLE 2 Statisical Analyses Time Decomposition F 1 ) 0 . 84 ns 2 . 26 ns 1 . 32 ns 3 . 22 ns 11 . 77 . 001 6 . 44 . 012 0 . 47 ns 7 . 18 . 008 3 Time 3 Questions Mean Std 150 . 3 49 . 8 234 . 7 80 . 1 1 . 56 0 . 15 72 . 7 45 . 5 4 . 81 1 . 23 5 . 42 1 . 03 4 . 17 0 . 62 5 . 50 1 . 47 Task Decomposition F 1 ) - 8 . 19 . 007 7 . 49 . 010 0 . 10 ns 4 . 21 . 048 7 . 98 . 005 7 . 71 . 006 6 . 40 . 012 6 . 37 . 012 Time x Task Interaction F P 2 . 32 ns 0 . 22 ns 4 . 53 . 040 1 . 28 ns 5 . 13 . 024 6 . 72 . 010 0 . 43 ns 3 . 36 ns 57 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Appendix Perceived Effectiveness 0 How effective was your group at generating ideas very Neutral / very very Neutral / very Ineffective Undecided Effective 0 Rate the effectiveness of the ideas proposed . Ineffective Undecided Effective Very Low Neutral / Very High Quality Undecided Quality Would you recommend this idea generation technique as a useful technique to others as a means of generating ideas ? 0 Rate the quality of the ideas proposed . Not Neutral / very Useful Undecided Useful How effective was your group at making use of members skills , abilities , and resources ? very Neutral / very Ineffective Undecided Effective Satisfaction 0 How do you feel about the process by which you generated ideas ? very very very very Dissatisfied Neutral Satisfied e How do you feel about the ideas proposed ? Dissatisfied Neutral Satisfied How satisfied were you with the computer application your group used to discuss this problem ? 0 very very Dissatisfied Neutral Satisfied All in all , how satisfied are you with being a member of this group ? 0 very very Dissatisfied Neutral Satisfied Overall , how enjoyable did you find your experience in this group ? Not at all Neutral / very Enjoyable Undecided Enjoyable Time For this idea generation session , did you : * Have as much Neutral / Want more time as you needed Undecided time Did you have enough time to review other comments and ideas ? * Ample Time Neutral / Inadequate Undecided Time Felt Neutral / No Rushed Undecided Rush 0 Did you feel rushed in recording your ideas ? Considering all the ideas you thought of , did you : * Have time to Neutral / Not have time express all your Undecided to express all ideas ideas Diversity of Ideas Did you explore many different topic areas or fewer topic areas in greater detail ? * Many different Neutral / Fewer topic topic areas Undecided areas 0 Were the topics discussed : Very Similar Neutral / Very Different to one another undecided from one another One Area Neutral / Many Areas 0 Did you focus primarily in one topic area , or many ? Undecided Did other members of your group focus primarily in one topic area , or many ? 0 One Area Neutral / Many Areas Overall , did some problem areas receive more attention than others ? Undecided 0 One Area got Neutral / All Areas all the attention Undecided received attention 0 Did the group as a whole explore * Many different Neutral / Fewer topic topic areas Undecided areas * Indicates reversed scored items . 58