Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Modelling how face masks and symptoms - based quarantine synergistically and cost - effectively reduce SARS - CoV - 2 transmission in Bangladesh Elaine A Ferguson , Eric Brum , Anir Chowdhury , Shayan Chowdhury , Mikolaj Kundegorski , Ayesha S Mahmud , Nabila Purno , Ayesha Sania , Rachel Steenson , Motahara Tasneem , Katie Hampson PII : S1755 - 4365 ( 22 ) 00039 - 1 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2022 . 100592 Reference : EPIDEM100592 To appear in : Epidemics Received date : 2 June 2021 Revised date : 22 April 2022 Accepted date : 10 June 2022 Please cite this article as : Elaine A Ferguson , Eric Brum , Anir Chowdhury , Shayan Chowdhury , Mikolaj Kundegorski , Ayesha S Mahmud , Nabila Purno , Ayesha Sania , Rachel Steenson , Motahara Tasneem and Katie Hampson , Modelling how face masks and symptoms - based quarantine synergistically and cost - effectively reduce SARS - CoV - 2 transmission in Bangladesh , Epidemics , ( 2021 ) doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2022 . 100592 This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2021 Published by Elsevier . 1 Modelling how face masks and symptoms - based quarantine synergistically and cost - effectively reduce SARS - CoV - 2 transmission in Bangladesh AUTHORS : Elaine A Ferguson 1 * , Eric Brum 2 , Anir Chowdhury 3 , Shayan Chowdhury 3 , Mikolaj Kundegorski 1 , Ayesha S Mahmud 4 , Nabila Purno 5 , Ayesha Sania 6 , Rachel Steenson 1 , Motahara Tasneem 2 , Katie Hampson 1 1 University of Glasgow , UK 2 FAO , Bangladesh 3 a2i , Bangladesh 4 University of California , Berkeley , USA 5 UNFPA , Bangladesh 6 Columbia University , USA * elaine . ferguson @ glasgow . ac . uk Abstract Background : Non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) used to limit SARS - CoV - 2 transmission vary in their feasibility , appropriateness and effectiveness in different contexts . In Bangladesh a national lockdown implemented in March 2020 exacerbated poverty and was untenable long - term . A resurgence in 2021 warranted renewed NPIs . We sought to identify NPIs that were feasible in this context and explore potential synergies between interventions . Methods : We developed an SEIR model for Dhaka District , parameterised from literature values and calibrated to data from Bangladesh . We discussed scenarios and parameterisations with policymakers with the aid of an interactive app . These discussions guided modelling of lockdown and two post - lockdown measures considered feasible to deliver ; symptoms - based household quarantining and compulsory mask - wearing . We compared NPI scenarios on deaths , hospitalisations relative to capacity , working days lost , and cost - effectiveness . Results : Lockdowns alone were predicted to delay the first epidemic peak but could not prevent overwhelming of the health service and were costly in lost working days . Impacts of post - lockdown interventions depended heavily on compliance . Assuming 80 % compliance , symptoms - based household quarantining alone could not prevent hospitalisations exceeding capacity , whilst mask - wearing prevented overwhelming health services and was cost - effective given masks of high filtration efficiency . Combining masks with quarantine increased their impact . Recalibration to surging cases in 2021 suggested potential for a further wave in 2021 , dependent on uncertainties in case reporting and immunity . Conclusions : Masks and symptoms - based household quarantining synergistically prevent transmission , and are cost - effective in Bangladesh . Our interactive app was valuable in supporting decision - making , with mask - wearing being mandated early , and community teams being deployed to support quarantining across Dhaka . These measures likely contributed to averting the worst public health impacts , but delivering an effective response with consistent compliance across the population has been challenging . In the event of a further resurgence , concurrent messaging to increase compliance with both mask - wearing and quarantine is recommended . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 2 Key words : Coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) ; Non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) ; Low - and middle - income countries ( LMICS ) ; Cost - effectiveness ; Facemasks Introduction During the early stages of the COVID - 19 pandemic , countries around the world turned to a range of non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) to limit transmission . These measures included improved hygiene practices , social distancing , contact tracing , travel restrictions , quarantines , shielding of the vulnerable , lockdowns of differing severity , and facemasks . For a variety of reasons , some of these measures may be less effective or more difficult to maintain in low - and middle - income countries ( LMICs ) . Vaccines came into play in 2021 , but rollout has been slow in LMICs . With negligible vaccination coverage and only NPIs to mitigate impacts , LMICs have faced subsequent epidemic waves of faster - spreading variants with possibly little protective immunity from prior infections ( Cele et al . , 2021 ; Planas et al . , 2021 ) . Lockdowns can effectively control COVID - 19 transmission ( Flaxman et al . , 2020 ) . However , they also exacerbate poverty ( Amewu et al . , 2020 ; Andam et al . , 2020 ) and risk food security , whilst poor adherence limits their effectiveness . Social distancing may be impractical in densely populated areas ( Anwar et al . , 2020 ; Chowdhury et al . , 2020 ; Gupta et al . , 2020 ) , and in urban slums and refugee camps , where cramped conditions and poor healthcare access co - occur ( Ahmed et al . , 2020 ; Truelove et al . , 2020 ) . Shielding the most vulnerable , is also challenging in multi - generational households ( Hodgins and Saad , 2020 ; Lloyd - Sherlock et al . , 2020 ; United Nations , Department of Economic and Social Affairs , 2019a ) . Contact tracing is limited by testing capabilities ( facilities , trained personnel , consumables , reagents and biosafety ) ( Anwar et al . , 2020 ; Homaira et al . , 2020 ; Rahaman et al . , 2020 ) and information management capacity . Moreover , in settings where healthcare resources are already stretched , there is limited ability to temporarily increase capacity to deal with sudden increases in patient volume ( Torres - Rueda et al . , 2020 ) . The impact of COVID - 19 , however , may be mitigated in LMICs by the relatively younger populations with fewer underlying risk factors , meaning that a smaller proportion of cases are likely to be severe relative to high - income countries ( HICs ) ( Clark et al . , 2020 ; Gupta et al . , 2020 ; Hodgins and Saad , 2020 ) . More generally , the wider social and economic consequences of NPIs may trade off against their impact on controlling disease , and the structure and underlying health of populations may impact the shape of this trade - off ( Reidpath et al . , 2020 ) . Hence , there was an urgent need for the development and implementation of contextually appropriate interventions that take into account the population that they target ( Hodgins and Saad , 2020 ) . During the pandemic , epidemiological models have received increased attention from governments and the public alike , and have influenced policy decisions worldwide ( McBryde et al . , 2020 ) . However , a translational gap persists between policymakers and the scientists working on these models . Early in the pandemic , this gap was exacerbated by uncertainties about the biology and transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 , and continually compounded by limited understanding of and changes in people’s behaviour . As a consequence , there was often simultaneously both overconfidence in , and mistrust of , models . Ideally , policymakers , scientists and communities should work together to develop and implement locally appropriate interventions . By empowering decision makers to better understand the mechanisms underpinning the timescales and magnitude over which interventions lead to impact , as well as the uncertainties and social and behavioural factors that affect their efficacy , co - created models can inform short - and longer - term policies . Cases of COVID - 19 were first confirmed in Bangladesh on the 8 th March 2020 , and NPIs were subsequently introduced , beginning with postponements to mass gatherings , followed by international travel restrictions , and culminating in a national lockdown ( announced as a ‘general J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 3 holiday’ ) from 26 th March ( Ahmed et al . , 2020 ; Anwar et al . , 2020 ) . The lockdown had swift economic repercussions : around 60 % of households lost their main income source , the majority of previously vulnerable non - poor households slipped below the poverty line , and food security declined ( Rahman et al . , 2020 ) . The nationwide lockdown was quickly recognized as untenable long - term ( ultimately ending on 1 st June 2020 ) . With input from policymakers on the feasibility of implementation , we developed an SEIR model to compare post - lockdown NPIs on : 1 ) their ability to reduce deaths and hospitalisations ; and 2 ) both their cost - effectiveness to the health provider and their cost in terms of working days lost ( one of many societal costs of the pandemic and associated control efforts ) . In particular , we sought to identify potential synergies between different measures . We also explored the consequences of long scale - up periods or delays in implementing interventions , and designed an associated interactive app within which policymakers could explore the NPI scenarios to gain an understanding of how the model worked and how uncertainties may influence outcomes . Finally , we examined scenarios following resurgence of cases and a renewed lockdown in March 2021 . Methods Model description We developed a deterministic SEIR model comprising a set of ordinary differential equations ( ODEs ) to describe SARS - CoV - 2 transmission in Dhaka District , the most densely populated district in Bangladesh . Dhaka District includes rural areas in addition to the city area itself , but , as case data were resolved to district level , we consider the full district population , rather than restricting analyses to the city population . The model includes three infectious states , with latently infected individuals either becoming pre - symptomatically infectious ( p I ) before progressing to symptomatic infection ( s I ) , or becoming asymptomatically infectious ( a I ) until their recovery ( Fig . 1 ) . Susceptible individuals are exposed to SARS - CoV - 2 according to transmission rates specific to each infectious state ( a  , p  and s  ) . These rates are based on : 1 ) asymptomatic individuals producing 65 % of the secondary infections produced by pre - symptomatic - to - symptomatic individuals ( Yi et al . , 2020 ) ; 2 ) 35 % of secondary infections from pre - symptomatic - to - symptomatic individuals happening in the pre - symptomatic period ( Liu et al . , 2020 ) ; and 3 ) the value of 0 R :    0 1 a a a a p p s s R f d f d d        where 7 a d  , 2 p d  and 7 s d  are the mean durations ( in days ) of each infectious state ( Byrne et al . , 2020 ; Hu et al . , 2020 ) , and a f is the proportion of infections that are asymptomatic ( supplementary Table S4 ) . Recovered individuals are considered to be immune . SEIR models have been widely used in the COVID - 19 pandemic , though there has been some variation in the modelling of the infectious classes , with some using the same three classes described here ( Davies et al . , 2020b ) , while others do not break down the pre - symptomatic and symptomatic classes ( Keeling et al . , 2021 ) or use more complex infectious structures ( Jayasundara et al . , 2021 ) . We track numbers of both general and Intensive Care Unit ( ICU ) beds required by COVID - 19 patients , and deaths due to COVID - 19 ( Fig . 1 ) . A proportion of individuals   1 H ICU f f  that leave the pre - symptomatic state join a holding category prior to progressing to general hospital beds , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 4 while a second proportion H ICU f f enters a holding category prior to entering ICU beds . Individuals remain in these two holding categories from the first appearance of symptoms until the point at which hospitalisation is required ; on average 7 days ( Liang et al . , 2020 ; Linton et al . , 2020 ) . A third holding category retains a proportion of individuals D f from the first appearance of symptoms until death , on average 20 . 2 days later ( Linton et al . , 2020 ; Verity et al . , 2020 ) . While we assume no overlap between the groups in ICU versus general hospital beds , overlap between those that die and the hospitalized groups is both permitted and expected . On leaving hospital , after a mean of 5 days for general beds and 7 days for ICU ( Rees et al . , 2020 ) , recovered individuals recuperate for an average of 3 weeks before resuming work , if employed ( Halpin et al . , 2020 ) . The number of individuals in the seven health outcome states has no impact on transmission dynamics , and it is assumed that there is no impact of a lack of hospital beds on the COVID - 19 death rate . This approach to modelling health outcomes outside of the main transmission model is similar to that described in several other COVID - 19 models ( Davies et al . , 2020b ; Keeling et al . , 2021 ) . Other models include hospitalised patients as infectious categories integrated into the progression from susceptible to removed ( Aleta et al . , 2020 ; Jayasundara et al . , 2021 ; Kerr et al . , 2021 ) . Figure 1 : Model Schematic illustrating the movement of individuals between classes . Coloured circles indicate disease states that impact transmission . Grey circles describe health outcomes that are tracked but have no impact on disease transmission . We use data on the age structure of the Dhaka population ( Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2011 ) ( supplementary Table S1 ) to inform parameters describing the risks of SARS - CoV - 2 infections . Previously estimated age - specific risks of hospitalisation and death due to COVID - 19 ( Davies et al . , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 5 2020b ) , and of developing symptoms ( Davies et al . , 2020a ) ( supplementary Table S2 ) , were combined with the age distribution in Dhaka District , to estimate the overall proportions of 1 ) asymptomatic infections , 0 . 701 a f  , 2 ) symptomatic infections that lead to death , 0 . 009 D f  , and 3 ) symptomatic infections requiring hospitalisation , 0 . 073 H f  . Of those hospitalised we assume that the proportion requiring critical care in an ICU is 0 . 31 ICU f  ( World Health Organisation ( WHO ) , 2020a ) . We assumed no age - structure in contacts within our model . The model was initially developed as an interactive epidemiological teaching tool ( http : / / boydorr . gla . ac . uk / BGD _ Covid - 19 / CEEDS / ) , to allow policymakers to explore the impact of interventions on health outcomes and working days lost . For speed and efficiency , and given the large population ( Dhaka District population in 2020 is around 13 . 8 million ( Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2011 ; United Nations , Department of Economic and Social Affairs , 2019b ) ) , the decision was made to make the model deterministic rather than stochastic . We minimise computational complexity by modelling transmission at the population level rather than at the level of the individual or household . However , to more accurately model household quarantining , we further subdivide the six disease states ( Fig . 1 ) to track within - household transmission and account for household - level susceptible depletion ( Supplement A ) . The ODEs comprising the model are provided in Supplement A and the model parameter descriptions , values and sources , are listed in supplementary Table S4 . Analyses were implemented in R ( R Core Team , 2021 ) , with the ODEs numerically integrated using the package deSolve ( Soetaert et al . , 2010 ) . Code can be accessed from our Github repository ( https : / / github . com / boydorr / BGD _ Covid - 19 / BGD _ NPI _ model ) . Interventions We implemented three main NPIs – lockdown , household quarantining delivered through Community Support Teams ( CSTs ) , and mask wearing – that were considered to be feasible by policymakers in Bangladesh . We define a lockdown as a scenario where all except essential workplaces are closed , including educational facilities , and people are asked to stay home where possible and practice social distancing . For compliant individuals and those that are not essential workers , this intervention is assumed to reduce contacts , and therefore transmission , outside of the household by the proportion ld  , while leaving within - household transmission unchanged . We achieve this by breaking down the transmission rates for the three infectious states into within - and between - household components using estimates of the SARS - CoV - 2 household secondary attack rate , 0 . 166  ( Madewell et al . , 2020 ) , and the mean household size , 4  ( Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2016 ) . We considered a scale - up period for the lockdown , during which compliance increased linearly from zero to a maximum . Following scale - up , we assume compliance starts to decline sigmoidally towards a minimum . Full details of the lockdown compliance function are given in Supplement A ( equation ( S . 6 ) ) . Under the household quarantine intervention , when a symptomatic individual occurs , that individual’s entire household is required to quarantine for 14 days . Those who develop symptoms can self - report to a national COVID - 19 hotline or are identified by word - of - mouth , triggering a visit by CST , a volunteer workforce of community - based support workers trained by BRAC / FAO . The CST confirm that symptoms are consistent with COVID - 19 , provide information on how to limit spread , facilitate access to healthcare , and offer support to aid quarantine compliance , with additional follow - up during the quarantine period . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 6 Incorporating household quarantine into models can be achieved far more naturally in the realm of agent - based models , where individuals can be explicitly assigned to households ( Aleta et al . , 2020 ; Ferguson et al . , 2020 ) . Here , similarly to Keeling et al . , ( 2021 ) , we approximate household quarantine by sub - dividing the disease states into additional categories , but with some changes to allow inclusion of a pre - symptomatic infectious class . We also remove the assumption that only the first individual in a household transmits . Modelling household quarantine requires us to identify both those individuals that trigger quarantining ( the first symptomatic individuals within households ) , and other individuals in their households who also undergo quarantine . We subdivide the disease states to identify those not currently in an infected household , those in a non - quarantined infected household , and those in a quarantined household . When a susceptible individual in an uninfected household becomes latently infected ( through between - household transmission ) , 1  other individuals also move from uninfected household categories into categories that identify them as being in a non - quarantined infected household , making them vulnerable to both within - household and between - household transmission . We track the group of individuals who were the first infected within a household separately to those who subsequently became infected , allowing us to observe when household index cases become symptomatic . A proportion of these symptomatic index cases comply with quarantine , taking 1  individuals from non - quarantined infected households with them . We also trigger quarantines when within - household cases resulting from index asymptomatic cases become symptomatic . The equations generating these dynamics are described in Supplement A . Infectious individuals within quarantined households are assumed to not cause any between - household transmission . As with lockdown , household quarantining with CST support has defined start and end times , and the proportion of households that are compliant increases linearly through a scale - up period . Following the scale - up period , compliance remains at a constant maximum ( see Supplement A ) . Finally , we considered compulsory mask - wearing outside of the household . Within the model , masks are assumed to block a proportion , m  , of between - household transmission from compliant individuals , while also blocking a proportion , m m   , of transmission to compliant individuals , where 0 1 m    , i . e . masks protect others from the wearer , and the wearer from others , to different degrees , with protection provided to the wearer never greater than that provided to others ( Howard et al . , 2020 ; Stutt et al . , 2020 ) . We assume a linear scale - up period for mask use , after which compliance remains constant ( Supplement A ) . We do not consider a decline in compliance over time for household quarantine and masks , since , unlike lockdown , these measures do not cause long - term loss of income , and should be possible to maintain with continued promotion . We recognise , however , that erosion of compliance may occur in reality as a result of , for example , reduced perception of risk . We model working days lost due to both illness and interventions . Based on the 2011 census ( Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2011 ) , we assume 52 % of the population is formally employed , working five days a week . We assume that both symptomatic and recuperating individuals are unable to work , and that deaths result in loss of all subsequent working days through 2020 . During lockdown , those workers that are both compliant and not essential workers lose their working days . Those in quarantined households do not work , and , since household quarantine is based on symptoms , we assume that , in addition to those quarantined due to COVID - 19 , a proportion of households affected by non - COVID - 19 influenza - like illnesses also undergo quarantine . Based on the 2011 census , 23 % of the population is unemployed , but works within the household , e . g . with caring responsibilities ( Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2011 ) . When these individuals are hospitalised or die , we assume another ( possibly formally employed ) household member replaces them , leading to further loss of working days . Finally we assume that , in response to each death , a J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 7 number of grieving individuals ( taken to be 1  ) do not work for a week . Details of the working days lost calculation are provided in equations S . 16 - 17 in Supplement A . Scenario comparison For each intervention , and combination of interventions , we fully explored with policymakers in real - time the impact of different timings of implementation , scale - up periods , and levels of compliance . Here , we describe just 15 combinatorial scenarios for 2020 , including a baseline with no interventions and unmitigated SARS - CoV - 2 spread . The first of four lockdown - only scenarios aimed to replicate the lockdown as implemented , from 26 th March until 1 st June 2020 . The other three lockdown - only scenarios involved extending the lockdown by 1 , 2 and 3 months . Despite their impracticality , these extended lockdowns allow comparison with more feasible scenarios . Google community mobility data ( Google , 2021 ) were used to parameterise the function describing changes in lockdown compliance with time ( see Supplement B for details ) . The estimated parameters indicate that the lockdown did not have an initial scale - up , with compliance being very high ( 93 % ) from the first day . However , the estimated compliance declined rapidly thereafter and was only 42 % by the lockdown’s end ( supplementary Fig . S2D ) . The impact of lockdown on between - household transmission of compliant individuals ld  was estimated during model calibration ( see below ) . We also examined scenarios where lockdown , as implemented in Bangladesh , was followed by either CST interventions , compulsory mask - wearing , or both ; beginning a week before lockdown ended and continuing through 2020 with a 7 - day scale - up period and 80 % peak compliance with each intervention . The ability of masks both to protect others from transmission from the wearer and to protect the wearer from transmission from others depends on several variables , including the material used , the construction ( e . g . layers of material ) , and the quality of fit ( Aydin et al . , 2020 ; Davies et al . , 2013 ; Howard et al . , 2020 ) . Therefore , for mask - wearing we consider scenarios where there is low , medium , and high protection of others from the wearer (   0 . 2 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 8 m   ) , and where the protection provided to the wearer is zero , half that provided to others , or equal to that provided to others (   0 , 0 . 5 , 1 m   ) , giving nine mask - wearing scenarios . For the 2020 time horizon we compared the total : 1 ) hospitalisations , 2 ) deaths , 3 ) percentage of patient days exceeding hospital capacity ( the sum of patients in excess of hospital beds each day , divided by the summed total patients over all days ) , 4 ) working days lost , 5 ) cost of implementing interventions and of healthcare for COVID - 19 patients , 6 ) cost per death averted ( relative to no intervention ) , and 7 ) the percentage return ( in terms of healthcare savings ) on investment ( % ROI ) in interventions . For estimating total cost we include healthcare provision for hospitalised COVID - 19 patients , media campaigns , training and deployment of CSTs , and mask distribution , as detailed in Table 1 . Note that these costs include only the direct monetary costs to health provider , and not any of the wider economic or societal costs of the pandemic and interventions to , for example , businesses , employment , trade , etc . ; many of which may persist long after initial pandemic waves . For each scenario , we used the total cost to estimate the cost per death averted . This was calculated by subtracting the cost of the baseline scenario from that of the focal scenario , then dividing by the reduction in deaths from the baseline . The % ROI for each scenario was calculated by subtracting the total cost of each scenario from the baseline , and dividing by the intervention implementation costs ( i . e . the sum of all costs other than hospital care ) . Given the heavy societal and economic costs of lockdowns , they are typically viewed as temporary measures to buy time for implementation of other less restrictive measures ( e . g . mask J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 8 wearing ) or more targeted measures ( e . g . household quarantines and contact tracing ) . To explore the impact of preparedness prior to lockdown ending , we examined the sensitivity of model outcomes ( hospitalisations , deaths , working days lost , and exceeded hospital capacity ) to the scale - up period and start date of post - lockdown interventions . Modelling lockdown as implemented in Bangladesh , we looked at scenarios where lockdown was followed by household quarantining only , mask - wearing only ( assuming mask protectiveness parameters 0 . 5 m   and 0 . 5 m   ) , or both . We varied the start date of the post - lockdown intervention ( s ) from 30 days pre - to 30 days post - lockdown ending , while keeping the scale - up period constant at 7 days , and vice versa varying the scale - up period ( zero to 30 days ) , while keeping the start constant ( 7 days prior to the lockdown end ) . Table 1 : Direct costs associated with healthcare and implementation of interventions , derived from ongoing practices in Bangladesh . Item Description of activities Costs ( USD ) Hospital care Provision of hospital beds and associated care ( mechanical ventilation , oxygen etc . ) for severely ill COVID - 19 patients . $ 649 / week / ICU patient $ 266 / week / non - ICU patient Community Support Team ( CST ) package The CST package covers : - community health worker training ( both initial training and one refresher training session for each volunteer in 2020 ) and equipment - monthly allowance per volunteer , area manager and coordinator , covering honorarium , phone credit , and travel . Each volunteer can visit 20 - 40 quarantining households per day . Plans were to train 2000 volunteers ; deemed sufficient to cover the Dhaka District population . An area manager is assumed for every 25 - 26 volunteers ( 78 total ) , and a coordinator for every 3 - 4 area managers ( 22 total ) . $ 466 / volunteer trained and equipped $ 8 , 470 one - time cost for telemedicine training for a subset of volunteers $ 151 allowance / month / volunteer $ 253 allowance / month / area manager $ 447 allowance / month coordinator $ 8 , 962 / month advertising cost Masks An average of 5 re - usable cloth masks was provided to each household in Dhaka District . Mask wearing was promoted through a public awareness campaign . $ 1 / mask $ 8 , 962 / month advertising cost Lockdown Public awareness campaign to encourage people to remain at home and practice social distancing . $ 8 , 962 / month advertising cost J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 9 Model calibration We calibrated two parameters , 0 R and ld  ( the proportion by which lockdown reduces between - household transmission from compliant people ) , against daily COVID - 19 death data in Bangladesh ( European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , 2020 ) . We chose to calibrate against reported deaths rather than cases , since death data are less affected by testing and reporting capacity . To obtain a time - series of deaths in Dhaka District , we extracted the proportion of district - resolved case totals for Dhaka District from Bangladesh’s COVID - 19 dashboard ( “Coronavirus COVID - 19 Dashboard , 2020 , ” 2020 ) and assumed this proportion remained constant . The first three cases in Bangladesh were confirmed on 8 th March 2020 , but it is thought likely that infection began circulating undetected prior to this , with genomic data indicating an introduction in mid - February and at least eight introduced cases prior to the ban on international travel ( Cowley et al . , 2021 ) . We therefore initialise the model with eight infectious cases on 15th February 2020 . The value of 0 R was optimised to minimise the sum of squared differences between modelled and reported cumulative deaths on each day during the period from first detection ( 8 th March ) to the start of lockdown ( 26 th March ) . Following this optimisation of 0 R , the value of ld  was similarly estimated by minimizing the sum of squared differences between modelled deaths and data during the period the lockdown was in operation . We recalibrated the model to data from the rapid resurgence beginning in March 2021 to learn about the likely 0 R at that time , when Beta ( B . 1 . 351 ) increased in frequency to become the dominant virus variant ( Saha et al . , 2021a ) . These data were curated from a range of sources , including both data aggregating websites and national government health departments ( Dong et al . , 2020 ) , and were accessed using the ‘coronavirus’ package in R ( Krispin and Byrnes , 2021 ) . In March 2021 , levels of mask - wearing and compliance with household quarantine were low , and there was no lockdown in place . As cases increased , a loose lockdown was introduced on 5 th April , with stronger restrictions applied on 14 th April . The lockdown was maintained until 23 rd May , with some relaxing of restrictions over this period . We modelled this with a lockdown from 5 th April to 23 rd May , with a 9 - day scale - up period , maximum compliance of 80 % , and the same rate of declining compliance as in 2020 ( supplementary Fig . S1C ) . We also assume that from 5 th April to 23 rd May 2021 there are low levels of both mask - wearing ( with 0 . 5 m   and 0 . 5 m   ) and household quarantine , with a scale - up period of 9 days to reach a compliance of 20 % . Some loose social distancing measures were maintained beyond 23 rd May , but the vast majority of workplaces were open by this point , so we do not consider these to constitute a continuation of lockdown . There was considerable uncertainty around the number of infectious and immune individuals in the population at the time of the March 2021 resurgence , so we calibrated the model under a range of initialisation scenarios in terms of immunity levels and circulating cases on 1 st March . A cross - sectional study from late 2020 to early 2021 in slum and slum - adjacent areas of Dhaka indicated 71 % seroprevalence ( icddrb , 2021 ) , while a study in mid - 2020 indicated a similar 74 % seroprevalence in slums , but only 45 % seroprevalence overall in Dhaka city ( icddrb , 2020 ) . Given that antibodies from previous COVID - 19 infections are less protective against the Beta variant ( Planas et al . , 2021 ) , the immunity to this variant in March 2021 may have been considerably lower than the seroprevalence . We , therefore , considered initialisation scenarios of 20 % , 40 % and 60 % immunity when estimating 0 R . At the end of the initial lockdown period in mid - 2020 , reported cases in Bangladesh were 6 % of those estimated by our model ( supplementary Fig . S2C ) , and we assume that this 6 % case detection still holds in March 2021 . We further assume that prevalent infectious individuals were about eight times estimated incident daily cases given the infectious period duration . Dividing by two , assuming that these individuals are on average halfway through their infectious period , we get J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 10 an effective number of 19 , 086 infectious individuals for initialization , and assume an equivalent number of incubating individuals . We also considered numbers of initial infections 50 % higher and lower than this estimate to allow for error . In the results , we refer to 2021 0 R estimates obtained under the assumptions of 19 , 086 circulating cases and a moderate 40 % immunity as our ‘best guess’ estimates , since , while error - prone , these assumptions best reflect our limited knowledge of the situation at that time . We took two approaches to optimisation of 0 R in the 2021 resurgence , minimizing : 1 ) the sum of squared differences between modelled and reported cumulative deaths on each day over the period from 1 st March - 5 th April 2021 ( the same approach taken for 2020 calibration ) , and 2 ) the difference in timing of the peaks in reported cases and modelled symptomatic cases ( with the constraint that modelled cumulative deaths from 1 st March until 20 th May had to be at least as high as reported deaths over the same period ) . By matching peak timing , rather than death data , we sought to reveal any potential under - reporting of COVID - 19 related deaths . This second optimisation approach could not be used in the 2020 calibration , since to fit 0 R and ld  separately , we had to fit 0 R using only data that fell before the lockdown start date , prior to the peak in cases . Sensitivity Analyses There is considerable uncertainty in the parameters governing SARS - CoV - 2 transmission and health impacts . We therefore undertook one - way sensitivity analyses across parameter value ranges for 0 R , the duration of disease states and health outcome stages , the introduction date , the household secondary attack rate , the ratios of asymptomatic to symptomatic transmission , and of pre - versus symptomatic transmission identified as plausible from the literature ( see supplementary Table S4 for the parameter ranges considered and their sources ) . The impact of changes in each of these parameters on the main model outputs was assessed individually , while keeping other parameter values fixed . We ran this analysis over scenarios of : 1 ) no interventions ; 2 ) lockdown as implemented ; 3 ) lockdown plus household quarantining ; and 4 ) lockdown plus compulsory mask wearing ( with 0 . 5 m   and 0 . 5 m   ) . Results Model calibration We estimated that 0 3 . 51 R  for transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in Dhaka in 2020 , and that the lockdown reduced between - household transmission ( ld  ) by 76 % for compliant individuals . The match between modelled deaths and data during the early stages of the epidemic is illustrated in supplementary Fig . S2A - B . Output from the calibrated model indicated that around 6 % of total cases were recorded during the period from SARS - CoV - 2 introduction to the end of the first lockdown ( supplementary Fig . S2C ) . Our estimates of 0 R in 2021 ( associated with the second wave caused by the Beta variant ) varied based on the initialisation scenario , with values increasing with lower initial circulating cases and higher levels of immunity in the population ( supplementary Table S5 ) . The approach used to optimise 0 R also impacted the estimates , with optimisation based on matching to deaths in the early stages of the resurgence leading to lower values ( range of 2 . 13 - 6 . 78 ) compared to peak matching ( range of 4 . 18 - 8 . 52 ) . Our best guess initialisation scenario ( 19 , 086 initial infections and J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 11 40 % prior immunity ) , led to an 0 R estimate of 3 . 46 when matching to deaths and 5 . 58 when matching to peak timing . Death detection estimates were in the range 32 - 119 % ( matching to deaths ) , or 11 - 31 % ( peak matching ) . The peak in symptomatic cases obtained by matching to deaths was always slightly later than the peak in reported cases , though never by more than four days . When calibrated to the trajectory of deaths , the model predicted that while NPIs in April - May 2021 initially controlled the resurgence , another peak would occur in the following months following their relaxation ( supplementary Fig . S3C ) . In contrast , calibration by matching peak timing leads to the prediction that the resurgence would sufficiently spread through the remaining susceptible population to prevent further waves ( supplementary Fig . S3D ) . Subsequent data showed that a third larger COVID - 19 wave caused by the Delta variant did in fact occur , with deaths rising again from late May / early June . The best visual match to the timing and size of both the second and third waves is given by fitting 0 R to death data , with an initial infectious of 19 , 086 and initial immunity of 20 - 40 % . Many of the other fits to the death data were considerably poorer , likely because the assumptions of initial numbers of infectious and immune individuals were too far from reality . Impacts of scenarios on health outcomes and working days lost In the absence of interventions we predicted that COVID - 19 patients in 2020 would peak at 45 , 664 in late May ( Fig . 2A ) , greatly exceeding hospital bed capacity ( estimated to be 10 , 947 in Dhaka District ( World Health Organisation ( WHO ) , 2020b ) ; supplementary Table S4 ) . Under this scenario hospital beds would have been unavailable for at least 55 % of patient days ( Fig . 3D ) , without accounting for non - COVID - 19 bed needs . Assuming unmitigated transmission , the epidemic would have likely led to around 13 . 2 million cases ( i . e . most of the Dhaka District population ; supplementary Table S4 ) and 35 , 765 deaths ( Figs . 3A , S3A & S4A ) . Although high relative to some of the mitigated scenarios , these deaths represent 0 . 26 % of the population , and would be expected to lead to a loss of < 1 % of total working days in 2020 ( Fig . 3C ) . We forecast that the first lockdown as implemented in Bangladesh would delay the initial epidemic ( Figs 2A and S3A ) , with minor impacts on deaths and hospitalised cases ( Fig . 3 ) , while increasing working days lost to 10 % . Extensions were predicted to further delay and slightly widen the first peak ( Figs 2A and S3A ) , though extensions beyond two months had no added impact on the epidemic peak and outcomes . Even with lockdown extensions , hospitalisations were still expected to outstrip capacity ( Fig . 2A ) , with only modest reductions in deaths ( Fig . 3 ) . Working days lost were predicted to increase by 1 . 6 - 1 . 9 percentage points with each extra month of lockdown . We found that introducing household quarantining following lockdown led to the epidemic peak being later , lower and wider than with lockdown alone ( Figs 2A and S3A ) . Hospital capacity was still exceeded , but this intervention was more effective in reducing hospitalisations than any of the lockdown - only scenarios . The additional working days lost by introducing and maintaining household quarantines throughout 2020 were similar to those lost by a one - month lockdown extension . The impact of introducing compulsory mask - wearing following lockdown varied based on the effectiveness of the masks used ( Figs 2B and 3 ) . When 0 . 2 m   , i . e . low filtration efficiency , only relatively small reductions to the epidemic peak were predicted , with the decline increasing with mask effectiveness in terms of PPE ( indicated by increasing m  ; Fig . 2B ) . Masks with high filtration efficiency ( 0 . 8 m   ) , or medium filtration efficiency combined with high PPE efficiency ( 0 . 5 m   , 1 m   ) , flattened the peak sufficiently to keep patient numbers below hospital capacity J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 12 ( Figs 2B and 3D ) . Effective masks also led to substantial drops in deaths and hospitalisations , while slightly reducing working days lost relative to the lockdown - only scenario ( Fig . 3 ) . Combining mask - wearing with household quarantine led to greater predicted reductions in the epidemic peak , and in both deaths and hospitalisations , than either intervention alone ( Figs 2C and 3A - B ) . In fact , the reductions were typically larger than the sums of the individual effects of these interventions , indicating synergy . Percentages of working days lost increase as mask quality decreases , ranging from 9 . 3 - 11 . 6 % . A combined strategy of masks and quarantine following lockdown was strategized for implementation in Dhaka District . In the end , mask provision was not directly funded despite recommendations , but mask - wearing was promoted ; by late 2020 mask use had largely declined to normal levels . The data - based estimates of cumulative deaths in Dhaka District take a path similar to those modelled by combining quarantining with masks of high filtration effectiveness ( 0 . 8 m   ) and medium to high PPE abilities ( m  of 0 . 5 or 1 . 0 ) . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 13 Figure 2 : Time series of hospital patients for intervention scenarios in 2020 . Horizontal dashed lines indicate hospital bed capacity in Dhaka District . Vertical lines indicate the start and end points of lockdown as implemented in Bangladesh . A ) Hospital patients in the absence of interventions , for the implemented lockdown plus extensions of up to 3 months , and for lockdown followed by household quarantine with community support teams . B ) Lockdown as implemented followed by compulsory mask wearing , considering nine mask effectiveness scenarios ; m  describes the proportion reduction in outward emissions by mask wearers , while m m   describes the proportion protection to mask wearers from others’ emissions . C ) Combined impacts of the lockdown , household quarantine , and masks of different effectiveness . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 14 Figure 3 : Summaries of health outcomes and working days lost for a range of interventions during 2020 . NI = no intervention , L = lockdown , Q = household quarantine with community support teams , M = compulsory mask wearing . The black bars for the lockdown ( L ) intervention describe the range of each outcome over the scenarios where lockdown is as implemented in Bangladesh and where this lockdown is extended by up to three months . For interventions involving mask - wearing ( M ) , the three coloured bars describe scenarios with different values of m  , the proportional reduction in outward emissions by mask wearers . These bars range over the scenarios where masks provide no protection to the wearer to where they provide proportional protection to the wearer from others’ emissions that is equal to m  . Scenario costs Total costs of the scenarios explored ranged from $ 22 . 2 - 111 . 0 million ( Fig . 4B ) . Despite requiring no direct intervention costs , the baseline scenario is among the most expensive due to the healthcare costs incurred by hospitalisations . Lockdown as implemented was predicted to be similar in cost to the baseline ( unmitigated transmission ) with slight cost reductions for lockdown extensions . Incorporating household quarantine led to lower costs than lockdowns . Combining lockdown with low effectiveness masks led to the highest costs due to the expense of mask distribution , offset by only small reductions in healthcare costs . Masks of high effectiveness , however , led to substantial J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 15 cost reductions , which generally increased when masks and household quarantine were modelled together . Since most scenarios had a lower total cost than the baseline , the cost per death averted is negative except in some of the lower effectiveness mask scenarios ( Fig . 4C ) . Lockdowns , and lockdowns combined with household quarantine and / or high effectiveness masks all provide similar savings per death averted in the $ 1 , 616 - $ 2 , 700 range . The % ROI was generally positive , again with some exceptions where lower effectiveness masks were used ( Fig . 4D ) . By far the highest % ROIs were given by extending lockdown by 2 - 3 months . This is because , despite relatively small reductions in hospitalisation costs ( Fig . 3B ) , the only implementation cost to lockdown is advertising ( Table 1 ) , and this cost is an order of magnitude smaller than the implementation costs of quarantine with CSTs , and two orders of magnitude smaller than the implementation costs of mask - wearing ( due to the high cost of providing masks to every household ) ( Fig . 4A ) . It should be remembered that while the % ROI for extended lockdowns is high , the return itself is relatively small and total costs are among the highest as a result ( Fig . 4B ) . Lockdown plus quarantining gave a % ROI of 168 % . The % ROI of all scenarios involving masks increased with the effectiveness of the masks in blocking transmission . Interventions involving high filtration efficiency masks all had a % ROI that was similar to or better than the lockdown plus quarantine scenario . Intervention timing and scale - up Starting either household quarantining or compulsory mask - wearing prior to the end of lockdown had little projected impact on health outcomes or the percentage of working days lost ( Fig . 5A - D ) . When masks and quarantining are combined , however , total deaths and hospitalisations are seen to decline in response to moving their start dates further before the end of lockdown . This difference occurs because the combined early start date of the two interventions pushes the epidemic peak later ( into 2021 ) than when considering either individually . Continuing interventions and calculating outcomes over both 2020 and 2021 , removes this apparent improvement in outcomes with start dates prior to lockdown’s end ( supplementary Fig . S6A - D ) . As the start date of quarantining and mask - wearing is delayed beyond the lockdown end date , their health benefits decline , with all outcomes approaching those of the lockdown - only scenario . Similar consequences to delaying intervention start dates result from lengthening the scale - up period ( Fig . 5E - H ) . Sensitivity Analyses 0 R was among the top three most influential parameters for all five outcome measures reported under all four baseline scenarios ( Figs . S7 - 10 ) . The duration of symptoms was among the top three most influential parameters in determining working days lost ( since symptomatic people are unable to work ) over all baselines , and , predictably , the mean lengths of stay in general hospital and ICU beds were highly influential for the percentage of patient days that lacked beds . For all baselines , other than that with no interventions , the introduction date of the disease ranked in the top three most important parameters for all outcomes except the percentage of patient days lacking beds . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 16 Some parameters only gained importance under specific baseline scenarios ( for example , the level of asymptomatic transmission becomes important under symptoms - based household quarantine ) ; for more details see Supplement E . Figure 4 : Costs of intervention scenarios . NI = no intervention , L = lockdown , Q = household quarantine with community support teams , M = compulsory mask wearing . The black bars for the lockdown ( L ) intervention describe the range of each cost outcome over the scenarios where lockdown is as implemented in Bangladesh and where this lockdown is extended by up to three months . For interventions involving mask - wearing ( M ) , the three coloured bars describe scenarios with different values of m  , the proportional reduction in outward emissions by mask wearers . These bars range over the scenarios where masks provide no protection to the wearer to where they provide proportional protection to the wearer from others’ emissions that is equal to m  . A ) Implementation costs of each intervention scenario ( i . e . total cost minus the hospital care cost ) . Note that the costs of the mask - wearing scenarios are assumed to be the same regardless of mask effectiveness . B ) Total cost of each intervention scenario based on costings in Table 1 . C ) Cost of each death averted relative to the baseline ( NI ) scenario . D ) Percentage return on investment in interventions in terms of healthcare savings . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 17 Figure 5 : Sensitivity to the start date and scale - up period of quarantine or mask wearing following lockdown . A - D ) Changes in health outcomes , working days lost and excess hospital demand over 2020 when the start date of interventions ( household quarantine , masks , or quarantine and masks ) following lockdown is adjusted relative to the lockdown end date . The days taken to scale up interventions to their full effectiveness is held constant at seven days . E - H ) Changes in the same outcomes when the time in days taken to scale up post - lockdown interventions is varied . The start date of the post - lockdown interventions is held constant at seven days prior to the lockdown end date . Discussion We modelled interventions for controlling COVID - 19 transmission in Dhaka District , Bangladesh , comparing their : 1 ) ability to prevent both deaths and overwhelming of the health system ; and 2 ) percentage working days lost and health provider costs . We found that under expected compliance , lockdowns alone , regardless of duration , were both costly and unable to keep cases below hospital capacity , while preventing only a small proportion of deaths , confirming that they are not an appropriate long - term measure in this context ( Amewu et al . , 2020 ; Andam et al . , 2020 ; Rahman et al . , 2020 ) . Additional quarantining of households with symptomatic individuals similarly was not predicted to prevent hospitalisations exceeding capacity . Modelling compulsory mask - wearing after the lockdown produced outcomes that varied widely depending on the effectiveness of masks in blocking transmission . Low - filtration efficiency masks had limited impacts and were not cost - effective , whereas high - filtration efficiency masks substantially reduced deaths , protected the healthcare system and were cost - effective . Perhaps our most important finding was that combining mask - wearing and household quarantine synergistically led to further reductions in deaths and excess hospitalisations , and was cost - effective when masks were of high filtration efficiency . For this reason we recommend a combination of these measures to provide the best levels of control . Simulations also suggest that early introductions of post - lockdown measures ( i . e . prior to the lockdown’s end ) would have had negligible additional impact over the full course of the epidemic J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 18 ( though they may have improved outcomes in the short - term ) . However , gaps between lockdown ending and post - lockdown interventions ( or long periods of scale - up ) quickly dilute their impacts . The inability of symptomatic household quarantining alone to prevent hospitalisations exceeding capacity is unsurprising . Even in HICs with greater healthcare capacity , lower 0 R estimates , and a lower proportion of asymptomatic transmission , other modelling studies have suggested that symptoms - based household quarantine would still allow overwhelming of health systems ( Aleta et al . , 2020 ; Ferguson et al . , 2020 ) . Additional tracing and quarantine of non - household contacts of symptomatic individuals can improve the effectiveness of quarantine measures ( Aleta et al . , 2020 ) . However , capacity for extensive contact tracing is limited in high - density resource - constrained settings like Dhaka . The finding that combining symptomatic household quarantining with mask mandates ( using mid - to high - filtration efficiency masks ) leads to effective control was crucial at the time , since both these NPIs were considered feasible . Given that household quarantining is only triggered by a symptomatic case , and we estimate that most cases in Bangladesh are asymptomatic , a large proportion of infectious households are likely missed by this measure , which will also have only limited impact on pre - symptomatic transmission . Since masks reduce transmission for all infections , irrespective of symptoms , masks work synergistically with household quarantine . While we consider scenarios where masks block only 20 % of transmission , we note that this is a worst case scenario ; experimental work suggests that our mid - to high - quality mask scenarios ( blocking 50 - 80 % of transmission ) are more likely ( Aydin et al . , 2020 ; Davies et al . , 2013 ) . Observational ( Abaluck et al . , 2021 ; Hong et al . , 2020 ; Wang et al . , 2020 ) and other modelling ( Stutt et al . , 2020 ) studies provide further evidence for the effectiveness of masks in blocking transmission . In reality , achieving the modelled effectiveness of household quarantining and mask - wearing depends on high compliance ( we assumed 80 % compliance in our main results ) . A survey in Israel suggested that quarantining compliance is likely to be highly dependent on compensation for loss of work ( Bodas and Peleg , 2020 ) . However , such compensation may be unachievable in many LMICs . Reducing insecurity experienced by households under quarantine in other ways , for example by food provisioning and healthcare access , may help mitigate income loss and boost compliance amongst poorer households . In Bangladesh , CSTs are already playing this role in supporting quarantining households , and in LMICs more broadly , community health workers are likely to prove invaluable in using their established trust to encourage compliance with NPIs ( Ballard et al . , 2020 ) . While the total costs of many of the interventions explored were high , most provided savings per death averted and a positive % ROI because of the high contribution of healthcare to overall costs . Note that these returns occur despite the relatively young population in Bangladesh , which leads to a low percentage of cases being hospitalized ( 2 . 2 % ) . Furthermore , the costs in working days of the post - lockdown NPIs considered were small when compared with the initial lockdown costs and potential extensions . These findings are in line with other work showing that the costs of unmitigated transmission exceed those of implementing NPIs ( Thunström et al . , 2020 ; Torres - Rueda et al . , 2020 ) . The costs we explore here are based on crude assumptions for mask purchase and costs of training and rollout of CSTs in Dhaka where there is already a large community volunteer workforce that can be mobilized . However , we do not include food packages or additional support for vulnerable communities that may increase NPI effectiveness but also costs . A further limitation to the cost analysis conducted here is that we only consider direct costs to the health J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 19 provider in providing care to COVID - 19 patients and in implementing interventions ; we do not consider potential costs to businesses ( some of which may not survive prolonged lockdowns ) and individuals within the population , except via the indirect measure of estimated working days lost . Furthermore , working days lost are only one of many societal costs of the pandemic and associated interventions ; impacts on education , mental health , healthcare for non - COVID - 19 patients , etc . , are likely to be significant , but are not considered in this study . Throughout the development of our model and interactive app , we incorporated suggestions from policymakers on questions that most urgently needed answers , and on NPIs under consideration and thought feasible to implement . This co - development allowed the investigation of scenarios appropriate to the local context that addressed pressing policy concerns ( McBryde et al . , 2020 ) . The app ( boydorr . gla . ac . uk / BGD _ Covid - 19 / CEEDS ) , which allows a user - friendly exploration and visualisation of how scenarios impact health outcomes and costs , proved to be an effective tool to support discussions with policymakers , as the timing and combination of interventions , along with uncertainties in parameters , including compliance , could be explored on the fly . This proved to be crucial in understanding the economic and health trade - offs involved , as well as helping to demystify the model itself and the ensuing epidemic . Our model has a number of limitations . First , to ensure it could run sufficiently quickly within the interactive app , stochasticity and individual variation in transmission was not incorporated ( in contrast to a number of other models developed for COVID - 19 : Aleta et al . , 2020 ; Davies et al . , 2020b ; Ferguson et al . , 2020 ; Kerr et al . , 2021 ) . We expect only a minimal impact of these simplifications on disease trajectories and key results due to the large population size considered and rapid epidemic growth observed . However , they do limit the usefulness of the model for exploring elimination scenarios , since stochasticity and superspreading , which are inherent to SARS - CoV - 2 transmission ( Adam et al . , 2020 ) , become more influential under low levels of infection ( Vespignani et al . , 2020 ) . Imported infections , which may similarly become important near elimination , were also not considered . Age - structured models have previously been proposed for studying COVID - 19 ( Davies et al . , 2020b ; Ferguson et al . , 2020 ; Keeling et al . , 2021 ) . We , however , did not include age - structured transmission , which , though not entirely realistic , may be reasonable given the high degree of intergenerational mixing in Bangladesh ( United Nations , Department of Economic and Social Affairs , 2019a ) and some other LMICs ( Hodgins and Saad , 2020 ) . Like many other models ( Davies et al . , 2020b ; Ferguson et al . , 2020 ; Jayasundara et al . , 2021 ; Keeling et al . , 2021 ) , we also do not consider exacerbated mortality when hospital capacity is exceeded , likely leading to underestimated mortality under those scenarios where this occurs , along with knock - on effects on working days lost and cost per death averted . This will not , however , impact the general ranking of scenarios by numbers of deaths , or outcomes relating to those scenarios where hospital capacity was not exceeded ( which are the only intervention scenarios we recommended pursuing ) . Therefore , our main conclusions should be unaffected by this assumption . Parameters used for case fatality , and proportions of symptomatic and hospitalised infections , were based on age - dependent estimates from HICs ( Davies et al . , 2020b , 2020a ) and the age - distribution in Dhaka District ; an approach similar to that taken by Truelove et al . ( 2020 ) . However , these HIC - derived parameters may be less accurate when applied in this setting , as the incidence among age classes of underlying conditions that increase COVID - 19 risk likely differs in LMICs ( Clark et al . , 2020 ) . We also note that our estimates of working days lost make the assumption that employed people cannot switch to working from home , possibly leading to overestimation . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 20 More generally there remains considerable uncertainty around many of the model parameters . Our sensitivity analyses indicated that 0 R was , predictably , very influential in determining health outcomes , but our 2020 0 R estimate is sensitive to the introduction date and the number of imported cases , which are both uncertain . In addition , prior to the lockdown in 2020 , only 5 deaths due to COVID - 19 had been recorded in Bangladesh , and given the inherent stochasticity in these events , tuning 0 R to data in this time window is unlikely to be very accurate . Finally , prior to the 2020 lockdown , some control measures , such as cancellations of large gatherings , had already been taken ( Anwar et al . , 2020 ) , potentially lowering our 0 R estimate . Our estimates of 0 R in 2021 similarly assumed no interventions in the run - up to the 5 th April lockdown , but low levels of mask - wearing and quarantine may have led to underestimation . The 2020 0 R estimate for Dhaka lies within the 90 % confidence interval estimated from a meta - analysis of pre - March 2020 estimates ( Davies et al . , 2020b ) . Many of our 2021 estimates exceed this confidence interval , but none are in excess of the confidence interval reported by Sanche et al . ( 2020 ) . A possibly higher 0 R value for 2021 is also not unexpected , given the dominant variant at the time ( Beta ) was known to be more transmissible than variants prevalent in 2020 . Our model , like many others , assumed that recovered individuals remain immune through 2020 . Although immunity to SARS - CoV - 2 is not permanent ( Iwasaki , 2021 ) , this assumption appeared reasonable given effects of immunity loss were likely limited over this period . However , with resurging cases from March 2021 concomitant with relaxed NPIs and the emergence of the more transmissible Beta variant , the question of immunity became paramount ( Saha et al . , 2021a ) . The level of immunity in the population at the time of the resurgence was very uncertain ; seroprevalence in Dhaka was estimated to be 45 % ( 71 % in slum areas ) in mid - 2020 ( icddrb , 2020 ) , but laboratory evidence suggests that prior COVID - 19 infections elicit less protection to the Beta variant ( Planas et al . , 2021 ) , making it unclear how this seroprevalence translated into effective immunity against this variant . These uncertainties translated into our estimates of 0 R in 2021 , which varied widely ( 2 . 13 - 8 . 52 ) under different assumptions , but with a best guess of 3 . 46 - 5 . 58 . The uncertainty in 0 R in turn led to uncertainty in predictions , with some suggesting a possible further wave later in 2021 , while others precluded this . Ultimately a further wave did occur , but it is unclear whether this was possible due to sufficient susceptibles remaining after the earlier wave or due to immune escape resulting from the arrival of the Delta ( B . 1 . 617 . 2 ) variant , which rapidly became dominant during this later wave ( Saha et al . , 2021b ) . We demonstrated the sensitivity of outcomes to the timing and scale - up of interventions , but human behavioural responses most dramatically impact outcomes . For these reasons , our model was primarily developed as a means to understand the potentially synergistic impact of interventions , rather than to accurately forecast dynamics subject to unpredictable changing human behaviours ( perhaps leading to some of the inconsistencies between the model and data during the 2020 lockdown period ; supplementary Fig . S2B ) . We therefore considered compliance to interventions to be a crucial interactive element of our app to build understanding and guidance on policy . Within the app , we also modelled the degree to which the limited ( but greatly increased ) testing capacity would still under - detect circulating cases , given some degree of cognitive dissonance and the considerable uncertainty in pre - and asymptomatic transmission during the early months of the pandemic . Overall we found the interactive app to be effective for communicating J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 21 epidemiological modelling outcomes to policymakers together with their caveats , and we recommend the use of such tools that can be tailored to other settings and interventions . In summary , we found that two NPIs combined , masks and symptoms - based household quarantining , were capable of averting an anticipated public health crisis in Dhaka , while also being good value for money . These measures were to a large extent rolled out in Bangladesh in 2020 , and appear to have contributed to limiting transmission , but the ensuing epidemic stretched the health system . In practice , compliance with these interventions and fidelity of their implementation was highly heterogeneous , with measures relaxing over the year as activity returned to levels approaching normalcy ( although schools have remained closed until September 2021 ) . The second and third waves of cases in 2021 , apparently driven by the Beta and Delta variants respectively , have now largely subsided . However , potential for the arrival of further new variants and waning in immunity present a risk of further waves . Mask - wearing and symptoms - based quarantine may therefore still have an important role to play , and the vaccine rollout currently underway needs to be pursued at pace . Further work to introduce vaccination to our model and examine its interaction with NPIs is now in progress . Declaration of competing interest : none Funding : The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation funded work by FAO and UoG ( INV - 022851 ) , and UoG reports funding from Wellcome ( 207569 / Z / 17 / Z ) . Data availability : All data and code can be accessed via out Github repository ( https : / / github . com / boydorr / BGD _ Covid - 19 / BGD _ NPI _ model ) . The interactive app is available at http : / / boydorr . gla . ac . uk / BGD _ Covid - 19 / CEEDS / . CRediT authorship contribution statement : Elaine A Ferguson : Conceptualization , Data curation , Formal analysis , Investigation , Methodology , Software , Visualization , Writing – original draft , Writing – review & editing . Eric Brum : Conceptualization , Funding acquisition , Investigation , Project administration , Writing – review & editing . Anir Chowdhury : Investigation . Shayan Chowdhury : Investigation . Mikolaj Kundegorski : Data curation . Ayesha S Mahmud : Methodology , Writing – review & editing . Nabila Purno : Data curation , Investigation , Project administration . Ayesha Sania : Funding acquisition , Investigation . Rachel Steenson : Data curation , Software , Visualisation . Motahara Tasneem : Data curation , Project administration . Katie Hampson : Conceptualisation , Funding acquisition , Data curation , Investigation , Methodology , Software , Supervision , Writing – original draft , Writing – review & editing . References Abaluck , J . , Kwong , L . H . , Styczynski , A . , Haque , A . , Kabir , A . , Bates - jeffries , E . , Crawford , E . , Benjamin - Chung , J . , Raihan , S . , Rahman , S . , Benhachmi , S . , Zaman , N . , Winch , P . J . , Hossain , M . , Reza , H . M . , Jaber , A . A . , Momen , S . G . , Bani , F . L . , Rahman , A . , Huq , T . S . , Luby , S . P . , Mobarak , A . M . , 2021 . The Impact of Community Masking on COVID - 19 : A Cluster - Randomized Trial in Bangladesh . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 22 Adam , D . C . , Wu , P . , Wong , J . Y . , Lau , E . H . Y . , Tsang , T . K . , Cauchemez , S . , Leung , G . M . , Cowling , B . J . , 2020 . Clustering and superspreading potential of SARS - CoV - 2 infections in Hong Kong . Nat . Med . 26 , 1714 – 1719 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 020 - 1092 - 0 Ahmed , S . A . K . S . , Ajisola , M . , Azeem , K . , Bakibinga , P . , Chen , Y . - F . , Choudhury , N . N . , Fayehun , O . , Griffiths , F . , Harris , B . , Kibe , P . , Lilford , R . J . , Omigbodun , A . , Rizvi , N . , Sartori , J . , Smith , S . , Watson , S . I . , Wilson , R . , Yeboah , G . , Aujla , N . , Azam , S . I . , Diggle , P . J . , Gill , P . , Iqbal , R . , Kabaria , C . , Kisia , L . , Kyobutungi , C . , Madan , J . J . , Mberu , B . , Mohamed , S . F . , Nazish , A . , Odubanjo , O . , Osuh , M . E . , Owoaje , E . , Oyebode , O . , Porto de Albuquerque , J . , Rahman , O . , Tabani , K . , Taiwo , O . J . , Tregonning , G . , Uthman , O . A . , Yusuf , R . , 2020 . Impact of the societal response to COVID - 19 on access to healthcare for non - COVID - 19 health issues in slum communities of Bangladesh , Kenya , Nigeria and Pakistan : results of pre - COVID and COVID - 19 lockdown stakeholder engagements . BMJ Glob . Heal . 5 , e003042 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjgh - 2020 - 003042 Aleta , A . , Martín - Corral , D . , Pastore y Piontti , A . , Ajelli , M . , Litvinova , M . , Chinazzi , M . , Dean , N . E . , Halloran , M . E . , Longini Jr , I . M . , Merler , S . , Pentland , A . , Vespignani , A . , Moro , E . , Moreno , Y . , 2020 . Modelling the impact of testing , contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of COVID - 19 . Nat . Hum . Behav . 4 , 964 – 971 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 020 - 0931 - 9 Amewu , S . , Asante , S . , Pauw , K . , Thurlow , J . , 2020 . The Economic Costs of COVID - 19 in Sub - Saharan Africa : Insights from a Simulation Exercise for Ghana . Eur . J . Dev . Res . 32 , 1353 – 1378 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41287 - 020 - 00332 - 6 Andam , K . S . , Edeh , H . , Oboh , V . , Pauw , K . , Thurlow , J . , 2020 . Estimating the economic costs of COVID - 19 in Nigeria , NSSP Working Paper 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2499 / p15738coll2 . 133846 Anwar , S . , Nasrullah , M . , Hosen , M . J . , 2020 . COVID - 19 and Bangladesh : Challenges and How to Address Them . Front . Public Heal . 8 , 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpubh . 2020 . 00154 Aydin , O . , Emon , B . , Cheng , S . , Hong , L . , Chamorro , L . P . , Saif , M . T . A . , 2020 . Performance of fabrics for home - made masks against the spread of COVID - 19 through droplets : A quantitative mechanistic study . Extrem . Mech . Lett . 40 , 100924 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eml . 2020 . 100924 Ballard , M . , Bancroft , E . , Nesbit , J . , Johnson , A . , Holeman , I . , Foth , J . , Rogers , D . , Yang , J . , Nardella , J . , Olsen , H . , Raghavan , M . , Panjabi , R . , Alban , R . , Malaba , S . , Christiansen , M . , Rapp , S . , Schechter , J . , Aylward , P . , Rogers , A . , Sebisaho , J . , Ako , C . , Choudhury , N . , Westgate , C . , Mbeya , J . , Schwarz , R . , Bonds , M . H . , Adamjee , R . , Bishop , J . , Yembrick , A . , Flood , D . , McLaughlin , M . , Palazuelos , D . , 2020 . Prioritising the role of community health workers in the COVID - 19 response . BMJ Glob . Heal . 5 , e002550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjgh - 2020 - 002550 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2016 . Household Income and Expenditure Survey ( HIES ) . Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics , 2011 . Bangladesh Population and Housing Census 2011 [ WWW Document ] . URL http : / / 203 . 112 . 218 . 65 : 8008 / Census . aspx ? MenuKey = 43 Bodas , M . , Peleg , K . , 2020 . Self - Isolation Compliance In The COVID - 19 Era Influenced By Compensation : Findings From A Recent Survey In Israel . Health Aff . 39 , 936 – 941 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1377 / hlthaff . 2020 . 00382 Byrne , A . W . , McEvoy , D . , Collins , Á . B . , Hunt , K . , Casey , M . , Barber , A . , Butler , F . , Griffin , J . , Lane , E . A . , McAloon , C . , O’Brien , K . , Wall , P . , Walsh , K . A . , More , S . J . , 2020 . Inferred duration of infectious period of SARS - CoV - 2 : rapid scoping review and analysis of available evidence for asymptomatic and symptomatic COVID - 19 cases . medRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 04 . 25 . 20079889 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 23 Cele , S . , Gazy , I . , Jackson , L . , Hwa , S . - H . , Tegally , H . , Lustig , G . , Giandhari , J . , Pillay , S . , Wilkinson , E . , Naidoo , Y . , Karim , F . , Ganga , Y . , Khan , K . , Bernstein , M . , Balazs , A . B . , Gosnell , B . I . , Hanekom , W . , Moosa , M . - Y . S . , Lessells , R . J . , de Oliveira , T . , Sigal , A . , 2021 . Escape of SARS - CoV - 2 501Y . V2 from neutralization by convalescent plasma . Nature . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 021 - 03471 - w Chowdhury , R . , Luhar , S . , Khan , N . , Choudhury , S . R . , Matin , I . , Franco , O . H . , 2020 . Long - term strategies to control COVID - 19 in low and middle - income countries : an options overview of community - based , non - pharmacological interventions . Eur . J . Epidemiol . 35 , 743 – 748 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10654 - 020 - 00660 - 1 Clark , A . , Jit , M . , Warren - Gash , C . , Guthrie , B . , Wang , H . H . , Mercer , S . W . , Sanderson , C . , McKee , M . , Troeger , C . , Ong , K . I . , Checchi , F . , Perel , P . , Joseph , S . , Gibbs , H . P . , Banerjee , A . , CMMID COVID - 19 working group , Eggo , R . , 2020 . How many are at increased risk of severe COVID - 19 disease ? Rapid global , regional and national estimates for 2020 . medRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 04 . 18 . 20064774 Coronavirus COVID - 19 Dashboard , 2020 [ WWW Document ] , 2020 . URL http : / / 103 . 247 . 238 . 81 / webportal / pages / covid19 . php ( accessed 11 . 19 . 20 ) . Cowley , L . A . , Afrad , M . H . , Rahman , S . I . A . , Mahfuz - Al - Mamun , M . , Chin , T . , Mahmud , A . S . , Rahman , M . Z . , Billah , M . M . , Khan , M . H . , Sultana , S . , Khondaker , T . , Baker , S . , Banik , N . , Alam , A . N . , Mannor , K . , Banu , S . , Chowdhury , A . , Flora , M . S . , Thomson , N . R . , Buckee , C . O . , Qadri , F . , Shirin , T . , 2021 . Genomic and mobility data reveal mass population movement as a driver of SARS - CoV - 2 dissemination and diversity in Bangladesh . medRxiv 2021 . 01 . 05 . 21249196 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 01 . 05 . 21249196 Davies , A . , Thompson , K . - A . , Giri , K . , Kafatos , G . , Walker , J . , Bennett , A . , 2013 . Testing the Efficacy of Homemade Masks : Would They Protect in an Influenza Pandemic ? Disaster Med . Public Health Prep . 7 , 413 – 418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dmp . 2013 . 43 Davies , N . G . , Klepac , P . , Liu , Y . , Prem , K . , Jit , M . , Eggo , R . M . , 2020a . Age - dependent effects in the transmission and control of COVID - 19 epidemics . Nat . Med . 26 , 1205 – 1211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 020 - 0962 - 9 Davies , N . G . , Kucharski , A . J . , Eggo , R . M . , Gimma , A . , Edmunds , W . J . , Jombart , T . , O’Reilly , K . , Endo , A . , Hellewell , J . , Nightingale , E . S . , Quilty , B . J . , Jarvis , C . I . , Russell , T . W . , Klepac , P . , Bosse , N . I . , Funk , S . , Abbott , S . , Medley , G . F . , Gibbs , H . , Pearson , C . A . B . , Flasche , S . , Jit , M . , Clifford , S . , Prem , K . , Diamond , C . , Emery , J . , Deol , A . K . , Procter , S . R . , van Zandvoort , K . , Sun , Y . F . , Munday , J . D . , Rosello , A . , Auzenbergs , M . , Knight , G . , Houben , R . M . G . J . , Liu , Y . , 2020b . Effects of non - pharmaceutical interventions on COVID - 19 cases , deaths , and demand for hospital services in the UK : a modelling study . Lancet Public Heal . 5 , e375 – e385 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S2468 - 2667 ( 20 ) 30133 - X Dong , E . , Du , H . , Gardner , L . , 2020 . An interactive web - based dashboard to track COVID - 19 in real time . Lancet Infect . Dis . 20 , 533 – 534 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30120 - 1 European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , 2020 . Download today’s data on the geographic distribution of COVID - 19 cases worldwide . Ferguson , N . M . , Laydon , D . , Nedjati - Gilani , G . , Imai , N . , Ainslie , K . , Baguelin , M . , Bhatia , S . , Boonyasiri , A . , Cucunubá , Z . , Cuomo - Dannenburg , G . , Dighe , A . , Dorigatti , I . , Fu , H . , Gaythorpe , K . , Green , W . , Hamlet , A . , Hinsley , W . , Okell , L . C . , van Elsland , S . , Thompson , H . , Verity , R . , Volz , E . , Wang , H . , Wang , Y . , Walker , P . G . , Walters , C . , Winskill , P . , Whittaker , C . , Donnelly , C . A . , Riley , S . , Ghani , A . C . , 2020 . Report 9 : Impact of non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) to J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 24 reduce COVID - 19 mortality and healthcare demand . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 25561 / 77482 Flaxman , S . , Mishra , S . , Gandy , A . , Unwin , H . J . T . , Mellan , T . A . , Coupland , H . , Whittaker , C . , Zhu , H . , Berah , T . , Eaton , J . W . , Monod , M . , Ghani , A . C . , Donnelly , C . A . , Riley , S . , Vollmer , M . A . C . , Ferguson , N . M . , Okell , L . C . , Bhatt , S . , 2020 . Estimating the effects of non - pharmaceutical interventions on COVID - 19 in Europe . Nature 584 , 257 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2405 - 7 Google , 2021 . COVID - 19 Community Mobility Reports [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . google . com / covid19 / mobility / ( accessed 8 . 10 . 21 ) . Gupta , M . , Wahl , B . , Adhikari , B . , Bar - Zeev , N . , Bhandari , S . , Coria , A . , Erchick , D . J . , Gupta , N . , Hariyani , S . , Kagucia , E . W . , Killewo , J . , Limaye , R . J . , McCollum , E . D . , Pandey , R . , Pomat , W . S . , Rao , K . D . , Santosham , M . , Sauer , M . , Wanyenze , R . K . , Peters , D . H . , 2020 . The need for COVID - 19 research in low - and middle - income countries . Glob . Heal . Res . Policy 5 , 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s41256 - 020 - 00159 - y Halpin , S . J . , McIvor , C . , Whyatt , G . , Adams , A . , Harvey , O . , McLean , L . , Walshaw , C . , Kemp , S . , Corrado , J . , Singh , R . , Collins , T . , O’Connor , R . J . , Sivan , M . , 2020 . Postdischarge symptoms and rehabilitation needs in survivors of COVID‐19 infection : A cross‐sectional evaluation . J . Med . Virol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jmv . 26368 Hodgins , S . , Saad , A . , 2020 . Will the Higher - Income Country Blueprint for COVID - 19 Work in Low - and Lower Middle - Income Countries ? Glob . Heal . Sci . Pract . 8 , 136 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9745 / GHSP - D - 20 - 00217 Homaira , N . , Islam , M . S . , Hassan , Z . , Haider , N . , Satter , S . M . , 2020 . Contact tracing for covid - 19 in low - and middle - income countries . BMJ Opin . Hong , L . , Lin , A . , He , Z . - B . , Zhao , H . - H . , Zhang , J . - G . , Zhang , C . , Ying , L . - J . , Ge , Z . - M . , Zhang , X . , Han , Q . - Y . , Chen , Q . - Y . , Ye , Y . - H . , Zhu , J . - S . , Chen , H . - X . , Yan , W . - H . , 2020 . Mask wearing in pre - symptomatic patients prevents SARS - CoV - 2 transmission : An epidemiological analysis . Travel Med . Infect . Dis . 36 , 101803 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tmaid . 2020 . 101803 Howard , J . , Huang , A . , Li , Z . , Tufekci , Z . , Zdimal , V . , van der Westhuizen , H . - M . , von Delft , A . , Price , A . , Fridman , L . , Tang , L . - H . , Tang , V . , Watson , G . L . , Bax , C . E . , Shaikh , R . , Questier , F . , Hernandez , D . , Chu , L . F . , Ramirez , C . M . , Rimoin , A . W . , 2020 . Face Masks Against COVID - 19 : An Evidence Review . Preprints . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 20944 / preprints202004 . 0203 . v3 Hu , Zhiliang , Song , C . , Xu , C . , Jin , G . , Chen , Y . , Xu , X . , Ma , H . , Chen , W . , Lin , Y . , Zheng , Y . , Wang , J . , Hu , Zhibin , Yi , Y . , Shen , H . , 2020 . Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with COVID - 19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing , China . Sci . China Life Sci . 63 , 706 – 711 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11427 - 020 - 1661 - 4 icddrb , 2021 . Higher COVID - 19 seropositivity observed among residents in Dhaka and Chattogram [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . icddrb . org / news - and - events / news ? id = 878 ( accessed 9 . 27 . 21 ) . icddrb , 2020 . The IEDCR and partners share insights on the prevalence , seroprevalence and genomic epidemiology of COVID - 19 in Dhaka city [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . icddrb . org / quick - links / press - releases ? id = 97 & task = view ( accessed 9 . 27 . 21 ) . Iwasaki , A . , 2021 . What reinfections mean for COVID - 19 . Lancet Infect . Dis . 21 , 3 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30783 - 0 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 25 Jayasundara , P . , Peariasamy , K . M . , Law , K . B . , Abd Rahim , K . N . K . , Lee , S . W . , Ghazali , I . M . M . , Abayawardana , M . , Le , L . V . , Khalaf , R . K . S . , Razali , K . , Le , X . , Chong , Z . L . , McBryde , E . S . , Meehan , M . T . , Caldwell , J . M . , Ragonnet , R . , Trauer , J . M . , 2021 . Sustaining effective COVID - 19 control in Malaysia through large - scale vaccination . Epidemics 37 , 100517 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2021 . 100517 Keeling , M . J . , Hill , E . M . , Gorsich , E . E . , Penman , B . , Guyver - Fletcher , G . , Holmes , A . , Leng , T . , McKimm , H . , Tamborrino , M . , Dyson , L . , Tildesley , M . J . , 2021 . Predictions of COVID - 19 dynamics in the UK : Short - term forecasting and analysis of potential exit strategies . PLOS Comput . Biol . 17 , e1008619 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1008619 Kerr , C . C . , Stuart , R . M . , Mistry , D . , Abeysuriya , R . G . , Rosenfeld , K . , Hart , G . R . , Núñez , R . C . , Cohen , J . A . , Selvaraj , P . , Hagedorn , B . , George , L . , Jastrzębski , M . , Izzo , A . S . , Fowler , G . , Palmer , A . , Delport , D . , Scott , N . , Kelly , S . L . , Bennette , C . S . , Wagner , B . G . , Chang , S . T . , Oron , A . P . , Wenger , E . A . , Panovska - Griffiths , J . , Famulare , M . , Klein , D . J . , 2021 . Covasim : An agent - based model of COVID - 19 dynamics and interventions . PLOS Comput . Biol . 17 , e1009149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1009149 Krispin , R . , Byrnes , J . , 2021 . coronavirus : The 2019 Novel Coronavirus COVID - 19 Dataset . R package version 0 . 3 . 21 . Liang , W . , Guan , W . , Li , C . , Li , Y . , Liang , H . , Zhao , Y . , Liu , X . , Sang , L . , Chen , R . , Tang , C . , Wang , T . , Wang , W . , He , Q . , Chen , Zi - sheng , Wong , S . - S . , Zanin , M . , Liu , Jun , Xu , X . , Huang , J . , Li , J . , Ou , L . , Cheng , B . , Xiong , S . , Xie , Z . , Ni , Z . , Hu , Yu , Liu , L . , Shan , H . , Lei , C . , Peng , Y . , Wei , L . , Liu , Y . , Hu , Ya - hua , Peng , P . , Wang , J . , Liu , Ji - yang , Chen , Zhong , Li , G . , Zheng , Z . , Qiu , S . , Luo , J . , Ye , C . , Zhu , S . , Cheng , L . , Ye , F . , Li , S . , Zheng , J . , Zhang , N . , Zhong , N . , He , J . , 2020 . Clinical characteristics and outcomes of hospitalised patients with COVID - 19 treated in Hubei ( epicentre ) and outside Hubei ( non - epicentre ) : a nationwide analysis of China . Eur . Respir . J . 55 , 2000562 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1183 / 13993003 . 00562 - 2020 Linton , N . , Kobayashi , T . , Yang , Y . , Hayashi , K . , Akhmetzhanov , A . , Jung , S . , Yuan , B . , Kinoshita , R . , Nishiura , H . , 2020 . Incubation Period and Other Epidemiological Characteristics of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Infections with Right Truncation : A Statistical Analysis of Publicly Available Case Data . J . Clin . Med . 9 , 538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jcm9020538 Liu , Y . , Centre for Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases nCoV Working Group , Funk , S . , Flasche , S . , 2020 . The contribution of pre - symptomatic infection to the transmission dynamics of COVID - 2019 . Wellcome Open Res . 5 , 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12688 / wellcomeopenres . 15788 . 1 Lloyd - Sherlock , P . , Ebrahim , S . , Geffen , L . , McKee , M . , 2020 . Bearing the brunt of covid - 19 : older people in low and middle income countries . BMJ 368 , m1052 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . m1052 Madewell , Z . J . , Yang , Y . , Longini , I . M . , Halloran , M . E . , Dean , N . E . , 2020 . Household Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 . JAMA Netw . Open 3 , e2031756 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2020 . 31756 McBryde , E . S . , Meehan , M . T . , Adegboye , O . A . , Adekunle , A . I . , Caldwell , J . M . , Pak , A . , Rojas , D . P . , Williams , B . M . , Trauer , J . M . , 2020 . Role of modelling in COVID - 19 policy development . Paediatr . Respir . Rev . 35 , 57 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . prrv . 2020 . 06 . 013 Planas , D . , Bruel , T . , Grzelak , L . , Guivel - Benhassine , F . , Staropoli , I . , Porrot , F . , Planchais , C . , Buchrieser , J . , Rajah , M . M . , Bishop , E . , Albert , M . , Donati , F . , Prot , M . , Behillil , S . , Enouf , V . , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 26 Maquart , M . , Smati - Lafarge , M . , Varon , E . , Schortgen , F . , Yahyaoui , L . , Gonzalez , M . , De Sèze , J . , Péré , H . , Veyer , D . , Sève , A . , Simon - Lorière , E . , Fafi - Kremer , S . , Stefic , K . , Mouquet , H . , Hocqueloux , L . , van der Werf , S . , Prazuck , T . , Schwartz , O . , 2021 . Sensitivity of infectious SARS - CoV - 2 B . 1 . 1 . 7 and B . 1 . 351 variants to neutralizing antibodies . Nat . Med . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 021 - 01318 - 5 R Core Team , 2021 . R : A language and environment for statistical computing . Rahaman , K . R . , Mahmud , S . , Mallick , B . , 2020 . Challenges of Testing COVID - 19 Cases in Bangladesh . Int . J . Environ . Res . Public Health 17 , 6439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph17186439 Rahman , H . Z . , Das , N . , Matin , I . , Mohammad Abdul Wazed , S . A . , Jahan , N . , Zillur , U . , 2020 . Livelihoods , coping , and support during COVID - 19 crisis , Power and Participation Research Centre ( PPRC ) & BRAC Institute for Governance and Development ( BIGD ) . Rees , E . M . , Nightingale , E . S . , Jafari , Y . , Waterlow , N . R . , Clifford , S . , B . Pearson , C . A . , Group , C . W . , Jombart , T . , Procter , S . R . , Knight , G . M . , 2020 . COVID - 19 length of hospital stay : a systematic review and data synthesis . BMC Med . 18 , 270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12916 - 020 - 01726 - 3 Reidpath , D . D . , Allotey , P . , O’Brien - Malone , A . , Diamond , M . R . , 2020 . Re : Tackling covid - 19 : are the costs worth the benefits ? COVID in ( country ) context . BMJ m1496 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . m1496 Saha , Senjuti , Tanmoy , A . M . , Sium , S . M . Al , Tanni , A . A . , Goswami , S . , Rahman , H . , Saha , Samir , Hooda , Y . , 2021a . Detection of the B . 1 . 1 . 7 and B . 1 . 351 SARS - CoV - 2 variants in Bangladesh [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / virological . org / t / detection - of - the - b - 1 - 1 - 7 - and - b - 1 - 351 - sars - cov - 2 - variants - in - bangladesh / 668 ( accessed 4 . 6 . 21 ) . Saha , Senjuti , Tanmoy , A . M . , Tanni , A . A . , Goswami , S . , Sium , S . M . Al , Saha , Sudipta , Islam , S . , Hooda , Y . , Malaker , A . R . , Anik , A . M . , Haq , M . S . , Jabin , T . , Hossain , M . M . , Tabassum , N . , Rahman , H . , Hossain , M . J . , Islam , M . S . , Saha , S . K . , 2021b . New waves , new variants , old inequity : A continuing COVID - 19 crisis . BMJ Glob . Heal . 6 , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjgh - 2021 - 007031 Sanche , S . , Lin , Y . T . , Xu , C . , Romero - Severson , E . , Hengartner , N . , Ke , R . , 2020 . High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1470 – 1477 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3201 / eid2607 . 200282 Soetaert , K . , Petzoldt , T . , Setzer , R . W . , 2010 . Solving Differential Equations in R : Package deSolve . J . Stat . Softw . 33 , 1 – 25 . Stutt , R . O . J . H . , Retkute , R . , Bradley , M . , Gilligan , C . A . , Colvin , J . , 2020 . A modelling framework to assess the likely effectiveness of facemasks in combination with ‘lock - down’ in managing the COVID - 19 pandemic . Proc . R . Soc . A Math . Phys . Eng . Sci . 476 , 20200376 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rspa . 2020 . 0376 Thunström , L . , Newbold , S . C . , Finnoff , D . , Ashworth , M . , Shogren , J . F . , 2020 . The Benefits and Costs of Using Social Distancing to Flatten the Curve for COVID - 19 . J . Benefit - Cost Anal . 11 , 179 – 195 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / bca . 2020 . 12 Torres - Rueda , S . , Sweeney , S . , Bozzani , F . , Vassall , A . , 2020 . The health sector cost of different policy responses to COVID - 19 in low - And middle - income countries . medRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 08 . 23 . 20180299 Truelove , S . , Abrahim , O . , Altare , C . , Lauer , S . A . , Grantz , K . H . , Azman , A . S . , Spiegel , P . , 2020 . The J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 27 potential impact of COVID - 19 in refugee camps in Bangladesh and beyond : A modeling study . PLOS Med . 17 , e1003144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 1003144 United Nations , Department of Economic and Social Affairs , P . D . , 2019a . Database on Household Size and Composition 2019 [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . un . org / development / desa / pd / data / household - size - and - composition ( accessed 1 . 11 . 21 ) . United Nations , Department of Economic and Social Affairs , P . D . , 2019b . World Population Prospects 2019 [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / population . un . org / wpp / Download / Standard / Population / ( accessed 9 . 17 . 20 ) . Verity , R . , Okell , L . C . , Dorigatti , I . , Winskill , P . , Whittaker , C . , Imai , N . , Cuomo - Dannenburg , G . , Thompson , H . , Walker , P . G . T . , Fu , H . , Dighe , A . , Griffin , J . T . , Baguelin , M . , Bhatia , S . , Boonyasiri , A . , Cori , A . , Cucunubá , Z . , FitzJohn , R . , Gaythorpe , K . , Green , W . , Hamlet , A . , Hinsley , W . , Laydon , D . , Nedjati - Gilani , G . , Riley , S . , van Elsland , S . , Volz , E . , Wang , H . , Wang , Y . , Xi , X . , Donnelly , C . A . , Ghani , A . C . , Ferguson , N . M . , 2020 . Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019 : a model - based analysis . Lancet Infect . Dis . 20 , 669 – 677 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30243 - 7 Vespignani , A . , Tian , H . , Dye , C . , Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , Eggo , R . M . , Shrestha , M . , Scarpino , S . V . , Gutierrez , B . , Kraemer , M . U . G . , Wu , J . , Leung , K . , Leung , G . M . , 2020 . Modelling COVID - 19 . Nat . Rev . Phys . 2 , 279 – 281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s42254 - 020 - 0178 - 4 Wang , Y . , Tian , H . , Zhang , L . , Zhang , M . , Guo , D . , Wu , W . , Zhang , X . , Kan , G . L . , Jia , L . , Huo , D . , Liu , B . , Wang , X . , Sun , Y . , Wang , Q . , Yang , P . , MacIntyre , C . R . , 2020 . Reduction of secondary transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in households by face mask use , disinfection and social distancing : a cohort study in Beijing , China . BMJ Glob . Heal . 5 , e002794 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjgh - 2020 - 002794 World Health Organisation ( WHO ) , 2020a . Report of the WHO - China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) , The WHO - China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 . World Health Organisation ( WHO ) , 2020b . Hospital beds ( per 10 000 population ) [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . who . int / data / gho / data / indicators / indicator - details / GHO / hospital - beds - ( per - 10 - 000 - population ) ( accessed 9 . 17 . 20 ) . Yi , C . , Aihong , W . , Bo , Y . , Keqin , D . , Haibo , W . , Jianmei , W . , Hongho , S . , Sia , W . , Guozhang , X . , 2020 . Epidemiological characteristics of infection among close contacts of new coronavirus pneumonia in Ningbo City . Chinese J . Endem . 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3760 / cma . j . cn112338 - 20200304 - 00251 CRediT authorship contribution statement Elaine A Ferguson : Conceptualization , Data curation , Formal analysis , Investigation , Methodology , Software , Visualization , Writing – original draft , Writing – review & editing . Eric Brum : Conceptualization , Funding acquisition , Investigation , Project administration , Writing – review & editing . Anir Chowdhury : Investigation . Shayan Chowdhury : Investigation . Mikolaj Kundegorski : Data curation . Ayesha S Mahmud : Methodology , Writing – review & editing . Nabila Purno : Data curation , Investigation , Project administration . Ayesha Sania : Funding J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 28 acquisition , Investigation . Rachel Steenson : Data curation , Software , Visualisation . Motahara Tasneem : Data curation , Project administration . Katie Hampson : Conceptualisation , Funding acquisition , Data curation , Investigation , Methodology , Software , Supervision , Writing – original draft , Writing – review & editing . Declaration of competing interest : none   ighlights   We developed an SEIR model to compare feasible COVID - 19 interventions in Bangladesh  Masks and symptoms - based quarantine synergistically reduce SARS - CoV - 2 transmission  These combined interventions are cost - effective , assuming high - filtration efficiency masks  Our interactive app was a useful tool in communicating epidemiology to policymakers J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f