Enhancing in vivo vascularized bone formation by cobalt chloride - treated bone marrow stromal cells in a tissue engineered periosteum model Wei Fan , Ross Crawford , Yin Xiao * Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation , Queensland University of Technology , Kelvin Grove Campus , Brisbane , Qld 4059 , Australia a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 14 November 2009 Accepted 13 January 2010 Available online 13 February 2010 Keywords : Periosteum Tissue engineering Osteoblasts Vascularization Cobalt chloride a b s t r a c t The periosteum plays an indispensable role in both bone formation and bone defect healing . In this study we constructed an artiﬁcial in vitro periosteum by incorporating osteogenic differentiated bone marrow stromal cells ( BMSCs ) and cobalt chloride ( CoCl 2 ) - treated BMSCs . The engineered periostea were implanted both subcutaneously and into skull bone defects in SCID mice to investigate ectopic and orthotopic osteogenesis and vascularization . After two weeks in subcutaneous and four weeks in bone defect areas , the implanted constructs were assessed for ectopic and orthotopic osteogenesis and vascularization by micro - CT , histomorphometrical and immunohistochemical methods . The results showed that CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs induced higher degree of vascularization and enhanced osteo - genesis within the implants in both ectopic and orthotopic areas . This study provided a novel approach using BMSCs sourced from the same patient for both osteogenic and pro - angiogenic purposes in con - structing tissue engineered periosteum to enhance vascularized osteogenesis . (cid:2) 2010 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Bone defects , especially large bone defects , remain a major challenge in orthopedic surgery [ 1 ] . Autologous bone trans - plantation is considered the most effective treatment , but insufﬁ - cient donor tissue , coupled with concerns about donor site morbidity , has hindered this approach in large - scale applications . Allo or xenogeneic bone grafts , on the other hand , have major issues concerning immunological reactions in the recipients , which impose a major restriction on the clinical application of these approaches . In both physiological and pathological processes , the perios - teum plays an indispensable role in both bone formation and defect healing , together with various growth factors and mechanical loading [ 2 – 4 ] . The periosteum is a dense , dual - layered and highly vascularized connective tissue membrane covering cortical bone surfaces [ 2 , 5 , 6 ] . The cambial layer of periosteum contains osteo - blasts and osteogenic progenitor cells , whereas in the ﬁbrous layer there are collagen ﬁbres , ﬁbroblasts and blood vessel networks . It is the osteogenic function of periosteum that determines the rate of de novo postnatal periosteal bone formation and , consequently , the bone strength during the process of growth or defect healing [ 4 ] . Transplantation of autogenous or allogenous periosteum has been applied successfully in the restoration of various - sized bone defects , especially large bone defects [ 7 – 9 ] . Bone healing induced by periosteum has several advantages compared to direct bone or bone substitute transplantation , such as healing with a natural bone structure , optimal bone integrity in the defect area , appro - priate degree of vascularization , and minimal ectopic ossiﬁcation through the defect encasement [ 7 , 8 ] . However , major concerns in the case of autogenous periosteum transplantation include insuf - ﬁcient autologous donor tissues and donor site morbidity ; and in the case of allogenous transplants , immunological rejections . An in vitro tissue engineered periosteum , designed to mimic the anatomical structure of natural periosteum , would therefore be a novel approach in the treatment of large bone defects . Bone marrow stromal cells ( BMSCs ) are progenitor cells with the capacity to be differentiated into osteogenic lineage following ex vivo expansion and osteogenic induction . It has been demonstrated that these cells are able to regenerate bone tissues , in bioactive scaffolds containing hydroxyapatite / tricalcium phosphate ( HA / TCP ) , upon in vivo transplantation [ 10 , 11 ] . However , tissue engi - neered bone substitutes , especially BMSCs delivery constructs , show some difﬁculties in forming functional bone tissues due to the limitation of blood supply after implantation . A critical problem , in using the bone tissue engineering approach to restore large bone defects , is that the nutrient supply and cell viability at the centre of the scaffold is severely hampered since the diffusion distance of * Corresponding author . Tel . : þ 61 7 3138 6240 ; fax : þ 61 7 3138 6030 . E - mail address : yin . xiao @ qut . edu . au ( Y . Xiao ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biomaterials journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / biomaterials 0142 - 9612 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2010 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2010 . 01 . 083 Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 nutrients and oxygen for cell survival is limited to 150 – 200 m m [ 12 ] . Indeed , numerous studies have recently identiﬁed that tissue engineered products could only form a limited tissue layer on the scaffold surface . Moreover , at the centre of the scaffold , cell densities are typically low and necrosis may occur . The desired tissue engineered bone constructs should therefore contain certain pro - angiogenic factors in order to recruit blood vessels into the bone substitutes . It is known that hypoxia will increase the expression of pro - angiogenic factors , such as VEGF , by BMSCs , which can help to restore vascularization in ischemic tissues [ 13 , 14 ] . VEGF is also thought to be one of the key factors coupling both vascularization and osteogenesis [ 15 ] . CoCl 2 is a hypoxia mimicking agent , which can activate the hypoxia inducible factor - 1 ( HIF - 1 ) in mesenchymal stem cells and subsequently activate HIF - a target genes including VEGF , EPO , and p21 [ 16 ] . In the present study , we constructed a dual - layered periosteum using BMSCs treated with CoCl 2 , and osteogenic differentiated BMSCs in a type I collagen scaffold . The osteogenesis and vascularization of the tissue engineered periosteum were evaluated subcutaneously and in a critical size cranial defect model in SCID mice . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Cells and cell cultures BMSCs were isolated and characterized based on protocols developed in previous studies by our research group [ 17 – 19 ] . Brieﬂy , bone marrow was obtained from patients undergoing hip and knee replacement surgery at the orthopedic department of the Prince Charles Hospital in Brisbane . Informed consent was given by all donors , and the procedure was approved by the Ethics Committee of Queensland University of Technology . Mononuclear cells ( MNCs ) were isolated from the bone marrow by density gradient centrifugation over Lymphoprep ( Axis - Shield PoC AS , Oslo , Norway ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The MNCs were platedintothetissuecultureﬂasksingrowthmediacontainingDulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium ( DMEM ; Invitrogen Pty Ltd . , Mt Waverley , VIC , Australia ) , 10 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum ( FCS ; In Vitro Technology , Noble Park , VIC , Australia ) and 1 % ( v / v ) penicillin / streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) . The unattached hematopoietic cells were removed through media changes . When reaching 70 – 80 % conﬂuence , the attached mesenchymal cells were further expanded by sub culturing . The medium was changed every three days until the cells were conﬂuent . Only early passage ( p2 – 5 ) mesenchymal cells were used in this study . 2 . 2 . Cobalt chloride treatment of BMSCs BMSCsweregrownto70 – 80 % conﬂuence , afterwhichthemediawaschangedto DMEM containing 10 % ( v / v ) FCS and100 m M CoCl 2 ( SigmaAldrich Pty Ltd , CastelHill , NSW , Australia ) for one week prior to implantation . Real - time quantitative poly - merase chain reaction ( RT - qPCR ) and western blot analysis was performed on both treated and untreated BMSCs ( n ¼ 4 ) to assess VEGF expression . Brieﬂy for the RT - qPCR , total RNA was collected from treated or untreated BMSCs and cDNA was synthesized from 1 m g of total mRNA with SuperScript III ( Invitrogen ) . Two times 12 . 5 m l SYBR Green qPCR master mix ( AB Applied Biosystems , Melbourne , Australia ) was mixed with 5 m L Ultrapure water ( Invitrogen ) , 2 . 5 m L of reverse and forward primers ( Sigma – Aldrich Pty . Ltd , Castle Hill , NSW , Australia ) and 2 . 5 m L cDNA to aﬁnal reactionvolumeof 25 m L in a96 - wellPCR clear plate . The geneexpressions of VEGF and 18s ( house keeping gene ) were detected by a real time - PCR machine ( ABI Prism 7300 , AB Applied Biosystems ) . The forward and reverse primer sequences of each gene are detailed in Table 1 . For western blot , total cell proteins was harvested and 10 m g proteins from each sample were separated on a 8 % SDS - PAGE gel at 125V for 1 h . The proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulous membrane ( Pall Corpora - tion , East Hills , NY , USA ) using semi - dry transfer method which was probed with an anti - VEGF ( 1 : 2000 , rabbit anti - human , Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , Fremont , CA , USA ) andananti - a - tubulin ( 1 : 5000 , rabbitanti - human , AbcomInc . , Cambridge , MA , USA ) primary antibodies . An HRP - conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( 1 : 10 , 000 , Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , Fremont , CA , USA ) was applied and Super - Signal substrate ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , Fremont , CA , USA ) used to visualize the bands on X - ray ﬁlms . 2 . 3 . Periosteum construction Collagen scaffolds were fashioned from a 1mm - thick bovine type I collagen sheet ( Medtronic Australia Pty Ltd , North Ryde , NSW , Australia ) , and were 5 mm in diameter and sterilized by soaking in 75 % ethanol for 10 min , then washed a minimum of three times in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) . The scaffolds were placed in a 96 - well cell culture plate and a total of 6 (cid:2) 10 4 BMSCs seeded on the scaffolds and cultured in growth media for 24 h , after which osteogenic differenti - ation media , containing 10 m M b - glycerophosphate , 50 m M ascorbic acid and 100 n M dexamethasone ( Sigma ) , was applied . After two weeks in the differentiation media , CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( 1 (cid:2) 10 5 ) were seeded onto the other side of the collagen scaffolds . The tissue engineered periostea were incubated in growth media for another 3 h , and then implanted in the SCID mice , either subcutaneously or in bone defect sites . Scaffold cell seeding efﬁciencies were evaluated using a NucleoCounter ( Che - moMetec A / S , Denmark ) , by calculating the ratio of cells attached on the scaffold over the total number of cells seeded . The distribution of osteogenic differentiated BMSCs on scaffolds was observed by cell nuclei staining . Brieﬂy , the scaffold was ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , embedded in parafﬁn and 5 m m - thick serial sections cut perpendicularly to the cell seeding surface with a microtome ( Leica Micro - systems GmbH , Wetzlar , Germany ) . Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) and viewed under a ﬂuorescence microscope ( Carl Zeiss Microimaging GmbH , Gottingen , Germany ) at 100 (cid:2) magniﬁcation . The distribution of CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in the scaffolds was observed by labelling these cells with intra - cellular green ﬂuorescent nano - particles ( Q - tracker 565 ; Invitrogen ) . After labelled cells were seeded ontothe scaffolds , a 60 m m thick slice was cryo - sectioned Table 1 Primer sequences for the genes observed in this study . genes Primer sequences Gene bank No . VEGF For . 5 0 GCTGTCTTGGGTGCATTGG E14233 Rev . 5 0 GCAGCCTGGGACCACTTG 18s For . 5 0 TTCGGAACTGAGGCCATGAT M10098 Rev . 5 0 CGAACCTCCGACTTCGTTC Fig . 1 . VEGF expression of CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs . The gene expression of VEGF ( A ) was signiﬁcantly upregulated in CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs compared with untreated BMSCs . The intra - cellular protein level of VEGF conﬁrmed the upregulated VEGF in CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( B ) by western blot . a - tubulin was used as protein loading control . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3581 and stained with DAPI and viewed directly under a ﬂuorescence microscope ( Carl Zeiss Microimaging GmbH , Go¨ttingen , Germany ) at 100 (cid:2) magniﬁcations . 2 . 4 . Subcutaneous implantation of tissue engineered periosteum in SCID mice Ethics approval for the use of severe combined immunodeﬁcient ( SCID ) mice was granted by the Animal Ethics Committee of Queensland University of Tech - nology . Each group contained four 5 - week old male SCID mice ( Animal Resources Centre , Canning Vale , WA , Australia ) . The animals were anesthetized with 10 m L / g bodyweight of a mixture of ketamine ( 100 mg / mL ) and xylazine ( 20 mg / mL ) , injected intraperitoneally . Three small incisions were made longitudinally along the central line of the shaved dorsal area , approximately 1 cm apart , and subcu - taneous pockets were made on each side of the incision with a pair of surgical scissors . Each individual pocket had one scaffold . Incisions were closed with surgical clips . All animals recovered fully from the surgery by the following day and were sacriﬁced after two weeks . The implants were retrieved for following analyses . 2 . 5 . Skull defect implantation of tissue engineered periosteum in SCID mice Atotaloftwenty - eight5 - weekoldmaleSCIDmicewereusedfortheskulldefect model experiments . The procedure was carried out as described in previous studies [ 20 , 21 ] . Brieﬂy , a small incision was made longitudinally along the centre line , exposing the skull bone surface . The periosteum covering the bone surface was totally removed using a dental scraper and a Ø 2 . 5 mm defect created using a dental bur . Special care was taken to avoid the drill entering the dura and sterile PBS was applied to the site to prevent overheating - related damage to surrounding tissues . The defect was ﬁlled with the tissue engineered periosteum , covered with skin and closed using surgical clips . The animals had all fully recovered from the surgery by the following day . They were sacriﬁced after four weeks and the skull defects and implants recovered . 2 . 6 . Assessment of mineralization by micro - CT scanning The implants were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde solution overnight at room temperature and washed in PBS . Cross - sectional scans , parallel to the cell seeding Fig . 2 . Cell seeding on collagenscaffolds . A . parafﬁnslice stained with DAPI showingcell attachment and distribution on scaffolds afterﬁrst seeding ; B . cryo - sectioned slice showing the distribution of secondarily seeded cells ( with green ﬂuorescence ) on scaffolds ; C . Cryo - sectioned slice showing scaffold collagen ﬁbres ; D . Cryo - sectioned slice showing the polarized distribution of ﬁrstly and secondarily seeded cells on scaffolds with higher magniﬁcation ; E . Bar graph showing the cell seeding efﬁciencies . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3582 surface of subcutaneous or skull defect implants , were performed in a micro - CT scanner ( m CT40 , SCANCO Medical AG , Bru¨ttisellen , Switzerland ) , at a resolution of 12 m m . Three dimensional ( 3D ) images of the implants were reconstructed from the scans with the micro - CT system software package . To validate the in vivo mineral - izationof tissueengineeredperiosteum , scaffoldscultured invitro , implantswithout pre - seeded cells , or carrying untreated BMSCs , were also scanned . For in vitro or subcutaneously implanted scaffolds , total volume and average density of minerali - zation , against hydro - apatite ( HA ) , were measured and recorded by the micro - CT system software package and this data was included in the statistical analysis . For scaffolds in the skull defect , volume and average density of mineralization within theimplants ( deﬁnedbyencirclingtheimplantareaoneachmicro - CTsliceasareaof interest ) were measured and recorded for statistical analysis . 2 . 7 . Mineralization detected by von Kossa staining in subcutaneous implants Following micro - CT scanning , subcutaneous implants were embedded in parafﬁn and 5 m m - thick serial sections were cut perpendicular to the implants by microtome . Slices near the central area of the implants were used for von Kossa staining . Brieﬂy , afterdewaxing and hydration , Mayer’s haematoxylin ( HD Scientiﬁc Pty Ltd . , Kings Park , NSW , Australia ) was applied for nuclear staining and 5 % silver nitrate ( Sigma – Aldrich ) added to each slice , which were then exposed to light for at least 30 min . The slices were brieﬂy washed in distilled water and dehydrated in ethanol before being mounted with cover slides and the mineralization was viewed under a microscope . 2 . 8 . Assessment of new bone formation by histological H & E staining Following micro - CT scanning , skull defect implants were decalciﬁed in 10 % EDTA , embedded in parafﬁn and 5 m m - thick serial sections cut perpendicular to the implants by microtome . Slices near the central area of the implants were used for the H & E staining . Brieﬂy , following dewaxing and hydration , Mayer’s haematoxylin ( HD Scientiﬁc Pty Ltd . ) was applied for nuclear staining . After dehydration in increasingalcohol concentrations , cell plasmaand extracellularmatrix were stained with eosin ( HD Scientiﬁc Pty Ltd . ) . De novo bone formationwithin the implants was visualizedbytheH & Estainingandtheareaofnewbonetissueswasmeasuredusing the AxioVision software ( Carl Zeiss Microimaging GmbH ) . The average of three measurements from each implant was used for statistical analysis . 2 . 9 . Assessment of vascularization and new bone formation using immunohistochemical staining Slices near the central areaof the implants were used for immunohistochemical staining . A von Willebrand factor ( vWF ) antibody ( mouse anti - human , Chemicom International Inc . , Temecula , CA ) was used to identify the presence of endothelial cells in the implants . An alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) antibody ( rabbit anti - human , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . , Santa Cruz , CA ) was used to detect the presence of newly formed bone matrix in the implants . Brieﬂy , tissue slices were dewaxed and hydrated , and endogenous peroxidase activity quenched by incubating in 3 % H 2 O 2 for 20 min before being blocked with 10 % swine serum for 1 h . Samples were incubated with vWF antibody ( 1 : 300 ) or ALP antibody ( 1 : 200 ) overnight at 4 (cid:3) C , followed by incubation with a biotinylated swine - anti - mouse , rabbit , goat secondary antibody ( DAKO Multilink , CA , USA ) for 15 min at RT , and then with horseradish perioxidase - conjugated avidin – biotin complex ( DAKO Multilink , CA , USA ) for 15 min . The antibody complexes were visualized by the addition of a buffered diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) substrate for 4 min and the samples counter stained with Mayer’s haematoxylin . The number of vWF þ blood vessels were counted and normalized to the area of the implant on each slice . Three measure - ments from each implant were averaged and used for statistical analysis . 2 . 10 . Double staining of both vWF and calcium on subcutaneous implants Double staining with vWF antibody and von Kossa calcium staining was per - formed on subcutaneous implants to determine the relationship between osteo - genesis and vascularization . Brieﬂy , following vWF staining , 5 % silver nitrate ( Sigma – Aldrich ) was added onto each slice and exposed to light for at least 30 min and the slices brieﬂy washed in distilled water and dehydrated in ethanol before being mounted with cover slides . 2 . 11 . Statistical analysis Analysis was performed using SPSS software ( SPSS Inc , Chicago , Il , USA ) . All the data were analyzed using one - way ANOVA or Friedman test for group differences . The signiﬁcance level was set at p (cid:4) 0 . 05 . Fig . 3 . Enhanced vascularization by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in subcutaneous implants . A . implants containing only osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; B . implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ; C . implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; D . vWF staining in implants containing only osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ( 200 (cid:2) ) ; E . vWF staining on implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ( 200 (cid:2) ) ; F . vWF staining on implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( 200 (cid:2) ) ; G . higher magniﬁcation ( 400 (cid:2) ) showing vWF þ micro - blood vessel in implants ( arrow ) ; H . bar graph showing the difference in vWF þ blood vessel density in different implants ; Bost : osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; BOC : Bost plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; BOB : Bost plus untreated BMSCs ; BM : BMSCs only ; COL : collagen scaffold only ; * : p < 0 . 05 W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3583 3 . Results 3 . 1 . VEGF expression in CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs The VEGF gene expression of CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs was assessed by RT - qPCR . BMSCs cultured in CoCl 2 - induced hypoxia condition expressed signiﬁcantly higher level of VEGF than those cultured in normal culture condition ( p < 0 . 05 ) ( Fig . 1A ) . The intra - cellular VEGF proteins identiﬁed by western blot conﬁrmed the upregula - tion of VEGF in CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( Fig . 1B ) . 3 . 2 . Tissue engineered periosteum Collagen sponges were used as scaffold ( Fig . 2C ) for the construction of tissue engineered periosteum . A total of 6 (cid:2) 10 4 BMSCs were seeded onto the collagen scaffolds ( Fig . 2A ) . The cell seeding efﬁciency was 92 . 3 (cid:5) 2 . 5 % ( Fig . 2E ) . After two weeks of osteogenic differentiation , CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs were seeded onto the opposite side of the scaffolds ( Fig . 2B ) . The cell seeding efﬁ - ciency of CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs was 85 . 3 (cid:5) 5 . 0 % ( Fig . 2E ) . Collagen scaffolds seeded with both osteogenic differentiated and CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs formed a dual - layered cell and matrix construct similar to the native periosteum structure , with osteogenic cells on one layer and pro - angiogenic cells on the other . The histology revealed that following the initial cell seeding , cells had attached to the collagen ﬁbres and were evenly distributed within the scaffold ( Fig . 2A ) . Fluorescence - labelled cryosections also revealed the dual - layered nature of the construct with a clear aggregation of CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs on one side and osteogenic cells on the other ( Fig . 2D ) . 3 . 3 . Enhanced vascularization and mineralization by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in subcutaneously implanted cell constructs The overall observation of the subcutaneous implants was that constructs containing CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs attracted more blood vessels around the construct compared with the other constructs ( Fig . 3A – C ) . This observation was conﬁrmed by vWF staining of implants , which showed that scaffolds containing CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs had a greater degree of vascularization ( Fig . 3D – H , p < 0 . 05 , Friedman test ) . Micro - CT scanning and 3D reconstruction revealed that a substantial amount of mineralization was found in the implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ( Fig . 4B – D ) . The constructs which contained both osteogenic differentiated and CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs showed the greatest volume of mineralized areas ( Fig . 4D and I , p < 0 . 05 , Friedman test ) ; however , the difference in the average density of mineralized areas between groups containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs was not statistically signiﬁcant ( Fig . 4J , p > 0 . 05 , Friedman test ) . There was no evidence of mineralization in scaffolds not seeded with cells or those scaffolds seeded with undifferentiated BMSCs ( Fig . 4I ) , and only limited mineralization was detectable in the in vitro - cultured constructs ( Fig . 4A and I ) . Implants treated with von Kossa stain Fig . 4 . Enhanced mineralization by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in subcutaneous implants A . 3D reconstruction of mineralized areas within invitro - cultured scaffolds ; B . 3D reconstruction of mineralized areas within implants containing only osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; C . 3D reconstruction of mineralized areas within implants containing osteogenic differ - entiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ; D . 3D reconstruction of mineralized areas within implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; E . Von Kossa stainingon implants containing onlyosteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; F . Von Kossa stainingon implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ; G . Von Kossa staining on implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; H . H & E staining on implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; I & J . bar graphs showing the differences in volume and density of mineralized areas within different scaffolds or implants ; Bost : osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; BOC : Bost plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; BOB : Bost plus untreated BMSCs ; BM : BMSCs only ; COL : collagen scaffold only ; Vitro : in vitro - cultured scaffold ; * : p < 0 . 05 ; * * * : p < 0 . 001 W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3584 conﬁrmed that CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs had signiﬁcantly enhanced mineralization within the implants ( Fig . 4E – G ) . However , despite obvious mineralization in the implants , H & E staining failed to demonstrate histological evidence of bone tissue in any of the subcutaneously transplanted constructs ( Fig . 4H ) . In subcutaneous implants , von Kossa and vWF double staining revealed a close relationship between mineralization and blood Fig . 5 . vWF and calciﬁcation double staining The relationship of vascularization and mineralization was revealed by the double staining of vWF and von Kossa . A & B . 200 (cid:2) ; C & D . 400 (cid:2) ; brown - colour staining showing the vWF þ micro - blood vessels ; black particles representing calcium precipitation . Fig . 6 . General observations of skull defect repair with different implants . A . defect without implants ; B . defect ﬁlled with scaffold only ; C . defect ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs only ; D . defect ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ; E . defect ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; F . zoom in image of the selected area in E . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3585 vessel distribution ( Fig . 5 ) . It was noted that micro - blood vessels were clearly observed around the mineralized areas ( Fig . 5 ) . 3 . 4 . Enhanced new bone formation and vascularization by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in skull defect In the skull defect model , the overall observation was that defects ﬁlled with scaffolds carrying osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ( alone or together with other cells ) had a greater capacity for repair than the control consisting of collagen scaffold alone or collagen impregnated with undifferentiated BMSCs ( Fig . 6 ) . 3D reconstruction of micro - CT scans showed that implants carrying osteogenic differentiated BMSCs and CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs had signiﬁcantly greater volume of mineralized areas than the other implants ( Fig . 7N , p < 0 . 001 , one - way ANOVA test ) ; however no signiﬁcant difference was found in the average density of miner - alized areas among different groups containing osteogenic differ - entiated BMSCs ( Fig . 7O , p > 0 . 05 , one - way ANOVA test ) . The 3D reconstructed defect area ( Fig . 7A – E ) showed that defects ﬁlled with osteogenic differentiated BMSCs and CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs implants healed better than the other groups . H & E staining revealed that the implants carrying osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs had signiﬁcantly more de novo bone tissue than the other implants ( Fig . 7F – I and P , p < 0 . 001 , one - way ANOVA test ) , and that the defects were almost completely bridged by new bone tissue ( Fig . 7I ) . It was interesting to note that Fig . 7 . Enhanced new bone formation by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in skull defect implants . 3D reconstruction of the defect area ﬁlled with no scaffold ( A ) , collagen scaffold only ( B ) , implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ( C ) , or implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ( D ) , or implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( E ) ; F . H & E staining on defect areas ﬁlled with no scaffold ; G . H & E stainingon defect areas ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs only ; H . H & E staining on defect areas ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ; I . H & E staining on defect areas ﬁlled with implants containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; J . H & E staining on defect areas ﬁlled with collagen scaffold only ; K & L . higher magni - ﬁcations ( 200 (cid:2) in K and 400 (cid:2) in L ) showing the de novo bone formed along and incorporated collagen ﬁbres of scaffold ; M . ALP staining showing ALP þ osteoblast surrounding the de novo bone tissue ( 400 (cid:2) ) ; N - P . bar graphs showing the differences in Micro - CTscanning and new bone formation among different groups ; Bost : osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; BOC : Bost plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; BOB : Bost plus untreated BMSCs ; EMP : defect without implant ; COL : collagen scaffold only ; COLB : scaffold plus BMSCs only ; * * * : p < 0 . 001 . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3586 the de novo bone tissue appeared to form along and incorporate the collagen ﬁbres of the scaffold ( Fig . 7K and L ) . ALP immunohisto - chemical staining revealed the presence of ALP þ osteoblasts surrounding the newly formed bone tissue within the implants ( Fig . 7M ) . The overall observation was that implants carrying both osteo - genic differentiated BMSCs and CoCl2 - treated BMSCs attracted blood vessels which grew into the defect area ( Fig . 6E and F ) . This observation was conﬁrmed by vWF staining which showed a greater degree of vascularization in scaffolds containing CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( Fig . 8 , p < 0 . 001 , one - way ANOVA test ) . Micro - blood vessels positive for vWF were also found in and around the de novo bone tissues ( Fig . 8D – F ) . 4 . Discussion In a recent review article it was proposed that a tissue engi - neered periosteum could assist in structural de novo bone forma - tion and was therefore a promising method for restoring bone defects [ 22 ] . Although much work has focused on the structure , cell populations and osteogenic mechanisms within the periosteum [ 4 , 23 – 26 ] , few , if any , references were found which addresses engineered periosteum containing different cell populations such as osteogenic and pro - angiogenic cells , not to mention an in vivo assessment of any such constructs . To the best of our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst attempt to construct an artiﬁcial bi - layered perios - teum with BMSCs dedicated into two different cell functions – osteogenic and pro - angiogenic . Previous studies concerning artiﬁ - cial periostea have described structures with a single cell pop - ulation , and which therefore differ considerably from the structure of native periosteum [ 27 – 29 ] . The most obvious deﬁciency of these approaches is the absence of data describing how osteogenic and pro - angiogenic cells interact during the formation of vascularized bone . In the experiment presented here , osteogenic ( BMSCs derived osteoblasts ) and pro - angiogenic cells ( CoCl 2 - pre - treated BMSCs ) were seeded onto opposite sides of a collagen membrane , thereby more accurately mimicking the physiological distribution of cell populations in native periosteum . Fig . 8 . Enhanced vasularization by CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs in skull defect implants A . vWF staining on implant containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs only ( 100 (cid:2) ) ; B . vWF staining on implant containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus untreated BMSCs ( 100 (cid:2) ) ; C . vWF staining on implant containing osteogenic differentiated BMSCs plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ( 100 (cid:2) ) ; D – F . higher magniﬁcation ( 400 (cid:2) ) of the vWF staining in A – C shows the vWF þ micro - blood vessels recruited into the implants and involved into the newly formed bone tissues ; G . bar graph showing the differences in vessel density within different implants ; Bost : osteogenic differentiated BMSCs ; BOC : Bost plus CoCl 2 - treated BMSCs ; BOB : Bost plus untreated BMSCs ; In picture , B : bone tissues , arrows : vWF þ micro - blood vessels ; * * * : p < 0 . 001 . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3587 There are , of course , other cell types residing within the peri - osteum , however , osteogenic and endothelial cells are the most abundant and important of these cell populations [ 30 , 31 ] , and it is the interactions between osteogenesis and vascularization which , to a large extent , determines the osteogenic function of periosteum . In order to enhance the vascularization of engineered tissues and organs there are three different approaches which may be considered : ( i ) autogenous or allogenous endothelial cells which could be directly incorporated into the host blood vessel networks [ 32 , 33 ] ; ( ii ) impregnation of pro - angiogenic growth factors such as VEGF , bFGF , and PDGF into the scaffold to induce new blood vessel formation [ 15 , 34 ] ; and ( iii ) incorporation of gene carrying vectors ( plasmid or virus ) within the scaffold encoding pro - angiogenic growth factors , or alternatively cells transfected with such vectors within scaffolds to attract new blood vessels [ 35 ] . All of these approaches have disadvantages with respect to their potential in vivo applications . For instance : the difﬁculties involved in isolating endothelial cells from the host ; immunological reactions to allog - enous endothelial cells ; the low in vitro growth rate of autologous endothelial cells ; concerns regarding gene vectors or transfected cells ; and unpredicable temporal and spatial release of pro - angio - genic growth factors in defect areas . Recent studies have tried to induce autologous bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells to differentiate towards endothelial cells , but this does not appear to be a viable approach [ 36 , 37 ] . Interestingly , it has been reported that both low oxygen pressure and hypoxia - mimic agents , such as CoCl 2 or desferrioxamine , appears to upregulate the expression of pro - angiogenic growth factors , VEGF in particular , in a variety of cells including BMSCs [ 38 , 39 ] . Hypoxia treated BMSCs have been applied successfully to assist in re - vascularizing ischemic or infarcted muscles in animal models [ 10 , 13 ] . In the present study , BMSCs were pre - treated with hypoxia - mimic agent CoCl 2 which resulted in a near 5 fold increase of VEGF expression . VEGF is an important growth factor involved in both angiogenic and osteo - genic processes [ 40 – 42 ] . In this study we incorporated CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs with BMSC - derived osteoblasts into a tissue engi - neered periosteum to model the in vivo generation of vascularized bone . Subcutaneous ( ectopic ) and bone defect ( orthotopic ) osteo - genesis implantations are the two most commonly used models to assess the in vivo osteogenic ability of engineered tissues : . In this study , we included both models . There are two distinct patterns of bone formation , namely intramembranous and endochondral ossiﬁcation . During intramembranous ossiﬁcation , which takes place predominantly in the periosteum during normal bone formation , osteoprogenitor cells differentiate directly into osteo - blasts and then proceed to lay down new bone tissues [ 43 ] . Much is already known about the in vivo and in vitro interactions between osteogenesis and vascularization [ 15 , 32 ] ; however , knowledge of the in vivo interactions between osteogenesis and vascularization , especially those taking place during early osteogenesis and relating to periosteal intramembranous ossiﬁcation , is not well character - ized . Early stage histological and ultrastructural changes in micro - vessels of periosteal calluses after bone facture , using the light and electron microscope , has been described previously , but as yet , no quantitative data about the interaction between osteogenesis and vascularization has been forthcoming [ 44 ] . In the present study , observations and assessments regarding osteogenesis and vascu - larization in the engineered periosteum were performed two weeks after subcutaneous implantation and four weeks after skull defect implantation . Osteogenesis and vascularization were then quantiﬁed using micro - CT scanning , histology and immunohisto - chemical methods [ 45 ] . Our ﬁndings showed more extensive calciﬁcation in subcutaneously implanted scaffolds compared to in vitro - cultured scaffolds , whereas scaffolds implanted in skull defects showed evidence of signiﬁcantly greater de novo bone tissues formation . Interestingly , in the skull defect sites collagen only implants or implants carrying undifferentiated BMSCs were almost completely degraded and had generated some very limited new bone tissues within the defect , compared to the implants carrying BMSC - derived osteoblasts . This observation suggests that new bone formation requires the orchestration of an osteogenesis - favouring environment with an appropriate degree of calcium precipitation on the collagen ﬁbres as well as the presence of osteogenic cells . As for the vascularization , the presence of CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs seemed to signiﬁcantly increase blood vessel density in both subcutaneously and skull defect implanted scaffolds compared to the controls . The apparent upregulation of VEGF expression by the CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs may stimulate the osteogenesis of BMSC - derived osteoblasts following cell seeding , creating a positive feedback mechanism which subsequently enhances vascularization . Calcium - vWF double staining and vWF þ micro - blood vessels surrounding the de novo bone tissues also suggests the existence of a close relationship between osteogenesis and vascularization . To conﬁrm the pro - osteogenic and pro - angiogenic effects of CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs , untreated BMSCs were used together with BMSC - derived osteoblasts as an internal control . This combination demonstrated that untreated BMSCs had little effect on in vivo vascularization and osteogenesis by the BMSC - derived osteoblasts in either the ectopic or orthotopic sites . 5 . Conclusions The ﬁndings of this study , suggests that CoCl 2 pre - treated BMSCs enhance the vascularization in both ectopic and orthotopic osteogenesis in an artiﬁcial periosteum model . This study provides an approach by using BMSCs sourced from the same donor for the regeneration of vacularized bone tissue . Acknowledgements We would like to thank the Built Environment & Engineering Faculty of Queensland University of Technology for its support in this project . The collagen sponge was kindly provided by Prof . Dietmar Hutmacher . The authors also wish to thank Mr Thor Friis for his assistance in preparing this document . Appendix Figures with essential color discrimination . Figs . 2 – 8 in this article are difﬁcult to interpret in black and white . The full color images can be found in the on - line version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2010 . 01 . 083 . References [ 1 ] Knothe Tate ML , Ritzman TF , Schneider E , Knothe UR . Testing of a new one - stage bone - transport surgical procedure exploiting the periosteum for the repair of long - bone defects . J Bone Jt Surg Am 2007 ; 89 ( 2 ) : 307 – 16 . [ 2 ] Malizos KN , Papatheodorou LK . The healing potential of the periosteum molecular aspects . Injury 2005 ; 36 ( Suppl . 3 ) : S13 – 9 . [ 3 ] Eyre - Brook AL . The periosteum : its function reassessed . Clin Orthop Relat Res 1984 ; 189 : 300 – 7 . [ 4 ] Seeman E . Perioste al bone formation – a neglected determinant of bone strength . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 349 ( 4 ) : 320 – 3 . [ 5 ] Simpson AH . The blood supply of the periosteum . J Anat 1985 ; 140 ( Pt 4 ) : 697 – 704 . [ 6 ] Nakahara H , Bruder SP , Haynesworth SE , Holecek JJ , Baber MA , Goldberg VM , et al . Bone and cartilage formation in diffusion chambers by subcultured cells derived from the periosteum . Bone 1990 ; 11 ( 3 ) : 181 – 8 . [ 7 ] Fujii T , Ueno T , Kagawa T , Sakata Y , Sugahara T . Comparison of bone formation ingrafted periosteum harvested from tibia and calvaria . Microsc Res Tech 2006 ; 69 ( 7 ) : 580 – 4 . [ 8 ] Vogelin E , Jones NF , Huang JI , Brekke JH , Lieberman JR . Healing of a critical - sized defect in the rat femur with use of a vascularized periosteal ﬂap , W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3588 a biodegradable matrix , and bone morphogenetic protein . J Bone Jt Surg 2005 ; 87 ( 6 ) : 1323 – 31 . [ 9 ] Hoshino M , Egi T , Terai H , Namikawa T , Takaoka K . Repair of long intercalated rib defects using porous beta - tricalcium phosphate cylinders containing recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 in dogs . Biomaterials 2006 ; 27 ( 28 ) : 4934 – 40 . [ 10 ] Arnold U , Lindenhayn K , Perka C . In vitro - cultivation of human periosteum derived cells in bioresorbable polymer - TCP - composites . Biomaterials 2002 ; 23 ( 11 ) : 2303 – 10 . [ 11 ] Jensen SS , Bornstein MM , Dard M , Bosshardt DD , Buser D . Comparative study of biphasic calcium phosphates with different HA / TCP ratios in mandibular bone defects . A long - term histomorphometric study in minipigs . J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2009 ; 90 ( 1 ) : 171 – 81 . [ 12 ] Laschke MW , Harder Y , Amon M , Martin I , Farhadi J , Ring A , et al . Angiogenesis in tissue engineering : breathing life into constructed tissue substitutes . Tissue Eng 2006 ; 12 ( 8 ) : 2093 – 104 . [ 13 ] Hu X , Yu SP , Fraser JL , Lu Z , Ogle ME , Wang JA , et al . Transplantation of hypoxia - preconditioned mesenchymal stem cells improves infarcted heart function via enhanced survival of implanted cells and angiogenesis . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2008 ; 135 ( 4 ) : 799 – 808 . [ 14 ] Li TS , Hamano K , Suzuki K , Ito H , Zempo N , Matsuzaki M . Improved angiogenic potency by implantation of ex vivo hypoxia prestimulated bone marrow cells in rats . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002 ; 283 ( 2 ) : 468 – 73 . [ 15 ] Kaigler D , Wang Z , Horger K , Mooney DJ , Krebsbach PH . VEGF scaffolds enhance angiogenesis and bone regeneration in irradiated osseous defects . J Bone Miner Res 2006 ; 21 ( 5 ) : 735 – 44 . [ 16 ] Pacary E , Legros H , Valable S , Duchatelle P , Lecocq M , Petit E , et al . Synergistic effects of CoCl ( 2 ) and ROCK inhibition on mesenchymal stem cell differenti - ation into neuron - like cells . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 ( Pt 13 ) : 2667 – 78 . [ 17 ] Mareddy S , Broadbent J , Crawford R , Xiao Y . Proteomic proﬁling of distinct clonal populations of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells . J Cell Biochem 2009 ; 106 ( 5 ) : 776 – 86 . [ 18 ] Mareddy S , Crawford R , Brooke G , Xiao Y . Clonal isolation and characterization of bone marrow stromal cells from patients with osteoarthritis . Tissue Eng 2007 ; 13 ( 4 ) : 819 – 29 . [ 19 ] Singh S , Jones BJ , Crawford R , Xiao Y . Characterization of a mesenchymal - like stemcellpopulationfromosteophytetissue . StemCellsDev2008 ; 17 ( 2 ) : 245 – 54 . [ 20 ] Xiao Y , Haase H , Young WG , Bartold PM . Development and transplantation of a mineralized matrix formed by osteoblasts in vitro for bone regeneration . Cell Transplant 2004 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 15 – 25 . [ 21 ] Xiao Y , Qian H , Young WG , Bartold PM . Tissue engineering for bone regener - ation using differentiated alveolar bone cells in collagen scaffolds . Tissue Eng 2003 ; 9 ( 6 ) : 1167 – 77 . [ 22 ] Zhang X , Awad HA , O’Keefe RJ , Guldberg RE , Schwarz EM . A perspective : engineering periosteum for structural bone graft healing . Clin Orthop Relat Res 2008 ; 466 ( 8 ) : 1777 – 87 . [ 23 ] Stevens MM , Qanadilo HF , Langer R , Prasad Shastri V . A rapid - curing alginate gel system : utility in periosteum - derived cartilage tissue engineering . Biomaterials 2004 ; 25 ( 5 ) : 887 – 94 . [ 24 ] Fan W , Crawford R , Xiao Y . Structural and cellular differences between meta - physealanddiaphysealperiosteumindifferentagedrats . Bone2008 ; 42 ( 1 ) : 81 – 9 . [ 25 ] Hutmacher DW , Sittinger M . Periosteal cells in bone tissue engineering . Tissue Eng 2003 ; 9 ( Suppl . 1 ) : S45 – 64 . [ 26 ] Augustin G , Antabak A , Davila S . The periosteum . Part 1 : anatomy , histology and molecular biology . Injury 2007 ; 38 ( 10 ) : 1115 – 30 . [ 27 ] Hattori K , Yoshikawa T , Takakura Y , Aoki H , Sonobe M , Tomita N . Bio - artiﬁcial periosteum for severe open fracture – an experimental study of osteogenic cell / collagen sponge composite as a bio - artiﬁcial periosteum . Biomed Mater Eng 2005 ; 15 ( 3 ) : 127 – 36 . [ 28 ] Neel M . The use of a periosteal replacement membrane for bone graft containment at allograft - host junctions after tumor resection and recon - struction with bulk allograft . Orthopedics 2003 ; 26 ( 5 Suppl ) : s587 – 589 . [ 29 ] Zhang KG , Zeng BF , Zhang CQ . Periosteum construction in vitro by small intestinal submucosa combined with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell . Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi 2005 ; 43 ( 24 ) : 1594 – 7 . [ 30 ] Thomson RC , Mikos AG , Beahm E , Lemon JC , Satterﬁeld WC , Aufdemorte TB , et al . Guided tissue fabrication from periosteum using preformed biode - gradable polymer scaffolds . Biomaterials 1999 ; 20 ( 21 ) : 2007 – 18 . [ 31 ] Squier CA , Ghoneim S , Kremenak CR . Ultrastructure of the periosteum from membrane bone . J Anat 1990 ; 171 : 233 – 9 . [ 32 ] Rouwkema J , de Boer J , Van Blitterswijk CA . Endothelial cells assemble into a 3 - dimensional prevascular network in a bone tissue engineering construct . Tissue Eng 2006 ; 12 ( 9 ) : 2685 – 93 . [ 33 ] Amiel GE , Komura M , Shapira O , Yoo JJ , Yazdani S , Berry J , et al . Engineering of blood vessels from acellular collagen matrices coated with human endothelial cells . Tissue Eng 2006 ; 12 ( 8 ) : 2355 – 65 . [ 34 ] Koch S , Yao C , Grieb G , Prevel P , Noah EM , Steffens GC . Enhancing angiogenesis in collagen matrices by covalent incorporation of VEGF . J Mater Sci Mater Med 2006 ; 17 ( 8 ) : 735 – 41 . [ 35 ] Cai S , Ma Q , Yu X , Dang G , Ma D . Expression of human VEGF ( 121 ) cDNA in mouse bone marrow stromal cells . Chin Med J ( Engl ) 2002 ; 115 ( 6 ) : 914 – 8 . [ 36 ] Oswald J , Boxberger S , Jorgensen B , Feldmann S , Ehninger G , Bornhauser M , et al . Mesenchymal stem cells can be differentiated into endothelial cells in vitro . Stem Cells 2004 ; 22 ( 3 ) : 377 – 84 . [ 37 ] Zhang SJ , Zhang H , Hou M , Zheng Z , Zhou J , Su W , et al . Is it possible to obtain " true endothelial progenitor cells " by in vitro culture of bone marrow mono - nuclear cells ? Stem Cells Dev 2007 ; 16 ( 4 ) : 683 – 90 . [ 38 ] Ohnishi S , Yasuda T , Kitamura S , Nagaya N . Effect of hypoxia on gene expression of bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells and mono - nuclear cells . Stem Cells 2007 ; 25 ( 5 ) : 1166 – 77 . [ 39 ] Loboda A , Jazwa A , Wegiel B , Jozkowicz A , Dulak J . Heme oxygenase - 1 - dependent and - independent regulation of angiogenic genes expression : effect of cobalt protoporphyrin and cobalt chloride on VEGFand IL - 8 synthesis in human microvascular endothelial cells . Cell Mol Biol ( Noisy - le - grand ) 2005 ; 51 ( 4 ) : 347 – 55 . [ 40 ] Cho SW , Lim SH , Kim IK , Hong YS , Kim SS , Yoo KJ , et al . Small - diameter blood vessels engineered with bone marrow - derived cells . Ann Surg 2005 ; 241 ( 3 ) : 506 – 15 . [ 41 ] Nakagawa M , Kaneda T , Arakawa T , Morita S , Sato T , Yomada T , et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) directly enhances osteoclastic bone resorp - tion and survival of mature osteoclasts . FEBS Lett 2000 ; 473 ( 2 ) : 161 – 4 . [ 42 ] Peng H , Usas A , Olshanski A , Ho AM , Gearhart B , Cooper GM , et al . VEGF improves , whereas sFlt1 inhibits , BMP2 - induced bone formation and bone healing through modulation of angiogenesis . J Bone Miner Res 2005 ; 20 ( 11 ) : 2017 – 27 . [ 43 ] Shapiro F . Bone development and its relation to fracture repair . The role of mesenchymal osteoblasts and surface osteoblasts . Eur Cell Mater 2008 ; 15 : 53 – 76 . [ 44 ] Brighton CT , Hunt RM . Early histologic and ultrastructural changes in micro - vessels of periosteal callus . J Orthop Trauma 1997 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 244 – 53 . [ 45 ] Hedberg EL , Kroese - Deutman HC , Shih CK , Lemoine JJ , Liebschner MA , Miller MJ , et al . Methods : a comparative analysis of radiography , micro - computed tomography , and histology for bone tissue engineering . Tissue Eng 2005 ; 11 ( 9 – 10 ) : 1356 – 67 . W . Fan et al . / Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 3580 – 3589 3589