1 To appear in Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Cognitive Science Language and Conceptual Development Sudha Arunachalam & Sandra R . Waxman Abstract Linguistic and conceptual development converge crucially in the process of early word learning . Acquiring a new word requires the child to identify a conceptual unit , identify a linguistic unit , and establish a mapping between them . On the conceptual side , the child has to not only identify the relevant part of the scene being labeled , but also isolate a concept at the correct level of abstraction—the word “dog” must be mapped to the concept dog and not to the concepts petting or collie , for example . On the linguistic side , the child must use the syntactic context in which the word appears to determine its grammatical category ( e . g . , noun , verb , adjective ) . But she also uses syntactic information , along with observation of the world and social - communicative cues , to make guesses at which concept the word picks out as well as its level of abstraction . We present evidence that young learners learn new words rapidly and extend them appropriately . However , the relative import of observational and linguistic cues varies as a function of the kind of word being acquired , with verbs requiring a richer set of conceptual and linguistic cues than nouns . In decades past , language and conceptual development were treated as distinct research enterprises , but with the advent of the cognitive sciences , this ‘silo’ approach has been replaced . In recent years , a genuine focus on the relation between language and conceptual development has emerged , elucidating how this relation unfolds from infancy through adulthood . Research on word learning has served as a cornerstone in this integrative approach , primarily because word learning requires , by its very nature , precise coordination between the linguistic and conceptual systems ( Bloom , 2000 ; Gelman et al . , 1998 ; Hall & Waxman , 2004 ; Waxman & Lidz , 2006 ; Waxman & Gelman , 2009 ; Woodward & Markman , 1998 ) . To learn the meaning of a novel word , the learner must identify a linguistic element ( e . g . , “dog” ) , identify a referent ( e . g . , the dog she is currently petting ) , and establish a mapping between the two . But successful word learning requires more : the learner must be able to extend the novel word in a systematic and principled way beyond the particular situation in which it was initially introduced . That is , she must be able to extend “dog” beyond the particular dog she has just seen , or even all the dogs she has ever seen , to the abstract concept dog . Moreover , even a cursory consideration reveals another wrinkle : many different kinds of words can be applied to the very same scene , and each picks out a different aspect of the scene . When seeing a dog running at the park , for example , a child might hear , “Look ! A dog ! ” “Dog” , a noun , can be applied to that individual , but may also be extended to all other instances of the concept dog . Discovering the limit of its application ( dog ? collie ? mammal ? ) requires coordination of the linguistic and conceptual systems . But the child might also hear , “Look ! She’s so fluffy ! ” “Fluffy” , an adjective , applies not to the object itself but a property of it , and is extended to other entities sharing that property , regardless of object kind ( e . g . , fluffy pillows ) . The child might also hear a label for the dog’s action , “See ? She’s running ! ” Of course , she might also hear something generally exclamatory , like “Wow ! ” Amidst this richness and variability , the infant must determine which kind of description she has heard and its range of application . Research on early word learning has uncovered a great deal about infants’ and toddlers’ linguistic and conceptual capacities , and how these change over the course of development . Until recently , one kind of word ( noun ) and one kind of concept ( object categories or kinds ) have taken center stage . This is fitting given that nouns ( or words that are categorized as nouns in the adult 2 lexicon ) predominate in children’s early vocabularies ( e . g . , Gentner , 1982 ; Gentner & Boroditsky , 2001 ; see Waxman and Lidz , 2006 and Woodward and Markman , 1998 for reviews ) . But , of course , nouns are not the only words that children acquire , and object concepts are not the only concepts they entertain . Other kinds of words and concepts are equally important even in infancy ( e . g . , hug , kiss , wet ) . Moreover , nouns may not be the paradigmatic case for word learning : as we will see , learning different kinds of words requires different kinds of information . Studying the acquisition of other kinds of words ( e . g . , adjectives , verbs ) is therefore not just a simple extension of noun learning ( Gleitman & Fisher , 2005 ; Gleitman et al . , 2005 ; Waxman & Lidz , 2006 ) . We begin by outlining some recent findings documenting the conceptual capacities that preverbal infants have at their command even before they begin mapping concepts to words . Then we move on to consider how these kinds of concepts are mapped to different kinds of words . Because our interest is in the interface between conceptual and linguistic development , we focus on the acquisition of content words ( including nouns , adjectives , and verbs ) , and not function words or other functional aspects of language . We note two important points as background assumptions . First , the conceptual knowledge we will describe in infants does not represent the sum total of adult conceptual understanding . Surely over development , the conceptual representations available to infants become more elaborate . We focus here on early conceptual knowledge in order to examine early word learning processes . Second , we assume that although there are strong relations between language and conceptual development , these systems are not entirely dependent on one another . Language may highlight some concepts over others , and may shape some category boundaries , but pre - linguistic infants and non - linguistic creatures have conceptual representations . Concepts Even as they cross the threshold into productive language use , infants have established an impressive repertoire of concepts . Preverbal infants are adept at perceiving the kinds of entities described by nouns ; they parse the perceived environment into cohesive entities ( Spelke , 1990 ) and by 3 months , readily form object categories ( Quinn & Johnson , 2000 ; Mandler , 2000 ; Spelke , 2000 ) . But they are also sensitive to the kinds of concepts underlying verb and adjective meaning . Infants are powerfully drawn , for example , to the ways in which things move and the changes that actions bring about . They distinguish among these kinds of events and form distinct event - based categories based on relations like cause , containment , and support ( e . g . , Baillargeon , 2000 ; Hespos & Baillargeon , 2001 ; Leslie , 1984 ; Leslie & Keeble , 1987 ; Oakes & Cohen , 1994 ; Wagner & Carey , 2003 ) . By the second year of life infants distinguish between manners and paths of motion ( Pruden et al . , 2004 ; Pulverman et al . , 2006 ) and have expectations about the number of participants that will be involved in an event ( Gordon , 2003 ) . They are also sensitive to concepts that are expressed by adjectives—perceptual properties ( e . g . , temperature , texture , and color ) , salient changes of state ( e . g . , dirty , wet ) , and emotional valence ( e . g . , happy , sad ) . These conceptual underpinnings equip them well for word learning , providing a range of candidate hypotheses about the meanings of the words they will encounter and eventually acquire . This rich conceptual foundation has implications for word learning . If infants appreciate such a broad range of concepts , how do they discover which kind of concept is relevant for the meaning of a new word ? As we will see , the answer to this question may differ for different kinds of words . Infants learn some kinds of words ( e . g . , nouns labeling object categories ) more easily than others ( e . g . , verbs labeling kinds of relations ) . Because the evidence reveals that they appreciate event - based concepts , it stands to reason that their difficulty acquiring verbs must lie in the process of mapping words to those concepts . A Broad Initial Word - Concept Link 3 Infants learning their first words begin with a strong conceptual foundation . However , even thus conceptually armed , vocabulary acquisition is not a simple matter of mapping words onto a fully articulated category structure . Hearing new words invites babies to focus on particular categories , highlighting commonalities and differences among distinct objects that might otherwise have gone unnoticed ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ; Booth & Waxman , 2002 ; Fulkerson & Haaf , 2003 , 2006 ; Fulkerson & Waxman , 2007 ; Keates & Graham , 2008 ; Waxman , 1999 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ; Xu , 1999 , 2002 ) . In the first demonstration of this phenomenon , Waxman and Markow ( 1995 ) familiarized 12 - to 14 - month - old infants to four objects from a given object category ( e . g . , four animals ) . Infants were assigned to one of three auditory conditions . Infants in the Noun condition heard , e . g . , “See the fauna ? ” , those in the Adjective condition heard , “See the faunish one ? ” , and those in the No Word condition heard , “See here ? ” . Next , in the test phase , all infants saw the same two new objects : a ) a different member of the familiar object category ( e . g . , another animal ) , and b ) an object from a new category ( e . g . , a fruit ) . All infants heard “See what I have ? ” Infants in the Noun and Adjective conditions showed a novelty - preference at test , favoring the object from the new category ( the fruit ) over the object from the familiar category . In contrast , infants in the No Word condition showed no preference between the objects . Thus , infants detect novel words in fluent speech , and words have consequences on their conceptual organization . Providing a shared name for a set of objects promotes categorization , an effect that holds up for both novel and familiar objects ( Welder & Graham , in press ) . Although other auditory stimuli are also engaging to infants ( e . g . , melodies ) , these do not exert any facilitative effect on categorization ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ; Fulkerson & Haaf , 2003 , 2006 ; Ferry et al . , in press ; Fulkerson & Waxman , 2007 ; Xu , 2002 ) . Further , not just any word will promote categorization . Infants are more likely to map words to objects when the words are presented in a social communicative context such that the words have clear referential status ( Baldwin , 1991 ; Fennell & Waxman , 2006 ; Fennell et al . , 2007 ) . Nouns The evidence thus far indicates that for infants up to 12 months of age , novel words presented as either nouns or adjectives promote categorization . Later , infants form more precise correspondences between distinct kinds of words and kinds of concepts . By roughly 14 months , they assign object categories specifically to nouns . By roughly 21 months , they assign property - based commonalities specifically to adjectives , and by roughly 24 months they assign event - related commonalities specifically to verbs . To achieve these more precise mappings for particular grammatical categories , infants must pay attention to the relation between the novel word and other linguistic elements ( including articles , determiners , morphological and prosodic elements ) in the sentence , distinguishing , e . g . , “This one is a dax ” ( noun ) from “This is a dax one” ( adjective ) ( e . g . , Jusczyk & Aslin , 1995 ; Shi & Werker , 2001 ; Shi et al . , 1999 ) . As infants begin to distinguish among kinds of words , they first tease apart the grammatical category noun , and map nouns to objects and object categories ( Waxman & Booth , 2001 , 2003 ; Booth & Waxman , 2009 ) . In this series of studies , infants were familiarized to four distinct objects , all of which were drawn from the same object category and shared a salient property ( e . g . , four purple animals ) . The objects were presented in pairs . In the Noun condition infants heard , “These are blickets . This one is a blicket and this one is a blicket . ” In the Adjective condition , infants heard , “These are blickish . This one is blickish and this one is blickish ” . In the No Word control condition , they heard , “Look at these . Look at this one and look at this one . ” In the test phase , infants saw two new objects . One was a member of a different object category , but shared the salient property ( e . g . , a purple spatula ) . The other was a member of the familiar object category , but did not share the salient property ( e . g . , a blue horse ) . Infants were asked , “Can you give me the blicket ? ” ( Noun condition ) , “Can you give me the blickish one ? ” ( Adjective condition ) , or “Can you give me one ? ” ( No Word condition ) . Although 11 - month - olds treated nouns and adjectives identically , 14 - month - olds mapped nouns specifically to category - based ( but not property - based ) commonalities , choosing the test object from the now - familiar object category ( e . g . , the blue horse ) . But they mapped adjectives more broadly , to both category - and 4 property - based commonalities . By 18 - to 21 - months , infants mapped adjectives specifically to property - based commonalities , choosing the test object with the now - familiar property ( e . g . , the purple spatula ) . Conceptual and Linguistic Consequences of Noun Learning Even before infants produce many words on their own , they have honed their expectations about the links between kinds of words and meaning . In this developmental process , nouns hold a privileged place ; infants begin by first identifying nouns and mapping them specifically to object categories , with expectations about adjective and verb meanings emerging months later . Moreover , infants’ early links between nouns and object categories are more than simple word - object associations . Recall that infants map nouns to object categories , abstracting beyond the particular objects that have been named . In addition , the fact that 14 - month - olds map nouns specifically to object categories—and not to object properties—reveals that their mappings are more than mere associations . After all , in these studies , the novel noun co - occurred perfectly with both the category - and the property - based commonality , yet infants mapped the noun specifically to the former , and not to the latter . Moreover , the object categories that infants form in the context of hearing a novel noun have inductive strength . By 16 months , infants expect that members of the same named category will share deeper , non - obvious commonalities as well , including common functions and internal parts ( Keates & Graham , 2008 ) . On the conceptual side , then , acquiring noun labels for object categories provides the child with a rich basis for categorization and reasoning ( Gelman & Markman , 1986 ) . As we will see in the next section , noun acquisition also provides a foundation for acquisition of verbs and adjectives . These findings and others ( e . g . , Booth et al . , 2006 ; Waxman & Gelman , 2009 ) reveal that infants attend to perceptual information as they map words to meaning ( Landau , Smith , & Jones , 1998 ; Sloutsky , Kloos , Fisher , 2007 ; Sloutsky & Robinson , in press ; Smith & Samuelson , 2006 ) , perceptual information alone cannot account sufficiently for word learning ( Gopnik & Sobel , 2000 ; Graham & Kilbreath , 2007 ; Jaswal , 2004 ; Jaswal & Markman , 2007 ; Waxman & Gelman , in press ) . Infants are sensitive to different kinds of words , attending not only to the novel word itself , but also to its surrounding linguistic elements . Verbs We noted earlier that although even preverbal infants have a rich repertoire of concepts , including the kinds of concepts that underlie verb meaning , they do not begin to produce verbs in appreciable numbers until roughly 24 months , well after they have begun to produce nouns ( Fenson et al . , 2000 ) . Moreover , several laboratory - based studies have reported that difficulties in verb learning persist into the preschool years ( Imai et al . , 2005 , 2008 , Meyer et al . , 2003 ) . In Imai et al . ( 2008 ) , for example , children watched scenes of an actor performing a novel action ( e . g . , twirling ) on a novel object ( e . g . , a novel toy ) . Some heard the scenes labeled with a novel noun ( e . g . , “It’s a blicket ” ) , and others with a novel verb ( e . g . , “She’s blicking it” ) . At test , children were asked to choose between a ) a scene depicting the now - familiar action but with a new object , and b ) a scene depicting a new action but the now - familiar object . Surprisingly , although they successfully mapped the nouns to the object , 3 - year - olds and even some 5 - year - olds had difficulty mapping the novel verbs to the actions . In contrast to these failures , we have recently demonstrated successful verb learning in 24 - month - olds in laboratory tasks ( Arunachalam & Waxman , 2009 ; Waxman et al . , in press ) . This is important because it provides a demonstration proof that toddlers can indeed learn new verbs , and can do so in a laboratory setting . Further , a careful look at the procedures offers insight into the kinds of information toddlers require in learning novel verbs . Waxman et al . ( in press ) demonstrated that 24 - month - olds not only successfully mapped nouns to object categories , but also mapped novel verbs to action categories ( see also Bernal et al . , 2005 ) . Toddlers were first familiarized to scenes in which an actor performed a simple action on an object ( e . g . , waving a balloon ) . Toddlers saw four instances of this type of scene . What 5 varied was the linguistic information toddlers heard in conjunction with these scenes . Those in the Noun condition heard , “Look ! The man is waving a pilker ! ” , those in the Verb condition heard “Look ! The man is pilking a balloon ! ” , and those in the No Word condition heard “Wow ! Look what’s happening here ! ” Then , they viewed a contrast phase , in which the actor was performing a very different action with a very different object ( e . g . , playing a toy saxophone ) , and heard “Uh - oh , that’s not a pilker ” ( Noun condition ) , or “Uh - oh , he’s not pilking that” ( Verb condition ) , or “Uh - oh , look at that” ( No Word condition ) . At test , toddlers in all conditions saw two scenes side - by - side : in one , the actor was performing the now - familiar action on the familiar object ( waving the balloon ) , and in the other , he was performing a new action on the same object ( tapping the balloon ) . Toddlers were asked , “Which one is a pilker ? ” ( Noun condition ) , “Which one is he pilking ? ” ( Verb condition ) , or “What do you see now ? ” ( No Word condition ) . The results indicate that 2 - year - olds can successfully map novel verbs to event categories ( e . g . , waving events ) . In a subsequent study , we asked whether the toddlers were able to map the novel verb beyond the particular event with which it had been introduced . For example , could they extend “pilk” to waving events in general , whether it was a rake or a balloon that was being waved ? Arunachalam and Waxman ( under review ) demonstrated that 24 - month - olds are indeed able to represent verbs in this abstract fashion . We used a method patterned closely after Waxman et al . ( in press ) , but at test , we showed toddlers one scene in which the actor performed the familiar action on a new object ( e . g . , waving a rake ) , and another in which the actor performed a new action , but on the familiar object ( e . g . , tapping the balloon ) . Notice that to succeed at this task , toddlers in the Verb condition had to accept an event that preserved the action , despite a change in objects , and those in the Noun condition had to accept an event that preserved the object , despite a change in the action in which it was involved . Toddlers succeeded , demonstrating that their initial representations of the meaning of these novel nouns and verbs were sufficiently abstract to permit them to extend the words appropriately . Converging evidence lends additional support to our interpretation that 24 - month - olds map verbs successfully to actions , and that their representations are sufficiently abstract to extend beyond the particular events with which the verb was initially introduced ( e . g . , Bunger & Lidz , 2006 ; Naigles et al . , 2009 ) . Together , these recent demonstrations of successful verb learning in toddlers contrast with previous work documenting difficulties at age 3 and beyond . But still , their success at 24 months is later than their success in noun learning ( which has been documented as early as 14 months ) . Of course , further advances in experimental techniques may uncover successful verb learning in infants younger than 24 months , but we suspect that even with the most sensitive methodological tools , verb acquisition will always trail behind noun acquisition . We suggest that this is not because infants fail to represent the kinds of concepts linked to verb meanings . If the problem is not one of entertaining the concepts linked to verb meanings , then why should verb learning be relatively delayed ? We suggest that the delay is related to the process of mapping those concepts to words . Establishing a mapping for verbs involves more , and perhaps different , information than is required for establishing a mapping for nouns ( e . g . , Gleitman et al . , 2005 ; Waxman & Lidz , 2006 ) . Mapping verbs to concepts requires the child to solve two problems : the reference problem—determining which part of a complex scene the verb describes , and the frame problem—determining how the verb construes the event or state it describes . Solving the reference problem entails isolating the relevant component of a cluttered environment . For example , when learning the verb “catch” while observing a game of catch at a park , the adult and child have to coordinate their attention on the relevant participants ( the two players and the ball , to the exclusion of a nearby dog or tree ) , and the relevant action ( the action involving the ball toss , not that the players are talking , laughing , standing , etc . ) . The reference problem is common to learning any kind of content word , but it is particularly acute for verb learning . Once the relevant part of the scene has been identified , the child has to determine how it is being described . For example , “throwing” , “catching” , “palming” , “giving” , and “playing” are all reasonable descriptions of the same event ( i . e . a game of catch ) . The frame problem is most striking with verb pairs like “throw” versus “catch” , “chase” versus “flee” , or “buy” versus “sell” , where the two verbs describe simultaneously occurring parts of the same larger event . The child 6 will require more than an observation of the scene to disentangle which meaning is most fitting . In the next section , we consider the power of observational and linguistic information in the acquisition of nouns and verbs . Observational and Linguistic Information in Noun and Verb Learning Learning from Observation Alone Children seem to learn some kinds of words , and nouns in particular , when they are provided with observational information . Children’s earliest vocabularies contain many names for very familiar objects , such as ball and bottle . But children must also acquire words for unobservable concepts , such as idea and thought . And even for observable cases , there are many cases in which observation alone is insufficient . The same individual , for example , can be described as a girl , or as someone’s sister . For relational nouns like these , as for verbs , observation alone does not provide sufficient information to establish meaning . Gillette et al . ( 1999 ) provided a striking demonstration of the limits of observation using a method known as the Human Simulation Paradigm ( see also Snedeker and Gleitman , 2004 ) . Adults viewed soundless videos of naturalistic scenes , and were asked at various points to guess the word that they imagined had been uttered by the participants in the scenes . This task was designed to mimic the problem of learning words from observation alone . Adults had difficulty guessing verbs , despite the fact that they already possessed the conceptual and linguistic representations of the words in question . Although they had more success with nouns , they nonetheless had trouble with some of these as well . In fact , the more “image - able” the referent , regardless of whether it was a noun ( e . g . , chair vs sister ) or verb ( e . g . , hit vs think ) , the better participants’ performance . Their performance with the hard - to - image words illustrates the limits of observation ; it also illustrates the value of including linguistic information . When adults were offered linguistic information in conjunction with observation , their performance improved . For example , if they were offered either the syntactic structure in which the word appeared , or a list of the other content words that appeared in the sentence , adults’ ability to identify the mystery word improved . This result provides a strong in - principle demonstration of the importance of linguistic information ( content words or structure ) . Recent work shows important parallels with 3 - and 7 - year - old children in the Human Simulation Paradigm task ( Piccin & Waxman , 2007 ; Waxman & Plotkin , 2008 ) . When provided with visual scenes alone , children performed better with nouns than verbs . But within these grammatical classes , relational nouns ( e . g . , friend ) yielded poorer performance than concrete nouns ( e . g . , book ) , and mental verbs ( e . g . , want ) yielded poorer performance than action verbs ( e . g . , sit ) . The Human Simulation findings from adults and children point to the importance of linguistic information , especially when observation alone proves insufficient . Why might linguistic information be required more for some kinds of words than others ? While most nouns ( especially non - relational nouns ) pick out roughly the same object category regardless of the other elements in the sentence , other kinds of words interact more heavily with the linguistic contexts in which they appear . The adjective small , for example , means something quite different in the phrase the small mouse than it does in the phrase the small elephant . Verbs also interact heavily with linguistic context . Verb meaning is intimately connected to the syntactic structures the verb can appear in ( e . g . , Chomsky , 1981 ; Levin & Rappaport Hovav , 1995 ) . For example , verbs that describe a manner of motion typically appear in intransitive sentences ( e . g . , “The birds flew” ) , while verbs describing an object’s change of state ( e . g . , a glass breaking ) generally appear in transitive or intransitive sentences ( e . g . , “Al broke the glass” / “The glass broke” ) . Because there are links between what a verb means and what structures it appears in , syntactic information is not only useful in helping children determine whether a new word labels an object or action category , but also in determining its meaning ( Gleitman , 1990 ; Golinkoff & Hirsh - Pasek , 2008 ; Landau & Gleitman , 1985 ) . Learning from Syntax 7 Infants as young as 26 months of age are sensitive to precise aspects of the syntactic information they receive when seeking to establish verb meaning ( e . g . , Bunger & Lidz , 2004 ; Fisher , 2002 ; Fisher et al . , 1994 ; Naigles , 1990 ; Naigles & Kako , 1993 ) . In a landmark study , Naigles ( 1990 ) familiarized 26 - month - olds to scenes in which two actors were simultaneously engaged in two kinds of action : one actor ( dressed as a duck ) was pushing the other ( dressed as a bunny ) repeatedly into a squatting position , while both actors simultaneously circled one of their hands in the air . As they viewed these scenes , toddlers heard either a transitive sentence , “The duck is gorping the bunny” , or an intransitive sentence , “The duck and the bunny are gorping” . In the immediately following test phase , the two actions were uncoupled : one screen depicted just the duck forcing the bunny to squat , and the other depicted the duck and bunny waving one of their own hands . Naigles predicted that toddlers who had heard the transitive sentence would look longer at the scene in which the duck was acting on the bunny , because the transitive sentence structure is not compatible with an event in which two actors are acting independently . As predicted , toddlers hearing the transitive sentence looked longer at the forcing - to - squat scene than did toddlers hearing the intransitive sentence . In recent work , we demonstrated that what is instrumental in their success in this kind of learning situation is the syntax . In fact , even in the absence of any concurrent visual information , toddlers take advantage of syntactic information ( Arunachalam & Waxman , 2008 ) . Using an innovative new method developed by Yuan and Fisher ( 2006 ) , we presented toddlers ( ages 25 to 29 months ) with scenes depicting two actors having a conversation . The dialogue featured a novel verb in either transitive ( e . g . , “Guess what ? The girl mooped her sister ! ” ) , or intransitive sentences ( e . g . , “Guess what ? The girl and her sister mooped ! ” ) . Immediately following this linguistic familiarization , they viewed two scenes , one in which one actor acted on another ( e . g . , by spinning her in a swivel chair ) , and one in which the two actors performed the same simultaneous action ( e . g . , bending at the waist ) . We asked toddlers to point to the scene depicting mooping , but using the verb in a neutral syntactic context ( “ Find mooping ! ” ) . In order to succeed , children had to use the linguistic information they had heard earlier in the dialogues . Toddlers did succeed ; those in the transitive condition pointed to the causative spinning scene significantly more often than did those in the intransitive condition . These studies document the relation between syntactic and semantic information across the course of verb acquisition ( Gleitman et al . , 2005 ) . The fact that toddlers can use purely syntactic information ( e . g . , whether a verb appears in transitive or intransitive sentences ) to draw inferences about verb meaning is exciting , but it does not mean that they do not use other cues as well . Infants and toddlers also recruit other linguistic cues , including the content of the other words in the sentence ( Fernald & Hurtado , 2006 ; Goodman et al . , 1998 ) . A toddler who knows the word “eat” , but not the word “papaya” , can infer that a papaya is a kind of food from hearing the phrase “eat some papaya” . For verbs ad adjectives , too , the content words in the sentence serve as clues to meaning . For example , 24 - month - olds map novel verbs more successfully when the verbs are presented in full noun phrase contexts ( e . g . , “The man is pilking the balloon” ) than when they are surrounded by pronouns ( e . g . , “He’s pilking it” ) ( Arunachalam & Waxman , 2009 ) . Mintz and Gleitman ( 2002 ) and Klibanoff and Waxman ( 2000 ) find similar results for adjective learning . The kind of linguistic information available to children will differ across languages , and this may impact the relative ease or difficulty of learning different kinds of words . In languages like Mandarin Chinese , for example , nouns may be freely dropped if their referents are recoverable from the discourse or environmental context ( Huang , 1984 ) . Given that young learners of English rely heavily on the surrounding nouns to successfully interpret novel adjectives and verbs ( Arunachalam & Waxman , 2009 ; Mintz & Gleitman , 2002 ; Klibanoff & Waxman , 2000 ) , it could be the case that verb learning is more difficult in Mandarin , in which learners have less access to rich surrounding linguistic contexts . Another possibility , though , is that the relative salience and frequency of verbs as compared to nouns in the child input aids verb learning ( Brown , 1998 ; Choi & Gopnik , 1995 ; Tardif , 1996 ) . More experimental work is needed in this area to tease apart these possibilities . 8 Of course , children also use nonlinguistic information , including their observation of the world . After all , linguistic information narrows the set of candidate hypotheses for a new word’s meaning , but it does not settle the matter on its own . For example , the verbs roll and slide , along with several other verbs , occur in the same set of syntactic structures ( Fisher et al . , 1991 ; Lederer et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , on the basis of the sentence , “The girl blicked down the hill” , a learner cannot determine , without observation , in precisely what manner the girl moved . Children also attend to social and referential cues , such as eye gaze and the inferred intentions of the event participants , to discover the meaning of novel words ( e . g . , Baldwin , 1991 ; Tomasello & Barton , 1994 ) . Clearly , if they are to succeed in the task of word learning , infants and young children must coordinate several sources of linguistic and nonlinguistic information . Moreover , the relative import of these informational sources may vary as a function of the kind of word being acquired . Syntactic information may be more important for verb learning than noun learning , and for learning names for unobservable concepts more than for observable concepts . But syntax and observation have different consequences within the acquisition of any given lexical item as well . While syntactic information is crucial for learning that a word is a noun or a verb , observational information is crucial for determining other aspects of meaning , for example , the difference between a chihuahua and a poodle , or rolling and sliding . Conclusion Word learning stands at the crossroad of language and conceptual development . Even before they produce words on their own , infants are sensitive to relations between words and concepts . Within the first year , they map words to commonalities among objects . In the second year , they establish more precise mappings between kinds of words ( e . g . , noun , verb , adjective ) and kinds of concepts ( e . g . , categories of objects , properties of objects , relations among objects ) . These mappings evince different developmental trajectories , with the mapping for adjectives and verbs emerging later than the mapping for nouns . This is because there are different informational requirements for these mappings . Verbs are more heavily dependent on particular features of the linguistic and observational context available during exposure . Acquiring verbs requires a richer set of linguistic and conceptual cues than noun learning . Thus , word learning is a dynamic process , one that is influenced by whatever innate principles undergird the conceptual and linguistic systems , and is tuned by the learners’ experience with the objects , events and native language they encounter . We have focused on evidence from infants and young children acquiring English , but to identify which aspects of acquisition are universal , and which will vary as a function of the structure of the ambient language , cross - linguistic evidence is also essential ( e . g . , Bloom & Bowerman , 2007 ; Lee & Naigles , in press ; Papafragou & Selimis , 2007 ; Waxman & Guasti , in press ) . Another promising avenue for investigation is the interface between early word learning and language processing . Although previous work on language processing focused almost exclusively on adults , researchers have recently focused on this interface in infants and young children . By presenting them with a visual scene and tracking the time - course underlying their eye movements as they hear concurrent speech ( Booth & Waxman , 2009 ; Fernald et al . , 2008 ; Swingley et al . , 1999 ; Swingley & Aslin , 2007 ; Trueswell & Gleitman , 2007 ; Waxman et al . , in press ) , researchers have begun to shed light on the real - time processes of establishing representations for new words . Finally , recent work has provided insight into infants’ and young children’s conceptual and social / interactive capacities and how these are influenced by language . So far , words have been implicated not only in object categorization , as reviewed above , but also object individuation ( Xu , 1999 ) , induction ( Keates & Graham , 2008 ) , understanding actors’ intentions ( Chen & Waxman , in prep ) , and apprehending social convention ( e . g . , Baldwin , 1999 ; Fennell & Waxman , 2006 ; Fennell et al . , 2006 ; Houston - Price et al . , in press ; Jaswal , 2004 ) . These new directions are especially fitting because as they acquire language , infants gain not only words , but a powerful capacity to influence the minds of others , and a nuanced ability to understand their goals and intentions . 9 References Akhtar , N . , & Tomasello , M . ( 1997 ) . Young children’s productivity with word order and verb morphology . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 952 - 965 . Arunachalam , S . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2008 ) . Syntax informs two - year - olds’ expectations about verb meaning . BUCLD 33 Proceedings Supplement . Arunachalam , S . , & Waxman , S . R . ( under review ) . 24 - month - old infants’ use of syntactic context in noun and verb learning . Baillargeon , R . ( 2000 ) . How do infants learn about the physical world ? In D . Muir & A . Slater ( Eds . ) , Infant development : The essential readings . Malden , MA : Blackwell Publishers , Inc . Balaban , M . T . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Do words facilitate object categorization in 9 - month - old infants ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 64 , 3 - 26 . Baldwin , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Infants’ contribution to the achievement of joint reference . Child Development , 62 , 875 - 890 . Bernal , S . , Lidz , J . , Millotte , S . , & Christophe , A . ( 2007 ) . Syntax constrains the acquisition of verb meaning . Language Learning and Development , 34 , 325 - 341 . Bloom , P . ( 2000 ) . How Children Learn the Meanings of Words . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Booth , A . E . & Waxman , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Object names and object functions serve as cues to categories for infants . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 948 - 957 . Booth , A . E . & Waxman , S . R . ( 2009 ) . A horse of a different color : Specifying with precision infants ' mappings of novel nouns and adjectives . Child Development . 80 , 15 - 22 . Booth , A . E . , Waxman , S . R . , & Huang , Y . T . ( 2005 ) . Conceptual information permeates word learning in infancy . Developmental Psychology , 41 , 491 - 505 . Brown , P . , & Bowerman , M . ( 2007 ) . Crosslinguistic Perspectives on Argument Structure : Implications for Learnability . New York : Lawrence Erlbaum . Bunger , A . & Lidz , J . ( 2004 ) . Syntactic Bootstrapping and the internal structure of causative events . Proceedings of the 28th Boston University Conference on Language Development . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Bunger , A . & Lidz , J . ( 2006 ) . Constrained flexibility in the acquisition of causative verbs . Proceedings of the 30th Boston University Conference on Language Development . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Chen , M . L . , & Waxman , S . ( in prep ) . Language as a window into intentions at 14 months . Chomsky , N . ( 1981 ) . Lectures on Government and Binding . Dordrecht : Foris . Conwell , E . , & Demuth , K . ( 2007 ) . Early syntactic productivity : Evidence from dative shift . Cognition , 103 , 163 - 179 . Feldman , H . , Goldin - Meadow , S . , & Gleitman , L . ( 1978 ) . Beyond Herodotus : The creation of language by isolated deaf children . In J . Locke ( Ed . ) , Action , Gesture , and Symbol . New York : Academic Press . Fennell , C . T . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2006 ) . Infants of 14 months use phonetic detail in novel words embedded in naming phrases . In Proceedings of the 30 th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Fennell , C . T . , & Waxman , S . R . , & Weisleder , A . ( 2007 ) . With referential cues , infants successfully use phonetic detail in word learning . In Proceedings of the 31 st Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . 10 Fernald , A . & Hurtado , N . ( 2006 ) . Names in frames : Infants interpret words in sentence frames faster than words in isolation . Developmental Science , 9 , F33 - F40 . Fernald , A . , Zangl , R . , Portillo , A . L . , & Marchman , V . A . ( 2008 ) . Looking while listening : Using eye movements to monitor spoken language comprehension by infants and young children . In I . A . Sekerina , E . M . Fernandez , & H . Clahsen ( Eds . ) , Developmental Psycholinguistics : On - line Methods in Children ' s Language Processing . Ferry , A . , Hespos , S . J . , & Waxman , S . R . ( in press ) . Language facilitates category formation in 3 - month - old infants . Fisher , C . ( 2002 ) . Structural limits on verb mapping : The role of abstract structure in 2 . 5 - year - olds’ interpretations of novel verbs . Developmental Science , 5 , 55 - 64 . Fisher , C . , Gleitman , L . R . , & Gleitman , H . ( 1991 ) . On the semantic content of subcategorization frames . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 331 - 392 . Fulkerson , A . L . , & Haaf , R . A . ( 2003 ) . The influence of labels , non - labeling sounds , and source of auditory input on 9 - and 15 - month - olds’ object categorization . Infancy , 4 , 349 - 369 . Fulkerson , A . L . , & Haaf , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Does object naming aid 12 - month - olds’ formation of novel object categories ? First Language , 26 , 347 - 361 . Fulkerson , A . L . , Waxman , S . R . ( 2007 ) . Words ( but not tones ) facilitate object categorization : Evidence from 6 - and 12 - month - olds . Cognition , 105 , 218 - 228 . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , Categories and induction in young children . Cognition , 23 , 183 - 209 . Gelman , S . A . , Coley , J . D . , Rosengren , K . S . , Hartman , E . , & Pappas , A . ( 1998 ) . Beyond labeling : The role of maternal input in the acquisition of richly structured categories . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 63 , v - 148 . Gentner , D . ( 1982 ) . Why nouns are learned before verbs : Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning . In S . Kuczaj ( Ed . ) , Language Development : Language , Thought , and Culture , Vol . 2 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Boroditsky , L . ( 2001 ) . Individuation , relativity , and early word learning . In M . Bowerman & S . Levinson ( Eds . ) , Language Acquisition and Conceptual Development . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gervain , J . , Nespor , M . , Mazuka , R . , Horie , R . , Mehler , J . ( 2008 ) . Bootstrapping word order in prelexical infants : A Japanese - Italian cross - linguistic study . Cognitive Psychology , 57 , 56 - 74 . Gleitman , L . R . , Cassidy , K . , Nappa , R . , Papafragou , A . , & Trueswell , J . C . ( 2005 ) . Hard words . Language Learning and Development , 1 , 23 - 64 . Gleitman , L . R . , & Fisher , C . ( 2005 ) . Universal aspects of word learning . In McGilvray , J . A . ( Ed . ) , The Cambridge Companion to Chomsky . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Golinkoff , R . , & Hirsh - Pasek , K . ( 2008 ) . How toddlers learn verbs . Trends in Cognitive Science , 12 , 397 - 403 . Goodman , J . C . , McDonough , L . , & Brown , N . ( 1998 ) . The role of semantic context and memory in the acquisition of novel nouns . Child Development , 69 , 1330 - 1344 . Gopnik A . , & Sobel , D . M . ( 2000 ) . Detecting blickets : How young children use information about causal powers in categorization and induction . Child Development , 71 , 1205 - 1222 . Gordon , P . ( 2003 ) . The origin of argument structure in infant event representations . In A . Brugos , L . Micciulla , & C . E . Smith ( eds ) , Proceedings of the 28th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development , pp . 189 - 198 . Cascadilla Press . 11 Graham , S . A . , & Kilbreath , C . S . ( 2007 ) . It’s a sign of the kind : Gestures and words guide infants’ inductive inferences . Developmental Psychology , 43 , 1111 – 1123 . Hall , D . G . , & Waxman , S . R . ( Eds . ) . ( 2004 ) . Weaving a Lexicon . Cambridge : MIT Press . Hespos , S . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2001 ) . Infants’ knowledge about occlusion and containment events : A surprising discrepancy . Psychological Science , 12 , 141 - 147 . Hollich , G . J . , Hirsch - Pasek , K . , & Golinkoff , R . M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . Breaking the Language Barrier : An Emergentist Coalition Model for the Origins of Word Learning ( Vol . 65 ) . Houston - Price , C . , Plunkett , K . & Duffy , H . ( in press ) . The use of social and salience cues in early word learning . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology . Huang , James . ( 1984 ) . On the distribution and reference of empty pronouns . Linguistic Inquiry , 15 , 531 - 574 . Jaswal , V . K . ( 2004 ) . Don’t believe everything you hear : Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category induction . Child Development , 75 , 1871 - 1885 . Jaswal , V . K . , & Markman , E . M . ( 2007 ) . Looks aren’t everything : 24 - month - olds ' willingness to accept unexpected labels . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 93 - 111 . Jusczyk , P . , & Aslin , R . N . ( 1995 ) . Infants ' detection of the sound patterns of words in fluent speech . Cognitive Psychology , 29 , 1 - 23 . Keates , J . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Category labels or attributes : Why do labels guide infants’ inductive inferences ? Psychological Science , 19 , 1287 - 1293 . Landau , B . , & Gleitman , L . ( 1985 ) . Language and Experience : Evidence from the Blind Child . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Landau , B . , Smith , L . B . , & Jones , S . S . ( 1988 ) . The importance of shape in early lexical learning . Cognitive Development , 3 , 299 - 321 . Lederer , A . , Gleitman , H . , & Gleitman , L . ( 1995 ) . Verbs of a feather flock together : Semantic information in the structure of maternal speech . In M . Tomasello & W . Merriman ( Eds . ) , Beyond Names for Things : Young Children’s Acquisition of Verbs . New York : Psychology Press . Lee , J . & Naigles , L . ( in press ) Mandarin learners use syntactic bootstrapping in verb acquisition . Cognition . Leslie , A . M . ( 1984 ) . Spatiotemporal continuity and the perception of causality in infants . Perception , 13 , 287 - 305 . Leslie , A . M . , & Keeble , S . ( 1987 ) . Do six - month - olds perceive causality ? Cognition , 25 , 265 - 288 . Levin , B . , & Rappaport Hovav , M . ( 1995 ) . Unaccusativity : At the Syntax - Lexical Semantics Interface . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lidz , J . , Gleitman , H . , & Gleitman , L . ( 2003 ) . Understanding how input matters : Verb learning and the footprint of universal grammar . Cognition , 87 , 151 - 178 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Perceptual and conceptual processes in infancy . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 3 - 36 . Mintz , T . H . , & Gleitman , L . R . ( 2002 ) . Adjectives really do modify nouns : The incremental and restricted nature of early adjective acquisition . Cognition , 84 , 267 - 293 . Naigles , L . ( 1990 ) . Children use syntax to learn verb meanings . Journal of Child Language , 17 , 357 - 374 . Naigles , L . , & Kako , E . ( 1993 ) . First contact : biases in verb learning with and without syntactic information . Child Development , 64 , 1665 – 1687 . 12 Naigles , L . , Hoff , E . , & Vear , D . ( 2009 ) . Flexibility in Early Verb Use : Evidence from a Multiple - n Diary Study . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development . Oakes , L . M . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 1994 ) . Infant causal perception . Advances in Infancy Research , 9 , 1 - 57 . Onishi , K . H . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2005 ) . Do 15 - month - old infants understand false beliefs ? Science , 308 , 255 - 258 . Papafragou , A . , & Selimis , S . ( 2007 ) . Lexical and structural cues for acquiring motion verbs cross - linguistically . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Pruden , S . M . , Hirsh - Pasek , K . , Maguire , M . J . , & Meyer , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Foundations of verb learning : Infants form categories of path and manner in motion events . In A . Brugos , L . Micciulla & C . E . Smith ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 28th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development ( pp . 461 - 472 ) . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Pulverman , R . , Hirsh - Pasek , K . , Pruden , S . , & Golinkoff , R . M . , ( 2006 ) . Precursors to verb learning : Infant attention to manner and path . ( pp . 134 - 160 ) In K . Hirsh - Pasek & R . M . Golinkoff ( Eds . ) , Action Meets Word : How Children Learn Verbs . New York : Oxford Press . Quinn , P . C . , & Johnson , M . H . ( 2000 ) . Global before basic category representations in connectionist networks and 2 - month old infants . Infancy , 1 , 31 - 46 . Shatz , M . ( 1994 ) . A Toddler’s Life : Becoming a Person . New York : Oxford University Press . Shi , R . , & Werker , J . F . ( 2001 ) . Six - month - old infants ' preference for lexical over grammatical words . Psychological Science , 12 , 70 - 75 . Shi , R . , Werker , J . F . , & Morgan , J . L . ( 1999 ) . Newborn infants ' sensitivity to perceptual cues to lexical and grammatical words . Cognition , 72 , B11 - B21 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Kloos , H . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2007 ) . When looks are everything : Appearance similarity versus kind information in early induction . Psychological Science , 18 , 179 – 185 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Robinson , C . W . ( in press ) . The role of words and sounds in visual processing : From overshadowing to attentional tuning . Cognitive Science . Smith , L . B . , & Samuelson , L . ( 2006 ) . An attentional learning account of the shape bias : Reply to Cimplian & Markman ( 2005 ) and Booth , Waxman & Huang ( 2005 ) . Developmental Psychology , 42 , 1339 – 1343 . Snedeker , J . , & Gleitman , L . ( 2004 ) . Why it is hard to label our concepts . In D . G . Hall & S . R . Waxman ( Eds . ) , Weaving a Lexicon . Cambridge : MIT Press . Spelke , E . S . ( 1990 ) . Principles of object perception . Cognitive Science , 14 , 29 - 56 . Spelke , E . S . ( 2000 ) . Core knowledge . American Psychology , 55 , 1233 - 1243 . Swingley , D . , Pinto , J . P . , & Fernald , A . ( 1999 ) . Continuous processing in word recognition at 24 months . Cognition , 71 , 73 - 108 . Swingley , D . and Aslin , R . N . ( 2007 ) . Lexical competition in young children ' s word learning . Cognitive Psychology 54 , 99 - 132 . Tomasello , M . ( 2001 ) . Perceiving intentions and learning words in the second year of life . In M . Bowerman & S . C . Levinson ( Eds . ) , Language Acquisition and Conceptual Development . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Tomasello , M . , & Barton , M . ( 1994 ) . Learning words in nonostensive contexts . Developmental Psychology , 30 , 639 – 650 . 13 Trueswell , J . C . , & Gleitman , L . R . ( 2007 ) . Learning to parse and its implications for language acquisition . In G . Gaskell ( Ed . ) , Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Wagner , L . , & Carey , S . ( 2003 ) . Individuation of objects and events : A developmental study . Cognition , 90 , 163 - 191 . Waxman , S . R . ( 1999 ) . Specifying the scope of 13 - month - olds ' expectations for novel words . Cognition , 70 , B35 - B50 . Waxman , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Early word learning and conceptual development : Everything had a name , and each name gave birth to a new thought . In U . Goswami ( Ed . ) , Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development ( pp . 102 - 126 ) . Oxford UK : Blackwell Publishers . Waxman , S . R . , & Booth , A . E . ( 2001 ) . Seeing pink elephants : Fourteen - month - olds’ interpretations of novel nouns and adjectives . Cognitive Psychology , 43 , 217 - 242 . Waxman , S . R . , & Booth , A . E . ( 2003 ) . The origins and evolution of links between word learning and conceptual organization : New evidence from 11 - month - olds . Developmental Science , 6 , 130 - 137 . Waxman , S . R . & Guasti , M . T . ( in press ) . Linking nouns and adjectives to meaning : New evidence from Italian - speaking children . Language Learning and Development . Waxman , S . R . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2009 ) . Early word - learning entails reference , not merely associations . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13 , 258 - 263 . Waxman , S . R . , & Lidz , J . ( 2006 ) . Early word learning . In D . Kuhn & R . Siegler ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Child Psychology , Cognition , Perception and Language ( 6th Edition ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Waxman , S . R . , Lidz , J . , Braun , I . , & Lavin , T . ( in press ) . 24 - month - olds’ interpretations of novel verbs and nouns in dynamic scenes . Cognitive Psychology . Waxman , S . R . , & Markow , D . B . ( 1995 ) . Words as invitations to form categories : Evidence from 12 - to 13 - month - old infants . Cognitive Psychology , 29 , 257 - 302 . Welder , A . N . & Graham , S . A . ( in press ) . Infants ' categorization of objects with more or less obvious features . Cognitive Psychology . Woodward , A . L . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1998 ) . Early word learning . In W . Damon , D . Kuhn , & R . Siegler ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Child Psychology : Cognition , Perception and Language . New York : John Wiley and Sons . Xu , F . ( 1999 ) . Object individuation and object identity in infancy : The role of spatiotemporal information , object property information , and language . Acta Psychologica , 102 , 113 - 136 . Xu , F . ( 2002 ) . The role of language in acquiring object concepts in infancy . Cognition , 85 , 223 - 250 . Xu , F . & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2005 ) . Word learning as Bayesian inference : Evidence from preschoolers . Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Yuan , S . , & Fisher , C . ( 2006 ) . “Really ? He blicked the cat ? ” : Two - year - olds learn distributional facts about verbs in the absence of a referential context . Proceedings of the Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development . Cambridge , MA : Cascadilla Press .