NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES THE ECONOMIC APPROACH TO SOCIAL CAPITAL Edward L . Glaeser David Laibson Bruce Sacerdote Working Paper 7728 http : / / www . nber . org / papers / w7728 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH 1050 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge , MA 02138 June 2000 Glaeser and Laibson thank the National Science Foundation , the Sloan Foundation , the MacArthur Foundation and the Olin Foundation . Helpful comments and discussions were provided by Sam Bowles , Robert Haveman , Larry Katz , Robert Putnam and Andrei Shleifer . Excellent research assistance was provided by Stephen Weinberg . The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research . © 2000 by Edward L . Glaeser , David Laibson , and Bruce Sacerdote . All rights reserved . Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs , may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit , including © notice , is given to the source . The Economic Approach to Social Capital Edward L . Glaeser , David Laibson , and Bruce Sacerdote NBER Working Paper No . 7728 June 2000 JEL No . D0 , J0 , R0 ABSTRACT To identify the determinants of social capital formation , it is necessary to understand the social capital investment decision of individuals . Individual social capital should then be aggregated to measure the social capital of a community . This paper assembles the evidence that supports the individual - based model of social capital formation , including seven facts : ( 1 ) the relationship between social capital and age is first increasing and then decreasing , ( 2 ) social capital declines with expected mobility , ( 3 ) social capital investment is higher in occupations with greater returns to social skills , ( 4 ) social capital is higher among homeowners , ( 5 ) social connections fall sharply with physical distance , ( 6 ) people who invest in human capital also invest in social capital , and ( 7 ) social capital appears to have interpersonal complementarities . Edward L . Glaeser David Laibson Department of Economics Department of Economics Harvard University Harvard University Littauer 200 Littauer 200 Cambridge , MA 02138 Cambridge , MA 02138 and NBER and NBER eglaeser @ kuznets . harvard . edu dlaibson @ harvard . edu Bruce Sacerdote Department of Economics Dartmouth College Rockefeller Hall Hanover , NH 03755 and NBER bruce . i . sacerdote @ dartmouth . edu