Learning From the News : The Role of Topic , Multimedia and Interest in Knowledge Retention Heather O ' Brien School of Library , Archival and Information Studies University of British Columbia Vancouver , Canada 1 - 604 - 827 - 5842 h . obrien @ ubc . ca Jocelyn McKay School of Library , Archival and Information Studies University of British Columbia Vancouver , Canada 1 - 604 - 827 - 5842 jocelyn . d . mckay @ gmail . com Jacob Vangeest School of Library , Archival and Information Studies University of British Columbia Vancouver , Canada 1 - 604 - 827 - 5842 jvangeest @ gmail . com ABSTRACT We conducted a study to examine how people interact with and learn from human - interest news stories . Participants engaged with news stories and completed knowledge retention tests to evaluate their ability to remember the content . We analyzed how the stories and the way in which they were presented ( audio , video , text ) related to knowledge retention . Results demonstrated a complex interaction between topic and knowledge retention , where participants obtained higher scores for the least preferred story . We explored these findings with respect to participants’ demographics and user experience . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ User studies • Human - centered computing ~ Empirical studies in HCI Keywords Information interaction ; learning ; multimedia ; online news 1 . INTRODUCTION Information seeking is comprised of several iterative stages : defining an information need , choosing a source , querying , examining and assessing search results , extracting information , and determining when one has ‘enough’ information – or has had enough of the search process [ 19 ] . Over the past decades studies have investigated how searchers translate ( or fail to translate ) information needs into queries [ 5 ] , adopt specific strategies to accomplish different tasks [ 18 ] , and assess the relevance of search results [ 26 ] . Extraction , “working through material in relevant sources” [ 6 ] ( p . 480 ) and information use tend to be less studied , but are nonetheless essential for understanding and measuring information interaction outcomes [ 3 ] . Rather than focusing on the whole search process , we isolated the less studied stages of extraction and use , focusing on the way in which news content delivery affects the basic learning outcome of remembering . Content and its presentation ( e . g . , media , interactivity ) are closely coupled in digital environments , and impact users’ experiences and capacity to extract and meaningfully use or learn from information , [ 9 ; 16 ; 24 ] . Information content evokes affective responses in searchers , and is strongly tied to interest [ 2 ; 21 ] . Interest and other personal qualities of searchers , such as prior knowledge , motivation , and expectations , are strong predictors of information extraction and use , along with tasks , systems , domains , and settings . These “information seeking factors are not mutually exclusive… [ but ] linked by relationships that vary in complexity and importance [ 19 ] ( pp . 48 ) . In this study , we explored the relationship amongst information seeking factors and learning at the point of information extraction and use . We presented two human - interest news stories in audio , video , or text formats , and measured learning at a basic level of knowledge retention . This paper outlines the study and its findings , which suggest that the news stories , rather than how they were delivered , resulted in greater knowledge retention scores . 2 . PRIOR RESEARCH Extraction consists of a host of activities , including “reading , scanning , listening , classifying , copying , and storing information” [ 19 ] ( pp . 57 ) . Users extract information using strategies , such as restating information in their own words , copying or annotating text , etc . In doing so , information is incorporated into their existing knowledge base and changes how they evaluate new information [ 19 ] , i . e . , learning . Extraction is inextricably linked with information use , which may be conceptual ( intangible ) or instrumental ( tangible ) [ 3 ] . There is longstanding agreement that information use is understudied in interactive information retrieval [ 3 ; 27 ] . Vakkari [ 27 ] , drawing upon papers accepted at the International Information Seeking in Context ( ISIC ) Conference in 1997 , noted that work was concentrated on information needs and seeking , with much less emphasis on use . This illustrated “gap” in information seeking research was in spite of the “growing interest in relating information needs and seeking to the outcomes of the work roles or tasks” ( pp . 461 ) . Almost two decades later , Case and O’Connor’s [ 3 ] systematic review suggests there are still limitations in understanding how extracted information is used . Conceptual or intangible use ( “in head” ) is difficult to capture , and though bibliometrics and social media / web analytics provide some indication of what people do with information , ascertaining “meaningful use” remains a challenge . For example , citing research may be more “ritualistic” than “a meaningful application of the contents” [ 3 ] ( p . 657 ) , and social media activities may or may not represent meaningful information exchange . The Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHIIR ' 17 , March 07 - 11 , 2017 , Oslo , Norway Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4677 - 1 / 17 / 03… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3020165 . 3020166 185 resurgence of interest in IIR on searching as learning 1 indicates that the community is invested in understanding how people seek , extract , and use information for the purpose of learning . This paper focuses on conceptual use , operationalized here as short - term recall , to understand the effects of media format on knowledge retention . Two human interest news stories of equal readability and sentiment were selected to reduce the influence of content characteristics on participants’ ability to extract information , as it was hypothesized that media would have a greater impact on recall . Actual findings were counter to these predictions , and thus personal interest in the news stories and demographic variables were examined to make sense of these contrary results . 2 . 1 Learning The ability to understand or make sense of information is an important goal of information seeking [ 20 ] . There is general agreement that learning involves cognitive , affective and behavioral elements [ 12 ] , though much work in information interaction has focused on cognitive learning , specifically Bloom’s Taxonomy ( remembering , understanding , applying , analyzing , evaluating , and creating ) [ 1 ] . Jansen , Booth and Smith [ 14 ] found that tasks designed to activate lower ( remembering , understanding ) and higher ( evaluating , creating ) levels of learning resulted in shorter queries than middle levels ( applying , analyzing ) , which also required more search time . Building on Jansen et al . [ 14 ] , Kelly , Arguello , Edwards and Woo [ 15 ] categorized twenty tasks according to Bloom’s taxonomy and examined the relationship between learning tasks , cognitive complexity , and search behavior . More complex learning tasks required more time and consisted of more interactions ( e . g . , SERP clicks ) , but were not associated with higher difficulty or lower satisfaction . The researchers observed that users’ initial perceptions of task difficulty shaped their perceived difficulty as they progressed , amplifying negative emotions when the task was found to more challenging than expected . Though they did not measure cognitive learning outcomes in the study , their findings underscored the role of affect on the completion of cognitive “searching as learning” tasks . This would suggest that user perceptions of and reactions to information tasks impacts user satisfaction , and potentially tangible outcomes such as learning . Thus , exploring what shapes the user experience is important for understanding if , how , and to what extent information is used . 2 . 2 User Experience User experience ( UX ) “is rooted in how people perceive , act upon , and feel about” their digitally mediated interactions with the world [ 23 ] ( p . 73 ) . Whether focused on the design of digital applications or on the subjective experience of the user , UX acknowledges that interactions with technology hinge upon more than usability ; rather they are the complex interplay of user , system , and contextual factors . In this study we concentrated specifically on how information is delivered ( i . e . , format ) and users’ reactions to content . Colbert and Boodoo [ 4 ] concluded that poorly presented content interfered with information extraction and use in an online 1 Recent activities include the the Special Issue of the Journal of Information Science ( vol . 42 ) published in February 2016 , and the IIiX 2014 ( http : / / www . diigubc . ca / IIIXSAL / ) and SIGIR 2016 ( http : / / chauff . github . io / sal2016 / ) workshops . experiment . They compared behavioral patterns of visitors to two websites that differed only in their adherence to guidelines for writing web content . People spent more time interacting with and were more apt to return to the compliant website . The authors reasoned that participants who were led to the non - compliant version evaluated its presentation of information ( e . g . , ineffective use of lists or images , large amounts of text , or confusing wording ) negatively , and therefore its information less credible . Hong [ 13 ] found that the decision to interact further with content was contingent upon the way in which it was framed . She exposed participants to one of two versions of a health message about the relationship between diet and eye health : promotional ( “…diets rich in fruits and vegetables may create better eyesight , including improved night vision” ) , and preventive ( “…diets rich in fruits and vegetables may reduce the risk of developing eyesight problems , including cataract” ) . Participants were then invited to interact with promotional ( i . e . , create more energy , improve digestive health , and strengthen bones ) and preventative ( i . e . , reduce risk of cancer , lower blood pressure , prevent heart disease ) taglines to explore further content . Participants’ behaviors were guided by whether subsequent content matched the orientation of the condition to which they were assigned . In other words , those assigned to the promotional message chose promotional taglines , and those who encountered the preventative message were more apt to select preventative taglines . Research has also shown that user interactions with content are driven by interest . McCay - Peet , Lalmas and Navalpakkum [ 21 ] found that the visual saliency of news headlines , based on cues such as color , size , and placement on the screen , increased participants’ search task efficiency , but , in some cases , participants wanted to pursue content that was personally interesting but not task relevant . Interest was also a defining component of Arapakis , Lalmas , Cambazoglu , Marcos , and Jose’s [ 2 ] online news study . They analyzed 13 , 000 news articles to select 18 articles that varied in interest ( high , low ) and polarity ( positive , negative ) and employed these in a user study . Arapakis et al . [ 2 ] found that affect , interest , and curiosity were positively associated with sentiment , but more so when news content became more negative . They concluded that both cognitive ( interest ) and affective ( polarity ) content elements affected the user experience . In addition to interest , user interactions with content during information seeking an be affected by user individual differences , such as age , gender , prior knowledge , expertise , level of education , and cognitive and affective variables . For example , Ford et al . [ 9 ] demonstrated that searchers enact information processing strategies , whereby they search for information in a particular and consistent manner , and that these strategies affect information retrieval success . User experience can also be influenced by how information is packaged . In a study that linked aspects of content and its presentation , Koehler , Yadav , Phillips and Cavazos - Kottke [ 17 ] experimented with four content genres ( human interest story , informative or persuasive story , poem , and scholarly lecture ) across two media formats ( video and text ) . The researchers were interested in how the representational affordances of various media types affected learning outcomes , as well as how story type influenced user - media interactions . Koehler and colleagues [ 17 ] found that when people interacted with content in video format , they perceived the information as more factual , the author as more authoritative , and that they had learned more . Koehler et al . ’s [ 17 ] study suggested that “modality interactivity” is important for helping people “access the core message that the 186 medium aims to deliver , rather than merely increase [ ing ] navigational activity” [ 24 ] ( p . 214 ) . In a study that used an informational website to deliver anti - smoking messages , Oh and Sundar [ 24 ] showed that the level of modality interactivity increased users’ cognitive absorption , favorable attitudes toward the website and its messages , and led to more positive interface assessments . However , high modality interactivity “significantly reduced the amount of message - related thoughts after browsing” ( p . 227 ) , suggesting that positive engagement with the site may not have led to learning . Recent work by Freund and colleagues [ 10 ] investigated how people interacted with and comprehended reading materials ( journal article , webpage , blog ) . They presented the materials in plain text or “in context” ( with design , graphical and paratextual cues ) and varied the interactivity of the reading environment ( no interactivity , reading tools for annotating and highlighting text ) . Participants in the plain text , non - interactive condition achieved the highest comprehension scores , while those in the in - context , non - interactive condition had the lowest scores . This was surprising as “structural features [ of texts ] such as headings and outlines…can aid in extracting relevant information [ 19 ] ( p . 58 ) . Participants in the two interactive conditions achieved similar comprehension scores , suggesting that the ability to annotate or highlight text was linked to understanding more than in - context presentation . In summary , user experience is impacted by information quality [ 4 ] , framing [ 13 ] , and sentiment [ 2 ] , as well as topical interest [ 2 ; 21 ] . Genre , media format , and interactivity can affect user experience and searchers’ ability to extract information from content [ 9 ; 17 ; 24 ] . How such content and media characteristics impact learning is inconclusive , since positive user experiences may not be indicative of information extraction and use [ 24 ] . Information interaction research suggests that different levels of cognitive learning , operationalized through search tasks , result in different search behaviors that are associated with cognitive complexity , perceived challenge and affect . 3 . CURRENT STUDY This study isolated select content and media characteristics to examine their relationship to learning , operationalized at Bloom’s basic level of remembering . We asked participants to interact with two different news stories that were comparable in terms of genre , readability , and sentiment , but topically different . We anticipated that there would be no differences in knowledge retention between the two stories . We measured interest , curiosity , and participants’ behavioral intentions to link to related content or share the stories with others to understand what effect topic might have on UX . In terms of media characteristics , we manipulated only the format in which the stories were delivered . News and information platforms deliver content in a variety of media ( video , infographics , text ) and include interactive functions , e . g . , links to share information through social media channels , features to rate or comment publically on content . We expected that video , which is more interactive and multi - sensory than audio and text , would result in greater recall and recognition . Our rationale for this was situated in dual coding theory , which proposes that verbal ( language - specialized ) and nonverbal ( symbolic or imagery ) information is represented and processed by different cognitive sub - systems that function independently , but are also interconnected and trigger each other [ 25 ] ( pp . 53 - 54 , 62 ) . In other words , information that activates both sub - systems ( e . g . , text and images , video and audio ) results in deeper information processing . Holding content characteristics of genre , sentiment , and readability constant allowed us to investigate topic effects , while manipulating only media format enabled us to separate format and interactivity to examine effects of information delivery on knowledge retention . Quantitative and qualitative data collected in the study were drawn upon in this paper to make sense of the user experience at the point of information extraction , and its relationship to participants’ ability to remember the content with which they interacted . 2 4 . Method 4 . 1 Participants Seventy - eight people ( F = 50 , M = 27 , no response = 1 ) took part in this study . Recruitment took place at a university through email lists , posters , and a website advertising research studies . Interested individuals contacted the researchers via email to arrange a session . The majority of participants were students ( 88 . 5 % ) under the age of 30 ( 74 . 7 % ; 31 - 40 , 24 . 3 % ) who had completed high school and were pursuing or had completed some form of post - secondary education . Non - students included two research assistants and two sales or marketing staff , as well as one housewife , security guard / tennis instructor , customer service representative , programmer , administrator , and library staff member ; one person did not specify their current employment . The participants were avid news readers and interacted with news daily ( n = 38 ) , several times a week ( n = 23 ) , or on a weekly ( n = 15 ) or monthly ( n = 2 ) basis . 4 . 2 News media Two human - interest news stories were selected for this study . Only one genre was examined in this study to afford greater experimental control of story type ; it was reasoned that this would allow clear observations of media and topic effects . The stories were available from a news provider in audio , video , and transcript - style text formats . A narrative - style version of each story was created that each contained one image . We did not alter the order of story ideas . The stories were different topically , but in pre - testing the video versions of the stories , users rated them similarly in terms of interest ( story 1 : 6 / 7 ; story 2 : 5 / 7 ) and positive sentiment ( 5 / 7 ) . The stories also varied in duration : the video and audio versions of story 1 ( mining ) ( 9 minutes , 54 seconds ) were longer than story 2 ( farming ) ( 6 minutes , 26 seconds ) . The narrative versions were 1336 words ( story 1 ) , and 981 words ( story 2 ) . However , both stories had similar Flesch - Kincaid Reading Ease scores ( story 1 = 62 . 4 ; story 2 = 63 . 3 ) and Flesch - Kincaid Grade Levels ( story 1 = 8 . 7 ; story 2 = 8 . 6 ) ( readability - score . com ) . Our texts were comparable to other popular press materials , e . g . , Reader’s Digest has a reading ease 2 Study results are reported in two additional publications : A more extensive analysis of the individual and situational nature of participants’ interest in the news items by story and media format appears in the 2016 short paper : “What makes online news interesting ? Personal and situational interest and the effect on behavioral intentions” in Proceedings of the Association of Information Science and Information Technology . 53 : 1 – 6 . The quantitative findings depicting the effects of story and media on user engagement and knowledge retention are examined in - depth in “Antecedents and Learning Outcomes of Online News Engagement” to appear in The Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology . 187 score of 65 [ 8 ] . Readability is based on the average number of syllables per word and average number of words per sentence . Longer sentences and words with more syllables are more complex and require more reading skill [ 7 ] . Readability assessments are not the same as reader perceptions of text difficulty . 4 . 3 Measures We used a variety of measures to record participants’ characteristics and their experiences interacting with news stories in this study . Here we report only on the instruments corresponding to variables examined in this paper . Demographic questionnaire . We gathered information about participants’ demographics including gender , age , occupation ( student / non - student ) , and highest level of education obtained . We also asked about the frequency and format in which they typically interacted with news . User experience . Participants were asked to indicate their post - task levels of interest and curiosity about each story , and whether they would link to additional materials on the same topic or recommend the story to others . These four items , collected after each story , were measured using a seven - point rating scale . We also conducted semi - structured interviews with approximately half ( n = 41 ) of our participants to gather their perceptions of interacting with the stories . Individuals were asked about their interaction with each story , how the format in which they interacted with the stories compared to their typical news reading behavior , and the overall quality of the news experience ; probes were used to solicit elaborations on responses as needed . Knowledge retention . The lead author and a graduate research assistant ( GRA ) created ten short answer and multiple - choice questions per story . Two other GRAs interacted with each story , and responded to and assessed the questions . Questions were revised and retested with a convenience sample to ensure equal distribution of short answer and multiple - choice items , and of user perceived easy , medium , and difficult questions per story . 4 . 4 Procedure The experimental study took place on a university campus . All materials were delivered through a laptop with a 15 - inch monitor ; a mouse and headphones were attached for participants use . An experimental system was created to deliver the study questionnaires and tasks . After participants completed the electronic consent form , the system randomly assigned them to one of four media conditions ( video , audio , transcript - style text , or narrative text ) , and presented one of the two stories ; story presentation was counterbalanced to prevent order effects . The system saved all data entered by participants and stored it on a university server backed up daily on a local external hard drive . An experimental protocol was adhered to for all sessions to ensure consistency across sessions , as three GRAs assisted with the study . At the beginning of the experiment , the GRA opened the experimental system and led the participant through the informed consent process . Once they had the opportunity to read and ask questions about the study , participants were asked to click the “continue” button at the bottom of the screen to signify their consent to proceed . The GRA then followed a standard script , telling participants that the study materials , including the stories and questionnaires with which they would interact , would be presented on the laptop ; participants were instructed not to hit the back button in the experimental system . The GRA explained they would be asked to answer questions about their experiences interacting with the stories and about the events depicted in the stories . Participants were encouraged to , “do your best to answer the questions , but please do not worry if you cannot answer them all . ” The GRA stayed in the room to assist participants as needed . Participants first completed the demographic questionnaire , which was followed by the human - interest news stories presented in counterbalanced order . The stories were incorporated into the experimental system via a link to the original news website ; the set up used a frame to ensure that participants did not leave or close the experimental system . After interacting with each story , participants completed a questionnaire about their interest in , curiosity about , and behavioral intentions regarding the stories . In addition to the rating scale for these questions , an open - ended text box encouraged participants to explain their responses . Next , participants completed the knowledge retention test . This pattern of interacting with the story and answering questions was repeated for each story . A concluding page thanked participants , reiterated contact information for the principle investigator , and asked participants to inform the GRA that they had finished . Participants took , on average , 35 minutes , 42 seconds to complete this portion of the study . Half of the sample ( n = 41 ) was then interviewed post - session . We interviewed the first people to take part and skipped or added additional interviews sequentially to ensure adequate representation across all media conditions . There were 9 video , 12 transcript , 9 audio , and 10 narrative interviews . Upon completion of the study , participants were thanked for their time and paid an honorarium . 4 . 5 Data Screening and Preparation GRAs took note of any anomalies that occurred during the study , and these notes were used to identify potential issues in data collection for subsequent analysis . Two participants encountered difficulties with the experimental system , i . e . , one was assigned to a different media format for each story , and one person’s session was interrupted when the browser unexpectedly closed . An additional person was observed to “cheat” , that is , return to the stories to answer the knowledge retention questions at the end ; and one person had previously encountered the stories . Data for these individuals was removed leaving 78 valid cases . Data was downloaded from the experimental system database in . csv format . Quantitative data , e . g . , demographics and questionnaire items , were analyzed using SPSS statistical software . Open - ended items in the post - task questionnaires and post - session interviews were transcribed and explored qualitatively using NVivo software . Interviews were brief and were coded thematically based on the semi - structured questions we asked . We were interested in looking at this data according to what participants said about the stories , media , their overall experience , and whether they would want to find out more about the topic ; another category was created for comments related specifically to learning or remembering content from the stories . We examined the interviews according to these broad areas , noting the participant ID , media condition , and specific story during the coding process . In this study , we report only on quantitative and qualitative data that is directly related to the research questions . 4 . 5 . 1 Knowledge retention test scores We created knowledge retention scores for each story based on an answer key ; multiple - choice questions were straightforward ( i . e . , correct or incorrect ) ; short answer questions were more nuanced . Two coders independently evaluated participants’ responses to the questions , scoring answers as 1 for “correct , ” 0 . 5 for a “partially 188 correct” or 0 “incorrect” . We used percent agreement to calculate the inter - coder reliability , though we realize there is a risk of over - estimating the level of agreement using this method . For story 1 , the percent agreement was 80 . 73 % ( 126 disagreements , 654 agreements ) and 94 . 3 % for story 2 ( 42 disagreements / 738 agreement ) . The coders then compared the number of agreements and disagreements between them and provided a rationale for the discrepancies . The lead author reviewed the coders’ rationales and made a decision confirming either coder A or B’s initial assessment . A score was then calculated per participant per story . We examined z - scores to identify outliers in the data ; only one value for story two was above 3 ( z = 3 . 13 ) . However , the Shapiro Wilk test was significant for both story 1 ( W = 0 . 932 ( 78 ) , p = 0 . 000 ) and 2 ( W = 0 . 954 ( 78 ) , p = 0 . 007 ) , and therefore the assumption of normality was not met ; the scores for both stories were negatively skewed . Thus , we proceeded with our analysis using non - parametric tests . 5 . RESULTS We report the relationship between knowledge retention scores and story and media format , and look at these findings with respect to participants’ interest in the stories and demographic characteristics . The quantitative data is complemented by insights gained from open - ended post - task questionnaire responses ( n = 78 ) and post - session interviews ( n = 41 ) . The qualitative data is not analyzed in - depth in this report but is used to aid in the interpretation of the quantitative findings . 5 . 1 Story and media format First , we examined whether there was an effect of story or multimedia condition on knowledge retention test scores . Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for overall and story specific knowledge retention scores by media condition . The Wilcoxon paired sign rank test demonstrated that participants had higher knowledge test scores for the mining story ( M = 6 . 55 , SD = 1 . 96 ) compared to the farming story ( M = 6 . 04 , SD = 1 . 60 ) , Z ( 77 ) = - 2 . 44 , p = 0 . 015 . Second , the Kruskal - Wallis Test showed that media format did not influence knowledge retention ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 6 . 487 , p = 0 . 09 ) . Those in the narrative and video conditions achieved similar overall knowledge retention scores , while those in the audio condition obtained the lowest scores . Table 1 : Descriptive statistics for story and condition by knowledge retention scores Media Condition N Overall Knowledge Retention M ( SD ) Story 1 ( Mining ) M ( SD ) Story 2 ( Farming ) M ( SD ) Audio 40 11 . 5 ( 2 . 65 ) 5 . 85 ( 1 . 77 ) 5 . 65 ( 1 . 34 ) Transcript 38 12 . 36 ( 3 . 47 ) 6 . 77 ( 2 . 08 ) 5 . 58 ( 1 . 77 ) Video 40 13 . 26 ( 3 . 16 ) 7 ( 1 . 73 ) 6 . 26 ( 1 . 86 ) Narrative 42 13 . 26 ( 2 . 52 ) 6 . 64 ( 2 . 19 ) 6 . 61 ( 1 . 29 ) Total by Story 6 . 55 ( 1 . 96 ) 6 . 04 ( 1 . 6 ) When we looked at knowledge retention scores for each story by media condition , there were no significant differences for either story 1 ( mining ) ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 4 . 43 , p = 0 . 218 ) , or story 2 ( farming ) ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 6 . 73 , p = 0 . 08 ) according to the Kruskall - Wallis Test . Though not significant , it is interesting to note that those in the audio condition had the lowest test scores for story 1 and transcript text was lowest for story 2 . For story 1 , video was highest , followed by transcript and narrative text , while for story 2 , narrative was highest , followed by video and audio . Our analysis showed that the stories participants interacted with had an impact on their ability to recall information , but that media condition did not ; therefore neither prediction was supported . Though not statistically significant , mean scores varied as a product of the media condition to which people were assigned on a story - by - story basis . While those in the narrative condition achieved comparable knowledge retention scores across both stories , participants in the video and transcript conditions achieved higher scores for story 1 than story 2 . Audio participants had lower scores than those in other conditions , but they achieved slightly higher scores for story 2 than story 1 . These patterns were not due to order effects because the stories were counterbalanced as part of the study design . However , other factors related to content presentation could have been at play . For example , some participants described editorial mistakes , tone , language , flow , and density of information as negative factors of story presentation . During the post - task interviews , participants highlighted the importance of visuals in understanding a story’s content . One participant ( P17 , transcript ) stated they needed visuals to better connect to the people in the story , while many others voiced a desire to see wells being drilled for farmers ( story 2 ) , or the mines where the minerals came from ( story 1 ) . For both stories , participants in the audio condition scored lower than those who interacted with video and narrative text , which both contained images . Another possible reason for lower achievement in the audio format may be the lack of “navigational control” experienced by audio participants ( e . g . , P6 , P7 ) . Unlike the narrative format in which a reader may reread a particularly difficult or interesting paragraph , refinding information in an audio or video clip is more challenging , especially if there are limited navigation affordances . This was illustrated by a video participant ( P12 ) : If it was text you could simply go two paragraphs above and look it up and it’s hard to search for specific information in video . Right , so you have to guess at which point , in the story is it a minute and a half for the story and then it’s you know , I don’t think it’s as easy to navigate the story . One participant revealed that their lack of interest in the story combined with the audio format required them to pay extra attention , and that this resulted in them forgetting details ( such as speaker names ) of the story ( P35 , audio ) . Conversely , participants interacting with the narrative format appreciated the navigational control they had when rereading sections they did not understand or had never encountered before the study ( P60 , narrative ) . Given these results , coupled with the significant effect of story on knowledge retention reported earlier , there may be an undetected interaction effect between story and media condition . Despite comparable reading ease and grade level scores for both stories ( see “News media” section ) , other qualities of the stories – whether length or topic – led to different knowledge retention scores . 5 . 2 User experience of interacting with the news stories After each news story , participants were asked to rate their interactions according to interest , curiosity , desire to link to further content on the topic , and likelihood to recommend the story to others . There were no missing values with the exception of one question ( likelihood to recommend ) for story 2 only . Table 2 shows the mean ( standard deviations ) for each of these post - task questions , based on a 7 - point rating scale , for each story . Story 2 189 ( farming ) was rated , on average , higher on all questions . A Wilcoxon paired sign rank test revealed this difference was significant for self - reported interest , curiosity , and willingness to recommend the stories to others , but not for participants’ intentions to link to related content . Table 2 . Descriptive statistics for post - task user experience questions by story No . responses Story 1 : Mining M ( SD ) Story 2 : Farming M ( SD ) Z ( p ) Interest 78 4 . 56 ( 1 . 82 ) 5 . 23 ( 1 . 28 ) - 2 . 404 ( 0 . 016 ) * Curiosity 78 4 . 71 ( 1 . 71 ) 5 . 33 ( 1 . 33 ) - 2 . 585 ( 0 . 010 ) * Link to content 77 3 . 65 ( 2 . 02 ) 3 . 94 ( 1 . 97 ) - 0 . 865 ( 0 . 387 ) Recommend to others 78 3 . 35 ( 2 . 06 ) 4 . 12 ( 1 . 86 ) - 2 . 661 ( 0 . 008 ) * * Significant at p < 0 . 05 We examined users’ perceptions of their experiences in relation to their knowledge retention scores for each story using the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient or Spearman’s rho . For story 1 ( mining ) , there was a positive association between knowledge retention scores and interest ( rho = 0 . 306 , p = 0 . 006 ) and curiosity ( rho = 0 . 282 , p = 0 . 012 ) , but not willingness to link to related content ( rho = 0 . 091 , p = 0 . 428 ) or recommend to family and friends ( rho = 0 . 216 , p = 0 . 058 ) ; though the latter is not statistically significant , there is a weak correlation present . For story 2 , there were no significant correlations between knowledge retention and interest ( rho = 0 . 152 , p = 0 . 184 ) , curiosity ( rho = 0 . 075 , p = 0 . 516 ) , desire to link to related content ( rho = 0 . 182 , p = 0 . 101 ) or willingness to share ( rho = 0 . 182 , p = 0 . 113 ) . Overall , participants rated story 1 ( mining ) less positively than story 2 ( farming ) , and stated that they would be less willing to share it with others or to look for further content on the topic . Behavioral intention to share the stories with others or to link to further content was not significantly related to knowledge retention for either story , but interest and curiosity were related to higher knowledge retention scores for story 1 ( mining ) . The post - session interviews indicated that participants were interested in the people in the story , the relevance of the content to their own lives , or their ability to connect the story to their own experiences . Those who were disinterested in story 1 ( mining ) found it difficult to relate to the content because it was about a distant country , lacked focus on people , and was perceived as disconnected from the participants’ own lived experience . Participants rated their experiences with the news stories before completing the knowledge test , so perceptions of interest were not based on how well they perceived they did on the knowledge retention test . The positive correlation between knowledge retention scores and user experience for story 1 suggests that those who enjoyed the story most did better on the knowledge retention test , and those who did not enjoy the story did worse ; interest did not affect participants’ ability to remember details about story 2 . 5 . 3 Demographic characteristics To understand if individual differences had any bearing on knowledge retention scores , we examined demographic variables including gender , occupation , age , education level , and the typical ways in which participants interacted with news and their news reading frequency . Overall , there were no significant effects of gender ( U = 958 , p = 309 ) or occupation ( U = 201 . 5 , p = 0 . 087 ) , according to the Mann - Whitney U test on the overall knowledge retention test scores . Knowledge retention was also not related to education level ( x 2 ( 5 ) = 6 . 183 , p = 0 . 289 ) or age ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 4 . 486 , p = 0 . 223 ) according to the Kruskall Wallis test . When we examined the demographic data based on story , we observed some differences for occupation , but not for gender , education , or age . Students had higher knowledge retention scores than non - students for story 1 ( mining ) . Students’ mean scores were also higher for story 2 ( farming ) , but this difference was not significant ( Table 3 ) . This finding should be interpreted with caution due to the low number of non - students in the sample ( 11 . 5 % ) , but one reason for the difference could be that students are immersed in an environment where they regularly need to read and retain knowledge , e . g . , to pass a quiz , and thus may invoke different strategies for interacting with content – even when it is not explicitly linked with an academic purpose or performance ; the experimental setting may have activated this behavior . Table 3 : Mean rank of knowledge retention test scores by occupation N Story 1 ( Mining ) Story 2 ( Farming ) Student 69 41 . 43 40 . 53 Non - student 9 24 . 72 31 . 61 Mann - Whitney U 177 . 5 , p = 0 . 036 239 . 5 , p = 0 . 257 How people typically interacted with news did not impact overall knowledge retention ( x 2 ( 2 ) = 0 . 813 , p = 0 . 666 ) . Story 1 ( mining ) knowledge retention scores were highest for those who read print and online news , followed by those who read web news only , and then print , ( x 2 ( 2 ) = 0 . 583 , p = 0 . 747 ) . This pattern was different for story 2 ( farming ) : web only news readers had the highest knowledge retention scores , followed by the print only and then print / web news readers ( x 2 ( 2 ) = 2 . 151 , p = 0 . 341 ) ( Table 4 ) . These patterns were not statistically significant . Table 4 : Mean rank of knowledge test scores by typical news reading format N Story 1 ( Mining ) Story 2 ( Farming ) Overall Mean Rank Print 3 32 . 67 40 . 00 32 . 17 Web 30 38 . 05 44 . 08 42 . 02 Print & Web 45 40 . 92 36 . 41 38 . 31 Qualitatively participants commented that they were not accustomed to interacting with video news stories ( P30 , video ) , and that watching a video was less efficient than reading a news story : “ [ you ] could probably get more information and background into an article that you know could be read in the same period of time it took to watch the video” ( P24 , video ) . However , participants interacting with web - based news may engage with news in its more traditional text format rather than listening or viewing news . Therefore , future studies should ask more fine - grained questions about news interactions rather than whether people access news in print or online . Based on the Kruskall - Wallis test , there were significant differences in knowledge retention scores based on news reading frequency ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 13 . 001 , p = 0 . 005 ) . As shown in Table 5 , those who read news several times per week had the highest mean rank knowledge retention scores for both stories , followed by the 190 weekly , daily , and , finally , monthly news readers . This pattern was the same for both stories and was significant for story 1 ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 12 . 322 , p = 0 . 006 ) , but not story 2 ( x 2 ( 3 ) = 7 . 095 , p = 0 . 069 ) . Table 5 : Mean rank of knowledge test scores by typical news reading frequency N Story 1 ( Mining ) Story 2 ( Farming ) Mean Rank Daily 38 33 . 74 37 . 54 33 . 89 Several times / week 23 49 . 54 44 . 52 49 . 85 Weekly 15 43 . 33 41 . 67 42 . 83 Monthly 2 4 . 75 2 . 75 2 6 . DISCUSSION We examined how people interact with and extract information from multimedia content . We explored differences in knowledge retention scored by story and media format , and how short - term recall was related to user experience ( i . e . , interest in and behavioral intention toward the news stories ) demographic variables , and news reading habits . We found that people had higher knowledge retention scores for story 1 ( mining ) even though story 2 ( farming ) was more preferred , as measured through participants’ interest , curiosity , and willingness to recommend ratings . However , media format did not affect knowledge retention . Few demographic variables influenced retention . 6 . 1 Media Format , Story and Knowledge Retention In the current study participants using the video format scored the highest out of all formats for story 1 , and second highest for story 2 ( though not statistically significant ) . Koehler et al . [ 17 ] proposed that , according to dual coding theory , video should provide the greatest learning benefits given “there is little competition for resources when presenting visual and auditory information together” ( pp . 250 ) . Like Koehler et al . , we failed to find a significant effect of media on recall . In the current study , narrative participants’ scores were also high , and relatively stable across both stories . They were provided with one still image , yet it is difficult to say whether this visual was sufficient to enhance their representation and processing capacity . One study participant believed that the act of reading was directly and positively related to comprehension : “you are probably more bound to remember things… if you’ve read them” ( P10 , video ) . Our questions about typical news reading behaviors focused on web , print or web and print interactions , rather than multimedia interactions . Thus , participants in this study may be habituated to reading news despite new modes of news presentation , and this may have resulted in positive outcomes for the narrative group and minimized any gains for video participants . Audio and transcript text , which relied on either the symbolic or language sub - systems , faired the poorest in terms of recall outcomes . Many participants in the audio and transcript text conditions relayed the need for visuals to enhance their understanding of the stories , and , further , that format was a major deterrent for engagement . Interestingly , these participants were primarily those interacting with the transcript format . For example , P16 stated that although they were interested in story 2 , the fact that the content was “filled with grammatical mistakes or strange contextual ramblings” made them want to “jump to another website” for information on the topic . This aligns with Colbert and Boodoo’s [ 4 ] finding that users prefer web content to follow particular writing guidelines and has implications for website designers and content writers . The transcript text was , although accurate , perplexing for users and atypical of most news and general web interactions . The audio participants relied exclusively on the language sub - system and thus this media may have been more cognitively taxing . One caveat is that our news interactions were passive in nature . Koehler et al [ 17 ] argued that learning “depends far more on an interaction between the content and style of the presentation than on the medium itself” ( p . 270 ) . While other studies have included forms of modality interactivity , they have failed to link media interactivity with learning [ 24 ] , or concluded that interactivity can be useful for comprehending information when people cannot strip away the contextual elements of the interface [ 10 ] , as is the case for most web and database systems . Looking at media with respect to active and passive content delivery may lead to more insights into the affects of media format on information extraction and use . 6 . 2 User Experience and Demographics Our findings demonstrate the complexity and interconnectivity of factors affecting user experience with news stories and knowledge retention , specifically interest in content and select individual differences . We found that students had higher knowledge retention scores than non - students , and that the frequency and format in which participants interacted with news also affected information recall . This speaks to the role of prior knowledge , which is not only declarative ( topic - based ) but also procedural and habitual ( applied ) in nature . However , it is essential to note that additional individual differences should have been measured in this study , such as cognitive ability , to offer more concrete explanations of why topic and not media led to different knowledge retention outcomes . Of note in this study was that daily news readers did not have the highest mean rank recall scores . Thus , while interacting with news on a regular basis ( i . e . , several times per week , weekly ) played a role in knowledge retention , this relationship was not linear . Recent Pew research reported that 63 % of Americans surveyed used Facebook and Twitter to consume national , international , business , sports , and other news . Although growth in social media news consumption has been consistent across demographic groups , younger users ( under 35 ) are more likely to view news via these platforms [ 22 ] . Given the young age of our participants , and that news is consumed through a variety of news and social media sources , those who interacted with news most frequently ( daily ) may focus less attention on individual news stories to cope with the steady stream of information ; those who interact weekly / several times a week may be more selective in what they read and more likely to engage more deeply . However , these ideas need verification . In addition to participants’ news reading habits , their perceptions of the stories and their interactions with them provide further evidence that cognitive and affective factors are related to learning outcomes [ 11 ] . The current study sample was larger than our pre - test sample ( n = 6 ) , and while we found similar interest and sentiment ratings for both stories amongst pilot participants , story 1 ( mining ) was more polarizing in terms of perceived interest in the main study . Story 2 ( farming ) was significantly more interesting , and participants expressed more curiosity about it and willingness to share it with others or link to further content on the topic compared to story 1 . Overall , we saw an interesting paradox where participants preferred story 2 ( farming ) to story 1 ( mining ) , but actually achieved higher average knowledge retention scores 191 for the less preferred story . However , interest and curiosity were only related to knowledge outcomes for story 1 . One explanation for these findings could be that story 1 was perceived to be more difficult for some . Although reading ease and grade level were equivocal for the two stories , we did not measure users’ perceptions of difficulty . There were an equal number of knowledge retention questions per story , but story 1 was longer and thus contained more content . The length of story 1 may have made it more cognitively complex , and , for those who lacked interest in the story ( e . g . could not relate to it ) , this may have negatively affected their perceptions of effort [ 15 ] and subsequent ability to derive meaning from the story . However , we cannot say whether interest affected people’s willingness to interact with the story , or whether interacting with the story created or deterred interest , resulting in more or less positive learning outcomes . Yet , the substantial role of interest in this study corresponds to other work linking interest and affect [ 2 ; 21 ] . Many participants in our study pointed to the human element in the stories , but particularly story 2 ( farming ) . The inability to relate to story 1 , due to its geographical setting , emphasis on technology rather than people , and perceived distance from participants’ daily lives , produced disinterest in some participants , and this was directly related to knowledge retention scores . 6 . 2 . 1 Limitations A limitation of this study is that it used static news experiences , limited to two stories , focusing on users’ interactions with content and media rather than investigating a multi - stage search process . However , in a dynamic search process it would be difficult to distinguish the effects of content and media on the user experience and learning . The experimental design used in this study afforded us the ability to isolate and systematically investigate our variables of interest , and to learn more about the extraction phase of information retrieval and its relationship to participants’ ability to remember story content . We operationalized learning at a very basic level of Bloom’s taxonomy : remembering , as measured using a knowledge retention test . It can be argued as to whether or not our measure was optimal , given that we did not systematically assess prior knowledge of the story topics [ 27 ] , and many researchers have stressed the need to go beyond recall and recognition as an outcome of searching as learning [ 10 ; 28 ] . These arguments are rooted in the fact that searching involves acts of information acquisition , but also comprehension , interpretation , and comparison [ 20 ] and results in changes within learners [ 14 ] . Recent attempts to measure learning have tried to be more encompassing than simply the number of recalled facts . Wilson and Wilson [ 28 ] developed measures based on the usefulness of recalled facts , participants’ ability to incorporate facts into intelligent statements , and their use of facts to raise further questions about the content within participant - generated summary statements . Freund et al . [ 10 ] used Kintsch’s Construction – Integration ( C - I ) Model [ 16 ] to develop instruments ( true and false , sentence verification , and summary statements ) to measure comprehension with reading materials . Both studies reported successful implementation of their measures . Wilson and Wilson [ 28 ] found significant differences between pre - and post - task summaries for all of their measures , but the length of the summaries and participants’ prior knowledge affected the results , while Freund et al . [ 10 ] found significant differences in participants’ ability to decode and recall content , but they did not demonstrate more global processing of the material . Freund et al . [ 10 ] noted that assessing comprehension was the “major challenge in conducting [ their ] study , and it is one that must be faced by the information retrieval community given that learning is an important outcome of search” ( p . 90 ) . As work in this area increases , we look forward to replicating this study with more sophisticated , theoretically derived measures of learning and to study information extraction and use over a longer period of time . 7 . Conclusion Although there were non - significant different learning outcomes for participants according to the media format to which they were assigned , the stories themselves generated the most significant differences in knowledge retention scores . Interestingly , the most interesting story ( farming ) had lower average knowledge test scores than the less interesting , longer , and , perhaps more challenging story ( mining ) . We suggest that participants’ level of interest in story 1 affected their learning outcomes ( positively and negatively ) , emphasizing the role of cognitive and affective responses to content in learning , and suggesting that media may be less significant in the extraction and use of information than the content itself . This has implications for the way in which content is delivered to information consumers , and suggests that the format and interactivity of media may affect user experience but not other important outcomes such as the ability to recall content . While we cannot control the personal characteristics that people bring to information interactions ( e . g . , prior knowledge , habitual interaction modes ) , we can focus on ways to generate situational interest during the extraction process to promote knowledge gains . Our qualitative data suggest that content factors other than media may be more influential , which bears further investigation . These findings have implications for the design of information systems . Given the differences in knowledge retention by media condition , we need to understand why participants’ performance was stable for the narrative condition , but varied for the video , audio and transcript conditions . This could be achieved by measuring other content factors beyond readability ( as we did in this study ) and individual differences , testing active versus passive information extraction , and deploying more sophisticated measures of learning outcomes to understand the relationship between user perceptions and information complexity . 8 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the UBC Hampton Research Fund . Thank you to research assistants Devin Soper , Tammi Mercado , Jack Hallin and Zoe MacDougall . 9 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Anderson , L . W . , Krathwohl , D . R . , & Bloom , B . S . ( Eds . ) . ( 2001 ) . A Taxonomy for Learning , Teaching , and Assessing : A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives . New York , NY : Longman . [ 2 ] Arapakis , I . , Lalmas , M . , Cambazoglu , B . , Marcos , M . - C . & Jose , J . M . ( 2014 ) . User engagement in online news : Under the scope of sentiment , interest , affect , and gaze . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 65 ( 10 ) , 1988 - 2005 . [ 3 ] Case , D . O . & O’Connor , L . G . ( 2016 ) . What’s the use ? Measuring the frequency of studies of information outcomes . Journal of the Association of Information Science & Technology , 67 ( 3 ) , 649 - 661 . [ 4 ] Colbert , M . & Boodoo , A . ( 2011 ) Does ‘Letting Go of the Words’ increase engagement : A traffic study . In Extended 192 Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 655 – 67 ) . ACM . [ 5 ] Cole , C . ( 2012 ) . Information Need : A Theory Connecting Information Search to Knowledge Formation . Medford , NJ : Information Today . [ 6 ] Ellis , D . ( 1993 ) . Modeling the information - seeking patterns of academic researchers : A grounded theory approach . The Library Quarterly , 63 ( 4 ) , 469 - 486 . [ 7 ] Farrall , M . L . ( 2012 ) . Reading Assessment : Linking Language , Literacy , and Cognition . Somerset , NJ : John Wiley & Sons . Retrieved from http : / / www . ebrary . com [ 8 ] Flesch , R . How to write plain English . University of Canterbury . Retrieved 11 February 2016 from http : / / www . mang . canterbury . ac . nz / writing _ guide / writing / fles ch . shtml [ 9 ] Ford , N . , Miller , D . , & Moss , N . ( 2001 ) . The role of individual differences in Internet searching : An empirical study . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 52 ( 12 ) , 1049 – 1066 . [ 10 ] Freund , L . , Kopak , R . & O’Brien , H . L . ( 2016 ) . The effects of textual environment on reading comprehension : Implications for searching as learning . Journal of Information Science , 42 ( 1 ) 79 – 93 . [ 11 ] Graesser , A . , & D’Mello , S . K . ( 2011 ) . Theoretical perspectives on affect and deep learning . In R . A . Calvo & S . K . D’Mello ( Eds . ) , New Perspectives on Affect and Learning Technologies ( pp . 11 – 21 ) . New York : Springer . [ 12 ] Hess , J . A . ( 2015 ) . Editor’s introduction : What exactly are we studying ? Communication Education , 64 ( 4 ) , 491 – 493 . [ 13 ] Hong , T . ( 2012 ) . Internet health search : When process complements goals . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 63 ( 11 ) , 2283 - 2293 . [ 14 ] Jansen , B . J . , Booth , D . , & Smith , B . ( 2009 ) . Using the taxonomy of cognitive learning to model online searching . Information Processing & Management , 45 ( 6 ) , 643 – 663 . [ 15 ] Kelly , D . , Arguello , J . , Edwards , A . , & Wu , W . ( 2015 ) . Development and evaluation of search tasks for IIR experiments using a cognitive complexity framework . In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on The Theory of Information Retrieval ( pp . 101 – 110 ) . ACM . [ 16 ] Kintsch W . ( 1998 ) . Comprehension : A Paradigm for Cognition . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . [ 17 ] Koehler , M . J . , Yadav , A . , Phillips , M . & Cavazos - Kottke , S . ( 2005 ) . What is video good for ? Examining how media and story genre interact . Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia , 14 ( 3 ) , 249 – 72 . [ 18 ] Liu , J . , Cole , M . J . , Liu , C . , Bierig , R . , Gwizdka , J . , Belkin , N . J . , . . . & Zhang , X . ( 2010 ) . Search behaviors in different task types . In Proceedings of the 10th annual joint conference on Digital libraries ( pp . 69 - 78 ) . ACM . [ 19 ] Marchionini , G . ( 1995 ) . Information Seeking in Electronic Environments . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . [ 20 ] Marchionini , G . ( 2006 ) . Exploratory search : From finding to understanding . Communications of the ACM , 49 ( 4 ) , 41 – 46 . [ 21 ] McCay - Peet , L . , Lalmas , M . & Navalpakkam , V . ( 2012 ) . On saliency , affect and focused attention . In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 541 - 550 ) . ACM . [ 22 ] Mitchell , A . , Barthel , M . , Shearer , E . , et al . ( July 14 , 2015 ) . The evolving role of news on Twitter and Facebook . Pew Research Centre . Retrieved April 4 , 2016 , from http : / / www . journalism . org / files / 2015 / 07 / Twitter - and - News - Survey - Report - FINAL2 . pdf [ 23 ] O’Brien , H . L . ( 2011 ) . Weaving the threads of experience into human information interaction ( HII ) : Probing user experience ( UX ) for new directions in information behaviour . In A . Spink & J . Heinström New directions in information behaviour ( pp . 69 - 92 ) . Emerald Publishing . [ 24 ] Oh , J . & Sundar , S . S . ( 2015 ) . How does interactivity persuade ? An experimental test of interactivity on cognitive absorption , elaboration , and attitudes . Journal of Communication , 65 ( 2 ) , 213 – 36 . [ 25 ] Paivio , A ( 1990 ) . Mental representations : a dual coding approach . Oxford . England : Oxford University Press . [ 26 ] Saracevic , T . ( 2007 ) . Relevance : A review of the literature and a framework for thinking on the notion in information science . Part III : Behavior and effects of relevance . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 58 ( 13 ) , 2126 - 2144 . [ 27 ] Vakkari , P . ( 1997 ) . Information seeking in context : a changing and challenging metatheory . In P . Vakkari , R . Savolainen , & B . Dervin , Information seeking in context ( pp . 452 - 646 ) . London : Graham Taylor . [ 28 ] Wilson , M . J . & Wilson , M . L . ( 2013 ) . A comparison of techniques for measuring sensemaking and learning within participant - generated summaries . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 64 ( 2 ) , 291 - 306 . 193