13 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) Introduction Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) are high - affinity cell surface receptors for polypeptide growth factors , cytokines , and hor - mones . RTKs regulate many intracellular signal transduc - tion pathways involved in multiple normal and pathological biological processes , including cancer initiation , progression , invasiveness , metastasis and resistance to therapy . 1 The Mesenchymal Epithelial Transition ( MET ) receptor belongs to a family of RTKs . Dysregulation of the MET signaling pathway occurs in a wide range of human cancers . 1 , 2 Increasing evidence indicated that MET may be a com - mon mechanism of resistance to anticancer treatment . In the present paper we review the mechanisms underlying this resis - tance and possible solutions to restore the sensitivity to sev - eral anticancer therapies , including targeted therapy ( EGFR inhibitors , VEGFR inhibitors , anti - HER2 drugs , B - RAF inhibitor , ALK inhibitors ) , chemotherapy ( gemcitabine , tax - anes , cisplatin , capecitabine ) and radiotherapy . The above mentioned drugs are currently used in the treatment of the most frequent solid tumors , including lung , renal and pancre - atic cancer . For these tumors the mechanisms of resistance are specifically discussed . Discovery , Structure and Function of MET and HGF / SF The MET proto - oncogene is located on chromosome 7q21 – 31 and encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase MET . In 1984 , TPR - MET oncogenic fusion protein from human osteosar - coma tumor cells was first discovered . 3 The MET receptor is a 190 kDa glycoprotein heterodimer consisting of an extracellu - lar α - subunit linked to transmembrane β - subunit by a disul - fide bond . The extracellular portion includes the semaphorin ( Sema ) domain , the PSI domain ( Plexin , Semaphorin and Integrin cysteine - rich ) and four IPT domains ( immunoglobu - lin plexins transcription ) . 4 The intracellular domain includes a juxtamembrane sequence , a catalytic region and a carboxy - terminal multifunctional docking site . The juxtamembrane domain contains both Ser975 and Tyr1003 residues , that are involved in MET downregulation . 5 A catalytic region posi - tively modulates the kinase activity . Finally , a carboxy - terminal multifunctional docking site is responsible for the recruitment of many intracellular transducers and adaptors ( Fig . 1 ) . 5 , 6 The MET receptor is expressed on the surface of epi - thelial and endothelial cells , where it can be bound specifi - cally by its only known ligand , the hepatocyte growth factor c - Met as a Target for Personalized Therapy ingrid garajová 1 , 2 , elisa giovannetti 1 , 3 , guido Biasco 2 and godefridus J . Peters 1 1 Department of Medical Oncology , VU University Medical Center , Cancer Center Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 2 Department of Experimental , Diagnostic and Speciality Medicine , University of Bologna , Sant’Orsola - Malpighi Hospital , Bologna , Italy . 3 Cancer Pharmacology Lab , AIRC Start - Up Unit , University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy . Supplementary Issue : Pharmacodynamic Biomarkers of Response and Resistance AbSTrAcT : MET and its ligand HGF are involved in many biological processes , both physiological and pathological , making this signaling pathway an attractive therapeutic target in oncology . Downstream signaling effects are transmitted via mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) , PI3K ( phosphoinositide 3 - kinase protein kinase B ) / AKT , signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins ( STAT ) , and nuclear factor - κ B . The final output of the terminal effec - tor components of these pathways is activation of cytoplasmic and nuclear processes leading to increases in cell proliferation , survival , mobilization and invasive capacity . In addition to its role as an oncogenic driver , increasing evidence implicates MET as a common mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies includ - ing EGFR and VEGFR inhibitors . In the present review , we summarize the current knowledge on the role of the HGF - MET signaling pathway in cancer and its therapeutic targeting ( HGF activation inhibitors , HGF inhibitors , MET antagonists and selective / nonselective MET kinase inhibitors ) . Recent advances in understanding the role of this pathway in the resistance to current anticancer strategies used in lung , kidney and pancreatic cancer are discussed . KEyworDS : MET , HGF , drug resistance , targeted therapy , NSCLC , renal cancer , pancreatic cancer SuPPleMenT : Pharmacodynamic Biomarkers of response and resistance CITaTIon : garajová et al . c - met as a Target for Personalized Therapy . Translational Oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) 13 – 31 doi : 10 . 4137 / Tog . s30534 . TYPe : review ReCeIved : July 02 , 2015 . ReSuBMITTed : september 20 , 2015 . aCCePTed foR PuBlICaTIon : september 23 , 2015 . aCadeMIC edIToR : Todd W . miller , editor in chief PeeR RevIew : Four peer reviewers contributed to the peer review report . reviewers’ reports totaled 760 words , excluding any confidential comments to the academic editor . fundIng : authors disclose no funding sources . CoMPeTIng InTeReSTS : Authors disclose no potential conflicts of interest . CoRReSPondenCe : gj . peters @ vumc . nl CoPYRIghT : © the authors , publisher and licensee libertas academica limited . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons cc - BY - nc 3 . 0 license . Paper subject to independent expert blind peer review . all editorial decisions made by independent academic editor . Upon submission manuscript was subject to anti - plagiarism scanning . Prior to publication all authors have given signed confirmation of agreement to article publication and compliance with all applicable ethical and legal requirements , including the accuracy of author and contributor information , disclosure of competing interests and funding sources , compliance with ethical requirements relating to human and animal study participants , and compliance with any copyright requirements of third parties . This journal is a member of the committee on Publication ethics ( coPe ) . Published by libertas academica . learn more about this journal . Garajová et al 14 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) ( HGF ) , also called the scatter factor ( SF ) . HGF / SF is a protein belonging to the serine protease family and produced in cells of mesenchymal origin . It is secreted as a single chain , biologi - cally inactive , and converted into its mature form by a cleavage process catalyzed by extracellular proteases . 6 – 8 Its biologically active form consists of a disulfide - bond heterodimer contain - ing an α - chain and a β - chain . The first contains an amino - terminal hairpin loop ( HL ) domain followed by four peculiar domains , known as kringle domains ; the latter contains a serine proteases homology ( SPH ) domain that lacks proteolytic activity , 6 – 8 as shown in Figure 2 . MET has two binding sites for HGF . Firstly , the IPT3 and IPT4 domains that bind the N domain of HGF / SF with high affinity , independently of HGF maturation . Secondly , the SEMA domain will bind the SPH domain of HGF / SF with low affinity but only when HGF is active . 9 – 10 MET and its ligand HGF are involved in many normal and pathological biological processes , such as fetal development figure 2 . Structure of HGF . Its biologically active form consists of a disulfide - bond heterodimer containing an α - chain and a β - chain . figure 1 . structure of the c - meT receptor . extracellular portion include sema domain , Psi domain and iPT domain . intracellular portion include juxtamembrane sequence , catalytic domain and c - terminal region with multifunctional docking site . c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 15 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) figure 3 . HgF - meT signaling pathway with its downstream effector components ( maPK , sTaT , Pi3K - aKT cascades and nF - κ B ) leading to increases in cell survival , motility and proliferation . where it plays an important role in liver , placenta and muscle formation , as well as development of the nervous system . 11 – 13 After birth , activation of the HGF - MET pathway appears to be involved in epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , 14 as well as hepatic , renal and epidermis regeneration . 11 Further - more , MET signaling is also involved in tumor growth , inva - sion , resistance to therapy , angiogenesis and specially in the generation and maintenance of cancer stem cells ( CSCs ) . 15 – 17 Activation of MET Signaling Pathway Activation of the MET signaling pathway can result from various molecular mechanisms , including germline or somatic mutations , chromosomal rearrangement , MET amplification , increased MET protein expression , increased HGF expres - sion or by alteration of other pathways affecting MET activa - tion . 2 These modifications can be observed in a tissue - specific manner alone or combined in different proportions . 1 The initiation of MET signaling begins with the bind - ing of HGF to the MET receptor at the plasma membrane leading to the stable dimerization of two molecules of MET . Subsequent activation of its intracellular domain is through a process of trans - phosphorylation of the two tyrosine resi - dues in the catalytical regions Y1234 and Y1235 , followed by trans - phosphorylation of two docking tyrosines ( Y1349 and Y1356 ) in the carboxy - terminal site . These two tyrosines form the multifunctional docking site which is unique to members of the MET subfamily and essential for MET signaling . It enables MET to bind to multiple substrates and activate a variety of signaling pathways either through direct interaction with signaling molecules or through adaptors such as growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( Grb2 ) and Grb2 - associated - binding protein 1 ( Gab1 ) . Subsequent activation of differ - ent intracellular signaling pathways ( MAPK , PI3K - AKT cascades , STAT and NF - κ B signaling pathways ) is respon - sible for driving proliferation , cell survival , migration and invasiveness ( Fig . 3 ) . 18 – 22 MAPK signaling pathways . The Mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPK ) s are a group of serine / threonine protein kinases that are activated in response to a variety of extracellular stimuli and mediate signal transduction from the cell surface to the nucleus . They are involved in the regulation of normal cell proliferation , survival and differentiation . 23 These cascades consist of three protein kinases : a MAPK kinase kinase ( MAPKKK ) , a MAPK kinase ( MAPKK ) and a MAPK that are partially controlled by protein phospho - rylation . 20 , 24 The MAPKs represent the final effectors of the cascade . There are several groups of MAPKs in mammalian cells : the Extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERKs ) , the p38MAPKs and the c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinases ( JNKs ) . 7 The ERK pathway is the best studied of the mammalian MAPK pathway , and is deregulated in approximately one - third of all human cancers . 25 The ERKs are mainly triggered by tyrosine kinase - dependent stimulation of RAS . 7 MET activates RAS through the GRB2 – SOS complex which can interact directly with carboxy - terminal multifunctional docking site of MET or can be associated indirectly through the SHC adaptor protein . 18 , 26 Moreover , the tyrosine phos - phatase SHP2 dephosphorylates the binding site on the Garajová et al 16 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) adaptor protein GAB1 ; this will also result in RAS - ERK activation . 27 , 28 In this pathway , ligand - mediated activation of receptor tyrosine kinases triggers guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) loading of the RAS GTPase which can then recruit RAF kinases to the plasma membrane for activation . 25 When RAF translocates to the membrane , it becomes activated which leads to phosphorylation of the dual specificity kinases MEK1 and MEK2 . Finally , the activated MEKs phosphory - late the terminal effectors ERK1 / ERK2 . 7 PI3K – AKT signaling pathway . The PI3K - AKT path - way is highly conserved and its activation is tightly controlled via a multistep process . 29 PI3K can be activated directly by MET and / or indirectly by RAS . 18 In response to the activa - tion of the MET tyrosine kinases domain , the lipid kinase PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) to synthesize the second messenger phosphatidylinosi - tol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - triphosphate ( PIP3 ) . PIP3 recruits AKT to the plasma membrane where it is phosphorylated and activated by phosphoinositide - dependent kinase - 1 ( PDK - 1 ) . Activated AKT subsequently phosphorylates numerous substrates that promote tumor genesis , including the mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) , pro - apoptotic protein BAD , anti - apoptotic protein BCL2 , E3 ubiquitin - protein ligase MDM2 ( which promotes the degradation of the pro - apoptotic pro - tein p53 ) 7 and glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) . These targets interfere with important cell cycle regulators such as myc , cyclin D1 . 7 STAT signaling pathway . The Janus kinase ( JAK ) – signal transducer and activator of transcription ( STAT ) path - way consists of the seven members of the STAT protein family from which STAT3 and STAT5 have been demonstrated to be the most important for cancer progression . 30 – 32 Boccaccio et al found that phosphorylation of the docking site of MET is followed by phosphorylation of STAT3 which causes STATs to dissociate from the receptors . 33 STAT3 is mainly consid - ered to be a direct transcription factor , though many other functions have been described , including gene expression reg - ulation via epigenetic mechanisms , mitochondrion functions regulation , angiogenesis and CSCs regulation . This signaling pathway is able to promote tumor cell proliferation , survival and tumor invasion which highlights its function in cancer . 30 NF - κ b signaling . Nuclear factor - kappaB ( NF - κ B ) is present in almost all cell types and tissues where it regulates gene expression by binding to promoters / enhancers of a host of genes . The NF - κ B family consists of five proteins , p65 ( RelA ) , RelB , c - Rel , p105 / p50 ( NF - κ B1 ) and p100 / 52 ( NF - κ B2 ) that form homo - and heterodimeric complexes by associating with each other to transcriptionally regulate target genes . 34 The NF - κ B system is inactive in the cytoplasm due to the action of the inhibitor of κ B ( I κ B ) . 35 NF - κ B activation generally occurs through either classical or alternative pathways . 34 In the classical pathway , c - MET stimulation activates the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa - B kinase ( IKK ) complex resulting in the phosphorylation of two N - terminal serine residues of I κ B proteins leading to ubiquitin - mediated degradation of I κ B and NF - κ B activation . In the alternative pathway , IKK α is phos - phorylated by NF - κ B inducing kinase , which phosphory lates p100 leading to polyubiquitination and degradation of the inhibitory molecules by the proteasome . The result of both pathways is the destruction of I κ Bs which unmask the nucleus localization signal ( NLS ) resulting in the release of NF - κ B . NF - κ B translocates to the nucleus and transactivates target genes by binding to gene promoter / enhancer regions . 21 , 22 , 36 , 37 In conclusion , the final output of the terminal effector components of these pathways is the activation of cytoplasmic and nuclear processes leading to increases in cell proliferation , survival , mobilization and invasive capabilities . HGF and MET Dysregulation in cancer In human malignancies , genetic alterations of the MET proto - oncogene are relatively rare . In a recent study MET amplifi - cation was detected in 2 . 5 % of 1 , 115 patients with advanced solid cancers . The prevalence was highest in renal cell ( RCC , 14 % ) followed by adrenocortical tumors ( 15 % ) , gastroesopha - geal ( 6 % ) , breast ( 5 % ) and ovarian cancers ( 4 % ) . 38 Generally , in genetically altered MET tumors , MET oncogene behaves as a cell - autonomous selectable driver of tumor growth . 17 The role of MET in tumors is not only restricted to relatively rare genetic alterations but relies on the frequent overexpression of the wild - type gene . 4 , 7 , 39 In the CSCs , the wild - type form of MET helps to maintain the phenotype ‘inherent’ in the stem / progenitor cell of origin . 17 Indeed , activation of the HGF - MET pathway is cur - rently associated with aggressive pathologic features , poor prognosis , and treatment resistance in several different tumor types . 38 , 40 , 41 Lorenzato et al noted that activating somatic MET mutations were infrequent in primary tumors but com - monly present at metastatic sites , suggesting that MET muta - tions are associated with progres sion rather than initiation of tumorigenesis . 42 Cancers of unknown origin ( CUPs ) are characterized by upfront metastatic dissemination , a highly undifferentiated , stem - like phenotype and lacking histological markers of the tissue of origin . 43 Interestingly , in these tumors MET activating mutations are present more frequently ( 30 % ) in comparison to other solid tumors . 43 A more aggressive bio - logic behavior of tumors overexpressing MET is also reflected in the inferior survival outcomes found in some studies , 40 , 41 however , there are some contradictory results on this issue . 44 The frequency of MET dysregulation is higher in adenocarci - nomas compared to squamous cell tumors . In gastro esopha - geal tumors , MET amplification has been reported in only 1 % of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma , whereas it ranges from 2 % to 10 % in adenocarcinomas . 41 , 45 , 46 Moreover , some interesting association of MET dysregulation and BRAF mutation or PTEN loss have been described . 47 Finally , MET overexpression has been associated with treatment resistance in radiotherapy , anti - EGFR TKI , VEGFR / BRAF / mTOR inhibitors and anti - HER2 therapy . 48 – 51 c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 17 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) In summary , alterations in MET and / or HGF are frequently observed in a wide range of cancers and their pres - ence appears to confer an increased propensity for a more aggressive clinical behavior manifested by invasion , metastasis and resistance to the therapy . However , it is possible , that in some specific histological types and in the presence of some molecular aberrations , there is no correlation between MET overexpression and survival outcome . HGF and MET Inhibitors for cancer Therapy RTK pathways have proven to be attractive drug targets allowing the development of novel treatment strategies . One such promising target is the HGF - MET pathway . The HGF and MET targeting agents can be categorized into those that target the HGF ligand or those that target the MET receptor . Agents targeting the ligand can further be categorized into either HGF activation inhibitors ( preventing the cleavage of pro - HGF into the active form ) or HGF inhibitors ( blocking the direct binding of HGF to the MET receptor ) . 4 Agents targeting the MET receptor can further be categorized into either MET antagonists ( binding the receptor ) or MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( TKIs ) targeting MET intracellu - larly 4 ( Fig . 4 , Table 1 ) . HGF and MET - targeting agents can be classified as either monoclonal antibodies or small molecules and they differ in terms of pharmacological properties as well as their underlying mechanism of action . They can be used either as a monotherapy , in combination with chemotherapy or in com - bination with other targeted therapy . 15 Most of the HGF and MET inhibitors showed promising results when used in drug combinations , most likely due to the complexity of tumor biology . Regarding side effects , HGF and MET inhibitors have demonstrated few adverse effects when administered to patients and any combination treatment has been well tolerated . The most frequent adverse events seen in clinical trials included fatigue , anorexia , nausea , vomiting , fever , hypersensitivity reactions , peripheral edema , proteinuria , hematuria , hypertension and bleeding . 1 , 15 Inhibition of HGF activation . The activation of HGF from its inactive precursor pro - HGF is a critical step in HGF function 52 and depends on the balance between the activators ( HGFAs ) and the inhibitors ( HAIs ) . 53 , 54 Hu et al . 55 inves - tigated the role of HAI - 1 in patients with prostate cancer and benign prostate hyperplasia . It was observed that a high level of HAI - 1 protein and mRNA expression was present in patients affected by benign disease compared to the more aggressive prostate cancer specimens . Low HAI - 1 correlated with a high Gleason score , a more advanced pathological stage and was a predictor for poor prognosis . Therefore , high HAI - 1 might be used as a favorable prognostic marker for pros - tate cancer and a therapeutic target for the treatment of this malignancy . 55 In another study , Tsai et al . 56 investigated the role of HAI - 2 in human prostate cancer progression . In this study , a human prostate cancer progression model consisting of cancer cells with increasing invasion capability was used , as well as xenograft models . The expression of HAI - 2 decreased throughout the progression in cell invasion capability , and was accompanied by an increased activation of matriptase , an extracellular matrix ( ECM ) - modulating protease which con - tributed to tumor genesis and metastasis . 56 Therefore , HAI - 1 and HAI - 2 might represent novel prognostic markers as well as therapeutic targets . The development of HAIs in cancer is still in the early stages and up to date , no available clinically tested HAIs are available . Inhibition of HGF binding to the MET receptor . HGF inhibitors bind to HGF and block binding to the MET receptor , effecting downstream activation of the pathway . Several monoclonal antibodies against HGF have been tested figure 4 . Therapeutic strategies targeting the HgF - meT signaling pathway in cancer include HgF activation inhibitors , HgF inhibitors , meT antagonists and meT kinase inhibitors . Garajová et al 18 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) preclinically , such as rilotumumab , ficlatuzumab and TAK701 . Rilotumumab is a fully humanized IgG2 monoclonal anti - body . 57 Preclinical data showed synergistic cyto toxicity when acting in combination with temozolomide and docetaxel . 58 , 59 The efficacy of rilotumumab was evaluated in a phase 2 study in patients affected by gastric or oesophagogastric junction tumors . The patients were randomized to receive rilotumumab plus capecitabine or placebo plus capecitabine . Interestingly , improved median progression - free survival ( PFS ) and over - all survival ( OS ) in patients treated with rilotumumab plus capecitabine was seen only among the patients with MET overexpression 60 which underlines the growing importance of stratifying the patients for target treatment . Ficlatuzumab is a humanized anti - HGF IgG1 monoclonal antibody that was evaluated in a phase I study in solid tumors as a single agent or in combination with erlotinib . 61 TAK701 is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against HGF . 62 Okamoto et al described that the addition of TAK - 701 to gefitinib treatment is a promising strategy to overcome EGFR TKI resistance induced by HGF in non - small - cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) with an activating EGFR mutation . 63 MET antagonists . MET antagonists compete with HGF for MET binding , resulting in the degradation of MET and subsequent inactivation . 1 Several MET antagonists have been synthesized , including onartuzumab , CE - 355621 , DN - 30 , and LA480 . Sano et al . 64 engineered the human NSCLC cell line PC - 9 , resulting in variants with MET / HGF overexpression and EGFR mutations ( exon 19 ) . The combination of onartu - zumab and erlotinib was tested in vitro and in vivo in xeno - graft models . A PC - 9 cell line with HGF overexpression was less sensitive to erlotinib than the parental PC - 9 cell line without HGF overexpression ; the addition of onartuzumab to erlotinib suppressed the proliferation of parental cells in vitro . In PC - 9 / HGF xenograft tumors , onartuzumab or erlotinib alone minimally inhibited tumor growth ; however , combining onartuzumab and erlotinib markedly increased tumor sup - pression . The authors concluded that patients with NSCLC with EGFR mutations who express high levels of HGF may benefit from onartuzumab and erlotinib combination therapy while HGF expression could be a potential novel biomarker for patient selection . 64 In clinical practice , onartuzumab showed significant survival benefits in combination with erlotinib in NSCLC patients with MET overexpression in a randomized phase II study . 65 MET kinase inhibitors . Another approach for inhib - iting the MET pathway is through MET kinase inhibitors which target intracellular MET . Several small molecule MET kinase inhibitors have entered clinical development over the past decade , including selective MET kinase inhibitors , such as tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) , savolitinib ( AZD6094 , HMPL - 504 ; volitinib ) , AMG 337 , INC 280 and nonselective MET kinase inhibitors ( crizotinib ( PF02341066 ) , cabozantinib ( XL 184 ) and foretinib . Tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) is a selective , oral , small molecule inhibitor of the MET RTK . 66 It has demonstrated antitu - mor activity in a wide range of human tumor cell lines and in human xenograft models . 66 , 67 Recently , a phase I study investi - gating the combination of tivantinib and sorafenib in patients with advanced solid tumors has been published . 67 Preliminary evidence of anticancer activity was observed in patients with renal cancer , hepatocellular cancer and melanoma , includ - ing patients refractory to sorafenib and / or other anti - VEGF pathway therapies . Therefore this combination treatment was Table 1 . Drugs targeting HgF - meT signaling pathway . dRug MoleCulaR TaRgeTS hgf activation inhibitors HgFas ( activators ) Pro - HgF Hais ( inhibitors ) Pro - HgF hgf inhibitors rilotumumab ( amg102 ) HgF Ficlatuzumab ( aV - 299 ) HgF TaK701 HgF MeT antagonists onartuzumab meT ce - 355621 meT Dn - 30 meT la480 meT MeT kinase inhibitors selective Tivantinib meT savolitinib meT amg 337 meT inc 280 meT nonselective crizotinib meT , alK , ros , ron cabozantinib meT , VegFr2 , KiT , reT , aXl , FlT3 c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 19 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) considered to have therapeutic potential treatment a variety of solid tumors . The combination of tivantinib plus erlotinib has been investigated in a phase 3 trial for the treatment of patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC 68 and in a phase 2 trial of tivantinib as a single agent for the treatment of hepato cellular carcinoma . 69 The combination treatment in NSCLC patients did not show statistically significant dif - ferences in OS between the arm of tivantinib plus erlotinib compared to the erlotinib alone arm , 68 although a significant improvement in PFS was observed in the group of patients with KRAS - mutant tumors ( P = 0 . 006 ) . Similarly , in HCC patients , a significant improvement in OS was observed in patients with high tumor MET expression . 69 Savolitinib ( AZD6094 , HMPL - 504 ) is a novel , selective MET inhibitor . 70 In preclinical studies , savolitinib displayed nanomolar in vitro activity against MET and its downstream signaling targets . In vivo , savolitinib induced antitumor activity , particularly in tumor models with high MET gene amplification , including papillary renal cell carcinoma xeno - grafts . 71 In an early clinical dose escalation study , savolitinib demonstrated partial responses in 3 papillary renal cell cancer patients , with a fourth patient still on study reaching 27 % tumor reduction . Analysis of pre - treatment tumor samples showed that the responders had either a high MET gene copy number or a high MET protein expression . 72 Crizotinib is a small molecule inhibitor of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) with additional activity against the MET , ROS , and RON receptors . Crizotinib was approved for use in ALK - rearranged advanced NSCLC in Europe and US . 73 – 75 The efficacy of crizotinib has been demonstrated in two randomized trials limited to patients whose tumors had the ALK rearrangement . The first study is a phase 3 trial which randomly assigned 347 pre - treated patients ( all one prior plat - inum - based chemotherapy regimen ) to either crizotinib or single agent pemetrexed or docetaxel . 76 In this study , PFS , the primary endpoint of the trial was significantly increased with crizotinib compared to traditional chemotherapy ( median 7 . 7 versus 3 months ) , the objective response rate ( ORR ) was also significantly increased ( 65 versus 20 percent ) . Responses were achieved more rapidly than with chemotherapy ( median time to response 6 . 3 versus 12 . 6 weeks ) and were of longer dura - tion ( 32 versus 24 weeks ) . In this study , no significant differ - ence was observed in OS ( median 20 . 3 versus 22 . 8 months ) . The absence of an OS bene fit presumably reflects subsequent treatment since 64 percent of chemotherapy - treated patients had crossed over to crizotinib after progressing on chemo - therapy . The second study is a phase 2 trial which randomly assigned 343 chemotherapy naïve patients to crizotinib or chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus either cisplatin or car - boplatin . 77 PFS , the primary endpoint of the trial , was pro - longed with crizotinib compared to chemotherapy ( median 10 . 9 versus 7 months , HR 0 . 45 , 95 % CI 0 . 35 – 0 . 60 ) . The ORR was also increased ( 74 versus 45 percent ) , although again OS was not significantly different . However , a recently published meta - analysis of six clinical trials revealed extended survival and improved response rates in NSCLC patients treated with crizotinib . 75 The ORR , partial response and complete response rates were 61 . 2 % , 59 . 8 % and 1 . 5 % , respectively . The propor - tion of patients achieving stable disease was 42 . 6 % . 78 Cabozantinib is a small molecule inhibitor of MET , VEGFR2 , KIT and RET followed by AXL and FLT3 79 and is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of progressive , metastatic medullary thyroid cancer . In a randomized trial , 330 patients with progressive , metastatic or unresectable locally advanced medullary thyroid cancer were randomly assigned to receive either cabozantinib or placebo . 80 A significant prolongation in PFS was observed for cabozantinib treatment compared to placebo ( 11 . 2 versus 4 . 0 months ) . Partial responses were observed in 28 versus 0 percent . Currently , multiple phase 3 trials in a variety of solid tumors are undergoing . Targeting HGF - MET in Solid Tumors to overcome the Drug resistance In addition to its role as an oncogenic driver , increasing evi - dence implicates MET as a common mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies including approved EGFR and VEGFR inhibitors . 48 , 49 Moreover , MET is involved in resistance to anti - HER2 therapies ( trastuzumab and lapatinib ) 51 , 81 and a BRAF inhibitor ( vemurafenib ) 82 has been described . In the following paragraphs , we describe how targeting of the HGF - MET signaling pathway can overcome the drug resistance in NSCLC , RCC and pancreatic cancer ( PDAC ) and we sum - marize clinical studies ( Table 2 ) . The expression of MET and HGF is high in these tumors : in NSCLC 40 % and 50 % , in RCC 70 % and 60 % and in PDAC . 70 % and . 35 % . 83 Targeting HGF - MET in NScLc to overcome drug resistance . Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer - related death for both men and women worldwide . The most preva - lent mutated or rearranged oncogenes identified in NSCLC are KRAS , epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and ALK . This knowledge has been translated into clinical prac - tice with the introduction of targeted therapies that have led to the improvement of NSCLC patients’ outcome : EGFR TKIs ( erlotinib , gefitinib ) for NSCLC patients harboring activat - ing mutations in the EGFR TK domain and crizotinib for NSCLC patients carrying ALK translocations . 84 – 86 Nevertheless , many patients acquire resistance to anti - EGFR therapy after 6 – 12 months . 87 Acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs can occur as a result of secondary EGFR muta - tions or parallel activation of downstream signaling pathways , including MET . Approximately 5 % – 22 % of NSCLC patients with secondary resistance to EGFR TKIs had evidence of amplification of the MET oncogene . 88 , 89 Functional crosstalk of MET with EGFR has been reported in lung and colorectal cancer 85 , 87 and has emerged as a major mechanism for cancer progression as well as resist ance to anti - EGFR targeted therapy ( see Fig . 5 ) . The therapy of Garajová et al 20 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) lung cancer with EGFR TKI leads to MET amplification which subsequently activates PI3K – AKT signaling . 88 , 89 In this way , MET signaling can compensate for EGFR inhi - bition . The resistance can be prevented by combined inhibi - tion of EGFR and MET , as has been shown in human lung tumor xenografts . 90 , 91 Conversely , the treatment of tumor cells with MET TKIs may lead to the selection of tumor cell populations that escape growth inhibition via the EGFR or SRC kinases . 92 Several MET inhibitors have been tested in combination with EGFR inhibitors . However , no difference in OS was observed with the combination of either tivantinib with erlo - tinib , 68 or onartuzumab with erlotinib . 65 When analyzing the subgroups of the patients , a significant improvement in PFS was observed in the group of patients with KRAS - mutant tumors ( P = 0 . 006 ) treated with tivantinib and erlotinib . Similarly , subgroup analysis of NSCLC patients revealed that tumors which overexpressed MET , the combination of onartuzumab figure 5 . Functional crosstalk of HgF - meT signaling pathway with egFr and VegFr signaling pathway . notes : The anticancer treatment with EGFR antibodies ( cetuximab , panitumumab ) or EGFR TKIs ( gefitinib , erlotinib ) leads to MET amplification with subsequent activation of Pi3K - aKT signaling . The resistance can be prevented by dual inhibition of egFr and meT . similarly , meT - HgF signaling pathway activation help evade VegFr inhibition induced by bevacizumab , sunitinib or pazopanib and dual inhibition with VegFr and meT inhibitor might overcome the resistance to anticancer treatment . Table 2 . The frequency of the most common meT alterations in selected human cancers . CanCeR PoInT MuTaTIonS gene aMPlIfICaTIon / hIgh CoPY nuMBeR Ref . nSClC 4 % 2 – 21 % 188 – 191 Kidney 100 % hereditary prcc 46 % type ii prcc , 81 % type i prcc 192 13 % – 21 . 6 % sporadic prcc gastric na 16 – 30 % 162 hCC 0 % 4 – 5 % 193 CRC na 10 % 194 , 195 head and neck 3 – 9 % na 196 c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 21 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) plus erlotinib was associated with a significant improvement in both PFS and OS ( P = 0 . 04 and 0 . 002 , respectively ) . Another type of MET - targeted therapy available in clinical practice is crizotinib , the first clinically available ALK inhibitor for ALK - rearranged NSCLC in the world . 93 , 94 This drug was initially designed as a MET inhibitor and indeed , Ou and colleagues showed that patients with NSCLC with MET amplification , but without ALK rearrangement , experienced a rapid and durable response to crizotinib . This demonstrated its therapeutic role also as a MET inhibi - tor . 95 Kogita et al investigated the role of the MET signal in ALK - positive NSCLC demonstrating that HGF medi - ated resistance to alectinib ( selective ALK inhibitor ) , but not to crizotinib . 96 It was observed that alectinib activated the MET signal even in the absence of HGF and that the inhibi - tion of the MET signal enhanced the efficacy of alectinib . 96 Moreover , MET expression was significantly increased in ALK - rearranged NSCLC . 97 Crizotinib showed remarkable responses in NSCLC patients harboring CD74 - ROS1 rearrangement ; however , crizotinib resistance eventually developed due to acquired mutations such as G2032R in ROS1 . As the result of high - throughput drug screening , the authors found that the cabozantinib effectively inhibited the survival of CD74 - ROS1 - mutant Ba / F3 cells and crizotinib - resistant patient - derived cancer cells ( MGH047 ) harboring G2032R - mutated CD74 - ROS1 . Cabozantinib was therefore identified as a potential therapeutic strategy to overcome this form of resis - tance to crizotinib . 98 , 99 Actually , several clinical trials targeting HGF - MET signaling in NSCLC are ongoing , using several different monotherapy drugs targeting HGF - MET , such as cabozan - tinib ( NCT01639508 ) or PF - 02341066 ( NCT00585195 ) and combinations with EGFR TKI ( gefitinib , erlotinib ) ( NCT01610336 , NCT01911507 , NCT01982955 , NCT01822496 , NCT01887886 ) , nivolumab ( NCT02323126 ) or peme - tre xed ( NCT02134912 ) . Therefore , in conclusion , HGF - MET signaling plays an important role in acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs in NSCLC and studies demonstrated that combined inhibi - tion of EGFR and MET can overcome resistance to EGFR inhibitors . Therefore , it seems reasonable to prefer combina - tion therapies that target both signalling pathways that are primarily responsible for the cancer phenotype . In this way , the rescue pathways are targeted simultaneously . Targeting HGF - MET in renal cancer carcinoma to overcome the drug resistance . RCC is the third most fre - quent cancer originating from the genitourinary organs . 100 It originates from either the proximal tubule of the kidney or the collecting duct and is classified into four major histo - logical types : clear cell ( ccRCC , 75 – 85 % of tumors ) , papillary ( pRCC , 10 – 15 % of tumors ) , chromophobe ( 5 – 10 % ) , and col - lecting duct tumor ( rare ) . pRCC can be further divided into two morphological subtypes ; type 1 consists of predominantly basophilic cells and type 2 of mostly eosinophilic cells . In general , metastatic pRCC has a worse prognosis than ccRCC . 98 Moreover , type I and type 2 of pRCC have different clinical features . Type I is characterized by an indolent clinical course , and type II by a more aggressive clinical behavior . 101 In ccRCC tumors , mutations or functional inactivation of the von Hippel - Lindau ( VHL ) gene occur in the major - ity of cases , resulting in the loss of function or reduced levels of the VHL protein . 102 The subsequent transcriptional hyper - activation of HIF - targeted genes , such as VEGF , PDGF , TGFa , HGF , MET drives tumor progression and hyper - vascularization . 103 , 104 Albiges and colleagues 105 reported that MET expression was higher in pRCC than in ccRCC , and higher in type I pRCC compared to type II pRCC . In pRCC , several activating missense mutations of the MET gene have been described , both in sporadic and hereditary forms . 106 The trisomy of chromosome 7 , in which MET is located , has been seen to be a common occurrence in pRCC . 107 Currently , first - line treatment of patients affected by RCC include several anti - VEGF agents ( sunitinib , pazopanib and bevacizumab ) and an mTOR inhibitor ( temsirolimus ) . 108 VEGF - targeted therapies have a survival benefit in RCC patients , but fail to produce enduring clinical responses in most patients . Inevitably , the disease progresses following a transient 9 – 11 month period of clinical benefit . 108 It is now well established that crosstalk between the MET and VEGFR pathways supports tumor vascularization and progression but is also implicated in the resistance to anti - VEGFR therapies ( Fig . 5 ) . Gene expression studies comparing primary glioblas - toma to bevacizumab - treated tumors revealed MET as one of the most upregulated genes . 109 Thus , MET activation is impli - cated in the upregulation of alternate pathways that help evade VEGFR inhibition . 110 , 111 Recently , Ciamporcero et al . 103 evaluated the effects of either monotherapy or combination strategy targeting the VEGF ( axitinib ) and MET pathways ( crizotinib ) in ccRCC models ( SCID mice ) . The authors tested these drugs in a human ccRCC patient – derived xenograft , in both sunitinib - sensitive and - resistant models . The combination therapy increased the antitumor effect of both drugs , independently from MET expression . It was concluded that , clinical test - ing of a combined VEGF and HGF - MET pathway block - ade could improve the outcome of patients affected by RCC . Similarly , Shojaei et al . 49 observed increased HGF expression in mouse models resistant to sunitinib . The addition of a MET inhibitor was able to overcome sunitinib resistance . 49 Choueiri and colleagues 112 conducted a phase II clinical trial to investi - gate the role of foretinib , a dual inhibitor of MET and VEGF in pRCC . Interestingly , pRCC harboring the germline MET mutations were highly predictive of foretinib response , with 50 % of patients with mutations having an objective response compared with 9 % of patients without mutations . 112 Another MET inhibitor , savolitinib , is currently in clinical develop - ment for various indications , including pRCC . 72 , 113 In a recent Garajová et al 22 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) study pharmacodynamic and antitumor activity of savolitinib were tested using a dose response up to 25 mg / kg daily , representing clinically achievable exposures and com parable with the activity of sunitinib or crizotinib . 71 Savolitinib treat - ment resulted in tumor regressions , whereas sunitinib or crizotinib resulted in unsustained growth inhibition . Evalu - ation of the pharmacodynamic effects of savolitinib showed that this drug can suppress the MET signalling pathway and the duration of target inhibition is dose related . Interestingly , continuous dosing of savolitinib for approximately 5 weeks showed antitumor activities with no signs of developing resis - tance , in contrast to sunitinib , 114 which suggested that savoli - tinib could be of therapeutic potential in sunitinib - resistant pRCC patients . 71 Temsirolimus is an mTOR inhibitor and is used in RCC patients with poor prognosis . 108 mTOR , a serine / threonine kinase , is a downstream target of the PI3K and AKT pathways , similar to EGFR , MET and VEGF . It plays a critical role in cell survival and proliferation . 115 , 116 Ishikawa et al . 115 demon - strated that mTOR inhibitors ( temsirolimus and everolimus ) can overcome HGF - dependent resistance to EGFR - TKIs in EGFR mutant lung cancer cells . Moreover suppression of tumor angiogenesis has been observed . 115 Actually , several clinical trials targeting HGF - MET in RCC are ongoing , both as a monotherapy ( crizotinib in NCT01524926 , AZD6094 in NCT02127710 , INC280 in NCT02019693 ) or in combination therapy ( axitinib and crizotinib in NCT01999972 ) . Targeting the MET and VEGFR pathways simultane - ously represents a promising approach for RCC treatment since this will target multiple pathways involved in angiogen - esis , tumor survival and metastasis . Targeting HGF - MET in pancreatic ductal adenocar - cinoma to overcome the drug resistance . PDAC is a highly aggressive malignancy and fourth leading cause of cancer - related death in developed countries . 117 The median survival after diagnosis is 2 – 8 months and only 3 – 6 % of all patients with PDAC survive 5 years after diagnosis . Surgical resec - tion remains the cornerstone of management of PDAC , but this is only feasible for a limited number of patients . The aver - age survival of successfully resected patients is between 12 to 20 months , with a high probability of relapse . Since symp - toms are not very clear in early stages , 80 % of PDACs are diagnosed when already advanced , and no curative therapy is currently available . 117 Chemotherapy prolongs life by only a few months , and PDAC chemoresistance renders most drugs ineffective . Nowadays , there are three different therapeutic options for PDAC in the metastatic setting , gemcitabine as monotherapy , gemcitabine in combinations with nab - paclitaxel or the combination of 5 - FU , leucovorin , irinotecan , and oxaliplatin ( FOLFIRINOX ) . 117 – 118 MET overexpression was significantly associated with TNM stage and lymph node invasion , poor tumor differentia - tion , increased abnormal angiogenesis and poor OS of PDAC patients . 119 – 121 There are different mechanisms by which MET overexpression confers chemoresistance in PDAC . MET has been identified as a marker of pancreatic CSCs which have been associated with PDAC aggressiveness , metastatic behav - ior and intrinsic resistance to chemotherapy . 122 Another mech - anism involves the mesenchymal support network . Stroma is the predominant source of HGF , suggesting MET activation is , at least in part , a result of paracrine signaling . 123 Interest - ingly , HGF has been shown to not only increase VEGF pro - duction by stromal cells , but also to act synergistically with VEGF to induce endothelial cell tube formation and prolifer - ation . 124 Inhibition of HGF could therefore represent a poten - tially useful antiangiogenic approach in PDAC . Additionally , preclinical studies have demonstrated that overexpression of MET has also been associated with EMT - like changes in acquired - gemcitabine - resistant PDAC cells . 125 Avan et al . 126 showed the ability of crizotinib to spe - cifically target CSC - like - subpopulations , interfere with cell - proliferation , induce apoptosis , reduce migration and syn - ergistically interact with gemcitabine , supporting further stud - ies on this novel therapeutic approach for PDAC . Moreover , the same group showed that crizotinib decreased tumor dimension , prolonged survival , promoted gemcitabine uptake but reduced gemcitabine catabolism . These effects were mediated by an increased activity of the human equilibrative and concentrative nucleoside transporters ( hENT1 and hCNT1 ) , and a decreased cytidine deaminase ( CDA ) . The synergism of gemcitabine and crizotinib in an orthotopic mouse model of primary PDAC warrants clinical evaluation for PDAC treatment . 127 Also cabozantinib enhanced the effect of gemcitabine in a human pancreatic cancer model growing orthotopically in NOD SCID mice . Alone and in combination the tumor growth was inhibited and the population of CSCs was decreased . 119 Hage et al . 128 demonstrated that cabozantinib altered the expression of apoptosis molecules and shifted the balance to antiapoptotic signaling . In parallel , cabozantinib inhibited SOX2 , MET and CD133 expression in addition to the self - renewal potential . Most importantly , cabozantinib increased efficacy of gemcit - abine even in high - gemcitabine - resistant PDAC , suggesting that cabozantinib can overcome gemcitabine resistance . Several clinical trials in advanced cancers , includ - ing PDAC are currently ongoing including combinations with crizotinib ( dasatinib , pazopanib / pemetrexed , vemu - rafenib , axitinib ) or the combination cabozantinib and gem - citabine ( NCT01744652 , NCT01548144 , NCT01531361 , NCT01999972 , NCT01663272 ) . Targeting HGF - MET in other tumors . Aberrant MET signaling is a hallmark of multiple cancer types . For metastatic medullary thyroid cancer , cabozantinib is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration . 129 The MET pathway is frequently aberrantly activated in colorectal cancer , esophagogastric cancer , hepatocellular carcinoma , prostate cancer , sarcomas and several studies have shown promis - ing activity of HGF - MET targeting drugs in these tumor c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 23 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) types . 130 – 138 Moreover , targeting the HGF - MET axis opens new therapeutic possibilities for liquid cancers . For example , HGF expression is critical in acute myeloid leukemia ( AML ) pathogenesis . Kentsis et al . 139 demonstrated that leukemic cells treated with crizotinib can develop resistance due to compensatory upregulation of HGF expression , leading to restoration of HGF signaling . In cases of AML where MET is coactivated with other tyrosine kinases , such as fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 ( FGFR1 ) , concomitant inhibition of FGFR1 and MET blocked compensatory HGF upregulation resulting in sustained logarithmic cell kill both in vitro and in vivo xenograft models in vivo . 139 biomarkers for MET Inhibitors In the era of personalized therapy with more frequent use of targeted agents , it is important to identify biomarkers which can predict response to a specific class of agents , including MET inhibitors . A number of predictive biomarkers to HGF - MET inhibitors are currently being evaluated , such as circu - lating HGF and MET , MET protein overexpression , MET gene amplification and mutation . However , none of them has been validated yet . circulating HGF and MET . Treatment with HGF inhibitors ( ficlatuzumab and rilotumumab ) can result in an increase in plasma total HGF and soluble MET concentra - tions from baseline , but no association with clinical outcomes was demonstrated . 140 – 144 In another clinical trial , adminis - tration of the MET antagonist onartuzumab resulted in an increase in HGF , but this elevation was independent of dose , drug exposure , dose duration or tumor type . In addition , the evaluation of the relationship between changes in HGF levels and clinical outcomes in MET - positive patients was inconclu - sive . 145 In contrast , MET kinase inhibitors ( tivantinib ) did not show obvious changes in HGF in phase I clinical studies . 146 MET protein overexpression . Currently , high MET protein expression levels in tumor tissues may be associated with poor prognosis in selected cancer types . In a phase 2 trial with patients that had positive MET expression in tumor tis - sues , a longer survival was found in patients who received the HGF inhibitor rilotumumab plus ECX ( epirubicin , cisplatin , capecitabine ) than patients who received ECX alone . 147 How - ever , the results could not be reproduced in the confirmatory phase 3 RILOMET - 1 study 148 and OS were statistically signif - icantly worse with rilotumumab ( P = 0 . 016 ) . Exploratory bio - marker analyses performed on patients with advanced NSCLC receiving the MET antagonist onartuzumab in combination with erlotinib demonstrated an OS benefit in MET - positive patients ( P = 0 . 002 ) . 149 A subgroup analysis suggested that MET expression by IHC was a more sensitive predictor than MET amplification measured by FISH . 149 However , mRNA expression of MET did not predict survival in patients treated with onartuzumab . 149 Furthermore , phosphorylated MET , a marker for MET pathway activation , and serum MET did not appear to be a suitable biomarker for NSCLC . 151 A multicenter Phase II randomized controlled trial , investigated the role of tivantinib in the second - line setting in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma . 152 The patients were randomized 2 : 1 to receive either oral tivantinib in two different drug dosages ( 360 mg twice - daily or 240 mg twice - daily ) or to receive placebo . Better PFS was observed in the tivantinib arm in comparison with the placebo arm ( HR 0 . 45 , P = 0 . 02 ) but no detrimental effect in MET - expression - negative patients wasfound . 152 , 153 A retrospective analysis of patients with NSCLC tumors treated with tivantinib plus erlotinib failed to demonstrate a predictive value for MET protein overexpression . 154 In subgroup analyses , it was shown that MET expression could have predictive potential only in MET - positive patients with nonsquamous histology , suggest - ing that the clinical relevance of MET biomarker for tivan - tinib may vary among tumor types . 155 MET gene amplification and mutation . Amplification of the MET gene locus with overexpression of the receptor on the cell surface is a well - characterized aberrancy as well as MET gene mutations . The latter leads in most cases to a constitutively active form of the molecule . The frequency of these molecular changes differs among tumor types ( see Table 2 ) . In preclinical studies MET amplification predicted sen - sitivity to multiple MET targeted agents including crizotinib ; this was also found in several clinical case reports . 156 – 157 In a subset of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma patients , a high level of MET amplification as measured by FISH , correlated with responsiveness to crizotinib , although this response was transient . 156 A durable response to crizotinib was observed in a NSCLC patient with de novo MET amplification . 157 In a Phase II trial of foretinib in pRCC , germline mutations of MET were predictive of clinical response . 112 Patients carry - ing a MET germline mutation experienced partial response ( 5 / 10 ) or stable disease ( 5 / 10 ) , compared to only 9 % ( 5 / 57 ) of patients with no MET mutations . 112 Moreover , in newly diag - nosed multiple myeloma , patients carrying four MET gene copies ( 9 . 8 % ) had a short PFS . 159 MET phosphorylation / activation . In clinical pre - and post treatment patients’ biopsies , changes in MET phospho - rylation and activation of downstream signaling effectors were observed in response to several anti - MET agents . 160 – 161 Treat - ment with foretinib or tivantinib led to a decrease in the level of MET phosphorylation and activation of ERK and AKT pathways in post treatment biopsies , although it remains unclear whether changes in these markers are predictive of clinical responses . 153 , 162 conclusions . Circulating HGF and MET were evalu - ated as a pharmacodynamic biomarker of MET inhibition in different clinical trials and it seems that their potential as pre - dictive biomarkers to response depends on the type of MET inhibition ( HGF inhibitors , MET antagonists , MET kinase inhibitors ) . To date their predictive value for clinical response has not been shown . MET protein expression levels in tumor Garajová et al 24 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) tissues may be prognostic biomarkers of survival in selected cancer types with specific molecular aberrations . MET gene amplification , copy number , and mutations appear to be rela - tively conservative biomarkers , but they may be associated with rare events in cancer development . Future Directions The HGF - MET axis seems to be one of the most functional signaling pathways involved in tumor genesis , progression and resistance to anticancer treatment . Several studies demonstrated both in vitro and in xeno - grafts that the inhibition of the MET signaling pathway by using selective MET inhibitors correlated with cell growth arrest and apoptosis . Furthermore , the combination strategy resulted in an additive antitumor effect and also restored chemosensitivity in MET - overexpressed resistant cells . Unfor tunately , there is a discrepancy between preclinical and clinical studies , which can often be attributed to inappropri - ate patients’ selection and missing circulating biomarkers . 2 In fact , one of the key challenges in the development of targeted therapeutics is the identification of patients likely to obtain clinical benefit by having potentially sensitive tumors . It is essential to develop biomarker assays that have good specific - ity and sensitivity , and should be included in both early stage and registration - enabled clinical trials to determine their clinical utility . 163 In accordance with Hack et al . 163 , possible biomarker strategies to identify MET - driven tumors might be at the DNA level ( MET gene amplifications / mutations ) , at the RNA level ( MET - RNA overexpression , microRNA associated with response / resistance to therapy ) , or at the pro - tein level ( MET protein overexpression , MET posttransla - tional modifications ie , phosphorylation ) . 163 Molecular heterogeneity exists both between patients and intra - patient . These molecular changes occur throughout the disease process , in response to treatment and as a consequence of resistance to therapy . Protein markers are often used to assess and predict disease progression and drug response , but gene expression markers may provide more reliable results . 163 MicroRNAs may also represent novel markers of MET activity . For example , three candidate microRNAs that are involved in the modulation of MET expression , miR - 449a , miR - 340 , and miR - 409 – 3p are down regulated in NSCLC , aggressive breast cancer cell lines , and bladder cancer cells , respectively . 164 – 165 In breast cancer cell lines , expression of miR - 340 was inversely correlated with MET expression . 166 Hence , the identification of small sets of gene signatures based on mRNA expression profiles may be helpful in predicting drug response . 167 Thus , in future clinical trials emphasis on biomarker identification and development should be prioritized , which will allow a better prediction of response to MET inhibitors . Another challenge in the effective use of HGF / MET - targeted agents for cancer treatment , is the identifica - tion and testing of rational drug combinations . Since solid malignancies are comprised of highly heterogeneous groups of cells , the use of targeted inhibitors may select a malignant clone of cells , which are inherently resistant to blockage of the HGF - MET pathway . Acquired resistance to HGF / MET inhibition in cancer cells can develop by point mutations , by increased amplification of MET or by activation of a com - pensatory signaling pathway which can bypass the effects of targeted agents . Strategies to overcome HGF - MET resistance would involve the targeting of multiple compensatory path - ways simultaneously either by using multitargeted agents such as cabozantinib ( MET , VEGF ) , crizotinib ( MET , ALK ) , or by combining targeted agents such as onartuzumab or ficlatuzumab with erlotinib / gefitinib ( MET / HGF and EGFR inhibitors , respectively ) . Inhibitors of heat shock protein 90 ( HSP90 ) , a mole - cular chaperone to MET , and of other key cellular pro - teins may offer another approach to overcome resistance to MET inhibition . 168 A better understanding of the toxicities associated with HGF - MET pathway inhibition is necessary . Peripheral edema due to an attenuation of HGF - mediated signaling in the vascular endothelium , has been associated in multiple tumor types after treatment with all monoclonal antibod - ies targeting HGF or MET , combined either with various cytotoxic or targeted therapies . 2 This could also explain the increased incidence of venous thromboembolism with HGF / MET inhibition . HGF / MET signaling has been impli - cated in physiological processes such as tissue growth / repair , hematopoesis and glucose metabolism ; therefore it is possible to expect additional toxicity signals such as myelosuppression , mucosal injury , wound healing complications or disturbances in glucose homeostasis . 143 – 144 Another challenging topic includes the potential of gene therapy for c - MET overexpression . As a potential therapeutic strategy to inhibit tumor growth Stabile et al . 169 constructed U6 expression plasmids for delivery of sense or antisense sequences into lung tumor cells . These should target the translation start site of the human c - MET gene . 169 These constructs have been examined both in vitro and an in vivo tumor xenograft model . The c - MET protein was downregulated by 50 – 60 % in two lung cancer cell lines that were transiently transfected with the c - MET antisense versus U6 control . Tumor cells treated with the c - MET antisense construct also showed decreased phosphorylation of c - MET and MAP kinase when exposed to exogenous HGF . The treatment of patient with lung tumors with c - MET antisense versus U5 control plasmid resulted in the downregulation of the c - MET protein expression , a 50 % decrease in tumor growth over a 5 - week treatment period and an increased rate of apoptosis . 169 conclusions c - MET encodes a versatile RTK involved in many physio - logical , and pathological and biological processes . The down - stream effectors activated by HGF - MET signaling pathway c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 25 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) Table 3 . an overview of cancer patients’ clinical outcome after treatment with c - meT inhibitors within clinical studies . TuMoR TYPe PhaSe dRug ReSPonSe RaTe PfS oS Ref . nsclc iii Tivantinib + erlotinib vs . placebo + erlotinib 8 . 4 % vs . 6 . 5 % 2 . 9 mo vs . 2 mo 12 . 9 mo vs . 11 . 2 mo 68 nsclc iii onartuzumab + erlotinib vs . placebo + erlotinib na 2 . 6 mo vs . 2 . 7 mo 6 . 8 mo vs . 9 . 1 mo 65 nsclc iii crizotinib vs . cT ( pemetrexed or docetaxel ) 65 % vs . 20 % 7 . 7 mo vs . 3 mo 20 . 3 mo vs . 22 . 8 mo 90 nsclc iii crizotinib vs . cT ( pemetrexed + cisplatin or carboplatin ) 74 vs . 45 % 10 . 9 mo vs . 7 mo na 94 nsclc ii erlotinib vs . cabozantinib vs . erlotinib + cabozantinib na 1 . 9 mo vs . 3 . 9 mo vs . 4 . 1 mo 4 . 0 mo vs . na vs . na 96 nsclc ii Ficlatuzumab + gefitinib vs . gefitinib 43 % vs . 40 % 5 . 6 mo vs . 4 . 7 mo na 170 rcc ii Foretinib 13 . 5 % 9 . 3 mo na 106 rcc ii rilotumumab 10 mg vs . 20 mg 2 . 5 % vs . 0 % 3 . 7 mo vs . 2 . 0 mo 14 . 9 mo vs . 17 . 6 mo 171 rcc i cabozantinib Pr 28 % , sD 52 % 12 . 9 mo 15 mo 172 rcc iii cabozantinib + rosiglitazone 28 % 14 . 7 mo na 173 solid tumors ( mainly rcc and colorectal cancer ) i savolitinib 3 rcc pts achieved Pr , 1 pt crc achieved Pr na na 72 Prostate cancer iii cabozantinib vs . prednisone 41 % vs . 3 % 5 . 5 mo vs . 2 . 8 mo 11 mo vs . 9 . 8 mo 174 Prostate cancer ii mitoxantrone + prednisone + rilotumumab vs . mitoxantrone + prednisone + placebo 11 % vs . 14 % 3 . 0 mo vs . 2 . 9 mo 12 . 2 mo vs . 11 . 1 mo 175 colorectal cancer i / ii cetuximab + irinotecan + tivantinib vs . cetuximab + irinotecan + placebo 45 % vs . 33 % 8 . 3 mo vs . 7 . 3 mo na 176 colorectal cancer i / ii Panitumumab + rilotumumab vs . panitumumab + ganitumumab vs . panitumumab + placebo 31 % vs . 22 % vs . 21 % 5 . 2 mo vs . 5 . 3 mo vs . 3 . 7 mo na 177 esophagogastric cancer ii epirubicin + cisplatin + xeloda + rilotumumab vs . epirubicin + cisplatin + xeloda + placebo 38 % vs . 24 % 5 . 6 mo vs . 4 . 2 mo 11 . 1 mo vs . 8 . 9 mo 178 gatric cancer ii Forentinib ( intermittent vs . daily cohort ) 0 % vs . 0 % 1 . 7 mo vs . 1 . 8 mo 7 . 4 mo vs . 4 . 3 mo 179 Hepatocellular cancer ii Tivantinib vs . placebo 1 % vs . 0 % 1 . 5 mo vs . 1 . 4 mo 6 . 6 vs . 6 . 2 mo 153 Hepatocellular cancer ii cabozantinib 5 % 4 . 4 mo 15 . 1 mo 180 Hepatocellular cancer i / ii Foretinib 24 % 4 . 2 mo na 181 Uveal melanoma ii cabozantinib na 4 . 8 mo 12 . 6 mo 182 melanoma ii cabozantinib Pr 5 % , sD 57 % 4 . 2 mo na 183 Breast cancer ii cabozantinib Pr 14 % , sD 57 % 4 . 3 mo na 184 Hnscc ii Foretinib na 3 . 65 mo 5 . 59 mo 185 germ cell tumors ii Tivantinib Pr 0 % , sD 20 % 1 . 0 mo 6 . 0 mo 186 glioblastoma ii rilotumumab ( 10 vs . 20 mg / kg ) 0 % vs . 0 % 4 . 1 mo vs . 4 . 3 mo 6 . 5 mo vs . 5 . 4 mo 144 sarcoma ii crizotinib Pr 0 % , sD 58 . 3 % , PD 41 . 7 % 5 . 25 mo na 187 Thyroid cancer iii cabozantinib vs . placebo 28 % vs . 0 % 11 . 2 mo vs . 4 . 0 mo na 188 abbreviations : Hnscc , head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ; mo , months ; na , not available ; nsclc , non small cell lung cancer ; os , overall survival ; PFs , progression free survival ; Pr , partial response ; rcc , renal cancer carcinoma ; sD , stable disease . are involved in cell survival , motility and proliferation . The HGF - MET axis is frequently dysregulated in cancer , espe - cially in advanced or metastatic disease and is responsible for tumor growth , invasion and resistance to anticancer therapy . Clinical trials of MET - targeted drug monotherapy have shown promising results in terms of antitumor efficacy and improvement of clinical outcomes in various tumor types ( Table 3 ) . However , in our opinion , the potential of MET Garajová et al 26 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) Table 4 . meT inhibitors combination therapy to overcome the drug resistance . dRug CanCeR PoSSIBIlITY To oveRCoMe ReSISTanCe To anTICanCeR TReaTMenT Ref . TaRgeTed TheRaPY egfR inhibitors erlotinib nsclc , K - ras mut erlotinib and tivantinib 68 nsclc , meT overexpression erlotinib and onartuzumab 65 nsclc , egFr mut mTor inhibitor 115 Gefitinib nsclc Butein ( dual egFr and meT inhibitor ) 150 nsclc , egFr mut Gefitinib and TAK701 63 cetuximab crc , meT overexpression cetuximab and meT inhibitor 198 Panitumumab crc , meT overexpression Panitumumab and meT inhibitor 198 vegfR inhibitors sunitinib ccrcc axitib and crizotinib 103 prcc savolitinib 71 Foretinib ( dual meT and VegF inhibition ) 112 sorafenib rcc , Hcc , melanoma sorafenib and tivantinib 67 Hcc , meT overexpression Tivantinib 69 anti - heR2 therapies Trastuzumab Breast cancer , Her2 positive Trastuzumab and meT inhibitor 51 lapatinib esophageal squamous cell carcinoma lapatinib and meT inhibitor 81 B - Raf inhibitor Vemurafenib melanoma , B - raF activating mutation V600e Vemurafenib and meT inhibitor 82 Selective alK inhibitors alectinib nsclc with alK rearrangement and meT overexpression crizotinib 93 – 97 non - selective alK inhibitors crizotinib nsclc , g2032r - mutated cD74 - ros1 cabozantinib 98 , 99 CheMoTheRaPY gemcitabine PDac gemcitabine and crizotinib 126 PDac gemcitabine and cabozantinib 127 Capecitabine gastric or oesofagogastric junction , meT overxpression capecitabine and rilotumab 60 Cisplatin Head and neck cancer , meT overexpression cisplatin and meT inhibitor 199 cervical cancer cisplatin and meT inhibitor 200 Taxanes ovarian cancer , meT overexpression Taxane and meT inhibitor 201 RadIoTheRaPY cancer cell lines radiation and meT inhibitor 202 targeted agents might be in combination approaches whereby both molecular drivers and mechanisms of resistance are inhibited ( Table 4 ) . In future , an accurate stratification of patients’ popu - lation and rational mechanism - based treatment combina - tions are critical for success of MET targeted therapy in the clinical practice . Abbreviations ALK : anaplastic lymphoma kinase CDA : cytidine deaminase CUP : cancer of unknown origin Gab1 : Grb2 - associated - binding protein 1 Grb2 : growth factor receptor bound protein 2 HGF : hepatocyte growth factor HL domain : hairpin loop domain IPT1 - 4 domain : four immunoglobulin plexins transcrip - tion domains ccRCC : clear cell renal cancer carcinoma CSCs : cancer stem cells EGFR : epidermal growth factor receptor EMT : epithelial - mesenchymal transition c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 27 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) ERK : extracellular signal - related kinase GSK3 β : glycogen synthase kinase 3 β GTP : guanosine triphosphate HAI : HGF inhibitor HGFA : HGF activator JAK : Janus kinase JNKs : c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinase MAPK : mitogen - activated protein kinase MET : mesenchymal epithelial transition receptor mTOR : mammalian target of rapamycin NF - κ B : nuclear factor kappaB NSCLC : non small cell lung cancer OS : overal survival PDK - 1 : phsphoinositide - dependent - kinase - 1 PDAC : pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma PIP2 : ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate PIP3 : ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - triphosphate PFS : progression - free survival pRCC : papillary cell renal cancer carcinoma PSI domain : plexin , semaphorin and integrin cystein - rich domain RCC : renal cancer carcinoma RTKs : receptor tyrosine kinases SEMA domain : semaphorin domain SF : scatter factor SPH : serine proteases homology domain TKI : tyrosine kinase inhibitor VEGFR : vascular endothelial growth factor Acknowledgment We would like to thank Dr . Richard J Honeywell for the care - ful reading and correction of the manuscript . Author contributions Wrote the first draft of the manuscript : GP , IG . Contrib - uted to the writing of the manuscript : EG , GB . Agree with manuscript results and conclusions : EG , GB . Jointly developed the structure and arguments for the paper : GP , IG . Made critical revisions and approved final version : GP , EG , GB . All authors reviewed and approved of the final manuscript . Short overview of Anticancer Therapy VEGFr inhibitors . Bevacizumab , axitinib , sunitinib , pazopanib . EGFr inhibitors . EGF receptor inhibitors ( cetuximab , panitumumab ) or EGFR TKIs ( erlotinib , gefitinib ) . b - rAF inhibitor . Vemurafenib . Anti - HEr2 therapy . Trastuzumab , lapatinib . mTor inhibitor . Temsirolimus . Gemcitabine . Nucleoside analog used as chemotherapy . Pemetrexed . Folate antimetabolite used as chemotherapy . FoLFIrINoX . Chemotherapy schedule that consist of 5 - fluorouracil , leucovorin , irinotecan and oxaliplatin . rEFErENcES 1 . Peters S , Adjei AA . MET : a promising anticancer therapeutic target . Nat Rev Clin Oncol . 2012 ; 9 ( 6 ) : 314 – 26 . 2 . Maroun CR , Rowlands T . The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : a key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance . Pharmacol Ther . 2014 ; 142 ( 3 ) : 316 – 38 . 3 . Cooper CS , Park M , Blair DG , et al . , Molecular cloning of a new transforming gene from a chemically transformed human cell line . Nature . 1984 ; 311 ( 5981 ) : 29 – 33 . 4 . Gherardi E , Birchmeier W , Birchmeier C , et al . Targeting MET in cancer : rationale and progress . Nat Rev Cancer . 2012 ; 12 ( 2 ) : 89 – 103 . 5 . Peschard P , Fornier TM , Lamorte L , et al . Mutation of the c - Cbl TKB domain binding site on the Met receptor tyrosine kinase converts it into a transforming protein . Mol Cell . 2001 ; 8 ( 5 ) : 995 – 1004 . 6 . Gelsomino F , Rossi G , Tiseo M . MET and Small - Cell Lung Cancer . Cancers ( Basel ) . 2014 ; 6 ( 4 ) : 2100 – 15 . 7 . Trusolino L , Bertotti A , Comoglio PM . MET signalling : principles and func - tions in development , organ regeneration and cancer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2010 ; 11 ( 12 ) : 834 – 48 . 8 . Furlan A , Kherrouche Z , Montagne R , et al . Thirty years of research on met receptor to move a biomarker from bench to bedside . Cancer Res . 2014 ; 74 ( 23 ) : 6737 – 44 . 9 . Basilico C , Arnesano A , Galluzzo M , et al . A high affinity hepatocyte growth factor - binding site in the immunoglobulin - like region of Met . J Biol Chem . 2008 ; 283 ( 30 ) : 21267 – 77 . 10 . Stamos J , Lazarus RA , Yao X , et al . Crystal structure of the HGF beta - chain in complex with the Sema domain of the Met receptor . EMBO J . 2004 ; 23 ( 12 ) : 2325 – 35 . 11 . Parikh RA , Wang P , Beumer JH , et al . The potential roles of hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) - MET pathway inhibitors in cancer treatment . Onco Targets Ther . 2014 ; 7 : 969 – 83 . 12 . Uehara Y , Monowa O , Mori C , et al . Placental defect and embryonic lethality in mice lacking hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor . Nature . 1995 ; 373 ( 6516 ) : 702 – 5 . 13 . Schmidt C , Bladt F , Goedecke S , et al . Scatter factor / hepatocyte growth factor is essential for liver development . Nature . 1995 ; 373 ( 6516 ) : 699 – 702 . 14 . Tsarfaty I , Rong S , resau JH , et al . The Met proto - oncogene mesenchymal to epithelial cell conversion . Science . 1994 ; 263 ( 5143 ) : 98 – 101 . 15 . Zhang Y , Jain RK , Zhu M . Recent Progress and Advances in HGF / MET - Targeted Therapeutic Agents for Cancer Treatment Biomedicines 2015 ; 3 ( 1 ) : 149 – 181 . 16 . Bussolino F , Di Renzo MF , Ziche M , et al . Hepatocyte growth factor is a potent angiogenic factor which stimulates endothelial cell motility and growth . J Cell Biol . 1992 ; 119 ( 3 ) : 629 – 41 . 17 . Boccaccio C , Comoglio PM . MET , a driver of invasive growth and cancer clonal evolution under therapeutic pressure . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2014 ; 31 : 98 – 105 . 18 . Ponzetto C , Bardelli A , Zhen Z , et al . A multifunctional docking site medi - ates signaling and transformation by the hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor receptor family . Cell . 1994 ; 77 ( 2 ) : 261 – 71 . 19 . Furge KA , Zhang YW , Vande Woude GF . Met receptor tyrosine kinase : enhanced signaling through adapter proteins . Oncogene . 2000 ; 19 ( 49 ) : 5582 – 9 . 20 . Johnson GL , Lapadat R . Mitogen - activated protein kinase pathways mediated by ERK , JNK , and p38 protein kinases . Science . 2002 ; 298 ( 5600 ) : 1911 – 2 . 21 . Fan S , Gao M , Meng Q , et al . Role of NF - kappaB signaling in hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor - mediated cell protection . Oncogene . 2005 ; 24 ( 10 ) : 1749 – 66 . 22 . Muller M , Morotti A , Ponzetto C . Activation of NF - kappaB is essential for hepatocyte growth factor - mediated proliferation and tubulogenesis . Mol Cell Biol . 2002 ; 22 ( 4 ) : 1060 – 72 . 23 . Roberts PJ , Der CJ . Targeting the Raf - MEK - ERK mitogen - activated protein kinase cascade for the treatment of cancer . Oncogene . 2007 ; 26 ( 22 ) : 3291 – 310 . 24 . Kesavan K , Lobel - Rice K , Sun W , et al . MEKK2 regulates the coordinate activation of ERK5 and JNK in response to FGF - 2 in fibroblasts . J Cell Physiol . 2004 ; 199 ( 1 ) : 140 – 8 . 25 . Dhillon AS , Hagan S , Rath O , et al . MAP kinase signalling pathways in cancer . Oncogene . 2007 ; 26 ( 22 ) : 3279 – 90 . 26 . Pelicci G , Giordano S , Zhen Z , et al . The motogenic and mitogenic responses to HGF are amplified by the Shc adaptor protein . Oncogene . 1995 ; 10 ( 8 ) : 1631 – 8 . 27 . Maroun CR , Naujokas MA , Holgado - Madruga M , et al . The tyrosine phos - phatase SHP - 2 is required for sustained activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase andepithelial morphogenesis downstream from the met receptor tyrosine kinase . Mol Cell Biol . 2000 ; 20 ( 22 ) : 8513 – 25 . 28 . Montagner A , Yart A , Dance M , et al . A novel role for Gab1 and SHP2 in epider - mal growth factor - induced Ras activation . J Biol Chem . 2005 ; 280 ( 7 ) : 5350 – 60 . 29 . Hemmings BA , Restuccia DF . PI3K - PKB / Akt pathway . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2012 ; 4 ( 9 ) : a011189 . 30 . Yu H , Lee H , Herrmann A , et al . Revisiting STAT3 signalling in cancer : new and unexpected biological functions . Nat Rev Cancer . 2014 ; 14 ( 11 ) : 736 – 46 . 31 . Yu H , Jove R . The STATs of cancer – new molecular targets come of age . Nat Rev Cancer . 2004 ; 4 ( 2 ) : 97 – 105 . 32 . Haura EB , Turkson J , Jove R . Mechanisms of disease : Insights into the emerging role of signal transducers and activators of transcription in cancer . Nat Clin Prat Oncol . 2005 ; 2 ( 6 ) : 315 – 24 . Garajová et al 28 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) 33 . Boccaccio C , Ando M , Tamagnone L , et al . Induction of epithelial tubules by growth factor HGF depends on the STAT pathway . Nature . 1998 ; 391 ( 6664 ) : 285 – 8 . 34 . Mukherjee N , Houston TJ , Cardenas E , et al . To be an ally or an adver - sary in bladder cancer : the NF - κ B story has not unfolded . Carcinogenesis . 2015 ; 36 ( 3 ) : 299 – 306 . 35 . Karin M , Cao Y , Greten FR , et al . NF - kappaB in cancer : from innocent bystander to major culprit . Nat Rev Cancer . 2002 ; 2 ( 4 ) : 301 – 10 . 36 . Proto JD , Tang Y , Lu A , et al . NF - kappaB inhibition reveals a novel role for HGF during skeletal muscle repair . Cell Death Dis . 2015 ; 6 : e1730 . 37 . Wang W , Du Z , Yan J , et al . Mesenchymal stem cells promote liver regenera - tion and prolong survival in small - for - size liver grafts : involvement of C - Jun N - terminal kinase , cyclin D1 , and NF - kappaB . PLoS One . 2014 ; 9 ( 12 ) : e112532 . 38 . Jardim DL , Tang C , Gagliato D , et al . Analysis of 1 , 115 patients tested for MET amplification and therapy response in the MD Anderson Phase I Clinic . Clin Cancer Res . 2014 ; 20 ( 24 ) : 6336 – 45 . 39 . Comoglio PM . , Giordano S , Trusolino L . Drug development of MET inhibi - tors : targeting oncogene addiction and expedience . Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2008 ; 7 ( 6 ) : 504 – 16 . 40 . Lengyel E , Prechtel D , Resau JH , et al . C - Met overexpression in node - positive breast cancer identifies patients with poor clinical outcome independent of Her2 / neu . Int J Cancer . 2005 ; 113 ( 4 ) : 678 – 82 . 41 . Lennerz JK , Kwak EL , Ackerman A , et al . MET amplification identifies a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib . J Clin Oncol . 2011 ; 29 ( 36 ) : 4803 – 10 . 42 . Lorenzato A , Olivero M , Patane S , et al . Novel somatic mutations of the MET oncogene in human carcinoma metastases activating cell motility and invasion . Cancer Res . 2002 ; 62 ( 23 ) : 7025 – 30 . 43 . Stella GM , Benvenuti S , Gramaglia D , et al . MET mutations in cancers of unknown primary origin ( CUPs ) . Hum Mutat . 2011 ; 32 ( 1 ) : 44 – 50 . 44 . Lee SJ , Lee J , Sohn I , et al . A survey of c - MET expression and amplification in 287 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma . Anticancer Res . 2013 ; 33 ( 11 ) : 5179 – 86 . 45 . Kato H , Arao T , Matsumoto K , et al . Gene amplification of EGFR , HER2 , FGFR2 and MET in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma . Int J Oncol . 2013 ; 42 ( 4 ) : 1151 – 8 . 46 . Graziano F , Galluccio N , Lorenzini P , et al . Genetic activation of the MET path - way and prognosis of patients with high - risk , radically resected gastric cancer . J Clin Oncol . 2011 ; 29 ( 36 ) : 4789 – 95 . 47 . Straussman R , Morikawa T , Shee K , et al . Tumour micro - environment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors through HGF secretion . Nature . 2012 ; 487 ( 7408 ) : 500 – 4 . 48 . Engelman JA , Zejnullahu K , Mitsudomi T , et al . MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling . Science . 2007 ; 316 ( 5827 ) : 1039 – 43 . 49 . Shojaei F , Lee JH , Simmons BH , et al . HGF / c - Met acts as an alternative angiogenic pathway in sunitinib - resistant tumors . Cancer Res . 2010 ; 70 ( 24 ) : 10090 – 100 . 50 . Ishikawa D , Takeuchi S , Nakagawa T , et al . mTOR inhibitors control the growth of EGFR mutant lung cancer even after acquiring resistance by HGF . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 ( 5 ) : e62104 . 51 . Minuti G , et al . Increased MET and HGF gene copy numbers are associated with trastuzumab failure in HER2 - positive metastatic breast cancer . Br J Cancer . 2012 ; 107 ( 5 ) : 793 – 9 . 52 . Gak E , Taylor WG , Chan AM , et al . Processing of hepatocyte growth factor to the heterodimeric form is required for biological activity . FEBS Lett . 1992 ; 311 ( 1 ) : 17 – 21 . 53 . Naldini L , Vigna E , Bardelli A , et al . Biological activation of pro - HGF ( hepato - cyte growth factor ) by urokinase is controlled by a stoichiometric reaction . J Biol Chem . 1995 ; 270 ( 2 ) : 603 – 11 . 54 . Parr C , Sanders AJ , Jiang WG . Hepatocyte growth factor activation inhibitors – therapeutic potential in cancer . Anticancer Agents Med Chem . 2010 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 47 – 57 . 55 . Hu C , Jiang N , Wang G , et al . Expression of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor - 1 ( HAI - 1 ) gene in prostate cancer : clinical and biological significance . J BUON . 2014 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 215 – 20 . 56 . Tsai CH , Teng CH , Tu YT , et al . HAI - 2 suppresses the invasive growth and metastasis of prostate cancer through regulation of matriptase . Oncogene . 2014 ; 33 ( 38 ) : 4643 – 52 . 57 . Giordano S . Rilotumumab , a mAb against human hepatocyte growth factor for the treatment of cancer . C urr Opin Mol Ther . 2009 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 448 – 55 . 58 . Buchanan IM , Scott T , Tandle AT , et al . Radiosensitization of glioma cells by modulation of Met signalling with the hepatocyte growth factor neutralizing antibody , AMG102 . J Cell Mol Med . 2011 ; 15 ( 9 ) : 1999 – 2006 . 59 . Jun HT , Sun J , Rex K , et al . AMG 102 , a fully human anti - hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor neutralizing antibody , enhances the efficacy of temozolomide or docetaxel in U - 87 MG cells and xenografts . Clin Cancer Res . 2007 ; 13 ( 22 Pt 1 ) : 6735 – 42 . 60 . Zhu M , Tang R , Doshi S , et al . Exposure - response analysis of rilotumumab in gas - tric cancer : the role of tumour MET expression . Br J Cancer . 2015 ; 112 ( 3 ) : 429 – 37 . 61 . Patnaik A , Weiss GJ , Papadopoulos K . et al . Phase I study of SCH 900105 ( SC ) , an anti - hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) monoclonal antibody ( MAb ) , as a sin - gle agent and in combination with erlotinib ( E ) in patients ( pts ) with advanced solid tumors . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) 2010 ; 28 ( 15 ) : 2525 . 62 . Hori A . et al . Monotherapeutic and combination antitumor activities of TAK701 , a humanized anti - hepatocyte growth factor neutralizing antibody , against multiple types of cancer . Proceedings of the American Association of Cancer Res . 2009 ; 1244 . 63 . Okamoto W , Okamoto I , Tanaka K , et al . TAK - 701 , a humanized monoclonal antibody to hepatocyte growth factor , reverses gefitinib resistance induced by tumor - derived HGF in non - small cell lung cancer with an EGFR mutation . Mol Cancer Ther . 2010 ; 9 ( 10 ) : 2785 – 92 . 64 . Sano Y , Hashimoto E , Nakatani N , et al . Combining onartuzumab with erlo - tinib inhibits growth of non - small cell lung cancer with activating EGFR muta - tions and HGF overexpression . Mol Cancer Ther . 2015 ; 14 ( 2 ) : 533 – 41 . 65 . Spigel DR , Ervin TJ , Ramlau RA , et al . Randomized phase II trial of Onartu - zumab in combination with erlotinib in patients with advanced non - small - cell lung cancer . J Clin Oncol 2013 ; 31 : 4105 – 14 . 66 . Munshi N , Jeay S , Li Y , et al . ARQ 197 , a novel and selective inhibitor of the human c - Met receptor tyrosine kinase with antitumor activity . Mol Cancer Ther . 2010 ; 9 ( 6 ) : 1544 – 53 . 67 . Puzanov I , Sosman J , Santoro A , et al . Phase 1 trial of tivantinib in combina - tion with sorafenib in adult patients with advanced solid tumors . Invest New Drugs . 2015 ; 33 ( 1 ) : 159 – 68 . 68 . Azuma K , Yoshioka H , Yamamoto N , et al . Tivantinib plus erlotinib versus placebo plus erlotinib in Asian patients with previously treated nonsquamous NSCLC with wild - type EGFR : First report of a phase III ATTENTION trial . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2014 ; 32 : 5s , a8044 . 69 . Trojan J , Zeuzem S . Tivantinib in hepatocellular carcinoma . Expert Opin Investig Drugs . 2013 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 141 – 7 . 70 . Jia H , Dai G , Weng J , et al . Discovery of ( S ) - 1 - ( 1 - ( Imidazo [ 1 , 2 - a ] pyridin - 6 - yl ) ethyl ) - 6 - ( 1 - methyl - 1H - pyrazol - 4 - yl ) - 1H - [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] triazolo [ 4 , 5 - b ] pyrazine ( volitinib ) as a highly potent and selective mesenchymal - epithelial transition factor ( c - Met ) inhibitor in clinical development for treatment of cancer . J Med Chem . 2014 ; 57 : 7577 – 89 . 71 . Schuller AG , Barry ER , Jones RD , et al . The MET Inhibitor AZD6094 ( Savoli - tinib , HMPL - 504 ) Induces Regression in Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma Patient - Derived Xenograft Models . Clin Cancer Res . 2015 ; 21 ( 12 ) : 2811 – 9 . 72 . Hui Kong Gan JL , Michael Millward , et al . First - in - human phase I study of a selective c - Met inhibitor volitinib ( HMP504 / AZD6094 ) in patients with advanced solid tumors ( Meeting abstracts ) . J Clin Oncol . 2014 ; 32 : 11111 . 73 . Cappuzzo F , Moro - Sibilot D , Gautschi O , et al . Management of crizotinib ther - apy for ALK - rearranged non - small cell lung carcinoma : an expert consensus . Lung Cancer . 2015 ; 87 ( 2 ) : 89 – 95 . 74 . Reck M , Popat S , Reinmuth N , et al . Metastatic non - small - cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) : ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis , treatment and follow - up . Ann Oncol . 2014 ; 25 ( 3 ) : iii27 – 39 . 75 . Ettinger DS , Akerley W , Borghaei H , et al . Non - small cell lung cancer . J Natl Compr Cancer Netw . 2012 ; 10 : 1236 – 71 . 76 . Shaw AT , Kim DW , Nakagawa K , et al . Crizotinib versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK - positive lung cancer . N Engl J Med . 2013 ; 368 ( 25 ) : 2385 – 94 . 77 . Solomon BJ , Mok T , Kim DW , et al . First - line crizotinib versus chemotherapy in ALK - positive lung cancer . N Engl J Med . 2014 ; 371 ( 23 ) : 2167 – 77 . 78 . Qian H , Gao F , Wang H , et al . The efficacy and safety of crizotinib in the treat - ment of anaplastic lymphoma kinase - positive non - small cell lung cancer : a meta - analysis of clinical trials . BMC Cancer . 2014 ; 14 : 683 . 79 . Viola D , Cappagli V , Elisei R . Cabozantinib ( XL184 ) for the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic progressive medullary thyroid cancer . Future Oncol . 2013 ; 9 ( 8 ) : 1083 – 92 . 80 . Schoffski P , Elisei R , Muller S , et al . An international , double - blind , random - ized , placebo - controlled phase III trial ( EXAM ) of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in medullary thyroid carcinoma ( MTC ) patients ( pts ) with documented RECIST progression at baseline . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2012 ; 30 : 5508 . 81 . Saito S , Morishima K , Ui T , et al . The role of HGF / MET and FGF / FGFR in fibroblast - derived growth stimulation and lapatinib - resistance of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma . BMC Cancer . 2015 ; 15 ( 1 ) : 1065 . 82 . Chapman PB , Hauschild A , Robert C , et al . Improved survival with vemu - rafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation . N Engl J Med . 2011 ; 364 ( 26 ) : 2507 – 16 . 83 . Sierra JR , Tsao MS . c - MET as a potential therapeutic target and biomarker in cancer . Ther Adv Med Oncol . 2011 ; 3 ( 1 ) : S21 – 35 . 84 . Chan BA , Hughes BG . Targeted therapy for non - small cell lung cancer : current standards and the promise of the future . Transl Lung Cancer Res . 2015 ; 4 ( 1 ) : 36 – 54 . 85 . Van Der Steen N , Pauwels P , Gil - Bazo I , et al . cMET in NSCLC : Can We Cut off the Head of the Hydra ? From the Pathway to the Resistance . Cancers ( Basel ) . 2015 ; 7 ( 2 ) : 556 – 73 . 86 . Melosky B . Treatment algorithms for patients with metastatic non - small cell , non - squamous lung cancer . Front Oncol . 2014 ; 4 : 256 . c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 29 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) 87 . Yano S , Nakagawa T . The current state of molecularly targeted drugs targeting HGF / Met . Jpn J Clin Oncol . 2014 ; 44 ( 1 ) : 9 – 12 . 88 . Engelman JA , Zejnullahu K , Mitsudomi T , et al . MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling . Science . 2007 ; 316 ( 5827 ) : 1039 – 43 . 89 . Sequist LV , Waltman BA , Dias - Santagata D , et al . Genotypic and histologi - cal evolution of lung cancers acquiring resistance to EGFR inhibitors . Sci Transl Med . 2011 ; 3 ( 75 ) : 75ra26 . 90 . Song N , Liu S , Zhang J , et al . Cetuximab - induced MET activation acts as a novel resistance mechanism in colon cancer cells . Int J Mol Sci . 2014 ; 15 ( 4 ) : 5838 – 51 . 91 . Zhang YW , Staal B , Essenburg C , et al . MET kinase inhibitor SGX523 syn - ergizes with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor erlotinib in a hepato - cyte growth factor - dependent fashion to suppress carcinoma growth . Cancer Res . 2010 ; 70 ( 17 ) : 6880 – 90 . 92 . Qi J , McTigue MA , Rogers A , et al . Multiple mutations and bypass mechanisms can contribute to development of acquired resistance to MET inhibitors . Cancer Res . 2011 ; 71 ( 3 ) : 1081 – 91 . 93 . Shaw AT , Kim DW , Nakagawa K , et al . Crizotinib versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK - positive lung cancer . N Engl J Med . 2013 ; 368 ( 25 ) : 2385 . 94 . Solomon BJ , Mok T , Kim DW , et al . First - line crizotinib versus chemotherapy in ALK - positive lung cancer . N Engl J Med . 2014 ; 371 ( 23 ) : 2167 – 77 . 95 . Ou SH , Kwak EL , Siwak - Tapp C , et al . Activity of crizotinib ( PF02341066 ) , a dual mesenchymal - epithelial transition ( MET ) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) inhibitor , in a non - small cell lung cancer patient with de novo MET amplification . J Thorac Oncol . 2011 ; 6 ( 5 ) : 942 – 6 . 96 . Kogita A , Togashi Y , Hayashi H , et al . Activated MET acts as a salvage signal after treatment with alectinib , a selective ALK inhibitor , in ALK - positivenon - small cell lung cancer . Int J Oncol . 2015 ; 46 ( 3 ) : 1025 – 30 . 97 . Feng Y , Minca EC , Lanigan C , et al . High MET receptor expression but not gene amplification in ALK 2p23 rearrangement positive non - small - cell lung cancer . J Thorac Oncol . 2014 ; 9 ( 5 ) : 646 – 53 . 98 . Katayama R , Kobayashi Y , Friboulet L , et al . Cabozantinib overcomes crizo - tinib resistance in ROS1 fusion - positive cancer . Clin Cancer Res . 2015 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 166 – 74 . 99 . Neal JW , Dahlberg SE , Wakelee HA , et al . Cabozantinib ( C ) , erlotinib ( E ) or the combination ( E + C ) as second - or third - line therapy in patients with EGFR wild - type ( wt ) non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) : A randomized phase 2 trial of the ECOG - ACRIN Cancer Research Group . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2015 ; 33 : 8003 . 100 . Miyata Y , Asai A , Mitsunari K , et al . Met in urological cancers . Cancers ( Basel ) . 2014 ; 6 ( 4 ) : 2387 – 403 . 101 . Delahunt B , Eble JN . Papillary renal cell carcinoma : a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 105 tumors . Mod Pathol . 1997 ; 10 ( 6 ) : 537 – 44 . 102 . Gnarra JR , Tory K , Weng Y , et al . Mutations of the VHL tumour suppressor gene in renal carcinoma . Nat Genet . 1994 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 85 – 90 . 103 . Ciamporcero E , Miles KM , Adelaiye R , et al . Combination strategy targeting VEGF and HGF / c - met in human renal cell carcinoma models . Mol Cancer Ther . 2015 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 101 – 10 . 104 . Pennacchietti S , Michieli P , Galluzzo M , et al . Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene . Cancer Cell . 2003 ; 3 ( 4 ) : 347 – 61 . 105 . Albiges L , Guegan J , Le Formal A , et al . MET is a potential target across all papillary renal cell carcinomas : result from a large molecular study of pRCC with CGH array and matching gene expression array . Clin Cancer Res . 2014 ; 20 ( 13 ) : 3411 – 21 . 106 . Giubellino A , Linehan WM , Bottaro DP . Targeting the Met signaling pathway in renal cancer . Expert Rev Anticancer Ther . 2009 ; 9 ( 6 ) : 785 – 93 . 107 . Balint I , Szponar A , Jauch A , et al . Trisomy 7 and 17 mark papillary renal cell tumours irrespectively of variation of the phenotype . J Clin Pathol . 2009 ; 62 ( 10 ) : 892 – 5 . 108 . Escudier B , Porta C , Schmidinger M , et al . Renal cell carcinoma : ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis , treatment and follow - up . Ann Oncol . 2014 ; 25 ( 3 ) : iii49 – 56 . 109 . Jahangiri A , De Lay M , Miller LM , et al . Gene expression profile identifies tyrosine kinase c - Met as a targetable mediator of antiangiogenic therapy resis - tance . Clin Cancer Res . 2013 ; 9 ( 7 ) : 1773 – 83 . 110 . Ebos JM , Lee CR , Cruz - Munoz W , et al . Accelerated metastasis after short - term treatment with a potent inhibitor of tumor angiogenesis . Cancer Cell . 2009 ; 15 ( 3 ) : 232 – 9 . 111 . Pàez - Ribes M , Allen E , Hudock J , et al . Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malig - nant progression of tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis . Cancer Cell . 2009 ; 15 ( 3 ) : 220 – 31 . 112 . Choueiri TK , Vaishampayan U , Rosenberg JE , et al . Phase II and biomarker study of the dual MET / VEGFR2 inhibitor foretinib in patients with papillary renal cell carcinoma . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 ( 2 ) : 181 – 6 . 113 . Gavine PR , Ren Y , Han L , et al . Volitinib , a potent and highly selective c - Met inhibitor , effectively blocks c - Met signaling and growth in c - MET amplified gastric cancer patient - derived tumor xenograft models . Mol Oncol . 2015 ; 9 : 323 – 33 . 114 . Houk BE , Bello CL , Poland B , et al . Relationship between exposure to suni - tinib and efficacy and tolerability end - points in patients with cancer : results of a pharmacokinetic / pharmacody - namic meta - analysis . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol . 2010 ; 66 : 357 – 71 . 115 . Ishikawa D , Takeuchi S , Nakagawa T , et al . mTOR inhibitors control the growth of EGFR mutant lung cancer even after acquiring resistance by HGF . mTOR PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 ( 5 ) : e62104 . 116 . Pópulo H , Lopes JM , Soares P . The mTOR signalling pathway in human cancer . Int J Mol Sci . 2012 ; 13 ( 2 ) : 1886 – 918 . 117 . Mohammed S , Van Buren G 2nd , Fisher WE . Pancreatic cancer : advances in treatment . World J Gastroenterol . 2014 ; 20 ( 28 ) : 9354 – 60 . 118 . Garajová I , Le Large TY , Frampton AE , et al . Molecular mechanisms underly - ing the role of microRNAs in the chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer . Biomed Res Int . 2014 ; 2014 : 678401 . 119 . Neuzillet C , Couvelard A , Tijeras - Raballand A , et al . High c - Met expression in stage I – II pancreatic adenocarcinoma : proposition of an immunostaining scoring method and correlation with poor prognosis . Histopathology . 2015 ; 67 : 664 – 76 . 120 . Patel MB , Pothula SP , Xu Z , et al . The role of the hepatocyte growth factor / c - MET pathway in pancreatic stellate cell - endothelial cell interactions : antiangiogenic implications in pancreatic cancer . Carcinogenesis . 2014 ; 35 ( 8 ) : 1891 – 900 . 121 . Zhu GH , Huang C , Qiu ZJ , et al . Expression and prognostic significance of CD151 , c - Met , and integrin alpha3 / alpha6 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Dig Dis Sci . 2011 ; 56 ( 4 ) : 1090 – 8 . 122 . Li C , Wu JJ , Hynes M , et al . c - Met is a marker of pancreatic cancer stem cells and therapeutic target . Gastroenterology . 2011 ; 141 ( 6 ) : 2218 – 27 . e5 . 123 . Neesse A , Michl P , Frese KK , et al . Stromal biology and therapy in pancreatic cancer . Gut . 2011 ; 60 ( 6 ) : 861 – 8 . 124 . Xin X , Yang S , Ingle G , et al . Hepatocyte growth factor enhances vascu - lar endothelial growth factor - induced angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo . Am J Pathol . 2001 ; 158 ( 3 ) : 1111 – 20 . 125 . Shah AN , Summy JM , Zhang J , et al . Development and characterization of gem - citabine - resistant pancreatic tumor cells . Ann Surg Oncol . 2007 ; 14 ( 12 ) : 3629 – 37 . 126 . Avan A , Quint K , Nicolini F , et al . Enhancement of the antiproliferative activ - ity of gemcitabine by modulation of c - Met pathway in pancreatic cancer . Curr Pharm Des . 2013 ; 19 ( 5 ) : 940 – 50 . 127 . Avan A , Caretti V , Funel N , et al . Crizotinib inhibits metabolic inactivation of gem - citabine in c - Met - driven pancreatic carcinoma . Cancer Res . 2013 ; 73 ( 22 ) : 6745 – 56 . 128 . Hage C , Rausch V , Giese N , et al . The novel c - Met inhibitor cabozantinib overcomes gemcitabine resistance and stem cell signaling in pancreatic cancer . Cell Death Dis . 2013 May 9 ; 4 : e627 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2013 . 158 . 129 . Elisei R , Schlumberger MJ , Müller SP , et al . Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 ( 29 ) : 3639 – 46 . 130 . Senetta R , Duregon E , Sonetto C , et al . YKL - 40 / c - Met Expression in Rectal Cancer Biopsies Predicts Tumor Regression following Neoadjuvant Chemora - diotherapy : A Multi - Institutional Study . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 ( 4 ) : e0123759 . 131 . Liu Y , Yu XF , Zou J , et al . Prognostic value of c - Met in colorectal cancer : A meta - analysis . World J Gastroenterol . 2015 ; 21 ( 12 ) : 3706 – 10 . 132 . Jardim DL , de Melo Gagliato D , Falchook GS , et al . MET aberrations and c - MET inhibitors in patients with gastric and esophageal cancers in a phase I unit . Oncotarget . 2014 ; 5 ( 7 ) : 1837 – 45 . 133 . Song EK , Tai WM , Messersmith WA , et al . Potent antitumor activity of cabo - zantinib , a c - MET and VEGFR2 inhibitor , in a colorectal cancer patient - derived tumor explant model . Int J Cancer . 2015 ; 136 ( 8 ) : 1967 – 75 . 134 . Xiang Q , Chen W , Ren M , et al . Cabozantinib suppresses tumor growth and metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma by a dual blockade of VEGFR2 and MET . Clin Cancer Res . 2014 ; 20 ( 11 ) : 2959 – 70 . 135 . Eswaraka J , Giddabasappa A , Han G , et al . Axitinib and crizotinib combination therapy inhibits bone loss in a mouse model of castration resistantprostate cancer . BMC Cancer . 2014 ; 14 : 742 . 136 . Smith DC , Smith MR , Sweeney C , et al . Cabozantinib in patients with advanced prostate cancer : results of a phase II randomized discontinuation trial . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 ( 4 ) : 412 – 9 . 137 . Schmitz K , Koeppen H , Binot E , et al . MET Gene Copy Number Altera - tions and Expression of MET and Hepatocyte Growth Factor Are Potential Biomarkers in Angiosarcomas and Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcomas . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 ( 4 ) : e0120079 . 138 . Schöffski P , Cornillie J , Wozniak A , et al . Soft tissue sarcoma : an update on systemic treatment options for patients with advanced disease . Oncol Res Treat . 2014 ; 37 ( 6 ) : 355 – 62 . 139 . Kentsis A , Reed C , Rice KL , et al . Autocrine activation of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase in acute myeloid leukemia . Nat Med . 2012 ; 18 ( 7 ) : 1118 – 22 . 140 . Amgen . A Phase 3 , Multicenter , Randomized , Double - Blind , Placebo Controlled Study of Rilotumumab ( AMG102 ) With Epirubicin , Cisplatin , and Capecit - abine ( ECX ) as First - line Therapy in Advanced MET - Positive Gastric or Gastroesophageal Junction Adenocarcinoma . Available from : http : / / clinicaltrials . gov / show / NCT01697072 . NLM Identifier : NCT01697072 . Garajová et al 30 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) 141 . Tan EP , Park K , Lim WT , et al . Phase Ib study of ficlatuzumab ( formerly AV - 299 ) , an anti - hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) monoclonal antibody ( MAb ) in combination with gefitinib ( G ) in Asian patients ( pts ) with NSCLC . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2011 ; 29 ( 15 ) : 7571 . 142 . Ryan CJ , Rosenthal M , Ng S , et al . Targeted MET inhibition in castration - resistant prostate cancer : a randomized phase II study and biomarker analysis with rilotumumab plus mitoxantrone and prednisone . Clin Cancer Res . 2013 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 215 – 24 . 143 . Schoffski P , Garcia JA , Stadler , et al . A phase II study of the efficacy and safety of AMG 102 in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma . BJU Int . 2011 ; 108 ( 5 ) : 679 – 86 . 144 . Wen PY , Schiff D , Cloughesy TF , et al . A phase II study evaluating the efficacy and safety of AMG 102 ( rilotumumab ) in patients with recurrent glioblastoma . Neuro Oncol . 2011 ; 13 ( 4 ) : 437 – 46 . 145 . Penuel E , Li C , Parab V , et al . HGF as a circulating biomarker of onartu - zumab treatment in patients with advanced solid tumors . Mol Cancer Ther . 2013 ; 12 : 1122 – 30 . 146 . Rosen LS , Senzer N , Mekhail T , et al . A phase I dose - escalation study of Tivan - tinib ( ARQ 197 ) in adult patients with metastatic solid tumors . Clin Cancer Res . 2011 ; 17 : 7754 – 64 . 147 . Iveson T , Donehower RC , Davidenko I , et al . Rilotumumab in combination with epirubicin , cisplatin , and capecitabine as first - line treatment for gastric or oesophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma : An open - label , dose de - escalation phase 1b study and a double - blind , randomised phase 2 study . Lancet Oncol . 2014 ; 15 : 1007 – 18 . 148 . Cunningham D , Tebbutt NC , Davidenko I , et al . Phase III , randomized , double - blind , multicenter , placebo ( P ) - controlled trial of rilotumumab ( R ) plus epirubicin , cisplatin and capecitabine ( ECX ) as first - line therapy in patients ( pts ) with advanced MET - positive ( pos ) gastric or gastroesophageal junc - tion ( G / GEJ ) cancer : RILOMET - 1 study . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2015 ; 33 : 4000 . 149 . Yu W , Pandita A , Penuel E , et al . Exploratory biomarker analyses from OAM4558 g : A placebo - controlled phase II study of erlotinib with or without MetMAb in patients with advanced non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2011 ; 29 : 7529 . 150 . Jung SK , Lee MH , Lim do Y , et al . Butein , a novel dual inhibitor of MET and EGFR , overcomes gefitinib - resistant lung cancer growth . Mol Carcinog . 2015 ; 54 ( 4 ) : 322 – 31 . 151 . Mai E , Zheng Z , Chen Y , et al . Nonclinical evaluation of the serum phar - macodynamic biomarkers HGF and shed MET following dosing with the anti - MET monovalent monoclonal antibody onartuzumab . Mol Cancer Ther . 2014 ; 13 : 540 – 52 . 152 . Rimassa LPC , Borbath I , Daniele B , et al . Tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) versus placebo in patients ( Pts ) with hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) who failed one systemic therapy : Results of a randomized controlled phase II trial ( RCT ) . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2012 ; 4006 . 153 . Santoro A , Rimassa L , Borbath I , et al . Tivantinib for second - line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma : a randomised , placebo - controlled phase 2 study . Lancet Oncol . 2013 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 55 – 63 . 154 . Zahir H , Rodig S , Sequist L , et al . Relationship between tumor MET expression and clinical outcomes in cancer patients treated with tivantinib . EJC supplements . 2012 ; 48 ( 6 ) : 149 . 155 . Rodig S , Sequist L , Schiller JH , et al . An exploratory biomarker analysis evalu - ating the effect of the c - Met inhibitor tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) and erlotinib in NSCLC patients in a randomized , double - blinded phase 2 study . Proceedings of the American Association of Cancer Res . 2012 ; 72 : 1729 . 156 . Lennerz JK , Kwak EL , Ackerman A , et al . MET amplification identifies a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib . J Clin Oncol . 2011 ; 29 ( 36 ) : 4803 – 10 . 157 . Tanizaki J , Okamoto I , Okamoto K , et al . MET tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizo - tinib ( PF - 02341066 ) shows differential antitumor effects in non - small cell lung cancer according to MET alterations . J Thorac Oncol . 2011 ; 6 ( 10 ) : 1624 – 31 . 158 . Ou SH , Kwak EL , Siwak - Tapp C , et al . Activity of crizotinib ( PF02341066 ) , a dual mesenchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) inhibitor , in a non - small cell lung cancer patient with de novo MET amplification . J Thorac Oncol . 2011 ; 6 ( 5 ) , 942 – 6 . 159 . Rocci A , Gambella M , Aschero S , et al . MET dysregulation is a hallmark of aggressive disease in multiple myeloma patients . Br J Haematol . 2014 ; 164 , 841 – 50 . 160 . Eder JP , Shapiro GI , Appleman LJ , et al . A phase I study of foretinib , a multi - targeted inhibitor of c - Met and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 . Clin Cancer Res . 2010 ; 16 ( 13 ) , 3507 – 16 . 161 . Klotz M , Schmid E , Steiner - Hahn K , et al . Preclinical evaluation of biomarkers for response monitoring to the MET inhibitor BAY − 853474 . Biomarkers . 2012 ; 17 ( 4 ) : 325 – 35 . 162 . Feldman DR , Einhorn LH , Quinn DI , et al . A phase 2 multicenter study of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) monotherapy in patients with relapsed or refractory germ cell tumors . Invest New Drugs . 2013 ; 31 ( 4 ) : 1016 – 22 . 163 . Hack SP , Bruey JM , Koeppen H . HGF / MET - directed therapeutics in gastroe - sophageal cancer : a review of clinical and biomarker development . Oncotarget . 2014 ; 5 ( 10 ) : 2866 – 80 . 164 . Giampieri R , Scartozzi M , Del PM , et al . Molecular biomarkers of resistance to anti - EGFR treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer , from classical to innova - tion . Crit Rev Oncol Hematol . 2013 ; 88 ( 2 ) : 272 – 83 . 165 . Luo W , Huang B , Li Z , Li , et al . MicroRNA - 449a is downregulated in non - small cell lung cancer and inhibits migration and invasion by targeting c - Met . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 ( 5 ) : e64759 . 166 . Wu ZS , Wu Q , Wang CQ , et al . miR - 340 inhibition of breast cancer cell migration and invasion through targeting of oncoprotein c - Met . Cancer . 2011 ; 117 ( 13 ) : 2842 – 52 . 167 . Itadani H , Hasako S , Yonekura K , et al . Identification of gene expression signa - ture to predict anti - tumor efficacy of MET / VEGFR inhibitor , TAS - 115 . EJC supplements . 2012 ; 48 ( 6 ) : 136 . 168 . Bachleitner - Hofmann T , Sun MY , Chen CT , et al . Antitumor activity of SNX - 2112 , a synthetic heat shock protein - 90 inhibitor , in MET amplified tumor cells with or without resistance to selective MET Inhibition . Clin Cancer Res . 2011 ; 17 ( 1 ) : 122 – 33 . 169 . Stabile LP , Lyker JS , Huang L , et al . Inhibition of human non - small cell lung tumors by a c - Met antisense / U6 expression plasmid strategy . Gene Ther . 2004 ; 11 ( 3 ) : 325 – 35 . 170 . Mok TSK , Park K , Geater SL , et al . A randomized phase 2 study with explor - atory biomarker analysis of ficlantuzumab a humanized hepatocyte growth factor inhibitory MAB in combination with gefitinib versus gefitinib in Asian patients with lung adenocarcinoma . Ann Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2012 ; 23 : 1198P . 171 . Schoffski P , Garcia JA , Stadler WM , et al . A phase II study of the efficacy and safety of AMG 102 in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma . BJU Int . 2011 ; 108 ( 5 ) : 679 – 86 . 172 . Choueiri TK , Pal SK , McDermott DF , et al . A phase I study of cabozan - tinib ( XL184 ) in patients with renal cell cancer . Ann Oncol . 2014 ; 25 ( 8 ) : 1603 – 8 . 173 . Choueiri TK , Pal SK , McDermott DF , et al . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in patients ( pts ) with metastatic , refractory renal cell carcinoma ( RCC ) . J Clin Oncol . 2012 ; 30 ( 5 ) : 364 . 174 . Smith MR , De Bono JS , Sternberg CN , et al . Final analysis of COMET - 1 : Cabozantinib ( Cabo ) versus prednisone ( Pred ) in metastatic castration - resistant prostate cancer ( mCRPC ) patients ( pts ) previously treated with docetaxel ( D ) and abiraterone ( A ) and / or enzalutamide ( E ) . J Clin Oncol . 2015 ; 33 ( 7 ) : 139 . 175 . Ryan CJ , Rosenthal M , Ng S , et al . Targeted MET inhibition in castration - resistant prostate cancer : a randomized phase II study and biomarker analysis with rilotumumab plus mitoxantrone and prednisone . Clin Cancer Res . 2013 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 215 – 24 . 176 . Eng C , Hart LL , Severtsev A , et al . A randomized , placebo - controlled , phase I / II study of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) in combination with cetuximab and irinotecan in patients ( pts ) with KRAS wild - type ( WT ) metastatic colorectal cancer ( CRC ) who had received previous front - line systemic therapy . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 : 3508 . 177 . Eng C , Van Cutsem E , Nowara E , et al . A randomized , phase Ib / II trial of rilotu - mumab ( AMG 102 ; ril ) or ganitumab ( AMG 479 ; gan ) with panitumumab ( pmab ) versus pmab alone in patients ( pts ) with wild - type ( WT ) KRAS metastatic colorec - tal cancer ( mCRC ) : Primary and biomarker analyses . J Clin Oncol . 2011 ; 29 : 3500 . 178 . Oliner KS , Tang R , Anderson A , et al . Evaluation of MET pathway bio - mark - ers in a phase II study of rilotumumab ( R , AMG 102 ) or placebo ( P ) in combi - nation with epirubicin , cisplatin , and capecitabine ( ECX ) in patients ( pts ) with locally advanced or metastatic gastric ( G ) or esoph - agogastric junction ( EGJ ) cancer . J Clin Oncol . 2012 ; 30 : 4005 . 179 . Shah MA , Wainberg ZA , Catenacci DV , et al . Phase II study evaluating 2 dos - ing schedules of oral foretinib ( GSK1363089 ) , cMET / VEGFR2 inhibitor , in patients with metastatic gastric cancer . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 ( 3 ) : e54014 . 180 . Verslype C , Cohn AL , Kelley RK , et al . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in hepatocellular carcinoma : results from a phase II randomized discontinuation trial ( RDT ) . J Clin Oncol . 2012 ; 30 : 4007 . 181 . Yau TC , Sukeepaisarnjaroen W , Chao Y , et al . A phase I / II study of foretinib , an oral multikinase inhibitor targeting MET , RON , AXL , TIE - 2 , and VEGFR in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) . J Clin Oncol . 2012 ; 30 : 4108 . 182 . Daud A , Kluger HM , Edelman G , et al . Activity of cabozantinib in metastatic uveal melanoma : updated results from a phase II randomized discontinuation trial ( RDT ) . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2013 ; 31 ( 15 ) : 9094 . 183 . Gordon MS , Kluger HM , Shapiro G , et al . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in metastatic melanoma : Results from a phase II randomized discontinuation trial ( RDT ) J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2012 ; 30 : 8531 . 184 . Winer EP , Tolaney S , Nechushtan H , et al . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in metastatic breast cancer ( MBC ) : Results from a phase II randomized discontinu - ation trial ( RDT ) J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2012 ; 30 : 535 . 185 . Seiwert T , Swann S , Kurz H , et al . ( 2009 ) . A phase II study of the efficacy and safety of foretinib , a novel receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , given on an intermit - tent 5 - days - on / 9 - days - off ( 5 / 9 ) schedule in patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell cancer of the head and neck . Mol Cancer Ther . 2009 ; 8 : 12 ( 1 ) : B6 . c - MET as a target for personalized therapy 31 TranslaTional oncogenomics 2015 : 7 ( s1 ) 186 . Feldman DR , Einhorn LH , Quinn DI , et al . A phase 2 multicenter study of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) monotherapy in patients with relapsed or refractory germ cell tumors . Invest New Drugs . 2013 ; 31 ( 4 ) : 1016 – 22 . 187 . Schoffski P , Wozniak A , Stacchiotti S , et al . Activity of crizotinib ( C ) in patients ( pts ) with clear cell sarcoma ( CCSA ) in EORTC phase II trial 90101 “ CREATE” . J Clin Oncol . ( Meeting abstracts ) . 2015 ; 33 : 10542 . 188 . Elisei R , Schlumberger MJ , Müller SP , et al . Cabozantinib in progressive med - ullary thyroid cancer . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 ( 29 ) : 3639 – 46 . 189 . Ludovini V , Bianconi F , Pistola L , et al . Optimization of patient selection for EGFR - TKIs in advanced non - small cell lung cancer by combined analy - sis of KRAS , PIK3CA , MET , and non - sensitizing EGFR mutations . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol . 2012 ; 69 ( 5 ) : 1289 – 99 . 190 . Cappuzzo F , Marchetti A , Skokan M , et al . Increased MET gene copy number negatively affects survival of surgically resected non - small - cell lung cancer patients . J Clin Oncol . 2009 ; 27 ( 10 ) : 1667 – 74 . 191 . Park S , Choi YL , Sung CO , et al . High MET copy number and MET overex - pression : poor outcome in non - small cell lung cancer patients . Histol Histopathol . 2012 ; 27 ( 2 ) : 197 – 207 192 . Okuda K , Sasaki H , Yukiue H , et al . Met gene copy number predicts the prog - nosis for completely resected non - small cell lung cancer . Cancer Sci . 2012 ; 99 ( 11 ) : 2280 – 5 . 193 . Albiges L , Guegan J , Le Formal A , et al . MET is a potential target across all papil - lary renal cell carcinomas : result from a large molecular study of pRCC with CGH array and matching gene expression array . Clin Cancer Res . 2014 ; 20 ( 13 ) : 3411 – 21 . 194 . Giordano S , Columbano A . Met as a therapeutic target in HCC : facts and hopes . J Hepatol . 2014 ; 60 ( 2 ) : 442 – 52 . 195 . Christensen JG , Burrows J , Salgia R . c - Met as a target for human cancer and characterization of inhibitors for therapeutic intervention . Cancer Lett . 2005 ; 225 ( 1 ) : 1 – 26 . 196 . Di Renzo MF , Olivero M , Giacomini A , et al . Overexpression and amplification of the met / HGF receptor gene during the progression of colorectal cancer . Clin Cancer Res . 1995 ; 1 ( 2 ) : 147 – 54 197 . Seiwert TY , Jagadeeswaran R , Faoro L , et al . The MET receptor tyrosine kinase is a potential novel therapeutic target for head and neck squamous cell carci - noma . Cancer Res . 2009 ; 69 ( 7 ) : 3021 – 31 . 198 . Bardelli A , Corso S , Bertotti A , et al . Amplification of the MET receptor drives resistance to anti - EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer . Cancer Discov . 2013 ; 3 ( 6 ) : 658 – 73 . 199 . Sun S , Wang Z . Head neck squamous cell carcinoma c - Met + cells display cancer stem cell properties and are responsible for cisplatin - resistance and metastasis . Int J Cancer . 2011 ; 129 ( 10 ) : 2337 – 48 . 200 . Kina S , Phonaphonh T , Liang F , et al . PDGF alpha receptor is a mediator for Cisplatin - induced Met expression . Eur J Pharmacol . 2013 ; 699 ( 1 – 3 ) : 227 – 32 . 201 . Mitamura T , Watari H , Wang L , et al . Downregulation of miRNA - 31 induces taxane resistance in ovarian cancer cells through increase of receptor tyrosine kinase MET . Oncogenesis . 2013 ; 2 : e40 . 202 . Ganapathipillai SS , Medova M , Aebersold DM , et al . Coupling of mutated Met variants to DNA repair via Abl and Rad51 . Cancer Res . 2008 ; 68 ( 14 ) : 5769 – 77 .