Open Research Online The Open University’s repository of research publications and other research outputs ContraVision : Designing a Contravideo Set Other How to cite : Mancini , Clara ; Coe , Tony ; Lay , Jeﬀery and Rogers , Yvonne ( 2012 ) . ContraVision : Designing a Contravideo Set . ACM Computers in Entertainment . For guidance on citations see FAQs . c (cid:13) 2012 Authors https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / Version : Accepted Manuscript Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and / or other copyright owners . For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult the policies page . oro . open . ac . uk ContraVision : Designing a Contravideo Set Clara Mancini * , Tony Coe ^ , Yvonne Rogers† , Jeffery Lay * * The Open University , UK ^ Two Cats Can , UK † University College London , UK C . Mancini @ open . ac . uk Abstract Users’ reactions to future technology can be difficult to predict , but they can determine a product’s success or failure when it reaches the market . Video can be used as a powerful medium to create realistic representations of technology in use and elicit potential users’ reactions at the concept - development stage . To account for the biases introduced by any representation and elicit a wider spectrum of reactions , the ContraVision method envisages the use of two contrasting versions of the same video scenario . Here we describe the criteria informing the design of what we call a contravideo set . This forum was born from the recognition that some things are better communicated by video than by text and that video is especially effective in conveying the experience of technology . Indeed the impression of reality created by the multitude of indexical signs that make up an audiovisual message can be very powerful , especially to communicate the experience of technology that does not yet exist . Apple’s Knowledge Navigator [ 1 ] , Hewlett Packard’s Cool Town [ 5 ] and Microsoft’s Healthcare [ 2 ] have captured the imagination of many with their futuristic visions depicting worlds in which our daily lives are significantly enhanced through the use of fictitious technologies . In the same way HCI researchers have also used video to capture the imagination of potential users and explore their reactions to new design concepts that may have a significant impact on their lives . Indeed , video has been used extensively to elicit in - depth responses from users , for example , to involve stakeholders in the design process [ 6 , 9 , 11 , 12 ] or for requirement elicitation [ 4 , 7 , 8 ] . However , any particular video representation only provides one of the many possible ways in which a technology can be portrayed . Selecting what aspects to represent , what profilmic reality to shoot or what cinematic codes to use constitutes an act of mediation that will inevitably influence the reactions of the audience . Here we discuss one way in which different representations of a futuristic scenario can be crafted and used in HCI research , to explore the acceptability of technology that does not yet exist . In particular , the ContraVision method aims to elicit users’ reactions to both positive and negative aspects of a future scenario , in order to mitigate inevitable representational biases and at the same time expand the spectrum of elicited responses to uncover the often elusive personal , cultural and social concerns that are relevant to the acceptance of personal technologies . Elsewhere [ 10 ] we describe the method in detail and how it was informed by the fictional cinematic theme of alternative realities , also reporting on the findings of an evaluation study exploring people’s attitudes towards the use of pervasive technology for personal healthcare . Instead , here we focus on how the two representations used in our study were designed to form what we call a contravideo set . Being able to compare the findings from the different viewings was as important to us as exploring the issues potentially raised by the technology . To increase the opportunities for observing differences and similarities in the viewers’ responses to the two videos , we wanted these to trigger reactions on a variety of issues that might be relevant to viewers and that could emerge from the use of the technology contextualized in everyday life . We chose to focus on futuristic technology because arguably the use of video in HCI is more relevant when no prototype is available for prospective users to experiment with . Moreover , the fact that the technology was fictitious gave us freedom to represent potentially controversial features or situations that were likely to trigger strong reactions , especially in relation to issues that were of particular interest for us , such as privacy and identity . Because of its popular but also sensitive nature we chose to focus on the themes of health care and body weight , and because of its potentially helpful but also controversial nature , we chose to represent a wearable diet - monitoring system . The system combined functionalities that could be very beneficial to the user but also raised issues of different kinds . For example , a camera embedded in the user’s glasses took a picture of any food that he looked at for more than three seconds , in order to text back to him an estimate of the food’s calorific content and help him make nutritional choices consistent with his diet ; this was potentially very helpful , but meant that the user’s visual preferences were constantly monitored and that his personal and social space could be heavily intruded by incoming texts . For another example , a microchip embedded in the user’s wrist recorded his physiological changes when he ingested food , so he could be alerted upon approaching his daily calorific allowance ; this too was potentially very helpful , but meant that the user was under constant pressure as he had no control over the microchip that was implanted in his body . In other words , we wanted the technology to present both positive and negative aspects , which were differently emphasized in the two videos depending on whether the representation was positive or negative . In order to control the different ways in which the technology was represented in the videos , these needed to share a number of similarities . At the very least , they needed to have the same duration , narrative structure and filming style , include the same number and type of scenes , represent the same characters and situations , and explore the same themes . Against these similarities , a number of differences regarding the main character , his interaction with the other characters and the technology , and the consequent diverging development of the two stories could be respectively explored in the positive and negative video . To facilitate this exploration , we chose to represent a variety of situations in which the main character had to manage his relationship with food in different environments and social contexts : for example , having the habitual breakfast at home with his wife , joining a colleague’s informal birthday celebration in the office , or attending a more formal business dinner with a client . Throughout these situations , in the positive video the main character demonstrated an open and proactive attitude in managing his interaction with both the technology and his social relations . On the contrary , in the negative video he demonstrated a deceptive and ineffectual attitude throughout . These differences ultimately contributed to very different outcomes in the stories . Because we wanted viewers to focus on the functional , interactional and social aspects of the technology in use , rather than on its technical aspects , we had to strike a balance in representing the technology . On the one hand , we needed to show enough of it and provide an impression of reality and familiarity , not to keep the viewer guessing how it might work ; on the other hand , it was important that we did not show too much of it and not ostentate it , not to lead the viewer to critique its technical aspects . To achieve this , our fictitious system made use of devices that are already commonly used ( mobile phone , microchip , glasses , cameras , etc . ) , with the difference that these had uncommon or altogether futuristic functionalities ( for example , the microchip could record the physiological changes taking place within the user’s body when they ate ) . Similarly , we did not want to draw the viewer’s attention to the filming style . We wanted this to be as transparent as possible while making the viewer feel as though they were part of the narrative and close to the main character . We achieved this by shooting with hand - held cameras mostly at eye level and relatively short range , prevailingly combining static medium shots with close shots , close - ups and extreme close - ups , to compose scenes and alternate syntagmas edited at a relatively slow pace . This allowed us to focus on the main character’s interactions with the technology and the other characters , and on his emotional reactions to both . The videos were each roughly ten minutes long , which gave us time for exploring a number of themes and gave the viewers participating in our study time to engage with our representations without being overloaded . To avoid any carry over effects that would have biased the viewing of the second video , each participant only saw either the positive or negative version so that the findings from the viewings of the different audiences could then be compared . Indeed , our findings [ 10 ] indicate that using carefully crafted , systematically contrasting portrayals can help mitigate the biases characterizing any representation , afford relative control and breadth in the elicitation process , facilitate the attribution of viewers’ feedback to specific elements in each representation and reveal a more faceted picture of prospective users’ reactions . Although our contravideo set was designed for a specific study , most of the design criteria that we applied could inform the design of different sets for different studies . With future work we will continue to investigate how contravideo sets might be designed and effectively used to explore prospective users’ reactions to future technology . In the meantime , however , our findings highlight the need to take representational biases into account and find ways of mitigating them when making use of video in HCI research . Acknowledgments The authors thank , Blaine Price , Arosha Bandara , Adam Joinson and Bashar Nuseibeh for their contributions . This work was funded by the UK EPSRC grant EP / F024037 / 1 . References 1 . Apple Computer Knowledge Navigator . http : / / video . google . com / videoplay ? docid = - 5144094928842683632 2 . Microsoft Future Vision : Healthcare . http : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = V35Kv6 - ZNGA . 3 . Parallel universe ( fiction ) . http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Parallel _ universe _ ( fiction ) . 4 . Bardram , J . , Bossen , C . , Lykke - Olesen , A . , Nielsen , R . , and Madsen , K . H . Virtual Video Prototyping of Pervasive Healthcare Systems . Proc . 4th Conf . on Designing interactive systems , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2002 ) , 167 - 177 . 5 . Barton , J . , Kindberg , T . , and Barton , J . J . The CoolTown User Experience . Hewlett - Packard Company , 2001 . 6 . Brun - Cottan , F . and Wall , P . Using Video to Re - present the User . Commun . ACM 38 , 5 ( 1995 ) , 61 - 71 . 7 . Little , L . and Briggs , P . Ubiquitous Healthcare : Do We Want It ? Proceedings of the 22nd British CHI Group Annual Conference on HCI 2008 : People and Computers XXII : Culture , Creativity , Interaction - Volume 2 , British Computer Society Swinton , UK , UK ( 2008 ) , 53 - 56 . 8 . Little , L . and Briggs , P . Pervasive Healthcare : the Elderly Perspective . Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments , ACM ( 2009 ) , 71 . 9 . Mackay , W . E . , Ratzer , A . V . , and Janecek , P . Video Artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap between Abstraction and Detail . Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2000 ) , 72 - 82 . 10 . Mancini , C . , Rogers , Y . , Bandara , A . K . , Coe , T . , Jedrzejczyk , L . , Joinson , A . N . , Price , B . A . , Thomas , K . , and Nuseibeh , B . ( 2010 ) ContraVision : Exploring Users’ Reactions to Futuristic Technology . Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM CHI 2010 , ACM Press , pp . 153 - 162 . 11 . Raijmakers , B . , Gaver , W . W . , and Bishay , J . Design Documentaries : Inspiring Design Research through Documentary Film . Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , ACM ( 2006 ) , 229 - 238 . 12 . Tikkanen , V . and Cabrera , A . B . Using Video to Support Co - Design of Information and Communication Technologies . Observatorio ( OBS * ) 2 , 2 ( 2008 ) .