“Oh , East is East , and West is West , and never the twain shall meet . ” ( Rudyard Kipling , 1892 . Barrack - Room Ballads ) There is an immense gap between research and prac - tice . I’m tempted to paraphrase Kipling and say “Oh , research is research , and practice is practice , and never the twain shall meet , ” but I will resist . The gap between these two communities is real and frustrating . Sometimes the gap is deliberate . Some research - ers proudly state they are uncon - cerned with the dirty , messy , unsavory details of commercial - ization while also complaining that practitioners ignore them . And some practitioners deride research results as coming from a pristine ivory tower—interest - ing perhaps , but irrelevant for anything practical . Sometimes the gap is accidental , caused by a misunderstanding on both sides of the requirements and goals of the other . I have heard researchers , who would like their ideas to impact practice , com - plain that when their ideas do get used , the practitioners do so incorrectly , omitting ( or mess - ing up ) the most critical aspects . Practitioners , in turn , complain that research results , even if relevant , never exist in any form that can readily be translated into practice . The gap between research - ers and practitioners extends to the professional societies . The major societal home for many researchers is the Association for Computing Machinery’s Special Interest Group on Computer - Human Interaction— ACM SIGCHI—the same group that brings you this magazine . Although CHI pretends that it is home for both researchers and practitioners , that is largely a delusion . In the major confer - ences , most especially its flag - ship conference , CHI proudly proclaims that it includes people from both universities and indus - try . Although this is true , the people from industry are seldom the developers and practitio - ners . Instead , they are primarily researchers who work for indus - trial research labs . Researchers in companies tend to be far more closely attuned to their academic brethren than to the people within the product divisions of their own companies . This close connection to research and sepa - ration from practice are a hall - mark of the research community and the CHI conferences . inter - actions has made a valiant and reasonably successful attempt to bridge the gap , but the fun - damental distinction remains strong . I know this problem well because I faced it when I headed a large research group in a prod - uct company ( the Advanced Technology Group at Apple ) . The gap between research and practice is fundamental . The knowledge and skill sets required of each group differ . Consider the research com - munity within design : the area called design research . This community attempts to under - stand basic patterns of human and social behavior and how technology affects both . Most of the studies focus upon problems and difficulties , in part because they are far easier to study than benefits and changes in work and life patterns , but also because new technologies are mostly accompanied by prob - lems , and most benefits do not show up for a long time , perhaps decades . Other researchers probe the technological boundaries , demonstrating new potential capabilities and new experi - ences . Both kinds of research are valuable . Both produce insights . But both are far removed from the intense attention to detail , reliability , and robustness that characterize products or the con - cern with how and what people actually buy , with the cost i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2010 9 OPINION THe WaY I See IT The Research - Practice Gap : The Need for Translational Developers Donald A . Norman Nielsen Norman Group , Northwestern University , KAIST Industrial Design | don @ jnd . org plines : law , art , music , business , medicine , and design . Each of these disciplines often has some scientific field behind it ( e . g . , art and music have perceptual psy - chology ; interaction design has well - established psychological roots ; many parts of business have a basis in decision theory , economics , and finance ; and medicine has biology and chem - istry ) . But even in the fields with a substantive scientific basis , the practical applications to the daily practice are very limited . Thus , although biology is important as a foundation for medicine , it gives no guidance regard - ing patient - doctor interaction , patient histories , or diagnosis , and it has nothing to say about patient empathy or best hospital practices . In business , finance and economics provide a ratio - nale for investment decisions , but where do the best manage - ment principles come from ? In law , what science underlies jury selection or presentations ? There is a great deal of music theory , but very little is directly relevant to music performance . In the end , practical disciplines are all taught through apprenticeship , internship , residency , and long periods of training . In science there are clear links among hypotheses , conclu - sions , and evidence . But in the practices of most professions , the links are tenuous at best . Instead , there is much reliance upon “best practice , ” where “best” is often defined by short - term measurements , usually of variables that are easy to mea - sure as opposed to those that are the most significant . Long - term measures are seldom taken ; methods are seldom compared . Note : It is not easy to figure out and skills to understand business plans and marketing strategy , to know how to lead a team of perhaps hundreds of developers to produce a reliable , bug - free set of code with millions of lines of instructions that can work across the many platforms and pertur - bations of equipment and appli - cations found in the real world , who can simultaneously make use of all the advanced research learnings of the multiple relevant disciplines : the social sciences , business , and technology . This is why I think the research - practice gap is so universal and so diffi - cult to overcome . Reexamining the Basics of Design The research - practice gap is only one of many problems facing the design profession . One other issue is that many of our basic beliefs about how to develop and design are built upon a shallow , insecure founda - tion . In the many years I have been writing this column , I have reconsidered some highly cher - ished beliefs in the practice of design and found many of the principles wanting . We know surprisingly little about how to do design . There is no science of the practice in the same sense that there is a science to the structural analysis of buildings and bridges , or to the building of circuits . Design is still an art , taught by apprenticeship , with many myths and strong beliefs , but incredibly little supporting evidence . We do not know the best way to design something . The real problem is that we believe we do . Beliefs are based more on faith than on data . This is a problem that con - fronts all professional disci - structure of potential products and the resulting profitability . Practitioners do not have time to deal with debates about the problems and difficulties that people face with new technolo - gies . They do , however , want to hear about the benefits and the new product directions to pursue . Studies of technology - induced alienation or concerns ( or lack of concern ) over privacy might be of great importance for society , but not for driving the next product cycle . Even when some research demonstration excites the product side of a company , it is seldom ready for release . Transforming a research demon - stration into a practical product that can be sold profitably in the marketplace is a complex and demanding job , a job for which the research community does not have the skills , patience , or interest . The skill sets that make for a creative , insightful researcher are very different from the skills required of devel - opment engineers to make some - thing work reliably and inexpen - sively or of marketing teams who must determine not what people actually need ( which is where researchers tread ) , but what they will actually purchase . Product people have to worry about sales and profitability , reliability and cost . These issues are seldom of interest to researchers and , moreover , are not within their normal skill sets . I emphasize the difference in required skills between research and practice to ensure that these comments are not taken as criticism . They are meant to reflect the reality that it is rare for a single individual to have the breadth and depth of knowledge i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2010 10 The Mystery of Product Development how to do these studies or com - parisons . Once again , this is not meant as criticism , but rather as a description of the current state of affairs . Scientists usually operate in what has been called “white room” conditions , care - fully forming abstract character - izations of the phenomena under consideration and studying them in a controlled research envi - ronment or the clean precision of the laboratory . Similarly , the theories are of necessity simpli - fied and abstracted to a pristine form of mathematical or simula - tion models . Science works best when all the variables are under - stood and controlled . But the real world is complex and messy , with uncontrolled variables , sometimes behaving in ways that contradict the neat , tidy , logical assumptions of the scientist . No wonder there is a gap . The lack of scientific stud - ies of practice is due to two things : First , practitioners are not trained in scientific research . They do not understand the need for experimental controls , nor do they understand statistical variability and experimental biases . Moreover , they don’t wish to—they want to get on with their work . Second , even when researchers well versed in experimental methods attempt to study practices , they discover the very nature of a practical discipline throws in so many idiosyncratic variables that rigor is simply not possible . In the field of design , many researchers end up studying the designers themselves . “How do designers think ? ” is a standard research question . I have seen many studies comparing indi - viduals with groups , or people in one culture with those of another . All of these studies make for interesting reading , but I find them of little value in help - ing us know how designers ought to work or how they ought to think . As a result , we have many myths about the power of design research , brainstorming , rapid prototyping , iterative test and design , but zero evidence . When researchers try to collect evidence , they often take a bunch of students , do some simple manipulations , and then try to state a general conclusion . The entire study lasts a few hours or at most an academic quarter or semester . I am continually amazed that the research com - munity believes the study of naive , unskilled students tells us anything at all about the practical problems of design in a large company , with multiple constraints and requirements , working in teams , with highly practiced and accomplished skills . Moreover , real design proj - ects take months and sometimes years . The difference between the researchers’ notion of the design setting and reality is immense . Misunderstandings : The Case of “Technology First , Needs Last” In my March + April 2010 col - umn , “Technology First , Needs Last , ” I stated that design research was quite effective at improving existing products both for their intended uses and also to move them into unexpected application areas , but it played little or no role in original inven - tion . New technology occurred first , I argued , with inventors doing their thing without the benefit of any design research , with few people besides the inventors believing there was a need . This blind , research - free invention often fails , but it is also the source of our major innovations . This approach has led to such breakthroughs as the telephone , phonograph , radio , automobile , Internet , CD , por - table music player , and camera . Design researchers had nothing to do with the initial develop - ments . Instead , the researchers have come along afterward and sometimes made valuable con - tributions , demonstrating how the product could be improved for its intended usage and , more important , by noticing needs not satisfied by the existing product and identifying how it might serve a vastly different audience from the one for which it was originally intended . The traditional folklore of research and development holds that there is a smooth , steady chain from pure , basic research to more applied research , to advanced products , to commodi - ty products . As a large number of studies of research and develop - ment have shown , this nice , logi - cal progression does not exist . Yet the myth persists . Donald Stokes’s book , Pasteur’s Quadrant , provides a nice anti - dote . Here , Stokes argues the most effective research can be seen in what Pasteur did when he developed the smallpox vac - cine . He started with a real , practical problem , realized it needed some fundamental scientific advances before it could be solved , did the science , and then applied it back to the problem . In other words , the research was done in search of a solution to a real problem : what Stokes calls “use - inspired basic research . ” Stokes argued that research can often be character - ized along two dimensions . The Stokes , D . E . Pasteur’s Quadrant : Basic Science and Technological Innovation . Washington D . C . : Brookings Institution Press , 1997 . i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2010 11 OPINION THe WaY I See IT from research to practice and from practice to research . Translational developers are needed who can mine the insights of researchers and hone them into practical , reliable , and useful results . Similarly , trans - lational developers must help convert the problems and con - cerns of practice into the clear , need - based statements that can drive researchers to develop new insights . Neither direction of translation is easy . Great innovations can come from anywhere , anyplace . Usually they come about when a new technology is unleashed upon the world and inventors and technologists scurry to find something they can do with it . Most of these attempts fail , but a few stick . The researchers come aboard after the technol - ogy has been unleashed . But this is precisely when they can be most effective , because it is now that they can play Pasteur’s game : starting with a real need , figuring out what the scientific requirements are , doing the sci - ence , and then feeding the results back to a practitioner community desperately awaiting those findings . There is a huge gap between research and practice . To bridge the gap , we need a new kind of practitioner : the translational developer . The gap is real , but it can be bridged . About the Author Don Norman wears many hats , including cofounder of the Nielsen Norman Group , professor at Northwestern University , visiting professor at KAIST ( South Korea ) , and author . His lat - est book is Living with Complexity . He lives at jnd . org . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1806491 . 1806494 © 2010 ACM 1072 - 5220 / 10 / 0700 $ 10 . 00 first dimension is about the kind of knowledge that is sought : fundamental or practical . The second dimension concerns consideration of use : whether it is a search for pure knowledge without consideration of use or whether it is aimed at some fun - damental , practical problem . The two dimensions give rise to four quadrants . Those who seek fundamental knowledge without consideration of how it might be used fit the general view of the impractical longhair mathematician or scientist . Inventors such as Thomas Edison fit the quadrant of searching for relevant knowledge to solve an applied problem , but without any attempt to expand our general understanding of phenomena . Hence , Edison’s classic search for the material that would improve the already existing lightbulb , allowing it to function more efficiently for greater duration , is a classic example . Although he succeeded in his quest , he did not advance our understanding of science or engineering . Edison provides an example of someone who did not attempt to add to our fundamental understanding but was consumed with making sure his inventions were practi - cal and useful . He did read the scientific literature , but he did not try to add to it . A third quad - rant is filled with tinkerers who produce inventions that neither add to fundamental understand - ing nor have any use . For Stokes , the most powerful quadrant is not that of the pure scientist . Rather , it is the quad - rant occupied by Pasteur , the quest for fundamental knowledge within a specific use context . This is where the biggest payoffs lie , at least according to Stokes . In the four quadrants formed by the axes of pure versus applied science , usages versus no use , researchers most often play in the fun quadrant , finding love - ly problems to work on without regard for whether anyone cares outside of their fellow research in - group . This is one reason for the research - practice gap . I recommend aiming at Pasteur’s quadrant—fundamental research geared to solving important applied problems . But even if researchers aim at the solution to practical prob - lems , they still face the funda - mental differences in the knowl - edge and skill sets required by those who conduct the research and those who attempt to trans - late those results into practical , reliable , and affordable form . Translational Development Between research and practice a third discipline must be inserted , one that can translate between the abstractions of research and the practicalities of practice . We need a discipline of transla - tional development . Medicine , biology , and the health sciences have been the first to recognize the need for this intermediary step through the funding and development of centers for trans - lational science . This intermedi - ate field is needed in all arenas of research , and it is of special importance to our community . We need translational develop - ers who can act as the inter - mediary , translating research findings into the language of practical development and busi - ness while also translating the needs of business into issues that researchers can address . Notice that the need for trans - lation goes in both directions : i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2010 12 The Mystery of Product Development