Article Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing Graphical Abstract Highlights d T cell cytotoxicity correlates with the exertion of mechanical force d Force exertion is associated with enhanced perforin pore formation on the target cell d Cell tension promotes perforin pore formation d Cytotoxic T cells spatiotemporally coordinate force exertion and perforin release Authors Roshni Basu , Benjamin M . Whitlock , Julien Husson , . . . , Judy Lieberman , Lance C . Kam , Morgan Huse Correspondence husem @ mskcc . org In Brief Cytotoxic T cells exert mechanical force against target cells through the immunological synapse . This potentiates target cell destruction by enhancing the pore - forming activity of the cytolytic molecule perforin . Basu et al . , 2016 , Cell 165 , 1 – 11 March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 Article Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing Roshni Basu , 1 , 10 Benjamin M . Whitlock , 2 , 10 Julien Husson , 3 , 10 Audrey Le Floc’h , 1 Weiyang Jin , 4 Alon Oyler - Yaniv , 5 Farokh Dotiwala , 6 Gregory Giannone , 7 Claire Hivroz , 8 Nicolas Biais , 9 Judy Lieberman , 6 Lance C . Kam , 4 and Morgan Huse 1 , * 1 Immunology Program , Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center , New York , NY 10065 , USA 2 Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate Program , Weill - Cornell Medical College , New York , NY 10065 , USA 3 Hydrodynamics Laboratory ( LadHyX ) , Department of Mechanics , Ecole Polytechnique , Palaiseau 91128 , France 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 , USA 5 Computational Biology Program , Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center , New York , NY 10065 , USA 6 Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 7 CNRS , University of Bordeaux , Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience , UMR 5297 , Bordeaux 33000 , France 8 Institute Curie , INSERM U932 , PSL Research University , Paris 75005 , France 9 Department of Biology , Brooklyn College of the City University of New York , New York , NY 11201 , USA 10 Co - ﬁrst author * Correspondence : husem @ mskcc . org http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 SUMMARY The immunological synapse formed between a cyto - toxic T lymphocyte ( CTL ) and an infected or trans - formed target cell is a physically active structure capable of exerting mechanical force . Here , we investigated whether synaptic forces promote the destruction of target cells . CTLs kill by secreting toxic proteases and the pore forming protein perforin into the synapse . Biophysical experiments revealed a striking correlation between the magnitude of force exertion across the synapse and the speed of per - forin pore formation on the target cell , implying that force potentiates cytotoxicity by enhancing perforin activity . Consistent with this interpretation , we found that increasing target cell tension augmented pore formation by perforin and killing by CTLs . Our data also indicate that CTLs coordinate perforin release and force exertion in space and time . These re - sults reveal an unappreciated physical dimension to lymphocyte function and demonstrate that cells use mechanical forces to control the activity of out - going chemical signals . INTRODUCTION Cells exchange information through adhesive and highly dy - namic cell - cell interactions . Within these contacts , communi - cative chemical processes are exposed to micrometer scale membrane and cytoskeletal movements capable of imparting substantial mechanical force . It is known that cells use applied force to sense the physical properties of their environment and translate this information into afferent chemical signals that ﬂow into the cell . This process , called mechanotransduction , plays critical roles in the activation and differentiation of multiple cell types ( Ingber , 2006 ; Orr et al . , 2006 ) . In principle , force could also modulate intercellular communication , particularly in close cell - cell interactions where movement on one side of the inter - face induces physical changes on the other side . Whether cell - derived forces actually contribute to the transmission of efferent signals in this manner , however , remains unclear . Cell - cell contacts in the immune system represent an inter - esting experimental context for exploring this question because they are structurally dynamic and also mediate a substantial amount of information transfer . One of the most important of these interactions is the immunological synapse ( IS ) used by cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTL ) to instruct infected or trans - formed target cells to die . Target cell killing is crucial for adaptive immune responses against intracellular pathogens , and it also plays a central role in several cell - based anti - cancer immuno - therapies ( Grupp and June , 2011 ) . IS assembly is triggered by the recognition of cognate peptide - major histocompatibility complex ( pMHC ) on a potential target by T cell receptors ( TCRs ) on the CTL . Once the IS forms , CTLs secrete a toxic mixture of proteins into the synaptic space that includes perforin and several granzyme proteases ( Stinchcombe and Grifﬁths , 2007 ) . Perforin is a hydrophobic molecule that forms calcium ( Ca 2 + ) - dependent pores in the target cell membrane . This induces a repair response that enables granzymes to access the target cell cytoplasm , where they induce apoptosis ( Keefe et al . , 2005 ; Thiery et al . , 2011 ) . Perforin and granzymes are stored in secretory lysosomes called lytic granules , which cluster around the centrosome in activated CTLs . During IS formation , the centrosome reorients to the center of the contact , placing the granules in close appo - sition to the synaptic membrane ( Stinchcombe et al . , 2006 ) . This polarization event is thought to enhance the potency and the speciﬁcity of killing by promoting directional release of granule contents toward the target . Recent results , however , indicate that CTLs kill quite effectively in the absence of centrosome re - orientation ( Bertrand et al . , 2013 ) , suggesting there are additional mechanisms by which the IS potentiates cytotoxicity . Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 1 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 IS formation also involves intense remodeling of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , which controls both the growth and the organi - zation of the interface ( Le Floc’h and Huse , 2015 ) . Recently , we demonstrated that phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) activity stimulates actin polymerization within the IS by recruiting Dock2 , an exchange factor for the Rho GTPase Rac ( Le Floc’h et al . , 2013 ) . CTLs lacking Dock2 form miniaturized synapses that are structurally unstable . Conversely , depletion of PTEN , a lipid phosphatase that antagonizes PI3K , markedly enhances IS growth . Interestingly , whereas Dock2 - deﬁcient CTLs kill target cells poorly , PTEN - deﬁcient CTLs exhibit dramatically enhanced cytotoxicity ( Le Floc’h et al . , 2013 ) . These results establish an intriguing link between target cell killing and F - actin remodeling at the IS . The mechanistic basis for this relationship , however , has remained unclear . Synaptic F - actin is highly dynamic , exhibiting constant retro - grade ﬂow toward the center of the IS as well as bursts of anter - ograde ﬂow in the opposite direction ( Bunnell et al . , 2001 ; Grakoui et al . , 1999 ; Ritter et al . , 2015 ) . These and other effects enable the T cell to impart nanonewton scale forces against the target cell ( Bashour et al . , 2014 ; Husson et al . , 2011 ) . In the pre - sent study , we combined speciﬁc perturbations of PI3K - Dock2 signaling with single cell biophysical approaches to investigate the impact of synaptic forces on CTL function . We found that force exertion at the IS potentiates killing by straining the target cell surface and thereby enhancing the pore forming activity of perforin . These results demonstrate that T cells mix physical and chemical outputs to enhance their effector responses and reveal an unexpected role for cellular mechanics in intercellular communication . RESULTS Cytotoxicity Correlates with Synaptic Force Exertion The killing phenotypes observed in PTEN - and Dock2 - deﬁcient CTLs implied an important role for PI3K - dependent F - actin re - modeling in cellular cytotoxicity . To investigate this relationship , we ﬁrst examined the distribution of lytic granules in CTL - target cell conjugates . CTLs expressing the OT1 TCR , which recog - nizes the ovalbumin 257 – 264 peptide ( OVA ) bound to the class I MHC molecule H2 - K b , were transduced with short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) against PTEN ( shPTEN ) or Dock2 ( shDock2 ) or with nontargeting control shRNA ( shNT ) ( Figure S1 ) . They were then mixed with OVA - loaded EL4 target cells and the resulting conju - gates ﬁxed and stained to visualize lytic granules ( Figure 1A ) . Suppression of Dock2 or PTEN had no effect on granule polari - zation to the IS ( Figure 1B ) , indicating that intracellular trafﬁcking of cytotoxic cargo does not involve PI3K - Dock2 signaling . We Figure 1 . PTEN and Dock2 Are Not Required for Lytic Granule Polarization and Ca 2 + Flux ( A and B ) OT1 CTLs expressing the indicated shRNAs were mixed with OVA - loaded EL4 cells , ﬁxed , and stained for pericentrin and Lamp1 to visualize the centrosome and lytic granules , respectively . ( A ) Left : brightﬁeld image of a representative CTL - target cell conjugate . Right : corresponding ﬂuorescence image , with white lines indicating CTL boundaries . ( B ) Left : polarization index was calculated using the center of gravity ( COG ) of the lytic granules ( see Supplemental ExperimentalProcedures ) . Right : quantiﬁcationoflyticgranulepolarizationindex ( n R 37persample ) . Differenceswerenotsigniﬁcant ( two - tailedStudent’sttest ) . ( C ) OT1 CTLs expressing the indicated shRNAs were mixed with OVA - loaded EL4 cells and degranulation assessed by surface exposure of Lamp1 . ( D ) CTLs expressing the indicated shRNAs were loaded with Fura2 - AM and imaged on glass surfaces coated with H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 . Left : representative time - lapse montages of CTLs contacting the stimulatory surfaces . Images are pseudocolored with warmer colors ( e . g . , orange , red ) indicating higher concentrations of intracellular Ca 2 + . Time in MM : SS is indicated above the montages . Right : mean normalized Fura ratio ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) graphed against time . n R 21 cells per sample . All scale bars , 10 m m . Error bars denote SEM . Data are representative of at least two independent experiments . See also Figure S1 . 2 Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 also quantiﬁed granule release ( called degranulation ) from CTLs by measuring surface exposure of the granule resident protein Lamp1 after stimulation with target cells . This response was unaffected by depletion of PTEN or Dock2 ( Figure 1C ) , consistent with previous results ( Le Floc’h et al . , 2013 ) . Finally , we examined TCR - induced calcium ( Ca 2 + ) ﬂux , a requisite step for granule clustering and exocytosis ( Beal et al . , 2009 ; Ostergaard et al . , 1987 ) , by imaging CTLs on glass surfaces coated with H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 ( a ligand for the a L b 2 integ - rin LFA1 ) . Dock2 - and PTEN - deﬁcient CTLs displayed robust Ca 2 + responses that were comparable to those of shNT ex - pressing controls ( Figures 1D and 1E ) . Taken together , these data indicate that suppression of PTEN and Dock2 does not affect granule polarization and fusion at the IS , implying that these perturbations inﬂuence cytotoxicity via a different mechanism . Force exertion across the IS could , in principle , provide a physical avenue for control of target cell killing . To investigate this possibility , we ﬁrst asked whether PI3K - Dock2 signaling , which controls cytotoxic efﬁciency , might also regulate IS mechanics . Accordingly , we compared synaptic force exertion in OT1 CTLs transduced with shNT , shPTEN , and shDock2 . To measure forces perpendicular to the IS , we used micropipettes to place individual CTLs in contact with polystyrene beads coated with H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 ( Figure 2A ) . Subsequent bead displacements toward or away from the CTL were trans - lated into force measurements using the known stiffness of the micropipette holding the bead ( see Experimental Procedures ) . Contact with stimulatory beads induced a rapid CTL spreading response not unlike IS formation with a target cell . Spreading was frequently accompanied by transient pushing of the bead away from its initial position . This was followed in almost all cases by a pronounced pulling phase in which the bead became engulfed by the CTL ( Figure 2B ; Movie S1 ) . Analysis of kymo - Figure 2 . PI3K Signaling Controls Force Exertion Perpendicular to the IS ( A ) Schematic diagram of the micropipette - based system . ( B ) Time - lapse montage of a representative micro - pipette experiment . Dashed white line denotes the initialpositionofthebead . TimeisindicatedinM : SS in the bottom left corner of each image . ( C ) Kymograph oftheexperimentshownin ( B ) . The loading rate can be derived from the slope of the red line . ( D ) Average loading rate during the pulling phase of theresponse , calculatedforcells expressing the indicated shRNAs . Error bars denote SEM . n R 10 cells percondition . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , calculated by two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . All scale bars , 5 m m . Data are representative of at least two in - dependent experiments . See also Movie S1 . graphs derived from each experimental trial enabled us to determine the rate of bead movement during the pulling phase of the response ( Figure 2C ) , which is pro - portional to the pulling force . This param - eter , called the loading rate , was signiﬁcantly enhanced in CTLs lacking PTEN and markedly reduced in CTLs lacking Dock2 ( Figure 2D ) . These results indicate that PI3K - Dock2 signaling drives force exertion perpendicular to the CTL - target cell interface . To measure forces in the plane of the IS , we imaged OT1 CTLs on arrays of polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) micropillars bearing immobilized H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 ( Figure 3A ) ( Bashour et al . , 2014 ) . Because the dimensions ( 6 m m tall , 0 . 7 m m diameter ) and composition of these pillars were known , observed pillar deﬂections could be converted into force vectors . OT1 CTLs exhibited cell spreading and OVA - induced Ca 2 + ﬂux upon con - tact with the arrays , consistent with canonical TCR activation and signaling ( Figures 3B and S2A ) . In most cells , spreading was associated with centrifugal pillar deﬂections , indicative of outwardly oriented forces ( Figures 3B and 3C ; Movie S2 ) . After the size of the interface stabilized , these deﬂections tended to reverse polarity and point inward . The progression from cen - trifugal ‘‘spreading’’ to centripetal ‘‘squeezing’’ was reminiscent of the responses displayed by naive CD4 + T cells on pillar arrays ( Bashour et al . , 2014 ) . However , OT1 CTLs exerted substantially more force per pillar than naive cells ( Figure 3D ) ( Bashour et al . , 2014 ) , and their force proﬁles were less symmetric . Indeed , instantaneous force exertion tended to be concentrated in ‘‘hotspots’’ characterized by the strong deﬂection of one to three pillars ( Figure 3B , green asterisks ) . Importantly , suppression of PTEN markedly enhanced force exertion on both individual pillars and also the entire array ( Figures 3E and S2B ) . Dock2 suppression gave less conclusive results , with some experi - ments revealing a slight inhibitory effect and others indicating no signiﬁcant difference ( Figures 3F and S2B ) . It is possible that forces in the plane of the IS are less sensitive to reduced PI3K signaling than those in the orthogonal dimension . Never - theless , when taken together with our micropipette data , these Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 3 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 studies indicate that CTLs exert multidimensional PI3K - depen - dent forces against the target cell . Myosin - based contractility is crucial for the generation of actin - dependent forces in multiple cell types , and clusters of the nonmuscle myosin II ( NMII ) isoform have been observed within the T cell IS ( Babich et al . , 2012 ; Jacobelli et al . , 2004 ; Yi et al . , 2012 ) . Although the precise function of synaptic NMII re - mains controversial ( Hammer and Burkhardt , 2013 ) , it is appro - priately positioned to contribute to force exertion . To investigate this possibility , we examined micropillar deﬂection in the pres - ence of blebbistatin , a small molecule myosin II inhibitor . Bleb - bistatin treatment dramatically reduced force exertion during both the ‘‘spreading’’ and ‘‘squeezing’’ phases of the response ( Figures 3G and S2C ) , indicative of an important role for NMII in IS mechanics . Next , we asked whether synaptic force exertion by NMII modulates cytotoxicity . For these experiments , we uti - lized shRNA knockdown of the myosin heavy chain MyH9 ( shMyH9 ) to target the NMII complex selectively in CTLs . This strategy yielded only partial suppression of MyH9 ( Figure S2D ) , as previously reported ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) . CTLs expressing shMyH9 exhibited a subtle , but consistent killing defect that paralleled the partial knockdown of the protein ( Figure 3H ) . Importantly , TCR - induced degranulation was not inhibited in these cells ( Figure S2E ) , indicating that TCR activation and signaling remained intact . We conclude that myosin activity , like PI3K signaling , controls both cytotoxicity and synaptic force exertion . PI3K Signaling Accelerates Perforin Pore Formation Next , we re - examined how PI3K signaling affects cytotoxicity , focusing on events that occur downstream of perforin and gran - zyme secretion . Perforin initiates killing by forming plasma mem - brane pores on the target cell ( Pipkin and Lieberman , 2007 ) . This event can be visualized by imaging CTLs and target cells in the presence of high concentration ( 100 m M ) propidium iodide ( PI ) ( Keefe et al . , 2005 ; Lopez et al . , 2013 ) . Plasma membrane perfo - ration allows PI to access the cytoplasm , rendering the target cell ﬂuorescent ( Figure 4A ) . To quantify the rate of perforin pore formation using this approach , we imaged OVA - loaded RMA - s target cells together with OT1 CTLs in 50 3 50 m m PDMS microwells , which facilitate extended observation of indi - vidual CTL - target cell interactions ( Figure 4B ; Movie S3 ) . These experiments revealed that CTLs expressing shPTEN were signif - icantly more effective at inducing perforin pore formation than Figure 3 . PI3K Signaling and NMII Control Force Exertion Parallel to the IS ( A ) Schematic diagram of the micropillar system . ( B – F ) CTLs expressing shNT , shDock2 , or shPTEN were imaged on stimulatory micropillar arrays . ( B ) Time - lapse montage of a representative CTL - micropillar interaction . Time is indicated in the top right corner of each image . Large pillar deﬂections are indicated by yellow arrows . Green asterisks denote ‘‘hotspots’’ of strong force exertion . ( C ) Average projection of pillar deﬂections along the line connecting each pillar to the cell’s center of gravity ( COG projection ) was determined for theCTLshown in ( B ) and plottedagainst time . ( D ) Aggregateplotofinstantaneous force per pillar exerted by theCTL in ( B ) , graphedagainst time . Pink dots denotepillars incontactwiththecell , and bluedotsdenote pillars outside of theinterface . Average forceper pillar within theinterface is showningreen and background force per pillar in cyan . ( E and F ) Total force exertion against the pillar array graphed versus time for CTLs expressing the indicated shRNAs . n R 6 cells per sample . ( G ) CTLs treated with 50 m M blebbistatin ( Bleb ) or vehicle control ( Veh ) were imaged on stimulatory micropillar arrays . Total force exertion against the array is graphed as in ( E ) . ( H ) CTLs expressing the indicated shRNAs were mixed 1 : 1 with OVA - loaded RMA - s cells . Speciﬁc lysis is graphed as a function of OVA concentration . All error bars denote SEM . Data are representative of at least two independent experiments . See also Figure S2 and Movie S2 . 4 Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 shNT expressing controls . The fraction of interactions associ - ated with target cell PI incorporation was higher ( 93 % for shPTEN CTLs versus 71 % for shNT CTLs ) , and among these , the time delay between IS formation and PI ﬂuorescence ( inﬂux time ) was signiﬁcantly reduced ( Figure 4C ) . CTLs lacking PTEN exhibited higher total levels of perforin protein ( Figure 4D ) , which could , in principle , explain the enhanced pore formation we observed . This increase in per - forin expression could be reversed , however , by removing one copy of the prf1 gene in the context of PTEN deﬁciency . Importantly , killing by PTEN - deﬁcient prf1 + / (cid:1) CTLs was essen - tially equivalent to that of PTEN - deﬁcient prf1 + / + CTLs and substantially greater than that of prf1 + / + shNT controls ( Fig - ure 4E ) . Hence , it is unlikely that the accelerated pore forma - tion seen in the absence of PTEN resulted from changes in perforin expression . Rather , PTEN suppression appeared to boost cytotoxicity by increasing perforin activity on a per molecule basis . Cell Tension Potentiates Target Cell Lysis Biophysical studies have shown that increasing the tension of target membranes boosts the activity of pore forming peptides , implying that tangential force can reduce the energetic cost of inserting a hydrophobic molecule into the bilayer ( Huang et al . , 2004 ; Lee et al . , 2008 ; Polozov et al . , 2001 ) . Accordingly , we Figure 4 . PTEN Deﬁciency Enhances Per - forin Pore Formation ( A ) Schematic diagram showing perforin pore detection by PI . ( B and C ) CTLs expressing shNT or shPTEN together with cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) were mixed with carboxyﬂuorescein succinimidyl ester ( CFSE ) - labeled , OVA - loaded RMA - s cells and imaged in PDMS microwells in the presence of 100 m M PI . ( B ) Time - lapse montage of a repre - sentative microwell showing conjugate formation ( magenta asterisk ) and PI inﬂux ( purple arrow - head ) . Time is indicated in H : MM in the bottom left corner of each image . ( C ) Time between conjugate formationand PI inﬂux ( PI inﬂux time ) quantiﬁed for shNT and shPTEN expressing CTLs . Error bars denote SEM . n R 65 conjugates per sample . P value calculated by two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . ( D ) Perforin ( Prf ) expression in the indicated CTLs was analyzed by western blot . Actin served as a loading control . ( E ) prf1 + / + and prf1 + / (cid:1) CTLs expressing the indi - cated shRNAs were mixed 1 : 1 with OVA - loaded RMA - s cells . Speciﬁc lysis isgraphedasafunction ofOVAconcentration . Dataarerepresentativeofat least two independent experiments . See also Movie S3 . reasoned that synaptic forces might potentiate perforin pore formation by applying tension to the target cell . To explore the relationship between cell tension and perforin function , we grew adherent cells on polyacrylamide hydro - gels of varying elasticity ( Engler et al . , 2006 ) . Cell tension in this culture system mirrors the underlying hydrogel ; stiff hydro - gels enforce high tension , while soft hydrogels induce the opposite effect ( Chan and Odde , 2008 ; Hui et al . , 2015 ; Lo et al . , 2000 ; Oakes et al . , 2009 ) . Consistent with this princi - ple , we found that B16 melanoma cells adopted a stellate architecture on stiff ( E = 50 kPa ) hydrogels characteristic of high tension , while on soft ( E = 12 kPa ) hydrogels they dis - played a more collapsed morphology ( Figure S3 ) . To assess perforin pore formation under each condition , we treated the cells with puriﬁed perforin protein ( (cid:3) 1 m g / ml ) in the presence of 100 m M PI ( Figure 5A ) . Although the capacity of perforin to induce PI inﬂux varied from day to day ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) , we consistently observed that cells on 50 kPa substrates were more sensitive to pore formation than those on 12 kPa substrates , implying that increased cell tension potentiates perforin activity ( Figures 5B , 5C , and S4A ; Movies S4 and S5 ) . Next , we investigated whether target cell tension similarly modulates CTL - mediated killing . OT1 CTLs were added to OVA - loaded B16 cells grown on stiff or soft substrates and target cell lysis measured by the release of lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) , a cytoplasmic enzyme ( Figure 5D ) . Killing was signiﬁcantly enhanced on 50 kPa hydrogels relative to 12 kPa hydrogels , despite equivalent levels of TCR - induced degranulation ( Figures Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 5 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 5E and S5 ) . Importantly , target cell killing by the small molecule staurosporine , which induces apoptosis in multiple cell types , was unaffected by substrate elasticity ( Figures 5F and 5G ) . B16 cells grown on stiff matrices are therefore not intrinsically less viable . Rather , they are selectively sensitized to perforin - dependent killing . Cell tension is imposed both by the cytoskeletal cortex and by the plasma membrane . To determine the relative contribu - tions of membrane and cortical tension to perforin function , we assessed pore formation in the presence of reagents that alter the two parameters differentially ( Figure 6A ) . Blebbistatin , by inhibiting myosin II , reduces cortical tension while increasing membrane tension ( Houk et al . , 2012 ; Lee et al . , 2011 ) . By contrast , the actin depolymerization agent latrunculin A re - Figure 5 . Cell Tension Promotes Perforin Pore Formation and CTL - Mediated Killing ( A – C ) B16 cells were cultured overnight on stiff ( E = 50 kPa ) or soft ( E = 12 kPa ) hydrogels , stained with Hoechst 33342 , and treated with the indi - cated dilutions of perforin ( 1 : 1 , 000 z 1 m g / ml ﬁnal concentration ) in the presence of 100 m M PI . ( A ) Schematic diagram of the perforation assay . ( B ) Representative images before and after per - forin treatment on both stiff ( top ) and soft ( bottom ) hydrogels . Perforated cells were identiﬁed by their PI + nuclei . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of a representative perforation experiment on hydrogels . Total cell counts are shown in parentheses above each bar . ( D ) Schematic diagram of a B16 killing assay on hydrogel substrate . ( E ) OT1CTLswereaddedtoOVA - loadedB16cells grown on stiff or soft hydrogels . Speciﬁc lysis was quantiﬁed by LDH release at the indicated effector to target ( E : T ) ratios . ( F ) Schematic diagram of staurosporine - induced apoptosis on hydrogel substrate . ( G ) B16 cells grown on stiff or soft hydrogels were exposed to the indicated concentrations of staurosporine . Apoptosis was quantiﬁed by LDH release . Error bars denote SEM . Data are repre - sentative of at least two independent experiments . See also Figures S3 , S4 , and S5 and Movies S4 and S5 . duces both parameters ( Masters et al . , 2013 ; Wakatsuki et al . , 2001 ) . Treatment of adherent B16 cells with latrunculin A substantially decreased pore formation by puriﬁed perforin , while blebbistatin reproducibly enhanced it ( Figures 6B , S4B , and S4C ) . These results suggested that membrane tension , rather than cortical tension , controls perforin activity . To further test this idea , we treated cells with hypotonic and hypertonic buffers , which increase and decrease , respec - tively , membrane tension ( Houk et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 6C ) . Pore formation was enhanced by hypotonic buffer and sup - pressed by hypertonicity ( Figures 6D and S4D ) , further supporting the idea that perforin and mem - brane tension function synergistically . Synaptic Force Exertion Is Coordinated with Degranulation Finally , we examined whether perforin release is spatiotempo - rally correlated with the application of force at the IS , using a degranulation probe containing a pH - sensitive GFP ( pHluorin ) attached to the C - terminal domain of Lamp1 ( Rak et al . , 2011 ) . pHluorin - Lamp1 is sorted into lytic granules , where its ﬂuores - cence is quenched by the acidic environment . Granule fusion with the plasma membrane , however , neutralizes the pH around the pHluorin , allowing it to ﬂuoresce . When CTLs expressing pHluorin - Lamp1 were imaged on PDMS micropillars coated 6 Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 with H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 , degranulation events appeared as abrupt increases in green ﬂuorescence within the interface be - tween the CTL and the array ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Most events occurred within 5 min of initial contact ( Figure 7C ) and many seemed to be closely associated with hotspots of strong force exertion ( Figure 7D ) . To quantify the relationship between degranulation and force , we computed the distance between each granule fusion event and the closest pillar experiencing strong deﬂections during that time ( called the distance to displaced pillar [ DDP ] ; see Experimental Procedures ) . We then compared each value to a null distribution generated by performing the DDP calculation for every x - y position within the interface between the CTL and the array ( Figure 7E ) . DDP values associated with degranulation events were signiﬁcantly lower than the mean values of their paired null distributions , indicating that the observed coupling between granule release and pillar deﬂection did not occur by chance ( Figure 7F ) . We also quantiﬁed the radial distribution of degranulation and force exertion within the IS ( Figure 7G ) and found that both parameters were enriched within an annular re - gion slightly more than halfway between the center of the IS and its outer edge ( Figures 7H and 7I ) . Taken together , these results suggest that CTLs spatiotemporally coordinate cytolytic secre - tion with the local application of force , and they also identify a domain within the IS in which these interactions occur . Could forces within this degranulation zone apply enough membrane tension to potentiate perforin pore formation ? To address this question , we ﬁrst determined the membrane ten - sion change necessary to sensitize a cell to perforin . Using an established approach in which an optical trap is used to pull a thin tether of membrane from the cell surface ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 ) ( Figures S6A and S6B ) , we calculated the membrane tension of adherent B16 cells to be 100 m N / m . In the presence of latrunculin A , which protects cells from perforin pore for - mation ( Figures 6B and S4B ) , membrane tension decreased to 15 m N / m . These data suggest that an (cid:3) 85 m N / m difference in membrane tension ( equivalent to 85 3 10 (cid:1) 18 J / m m 2 ) is sufﬁcient to make perforin pore formation more energetically favorable ( Figure S6C ) . Assuming a pore size of 15 nm , this tensional dif - ference implies a free energy change of 1 . 5 3 10 (cid:1) 20 J per pore ( see Experimental Procedures ) . In micropillar experiments , we routinely observed pillar deﬂections of > 1 m m within force exer - tion hotspots . Each of these strong deﬂections required > 340 pN of force ( Figure 3D ) , implying the transfer of > 170 3 10 (cid:1) 18 J of mechanical energy ( see Experimental Procedures ) within an (cid:3) 1 m m 2 region of the array . This degree of energy transmis - sion ( 170 3 10 (cid:1) 18 J / m m 2 ) compares favorably with the tensional change ( 85 3 10 (cid:1) 18 J / m m 2 ) demonstrated by the tether experi - ments to modulate perforin activity , and it would be sufﬁcient , in principle , to mechanically potentiate a large number of pores . Hence , under conditions of close synaptic contact , CTLs should be capable of locally sensitizing the target cell membrane to perforin . DISCUSSION Communication between immune cells is generally presented as a chemical process based on ligand recognition by receptors . It is becoming increasingly clear , however , that mechanical forces at cell - cell interfaces are necessary both to enable and to regu - late communicative chemical interactions . Recent studies have documented the importance of cytoskeletally driven pulling for receptor activation and antigen uptake ( Comrie et al . , 2015 ; Liu et al . , 2014 ; Natkanski et al . , 2013 ) , which are both processes that mediate information ﬂow into the lymphocyte . Our results demonstrate that physical forces can also modulate information ﬂow out of the cell , in this case by potentiating the activity of a secreted protein , perforin . This synergy between applied force and outgoing chemical signals , which we term mechanopoten - tiation , conceptually expands the purview of cellular mechanics Figure 6 . Membrane Tension Potentiates Perforin Pore Formation ( A ) Diagram schematizing the effects of blebbis - tatin ( Bleb ) and latrunculin A ( Lat A ) on cortical ( C ) and membrane ( M ) tension . Lamellipodial F - actin and stress ﬁbers are indicated in orange . ( B ) B16 cells cultured on plastic were treated with perforin ( 1 : 1 , 000dilution ) inthepresenceof100 m M PI and either 100 m M Bleb , 7 . 5 m M Lat A , or vehicle control ( Veh ) as indicated . Perforation was quan - tiﬁed by PI incorporation . ( C ) Diagram schematizing the effects of hypotonic ( Hypo ) or hypertonic ( Hyper ) medium on mem - brane tension . ( D ) B16 cells cultured on plastic were treated with perforin ( 1 : 1 , 000 dilution ) in the presence of 100 m M PI either in isotonic ( Iso ) , hypotonic , or hypertonic medium as indicated . Perforation was quantiﬁed by PI incorporation . In ( B ) and ( D ) , total cell counts are shown in parentheses above each bar . Data are representative of three independent experiments . See also Figure S4 . Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 7 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 as an active mediator of not only afferent but also efferent inter - cellular communication . It has been proposed that the IS enhances the intensity and speciﬁcity of intercellular communication by restricting the diffusion of secreted factors ( Huse et al . , 2006 ; Stinchcombe and Grifﬁths , 2007 ; Woodsworth et al . , 2015 ) . Studies of cyto - kine - mediated communication , however , indicate that soluble proteins escape the T cell - target cell interface very quickly ( Fei - nerman et al . , 2010 ; Mu ¨ ller et al . , 2012 ; Sanderson et al . , 2012 ) . An alternative strategy for boosting selectivity and efﬁciency would involve locally increasing the speciﬁc activity of secreted molecules . Synaptic mechanopotentiation of perforin pore for - mation falls into this second class of mechanisms . Synergy be - tween force exertion and perforin activity would reduce the amount of degranulation required for each killing event and thereby limit bystander damage resulting from excessive cyto - lytic secretion . It would also facilitate serial killing by enabling CTLs to reserve perforin and granzyme for other targets . We expect that other cytotoxic lymphocytes will also employ this strategy . OurresultsdemonstratethatNMIIiscriticalforforceexertionat the IS . This is surprising given that myosin activity is dispensable Figure 7 . Degranulation Is Spatiotemporally Correlated with Force Exertion at the IS ( A ) Diagram schematizing ﬂuorescent detection of degranulation during a micropillar experiment . ( B – I ) CTLs expressingpHluorin - Lamp1 were imaged on stimulatorymicropillar arrays . ( B ) Representative time - lapse montage showingpillar deﬂections during a degranulation event ( indicated by the yellow arrowhead ) . Time is indicated in M : SS in the top right corner of each image . ( C ) Graph of the offset time between contactformationanddegranulation ( degranulationtime ) . ( D ) Graphicalrepresentationofthepillararrayin ( B ) , withthedegranulationpositiondepictedasagreen circle and the cell envelope at the moment of degranulation shown in black . Pillars are color - coded based on their average deﬂection during the degranulation . Warmer colors ( e . g . , orange , red ) denote stronger deﬂections . The DDP for this degranulation is indicated by the double - headed white arrow . ( E ) Histogram plot derivedfrom theexperiment in ( B ) showing the DDP for each position in theCTLinterface . The mean value for thedistribution isdenoted by theverticalcyan line . The vertical green line indicates the DDP for the degranulation itself . ( F ) DDPs of degranulation ( Degran ) were compared to the mean values of their paired null distributions . * * * p < 0 . 001 , calculated by two - tailed paired t test . ( G ) Schematic diagram of the CTL - array interface showing the radial shells used for spatial analysis . ( HandI ) Theradialdistributionoftotalforceexertion ( H ) anddegranulationposition ( I ) indegranulatingcells . Color - codingofthebarscorrespondstothe shells shown in ( G ) . Gray bars indicate the spatial distribution that would be expected by chance ( outer shells are larger than inner ones ) . All error bars denote SEM . For ( C ) , ( F ) , and ( I ) , n = 49 degranulation events pooled from three independent experiments . See also Figure S6 . 8 Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 for IS formation and only modestly affects synaptic architecture ( Babich et al . , 2012 ; Jacobelli et al . , 2004 ; Yi et al . , 2012 ) . We also found that depletion of NMII reduced CTL - mediated cyto - toxicity , implying that myosin - dependent forces contribute to mechanopotentiation during target cell killing . Although we favor this interpretation , it must be noted that CTLs lacking NMII also exhibit delayed centrosome polarization ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) . A partial polarity defect could affect cytotoxicity by altering the directionality of cytolytic secretion . Hence , at this stage we cannot attribute the killing phenotype of NMII - deﬁcient cells solely to a defect in force exertion . Perforin pores drive target cell killing by inducing a membrane repair response that stimulates the uptake of additional perforin and granzymes ( Keefe et al . , 2005 ; Thiery et al . , 2011 ) . Although the methods used in this study assessed the effects of cellular mechanics on initial pore formation , they did not address whether force might also modulate membrane repair down - stream . Membrane tension has been implicated in the regulation of both exo - and endocytosis in multiple cell types ( Diz - Mun˜oz et al . , 2013 ) . It is therefore quite plausible that CTL - induced dis - tortions within the IS could inﬂuence membrane repair and in this manner control not only the initiation but also the progression of cytotoxicity . F - actin accumulates in the periphery of the IS and is depleted from the center , forming a stereotyped annular pattern ( Le Floc’h and Huse , 2015 ) . Lytic granules cluster beneath the center of the F - actin ring , and it has been proposed that they release their contents primarily by fusing with the actin - free plasma mem - brane in this region ( Stinchcombe and Grifﬁths , 2007 ; Stinch - combe et al . , 2006 ) . Using a ﬂuorescent probe for degranulation , we found that cytolytic secretory events are not enriched in the very center of the IS , but rather in an intermediate domain that overlaps with the region of strongest force exertion . In the canon - ical IS , this intermediate zone is occupied by the inner aspect of the F - actin ring and clusters of integrins ( Dustin et al . , 2010 ) ; it therefore contains the adhesive and cytoskeletal machinery required to transmit force . Super - resolution imaging studies have demonstrated that this zone can also accommodate the formation of actin hypodense regions of plasma membrane suit - able for vesicle fusion ( Brown et al . , 2011 ; Rak et al . , 2011 ) . Accordingly , we favor a model in which degranulation occurs at the border between the central F - actin - depleted area and the peripheral F - actin ring . This would enable the CTL to balance the physical requirements of exocytosis with the beneﬁts of syn - aptic mechanopotentiation . The striking spatiotemporal correlation we observed between lytic granule release and force exertion suggests that CTLs create local mechanical hotspots on the target cell surface that are particularly sensitive to perforin . Although the ﬂuid nature of lipid bilayers generally promotes rapid equilibration of applied force , local interactions with the cytoskeleton have been shown to generate inhomogeneities in tension ( Diz - Mun ˜ oz et al . , 2013 ) . The idea that physical inhomogeneities of this kind could be es - tablished within dynamic and strongly adhesive interfaces , such as the IS , is quite intriguing , and represents an interesting topic for future studies . The mechanical component of cytotoxicity could be particu - larly important in the context of anti - cancer immunity . Within solid tumors , cells tend to be stiffer because of enhanced cyto - skeletal contractility and extracellular matrix rigidity ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . Although increased stiffness would be expected to promote CTL - mediated killing , any advantage gained by the immune system would likely be overwhelmed by the tolerogenic signals that prevail within the tumor microenvironment ( Rabino - vich et al . , 2007 ) . During metastatic dissemination , however , cells from the tumor move away from this immunosuppressive milieu . In that regard , it is interesting to note that isolated cancer cells tend to be softer than their non - transformed counterparts ( Guck et al . , 2005 ; Hou et al . , 2009 ; Xu et al . , 2012 ) . This deform - ability could enable them to resist immune - mediated attack when outside of the tumor microenvironment . The intricate cytoskeletal dynamics of lymphocyte synapses include both actin ﬂows that propagate in the plane of the inter - face ( Bunnell et al . , 2001 ; Grakoui et al . , 1999 ; Ritter et al . , 2015 ) and ﬁlopodial protrusions that can deform the surface of the target cell ( Sage et al . , 2012 ; Ueda et al . , 2011 ) . As we work to deﬁne the functional relevance of these and other structures , it will be important to consider their capacity to transmit infor - mation physically during the effector phase of lymphocyte re - sponses . Mechanical forces are well suited for rapid and highly compartmentalized signaling within cell - cell interfaces and as such , they represent a valuable mode of intercellular communi - cation in complex environments . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Additional methods may be found in Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Animal Use The animal protocols used for this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center . Micropipette - Based Force Measurements Stimulatory beads were prepared by coating 6 - m m diameter streptavidin - coated polystyrene particles ( Spherotech ) with biotinylated H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 ( 1 m g / ml each ) for 2 hr in 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 % w / v BSA . Micropipettes for stimulatory beads and CTLs were prepared from borosilicate glass capillaries ( 1 mm OD , 0 . 78 mm ID , Harvard Apparatus ) . Imaging was carried out in an open top , environmentally controlled chamber mounted on an inverted microscope ( Nikon TE300 ) equipped with a 100 3 objective lens . The rigid CTL micropipette was attached to a motorized micro - manipulator ( MP285 , SutterInstruments ) andthebeadmicropipette tomanual micrometers ( Thorlabs ) . Beads were aspirated into the tip of the calibrated micropipette by applying (cid:3) 6 kPa aspiration pressure using a syringe ( typically 1mlairvolumedepression ) . Twohundredpascalsofpressure ( applied using a water reservoir ) was used to aspirate a CTL into the tip of the rigid pipette . Time - lapse recordings were started just before the CTL was gently brought into contact with the bead . In general , 50 ms brightﬁeld exposures were taken at2 - sintervalsfor3 – 5minusingMicromanagersoftware . Thedeﬂection ofthe ﬂexiblemicropipettewasdeterminedbytrackingthepositionofthebeadusing a customized ImageJ macro ( Husson et al . , 2011 ) . Bead position was deter - mined with a precision of < 60 nm , corresponding to a precision in force better than 6 pN for probe bending stiffness k = 0 . 1 nN / m m . Micropillar Force Assay PDMS ( Sylgard 184 , Dow Corning ) micropillar arrays coated with H2 - K b - OVA and ICAM1 were prepared from silicon masters as described previously ( Bashouretal . , 2014 ) . Allpillars were0 . 7 m mindiameter , 6 m mtall , and spaced hexagonallywitha2 m m center - to - center distance . Imaging experimentswere conducted using an inverted ﬂuorescence microscope ( Olympus IX - 81 ) ﬁtted witha100 3 objectivelens ( Olympus ) . Priortoimaging , CTLswerestainedwith Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 9 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 a ﬂuorescently labeled ( Alexa488 or Alexa647 ) anti - CD45 F ab ( clone 104 - 2 , MSKCC Antibody and Bioresource Core ) fragment to enable visualization of the cell membrane . They were then applied to the arrays and the cells and pillarsimagedatthefocalplaneofthepillartops . TheCTLfootprintonthepillar array ( determined from the anti - CD45 F ab signal ) was used to identify pillars in contact with the CTL at each time point . Deﬂections were derived from the imaging data using custom MATLAB scripts as described previously ( Bashour et al . , 2014 ) . Cellular Perforation Assay Twenty - four hours prior to imaging , B16 - F10 cells were plated at 10 4 cells / 100 m l / well in either ﬁbronectin - coated 96 - well plates ( Costar ) or in 96 - well ﬂat - bottom plates coated with polyacrylamide hydrogels ( Matrigen ) and ﬁbro - nectin . One hour prior to imaging , cells were transferred into C + buffer ( Hank’s balanced salt solution [ HBSS ] with 10 mM HEPES pH 7 . 2 , 4 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 4 % BSA ) containing Hoechst 33342 stain ( 1 : 2 , 000 , Invitrogen ) . PI ( 100 m M ﬁnal concentration ) was added along with Blebbistatin ( Sigma ) or Latrunculin A ( Sigma ) as necessary . After 5 min , Hoechst and PI images were collected at2 - min intervalsfor 30minusing an inverted wide - ﬁeld micro - scope ( Zeiss Axiovert 200M , Metamorph acquisition software ) ﬁtted with a 5 3 objective lens ( Zeiss ) . Dilutions of puriﬁed perforin in 50 m l C (cid:1) buffer ( HBSS , 10 mM HEPES pH 7 . 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 4 % BSA ) were added 4 min into the im - aging run . To vary tonicity , hypertonic ( + 150 mM sucrose ) or hypotonic ( H 2 O instead of HBSS ) C + and C (cid:1) buffers were used instead of isotonic C + and C (cid:1) . CTL - Target Cell Imaging in Microwells PDMS grids containing 50 3 50 3 25 m m wells were submerged in imaging medium and seeded with CFSE - labeled RMA - s cells that had been pulsed with1 m MOVA . Ingeneral , individualwellscontainedonetothreeRMA - scells ; 100 m M PI ( Life Technologies ) was added to the medium to enable real - time visualization of perforated cells . Then , CTLs expressing shNT or shPTEN together with CFP were added and the cells imaged using a 20 3 objective lens ( Olympus ) at6 - min intervals for8hr . Brightﬁeld , GFP , CFP , and PIimages were collected at each time point . Quantiﬁcation was restricted to target cells forming synapseswithonlyoneTcellduringtheﬁrst6hroftheimaging exper - iment . All cells in this category were scored for the time of initial IS formation and also for the ﬁrst appearance of PI signal above background . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and ﬁve movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . B . , B . M . W . , J . H . , A . L . F . , W . J . , A . O . - Y . , N . B . , L . C . K . , and M . H . designed the experiments . R . B . , B . M . W . , J . H . , A . L . F . , W . J . , A . O . - Y . , and M . H . collected the data . R . B . , B . M . W . , J . H . , A . L . F . , A . O . - Y . , and M . H . analyzed thedata . F . D . and J . L . provided assistance with puriﬁed perforin . G . G . and C . H . contributed key insights . M . H . , R . B . , and L . C . K . wrote the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankN . Bantilan andM . Kaissar fortechnical support ; U . Bandyopadhyay and M . Overholtzer for assistance with nitrogen cavitation ; A . Gondarenko for assistancewithmicropillarfabrication ; theMolecularCytologyCoreFacilityfor helpwithimaging ; theAntibodyandBioresourceCoreFacilityforﬂuorescently conjugatedF ab fragments ; S . BudhuandJ . WolchokforprovidingB16cells ; E . MaceandJ . Orangefor pHluorin - Lamp1 ; S . Rudenskyand K . Phamforcritical reading of the manuscript ; and members of the M . H . , L . C . K . , M . O . Li , and G . Altan - Bonnet labs for advice . This work was supported in part by the NIH ( R01 - AI087644 to M . H . , R01 - AI088377 to L . C . K . , PN2 - EY016586 to L . C . K . , and P30 - CA008748 to Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center ) , the AXA - Ecole Polytechnique Chair ( J . H . ) , Labex LaSIPS MECALEUCO ( J . H . ) , the French National Research Agency ( ANR - 13 - BSV2 - 0018 to C . H . ) , the French Foundation for Medical Research ( FRM DEQ20140329513 to C . H . ) , the Geoffrey Beene Cancer Research Center ( M . H . ) , the Starr Cancer Consortium ( M . H . ) , and the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society ( M . H . ) . Received : September 23 , 2015 Revised : December 9 , 2015 Accepted : January 13 , 2016 Published : February 25 , 2016 REFERENCES Babich , A . , Li , S . , O’Connor , R . S . , Milone , M . C . , Freedman , B . D . , and Bur - khardt , J . K . ( 2012 ) . F - actin polymerization and retrograde ﬂow drive sustained PLC g 1 signaling during T cell activation . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 775 – 787 . Bashour , K . T . , Gondarenko , A . , Chen , H . , Shen , K . , Liu , X . , Huse , M . , Hone , J . C . , and Kam , L . C . ( 2014 ) . CD28 and CD3 have complementary roles in T - cell traction forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 2241 – 2246 . Beal , A . M . , Anikeeva , N . , Varma , R . , Cameron , T . O . , Vasiliver - Shamis , G . , Norris , P . J . , Dustin , M . L . , and Sykulev , Y . ( 2009 ) . Kinetics of early T cell recep - tor signaling regulate the pathway of lytic granule delivery to the secretory domain . Immunity 31 , 632 – 642 . Bertrand , F . , Mu¨ller , S . , Roh , K . H . , Laurent , C . , Dupre´ , L . , and Valitutti , S . ( 2013 ) . Aninitialand rapidstepoflyticgranulesecretionprecedesmicrotubule organizing center polarization at the cytotoxic T lymphocyte / target cell syn - apse . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 6073 – 6078 . Brown , A . C . , Oddos , S . , Dobbie , I . M . , Alakoskela , J . M . , Parton , R . M . , Eiss - mann , P . , Neil , M . A . , Dunsby , C . , French , P . M . , Davis , I . , and Davis , D . M . ( 2011 ) . Remodelling of cortical actin where lytic granules dock at natural killer cell immune synapses revealed by super - resolution microscopy . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001152 . Bunnell , S . C . , Kapoor , V . , Trible , R . P . , Zhang , W . , and Samelson , L . E . ( 2001 ) . Dynamic actin polymerization drives T cell receptor - induced spreading : a role for the signal transduction adaptor LAT . Immunity 14 , 315 – 329 . Chan , C . E . , and Odde , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Traction dynamics of ﬁlopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 , 1687 – 1691 . Comrie , W . A . , Babich , A . , and Burkhardt , J . K . ( 2015 ) . F - actin ﬂow drives afﬁn - itymaturationandspatialorganizationofLFA - 1attheimmunologicalsynapse . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 475 – 491 . Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Bio - phys . J . 68 , 988 – 996 . Diz - Mun˜oz , A . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2013 ) . Use the force : mem - brane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends Cell Biol . 23 , 47 – 53 . Dustin , M . L . , Chakraborty , A . K . , and Shaw , A . S . ( 2010 ) . Understanding the structure and function of the immunological synapse . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a002311 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 . Feinerman , O . , Jentsch , G . , Tkach , K . E . , Coward , J . W . , Hathorn , M . M . , Sned - don , M . W . , Emonet , T . , Smith , K . A . , and Altan - Bonnet , G . ( 2010 ) . Single - cell quantiﬁcationofIL - 2responsebyeffectorandregulatoryTcellsrevealscritical plasticity in immune response . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 437 . Grakoui , A . , Bromley , S . K . , Sumen , C . , Davis , M . M . , Shaw , A . S . , Allen , P . M . , and Dustin , M . L . ( 1999 ) . The immunological synapse : a molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 285 , 221 – 227 . Grupp , S . A . , and June , C . H . ( 2011 ) . Adoptive cellular therapy . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 344 , 149 – 172 . Guck , J . , Schinkinger , S . , Lincoln , B . , Wottawah , F . , Ebert , S . , Romeyke , M . , Lenz , D . , Erickson , H . M . , Ananthakrishnan , R . , Mitchell , D . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Opti - cal deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transforma - tion and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 , 3689 – 3698 . 10 Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 Hammer , J . A . , 3rd , and Burkhardt , J . K . ( 2013 ) . Controversy and consensus regarding myosin II function at the immunological synapse . Curr . Opin . Immu - nol . 25 , 300 – 306 . Hou , H . W . , Li , Q . S . , Lee , G . Y . , Kumar , A . P . , Ong , C . N . , and Lim , C . T . ( 2009 ) . Deformability study of breast cancer cells using microﬂuidics . Biomed . Micro - devices 11 , 557 – 564 . Houk , A . R . , Jilkine , A . , Mejean , C . O . , Boltyanskiy , R . , Dufresne , E . R . , Angenent , S . B . , Altschuler , S . J . , Wu , L . F . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2012 ) . Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 . Huang , H . W . , Chen , F . Y . , and Lee , M . T . ( 2004 ) . Molecular mechanism of Peptide - induced pores in membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 198304 . Hui , K . L . , Balagopalan , L . , Samelson , L . E . , and Upadhyaya , A . ( 2015 ) . Cytoskeletal forces during signaling activation in Jurkat T - cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 685 – 695 . Huse , M . , Lillemeier , B . F . , Kuhns , M . S . , Chen , D . S . , and Davis , M . M . ( 2006 ) . T cells use two directionally distinct pathways for cytokine secretion . Nat . Immunol . 7 , 247 – 255 . Husson , J . , Chemin , K . , Bohineust , A . , Hivroz , C . , and Henry , N . ( 2011 ) . Force generation upon T cell receptor engagement . PLoS ONE 6 , e19680 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J . 20 , 811 – 827 . Jacobelli , J . , Chmura , S . A . , Buxton , D . B . , Davis , M . M . , and Krummel , M . F . ( 2004 ) . A single class II myosin modulates T cell motility and stopping , but not synapse formation . Nat . Immunol . 5 , 531 – 538 . Keefe , D . , Shi , L . , Feske , S . , Massol , R . , Navarro , F . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Lieberman , J . ( 2005 ) . Perforin triggers a plasma membrane - repair response that facilitates CTL induction of apoptosis . Immunity 23 , 249 – 262 . Le Floc’h , A . , and Huse , M . ( 2015 ) . Molecular mechanisms and functional im - plications of polarized actin remodeling at the T cell immunological synapse . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 72 , 537 – 556 . Le Floc’h , A . , Tanaka , Y . , Bantilan , N . S . , Voisinne , G . , Altan - Bonnet , G . , Fukui , Y . , andHuse , M . ( 2013 ) . AnnularPIP3accumulationcontrolsactinarchitecture and modulates cytotoxicity at the immunological synapse . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 2721 – 2737 . Lee , M . T . , Hung , W . C . , Chen , F . Y . , and Huang , H . W . ( 2008 ) . Mechanism and kinetics of pore formation in membranes by water - soluble amphipathic pep - tides . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 5087 – 5092 . Lee , C . Y . , Herant , M . , and Heinrich , V . ( 2011 ) . Target - speciﬁc mechanics of phagocytosis : protrusive neutrophil response to zymosan differs from the up - take of antibody - tagged pathogens . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1106 – 1114 . Liu , X . , Kapoor , T . M . , Chen , J . K . , and Huse , M . ( 2013 ) . Diacylglycerol pro - motes centrosome polarization in T cells via reciprocal localization of dynein and myosin II . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 11976 – 11981 . Liu , B . , Chen , W . , Evavold , B . D . , and Zhu , C . ( 2014 ) . Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide - MHC triggers T cell signaling . Cell 157 , 357 – 368 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 . Lopez , J . A . , Susanto , O . , Jenkins , M . R . , Lukoyanova , N . , Sutton , V . R . , Law , R . H . , Johnston , A . , Bird , C . H . , Bird , P . I . , Whisstock , J . C . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Perforin forms transient pores on the target cell plasma membrane to facilitate rapid access of granzymes during killer cell attack . Blood 121 , 2659 – 2668 . Masters , T . A . , Pontes , B . , Viasnoff , V . , Li , Y . , andGauthier , N . C . ( 2013 ) . Plasma membrane tension orchestrates membrane trafﬁcking , cytoskeletal remodel - ing , and biochemical signaling during phagocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 11875 – 11880 . Mu¨ller , A . J . , Filipe - Santos , O . , Eberl , G . , Aebischer , T . , Spa¨th , G . F . , and Bousso , P . ( 2012 ) . CD4 + T cells rely on a cytokine gradient to control intracel - lular pathogens beyond sites of antigen presentation . Immunity 37 , 147 – 157 . Natkanski , E . , Lee , W . Y . , Mistry , B . , Casal , A . , Molloy , J . E . , andTolar , P . ( 2013 ) . B cells use mechanical energy to discriminate antigen afﬁnities . Science 340 , 1587 – 1590 . Oakes , P . W . , Patel , D . C . , Morin , N . A . , Zitterbart , D . P . , Fabry , B . , Reichner , J . S . , and Tang , J . X . ( 2009 ) . Neutrophil morphology and migration are affected by substrate elasticity . Blood 114 , 1387 – 1395 . Orr , A . W . , Helmke , B . P . , Blackman , B . R . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Mecha - nisms of mechanotransduction . Dev . Cell 10 , 11 – 20 . Ostergaard , H . L . , Kane , K . P . , Mescher , M . F . , andClark , W . R . ( 1987 ) . Cytotoxic T lymphocyte mediated lysis without release of serine esterase . Nature 330 , 71 – 72 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . Pipkin , M . E . , and Lieberman , J . ( 2007 ) . Delivering the kiss of death : progress on understanding how perforin works . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 19 , 301 – 308 . Polozov , I . V . , Anantharamaiah , G . M . , Segrest , J . P . , and Epand , R . M . ( 2001 ) . Osmotically induced membrane tension modulates membrane permeabiliza - tionbyclassLamphipathichelicalpeptides : nucleationmodelofdefectforma - tion . Biophys . J . 81 , 949 – 959 . Rabinovich , G . A . , Gabrilovich , D . , and Sotomayor , E . M . ( 2007 ) . Immuno - suppressive strategies that are mediated by tumor cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 , 267 – 296 . Rak , G . D . , Mace , E . M . , Banerjee , P . P . , Svitkina , T . , and Orange , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Natural killer cell lytic granule secretion occurs through a pervasive actin network at the immune synapse . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001151 . Ritter , A . T . , Asano , Y . , Stinchcombe , J . C . , Dieckmann , N . M . , Chen , B . C . , Gawden - Bone , C . , van Engelenburg , S . , Legant , W . , Gao , L . , Davidson , M . W . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Actin depletion initiates events leading togranule secretion at the immunological synapse . Immunity 42 , 864 – 876 . Sage , P . T . , Varghese , L . M . , Martinelli , R . , Sciuto , T . E . , Kamei , M . , Dvorak , A . M . , Springer , T . A . , Sharpe , A . H . , and Carman , C . V . ( 2012 ) . Antigen recogni - tion is facilitated by invadosome - like protrusions formed by memory / effector T cells . J . Immunol . 188 , 3686 – 3699 . Sanderson , N . S . , Puntel , M . , Kroeger , K . M . , Bondale , N . S . , Swerdlow , M . , Iranmanesh , N . , Yagita , H . , Ibrahim , A . , Castro , M . G . , and Lowenstein , P . R . ( 2012 ) . Cytotoxic immunological synapses do not restrict the action of inter - feron - g to antigenic target cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 7835 – 7840 . Stinchcombe , J . C . , and Grifﬁths , G . M . ( 2007 ) . Secretory mechanisms in cell - mediated cytotoxicity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 495 – 517 . Stinchcombe , J . C . , Majorovits , E . , Bossi , G . , Fuller , S . , and Grifﬁths , G . M . ( 2006 ) . Centrosomepolarizationdeliverssecretorygranulestotheimmunolog - ical synapse . Nature 443 , 462 – 465 . Thiery , J . , Keefe , D . , Boulant , S . , Boucrot , E . , Walch , M . , Martinvalet , D . , Gop - ing , I . S . , Bleackley , R . C . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Lieberman , J . ( 2011 ) . Perforin pores in the endosomal membrane trigger the release of endocytosed gran - zyme B into the cytosol of target cells . Nat . Immunol . 12 , 770 – 777 . Ueda , H . , Morphew , M . K . , McIntosh , J . R . , andDavis , M . M . ( 2011 ) . CD4 + T - cell synapses involve multiple distinct stages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 17099 – 17104 . Wakatsuki , T . , Schwab , B . , Thompson , N . C . , and Elson , E . L . ( 2001 ) . Effects of cytochalasin D and latrunculin B on mechanical properties of cells . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1025 – 1036 . Woodsworth , D . J . , Dunsing , V . , andCoombs , D . ( 2015 ) . Designparametersfor granzyme - mediated cytotoxic lymphocyte target - cell killing and speciﬁcity . Biophys . J . 109 , 477 – 488 . Xu , W . , Mezencev , R . , Kim , B . , Wang , L . , McDonald , J . , andSulchek , T . ( 2012 ) . Cell stiffness is a biomarker of the metastatic potential of ovarian cancer cells . PLoS ONE 7 , e46609 . Yi , J . , Wu , X . S . , Crites , T . , and Hammer , J . A . , 3rd . ( 2012 ) . Actinretrogradeﬂow andactomyosinIIarccontractiondrivereceptorclusterdynamicsattheimmu - nological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 834 – 852 . Cell 165 , 1 – 11 , March 24 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 11 Please cite this article in press as : Basu et al . , Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing , Cell ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021