J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Building a fission machine – structural insights into dynamin assembly and activation Joshua S . Chappie * and Fred Dyda * Laboratory of Molecular Biology , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA * Authors for correspondence ( chappiej @ niddk . nih . gov ; dyda @ helix . nih . gov ) Journal of Cell Science 126 , 2773 – 2784 (cid:2) 2013 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 108845 Summary Dynamin is a large multidomain GTPase that assembles into helical arrays around the necks of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits and catalyzes membrane fission during the final stages of endocytosis . Although it is well established that the function of dynamin in vivo depends on its oligomerization and its capacity for efficient GTP hydrolysis , the molecular mechanisms governing these activities have remained poorly defined . In recent years , there has been an explosion of structural data that has provided new insights into the architecture , organization and nucleotide - dependent conformational changes of the dynamin fission machine . Here , we review the key findings of these efforts and discuss the implications of each with regard to GTP hydrolysis , dynamin assembly and membrane fission . Key words : Membrane fission , Dynamin , Structure , Endocytosis , GTPase , Hydrolysis Introduction Dynamin is a multidomain GTPase that forms helical assemblies at the necks of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) and catalyzes membrane scission during the final stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . It is the prototypical member of a family of large atypical GTPases that share the common properties of low affinity for guanine nucleotides ( apparent K m values of , 10 – 100 m M ) , high basal turnover ( , 0 . 4 – 1 min 2 1 ) and the propensity for oligomerization ( Song and Schmid , 2003 ) . Dynamin - related proteins participate in a wide variety of cellular processes including mitochondrial fission ( DRP1 and Dnm1 ) and fusion ( Opa1 , Mgm1 and mitofusins ) , vacuolar fission ( Vps1 ) , interferon - induced anti - viral protection ( Mx proteins ) , and plant cell cytokinesis and membrane fission ( Arabidopsis thaliana DRP proteins ) ( Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ) . In vitro , basal GTP hydrolysis can be observed when using purified dynamin tetramers ; they readily oligomerize into rings and spirals in low ionic strength buffer ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) or into helical arrays in the presence of anionic lipid scaffolds ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ; Stowell et al . , 1999 ) , structures that are reminiscent of the dynamin collars formed at the necks of invaginated clathrin - coated pits in vivo ( Takei et al . , 1995 ; Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . Similar assemblies have been observed with other dynamin family members , including Dnm1 ( Ingerman et al . , 2005 ; Mears et al . , 2011 ) , MxA ( Kochs et al . , 2002 ) and a bacterial dynamin like protein ( BDLP ) from Nostoc punctiforme ( Low and Lo¨we , 2006 ; Low et al . , 2009 ) . Oligomerization stimulates the basal hydrolysis rate of dynamin more than 100 - fold ( Warnock et al . , 1996 ; Stowell et al . , 1999 ) and is essential for CME , evidenced by the fact that mutations that impair GTP binding , self - assembly or assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis also cause defects in endocytic uptake in vivo ( Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . Dynamin has five functional domains ( Fig . 1 ) . The N - terminal G domain binds and hydrolyzes GTP and shows homology to the catalytic domains of other GTPases ( van der Bliek , 1999 ) . The ‘middle’ domain is largely a coiled - coil structure and mediates the higher - order dynamin oligomerization in conjunction with the GTPase effector domain ( GED ) ( Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) . Mutagenesis data initially suggested that the GED also functioned as an intramolecular GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) ( Sever et al . , 1999 ) ; however , our subsequent biochemical and structural studies revealed that it exerts its effects through a non - classical mechanism in which its C - terminus ( C GED ) associates with the N - and C - terminal helices of the G domain ( N GTPase and C GTPase , respectively ) , located far away from the active site ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ; Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . The resulting three - helix bundle is termed the ‘bundle - signaling element’ ( BSE ) , as mutations within its hydrophobic core indirectly modulate the GTPase activity of dynamin in vitro and shift the kinetics of endocytosis in vivo such that fission , rather than coated - pit maturation , becomes rate limiting ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ) . Dynamin also contains a membrane - binding pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain that preferentially targets phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] lipids ( Salim et al . , 1996 ) , and a C - terminal proline - arginine - rich domain ( PRD ) that binds the SH3 domains of accessory partner proteins that are important for CME ( see supplementary Table S1 in Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . The G domain is the most highly conserved region among dynamin homologs . Even distant relatives , such as BDLP , the interferon - induced human guanylate binding protein 1 ( GBP1 ) , the endoplasmic reticulum fusion proteins atlastin , yeast Sey1 and plant RHD3 , and the cellular trafficking EHD ATPases show significant sequence and structural similarity in this region ( Low and Lo¨we , 2006 ; Ghosh et al . , 2006 ; Daumke et al . , 2007 ; Byrnes and Sondermann , 2011 ; Bian et al . , 2011 ) . The middle domain and GED are also present in dynamin - related proteins , underscoring their functional importance in oligomerization . Additions to this core framework , i . e . the PH domain and PRD in Commentary 2773 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e dynamin , the B - insert in DRP1 and Dnm1 , the viral - binding loops in Mx proteins and membrane anchors found in Opa1 , Mgm1 and mitofusins , represent function - specific modifications ( Fig . 1 ) . Cell biologists have long struggled to understand the mechanisms underlying dynamin function . A structural - biology - led renaissance has occurred in recent years , which has provided numerous insights into the intricate architectural organization and hydrolysis activities of this complex fission machine . In this Commentary , we will review these results , emphasizing key findings from X - ray crystallography , cryoelectron microscopy and biochemistry . Our aim is not only to present the significant advances heralded by these studies , but also to inform those unfamiliar with structural biology about the limitations of the resulting models and important considerations for future experiments . Dynamin structure at atomic resolution X - ray crystallography can reveal detailed information about the architecture and mechanism of a macromolecule provided well - ordered diffraction - quality crystals can be obtained . This proved to be a challenge for dynamin , due to its size , complex folding and inherent propensity for oligomerization at high concentrations . For years , crystallographic studies were limited to a subset of isolated domains that retained a stable , compact structure , namely the G domains of human dynamin 1 and Dictyostelium discoideum DynA , which were made as fusions to myosin motors ( Niemann et al . , 2001 ; Reubold et al . , 2005 ) and the PH domain ( Ferguson et al . , 1994 ; Timm et al . , 1994 ) . Recently , however , the structures of the intact dynamin molecule ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ) and of its relative MxA ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) were solved ( Fig . 2A ) . The key to generating conformationally homogeneous monodisperse samples that were suitable for crystallization was the identification and incorporation of assembly - defective mutations that hinder the formation of helical arrays , while concomitantly preserving the underlying structural integrity . For human dynamin 1 and MxA , stretches of alanine mutations – IHGIR 395 – 399 to AAAAA and YRGR 440 – 443 to AAAA , respectively – were introduced based on previous success in crystallizing the isolated middle – GED MxA stalk ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) ; for rat dynamin , a single point mutation ( G397D ) was sufficient to enable suitable samples to be made . These substitutions , like the other previously described assembly - defective mutations in yeast mitochondrial Dnm1 ( G385D , Ingerman et al . , 2005 ) and human dynamin 1 ( I690K , Sever et al . , 2006 ; R361S and R399A , Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) , shift the oligomeric state from tetramers to dimers . Additionally , the PRD was removed from human and rat dynamin and the viral substrate - binding loop ( residues 533 – 561 ) of MxA was deleted . Together , these alterations produced crystals that diffracted to G domain PH GED PRD Middle Hs Dynamin 1 Hs DRP1 Hs MxA G domain B insert GED Middle Sc VPS1 G domain T M Middle T M Tail N GTPase BSE C GTPase BSE C GED BSE G domain PH GED PRD Middle G domain GED Middle G domain GED Middle G domain GED Middle Viral - binding loops G domain G domain T M Middle T M Tail At DRP1A At DRP2A Hs Atlastin Hs Mitofusin 1 G domain GED Middle Hs GBP1 G domain EH domain Helical Helical Hs EHD2 G domain GED Middle T M M T S Hs OPA1 Fig . 1 . Domain architecture of dynamin family members . Representative members of different dynamin - related proteins are shown . Hs , Homo sapiens ; Sc , Saccharomyces cerevisiae ; At , Arabidopsis thaliana ; BSE , bundle - signaling element ; PH , pleckstrin homology domain ; GED , GTPase effector domain ; PRD , proline - and arginine - rich domain ; MTS , mitochondrial - targeting sequence ; TM , transmembrane domain ; EH , epsin homology domain . Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2774 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 3 . 7 A˚ ( human dynamin 1 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ) , 3 . 1 A˚ ( rat dynamin ; Ford et al . , 2011 ) , and 3 . 5 A˚ ( MxA ; Gao et al . , 2011 ) . Dynamin and MxA each form extended monomers in which the polypeptide folds back on itself . As a result , the three - dimensional domain organization does not directly correlate with the linear sequence of functional domains ( Fig . 1 ; Fig . 2A ) . The two termini of the polypeptides come together to form parts of the BSE , which in turn connects the G domain to a helical stalk comprised of the middle domain and GED . The PH domain sits at the bottom of the stalk in dynamin and is replaced by the viral - binding loops in MxA . In the crystals , these monomers pack into linear arrays and contact each other through three distinct interfaces in the stalk ( Fig . 2B , C ) . Mutations that facilitated crystallization all map to a highly disordered region at the end of interface 3 . None of the structures contain nucleotide and represent single , structural snapshots of the apo state ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Gao et al . , 2011 ) . The connectivity between the structural domains is a significant aspect of these models . Two hinge regions ( Fig . 2B ) that link the BSE to the stalk ( hinge 1 ) and the G domain ( BSE hinge ) are of crucial importance as they dictate the relative orientation of these domains with respect to one another . The hinge 1 conformation differs among the three structures : it is partially disordered in human dynamin ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ) , whereas it forms a more rigid connection in MxA ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) and rat dynamin ( Ford et al . , 2011 ) . Hinge 1 mutants impair GTPase activity , while they enhance the efficiency of endocytosis in dynamin 1 ( Sever et al . , 1999 ) and abolish antiviral activity and alter nucleotide dependent - oligomerization A Human dynamin 1 PDB : 3SNH Rat dynamin PDB : 3ZVR Human MxA PDB : 3SZR G domain BSE Middle – GED stalk PH domain B 90° BSE Middle – GED stalk PH G domain BSE Middle – GED stalk G domain D C PH ? E Interface 1 Interface 2 Interface 3 BSEHinge Hinge 1 G domain PH GED Middle Hs Dynamin 1 Δ PRD N GTPase BSE C GTPase BSE C GED BSE ? Crystal packing dimer Long dimer Short dimer Fig . 2 . Structures and crystal packing of dynamin family members . ( A ) X - ray structures of intact human dynamin 1 , rat dynamin and human MxA . Each protein contains different mutations that yield stable dimers in solution . Only the monomers are shown . The linear domain arrangement of human dynamin 1 is shown above for comparison . Coloring is as follows : G domain , purple ; BSE , yellow ; middle – GED stalk , green ; PH domain , blue . ( B ) Dynamin - related proteins crystallize in linear arrays that are mediated primarily by stalk – stalk interactions . Rat dynamin crystal packing ( PDB : 3ZVR ) is depicted in two orientations ( top view above , side view below ) . ( C ) Magnified view of the dynamin stalk illustrating the three interfaces ( circles ) that mediate intermolecular interactions within the crystallized linear dynmain array . Mutations that result in the monodisperse dimers used for crystallization map to interface 3 . ( D ) Disordered regions at the base of the stalk yield an ambiguity ( black arrows ) in determining the stalk – PH connectivity . ( E ) Different putative domain connectivities within the mutant dynamin dimers can conform to the same crystal packing . Alternate dimers are colored orange and light blue . The light gray surface illustrates how different arrangements all yield the same overall shape and packing . Dynamin assembly and activation in 3D 2775 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e in Mx proteins ( Johannes et al . , 1997 ) , suggesting an important functional role for this region . The BSE hinge contains a highly conserved stretch of amino acids that kinks the C GTPase helix around a key proline residue ( 294 in human dynamin 1 , 294 in rat dynamin , and 340 in MxA ) at the C - terminal end of the G domain . The flexibility of this segment is vital to a hydrolysis - dependent movement of the BSE ( discussed below ) . The electron density at the base of the stalk is weak in these structures , with extended stretches of middle domain and GED residues being completely disordered . This prevents the accurate modeling of the stalk – PH connectivity or the viral - binding loops , and creates an inherent ambiguity in determining the overall trajectory of the individual polypeptide chains . Multiple PH domains pack close to the stalk in the dynamin crystals and each could theoretically connect ( Fig . 2D ) . The published representations of the monomer structures reflect this uncertainty , because different PH domains were selected in the human and rat models ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ) . In this Commentary , we have taken the liberty to change the assignment of the PH domain in human dynamin 1 to that of rat dynamin for simplicity and consistency ( Fig . 2A ) . Both arrangements , however , are equally probable . The interpretation of these connections becomes increasingly more complex when mutagenesis and biochemical data are also considered . For example , chemical crosslinking results impose additional structural constraints , which in turn generate two alternative subunit geometries ( Fig . 2E ; Fig . 3 ) . Regardless of the underlying connectivity , all of these geometries are compatible with the subunit organization observed in both the crystal lattice ( Fig . 2E ) and the helical dynamin polymer ( Fig . 3A , B ) . Further structural efforts are needed to decipher the connectivity unambiguously . Structural organization of the dynamin polymer Although the propensity of dynamin for oligomerization hindered crystallographic endeavors , it has aided in the structural characterization of the dynamin polymer . Mixing a functional , truncated form of dynamin ( D PRD ) ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) with anionic liposomes produces helical tubes that are ideally suited for cryo - electron microscopy ( EM ) , and numerous studies have produced three - dimensional reconstructions of these assemblies in different nucleotide states at moderate resolutions ( 12 – 23 A˚ ) ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ; Mears et al . , 2007 ; Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . Without nucleotide , D PRD tubes have a diameter of 50 nm and 14 . 2 subunits per turn ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) and , upon the addition of the non - hydrolyzable GTP analog GMPPCP , they constrict to 40 nm and 13 . 2 subunits per turn ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) ( Fig . 3A ) . In both cases , the asymmetric unit that is radially repeated within each helical rung is a T - shaped dimer consisting of three prominent densities : the leg , the stalk and the head ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) ( Fig . 3B ) . Structural comparison shows that changes in the stalk density , presumably induced by nucleotide binding , drive the tube constriction ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) . However , other data indicates that constriction alone is not sufficient to produce scission ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Shnyrova et al . , 2013 ) , suggesting that these EM models represent an intermediate along the endocytic scission pathway . Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dnm1 tubes also constrict , but exhibit a more dramatic narrowing from , 129 nm to , 67 nm that is associated with GTP hydrolysis ( Mears et al . , 2011 ) . The magnitude of this change and its occurrence at a different step in the hydrolysis cycle might reflect the specialized role of Dmn1 in mitochondrial fission ( Ingerman et al . , 2005 ) . While these observations are informative , the limited resolution of the EM density precludes a detailed description of the architecture and domain organization of assembled D PRD helices . Recent hybrid approaches in which X - ray structures were computationally fitted into the D PRD EM maps have yielded multiple pseudoatomic models for the dynamin polymer ( Gao et al . , 2010 ; Chappie et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ) ( Fig . 3A ) . All these display the same overall topology – the PH domain occupying the leg density , the middle domain and GED in the stalk , and G domain in the head ( Fig . 3B ) – and , together with mutagenesis data ( Sever et al . , 2006 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ; Gao et al . , 2010 ; Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) , suggest that a dimer is the basic building block of all dynamin assembly ( Fig . 3C ) . A key difference among these models , however , is the interpretation of the connectivity within this dimer , owing to the fact that the residues linking the middle – GED stalk to the PH domain are disordered in all dynamin crystal structures . Two prevailing interpretations have emerged . In the first ( Fig . 3C , left ) , dimers are defined based on crystal packing where an extensive interface between monomers ( interface 2 , see above ) forms the primary lattice contact ( Gao et al . , 2010 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ) . The second ( Fig . 3C , center and right ) defines dimers according to the constraints imposed by chemical crosslinking and limited proteolysis , which suggest that the C GED helix of the BSE is domain - swapped in the full - length protein and imply that the dynamin tetramer is a dimer of domain - swapped dimers ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . Two putative arrangements are consistent with these data : a short X - shaped dimer with only the C GED helix swapped ( Fig . 3C , center ) or an extended M - shaped dimer with the entire GED swapped ( Fig . 3C , right ) . We favor the extended M - shaped dimer as there is no evidence for C GED exchange at the top of the stalk in the full - length structures of human D PRD dynamin ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ) , rat D PRD dynamin ( Ford et al . , 2011 ) or human MxA ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) ( see Fig . 2A ) . The crystal packing of the D PRD X - ray structures is also compatible with the equivalent arrangement of the M - shaped domain - swapped dimers ( Fig . 2E ) , and there is currently no definitive evidence to rule out this possibility given the disordered regions at the base of the stalk . A similar M - shaped architecture has been proposed for a different mutant dimer ( D PRD human dynamin 1 with R399A and I690K substitutions ) based on small - angle X - ray scattering ( SAXS ) experiments ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) . This model was introduced prior to the publication of the full - length dynamin crystal structures and independently suggested that obligatory mutant dimers can adopt an extended conformation in solution in the absence of intramolecular stalk interactions . It is feasible that these mutants are instead stabilized by a complete GED domain swap . This exchange would probably have to occur concomitantly with protein synthesis and / or folding , given the high energetic cost of disrupting the extensive hydrophobic interface between the middle domain and GED . In context of an extended GED - swapped dimer , interfaces 2 and 3 would facilitate intermolecular interactions between the two dimers within a tetramer ( Fig . 3D , left ) rather than forming intramolecular interactions within a dimer ( Fig . 3D , right ) . Furthermore , these interfaces could facilitate higher - order interactions between tetramers once dynamin oligomerizes on the membrane ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . All additional dynamin Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2776 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e mutations that produce obligatory dimers map to interfaces 2 and 3 , further supporting their role in high - order assembly ( Sever et al . , 2006 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ; Gao et al . , 2010 ; Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ) . Critics of the domain - swapped dimer models have argued that they are inconsistent with a subset of MxA interface 2 mutants that produce assembly - deficient monomers ( Faelber et al . , 2012 ) . We feel it might be premature to assume that there is a one - to - one structural correlation between MxA and dynamin . For instance , the introduction of the corresponding MxA mutations into dynamin resulted in insoluble protein ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , although the tetramers of each molecule might be held together by conserved intermolecular interactions , the presence of a domain - swap in dynamin , and its absence in MxA , could explain the biochemical incongruities . It would be interesting to see if crosslinking experiments in MxA would visualize any sort of GED exchange between monomers . Although dimers constitute the minimal unit of dynamin assembly , we must emphasize that they are not free - floating autonomous entities under normal conditions ; rather , they will Long dimer Stabilized by full GED domain swap BSE Middle – GED stalk Middle – GED stalk BSE PH PH G domain G domain Short dimer Stabilized by C GED helix domain swap BSE Middle – GED stalk Middle – GED stalk BSE PH PH G domain G domain A B D C Head Stalk Leg Helical rung M M 7 nm 90° Pitch99 . 3Å Outer diameter40 nm Helical axis Outer diameter 40 nm Inner lumen 7 nm BSE Middle – GED stalk Middle – GED stalk BSE PH PH G domain G domain Crystal packing dimer Stabilized by interface 2 GED - swapped dimer 1 GED - swapped dimer 2 Membrane - bound tetramer Interface 2 and 3 form intermolecular interactions Interface 2 and 3 form intramolecular interactions Crystal packing dimer Monomer 2 Monomer 1 Helical rung Fig . 3 . Dynamin assembly and subunit architectures . ( A ) Pseudo - atomic model of the assembled dynamin polymer ( PDB : 3ZYS ) that has been derived from computationally fitting GG GMPPCP ( purple and yellow ; PDB : 3ZYC ) , the MxA stalk ( green , PDB : 3LJB ) and the human dynamin 1 PH domain ( blue , PDB : 1DYN ) into the 12 . 2 A˚ GMPPCP - stabilized D PRD cryo - EM map ( gray , EMD - 1949 ) . End - on and side - on views are shown in the left and right panels , respectively , with the dimensions and helical axis marked . ( B ) Cross - section view of the assembled dynamin polymer oriented as in A . The G domain , middle – GED stalk and PH domain occupy the head , stalk and leg density regions , respectively . The inner luminal diameter is indicated . M , membrane bilayer . ( C ) Different model representations of the minimal dynamin dimer building blocks . Monomers are colored purple and cyan . Left , dimer based on crystal packing ( PDB : 3ZVR ) that is stabilized by interface 2 interactions ; center , X - shaped short dimer based on chemical crosslinking and computational docking that is stabilized by a domain swap of the C GED helix ; right , M - shaped long dimer based on chemical crosslinking and computational docking that is stabilized by a full domain swap of the GED . ( D ) Putative structure of membrane - bound dynamin tetramer . Underlying dimers are colored yellow and light blue . This model assumes the entire GED is domain - swapped in each monomer ( see text ) . In this context , portions of interface 2 and 3 mediate inter - dimer interactions ( gray box ) . The structure of the crystal packing dimer is shown on the right for comparison with each monomer colored yellow and light blue . Note that in this case , interface 2 and 3 form intra - dimer interactions ( gray box ) . Dynamin assembly and activation in 3D 2777 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e exist as part of a stable tetramer . Subunit exchange within dynamin tetramers has thus far only been observed in the presence of harsh chemical denaturants ( S . L . Schmid , personal communication ) , indicating that once a tetramer is formed it does not typically come apart . Furthermore , all current structural descriptions of the tetramer are derived from models of the assembled dynamin polymer , which is biased towards a membrane - bound conformation . Analysis of dynamin mutations linked to centronuclear myopathy suggests that the wild - type tetramer in solution is autoinhibited ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) , adopting an assembly - incompetent configuration that is distinct from the assembly - competent membrane - bound form that is present in the polymer . The conversion between assembly - incompetent and assembly - competent states could serve as a key to the regulation of dynamin during endocytosis , with assembly being the switch that signifies the onset of fission ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . Further structural dissection of the dynamin tetramer will be necessary for understanding the range of its conformational flexibility . Although dynamin can induce membrane curvature at high concentrations , nucleation of the dynamin polymer becomes strongly dependent on membrane curvature at what is thought to be a physiological protein concentration ( Roux et al . , 2010 ) . Under these conditions , dynamin will preferentially bind highly curved regions of the plasma membrane ( Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ) , which in vivo can be generated by BAR - domain - containing proteins ( Mim and Unger , 2012 ) . Once formed , the dynamin scaffold itself might contribute to lowering the energy barrier for fission by increasing the membrane elastic energy ( Morlot et al . , 2012 ) . Essential catalytic machinery and the mechanism of stimulated GTP hydrolysis Dynamin assembles at the necks of CCPs during CME and harnesses the energy of GTP hydrolysis to catalyze membrane scission . Unraveling the mechanisms of the basal and assembly - stimulated GTPase activities of dynamin is therefore fundamental to understanding how dynamin functions as a fission machine . In all GTPases , efficient hydrolysis requires : ( 1 ) the correct positioning of a water molecule for an in - line S N 2 attack on the c - phosphate , ( 2 ) neutralization of a negative charge that develops between the b - and c - phosphates in the transition state , and ( 3 ) stabilization of the conformationally flexible switch regions ( switch I and switch II ) within the catalytic core ( Paduch et al . , 2001 ; Li and Zhang , 2004 ) . These conditions can be achieved either through interaction with a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) or through dimerization . In GAP - mediated hydrolysis , a stimulating partner binds the switch regions and facilitates the correct positioning of catalytic machinery in the active site ( Vetter and Wittinghofer , 2001 ) . This machinery typically includes a conserved glutamine residue in switch II that orients the nucleophilic water and a charge - compensating arginine finger ( Scheffzek et al . , 1997 ; Tesmer et al . , 1997 ; Scheffzek et al . , 1998 ) . Dimerization accomplishes the same end - state by a symmetric association of the guanine - nucleotide - binding domains , resulting in the reciprocal activation of the individual monomers ( Gasper et al . , 2009 ) . The essential catalytic machinery and mechanism of assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis for dynamin long remained elusive despite extensive mutagenesis studies ( see Table 1 in Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) and the available crystal structures of the apo and GDP - bound G domain of dynamin A ( Niemann et al . , 2001 ) and the nucleotide - free rat dynamin G domain ( Reubold et al . , 2005 ) . To address these issues , we engineered a minimal G - domain – GED fusion protein ( GG ) by connecting residues 6 – 320 and residues 726 – 750 from human dynamin 1 with a flexible linker ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ) ( Fig . 4A ) . Encompassing the G domain core and the BSE , this construct reconstitutes the basal GTPase activity of dynamin but does not assemble , even at high concentrations , providing an ideal platform for structure - function studies ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ) . GG dimerizes in the presence of the transition - state mimic GDP ? AlF 4 – but not with ground - state non - hydrolyzable GTP analogs such as GMPPCP ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ; Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . The 2 . 0 A˚ X - ray structure of the GG dimer ( GG GDP : AlF { 4 ; Chappie et al . , 2010 ) revealed that monomers associate exclusively through the G domains and bury a large surface of 2569 A˚ 2 ( Fig . 4B ) . The active sites face each other at the dimer interface , thereby sequestering the nucleotides from the solvent and reciprocally stabilizing the switch regions ( Fig . 4C ) , whereas the BSEs extend in opposite directions from the dimer core . Together , the main chain atoms of G139 and T65 along with an additional bridging - water that interacts with Q40 in the P - loop position the catalytic water . The strict use of non - side chain atoms for this purpose is , to date , unique to dynamin and explains why all previous mutagenesis efforts failed to identify these crucial catalytic components ( Fig . 4D ) . This also implies that basal GTP hydrolysis can only be disrupted by perturbing either the structural fold of dynamin or its nucleotide binding . Indeed , purported catalytic side chains such as T65 and S45 ( Marks et al . , 2001 ; Song et al . , 2004 ) actually function as coordinating ligands for Mg 2 + , an essential cofactor required for GTP binding ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ; Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , the assumed catalytic role for these residues is likely to be a consequence of defects in nucleotide binding . An unexpected feature of the GG active site is that a bound Na + ion replaces the charge - compensating arginine finger and is coordinated by AlF 4 2 , the b - phosphate , the carbonyl oxygens of G60 and G62 ( in switch I ) and the S41 side chain in the P - loop , in a manner similar to that of the in cis arginine finger of the related interferon - c - induced human guanylate protein 1 ( Fig . 4D ) . A number of other G - proteins including MnmE and FeoB have been identified that utilize K + exclusively as a charge - compensating element ( Ash et al . , 2012 ) . While both monovalent cations can support GG dimerization and the GTPase activity of dynamin in vitro ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) , K + is likely to be more physiologically relevant in vivo , given its higher intracellular concentration . D180 of the trans - stabilizing loop reaches across the dimer interface and forms hydrogen bonds with Q40 , S41 and the main chain nitrogen of G62 , thereby stabilizing the P - loop and switch I conformations such that they are poised for catalysis ( Fig . 4D ) . Q40 , S41 and D180 are absolutely conserved among dynamin family members , and mutagenesis of these residues selectively impairs assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis without inhibiting basal turnover ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . By comparing different nucleotide - bound structures of the dynamin G domain , it has been possible to identify key conformational changes that are associated with GTP binding , G domain dimerization , and GTP hydrolysis . Superposition of GG GDP : AlF { 4 ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) and the nucleotide - free rat dynamin G domain ( Reubold et al . , 2005 ) shows how numerous active site elements are reoriented upon the formation of the Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2778 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e G domain core Monomer A G domain core Monomer B Bundle signaling element Monomer A Bundle signaling element Monomer B C GED C GTPase C GTPase N GTPase C GED N GTPase 6 32 293 320 726 750 G domain core N GTPase C GTPase C GED Q40 D1800 K44 Mg 2 + Na + GDP S41 AlF 4 – G62 G60 H 2 O Cat H 2 O Bridge A B D C Na + P loop Switch I Switch II Cis - stabilizing loop Trans - stabilizing loop G4 Dynamin - specific loop E Dynamin 1 GG GDP . AlF 4 – PDB : 2X2E Gi α 1 GDP . AlF 4 – – RGS4 PDB : 1AGR GG GDP . AlF 4 – Rat G domain Apo Fig . 4 . The catalytic machinery of dynamin . ( A ) Domain arrangement of the G - domain – GED fusion derived from human dynamin 1 . Each monomer contains a G domain core ( purple ) , three helical segments ( N GTPase , C GTPase and C GED ; yellow ) that together form the bundle signaling element ( BSE ) , and a flexible linker ( dashed line ) . ( B ) Structure of the transition - state - stabilized GG GDP : AlF { 4 dimer ( PDB : 2X2E ) . The monomer cores are colored purple and cyan , and the bundle signaling elements ( BSEs ) are in yellow . ( C ) Switch region I ( red ) and switch region II ( green ) are stabilized at the dimer interface in the GG transition - state complex . GG monomers are shown in cyan and orange . The structure of the Gi a 1 – RGS4 transition - state complex is shown below for comparison ( Gi a 1 in cyan , RGS4 GAP in orange ) . Note that in this case the switch regions are stabilized at the interface between the G - protein and the GAP . ( D ) Transition - state stabilization of the of the GG active site . Structural elements involved in this stabilization are labeled . Catalytic and bridging waters are depicted as red spheres ; bound Mg 2 + and charge - compensating Na + ions are shown as green and blue spheres , respectively . Dashed lines indicate hydrogen - bonding interactions . Together , the charge compensating cation , the bound Mg 2 + and the K44 side - chain act to neutralize the negative charge that develops when the bond is broken between the b - and c - phosphates during hydrolysis . ( E ) Conformational changes in the active site that accompany the formation of a G domain dimer in dynamin . GG GDP : AlF { 4 monomer colored purple ; nucleotide free rat dynamin G domain structure ( PDB : 2AKA ) colored green . These structural changes serve to optimally position the catalytic machinery , which in turn promotes stimulated GTP hydrolysis . Dynamin assembly and activation in 3D 2779 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e transition - state - stabilized G domain dimer ( Fig . 4E ) : the P - loop tilts toward the a - and b - phosphates , switch I swings in to coordinate the charge - compensating cation , and the dynamin - specific loop converts from an extended unstructured conformation to a short helix , thereby capping the substrate and sequestering it from the solvent ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Additional changes are observed in the cis - stabilizing loop , which stabilizes the portion of switch II that does not make direct contact with the opposing monomer at the dimer interface ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . G domain dimerization , thus , optimally positions the catalytic machinery of dynamin for rapid and efficient GTP hydrolysis . It is important to note that the stabilization of the GG dimer in the transition - state depends on both the interaction of D180 with P - loop and switch I residues across the dimer interface , as well as the presence of the c - phosphate in each monomer . Together , these complete the coordination sphere for the charge - compensating cation and hold switch I in a locked position ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Loss of the c - phosphate would presumably allow an increased mobility of switch I , thereby destabilizing the dimer interface and causing the interacting dynamin molecules to dissociate and recycle during the fission reaction . This notion is supported by the structure of the G domain from Dictyostelium dynamin A in complex with GDP ( Niemann et al . , 2001 ) , where only the dynamin - specific loop and P - loop are visible and all the remaining catalytic machinery that is stabilized by dimerization is disordered . The membrane - bound conformation of dynamin prevents G domain dimers from forming within a tetramer and between neighboring tetramers in the same helical rung ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Instead , dimerization can only occur between tetramers A E B 1st helical rung 2ndhelical rung 90° G domain dimerization G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P 1 s t he li c a l r ung 2ndhe li c a l r ung G T P 1 s t he li c a l r ung G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P 2ndhe li c a l r ung G T P G T P G T P 2 1 6 5 2 1 6 5 C GG GMPPCP Monomer 2 Monomer 1 D Monomer 1 G domain R a d i a l a s s m e b l y C D Tetramer Tetramer 1 Tetramer Tetramer 2 Tetramer 3 Tetramer 3 Tetramer Tetramer 4 Tetramer Tetramer 5 G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P G T P 2 1 6 5 2 1 6 5 GG GMPPCP Monomer 2 Monomer 1 GG GMPPCP Monomer 1 Monomer 2 G domain R a d i a l a s s e m b l y C D G domain G domain Tetramer 1 Tetramer 5 Tetramer 1 Tetramer 5 Tetramer 1 Fig . 5 . Structural constraints of G domain dimerzation . ( A ) Membrane - bound conformation of the dynamin tetramer ( magenta ) . The dashed black line illustrates the axis of radial assembly within a helical rung . The arrows depict the relative orientation of the G domains within the tetramer . Note that the G domains do not form productive head - to - head interactions required for G domain dimerization . ( B ) Pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer generated by computationally docking crystallized dynamin domain structures into the GMPPCP - stabilized D PRD cryo - EM map ( gray ) . The numbering and rainbow coloring ( magenta to orange ) denotes the sequential addition of tetramers to the assembly and terminates when the first G domain dimer is formed between magenta tetramer 1 and orange tetramer 5 . The upper panel depicts a side view perpendicular to the helical axis ; the lower panel is an end view looking down this axis . The sequential rungs of the dynamin helix are marked in the upper panel with black brackets . The areas indicated by the black boxes ( see C and D ) highlight that G domain dimerization only occurs between tetramers in adjacent helical rungs . ( C , D ) Magnified top ( C ) and side ( D ) views of G domain interactions within the assembled dynamin polymer . The crystallized GG GMPPCP dimer ( monomers colored magenta and orange ) is shown below each for comparison . ( E ) Illustration of G domain dimerization in the context of the helical polymer . Tetramers are colored and numbered as in B . Arrows denote the direction of the hydrolysis - dependent BSE conformational change that would accompany stimulated GTP hydrolysis in each G domain dimer pair . Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2780 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e positioned in adjacent rungs of the helical assembly ( Fig . 5B – D ) . Constraining the productive head - to - head interaction in this manner ensures that stimulated GTP hydrolysis is coupled to dynamin assembly . The dynamin ‘powerstroke’ and conformational coupling The structure of GG has also been solved in the presence of GMPPCP ( GG GMPPCP ) . Although GG GMPPCP is entirely monomeric when analyzed by size exclusion chromatography ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) and analytical ultracentrifugation ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) , it forms a head - to - head dimer in the crystal presumably owing to the high concentration of protein present during crystallization ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . The non - hydrolyzable b - c methylene linkage of GMPPCP does not provide the necessary H - bonding interactions to complete the coordination sphere of the charge - compensating monovalent cation , and instead a water molecule partially fills the vacant ion - binding site in its absence . The P - loop residue S41 rotates 90 ˚ to stabilize this water and in the process severs its hydrogen bond with D180 across the dimer interface . The remainder of the active site is essentially unchanged from that in GG GDP : AlF { 4 . The BSE helices , in contrast , assume a radically different position relative to the G domain core ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) : in GG GMPPCP the bundles are oriented upwards , extending out from the core ; in GG GDP : AlF { 4 the bundles are rotated , 69 ˚ downwards with a slight counter - clockwise twist , pivoting around the conserved , flexible BSE hinge ( Fig . 6A , B ) . The central b - sheet shifts towards the nucleotide - binding pocket concomitantly with this change , which tightens the hydrophobic packing within the core and facilitates the formation of salt bridges and hydrophobic interactions that anchor the BSE . Together , these conformational changes suggest the possibility of a powerstroke in which the hydrolysis - dependent movement of the BSE converts the energy of G domain dimerization and / or stimulated GTP hydrolysis into large - scale rearrangements that could precipitate membrane fission ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . These movements might also have a role in the direct conformational coupling that exists between the PH domain at the membrane surface and the G domain at the top of the molecule ( Solomaha and Palfrey , 2005 ; Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ) . We find it significant that the BSE adopts a similar downwards conformation in all other dynamin structures , including those that are nucleotide free ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Reubold et al . , 2005 ) and GDP - bound ( Niemann et al . , 2001 ) . This implies that the up and down configurations of the BSE are coupled to the GTP loading and GTP hydrolysis steps , respectively , and that the G domain can somehow sense the nucleotide state in the active site and relay that information to the BSE . Small Arf - like GTPases use a distinct mechanism for this type of front - to - back communication wherein GTP engages switch I and induces an upwards shift of the central b - sheet . This movement displaces the N - terminal amphipathic helix , allowing it to interact with the membrane ( Pasqualato et al . , 2002 ) . In dynamin , GTP loading engages switch I and causes the central b - sheet to tilt away from the active site , which pushes against the BSE shifting it upwards ( Fig . 6C ) The central b - sheet then tilts back towards the active site upon GTP hydrolysis and the formation of the transition state , thus allowing the bundle to swing down ( Fig . 6D ) . Switch I remains engaged until the c - phosphate is released , after which it becomes highly flexible . The coordination of distant movements through the central b - sheet is a common feature of both protein families and might thus represent a conserved mechanism for conformational coupling . We speculate that the nucleotide state in dynamin is sensed by S41 in the P - loop , because it adopts multiple conformations throughout the hydrolysis cycle and is the only side chain that makes direct contact with the charge - compensating cation in the transition state ( Fig . 4D ) . Structural comparison of a GG fusion from Arabidopsis thaliana DRP1A in complex with GDP and GDP ? AlF 4 2 shows a similar conformational change of the BSE ( Yan et al . , 2011 ) ; the movement , however , appears to be coupled to a different nucleotide state such that the bundles are up in the transition state and down in the presence of bound GDP . This conformational difference could reflect different mechanistic requirements of CME in plants . Recent evidence suggests that DRP1A functions with DRP2B to catalyze coated - vesicle release in Arabidopsis ( Fujimoto et al . , 2010 ) . These two proteins display distinct domain features : the G domain of Arabidopsis DRP1 is more similar to human dynamin 1 , yet it lacks the PH domain and PRD regions that are present in Arabidopsis DRP2B ( Hong et al . , 2003 ) . This raises the possibility that they act together in a heteromeric complex , with each fulfilling a distinct functional role that is already pre - encoded within each of the individual metazoan dynamins ( Fujimoto et al . , 2010 ) . It remains to be seen whether Arabidopsis GG DRP2B – DRP1A heterodimers or GG DRP2B homodimers can support the formation of a transition - state complex and exhibit the same BSE conformational change . Although mutagenesis studies have established an essential role for the transition - state - stabilized G domain dimer in both dynamin - catalyzed fission ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) and endocytosis ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) , the functional relevance of the accompanying BSE movement has yet to be confirmed . Whether this movement produces a direct physical change , as we proposed ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) , or manifests its effects indirectly in these processes remains to be seen . Nucleotide - dependent BSE changes have thus far only been visualized in the context of G - domain – GED fusions ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ; Yan et al . , 2011 ) . Our knowledge concerning dynamin conformational changes is therefore skewed towards only a select region of the molecule in a specific context . Elucidating the structural changes that occur in other domains upon GTP hydrolysis will dramatically improve our understanding of the powerstroke and its role in the fission reaction . Conclusions Structural biology has provided the following crucial insights into dynamin GTP hydrolysis and assembly : ( 1 ) the dynamin polypeptide folds back on itself and assumes an extended conformation in the folded state ; ( 2 ) the underlying building block of dynamin assembly and oligomerization is a domain - swapped dimer , two of which stably associate to form a tetramer in solution ; ( 3 ) dynamin tetramers are likely to adopt different conformations when they are free in solution and when bound to the membrane surface ; ( 4 ) dynamin uses a bound monovalent cation as the charge - compensating element in the transition state of the hydrolysis reaction and orients the catalytic water with main chain atoms ; ( 5 ) transition - state - dependent G domain dimerization optimally positions the catalytic machinery in dynamin , leading to stimulated GTP hydrolysis ; ( 6 ) the BSE undergoes a hydrolysis - dependent conformational change that Dynamin assembly and activation in 3D 2781 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e might act as a powerstroke during fission events ; and ( 7 ) in the context of the assembled polymer , G domain dimerization occurs between tetramers in adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix . The timing and functional consequences of these activities during the fission reaction still need to be clarified . Early models for dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission suggested that dynamin functioned purely as a mechanochemical enzyme , expanding ( Stowell et al . , 1999 ) , constricting ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) or twisting ( Roux et al . , 2006 ) with GTP hydrolysis to sever the membrane . Recent studies argue that fission might instead be driven by partial disassembly of the dynamin polymer ( Pucadyil and Schmid , 2008 ; Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) , curvature - dependent changes in elastic energy at the edge of the dynamin polymer ( Morlot et al . , 2012 ) or PH domain tilting within short metastable dynamin collars ( Shnyrova et al . , 2013 ) . These models disagree on the role of stimulated GTP hydrolysis , despite the fact that this activity is absolutely required for fission in vitro ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) and efficient endocytosis in vivo ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Testing the behavior of Q40 , S41 and D180 mutants in different minimal biophysical systems ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Morlot et al . , 2012 ; Shnyrova et al . , 2013 ) could help in this regard . An emerging consensus seems to be that , in addition to facilitating G domain dimerization , dynamin assembly and constriction generate high membrane curvature and localized stress ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ; Roux et al . , 2010 ) , which asymmetrically impose a greater strain on the inner monolayer of the membrane neck ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . This can lead to the formation of a hemifission intermediate if the inner luminal diameter of the neck approaches the bilayer thickness ( , 4 nm ) ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Shnyrova et al . , 2013 ) . The current models for the dynamin polymer all have an inner luminal diameter of , 7 nm and therefore probably represent an intermediate along the fission pathway rather than the final structural state ( Chappie et al . , C GED N GTPase C GED N GTPase C GTPase C GTPase Powerstroke BSE GMPPCP BSE GDP . AlF 4 – BSE GDP . AlF 4 – BSE GMPPCP BSE Hinge BSE Hinge GG GMPPCP GG GDP . AlF 4 – BSE GDP . AlF 4 – BSE GMPPCP Up configuration β sheet BSE β sheet Switch I 30 ° GG GMPPCP GG GDP . AlF 4 – D Down configuration β sheet BSE 30 ° Switch I β sheet C GG GMPPCP FL RnDyn FL RnDyn ApoApo GTP loading GTP hydrolysis A B Fig . 6 . The dynamin powerstroke and conformational coupling . ( A ) Structural superposition of GG GMPPCP ( purple , PDB : 3ZYC ) and GG GDP : AlF { 4 ( cyan , PDB : 2X2E ) highlighting alternative BSE conformations . The BSE hinge is colored blue . ( B ) Side view of the hydrolysis - dependent BSE conformational change that constitutes the dynamin powerstroke . GG GMPPCP and GG GDP : AlF { 4 monomers are colored as in A and the BSE helices are labeled . The red arrow labeled ‘powerstroke’ depicts the 69 ˚ downwards rotation of the BSE in the transition - state complex . ( C , D ) Conformational coupling of the b - sheet , switch I and BSE movements during GTP loading ( C ) and GTP hydrolysis ( D ) . GG GMPPCP ( purple , PDB : 3ZYC ) , GG GDP : AlF { 4 ( cyan , PDB : 2X2E ) and the G domain from the nucleotide - free , full - length rat dynamin crystal structure ( yellow , PDB : 3ZVR ) are superimposed . Arrows indicate the conformational changes between the different structures . Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2782 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2010 ) . This discrepancy limits the direct comparisons and interpretations that can be made when integrating structural and biophysical data . Furthermore , the extended nature of this helical structure is an artifact of the cryo - EM reconstruction methodology and represents a non - physiological extreme . Indeed , estimations of the minimal fission apparatus suggest that only two helical turns are necessary for maximal fission efficiency ( Liu et al . , 2013 ; Shnyrova et al . , 2013 ) , which correlates with the short dynamin collars observed in vivo ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) and the observation that long dynamin scaffolds inhibit fission in vitro ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) . The structural models we describe here thus provide an atomic - resolution template that can assist in interpreting the low - resolution , and often indirect , read out from various cellular and biochemical assays . We anticipate that future structures of other dynamin - related proteins will represent variations on a common structural theme , especially given the shared features and motifs present in dynamin , MxA and distant cousins , such as human GBP1 ( Prakash et al . , 2000 ; Ghosh et al . , 2006 ) , atlastin ( Byrnes and Sondermann , 2011 ; Bian et al . , 2011 ) , BDLP ( Low and Lo¨we , 2006 ) and EHD2 ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) , as well as the observed dimerization - dependent activation of these GTPases ( Wittinghofer and Vetter , 2011 ) . The function and cellular localization of many of these proteins differ from that of dynamin , and it will be interesting to see what aspects of the mechanisms and / or associated conformational changes are also conserved . New findings might necessitate sub - dividing the ‘dynamin family’ further into specified groupings that more accurately reflect the distinct structural and functional properties of its members . Acknowledgements We thank Dr Jenny Hinshaw for insightful discussions and Dr Sandra Schmid for the communication of unpublished data . Funding The work of our laboratory was supported by the Intramural Program of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases ( NIDDK ) . J . S . C . is supported by a Nancy Nossal Fellowship award from NIDDK . Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months . References Ash , M . R . , Maher , M . J . , Mitchell Guss , J . and Jormakka , M . ( 2012 ) . The cation - dependent G - proteins : in a class of their own . FEBS Lett . 586 , 2218 - 2224 . Bashkirov , P . V . , Akimov , S . A . , Evseev , A . I . , Schmid , S . L . , Zimmerberg , J . and Frolov , V . A . ( 2008 ) . GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spontaneous fission . Cell 135 , 1276 - 1286 . Bian , X . , Klemm , R . W . , Liu , T . Y . , Zhang , M . , Sun , S . , Sui , X . , Liu , X . , Rapoport , T . A . and Hu , J . ( 2011 ) . Structures of the atlastin GTPase provide insight into homotypic fusion of endoplasmic reticulum membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 3976 - 3981 . Byrnes , L . J . and Sondermann , H . ( 2011 ) . Structural basis for the nucleotide - dependent dimerization of the large G protein atlastin - 1 / SPG3A . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 2216 - 2221 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Liu , Y . W . , Leonard , M . , Pucadyil , T . J . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . An intramolecular signaling element that modulates dynamin function in vitro and in vivo . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3561 - 3571 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . and Dyda , F . ( 2010 ) . G domain dimerization controls dynamin’s assembly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 , 435 - 440 . Chappie , J . S . , Mears , J . A . , Fang , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Milligan , R . A . , Hinshaw , J . E . and Dyda , F . ( 2011 ) . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 , 209 - 222 . Chen , Y . J . , Zhang , P . , Egelman , E . H . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2004 ) . The stalk region of dynamin drives the constriction of dynamin tubes . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 574 - 575 . Daumke , O . , Lundmark , R . , Vallis , Y . , Martens , S . , Butler , P . J . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2007 ) . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 , 923 – 927 . Faelber , K . , Posor , Y . , Gao , S . , Held , M . , Roske , Y . , Schulze , D . , Haucke , V . , Noe´ , F . and Daumke , O . ( 2011 ) . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature 477 , 556 - 560 . Faelber , K . , Held , M . , Gao , S . , Posor , Y . , Haucke , V . , Noe´ , F . and Daumke , O . ( 2012 ) . Structural insights into dynamin - mediated membrane fission . Structure 20 , 1621 - 1628 . Ferguson , S . M . and De Camilli , P . ( 2012 ) . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 75 - 88 . Ferguson , K . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Schlessinger , J . and Sigler , P . B . ( 1994 ) . Crystal structure at 2 . 2 A resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin . Cell 79 , 199 - 209 . Ford , M . G . , Jenni , S . and Nunnari , J . ( 2011 ) . The crystal structure of dynamin . Nature 477 , 561 - 566 . Fujimoto , M . , Arimura , S . , Ueda , T . , Takanashi , H . , Hayashi , Y . , Nakano , A . and Tsutsumi , N . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis dynamin - related proteins DRP2B and DRP1A participate together in clathrin - coated vesicle formation during endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A . 107 , 6094 – 6099 . Gao , S . , von der Malsburg , A . , Paeschke , S . , Behlke , J . , Haller , O . , Kochs , G . and Daumke , O . ( 2010 ) . Structural basis of oligomerization in the stalk region of dynamin - like MxA . Nature 465 , 502 - 506 . Gao , S . , von der Malsburg , A . , Dick , A . , Faelber , K . , Schro¨der , G . F . , Haller , O . , Kochs , G . and Daumke , O . ( 2011 ) . Structure of myxovirus resistance protein a reveals intra - and intermolecular domain interactions required for the antiviral function . Immunity 35 , 514 - 525 . Gasper , R . , Meyer , S . , Gotthardt , K . , Sirajuddin , M . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 2009 ) . It takes two to tango : regulation of G proteins by dimerization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 423 - 429 . Ghosh , A . , Praefcke , G . J . , Renault , L . , Wittinghofer , A . and Herrmann , C . ( 2006 ) . How guanylate - binding proteins achieve assembly - stimulated processive cleavage of GTP to GMP . Nature 440 , 101 - 104 . Hinshaw , J . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 - 192 . Hong , Z . , Bednarek , S . Y . , Blumwald , E . , Hwang , I . , Jurgens , G . , Menzel , D . , Osteryoung , K . W . , Raikhel , N . V . , Shinozaki , K . , Tsutsumi , N . et al . ( 2003 ) . A unified nomenclature for Arabidopsis dynamin - related large GTPases based on homology and possible functions . Plant Mol . Biol . 53 , 261 - 265 . Ingerman , E . , Perkins , E . M . , Marino , M . , Mears , J . A . , McCaffery , J . M . , Hinshaw , J . E . and Nunnari , J . ( 2005 ) . Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to fit mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 1021 - 1027 . Johannes , L . , Kambadur , R . , Lee - Hellmich , H . , Hodgkinson , C . A . , Arnheiter , H . and Meier , E . ( 1997 ) . Antiviral determinants of rat Mx GTPases map to the carboxy - terminal half . J . Virol . 71 , 9792 - 9795 . Kenniston , J . A . and Lemmon , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Dynamin GTPase regulation is altered by PH domain mutations found in centronuclear myopathy patients . EMBO J . 29 , 3054 - 3067 . Kochs , G . , Haener , M . , Aebi , U . and Haller , O . ( 2002 ) . Self - assembly of human MxA GTPase into highly ordered dynamin - like oligomers . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 14172 – 14176 . Kosaka , T . and Ikeda , K . ( 1983 ) . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J . Neurobiol . 14 , 207 - 225 . Li , G . and Zhang , X . C . ( 2004 ) . GTP hydrolysis mechanism of Ras - like GTPases . J . Mol . Biol . 340 , 921 - 932 . Liu , Y . W . , Mattila , J . P . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2013 ) . Dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission requires coordinated GTP hydrolysis . PLoS ONE 8 , e55691 . Low , H . H . and Lo¨we , J . ( 2006 ) . A bacterial dynamin - like protein . Nature 444 , 766 - 769 . Low , H . H . , Sachse , C . , Amos , L . A . and Lo¨we , J . ( 2009 ) . Structure of a bacterial dynamin - like protein lipid tube provides a mechanism for assembly and membrane curving . Cell 139 , 1342 - 1352 . Marks , B . , Stowell , M . H . B . , Vallis , Y . , Mills , I . G . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 . Mears , J . A . , Ray , P . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2007 ) . A corkscrew model for dynamin constriction . Structure 15 , 1190 - 1202 . Mears , J . A . , Lackner , L . L . , Fang , S . , Ingerman , E . , Nunnari , J . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2011 ) . Conformational changes in Dnm1 support a contractile mechanism for mitochondrial fission . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 20 - 26 . Mettlen , M . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Ramachandran , R . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Dissecting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 , 1022 - 1026 . Mim , C . and Unger , V . M . ( 2012 ) . Membrane curvature and its generation by BAR proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 37 , 526 - 533 . Morlot , S . , Galli , V . , Klein , M . , Chiaruttini , N . , Manzi , J . , Humbert , F . , Dinis , L . , Lenz , M . , Cappello , G . and Roux , A . ( 2012 ) . Membrane shape at the edge of the dynamin helix sets location and duration of the fission reaction . Cell 151 , 619 - 629 . Muhlberg , A . B . , Warnock , D . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Domain structure and intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J . 16 , 6676 - 6683 . Dynamin assembly and activation in 3D 2783 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Niemann , H . H . , Knetsch , M . L . W . , Scherer , A . , Manstein , D . J . and Kull , F . J . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of a dynamin GTPase domain in both nucleotide - free and GDP - bound forms . EMBO J . 20 , 5813 - 5821 . Paduch , M . , Jelen´ , F . and Otlewski , J . ( 2001 ) . Structure of small G proteins and their regulators . Acta Biochim . Pol . 48 , 829 - 850 . Pasqualato , S . , Renault , L . and Cherfils , J . ( 2002 ) . Arf , Arl , Arp and Sar proteins : a familyofGTP - bindingproteinswithastructuraldevicefor‘front - back’communication . EMBO Rep . 3 , 1035 - 1041 . Praefcke , G . J . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . The dynamin superfamily : universal membrane tubulation and fission molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 - 147 . Prakash , B . , Praefcke , G . J . K . , Renault , L . , Wittinghofer , A . and Herrmann , C . ( 2000 ) . Structure of human guanylate - binding protein 1 representing a unique class of GTP - binding proteins . Nature 403 , 567 - 571 . Pucadyil , T . J . and Schmid S . L . ( 2008 ) . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission and vesicle release . Cell 135 , 1263 - 1275 . Ramachandran , R . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2008 ) . Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J . 27 , 27 - 37 . Ramachandran , R . , Surka , M . , Chappie , J . S . , Fowler , D . M . , Foss , T . R . , Song , B . D . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2007 ) . The dynamin middle domain is critical for tetramerization and higher - order self - assembly . EMBO J . 26 , 559 - 566 . Ramachandran , R . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Liu , Y . W . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Lukiyanchuk , V . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Membrane insertion of the pleckstrin homology domain variable loop 1 is critical for dynamin - catalyzed vesicle scission . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4630 - 4639 . Reubold , T . F . , Eschenburg , S . , Becker , A . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Vallee , R . B . , Kull , F . J . and Manstein , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Crystal structure of the GTPase domain of rat dynamin 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 13093 - 13098 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission . Nature 441 , 528 - 531 . Roux , A . , Koster , G . , Lenz , M . , Sorre , B . , Manneville , J . B . , Nassoy , P . and Bassereau , P . ( 2010 ) . Membrane curvature controls dynamin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4141 - 4146 . Salim , K . , Bottomley , M . J . , Querfurth , E . , Zvelebil , M . J . , Gout , I . , Scaife , R . , Margolis , R . L . , Gigg , R . , Smith , C . I . , Driscoll , P . C . , Waterfield , M . D . and Panayotou , G . ( 1996 ) . Distinct specificity in the recognition of phosphoinositides by the pleckstrin homology domains of dynamin and Bruton’s tyrosine kinase . EMBO J . 15 , 6241 - 6250 . Scheffzek , K . , Ahmadian , M . R . , Kabsch , W . , Wiesmu¨ller , L . , Lautwein , A . , Schmitz , F . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 1997 ) . The Ras - RasGAP complex : structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants . Science 277 , 333 - 338 . Scheffzek , K . , Ahmadian , M . R . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 1998 ) . GTPase - activating proteins : helping hands to complement an active site . Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , 257 - 262 . Schmid , S . L . and Frolov , V . A . ( 2011 ) . Dynamin : functional design of a membrane fission catalyst . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 79 - 105 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1999 ) . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 - 486 . Sever , S . , Skoch , J . , Newmyer , S . , Ramachandran , R . , Ko , D . , McKee , M . , Bouley , R . , Ausiello , D . , Hyman , B . T . and Bacskai , B . J . ( 2006 ) . Physical and functional connection between auxilin and dynamin during endocytosis . EMBO J . 25 , 4163 - 4174 . Shnyrova , A . V . , Bashkirov , P . V . , Akimov , S . A . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Zimmerberg , J . , Schmid , S . L . and Frolov , V . A . ( 2013 ) . Geometric catalysis of membrane fission driven by flexible dynamin rings . Science 339 , 1433 - 1436 . Solomaha , E . and Palfrey , H . C . ( 2005 ) . Conformational changes in dynamin on GTP binding and oligomerization reported by intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescence . Biochem . J . 391 , 601 - 611 . Song , B . D . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . A molecular motor or a regulator ? Dynamin’s in a class of its own . Biochemistry 42 , 1369 - 1376 . Song , B . D . , Leonard , M . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2004 ) . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants that differentially affect GTP binding , GTP hydrolysis , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 40431 - 40436 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 27 - 32 . Sweitzer , S . M . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 - 1029 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 - 190 . Tesmer , J . J . G . , Berman , D . M . , Gilman , A . G . and Sprang , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Structure of RGS4 bound to AlF4—activated G ( i a 1 ) : stabilization of the transition state for GTP hydrolysis . Cell 89 , 251 - 261 . Timm , D . , Salim , K . , Gout , I . , Guruprasad , L . , Waterfield , M . and Blundell , T . ( 1994 ) . Crystal structure of the pleckstrin homology domain from dynamin . Nat . Struct . Biol . 1 , 782 - 788 . van der Bliek , A . M . ( 1999 ) . Functional diversity in the dynamin family . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 96 - 102 . Vetter , I . R . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 2001 ) . The guanine nucleotide - binding switch in three dimensions . Science 294 , 1299 - 1304 . Warnock , D . E . , Hinshaw , J . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Dynamin self - assembly stimulates its GTPase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 22310 - 22314 . Wittinghofer , A . and Vetter , I . R . ( 2011 ) . Structure - function relationships of the G domain , a canonical switch motif . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 80 , 943 - 971 . Yan , L . , Ma , Y . , Sun , Y . , Gao , J . , Chen , X . , Liu , J . , Wang , C . , Rao , Z . and Lou , Z . ( 2011 ) . Structural basis for mechanochemical role of Arabidopsis thaliana dynamin - related protein in membrane fission . J . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 378 - 381 . Zhang , P . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 922 - 926 . Journal of Cell Science 126 ( 13 ) 2784