Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Symptom profiles and risk factors for hospitalization in patients with SARS - CoV - 2 and COVID - 19 : A Large Cohort from South America Luis Antonio Díaz , M . D . , Tamara García - Salum , Ph . D . , Eduardo Fuentes - López , Ph . D . , Marcela Ferrés , M . D . , Rafael A . Medina , Ph . D . , Arnoldo Riquelme , M . D . , Contributors , Jorge Levican , Ph . D . , Leonardo I . Almonacid , Ph . D . , Eileen Serrano , cPh . D . , Javier Chahuan , M . D . , Colomba Cofré , M . D . , Manuel Álvarez , M . D . , Jaime Labarca , M . D . , Sebastián Valderrama , M . D . , Erick Salinas , R . N . , Adriana Toro , N . P . , Marcos Ortega , M . D . , Patricia García , M . D . , Margarita Pizarro , Ms . BT . PII : S0016 - 5085 ( 20 ) 30606 - 5 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2020 . 05 . 014 Reference : YGAST 63444 To appear in : Gastroenterology Accepted Date : 5 May 2020 Please cite this article as : Díaz LA , García - Salum T , Fuentes - López E , Ferrés M , Medina RA , Riquelme A , Contributors , Levican J , Almonacid LI , Serrano E , Chahuan J , Cofré C , Álvarez M , Labarca J , Valderrama S , Salinas E , Toro A , Ortega M , García P , Pizarro M , Symptom profiles and risk factors for hospitalization in patients with SARS - CoV - 2 and COVID - 19 : A Large Cohort from South America , Gastroenterology ( 2020 ) , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2020 . 05 . 014 . This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2020 by the AGA Institute 1 Symptom profiles and risk factors for hospitalization in patients with SARS - CoV - 2 and COVID - 19 : A Large Cohort from South America Authors : Luis Antonio Díaz , M . D . 1 * , Tamara García - Salum , Ph . D . 2 , Eduardo Fuentes - López , Ph . D . 3 * , Marcela Ferrés M . D . 2 , Rafael A . Medina , Ph . D . 2 + , Arnoldo Riquelme , M . D . 1 , 2 + . Contributors : Jorge Levican Ph . D . 2 , Leonardo I . Almonacid Ph . D . 2 , Eileen Serrano , cPh . D . 2 , Javier Chahuan , M . D . 1 , Colomba Cofré M . D . 4 , Manuel Álvarez M . D . 1 , Jaime Labarca , M . D . 5 , Sebastián Valderrama , M . D . 6 , Erick Salinas , R . N . 2 , Adriana Toro , N . P . 7 , Marcos Ortega , M . D . 8 , 9 , Patricia García , M . D . 10 , Margarita Pizarro , Ms . BT . 1 * Díaz , Garcia - Salum , and Fuentes - López contributed equally to this study . + Medina and Riquelme are co - corresponding authors . Afiliation : 1 . Department of Gastroenterology , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 2 . Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 3 . Department of Health Sciences , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 4 . Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 5 . Department of Infectious Diseases , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 6 . Department of Internal Medicine , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 7 . Pediatric Service , Clínica UC San Carlos , Red Salud UC Christus , Faculty of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 2 8 . Department of Intensive Care Medicine , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 9 . Department of Respiratory Medicine , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . 10 . Department of Clinical Laboratory , School of Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , Santiago , Chile . Corresponding authors : Arnoldo Riquelme , M . D . , M . Med . Ed . Full Professor Department of Gastroenterology Centre for Medical Education and Health Sciences Director Department of Health Sciences School of Medicine Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Santiago , Chile E - mail : a . riquelme . perez @ gmail . com Rafael A . Medina , Ph . D . Associate Professor Department of Infectious Diseases and Pediatric Immunology School of Medicine Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Santiago , Chile E - mail : rmedinai @ uc . cl 3 Contributors : AR and RM are responsible for the overall content of the project and the manuscript submitted as guarantors of the project . AR , RM , LAD , EFL and TGS had full access to all the data in the study . LAD , TGS and EFL take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis . AR , RM , LAD , EFL and TGS takes the final decision to submit for publication . Study concept and design : AR , RM , MF , MA , CC , JaL , LAD . Acquisition of data : LAD , TGS , EFL , EiS , ErS , AT , SV , MO , PG . Experiments and qRT - PCR analysis : RM , MF , TGS , JoL , LIA , EiS . Analysis or interpretation of data : RM , AR , LAD , TGS , EFL , JL , LIA , EiS , JC . Drafting of the manuscript : LAD , TGS , EFL , RM , AR , JC , MP . Critical revision of the manuscript for relevant intellectual content : LAD , TGS , EFL , JoL , LIA , EiS , MF , JC , CC , MA , JaL , SV , ErS , AT , MO , PG , MP , RM , AR . Statistical analysis : EFL , LAD , TGS . Word count : 743 Disclosure : The authors reported no potential conflict of interest . Financial support : Protocols and the study set - up used for this study were based on influenza virus studies established in part with the support the FONDECYT 1161971 grant from the Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo ( ANID ) of Chile , the FLUOMICS Consortium ( NIAID grant U19AI135972 ) funded by NIH and the CRIP ( Center for Research on Influenza Pathogenesis ) , an NIH funded Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Surveillance ( CEIRS , contract number HHSN272201400008C ) . Keywords : Diarrhea , 2019 - nCoV - 2 , coronavirus , COVID - 19 Acknowledgement : Valentina Riquelme , Faculty of Arts , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile , for her contribution with the illustration . Alonso Rioseco MD , Director of Clinica UC 4 San Carlos , Olga Martinez , Chief - Coordinator of Nursery , Lorena Solís , Pediatric Nurse coordinator , Clinica UC San Carlos , Red de Salud UC Christus , Lorena Troncoso , Nurse coordinator and Alejandra Muñoz , nurse supervisor , Intensive Care Unit ( ICU ) , Clinica UC San Carlos for their support to this project related to recruitment process . 5 The pandemic caused by a novel Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) can cause several gastrointestinal ( GI ) symptoms . A recent systematic review showed a prevalence of GI symptoms in 17 . 6 % . The most frequent manifestations were anorexia ( 26 . 8 % ) , diarrhea ( 12 . 5 % ) , nausea / vomiting ( 10 . 2 % ) , and abdominal pain ( 9 . 2 % ) 1 , and recent reports showed the detection of viral RNA in stools for prolonged periods ( 70 . 3 % ) 1 . We established the frequency and impact of GI symptoms , and viral presence in stools among Chilean patients infected with SARS - CoV - 2 . METHODS We used information available from the Chilean Ministry of Health . SARS - CoV - 2 infection was confirmed by a quantitative real - time reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( qRT – PCR ) from nasopharyngeal swab ( NPS ) . We analyzed a convenience cohort ( CC ) [ 2 Hospitals , Faculty - of - Medicine , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile / FM - PUC ] of SARS - CoV - 2 infected patients , including their sociodemographic and clinical data , and biological samples ( NPS , sputum and stools ) , which were collected for qRT - PCR analyses , and used the cycle threshold ( C T ) as a surrogate marker of viral load . The protocol was approved by the FM - PUC Scientific Ethics Committee . RESULTS In Chile , there were 82 , 271 tests performed to detect SARS - CoV - 2 , and 7 , 213 ( 8 . 8 % ) were positive by April 11 th 2020 , accounting for an incidence of 37 . 1 cases per 100 , 000 6 inhabitants . We included 7 , 016 in the analysis ( 97 . 3 % of patients confirmed nationally ) . The median age was 40 years old , and 50 % were females . The most common symptoms were cough ( 53 . 4 % ) , myalgia ( 56 . 4 % ) , and fever ( 43 . 9 % ) ( Figure ) . Diarrhea was reported in 7 . 3 % , and 3 . 7 % had abdominal pain . A total of 1 , 155 patients were hospitalized ( 16 . 5 % ) : 716 ( 62 % ) were in a general ward , 439 ( 38 % ) were in an intensive care unit , and 328 ( 28 . 4 % ) required mechanical ventilation . At the end of this study , 80 deaths had occurred ( mortality rate 1 . 1 % ) . The presence of diarrhea was associated with a higher risk of hospitalization , with a relative risk ( RR ) of 1 . 31 ( CI - 95 % 1 . 1 - 1 . 57 ; p - value < 0 . 01 ) , but abdominal pain was not ( RR 1 . 25 , CI - 95 % 0 . 98 - 1 . 60 ; p - value < 0 . 076 ) . In the convenience cohort ( N = 28 ) , the median age was 43 . 6 years - old [ 23 - 83 ] ; 11 ( 39 . 3 % ) were females , and 12 ( 42 . 9 % ) were hospitalized . None of our patients died at the end of this study . Twelve ( 42 . 9 % ) patients referred to GI symptoms , including diarrhea ( 32 . 1 % ) , nausea ( 14 . 3 % ) , abdominal pain ( 3 . 6 % ) , and vomiting ( 3 . 6 % ) . Viral RNA was detected in 23 patients ( 83 . 1 % ) with respiratory secretions , and 6 ( 50 % ) patients with stool samples available were positive . Of these , 4 ( 66 . 7 % ) presented GI symptoms ( Figure ) . No differences were observed in viral load in stools from patients with or without gastrointestinal symptoms , based on C T values ( C T : 37 . 06 vs . 35 . 47 ; p - value 0 . 800 , respectively ) . Interestingly , patients with diarrhea presented a trend towards higher viral detection in stools [ OR 6 . 8 ( 0 . 95 - 48 . 69 ) ; p - value 0 . 056 ] . 7 DISCUSSION In Chile , 7 . 3 % of SARS - CoV - 2 patients reported diarrhea and 3 . 7 % abdominal pain . A significant percentage of our population required hospitalization , reaching a low mortality rate of 1 . 1 % . The presence of diarrhea was associated with a higher risk of hospitalization , increasing the risk by 31 % . Instead , abdominal pain was not associated with a higher risk of hospitalization . In our CC , we determined that 50 % of patients had detectable stool viral RNA during illnesses , and patients with diarrhea had higher stool RNA positivity than those without diarrhea . The overall frequency of GI symptoms was similar to other populations 1 - 3 . Recent publications showed that the frequency of GI symptoms is higher in severe patients , becoming more pronounced with an increase disease severity 1 , 2 . However , the specific symptoms associated with higher risk had not been characterized . In this study , diarrhea and nausea were the most prevalent symptoms , highlighting and confirming the diverse clinical manifestations 1 , 3 - 5 . The mean C T value was similar between patients with and without GI manifestations . We could only obtain stool samples from a subset of our recruited patients ; hence , further studies are warranted to accurately assess the proportion of individuals with viral shedding in stools . It has been widely proposed that SARS - CoV - 2 could enter cells using the Angiotensin - converting - Enzyme - 2 ( ACE2 ) as a receptor 6 . ACE2 modulates intestinal inflammation , and 8 recent evidence showed that intestinal epithelium also supports SARS - CoV - 2 replication , suggesting that the fecal - oral route could provide a source of potential transmission 7 , 8 . In conclusion , the presence of diarrhea was associated with a higher risk of hospitalization in Chilean patients diagnosed with SARS - CoV - 2 . The frequency of GI manifestations in our population is similar to previous reports . Fifty percent of patients have detectable SARS - CoV - 2 RNA in stools . The fecal - oral route might be an underestimated mechanism of transmission . Preventive measures focused on this pathway could potentially decrease transmission . 9 REFERENCES 1 . Cheung KS , Hung IFN , Chan PPY , et al . Gastrointestinal Manifestations of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection and Virus Load in Fecal Samples from the Hong Kong Cohort and Systematic Review and Meta - analysis . Gastroenterology 2020 . 2 . Pan L , Mu M , Yang P , et al . Clinical Characteristics of COVID - 19 Patients With Digestive Symptoms in Hubei , China : A Descriptive , Cross - Sectional , Multicenter Study . Am J Gastroenterol 2020 . 3 . Li L - q , Huang T , Wang Y - q , et al . COVID - 19 patients ' clinical characteristics , discharge rate , and fatality rate of meta - analysis . Journal of Medical Virology ; n / a . 4 . Cao Y , Liu X , Xiong L , et al . Imaging and Clinical Features of Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus SARS - CoV - 2 : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Journal of Medical Virology ; n / a . 5 . Miri SM , Roozbeh F , Omranirad A , et al . Panic of Buying Toilet Papers : A Historical Memory or a Horrible Truth ? Systematic Review of Gastrointestinal Manifestations of COVID - 19 . Hepat Mon 2020 ; 20 : e102729 . 6 . Letko M , Marzi A , Munster V . Functional assessment of cell entry and receptor usage for SARS - CoV - 2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses . Nat Microbiol 2020 ; 5 : 562 - 569 . 7 . Hashimoto T , Perlot T , Rehman A , et al . ACE2 links amino acid malnutrition to microbial ecology and intestinal inflammation . Nature 2012 ; 487 : 477 - 81 . 8 . Lamers MM , Beumer J , van der Vaart J , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 productively infects human gut enterocytes . Science 2020 : eabc1669 . 10 FIGURE Figure . Clinical manifestations of SARS - CoV - 2 infected patients in Chile .