1 . Introduction 2 . Some popular synthesis methods of dextran conjugates 3 . Drug carrier systems based on dextran conjugates 4 . Applications of dextran conjugates in drug delivery 5 . Conclusion 6 . Expert opinion Review Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Jaleh Varshosaz Isfahan University of Medical Sciences , Faculty of Pharmacy and Novel Drug Delivery Systems Research Center , Department of Pharmaceutics , Isfahan , Iran Introduction : Dextran is a family of natural polysaccharides that is widely under investigation for use as polymeric carriers in novel drug delivery systems . The optimal drug delivery ( and consequently maximum therapeutic effect ) will be accomplished when carrier systems are used mainly for drugs with antitumoral activity , as they increase their blood permanence time , taking advantage of the increased mass that reduces kidney ultrafiltration . Areas covered : This review summarizes the attempts that have been made in the development of dextran conjugates and their application . The manuscript describes dextran hydrogels , the use of conjugates of dextran in bioadhesive oral delivery systems , colon drug delivery , reduction of ulcerogenicity of drugs , production of micelles , solubilization , long - circulating pharmaceutical carriers as anticancer drug carriers , non - viral vectors , stabilization of enzymes , functionalization of nanomaterials , diagnosis of solid tumors and hyperthermic treatment and liver targeting . Expert opinion : Dextran conjugation has aided the design of new tailor - made polymers with different molecular weights , shapes , structures and with the functional groups needed for coupling at the desired positions in the chain . Dextran prodrugs are very useful systems for achieving controlled drug release and drug targeting . In particular , various dextran - antitumor drug conjugates enhance the effectiveness and improve the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapeutic agents . Future studies should concentrate on barriers for their clinical use and safety as a drug carrier . Keywords : anticancer drug , biopolymer , conjugation , copolymer , dextran , drug delivery , micelles , prodrug Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) : 509 - 523 1 . Introduction New classes of pharmaceuticals and biologics ( peptides , proteins , and DNA - based therapeutics ) have caused rapid evolution of drug delivery technology . These new drugs typically cannot be effectively delivered by conventional means . Additionally , it has been determined that , for many conventional pharmaceutical therapies , the efficacy may be improved and the side effects reduced if the therapy is administered continuously , rather than through conventional burst release techniques . The benefits from targeted , localized delivery of certain therapeutic agents are another driving force in drug market . Areas that are being targeted for improve - ments through device development include : improved efficacy , reduced side effects , continuous dosing ( sustained release ) , reduced pain from administration , increased ease of use , and increased use compliance . To provide these benefits , a number of approaches are being ( or in some cases have been ) developed . The common thread running through the approaches is the concept of targeted and sustained release with increased bioavailability . During the last two decades , significant advances have been made in the development of biocompatible and biodegradable polymers for biomedical applications . A wildly used biopolymer in drug delivery is dextran . 10 . 1517 / 17425247 . 2012 . 673580 © 2012 Informa UK , Ltd . ISSN 1742 - 5247 509 All rights reserved : reproduction in whole or in part not permitted E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Dextran is a bacterial polysaccharide synthesized from sucrose by certain lactic - acid bacteria and is consisting of main chains from a - ( 1 ! 6 ) linked D - glucose units with differ - ent ratios of linkages and branches , depending on the bacterial strains [ 1 ] . This polymeric chain of glucosyl units may also be synthesized using dextransucrase by the transfer of D - glucosyl unit from sucrose to acceptor molecules [ 2 ] . The chemical struc - ture of dextran ( Figure 1 ) includes a - ( 1 ! 6 ) linkages that can vary from 97 to 50 % of total glucosidic bonds . The branching is made in position a - ( 1 ! 2 ) , a - ( 1 ! 3 ) , and / or a - ( 1 ! 4 ) . The hydroxyl groups in dextran are preferred for most derivatiza - tion . The C - 2 hydroxyl groups appear to be the first to react because the hydroxyl groups of C - 6 are concerned in a - 1 , 6 link - ages [ 1 ] . Different types of dextrans of varying size and structure are synthesized depending on the dextransucrase produced by the strain . The low molecular weight fractions of dextrans are used as a plasma expander . Furthermore , dextrans are widely under investigation as polymeric carriers in novel drug delivery systems [ 3 ] . The solubility of dextrans depends upon the branched linkage pattern . In fact , dextrans with > 43 % bran - ching through 1 , 3 - a linkages have been considered water inso - luble . Presence of 95 % linear linkages makes it water - soluble , which is suitable for various applications [ 2 ] . 2 . Some popular synthesis methods of dextran conjugates 2 . 1 Direct esterification Many ester prodrugs of dextran have been developed by its conjugation with acidic drugs to prolong drug release like most non - steroidal anti - inflammatory ( NSAIDs ) drugs . This type of linkage is formed by conjugation of hydroxyl groups of dextran in the presence of N , N ¢ - dicyclohexylcarbodiimide with carboxylic acid drugs [ 4 ] . Another type of dextran ester is dextran ester - olefin compound copolymer . Multifunctional dextran esters with varying degrees of substitution by furoyl - , pyroglutamyl - , propyl - , and acetyl moieties are able to self - assemble into regular nanospheres . 2 . 2 Carbonyldiimidazole activation method Activation of dextran hydroxy groups may be done with carbonyldiimidazole then amino groups are introduced by attaching ethylenediamine , and reacting amino groups with a succinimidyl - activated derivative of other hydroxyl containing substances like PEG [ 5 ] . Another example of use of this type of activation is in conjugation of cromoglycic acid with dextran [ 6 ] . 2 . 3 Carbonate or carbamate ester method Drugs containing a hydroxyl or amine group can be coupled to dextran in the form of carbonate or carbamate ester linkage , respectively . First of all hydroxyl groups of dextran are activated by phosgene then the alcoholic or amine drug is added to the activated dextran [ 7 ] . 2 . 4 Periodate oxidation method Enzymes and proteins are attached to dextrans and other polysaccharides by periodate oxidation of dextran which produces dialdehyde dextran . Then Schiff bases are produced from its condensation with amino compounds . The conjugate is then stabilized subsequently by reduction with sodium borohydride [ 8 ] . 2 . 5 Cyanogens bromide activation method Amine containing drugs and proteins may be attached to dextran or other polysaccharides by the cyanogens bromide activation of dextran [ 9 ] . 2 . 6 Etherification of dextran Ethers of dextran are made by irreversible nucleophilic substi - tution using aliphatic or aromatic halides , sulfates or epoxides , whereas reversible etherification is achieved via Michael addition of a , b - unsaturated reagents such as acrylonitrile , acrylamide , and methyl vinyl sulfone [ 10 ] . 3 . Drug carrier systems based on dextran conjugates 3 . 1 Dextran hydrogels Hydrogels form a specific class of polymeric biomaterials . Precise definition of this term is not obvious . Hydrogels are defined as two - or multicomponent systems consisting of a three - dimensional network of polymer chains and water that fills the space between macromolecules . Hydrogels are becoming increasingly important in the biomedical , pharma - ceutical specially in controlled release of drugs , biotechnolo - gical , and environmental fields . Dextran is a suitable polymer used for the preparation of hydrogels . Dextran hydrogels can be obtained by several different approaches , different chemical compositions , and cross - linking agents : chemical incorporation of glycidyl acrylate into dextran in aqueous phase , followed by free radical polymerization of the dextran derivatives in the presence of N , N ¢ - methylenebi - sacrylamide as an additional cross - linker [ 11 ] , cross - linking of Article highlights . . Some dextran conjugates show bioadhesive properties . . Prodrugs of dextran are specially useful in colon - targeted drug delivery . Liver - targeted delivery is also reported for dextran conjugates . . Dextran - based micelles are useful carriers for anticancer drugs . . Dextran - coated nanocarriers have long - circulating times due to prevention of particles being opsonized . . Solubilization of poorly soluble drugs may be achieved by their conjugation to dextran . . Dextran conjugation with cationic polymers reduces toxicity of these polymers while enhances their serum stability . This box summarizes key points contained in the article . J . Varshosaz 510 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . dextran with 1 , 6 - hexanediisocyanate in DMSO [ 12 ] and cross - linking of dextran with epichlorohydrin [ 13 ] . Kim et al . [ 14 , 15 ] also reported the synthesis of methacrylated and acrylated dextrans by reacting dextran with methacrylic anhydride , and with bromoacetyl bromide and sodium acrylate , respec - tively . Allyl isocyanate dextran and lactide diacrylate were used for preparation of biodegradable dextran - - polylactide hydrogel networks . This hydrogel was used in controlled release of indomethacin [ 16 ] . Phosphate diesters of waxy maize starch were prepared by cross - bonding reaction using phosphorus oxychloride . Cross - linked dextran is applied as a packing material for gel filtration columns [ 17 ] . Enzymatic cross - linking of dextran - tyramine ( Dex - TA ) conjugates in the presence of horseradish peroxidase and hydrogen peroxide was successively applied in the preparation of hydrogels used for encapsulation of chondrocytes . The Dex - TA hydrogels are promising 3D scaffolds for cartilage tissue engineering applications [ 18 ] . The swelling / degradation studies showed that under physiological conditions , Dex - TA linked by a urethane bond hydrogels are rather stable with less than 25 % loss of gel weight in 5 months , whereas DG - TA hydrogels with ester - containing diglycolic group are completely degraded within 4 - - 10 days [ 19 ] . These dextran - based hydrogels are promising for use as injectable systems for biomedical applications including tissue engineering and protein delivery . Dextran hydrogels containing non - steroidal anti - inflam - matory drugs ( NSAIDs ) as pendant agents , through ultravio - let irradiation of solutions of dextran functionalized with methacrylic groups in the presence of the drug deriva - tized in the same way have been prepared [ 20 ] . Release studies of different drugs from this system have demonstrated that it is strictly related to the concentration of the polymer in the solution submitted to irradiation as well as to its derivatization degree . 3 . 2 Bioadhesive oral delivery systems The bioadhesive properties of poly ( methyl vinyl ether - co - maleic anhydride ) ( Gantrez AN ) nanoparticles ( NP ) associated with two hydroxyl - functionalized dextrans and one amino - derivative of dextran have been shown by Porfire et al . [ 21 ] The in vivo bioadhesion study has demon - strated significantly higher adhesive interactions with the gastrointestinal tract of rats for all types of dextran - associated NP compared with control NP . These results encourage us for further use of these systems for oral delivery of drugs . 3 . 3 Conjugates of dextran in production of micelles Polymeric micelles using amphiphilic macromolecules are promising vehicles for antitumor targeting . A block copolymer composed of dextran and poly ( DL - lactide - co - glycolide ) ( PLGA ) ( Figure 2 ) was prepared by Jeong et al . [ 22 ] for antitu - mor drug delivery of doxorubicin ( DOX ) . In an antiprolifera - tion study , the polymeric micelles showed higher cytotoxicity to doxorubicin - resistant HuCC - T1 cells than free doxorubicin , indicating that the polymeric micelles were effectively engulfed by tumor cells , while free doxorubicin hardly penetrated the tumor cell membrane . Since aggregation states of amphotericin B ( AmpB ) are related to intrinsic cytotoxicity , prevention of AmpB aggrega - tion in aqueous solution will provide low cytotoxicity and increased antimicrobial activity for the infectious disease . For this reason , AmpB was encapsulated in polymeric micelle of PLGA - grafted dextran copolymer [ 23 ] . AmpB - incorporated O CH 2 H HO O OH H H H H HO O CH 2 H HO O OH H H H H HO O CH 2 H HO O OH H H H H HO O CH 2 H HO O H H H H HO O CH 2 H HO O OH H H H H HO 1 2 3 4 5 6 Figure 1 . Chemical structure of dextran . Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 511 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . polymeric micelle prepared from methanol / water mixture showed low cytotoxicity and favorable antimicrobial activity . Another type of micelle obtained from conjugation of dextran is stearate - g - dextran ( Dex - SA ) that was synthesized via an esterification reaction between the carboxyl group of stearic acid and hydroxyl group of dextran [ 24 ] . Dex - SA could self - assemble to form nanoscaled micelles in aqueous medium . Tumor cellular uptake test indicated that Dex - SA micelles had excellent internalization ability , which could deliver DOX into tumor cells and could prolong in vitro drug release to 48 h . In vivo antitumor activity results showed that Dex - SA / DOX micelles treatments effectively suppressed the tumor growth and reduced the toxicity against animal body compared with commercial DOX injection . Enhancement of drug loading and controlled drug release may be achieved by production of interpenetrating micellar networks . The strong associative network between cholesterol - modified dextran and short and long polyoxyethy - lene cholesteryl ether micelles was prepared [ 25 ] . The resulting network was constituted by polymeric chains connected by micellar aggregates through hydrophobic interactions between the micellar cholesterol cores and the pendent cholesterol moieties of the polymer . Stimuli responsive micelles are another type of copolymers of dextran which can control drug release by the environmen - tal stimuli . One of these systems is reduction - responsive biodegradable micelles that were developed from disulfide - linked dextran - b - poly ( " - caprolactone ) diblock copolymer ( Dex - SS - PCL ) and applied for triggering release of DOX in vitro and inside cells [ 26 ] . DOX could be efficiently loaded into the micelles with a drug loading efficiency of about 70 % . Notably , the in vitro release studies revealed that Dex - SS - PCL micelles released DOX quantitatively in 10 h . Amphiphilic Dex - g - PCL micelles were also used as carriers for particle encapsulation and stabilization in the aqueous phase [ 27 ] . Multiple supramagnetic nanoparticles were self - assembled together with the help of Dex - g - PCL during phase transfer from chloroform to water . Micelles based on Dex - b - PCL ( Figure 3 ) , with a series of well - defined chain lengths of each block were also prepared by conjugating a dextran chain with a PCL block via aza - Michael addition reaction under mild conditions [ 28 ] . O H HO OH H H OH H H OH O O H HO OH H H OH H H O O H HO OH H H OH H H O O H HO OH H H OH H HO O H HO OH H H OH H HO O H HO OH H H OH H HN O O O * * H O O NHO X Y Figure 2 . Schematic representation of dextran - poly ( DL - lactide - co - glycolide ) block copolymer . J . Varshosaz 512 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . The morphology of the copolymer assembly changed from spherical micelles to worm - like micelles and eventually to polymersomes , together with an increase in particle sizes . A series of amphiphilic copolymers of dextran - graft - methoxy - polyethylene glycol / poly ( " - caprolactone ) ( Dex - g - mPEG / PCL ) with great potential as drug carriers in biomedical fields were also synthesized by grafting both PCL and mPEG chains to dextran [ 29 ] . The prepared copolymers self - assembled into nano - sized spherical micelles in aqueous solution and the critical micellar concentration ( CMC ) of the graft copolymers could be adjusted by controlling the degree of substitution of mPEG and PCL , and these micelles may find . Deoxycholic acid ( DA ) - conjugated dextran ( DexDA ) micelles ( Figure 4 ) are another type of dextran conjugates which was synthesized for DOX delivery to DOX - resistant CT26 colon carcinoma cells [ 30 ] . The higher substitution degree of DA and higher drug feeding ratio resulted in increased particle size . Drug release was decreased by increase of substitution degree value of DA and increase of drug feeding ratio . At in vitro cytotoxicity test , higher antitumor activity was obtained with DOX - incorporated nanoparticles compared to free DOX . Targeted micelles of dextran are also prepared for active drug delivery to malignant cells . These micelles are promising in reduction of resistance to cytotoxic drugs . A novel folate ( FA ) - targeted amphiphilic derivative of all - trans retinoic acid - dextran ( ATRA - grafted Dex ) was synthesized success - fully using carbonyldiimidazole and dimethylaminopyridine for tumor - targeted drug delivery [ 31 ] . The degree of substitu - tion of FA was 20 % and for ATRA was 5 . 54 % according to the weight of the polymer . The CMC of the micelle was found to be 12 . 5 µ g / mL which is very low than that of the most surfactant micelles . Self - assembly of FA / Dex / ATRA copolymer produced micelles in PBS . Zeta potential of these O O O OH OH HO OH OH HO HO HO HO O HO HO O n O O OH HN OH OH HO OH HO HO HO HO O HO HO O n NH 2 O O OH HN OH HO HO OH HO HO HO HO O HO HO O n NH N O O O O H O m NH 2 H 2 N NaCNBH 3 DMSO TEADMSO DEX - EDA + HEML - PCL N OH O O O O m Sn ( Oct ) 2 Tolune N O O O O H O m A . B . Figure 3 . Synthetic route for amphiphilic diblock copolymer DEX - b - PCL . Reproduced with permission from eXPRESS Polymer Letters [ 28 ] . Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 513 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . nanomicelles was - - 15 . 9 mV indicating good stability of the micelles . The polymeric micelles showed no toxicity on HeLa cells even at 50 µ g / ml concentration and at 100 µ g / ml about 90 % of the cell survived . Then DOX was loaded in the micelles by dissolving method . Then the mixture was prob - sonicated for about 2 min . The cytotoxicity of micelles was evaluated by MTT assay on KG - 1 cell line in different concentrations of DOX . The folate - targeted micelles of DOX were cytotoxic on KG - 1 cell line ( acute leukemia ) in half concentration of DOX and seem promising in reducing the dose of this drug in acute leukemia [ 32 ] . Polymeric micelles of dextran have not only found their place in targeted drug delivery but they have become popular in food industries . For example b - casein is a good emulsifier in food industry but because of the acidic isoelectric point of casein , its solubility and functional properties are worse in acidic range . It is almost insoluble at around pH 4 . 6 , which is its isoelectric point ( pI ) . This is a significant limitation on the utility of casein in food industry because most foods are acidic . Therefore , the grafting of casein with suitable mono - mers has been extensively studied in order to improve the properties of casein . However , the graft copolymers produced by casein and synthetic polymers are not suitable in many food applications . Recently to solve this problem b - casein is grafted to dextran copolymer through Maillard reaction which has shown acidic solution properties with good stability in the presence of other acidic foods [ 33 ] . Purification of the protein - - dextran conjugate is done after dilution and adjusting the pH at 5 that causes precipitation of the un - reacted protein and separation is done by centrifugation . At the end using a cation exchange resin can separate the dextran conjugated to protein [ 34 ] . 3 . 4 Long - circulating pharmaceutical carrier To exert its activity , a drug must reach its pharmacological site ( s ) of action ( s ) within the body . One of the current approaches to achieve site specific delivery is the use of nano - carriers . Such systems are able to bypass the normal physiolo - gical defense processes occurring after the intravenous injection of particulates and , depending on the particle size and hydrophobicity of the outer layer of carrier properties , it remains for a prolonged period of time in the systemic circu - lation , or have a degree of selectivity for sites of deposition within the body . Inhibiting the uptake of nanoparticulate drug carriers by the major organ of the reticuloendothelial sys - tem , the liver gives greater chance to the drug to penetrate into the affected organs . Both the small size and the long - circulation lifetime suggest their potential application as a pharmaceutical carrier to enhance the delivery of various agents to their targets by the enhanced permeability and O CH 2 OR OR OR 1 O OR OR 1 O O CH 2 O O OR OR O CH 2 8 n 7 6 5 R = deoxycholic acid or H H3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 3 H H OH CH 3 CH 3 HO 3 H H O O Figure 4 . Schematic representation of dextran - - deoxycholic acid conjugate . J . Varshosaz 514 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . retention ( EPR ) effect . Large molecular weight polysaccha - rides with molecular mass greater or equal to 40 kD have low clearance and relatively long plasma half - life , resulting in accumulation in tumor tissues [ 35 ] . Long - circulating dextran - coated iron oxide nanoparticles have been extensively used as an experimental magnetic label for magnetic reso - nance ( MR ) imaging , and some preparations are currently being used in clinical trials [ 36 ] . These nanoparticles have extended circulation times because of their dense coating , which prevents opsonization , and their small size . Due to its hydrophilicity , dextran itself may also be conju - gated to other drugs for enhancing circulation time . One of these is uricase ( UC ) which is conjugated with dextran , cationic diethylaminoethyl - dextran ( DEAED ) , and anionic carboxymethyl - dextran ( CMD ) giving a molecular weight of 10 , 000 by the periodate oxidation method [ 37 ] . After i . v . injec - tion , 111In - UC was slowly eliminated from the circulation and gradually accumulated in the liver , spleen , and kidney . Conjugation with neutral dextran slightly enhanced the uptake of 111In - UC by the liver and spleen , while DEAED and CMD conjugation resulted in significant enhancement and reduction of hepatic uptake , respectively . The efficacy of a number of therapeutically active proteins and peptides is severely limited due to their instability in circulation . A successful approach is covalent modification of the protein or enzyme with some hydrophilic polymers such as dextran or PEG . These conjugates are more stable than the native protein both in vitro as well as in vivo . They exhibit enhanced resistant to proteolytic degradation , have a long - life in circulation and exhibit reduced immuno - genicity . The therapeutic efficacy of these conjugates is also greatly enhanced compared to the native protein or enzyme [ 38 ] . One of these stabilized peptides is mouse epidermal growth factor ( mEGF , 6 kDa ) . By reductive amination , mEGF was coupled to 13 and 46 kDa dextran [ 39 ] . In conclusion , dextranation affects the biodistri - bution of mEGF in vivo giving a prolonged circulation time , a decreased uptake in kidney , and an increased spleen accumulation . 3 . 5 Non - viral vectors More than 300 different polycations have been prepared starting from various natural polysaccharides and oligoamines having two to four amino groups . Dextran - - spermine cationic polysaccharide was one of them prepared by means of reductive amination between oxidized dextran and the natural oligoamine spermine . Although most of these cationic conju - gates formed stable complexes with plasmid DNAs , only the O O O HO 21 19 4 2 1 16 17 OH 18 O Budesonide O C CH 2 OH OH CH 3 HO CH 3 CH 3 F 1 2 4 16 17 18 19 21 O Dexamethasone CH 2 HO OH OH O CH 2 HO OH OH O O CH 2 CH 2 HO OH O O HO OH OH O n = 2 succinate n = 3 glutarate R O C O ( CH 2 ) n C O O Figure 5 . Conjugation of dextran with budesonide or dexamethasone . Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 515 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . dextran - - spermine - based polycations were found to be highly effective in transfecting cells in vitro . Polyethylenimine ( PEI ) is another cationic polymer that is an efficient transfection reagent with high toxicity and a susceptibility to aggregate in the presence of serum . Dextran can reduce the toxicity of PEI and increase its stability in the presence of serum . Dextran - polyethylenimine conjugates are believed to have greater potential for translational applications because of lower cytotoxicity characteristics and improved stability in serum - containing environments [ 40 ] . 3 . 6 Functionalization of nanomaterials Nanomaterials like single - walled carbon nanotubes , gold nanoparticles and gold nanorods have gained great attentions for biological applications , but they require appropriate functionalization to provide biocompatibility in biological environments . Conjugates of dextran and a phospholi - pid ( dextran - DSPE ) have been prepared as a general surfac - tant material that provides stable coatings for these nanomaterials [ 41 ] . 3 . 7 Diagnosis of solid tumors and hyperthermic treatment Magnetic nanoparticles have been used to diagnose tumors in the liver and spleen by magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) [ 42 ] . These nanoparticles accumulate in specific areas in the body and make possible the hyperthermic treatment with magnetic particles [ 43 - 51 ] . Magnetic nanoparticles convert energy absorbed from an alternating magnetic field into heat and may be useful for the delivery of hyperthermic therapy . Dextran magnetite is used widely as a liver - specific contrast medium and its safety has been established . It consists of core - shell structure with carboxy - dextran covering the core and the iron - oxide particles of the core . Dextran magnetite was conjugated with the carboxyl group of gelatin and cisplatin . This complex was used in thermal ablation which could slowly release the chemotherapeutic drug and showed potentially maximizing its antitumor effects [ 52 - 55 ] . Another magnetic drug - targeting carrier was prepared by encapsulating of magnetic nanoparticles with a smart poly - mer . The carrier was consisted of functionalized magnetite and conjugated doxorubicin , which was encapsulated with the thermosensitive polymer of dextran - g - poly ( N - isopropyla - crylamide - co - N , N - dimethylacrylamide ) . This polymer exhi - bited a lower critical solution temperature ( LCST ) of approximately 38 (cid:2) C . This behavior allowed for an on - - off trigger mechanism . At an experimental temperature lower than LCST , the drug release was very low . However , at a tem - perature greater than LCST , there was an initially rapid drug release followed by a controlled released in the second stage , especially , in the mild acidic buffer solution of pH 5 . 3 [ 56 ] . Superparamagnetic iron oxide ( SPIO ) nanoparticles are effective contrast agents for enhancement of magnetic reso - nance imaging at the tissue , cellular , or even molecular levels . Multiple SPIO nanoparticles were self - assembled together with the help of Dex - g - PCL during phase transfer from chloroform to water , and diameters of Dex - g - PCL / SPIO nanocomposites were 64 . 22 nm [ 27 ] . The time for enhanced - MRI could last at least 12 days and totally recovered after 16 days . This novel sensitive MRI contrast agent may find potential applications in discovering small liver lesions such as early tumor diagnosis . 4 . Applications of dextran conjugates in drug delivery 4 . 1 Prodrugs of dextran used in colon drug delivery Owing to their low tissue toxicity and high enzymatic degrad - ability at desired sites , dextran prodrugs have been frequently considered as a potential matrix system for colon - specific delivery and / or controlled release of bioactive agents . The activation of dextran will be possible by periodate oxidation , succinoylation and reaction with 4 - nitrophenyl chlorofor - mate . Even physical mixtures of drugs in dextran micros - phers [ 57 ] or tablets [ 58 ] are prone for targeted drug delivery to colon . Solid dispersion [ 59 ] of budesonide , a potent glucocorticoid with high affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor used for the treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases , with dextran is also reported as an effective strategy in controlled drug delivery to colon . Current oral formulations of budesonide present low effi - cacy against ulcerative colitis because of the premature drug release in the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract . A colon - specific delivery system for budesonide to increase the efficacy in the treatment of ulcerative colitis ( UC ) was developed by conjugating dextran to budesonide in the pres - ence of dimethylaminopyridine ( DMAP ) using succinate spacer ( Figure 5 ) [ 60 ] . Rats treated with budesonide - - dextran conjugate ( equivalent to 300 µ g / kg of budesonide ) showed huge improvement in macroscopic and histological scores of colitis compared to the negative control group , mesalasine and budesonide suspension [ 61 ] . Budesonide conjugates were also prepared using glutarate spacer ( Figure 5 ) [ 62 ] . The conjugate of budesonide - - dextran with glutarate spacer could decrease the macroscopic and microscopic scores of induced colitis compared with mesalasine and budesonide suspension . Dexamethasone was also attached to dextran using succi - nate anhydride in an anhydrous environment catalyzed by 4 - dimethylaminopyridine and 1 , 1’ - carbonyldiimidazole [ 63 ] . The dexamethasone - succinate - dextran ( DSD ) ( Figure 5 ) was stable in rat stomach and small intestine and negligibly absorbed from these tracts . Four to nine hours after the oral administration , most of the prodrug ( > 95 % ) had moved to the cecum and colon , and was easily hydrolyzed by an endodextranase [ 64 ] . Ketoprofen - dextran ester prodrugs showed the average absorption fractions of 100 to 67 % compared to the oral solution of an equivalent dose of parent ketoprofen [ 65 ] . J . Varshosaz 516 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . The colon - specific polymeric conjugates of celecoxib have also been prepared with dextran using succinic acid as linker between the drug and dextran [ 66 ] . 5 - Aminosalicylic acid ( 5 - ASA ) conjugates of dextrans were developed with a focus on Crohn’s disease applications [ 67 ] . Dextrans were oxidized using sodium periodate ( NaIO ( 4 ) ) , where the aldehyde groups formed were coupled with the alpha - amino ( - NH ( 2 ) ) group of 5 - ASA . The resulting imine bonds were unstable in water and were consequently reduced to secondary amine groups . Dextrans with a maximum degree of oxidation ( 93 % ) unsurprisingly gave maximum conjuga - tion of 5 - ASA but were resistant to dextranase hydrolysis . Less oxidized dextrans ( 12 % ) conjugated proportionally less 5 - ASA but were successfully hydrolyzed by dextranase , suggesting their potential applications for the treatment of Crohn’s disease in the distal ileum and proximal colon . Dextran - flufenamic acid ester ( Dex - FFA ) was prepared by imidazolide method [ 68 ] . Upon oral administration of this con - jugate ( 20 mg equivalent of FFA / kg ) or FFA ( 10 mg / kg ) to rats , t max for FFA delayed approximately 6h compared with that of free FFA , while C max for FFA was similar . The plasma level for FFA became greater around 6 h after administration of Dex - FFA than free FFA and it was maintained throughout the period of 24 - h experiment . Dex - FFA markedly attenuated gastric ulcerogenicity of FFA . Thus these studies show the application of the dextran ester prodrug approach for providing selective colon delivery of drugs possessing a carboxylic acid functional group . 4 . 2 Reduction of ulcerogenicity of NSAIDs Dextran conjugates of ketorolac [ 69 ] and flurbiprofen [ 70 ] were synthesized and characterized to improve ketorolac aqueous solubility and reduce gastrointestinal side effects . An N - acylimidazole derivative of ketorolac or flurbiprofen was condensed with dextran as a carrier polymer . In vivo bio - logical screening in mice and rats indicated that conjugates retained analgesic and anti - inflammatory activities with significantly reduced ulcerogenicity compared to the parent drug . Not only NSAID drugs conjugated to dextran have shown less ulcerogenicity but also drug loading into pH - sensitive hydrogels of dextran has shown no ulcerogenic effect . For example pH - sensitive hydrogels of dextran were synthesized by photochemical cross - linking reaction of methacrylate dextran ( DEX - MA ) at different derivatization degree , func - tionalized with acidic residues through reaction with phthalic anhydride [ 71 ] . Ibuprofen was loaded into the polymeric matrices . In vivo studies verified the biocompatibility of the materials . Moreover , when the matrix loaded with ibuprofen was administered to rats , it was able to protect them from the ulcerogenic effects of the drug . 4 . 3 Solubilization of poorly water - soluble drugs Most anticancer and antivirus drugs are water insoluble and their passive or active targeting is impossible until they are solubilized . Another application of dextran conjugates is solubilization of the poorly water - soluble drugs . Micellar solubilization is a powerful alternative for dissolving hydro - phobic drugs in aqueous environments . The length of the hydrophilic part as well as the content and chemical nature of the hydrophobic substituents has an important effect on the ability of polymeric micelles to solubilize poorly water - soluble drugs . Cyclosporin A ( CsA ) is an example which is solubilized in aqueous dispersions of dextran - grafted - polyethyleneglycolalkyl ether ( DEX - g - PEG - C n ) polymeric micelles [ 72 ] . Copolymers with longer polysaccharide chain showed larger CMC and mean diameter . The percentage of CsA loading into micelles was significantly larger in polymeric micelles compared to unmodified dextrans . It increased with increasing number of PEG - C n units grafted per dextran chain and decreasing dextran molecular weight . The cytotoxicity of DEX - g - PEG - C 16 polymeric micelles toward Caco - 2 cells was significantly lower than that of free PEG - C 16 molecules . Acyclovir , the antivirus drug with good in vitro activity against hepatitis B virus , is another example of low - soluble drugs which has low distribution in liver . The clinical applica - tion of this drug in hepatitis B is limited for this reason . To increase the solubility and the distribution in liver , acyclovir - - dextran conjugate was synthesized by formation of Schiff’s base [ 73 ] . The solubility of obtained conjugate was 12 times greater than free acyclovir . Acyclovir will be slowly released from the obtained conjugate . Relatively higher distribution of acyclovir in liver was observed when i . v . acyclovir - - dextran conjugate was administered in mice compared to i . v . free acyclovir . Paclitaxel ( taxol ) is a very effective anticancer drug . How - ever , the solution used to enhance the water solubility of paclitaxel , a mixture of polyoxyethylene castor oil ( Cremphor EL ) and dehydrated ethanol , causes irritation . Taxol conjuga - tion with aminated dextran ( Dex - TXL ) was synthesized for the water - solubilization of taxol and folic acid was conjugated to it . Dex - TXL showed two to three times greater anticancer effect when conjugated with FA [ 74 ] . 4 . 4 Dextran conjugates as anticancer drug carriers Macromolecular drug carrier systems have been developed in an attempt to enhance the selectivity of action of cytotoxic drugs by coupling them to carriers with expected affinity for the target tissue . Some advantages of dextrans as drug carriers may be summarized as : i ) polymeric chemical structure with repetitive monomers , ii ) highly water solubility , iii ) high stabi - lity to acidic or alkaline conditions due to stable glucosidic bonds that are not hydrolyzed easily except under extreme pH ranges , iv ) the possibility of derivatization on numerous reactive hydroxyl groups present in its structure , v ) availability of different molecular weights , vi ) inert nature due to low toxicity and pharmacological activity , vii ) protection of conju - gated drugs from biodegradation , and viii ) an apparent passive targeting of this soluble macromolecules to solid tumors due to EPR effect . Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 517 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Thus , much effort has been made to target DOX to cancer tissues , improving its efficacy and safety [ 75 ] . Daunorubicin and DOX were covalently coupled to dextrans and were found to reduce the toxicity in mice [ 76 , 77 ] . Various other anti - cancer agents , such as methotrexate [ 78 , 61 ] and mitomycin C [ 79 ] , 5 - fluorouracil [ 80 ] or cisplatin [ 81 ] have been covalently coupled to dextrans . It has been shown that dextran - - DOX conjugate can inhibit P - glycoprotein ( P - gp ) pump overexpressed in multidrug - resistant cells and consequently superior antitumor activity to the free drug [ 82 ] . Conjugatation of adriamycin to dextran has been done by peptide spacer of Gly - - Leu - - Gly too and galactosamine also has been anchored to it as a targeting moiety [ 83 ] . This conjugate generated the best therapeutic effect with the presence of long - term survival on day 50 against CT - 26 mice colon cells implanted subcutaneously in Balb - C mice . 4 . 5 Liver targeting It is demonstrated that dextrans may be of great value in targeting therapeutic agents to the liver [ 84 ] . The plasma and tissue disposition of two novel dextran prodrugs of methyl - prednisolone ( MP ) containing one or five amino acids as linkers were studied in rats [ 85 ] . These data suggest that conju - gates with one amino acid may be more suitable than five for targeting immunosuppression to the liver and spleen . Molten et al . [ 86 , 87 ] worked on carboxypeptidase G2 conju - gated to soluble dextrans . They found a pronounced uptake of both CNBr - activated dextran and dextran - - enzyme conju - gate by the liver . Dextran conjugate of glutathion has also shown transport to hepatic cells , intracellularly hydrolyzed to free form and protects mice from hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen [ 88 ] . Positively charged radiolabelled dextrans are rapidly elimi - nated from the plasma of tumor - bearing mice and accumulate in tissues like the liver [ 89 ] . However , negatively charged dextrans persist for a long time in the systemic circulation and have negligible tissue accumulation [ 89 - 91 ] . It is proposed that dextrans enter cells through fluid - phase endocytosis [ 92 ] which is a passive phenomenon . However , efforts have been made to chemically modify dextrans for active targeting to specific cells in the liver . Vansteenkiste et al . [ 93 ] prepared dextrans glycosylated with mono - or tri - D - galactose for asialoglycoprotein receptor - mediated delivery to the liver . In another study [ 94 ] , carboxy - methyl dextran ( CMD ) modified with galactose and mannose residues accumulated mostly in the parenchymal and non - parenchymal cells of the mouse liver , respectively . However , non - modified CMD did not accumulate in either type of cells . Schechte et al . [ 95 ] reported conjugation of 5 - fluorouridine to high molecular weight carrier CMD which was charged with two to four biotinyl groups for complexing to trinitrophenyl ( TNP ) - modified streptavidin ( St ) . Specific liver accumulation occurred following administration of the conjugate only when complexed to TNP - St . When conjugation of a drug to dextran leads to its undesir - able accumulation in the liver at a low dose , an appropriate modification of dextran such as carboxymethylation would be required in such cases [ 96 ] . 4 . 6 Targeting to other routes Passive targeting is also reported for some conjugates of dextran . Pyrimethamine is an anti - leishmanial drug , although this effect in vivo appears only in relatively high concentra - tions . To reach the parasites inside macrophage cells , where they are sheltered , targeted drugs of pyrimethamine , carboxymethyldextran - thiomannopyranoside - pyrimethamine ( CMD - P ) was synthesized which showed a destruction of approximately 50 % of the intracellular amastigotes of L . ( L . ) amazonensis , with no detectable toxicity to macrophage cells [ 97 ] . Human interferon b ( IFN b ) was passively targeted to cho - roidal neovascularization ( CNV ) by combining it with dex - tran , based on metal ( Zn 2 + ) coordination , and an enhanced antiangiogenic effect was achieved . This conjugate could pro - long the plasma half - life of IFN b , enhance the accumulation of IFN b in CNV lesions , and inhibit progression of CNV in rabbits [ 98 ] . Long - term antibiotic treatment is required to cure tubercu - losis . Targeted antibiotics should improve the efficacy of treatment by concentrating the drugs close to the bacteria . Dextran was used as the polymer bearing mannose and norfloxacin . Different peptide spacer arms were used to link norfloxacin to dextran . Thus , norfloxacin , which is inactive against mycobacteria in its native form in vivo , can be transformed into an active drug by targeting [ 99 ] . 5 . Conclusion Among the different drug delivery systems , macromolecule conjugates have been widely explored ; this review collects and summarizes the therapeutic applications of conjugates of dextran . The insight that will be gained is knowledge about the progress in the development of polymeric conjugates of dextran especially in drug delivery systems and targeted delivery of anticancer drugs . This review also aims to introduce the different conjugates of polymers with natural and modified dextran polysaccharides used in production of micellar nanocarrier systems . The highly versatile nature of the dextran conjugates can overcome many practical difficul - ties in delivering chemotherapeutics , genes and other drugs due to the surface nature including biocompatibility , degradability and size / dimension are all adjustable . Further - more , the simple and inexpensive nature of this polymer can also satisfy strict demands from an economic point of view . 6 . Expert opinion The advent of new research on drug delivery in cancer chemotherapy has outlined new strategies for therapeutic J . Varshosaz 518 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . intervention . Conjugation of natural and synthetic polymers , proteins and polysaccharides that have been covalently coupled with cytotoxic and other types of drugs is one of the progressive approaches . Dextran conjugates can be synthe - sized either by direct conjugation or by spacer arm technique . The advances in the field of targeted drug delivery by dextran conjugates especially targeted micelles of dextran can result in more efficient strategies for cancer treatment . Like many works so far done on stable liposomes , lipid and polymeric nanoparticles as nanocarriers , polymeric and especially dextran - based micelles are colloidally stable and present enor - mous opportunities for loading chemotherapeutic agents . These dextran - based delivery systems offer such a great versa - tility that can be used both for parentral , oral and for local drug delivery , with huge possible applications in different clinical areas . Prodrugs of dextran satisfy the requirements for being colon - specific and a potential strategy to circumvent obstacles in developing efficient colon - specific prodrugs . The prodrugs of dextran also have great potency in reduction of ulcerogenicity of non - steroidal anti - inflammatory ( NSAID ) drugs . Not only NSAID drugs chemically conjugated to dextran but also physically loaded in pH - sensitive dextran conjugates show less ulcerogenicity than parent drug . Solubi - lization of poorly soluble drugs is another important feature in drug delivery systems that is achieved by dextran conjuga - tion . Conjugation of anticancer drugs to this soluble carbohy - drate produces long - circulating carriers which provide the chance of escaping from reticuloendothelial system and nano - carriers will have greater time for permeation and retention by the leaky tumor vasculature . The choice of macromolecule , the spacer , and the chemistry of the linkage with cytotoxic drugs are key points to obtain effective conjugates with higher activity than that of the free drug and reducing its side effects . The clinical usefulness of non - viral methods is still hindered by their relatively low gene delivery / transgene expression efficiencies . Dextran conjugates have shown to be a useful non - viral vector with reduction of toxicity and enough efficiency in delivery of plasmid DNA to cells . The main advantages of this polymeric drug conjugate include : increased water solubility of low - soluble or insoluble drugs and therefore enhancement of drug bioavailability , improvement in pharmacokinetics , the ability to provide passive or active targeting of drugs to the site of their action and the possibility to form an advanced complex drug delivery system . The most promising techniques in production of its conjugates are specially production of prodrugs and also micellar - targeted carriers for anticancer drugs due to their biocompatibility and natural origin . Although dextran is a natural polymer and is expected to be the safest platform , the results of clinical Phase I trial of dextran - conjugated doxorubicin has shown some unexpected toxicity including thrombocytopenia and hepatotoxicity possi - bly due to the uptake of the polysaccharide by the reticuloendo - thelial system [ 100 ] . Therefore , more clinical studies should be performed to remove the question mark on clinical safety of dextran conjugates . Further preclinical and clinical studies are needed to evaluate the safety and potential significance of dextran conjugates in targeting of chemotherapeutics to cancer cells resistant to the therapy . Despite the remarkable potential and extensive research being conducted on dextran conjugates for use in drug delivery , commercialization and large - scale production are limited by the cost and difficulty of chemical reactions needed for their production . A continuing challenge in the field is to work on more feasible chemical procedures for scaling up the production of dextran conjugates . Declaration of interest The authors state no conflict of interest and have received no payment in preparation of this manuscript . Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 519 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Bibliography Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest ( (cid:3) ) or of considerable interest ( (cid:3)(cid:3) ) to readers . 1 . Suflet DM , Chitanu GC , Desbrieres J . Phosphorylated polysaccharides . 2 . Synthesis and properties of phosphorylated dextran . Carbohydr Polym 2010 ; 82 ( 4 ) : 1271 - 7 2 . Purama RK , Goswami P , Khan AT , Goyal A . Structural analysis and properties of dextran produced by Leuconostoc mesenteroides NRRL B - 640 . Carbohydr Polym 2009 ; 76 ( 1 ) : 30 - 5 . This article gives very good information about properties of dextran . 3 . Can HK , Denizli BK , Guner A , Rzaev ZMO . Effect of functional crosslinking agents on preparation and swelling properties of dextran hydrogels . Carbohydr Polym 2005 ; 59 ( 1 ) : 51 - 6 4 . Harboe E , Johansen M , Larsen C . Macromolecular pro - drugs . VI . Coupling of naproxen to dextrans and in vitro characterization of the conjugates . Farm Sci Ed 1988 ; 16 : 73 - 85 5 . Lukyanov AN , Sawant RM , Hartner WC , Torchilin VP . PEGylated dextran as long - circulating pharmaceutical carrier . J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2004 ; 15 ( 5 ) : 621 - 30 6 . Williams AS , Taylor G . Synthesis , characterization and release of cromoglycate from dextran conjugates . Int J Pharm 1982 ; 83 ( 1 - 3 ) : 233 - 9 7 . Weiner BZ , Tahan M , Zilkha A . Polymers containing phenethylamines . J Med Chem 1972 ; 15 : 410 - 13 8 . Bocher M , Boldicke T , Kie (cid:2) M , Bilitewski U . Synthesis of mono - and bifunctional peptide - - dextran conjugates for the immobilization of peptide antigens on ELISA plates : properties and application . J Immun Methods 1997 ; 208 ( 2 ) : 191 - 202 9 . Axen R , Porath J , Ernback S . Chemical coupling of peptides and proteins to polysaccharides by means of cyanogens halides . Nature 1967 ; 214 : 1302 - 4 10 . Lapasin R , Pricl S . Rheology of Industrial Polysaccharides : Theory and Applications . Aspen Publication ; New York : 1995 11 . Edman P , Ekman B , Sjoholm I . Immobilization of proteins in microspheres of biodegradable polyacyldextran . J Pharm Sci 1980 ; 69 ( 7 ) : 838 - 42 12 . Brondsted H , Anderson C , Hovgaard L . Crosslinked dextran - - - - a new capsule material for colon targeting of drugs . J Control Release 1998 ; 53 ( 1 - 3 ) : 7 - 13 13 . Dogan AK , Gumusderelioglu M , Aksoz E . Controlled release of EGF and bFGF from dextran hydrogels in vitro and in vivo . J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2005 ; 74 ( 1 ) : 504 - 10 14 . Kim SH , Won CY , Chu CC . Synthesis and characterization of dextran based hydrogels prepared by photocrosslinking . Carbohydr Polym 1999 ; 40 ( 3 ) : 183 - 90 15 . Kim SH , Won CY , Chu CC . Synthesis and characterization of dextran - maleic acid based hydrogel . J Biomed Mater Res 1999 ; 46 ( 2 ) : 160 - 70 16 . Zhang Y , Chu CC . Biodegradable dextran - - polylactide hydrogel networks : their swelling , morphology and the controlled release of indomethacin . J Biomed Mater Res 2002 ; 59 ( 2 ) : 318 - 28 17 . Bartkowiak A , Jezierska I , Spychai T . An EPR study of polysaccharide copper ( II ) complexes in composite dextran / epichlorohydrin gels . Polym Bull 1998 ; 41 ( 2 ) : 199 - 206 18 . Jin R , Moreira Teixeira LS , Dijkstra PJ , et al . Enzymatically crosslinked dextran - tyramine hydrogels as injectable scaffolds for cartilage tissue engineering . Tissue Eng Part A 2010 ; 16 ( 8 ) : 2429 - 40 19 . Jin R , Hiemstra C , Zhong Z , Feijen J . Enzyme - mediated fast in situ formation of hydrogels from dextran - tyramine conjugates . Biomater 2007 ; 28 ( 18 ) : 2791 - 800 20 . Feeney M , Giannuzzo M , Paolicelli P , Casadei MA . Hydrogels of dextran containing nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs as pendant agents . Drug Deliv 2007 ; 14 ( 2 ) : 87 - 93 21 . Porfire AS , Zabaleta V , Gamazo C , et al . Influence of dextran on the bioadhesive properties of poly ( anhydride ) nanoparticles . Int J Pharm 2010 ; 390 ( 1 ) : 37 - 44 . . This article demonstrates the novel aspect of mucoadhesion of dextran conjugates which may be useful in different mucosal pathways of drug delivery . 22 . Jeong YI , Kim DH , Chung CW , et al . Doxorubicin - incorporated polymeric micelles composed of dextran - b - poly ( DL - lactide - co - glycolide ) copolymer . Int J Nanomed 2011 ; 6 : 1415 - 27 23 . Bang JY , Song CE , Kim C , et al . Cytotoxicity of amphotericin B - incorporated polymeric micelles composed of poly ( DL - lactide - co - glycolide ) / dextran graft copolymer . Arch Pharm Res 2008 ; 31 ( 11 ) : 1463 - 9 24 . Du YZ , Weng Q , Yuan H , Hu FQ . Synthesis and antitumor activity of stearate - g - dextran micelles for intracellular doxorubicin delivery . ACS Nano 2010 ; 4 ( 11 ) : 6894 - 902 . . Promising results with simple method of preparation of micelles are interesting in this article . 25 . Afifi H , da Silva MA , Nouvel C , et al . Associative networks of cholesterol - modified dextran with short and long micelles . Soft Matter 2011 ; 7 : 4888 - 99 26 . Sun H , Guo B , Li X , et al . Shell - sheddable micelles based on dextran - ss - poly ( epsilon - caprolactone ) diblock copolymer for efficient intracellular release of doxorubicin . Biomacromolecules 2010 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 848 - 54 27 . QiaoYing W , HongYing S , ChunChao X , et al . Amphiphilic dextran / magnetite nanocomposites as magnetic resonance imaging probes . Chin Sci Bull 2009 ; 54 ( 17 ) : 2925 - 33 28 . Zhang YL , Dou XW , Jin T . Synthesis and self - assembly behavior of amphiphilic diblock copolymer dextran - block - poly ( epsilon - caprolactone ) ( DEX - b - PCL ) in aqueous media . eXPRESS Polymer Letters 2010 ; 4 ( 10 ) : 599 - 610 . The article explains the chemical reaction of production of micelles of dextran very precisely . 29 . Qiu F , Feng J , Wu DQ , et al . Nanosized micelles self - assembled from amphiphilic dextran graft methoxypolyethylene glycol / poly ( epsilon - caprolactone ) copolymers . Eur Polym J 2009 ; 45 ( 4 ) : 1024 - 31 30 . Jeong YI , Chung KD , Choi KC . Doxorubicin release from self - assembled nanoparticles of deoxycholic J . Varshosaz 520 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . acid - conjugated dextran . Arch Pharm Res 2011 ; 34 ( 1 ) : 159 - 67 31 . Varshosaz J , Hassanzadeh F , Sadeghi H , et al . Synthesis and characterization of folate - targeted micellar nanocapsules of dextran / retinoic acid . Proceed 2nd Int Conf Nanotechnol : Fundamentals and Applications ; 28 - - 29 July 2011 ; Ottawa , Ontario , Canada 32 . Varshosaz J , Hassanzadeh F , Sadeghi H , et al . Folate - targeted micellar nanocapsules of dextran / retinoic acid for doxorubicin delivery in acute leukemia . Proceed 4th Int Conf Nanostructures ( ICNS4 ) ; 12 - - 14 March 2012 ; Kish Island , I . R . Iran 33 . Mu M , Pan X , Yao P , Jiang M . Acidic solution properties of beta - casein - graft - dextran copolymer prepared through Maillard reaction . J Colloid Interface Sci 2006 ; 301 ( 1 ) : 98 - 106 34 . Etzel MR , Bund T . Monoliths for the purification of whey protein - dextran conjugates . J Chromatogr A 2011 ; 1218 ( 17 ) : 2445 - 50 35 . Mehvar R . Recent trends in the use of polysaccharides for improved delivery of therapeutic agents : pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic perspectives . Curr Pharm Biotechnol 2003 ; 4 ( 5 ) : 283 - 302 . . This is a very good review article considering the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic aspects of dextran . 36 . Moore A , Marecos E , Bogdanov A Jr , Weissleder R . Tumoral distribution of long - circulating dextran - coated iron oxide nanoparticles in a rodent model . Radiology 2000 ; 214 ( 2 ) : 568 - 74 37 . Fujita T , Yasuda Y , Takakura Y , et al . Tissue distribution of 111In - labeled uricase conjugated with charged dextrans and polyethylene glycol . J Pharmacobiodyn 1991 ; 14 ( 11 ) : 623 - 9 38 . Mumtaz S , Bachhawat BK . Conjugation of proteins and enzymes with hydrophilic polymers and their applications . Indian J Biochem Biophys 1991 ; 28 ( 5 - 6 ) : 346 - 51 39 . Zhao Q , Tolmachev V , Carlsson J , et al . Effects of dextranation on the pharmacokinetics of short peptides . A PET study on mEGF . Bioconjug Chem 1999 ; 10 ( 6 ) : 938 - 46 40 . Jiang D , Salem AK . Optimized dextran - polyethylenimine conjugates are efficient non - viral vectors with reduced cytotoxicity when used in serum containing environments . Int J Pharm 2011 ; [ Epub ahead of print ] doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijpharm . 2011 . 10 . 032 . . This article is a novel application of dextran conjugates with promising results . 41 . Goodwin AP , Tabakman SM , Welsher K , et al . Phospholipid - dextran with a single coupling point : a useful amphiphile for functionalization of nanomaterials . J Am Chem Soc 2009 ; 131 ( 1 ) : 289 - 96 42 . Kopp AF , Laniado M , Dammann F , et al . MR imaging of the liver with resovist : safety , efficacy , and pharmacodynamic properties . Radiologia 1997 ; 204 ( 3 ) : 749 - 56 43 . Kobeiter H , Georgiades CS , Leakakos T , et al . Targeted transarterial therapy of Vx - 2 rabbit liver tumor with Yttrium - 90 labeled ferromagnetic particles using an external magnetic field . Anticancer Res 2007 ; 27 ( 2 ) : 755 - 60 44 . Jordan A , Wust P , Fahling H , et al . Inductive heating of ferrimagnetic particles and magnetic fluids : physical evaluation of their potential for hyperthermia . Int J Hyperthermia 1993 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 51 - 68 45 . Moroz P , Jones SK , Winter J , et al . Targeting liver tumors with hyperthermia : ferromagnetic embolization in a rabbit liver tumor model . J Surg Oncol 2001 ; 78 ( 1 ) : 22 - 49 46 . Moroz P , Metcalf C , Gray BN . Histologic analysis of liver tissue following hepatic arterial infusion of ferromagnetic particles in a rabbit tumour model . Biomater 2003 ; 16 ( 3 ) : 455 - 64 47 . Motoyama J , Yamashita N , Morino T , et al . Hyperthermic treatment of DMBA - induced rat mammary cancer using magnetic nanoparticles . Biomagn Res Technol 2008 ; 6 ( 2 ) : 1 - 6 48 . Takamatsu S , Matsui O , Gabata T , et al . Selective induction hyperthermia following transcatheter arterial embolization with a mixture of nano - sized magnetic particles ( ferucarbotran ) and embolic materials : feasibility study in rabbits . Radiat Med 2008 ; 26 ( 4 ) : 179 - 87 49 . Wada S , Yue L , Tazawa K , et al . New local hyperthermia using dextran magnetite complex ( DM ) for oral cavity : experimental study in normal hamster tongue . Oral Dis 2001 ; 7 ( 3 ) : 192 - 5 50 . Mitsumori M , Hiraoka M , Shibata T , et al . Development of intra - arterial hyperthermia using a dextran - magnetite complex . Int J Hyperthermia 1994 ; 10 ( 6 ) : 785 - 93 51 . Mitsumori M , Hiraoka M , Shibata T , et al . Targeted hyperthermia using dextran magnetite complex : a new treatment modality for liver tumors . Hepatogastroenterology 1996 ; 43 ( 12 ) : 1431 - 7 52 . Sonoda A , Nitta N , Ohta S , et al . Development of a conjugated gadolinium and cisplatin - gelatin possessing properties as an intravascular contrast agent for MR imaging . Eur J Radiol 2009 ; 71 ( 3 ) : 570 - 5 53 . Konishi M , Tabata Y , Kariya M , et al . In vivo anti - tumor effect of dual release of cisplatin and adriamycin from biodegradable gelatin hydrogel . J Control Release 2005 ; 103 ( 1 ) : 7 - 19 54 . Hilger I , Hergt R , Kaiser WA . Use of magnetic nanoparticle heating in the treatment of breast cancer . IEE Proc Nanobiotechnol 2005 ; 152 ( 1 ) : 33 - 9 55 . Sonoda A , Nitta N , Nitta - Seko A , et al . Complex comprised of dextran magnetite and conjugated cisplatin exhibiting selective hyperthermic and controlled - release potential . Int J Nanomed 2010 ; 5 : 499 - 504 56 . Zhang J , Misra RD . Magnetic drug - targeting carrier encapsulated with thermosensitive smart polymer : core - shell nanoparticle carrier and drug release response . Acta Biomater 2007 ; 3 ( 6 ) : 838 - 50 57 . Varshosaz J , Ahmadi F , Emami J , et al . Microencapsulation of budesonide with dextran by spray drying technique for colon - targeted delivery : an in vitro / in vivo evaluation in induced colitis in rat . J Microencapsul 2011 ; 28 ( 1 ) : 62 - 73 58 . Ahmadi F , Varshosaz J , Emami J , et al . Preparation and in vitro / in vivo evaluation of dextran matrix tablets of budesonide in experimental ulcerative colitis in rats . Drug Deliv 2011 ; 18 ( 2 ) : 122 - 30 59 . Varshosaz J , Ahmadi F , Emami J , et al . Colon delivery of budesonide using solid dispersion in dextran for the treatment and secondary prevention of ulcerative Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 521 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . colitis in rat . Int J Prev Med 2010 ; 1 ( 2 ) : 115 - 23 60 . Varshosaz J , Emami J , Tavakoli N , et al . Synthesis and evaluation of dextran - budesonide conjugates as colon specific prodrugs for treatment of ulcerative colitis . Int J Pharm 2009 ; 365 ( 1 - 2 ) : 69 - 76 61 . Varshosaz J , Emami J , Fassihi A , et al . Effectiveness of budesonide - succinate - dextran conjugate as a novel prodrug of budesonide against acetic acid - induced colitis in rats . Int J Colorectal Dis 2010 ; 25 ( 10 ) : 1159 - 65 . . This article demonstrates the in vivo effectiveness of dextran prodrug of budesonide in colitis . 62 . Varshosaz J , Emami J , Ahmadi F , et al . Preparation of budesonide - dextran conjugates using glutarate spacer as a colon - targeted drug delivery system : in vitro / in vivo evaluation in induced ulcerative colitis . J Drug Target 2011 ; 19 ( 2 ) : 140 - 53 63 . Pang YN , Zhang Y , Zhang ZR . Synthesis of an enzyme - dependent prodrug and evaluation of its potential for colon targeting . World J Gastroenterol 2002 ; 8 ( 5 ) : 913 - 17 64 . Zhou SY , Mei QB , Liu L , et al . Characteristics of drug - release in vitro of different dextran - dexamethasone conjugates . Yao Xue Xue Bao 2003 ; 38 ( 5 ) : 388 - 91 65 . Larsen C , Jensen BH , Olesen HP . Bioavailability of ketoprofen from orally administered ketoprofen - dextran ester prodrugs in the pig . Acta Pharm Nord 1991 ; 3 ( 2 ) : 71 - 6 66 . Shrivastava PK , Shrivastava SK . Dextran carrier macromolecule for colon specific delivery of celecoxib . Curr Drug Deliv 2010 ; 7 ( 2 ) : 144 - 51 67 . Ahmad S , Tester RF , Corbett A , Karkalas J . Dextran and 5 - aminosalicylic acid ( 5 - ASA ) conjugates : synthesis , characterisation and enzymic hydrolysis . Carbohydr Res 2006 ; 341 ( 16 ) : 2694 - 701 68 . Lee Y , Kim IH , Kim J , et al . Evaluation of dextran - flufenamic acid ester as a polymeric colon - specific prodrug of flufenamic acid , an anti - inflammatory drug , for chronotherapy . J Drug Target 2011 ; 19 ( 5 ) : 336 - 43 69 Vyas S , Trivedi P , Chaturvedi SC . Ketorolac - dextran conjugates : synthesis , in vitro and in vivo evaluation . Acta Pharm 2007 ; 57 ( 4 ) : 441 - 50 70 . Shrivastava SK , Jain DK , Trivedi P . Dextrans - potential polymeric drug carriers for flurbiprofen . Pharmazie 2003 ; 58 ( 6 ) : 389 - 91 71 . Giannuzzo M , Corrente F . Feeney M , et al . pH - Sensitive hydrogels of dextran : synthesis , characterization and in vivo studies . J Drug Target 2008 ; 16 ( 9 ) : 649 - 59 72 . Francis MF , Lavoie L , Winnik FM , Leroux JC . Solubilization of cyclosporin A in dextran - g - polyethyleneglycolalkyl ether polymeric micelles . Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2003 ; 56 ( 3 ) : 337 - 46 73 . Tu J , Zhong S , Li P . Studies on acyclovir - - dextran conjugate : synthesis and pharmacokinetics . Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2004 ; 30 ( 9 ) : 959 - 65 74 . Nakamura J , Nakajima N , Matsumura K , Hyon SH . Water - soluble taxol conjugates with dextran and targets tumor cells by folic acid immobilization . Anticancer Res 2010 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 903 - 9 75 . Bisht S , Maitra A . Dextran - - doxorubicin / chitosan nanoparticles for solid tumor therapy . Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2009 ; 1 ( 4 ) : 415 - 25 76 . Mitra S , Gaur U , Ghosh PC , Maitra AN . Tumour targeted delivery of encapsulated dextran - - doxorubicin conjugate using chitosan nanoparticles as carrier . J Control Release 2001 ; 74 ( 1 - 3 ) : 317 - 23 77 . Zhang J , Luo M , Zhou Y , Zhang JR . Anti - human IgG - dextran - adriamycin conjugate for immunotargeting of S180 sarcoma : effects on the tumor weight and survival time of the tumor - bearing mice . Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao 2008 ; 28 ( 4 ) : 646 - 8 78 . Dang W , Colvin HB , Saltzman WM . Covalent coupling of methotrexate to dextran enhances the penetration of cytotoxicity into a tissue - like matrix . Cancer Res 1994 ; 54 ( 7 ) : 1729 - 35 79 . Nomura T , Saikawa A , Morita S , et al . Pharmacokinetic characteristics and therapeutic effects of mitomycin C - dextran conjugates after intratumoural injection . J Control Release 1998 ; 52 ( 3 ) : 239 - 52 80 . Hao AJ , Deng YJ , Suo XB , Cao YH . Synthesis and characteristics of the fluorouracil - dextran conjugates . Pharmazie 2006 ; 61 ( 5 ) : 489 - 90 81 . Nakashima M , Ichinose K , Kanematsu T , et al . In vitro characteristics and in vivo plasma disposition of cisplatin conjugated with oxidized and dicarboxymethylated dextrans . Biol Pharm Bull 1999 ; 22 ( 7 ) : 756 - 61 82 . Lam W , Leung CH , Chan HL , Fong WF . Toxicity and DNA binding of dextran - doxorubicin conjugates in multidrug - resistant KB - V1 cells : optimization of dextran size . Anticancer Drugs 2000 ; 11 ( 5 ) : 377 - 84 83 . Guu JA , Hsiue GH , Juang TM . Synthesis and biological properties of antitumor - active conjugates of ADR with dextran . J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2002 ; 13 ( 10 ) : 1135 - 51 84 . Mehvar R , Robinson MA , Reynolds JM . Molecular weight dependent tissue accumulation of dextrans : in vivo studies in rats . J Pharm Sci 1994 ; 83 ( 10 ) : 1495 - 9 . . An interesting article that shows the effect of molecular weight of dextran on its biodistribution . 85 . Penugonda S , Agarwal HK , Parang K , Mehvar R . Plasma pharmacokinetics and tissue disposition of novel dextran - methylprednisolone conjugates with peptide linkers in rats . J Pharm Sci 2010 ; 99 ( 3 ) : 1626 - 37 86 . Melton RG , Wiblin CN , Baskerville A , et al . Covalent linkage of carboxypeptidase G2 to soluble dextrans - - II . In vivo distribution and fate of conjugates . Biochem Pharmacol 1987 ; 36 ( 1 ) : 113 - 21 87 . Melton RG , Wiblin CN , Foster RL , Sherwood RF . Covalent linkage of carboxypeptidase G2 to soluble dextrans - - I . Properties of conjugates and effects on plasma persistence in mice . Biochem Pharmacol 1987 ; 36 ( 1 ) : 105 - 12 88 . Kaneo Y , Fujihara Y , Tanaka T , et al . Intrahepatic delivery of glutathione by conjugation to dextran . Pharm Res 1989 ; 6 ( 12 ) : 1025 - 31 89 . Takakura Y , Fujita T , Hashida M , Sezaki H . Disposition characteristics of macromolecules in tumor - bearing mice . Pharm Res 1990 ; 7 : 339 - 46 90 . Nishida K , Tonegawa C , Nakane S , et al . Effect of electric charge on the hepatic uptake of macromolecules in the rat liver . Int J Pharm 1990 ; 65 : 7 - 17 91 . Nishida K , Mihara K , Takino T , et al . Hepatic disposition characteristics of J . Varshosaz 522 Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . electrically charged macromolecules in rat in vivo and in the perfused liver . Pharm Res 1991 ; 8 : 437 - 44 92 . Lake JR , Licko V , Van Dyke RW , Scharschmidt BF . Biliary secretion of fluid - phase markers by the isolated perfused rat liver . Role of transcellular vesicular transport . J Clin Invest 1985 ; 76 : 676 - 84 93 . Vansteenkiste S , Schacht E , Duncan R , et al . Fate of glycosylated dextrans after in vivo administration . J Control Release 1991 ; 16 : 91 - 100 94 . Nishikawa M , Kamijo A , Fujita T , et al . Synthesis and pharmacokinetics of a new liver - specific carrier , glycosylated carboxymethyl - dextran , and its application to drug targeting . Pharm Res 1993 ; 10 ( 9 ) : 1253 - 61 95 . Schechter B , Chen L , Arnon R , Wilchek M . Organ selective delivery using a tissue - directed sreptavidin - biotin system : targeting 5 - fluorouridine via TNP - streptavidin . J Drug Target 1999 ; 6 ( 5 ) : 337 - 48 96 . Nishikawa M , Yamashita F , Takakura Y , et al . Demonstration of the receptor - mediated hepatic uptake of dextran in mice . J Pharm Pharmacol 1992 ; 44 ( 5 ) : 396 - 401 97 . De Carvalho PB , Ramos DCC , Cotrim PC , Ferreira EI . Synthesis and in vitro evaluation of potential anti - leishmanial targeted drugs of pyrimethamine . J Pharm Sci 2003 ; 92 ( 10 ) : 2109 - 16 98 . Yasukawa T , Kimura H , Tabata Y , et al . Targeting of interferon to choroidal neovascularization by use of dextran and metal coordination . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002 ; 43 ( 3 ) : 842 - 8 99 . Roseeuw E , Coessens V , Balazuc AM , et al . Degradation , and antimicrobial properties of targeted macromolecular prodrugs of norfloxacin . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003 ; 47 ( 11 ) : 3435 - 41 100 . Danhauser - Riedl S , Hausmann E , Schick HD , et al . Phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic trial of dextran conjugated doxorubicin ( AD - 70 , DOX - OXD ) . Invest New Drugs 1993 ; 11 ( 2 - 3 ) : 187 - 95 Affiliation Jaleh Varshosaz † Author for correspondence Isfahan University of Medical Sciences , Faculty of Pharmacy and Novel Drug Delivery Systems Research Center , Department of Pharmaceutics , Isfahan , PO Box 81745 - 359 , Iran Tel : + 0098 311 7922579 ; Fax : + 0098 311668001 ; E - mail : varshosaz @ pharm . mui . ac . ir Dextran conjugates in drug delivery Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . ( 2012 ) 9 ( 5 ) 523 E xp e r t O p i n . D r ug D e li v . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m a h ea lt h ca r e . c o m by U n i v e r s it y o f C a l g a r y on 06 / 18 / 12 F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .