5 “… so what ? ” - Limitations of Participatory Design on Decision - making in Urban Planning Mariana Salgado - Aalto University Michail Galanakis - Helsinki University ABSTRACT This article addresses certain Participatory Design ( PD ) - related aspects of the project OurCity that took place in Meri - Rastila , a multicultural suburb in East Helsinki , Finland . The aim of OurCity was to democratize design processes and to empower local residents to influence the redevelopment of their area . PD processes were a key component to the OurCity project and its activities , particularly in relation to the process of drafting an Alternative Master Plan ( AMP ) for the area . The plan competed with , and lost by a narrow margin to , the plan drafted by the Helsinki City Planning Department . The scope of PD was underestimated because AMP , the design object , was envisioned in isolation from the participatory process it entailed . Had PD been presented as crucial to the process , AMP would have greater impact . In this article , we argue that it is necessary to make PD processes more visible in the end products of participatory planning . We base this argument on firsthand experience as members of the OurCity team and on an analysis of printed media and digital texts . Author Keywords PD , immigrants , social inclusion , planning , grassroots . INTRODUCTION In our increasingly diverse cities , deciding on issues important to the common good is no easy task . This is particularly true of urban planning , where supposedly universal ideals have been challenged ( Hracs and Massam , 2008 ) . The ways different people conceive , perceive and experience city space as common ground differ . Hracs and Massam ( ibid ) demonstrate that civic conversations are vital to negotiating ideas and values . Planning has the potential to bring people together and negotiate ( Forester , 2000 ; Sandercock , 2003 ) . In addition , a coalition formed for physical and social planning has significant potential in terms of the development of an intercultural milieu ( Sandercock and Attili , 2009 ) . In such coalitions , different people and groups build bridges of communication and understanding in continuous and sometimes contentious negotiations . PD facilitates the building of spaces for civic conversations and creates conditions for intercultural understanding . Recent studies have investigated the use of PD in urban planning and in the design of interactive systems in order to facilitate public participation ( Hornecker et al , 2002 ; Botero & Saad - Sulonen 2010 ; Bratteteig & Wagner 2012 ) . The Finnish Land Use and Building Act ( Ministry of Environment , 1999 ) stipulates that city planners have to consult citizens . In most cases , the City Planning Department ( CPD ) initiates and dominates the consultation processes , which are envisioned as demonstrations of pre - determined plans in which only a few residents participate and give feedback . The planning process does not afford citizens the possibility to contribute ideas to the project at its early phases ( Saad - Sulonen , Botero & Kuutti , 2012 ) , or to work on a grassroots level . Leikila , Fahenle & Galanakis ( 2013 : 187 - 8 ) demonstrate that urban planning processes in Helsinki have difficulty addressing the demands that arise with increasing ethnocultural diversity . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662177 The members of the OurCity team worked for grassroots participation in the early stage of the urban planning process by conducting workshops open to local residents . OurCity shares values and visions with previous participatory urban projects that empowered marginalized citizens to influence their living environment ( Yan - Chi Kwok , 2004 ) . OurCity adhered to the political agenda that PD started in the 70s ( Ehn , 1988 ) by voicing democratic arguments in favor of inclusion in the planning process . We agree with Björgvinsson , Ehn & Hillgren ( 2012 ) who demonstrate that PD facilitates agonistic democracy and inclusion of marginal voices . Additionally , we value the context - based – rather than the abstract – theorization of PD . In this light , Meri - Rastila was the focus area for the OurCity project because , despite the opposition of local residents , the City Planning Department of Helsinki ( CPD ) was planning to build a new housing area that would destroy one fourth of the local forestland . THE CASE OF OURCITY In 2012 , an independent team of experts – including architects , designers and community workers of various nationalities – got together to organize OurCity in Meri - Rastila . The mother tongue of some 28 . 7 % of the area’s residents is a language other than Finnish . This percentage is much higher than in the rest of Helsinki ( Helsinki kuntarekisteri : Facta 2012 ) . Meri - Rastila has been stigmatized in the past because of Somalis living there ( Galanakis , 2008 ) . OurCity team recognized a great opportunity for civic conversation to flourish in this area . One of the aims of OurCity was to enable immigrant Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 Companion , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3214 - 9 / 14 / 10… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662177 6 residents of Meri - Rastila who are rarely heard to voice their views on the planning of their living environments . The team approached local stakeholders , negotiated collaborations , and commenced discussions that revolved around the urban space . However , other issues , regarding for instance the accessibility to services , surfaced as well ( Fuad - Luke , 2012 ) . Pro Meri - Rastila – an association of local residents – defended the local forestland by lobbying and organizing public meetings and candle - lit marches to protest and to spread their ideas about the future of the area . They also held meetings with city planners to discuss plans for the future . Pro Meri - Rastila members quickly recognized the opportunity OurCity presented and asked for help to devise a master plan that would serve as an alternative to the one presented by city planners , a plan capable of accommodating 2000 new residents while leaving the forestland unscathed . OurCity accepted the request for help and , therefore , we argue that the Alternative Master Plan ( AMP ) was a citizen - driven initiative . OurCity stipulated that the plan be drafted as part of a participatory design process that included immigrants and other less engaged local residents . Immigrant residents of Meri - Rastila were fond of the forestland and didn’t want to see it destroyed . Notwithstanding , their engagement in the planning discussion was highly problematic ( Leikila , Fahenle & Galanakis , 2013 ) . Two architects from the OurCity team supervised a larger design team of university students in its effort to devise an AMP for Meri - Rastila . We conducted a series of PD workshops with local residents . In conjunction with the AMP design team , we analyzed the results of the workshops in order to inform the drafting of the plan . Thus , the AMP represented the voices of a wider group of residents . Once the plan was ready , OurCity members decided to let the Pro Meri - Rastila group adopt it as its own and present it to the City Planning Board ( CPB ) for evaluation . The AMP was presented to the CPB as an alternative to the plan proposed by the city . The CPB voted five to four in favor of the proposal put forth by the city planners ( City Planning Board , 2012 ) . Later on , the Finnish National Innovation Fund ( Sitra ) financed a comparative analysis of the environmental impact of the two proposals . Even though that analysis favored the AMP ( Savisalo et al , 2013 ) , the CPB voted again in favor of the city planners’ proposals and the AMP was rejected ( City Planning Board , 2012b ) . Nevertheless , CPD experts were instructed to draft a new version of their plan that preserved the forest as a recreational area . In this context we ask how the media , the authorities , and active bloggers perceived the participation of local residents , including immigrants , in the AMP . We ask how this participatory process influenced decision - making . It is with these questions in mind that we describe the process and present its results . OURCITY AND PD WORKSHOPS OurCity members were invited to participate in events and to organize others involving local residents ( OurCity blog , 2012 ) . In this paper , we discuss three workshops geared to informing residents about the design of the AMP . Participants in the first workshop were the 15 members of Pro Meri - Rastila . In the second workshop , we worked with seventeen 5th grade students and their teacher in the local school . Approximately half of the students had a multicultural background . The third workshop was an open invitation to all the neighbors and community workers . Open invitations , however , did not prove to be enough . We extended special invitations to local immigrant groups and associations . We contracted a translator so that a group of Somali women could take part in a workshop that ultimately included 35 participants . The aims of the first three workshops were to encourage participants to be creative and playful using clay , Lego , and wood pieces while envisioning possible scenarios for Meri - Rastila ; to facilitate a discussion on the proposals generated by local autochthonous and immigrant residents ; to build relationships with residents that could eventually inform the design of AMP . In the fourth workshop , eight members of the AMP design team analyzed the data retrieved from the previous workshops , such as videos , photos and audio material , and presented their findings . The idea of urban in - filling 1 e merged from these workshops and it became the key design concept for the AMP . In - filling was a sound strategy for antagonizing the official city plan . Under in - filling , the bulk of the new housing proposed by the City planners would also be maintained in the AMP , the neighborhood would become more densely populated , spaces for possible new services would be preserved , and existing service networks would be unencumbered . Crucially , the forestland would be protected . The workshops were particularly useful at the beginning of the planning process . At that stage , active residents were not the only ones that could express their opinions ; the process welcomed those who had never joined in a public discussion . Somali women in the workshop expressed their need for a large community center to host their parties and gatherings ; these requests were accommodated by the AMP . The workshops allowed the participating residents to be active players in the various stages of the design process . This is evident in the way that residents defended the AMP in the media ( both in blogs discussions and in letters to newspapers ) . We argue that the main advantages of AMP were the preservation of the forestland and the PD processes that engaged local residents . PARTICIPATION TRIVIALIZED Over the course of the OurCity project , we retrieved a total of 32 articles from the printed media that discussed the plans proposed for Meri - Rastila . For the purpose of this article , we reviewed 23 print media articles , 6 major blogposts , the actual document of the Alternative Master Plan , and the CPB resolutions . The blogposts were 1 In - filling is a process of densification where the optimal use of free or underused land within a built area is preferred to developing adjoining rural or green areas . In - filling is extensively discussed in literature on urban development that is out of the scope of this article . 7 selected because local residents actively commented on them ( 218 comments were gathered in the 6 posts ) . We analyzed this material with two questions in mind : Was discussion generated around the PD process and how was this process described ? Twenty - eight percent of the articles valued citizens’ participation . Only a few of the articles or the comments on the blogposts mentioned that immigrants were involved in drafting the AMP . Four articles mentioned that immigrants participated in the proposal but only one of them was in Finnish . The title in English of this article would have been “Lanterns and Lego for the forest . Meri - Rastila people walk in the woods and do craft on behalf of the forest . ” In that text , the facilitator of the workshop was referred to as the “craft leader” , though this was not an art & craft event . The same article mentioned the participation of Somali women , but it did so anecdotally rather than reading that participation as a positive sign of social inclusion ( Hakkarainen & Vanninen , 2012 ) . On these grounds , we conclude that the participatory methods we put into practice were poorly presented . Neither the CPB nor the media highlighted the value of the AMP as a proposal that entailed a democratic planning process . In the material we reviewed , the AMP was considered important first and foremost because it protected forestland ( 70 % ) , then because it encouraged citizen participation ( 45 % ) , and finally because the makeup of the OurCity team was multicultural ( 10 % ) . When the authors of the above sources referred to the background of the members of the OurCity project team , they were called “international” ; the foreign residents of Meri Rastila , on the other hand , were referred to as “immigrants” . Of a total of 218 comments written in response to the six blogposts , 25 % discussed the AMP in terms of the benefit of protecting the forest ; only 2 , 7 % addressed the proposal in terms of the merit of representing local residents ; none of the comments referred to the fact that this was a process involving immigrant residents . The AMP effectively described the planning proposal in architectural drawings and in a 39 - page written report . 2 The participatory design process involving residents is described on page eight of that document . It appears that this did not suffice to communicate to the authorities and the wider public the value of the participation of local residents , especially of immigrants , in the planning process . Shuler and Namioka ( 1993 ) argue that people who are affected by a decision or event should have the opportunity to influence it . For this to occur , society needs to openly advocate participation . In addition , participatory efforts engaging different stakeholders must be evident in the end - results insofar as they have an impact on decision - making . OurCity forged a participatory process in which autochthonous and immigrant residents voiced their concerns . This participatory phase was not acknowledged or discussed once the design object , in this case the AMP , was 2 http : / / meidankaupunki . wordpress . com / alternative - master - plan / a3 - book - and - exhibition - panels / finalized . We argue , therefore , that the design object was envisioned in relative isolation from the participatory process it entailed . DISCUSSION There are many reasons why the PD process was perceived as detached from the final design object . One may be the failure to represent more efficaciously how citizens’ participation and the end - product are interlinked ; another could be that designers who are not trained in PD have trouble appreciating it . In our view , this is particularly true of architects and urban planners . Indeed , it may not be unfair to say that underestimating residents’ participation in the AMP is indicative of traditional planning practices still at work ( see Scott - Brown , 2009 ) . We acknowledge as well that reciprocity and trust between all stakeholders involved in the PD processes would have required more time than the predetermined one - year period granted to OurCity project . Furthermore , while we allocated great effort to the PD process and community engagement , we failed to adequately defend residents’ participation in the crucial decisions of the AMP . Eventually , the PD process , as well as its impact on the drafting of the AMP , was played down . It may well be asked , then , what the point of citizens’ participation is when that participation is barely acknowledged and when the power distribution that it requires seems unattainable . We praise PD within like - minded circles of advocates . However , in many cases the wider public and the authorities still perceive PD as a benevolent gesture , rather than as an integral design process . When stripped of its mandate , PD does not affect decision - making . We argue that this is unfortunate for the grassroots involved . Hence , we propose the use of special ISO standard 3 labels certifying projects involving PD . This would allow people to corroborate that a project of any sort , from urban development to industrial production , makes use of PD processes that truly engage end - users . CONCLUSIONS The fact that the AMP was a proposal instigated by residents and devised in collaboration with some local residents was undermined by the concern with preservation of the forestland . Ideally , those two components would reinforce one another . With the AMP , OurCity project affected the decision - making process . We achieved our goal of providing an example in which citizens and independent professionals generated and implemented new ideas . In addition , we agree with Nuojua et al ( 2008 ) that new methods for public participation are needed in order to make urban planning processes more democratic . Methods are also required to render participatory processes visible at all stages of decision - making in urban planning . There are many ways for designers to present their final results . Perspective and aerial views , scale drawings and 3 International Organization for Standardization 8 models , and digital renderings , all serve to describe the proposals in terms of final outcome . However , none of those representations grasps PD processes and the richness , as well as the messiness , grassroots participation brings . There is evidence that certain methods of mapping promote public involvement in decision - making ( Latour et al , 1992 ; Sieber , 2006 ) . If PD were to be incorporated convincingly in urban planning , it would greatly benefit from these mapping methods . Unfortunately , in traditional urban planning PD processes remain underestimated and therefore representing such processes is deemed unnecessary . Amidst this climate , as designers , we need to reformulate our visualization tools to demonstrate PD processes in the end - result . The use of a PD ISO standard label would imply an added value attached to a master plan that would be instigated by , and drafted with , local residents . Responsible decision - making by cities requires planning processes that are more informed of citizens’ needs and that require citizens’ participation . It is therefore , time for PD advocates in urban planning to gain some sisu ( Finnish for perseverance ) and become more brazen . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank all our participants in Meri - Rastila and our colleagues at the OurCity project . We are grateful to the World Design Capital Helsinki 2012 for endorsing this project . Last but not least , we thank the Academy of Finland ( Decision No 137954 ) . REFERENCES Botero , A . and Saad - Sulonen , J . Enhancing citizenship : the role of in - between infrastructures . Proceedings of PDC , USA , 2010 , 81 - 90 . Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . Proceedings of the PDC : Research Papers - Volume 1 , 2012 , 41 - 50 Ehn , P . Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Arbetslivscentrum , Stockholm . 1988 . Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . and Hillgren , PA . Agonistic participatory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign , 2012 , 8 ( 2 - 3 ) : 127 - 144 . City Planning Board . Minutes of the meeting . 8 . 05 . 2012 . Retrieved on 20 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1f5FgLd City Planning Board . Minutes of the meeting . 05 . 11 . 2013 . Retrieved on 20 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1dpIY5Y Forester , J . The Deliberative Practitioner . Encouraging Participatory Planning Processes . The MIT Press , Cambridge - Massachusetts , London . 2000 . Fuad - Luke , D . How Was It for You ? OurCity - OutReach and the City of Helsinki . 2012 . Retrieved on 26 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1mUmlNi Galanakis , M . Space Unjust . Socio - spatial Discrimination in Urban Public Space - Cases from Helsinki and Athens . UIAH , Gummerus , Jyväskylä . 2008 . Hakkarainen , K . and Vanninen A . Lyhdyin ja Legon metsä puolesta . Meri - Rastila väki kävelee ja askartelee metsän puolesta . Helsingin Sanomat , 02 . 08 . 2012 . Helsingin kuntarekisteri : Facta 2012 . Retrieved on 24 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1gQqn1M Hornecker , E . , Eden , H . and Scharff , E . “In MY situation , I would dislike THAAAT ! ” Role Playing as Assessment Method for Tools Supporting Participatory Planning . Proceedings of the PDC 2002 , 243 - 247 . Hracs , J . B . , and Massam , H . B . Places / Spaces of Celebration and Protest : Citizenship , Civic Conversations and the Promotion of Rights and Obligations . Canadian Journal of Urban Research , 2008 , 17 : 63 - 81 . Land Use and Building Act . Unofficial Translation , 1999 . Retrieved on 20 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / NuzA7L Latour , B . Mauguin , P . and Tell , G . A Note on Socio - Technical Graphs . Social Studies of Science . 1992 , 22 : 33 - 57 . Leikkilä , J . , Faehnle , M . and Galanakis , M . Urban Nature and Social Diversity Promoting Interculturalism in Helsinki by Planning Urban Nature . Urban Forestry & Urban Greening , 2013 , 12 ( 2 ) : 183 - 190 . Nuojua , J . , Juustila , A . , Räisänen , T . , Kuutti , K . and Soudumsaari , L . Proceedings of the PDC 2008 , 274 - 277 . OurCity blog . Alternative Master Plan , 2012 . Retrieved on 24 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1kYpLdf Saad - Sulonen , J . , Botero , A . and Kuutti , K . A long - term strategy for designing ( in ) the wild : lessons from the Urban Mediator and traffic planning in Helsinki . DIS , Newcastle , UK , 2012 , 166 - 175 . Sandercock , L . and Attili , G . ( eds ) Where Strangers Become Neighbours . Springer Science + Business Media . 2009 . Sandercock , L . Cosmopolis II Mongrel Cities in the 21st Century . Continuum , London , New York . 2003 . Savisalo , A . , Tvrdý , J . , Partanen , J . and Rapola , E . Rastilan vaihtoehtotarkastelu . FCG suunnittelu ja tekniikka OY . 2013 . Retrieved on 21 . 02 . 2014 , from http : / / bit . ly / 1naHyzo Sieber , R . Public participation Geographic Information Systems : A Literature Review and Framework . Annals of the Association of the American Geographers , 2006 , 96 ( 3 ) : 491 - 507 . Scott - Brown , D . Urban design at fifty . A personal view . In A . Krieger and W . Saunders ( eds ) Urban Design . University of Minnesota Press , Minnesota , MN . 2009 , 61 – 87 . Shuler , D . and Namioka , A . ( eds ) Participatory Design . Principles and Practices . Lawrence Earlbaum Associates : Hillsdale . 1993 . Yan - Chi Kwok , J . The Weight of Space : Participatory Design Research for Configuring Habitable Space of New Arrival Women in Hong Kong . Proceedings of the PDC 2004 , 183 - 192 .