s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 1 The Co - Creation Connection by C . K . Prahalad and Venkatram Ramaswamy Companies spent the 20th century managing efficiencies . They must spend the 21st century managing experiences . For more than 100 years , a company - centric , efficiency - driven view of value creation has shaped our industrial infrastructure and the entire business system . Although this perspective often conflicts with what consumers value — the quality of their experiences with goods and services — companies see value creation as a process of cost - effectively producing goods and services . Now information and communications technology , the Internet in particular , is forcing companies to think differently about value creation and to be more responsive to consumer experiences . In fact , the balance of power in value creation is tipping in favor of consumers . I ll u s t r a t i o n b y S t e v e M oo r s c o n t e n t m a n a g e m e n t 51 c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 3 s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 The disconnect between what companies and con - sumers value traces back to the early - 20th - century industrial principles . Frederick Winslow Taylor’s scien - tific management focused on lowering unit costs of pro - duction . The value chain , a concept introduced by Michael Porter in the 1980s , gave managers an integrat - ed framework to identify and manage costs of designing , producing , marketing , delivering , and supporting goods or services . And Michael Hammer and James Champy’s business process reengineering was widely interpreted as implicitly linking cost reduction and internal efficiencies to value creation . During the 1990s , notions of the extended enter - prise and the boundaryless organization encouraged managers to broaden their search for efficiencies and discover ways of creating value from their supplier net - work and beyond . Starting in 1995 , the Internet further invigorated the corporate pursuit of efficiency , this time expanding it to include all the activities directly involv - ing or affecting the company – customer relationship . Still , throughout this evolution , the assumption that internal cost efficiency is the source of value creation has remained unchallenged . Consumers appreciate and expect efficiency when it improves their experience with a product or service . But most of the time , managers are so preoccupied with operating efficiently that they don’t even think about value in terms of the consumer’s experience . ( See Exhibit 1 . ) Ask yourself : Do you as a consumer of a digital cam - era think about the complex sourcing patterns and logis - tics that the manufacturer has to deal with , or are you thinking about the fun you will have when you bring the camera to the beach to record your children’s first ocean swim ? Because companies have historically controlled all business activities involved in the creation of the things they sell , it is their view of value that is dominant . Indeed , the consumer typically has little or no influence on value created until the point of exchange when own - ership of the product is typically transferred to the con - sumer from the firm . This is true whether the consumer is a company or an individual . Now consumers are challenging this corporate logic of value creation . Spurred by the consumer - centric cul - ture of the Internet — with its emphasis on interactivi - ty , speed , individuality , and openness — the consumer’s influence on value creation has never been greater , and it is spreading to all points in the value chain . ( See “The Five Powers of the Connected Consumer , ” page 7 . ) nd therein lies a fundamental challenge for business . Companies have grown used to viewing con - sumers as passive target markets for what they create . But , interest - ingly , markets are not passive ; they are now becoming more like forums , largely because of the Internet . In the “market as a forum , ” consumers active - ly define value the way they see value — as experiences — and push companies to see it the same way . Today’s companies know just how dramatically 40 million con - sumers networking with each other and challenging the status quo online , in categories as different as music and mortgages , are shaking up the business world . In this environment , we believe companies need to embrace a new approach to value creation , one in which the basis for value shifts from products to experiences ; C . K . Prahalad ( cprahalad @ aol . com ) is the Harvey C . Fruehauf Professor of Business Administration at the University of Michigan Business School , Ann Arbor . He is also the founder and chairman of Praja Inc . , a pio - neer company in interactive event experiences . Venkatram Ramaswamy ( venkatr @ umich . edu ) is profes - sor of marketing , the Michael R . and Mary Kay Hallman Fellow of Electronic Business , and the director of the Community for Business Innovation at the University of Michigan Business School . A c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 4 consumer influence is spread across the value chain ( in research and development , design , manufacturing , logis - tics , service , and points in between ) ; conflicts between companies and consumers are more visible and resolved more productively ; and companies don’t dictate how value is created . In short , companies must learn to co - create value with their customers . Although it is only human to feel threatened by a loss of control , it makes little sense for companies not to be open and engaged with consumers . By partnering with them in the value creation process , companies can better balance the objectives of value creation , managing the bottom line ( cost and investments ) and the top line ( growth and revenues ) . Furthermore , co - creation is be - coming a competitive imperative . Information illumi - nating what consumers value is voluminous , and it flows freely in information networks . If your company does not capture this intelligence to create more fulfilling experiences for consumers , your competitors will . The Art of Co - Creation How do companies co - create valuable experiences with consumers ? The traditional company - centric view says : ( 1 ) the consumer is outside the domain of the value chain ; ( 2 ) the enterprise controls where , when , and how value is added in the value chain ; ( 3 ) value is created in a series of activities controlled by the enterprise before the point of purchase ; ( 4 ) there is a single point of exchange where value is extracted from the customer for the enterprise . The consumer - centric view says : ( 1 ) the consumer is an integral part of the system for value creation ; ( 2 ) the consumer can influence where , when , and how value is generated ; ( 3 ) the consumer need not respect industry boundaries in the search for value ; ( 4 ) the consumer can compete with companies for value extraction ; ( 5 ) there are multiple points of exchange where the consumer and the company can co - create value . In the customer - centric mass production and mar - keting of automobiles , for example , suppliers provide raw materials , components , subcomponents , and sys - tems to manufacturers , who create value by assembling these inputs into vehicles . Consumers actively decide what vehicle to buy , but companies decide what their choices will be . Cars are sold by dealers acting as inter - mediaries for the automakers . For companies reliant on this scenario , value creation is defined solely by extract - ing profit from end consumers . The Saturn Corporation , billing itself as “a different Exhibit 1 : Value Creation : How Companies and Consumers Think T h e P o i n t o f E x c h a n g e How Companies Think How Consumers Think HopesDreamsDesires Aspirations Peace of MindFamily LifestyleWork Style CompromisesNeedsChatsStage of Life Consumer ReportsActivities CommunitiesWord of Mouth Expectations CRMCall Centers ERPChoiceboardsEnterprise Networks Product Variety PlantsPricingLogisticsProduct ManufacturingEngineeringTechnologyScienceR & D Platforms c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 5 s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 kind of car company , ” has spurned the industry’s tradi - tional ways . In 1985 , when the General Motors Corporation launched Saturn , it didn’t just start a new car company , it created a “community . ” Saturn works with its customers in the design , manufacturing , and sales processes , and it engages Saturn owners to help continuously innovate and improve its cars . Consumers think about the place of a car in their life — how it fits their budget , their desire for comfort , their need for peace of mind , their aesthetics . Companies think about their competitive strategy and their operations — engineering , differentiation , logis - tics , pricing , and , above all , revenue and profit . Although these views of value do clash , they’re not irrec - oncilable . Saturn is a company trying to merge these two ways of looking at value . In the pages that follow , we present a framework — a new value creation paradigm — to suggest how com - panies can better understand the consumer’s view of value and productively work with them to co - create more satisfying value for both sides . Elements of Exchange The point of exchange is often the place where the con - flict between the traditional company view of value and the consumer view of value is most exposed . Although companies are not inclined to interact with consumers at all points in the value chain , opportunities for exchanges between the company and the consumer nei - ther begin nor end when a consumer purchases some - thing from a company . Indeed , the point of exchange need not be restricted to where the company and the consumer trade money for finished goods or services . If experience is the critical source of value for con - sumers , we need to identify the factors that determine experience . We call these the elements of exchange , and they are : • How transactions are managed . • How choices are determined . • How the consumption experience is staged . • How price and performance relate . By examining the four basic elements that consti - tute an exchange , companies can explore how current management approaches may positively or negatively affect customer experiences , and discover better ways to create value . • Transactions . Companies have been quick to spot emerging technologies that reduce transaction costs by having consumers perform functions formerly han - dled by employees ( i . e . , customer self - service ) . Gas sta - tions’ transitioning from full - service to self - service was an easy win for gasoline retailers and consumers . Com - panies asked customers to fill their own tanks and pay through devices on the pump . And what drivers lost in attendant service they happily traded for the conven - ience of self - service and , sometimes , better prices . But most customer self - service scenarios aren’t this smooth . Managers are usually so preoccupied with the cost advantages of self - service that they misjudge its con - sequences on the customer experience . Or worse , they don’t consider the consequences at all . Anyone who has been foiled by automated multiple - choice customer service over the phone , or who has been left on hold lis - tening to bad music , knows the limitations of call cen - ters . When hospitals , laboratories , and pharmacies put health records , diagnoses , and prescription information online to cut costs , are they taking into account con - sumer concern about privacy ? In a market forum , consumers define value as experiences and push companies to see value the same way . c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 6 On the Web — the ultimate self - service technology — corporate indifference to the consumer experience occurs constantly . Witness the number of abandoned “shopping carts” ; perhaps shoppers who stop short of purchasing find the interfaces confusing or don’t feel secure using a credit card online . For the consumer who doesn’t believe a company will not sell his or her per - sonal data to someone else , giving profile information in exchange for the convenience of “one - click” purchasing or instant recognition on a password - protected Web site may not be worth the risk . Companies also have greatly underestimated how differently older and younger peo - ple view issues like privacy and security online . The key issue in automating transactions is con - sumer heterogeneity . Customers differ in their skills , their propensity for problem solving , and their willing - ness to spend time to learn a new system , as well as their willingness to trust it . This is true whether it involves the Web or any other system that is unfamiliar . Self - service works best when it’s applied by compa - nies that manage their costs and the customer experi - ence with equal care . Southwest Airlines Company works hard to make sure its standards for being prompt , accurate , and friendly are the same whether the cus - tomer exchange is made through an automated channel or handled by an employee . Similarly , Lands’ End Inc . has invested in self - service technology and superior agent training so that the consumer experience on its Web site is as good as its catalog operation consumer experience . • Choice . Elaborately structured distribution and communications channels allow companies to control a consumer’s choices . But when companies don’t offer the same choices across channels , they risk antagonizing the customer . One clothing retailer trying to optimize inventory management and pricing by channel charged $ 48 for a shirt online and marked the same shirt down to $ 24 . 99 in a retail store . Over time , consumers will recognize such differences , and they might accept them , but only if an explicit policy exists that says online and in - store pricing ( or styles and colors ) may differ . Information technology has opened a whole new opportunity for manufacturers to cost - effectively offer customized products faster and cheaper . In the comput - er industry , companies like the Dell Computer Corporation have an impressive competitive advantage in build - to - order PCs . Now BMW is offering a “cus - tom” car , delivered in 12 days . For the Z3 roadster , the automaker offers a choice of 26 wheel designs and 123 console options . Mass customization allows companies like Dell and BMW to offer variety , but who decides what can be cus - tomized ? Customization ultimately is a matter of what can be built and delivered to suit the efficient operation of a company’s value chain . Even in the most sophisti - cated mass - customization schemes , the customer choos - es from a menu dictated by the company . hanks to the Web , companies can become much more astute about what consumers like and don’t like , and that knowledge will greatly improve companies’ ability to be innovative and to anticipate con - sumer needs . On the Web , consumer - to - consumer recommendations , new ideas , critiques , musings , and more are having a power - ful influence on choice . About . com ( owned by Primedia Inc . ) , one of the most popular consumer word - of - T Before the Internet liberated informa - tion , companies could do everything — choose materials used in products , design production processes , craft marketing messages , control sales channels — with no interference . Now , consumers exercise their influ - ence in every part of the business sys - tem . Nevertheless , companies should welcome , not resist , the consumer powers detailed below . 1 . Information Access . With access to unprecedented amounts of infor - mation , consumers have knowledge to make much more informed deci - sions . This is causing companies across industries to cede control over value creation and develop new ways of doing business . Consider health care . More than 70 million Americans have reportedly used the Internet to learn about diseases and treatment options and investigate how to get involved in clinical drug trials . Consumers now question their physi - cians more aggressively and partici - pate more fully in choosing treat - ments . This is dramatically altering traditional pharmaceutical sales practices . In the U . S . , it is driving con - sumer - centric “defined - contribution” health - care reform wherein compa - nies give employees information and ask them to assume more responsi - bility for selecting and managing their own health - care benefits . 2 . Global View . The Internet is the first single source of information that gives consumers the ability , 24 hours a day , to see what is happening around the world . That is changing the rules for how companies com - pete . For example , multinationals are more exposed to consumer scrutiny of product price and performance across geographies , which means those businesses have less latitude to vary the price or quality of products sold in multiple regions . But it also means companies have more infor - mation to sharpen global strategies . New competitors and potential part - ners for large companies are also emerging in the global marketplace . Even poor artisans in Rajasthan , India , can sell high - quality table linen on the Web for $ 10 and deliver it to buyers in the U . S . in about a week , and for one - tenth the cost of compa - rable linen in the United States . 3 . Networking . Consumers natu - rally coalesce around common skills , interests , and experiences . The Internet amplifies this by encouraging an unparalleled ease and openness of communication among perfect strangers . Indeed , “communities of interest , ” where individuals confabu - late and commiserate without geo - graphic constraints and with few social barriers , exist all over the Web . People participating in a chat area may know nothing more about those they’re chatting with than the interest they share . The power of consumer The Five Powers of the Connected Consumer c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 7 s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 mouth sites , is host to discussions about more than 50 , 000 subjects , from allergies to zebras . Content , organized by topic , is kept fresh and credible with a thorough oversight system run jointly by About . com and its community members . Sites like About . com are trying to establish businesses promoting consumer - to - consumer communication , but thousands of Web sites exist that buzz with conversations about what con - sumers value and don’t value . Companies need to listen , learn , and absorb this valuable intelligence . Even in the world of drugs for treating life - threat - ening diseases , consumer advocacy in online support groups seems to be as influential as company marketing . For example , when Novartis AG began clinical trials of a promising leukemia drug , word spread so fast that the company was overwhelmed with demand from patients seeking participation . • Consumption Experience . Companies like the Starbucks Corporation and Walt Disney Company are highly attuned to human behaviors , preferences , and tastes because experiences are the essence of what they sell . But the fact is , companies that manufacture prod - ucts bear just as much responsibility as restaurants and entertainment companies for enhancing or diminishing the value of consumer experience . For example , most antibiotics are prescribed to be taken several times a day for two to three weeks . If you forget to take the pills , the medicine is ineffective , and many people don’t remem - ber to complete the full cycle . The pharmaceutical com - pany Pfizer Inc . saw this behavior as an opportunity to make it easier for people to take medicine the way it was prescribed . It introduced an antibiotic called Zithromax that typically requires an initial dosage of two pills fol - lowed by a daily single pill for only four days . Then Pfizer marketed Zithromax in a blister pack called the Z - pak , which clearly reminds users of their daily dosage requirement and how much they have left to take . Pfizer effectively became the patient’s partner in making it as c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 8 easy as possible for the medicine to do its curative work . Zithromax now dominates its market . Consumers like Zithromax’s shorter cycle and the convenient reminders to take their pill . Doctors , too , applaud these features , because they make the drug more effective . With the Z - pak , Pfizer has creatively incorporated the consumption variable into the manufacture and design of the product to increase its value . • Price - Performance . The traditional psychology of price setting , largely based on cost structures , is becoming increasingly irrelevant . Further , the relation - ship between price and performance is no longer implic - it and controlled by companies ; it is explicit and debated by consumers . Independent consumer - feedback Web sites , such as Epinions . com , PlanetFeedback . com , and BizRate . com , allow people to share price information recommenda - tions , reviews , and comparative price information for thousands of products . Search engines like Google are also powerful tools consumers can use to collect and compare price and performance data . Global television and the Internet make it easier for people to see the kinds of products companies sell in dif - ferent regions and countries and compare them to what’s offered in their own market . That is altering consumer desires and raising consumer expectations , especially in developing countries . Consumers in emerg - ing - market countries ( e . g . , India , Brazil , and Indonesia ) with annual incomes sufficient to purchase cars , refrig - erators , branded clothing , and other mainstays of com - fortable living expect these products to be affordably priced and to meet global quality standards and local cultural requirements . The new challenge for companies accustomed to producing lower - priced , and often inferior , goods for these markets is to raise the consumer experience bar and make a profit . For example , Hyundai in India is suc - cessfully selling its Santro sedan for the equivalent of networks is that they’re independent and based on real consumer experi - ences , not what the company tells them they will experience . Such networking among con - sumers turns traditional company - controlled marketing and advertising upside down . For example , rather than attempt to shut down unofficial Hobbit fan sites , New Line Cinema co - opted them , to help spread word of mouth and create buzz about its movie The Lord of the Rings . Gordon Paddison , senior vice president of worldwide interactive marketing , reached out to the more than 400 fan sites before the movie was released to communicate with the early influ - encers and give them insider tips . Consumer education and feedback sites are struggling to prove them - selves as viable businesses . But this does not diminish their utility as places where consumers can com - pare and share information , and places where companies can learn what consumers are thinking . 4 . Experimentation . Consumers use the Internet to experiment with and develop products , especially digi - tal ones . The German research com - pany Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental Software Engineering released MP3 as a freely available compression standard that accelerat - ed the transmission of digital audio . The collective competence of soft - ware users has enabled the codevel - opment of popular products , such as the Apache Web server software and the Linux operating system . The ability of consumers to experi - ment with each other goes beyond software and digital products . Cooks can share recipes . Gardening enthu - siasts can share tips on growing organic vegetables . Homeowners can share stories about their home improvement projects . The list goes on . Companies that choose the path of co - creation can tap into con - sumers’ creativity for the develop - ment of products and services . 5 . Activism . As people learn , they become more discriminating in their choices about what they buy , and as they network , they become embold - ened to speak out . Now consumers provide unsolicited feedback to com - panies and to each other . There are hundreds of “sounding - off sites” on the Web that target specific compa - nies and brands . AOL Watch , for example , publishes complaints from former and current AOL customers . The Web has also become an influen - tial tool for social groups focused on such issues as child labor and envi - ronmental protection to get corporate attention and promote reform . Although activism might seem men - acing to companies , it also opens the door to competitive opportunity . — C . K . P and V . R . c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 9 s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 about $ 8 , 000 . The Santro’s driving performance is com - parable to that of a compact car sold in the U . S . for about $ 11 , 000 , and it has comfort features , such as spa - cious seating and headroom , that are highly valued by consumers in India . Even the world’s 4 billion poorest consumers , who earn less than $ 1 , 500 a year , are aspiring to a better life and demanding more goods and services . This situation represents a huge opportunity for companies to change their mind - sets and their business models ( e . g . , “the poor can’t afford or have no use for consumer products , ” or “we can’t make money in this market” ) . In 1995 , Unilever PLC’s subsidiary in India , Hindustan Lever Ltd . ( HLL ) , drastically altered the management of its value chain so it could sell a detergent , called Wheel , to the poor . HLL decentralized its production , marketing , and distribution and quickly established sales channels through thousands of small storefronts . HLL adjusted the cost structure of its detergent business so it could sell Wheel at a very low price point and still make money . Today , Wheel has gross margins and a return on capital as good as , or better than , HLL’s higher - end cleaning products , and Unilever has used this business model to create a new detergent market in Brazil . Patients at India’s Aravind Eye Hospital , the world’s largest eye - care facility , pay about $ 10 for cataract sur - gery , compared to $ 1 , 600 for equivalent care in the United States . The hospital , which operates on more than 200 , 000 patients per year , gives 60 percent of its care at no cost and still is highly profitable . Between 1998 and 1999 , Aravind’s total income was Rs . 230 . 6 million ( about $ 5 . 2 million ) , with a profit of Rs . 110 . 1 million ( about $ 2 . 5 million ) , and return on capital of more than 200 percent on surgery and its lens manufac - turing arm . Like Unilever , Aravind is testing this busi - ness model in other regions . Building Blocks for Co - Creation Businesses operate in a networked environment in which it is possible both to learn continuously about what people want and need , and to interact with them in ongoing exchanges of value . But companies need to be much more aware of where these opportunities to interact with consumers exist . We suggest there are four building blocks for co - creating value . Dialogue at every stage of the value chain encourages not just knowledge sharing , but , even more importantly , understanding between companies and customers . It also gives consumers more opportunity to interject their view of value into the creation process . In short , access challenges the notion that ownership is the only way for the consumer to experience value . By focusing on access to value at multiple points of exchange , as opposed to simply ownership of products , companies can broaden their view of the business opportunities creating good experiences . Risk reduction assumes that if consumers become co - creators of value with companies , they will demand more information about potential risks of goods and services ; but they may also have to bear more responsibility for handling those risks . Transparency of information is required to create the trust between institutions and individuals . 1 . Dialogue . Dialogue is creating shared meaning . In dialogues , people listen and learn from each other ; in the most productive dialogues , people communicate and debate as equals . Dialogue helps companies to understand the emotional , social , and cultural contexts that shape consumer experiences and provides knowl - c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 10 edge companies can use to innovate . Dialogue with con - sumers is central to Harley - Davidson Inc . ’s being able to co - create a multigenerational “way of life . ” Building a forum for dialogue was how , early on , America Online Inc . created a community — a group of enthusiasts whose shared interests bonded them to the service at the same time that it gave the company insights into service improvements . Dialogue was what kept a loyal commu - nity of Macintosh users together when Apple Computer Inc . ’s product development began to wane . And it is dia - logue that is helping the personal - computer manufac - turer to recover with the introduction of the new iMac . ialogue involves more than listening and reacting . It requires deep engage - ment , lively interactivity , empathetic understanding , and a willingness by both parties to act , especially when they’re at odds . What is happening in the music industry today is the antithesis of dialogue . If the record labels were listening , they would hear that consumers don’t object to paying for music . They just want to cre - ate their own musical experiences once they’ve paid for it . People have been packaging their own music for years ( in the 1970s , parents of Napster and MP3 player fans made custom cassette tapes by copying songs from long - playing records ) . Why , with even better technology available today to duplicate and mix their own music , would consumers want anything else ? While recording companies fight the battle against “illegal downloading” and resist changing their business models , music sales are declining and sales of blank CDs are soaring . “If the industry doesn’t change the way we do business , we’re going to be bankrupt , ” Val Azzoli , cochairman of Atlantic Records , told the New York Times in February 2002 . The Sony Corporation shows just what’s at stake . Its music sales are currently about $ 4 . 6 billion , compared to about $ 40 billion in sales from consumer electronics , including CD burners and MP3 players . 2 . Access . Ownership is the traditional way to look at the transfer of value from the company to the customer . But you don’t need to own something to experience its value . Indeed , access without ownership is desirable for consumers and can be very profitable for businesses . Thinking in terms of access expands a com - pany’s view of potential markets . Over the past decade , numerous companies serving European and U . S . cities have begun to offer a novel service for people who want more than just a rental car ; they want the convenience of having a car they don’t own at their disposal all the time . For example , in Switzerland , people who join Mobility CarSharing receive a personal access device that unlocks a dedicated pool of cars , which are rented on a pay - as - you - drive basis , making the service ideal for running short errands , visiting friends in the suburbs in the evening , and the like . What do Mobility CarSharing and similar compa - nies sell ? A new urban lifestyle that is not only econom - ical and convenient , but also reduces pollution and parking problems . In the music industry , consumers are not fighting for all music to be free ; they just want more freedom to choose how they access music once they’ve paid a fair price . This is a classic instance of the consumer being shut out of the value creation process . The successful coupling of access with dialogue in the computer community’s Open Source movement has had a significant influence on traditional players in the industry as they see its benefits . For example , to promote the use of Linux , the open source operating system , IBM is putting $ 40 million of its software tools in the public domain . More important , in 2001 , IBM made the largest commitment of any computer maker — about 20 percent of its R & D budget ( $ 1 billion ) — to Linux and Apache Web servers . 3 . Risk Reduction . The obligations and responsibil - ities of the firm and consumers for risk management will always be debated . But it is safe to assume that as con - sumers become more involved in co - creating experi - ences with companies , they may be willing to take on more responsibility for managing risk exposures , if com - panies are willing to reveal more information about the risks associated with the products and services they pro - duce . One key issue in the Firestone - Ford tire case cen - tered on the amount of knowledge Ford and Firestone had about risks associated with the combination of vehi - cle , tire pressure , and driving conditions . How much should Firestone and Ford have shared with consumers ? In a world where good information is widely avail - able , consumers , within the limits of their technical knowledge , should be able to make more informed choices about risks . Companies can be a part of that process by being both forthcoming in the discussions of risk with the general public , and by disseminating appropriate methods for assessing personal risk and soci - etal risk . Labeling is one way of explicitly passing on to D c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 11 s t r a t e g y + b u s i n e ss i ss u e 27 the consumer more responsibility for risk . But that is not enough . Companies will need to be more willing to engage in open dialogues with concerned people . Companies should not approach their communications defensively . On the contrary , proactive risk communica - tion and management offers new opportunities for firms to differentiate themselves . 4 . Transparency . In the wake of the Enron debacle , shareholders are demanding more transparent , or thor - ough , financial disclosure ; but transparency is also nec - essary for consumers of goods and services to become co - creators of value . When companies make vital busi - ness - process information visible to consumers , compa - nies , in effect , relinquish control of the value creation process before the traditional point of exchange . The Federal Express Corporation has high levels of transparency in its logistics system . Customers can log on to its Web site and check the progress of packages in real time using the same information that FedEx employees use ; large corporate customers can also reroute packages themselves . Individuals have choices they wouldn’t have if FedEx controlled all the informa - tion , and that improves the customer experience . This same type of information transparency has cre - ated a revolution in the trading of securities . Global agency brokers like Instinet Group Inc . build trans - parency into their trading systems so that customers can monitor in real time how much the fund manager’s trad - ing is costing them . In June 2001 , Eli Lilly and Company launched a new e - business research venture called InnoCentive LLC . It brings together , via its Web site , companies and researchers from around the world seeking solutions to scientific problems . Significant cash incentives are awarded to researchers who offer the solution judged “best” by the company that posted the problem . InnoCentive represents a bold open source approach to innovation for industries that in the past have been closed and private . umerset Houseboats , the world’s largest houseboat manufacturer , based in rural Kentucky , shows how all the pieces of a co - creation model — dialogue , access , risk reduction , and transparency — can fit together . Imagine interactively codesigning the layout and configuration of your dream boat , negotiating specs and prices , connecting with the factory to participate in your boat’s construc - tion , and monitoring its progress in real time . Now imagine a personal Web page where you can review drawings ; access architectural , aesthetic , and structural expertise ; and consult a customer representative . You can see pictures and read the biographies of the people who are crafting your boat . You can critique design ele - ments and fully furnish your boat before it is delivered . You can have dialogues with other Sumerset customers and a wider community of avid sailors . What is co - created in this process is not just a boat , a physical artifact , but also experiences . Even before owners set sail , they begin to form an emotional attach - ment to their boat while building their stake in the out - come of the value creation process . The company also benefits . Sumerset and its sup - pliers learn more about the end consumer and access new ideas for design , engineering , and manufacturing . Everyone from design engineers to carpenters gains a The world’s largest houseboat maker shows how the pieces of the co - creation model — dialogue , access , risk reduction , and transparency — fit together . S c o n t e n t s t r a t e g y & c o m p e t i t i o n 12 deeper understanding of consumer desires and the potential value trade - offs . This reduces investment risk for the company as well as the risk the consumer won’t be satisfied . A Quiet Revolution As the noise from debates about the old economy and the New Economy dies down , it is easier to detect a qui - eter revolution — fomented by a shift in how value is perceived and created . Movement toward a market envi - ronment in which companies and consumers co - create experiences is gaining momentum , but as with any change in deep - seated assumptions about competition and strategy , the adjustments for companies will be complicated and trying . First , companies must embrace the notion that con - sumers can become partners in the co - creation of expe - riences . Only by letting go of the company - centric view of value creation , once and for all , can companies pro - ceed with the difficult and long - term work of making lasting reforms to the business system . Managers must make a major transformation in the way they conceive of the tasks of value creation , and therefore change how firms are organized . Management disciplines and the relationships between disciplines need to be reexamined — market research , product development , logistics , branding , pricing , and accounting , among others . Companies are getting more used to competing on the basis of their adaptability and how fast they innovate and apply knowledge , and they are rising to the chal - lenge of keeping down the costs of experimentation as they test new ideas . But business competition is a lot more unpredictable when innovation and flexibility , rather than efficiency , are the main drivers of value . Firms also need new and different IT strategies and applications that incorporate the principles of a more balanced system of value creation , and a system more sensitive to the consumer’s perception of value . A new information architecture that allows a company to maintain a consistent brand identity and quality of cus - tomer experience across channels , for example , is an essential strategic asset . Likewise , IT vendors need to work with companies to come up with replacements for today’s company - centric business software systems . Companies can and will make the adjustments to thrive in a world where value is co - created in experi - ences . But it will take time , courage , and stamina to compete in a different value creation space . If companies rise to the challenge , they are sure to discover an excit - ing new era of business creativity and opportunity . + Reprint No . 02206 Resources J . Philip Lathrop , Gary D . Ahlquist , and David G . Knott , “Health Care’s New Electronic Marketplace , ” s + b , Second Quarter 2000 www . strategy - business . com / press / article / ? art = 19291 & pg = 0 C . K . Prahalad and Stuart L . Hart , “The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid , ” s + b , First Quarter 2002 www . strategy - business . com / press / article / ? art = 229761 & pg = 0 C . K . Prahalad and Venkatram Ramaswamy , “Co - Opting Customer Competence , ” Harvard Business Review , January – February 2000 www . hbsp . harvard . edu / hbsp Neil Strauss , “Behind the Grammys , Revolt in the Industry , ” New York Times , February 24 , 2002