A Pattern Language Approach to the Design of a Facilitation Reporting Database Douglas A . Druckenmiller Department of Information Systems and Decision Sciences Western Illinois University DA - Druckenmiller @ wiu . edu Jon Jenkins Department of International Communications , School of Communications and Media Hanze University of Applied Sciences , Groningen jon @ imaginal . nl Daniel Mittleman College of Computing and Digital Meda DePaul University , Chicago danny @ cdm . depaul . edu Peter Bootsman Owner , Quality Research Groningen p . bootsma @ qualityresearch . nl Abstract The IAF Methods Database has 455 as of 29 August reported techniques used by facilitators divided into 3 levels : Applications , Methods and Models , and Interventions . Methods and Models are the same level of abstraction as ThinkLets . We use the ThinkLet pattern language to define requirements for a redesign of the database . We also discuss the implications for collaboration engineering and examine requirements for other levels of abstraction at the intervention and application level . 1 . Introduction Group process facilitators come to their profession via a variety of paths . But , as no college degrees – and few college courses – are offered in facilitation , most learn their skills either as part of tangential work practices or through a short job related training program . Consequently , most of the many thousand facilitators practicing today only know a small subset of group process techniques developed over the past three quarters of a century , and few possess the wherewithal to acquire or evaluate processes outside their own regular practice . Several have attempted to organize and catalog group facilitation processes . But each of these catalogs itself is a subset of the full realm of known techniques . This is due to limitations of practice scope , resources , and common language that spans the full set of group facilitation philosophies . Among the larger attempts to catalog processes are the International Association of Facilitators [ IAF ] Methods Database [ 13 ; 14 ] at over 450 methods , and the initial collection of about 65 Collaboration Engineering ThinkLets [ 5 ] . Other catalogs include collections by Straus [ 21 ] ; BlueOxen [ 4 ] ; and Lightsmith [ 17 ] . Group process facilitation has emerged from several parallel but different heritages . For example , organization development ( OD ) consultants have modeled and adapted decision making and conflict management techniques appropriate to middle management and the boardroom . Marketing researchers have evolved creativity and ideation techniques for product development and advertising . Systems analysts have built requirements elicitation and negotiation processes helpful in building large scale information systems . Community development practitioners have evolved techniques to empower large groups toward shared decision making and solution buy - in . This list represents only a subset of group facilitation heritage , each with it own objectives , assumptions , culture , language , and constraints . However , each of these realms has likely evolved significant , though overlapping , approaches toward modeling group behaviors . The problem and opportunity this paper addresses is : how can we bring together the knowledge from these separate domains into a structure and format that each domain can benefit from the others ? The IAF has determined that its Methods Database is in need of an overhaul . The current database is not well normalized , is not readily accessible via the web , and has grown beyond the size . The authors of this papers—among whom are the architects of the next generation of the IAF Methods Database—are leveraging this opportunity to explore both a conceptual database architecture and a pattern language to address the opportunity of bridging different group facilitation heritages and potentially capture all techniques , if not in the same location , in the same language to make techniques mutually accessible and comparable . This paper uses a design science methodology to construct , from existing research and practice , a pattern language for collaboration . Then , from this pattern language , a database schema is developed . The schema will be validated by testing it against existing patterns in the IAF Methods Database and the CE ThinkLets collection . 2 . Methodology A design science paradigm [ 6 ; 10 ; 11 ; 22 ] is being used as a methodological approach . This paradigm is an accepted approach to research and is complementary to the behavioral science paradigm rooted in behavioral science research . While behavioral science research seeks to develop and justify theory , design science seeks to solve problems through innovative and creative development of artifacts that apply , and test , kernel theories and methods through an iterative process of development [ 3 ; 16 ; 20 ] . Hevner et al . [ 11 ] provide 1 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 978 - 0 - 7695 - 3869 - 3 / 10 $ 26 . 00 © 2010 IEEE guidelines for design science research . This article addresses these guidelines in the following ways : 2 . 1 . Research Communication This research focuses on the development of a methods database that is practitioner based . The database presents a unique opportunity to the research community to link findings of research with practitioners seeking Qualitative research in Collaboration Engineering will benefit from the empirical nature of the database though a catalogue of reported practice . Practitioners benefit from having access to solutions for facilitation problems or a source for particular facilitation objectives . 2 . 2 . Research rigor The research reported here uses the theoretical perspective of Collaboration Engineering as espoused by Kolfschoten and colleagues . This theoretical perspective is the basis for formulating the requirements for a redesign of a database of facilitation practice . The design pattern basis of this perspective is of particular relevance to this research in that it provides for a critical analysis and guide to the redesign of the database . A key objective of this redesign is to provide a more rigorous framework for reporting of practice that informs theory construction and empirical development . 2 . 3 . Problem relevance There exists a gap between current research in collaboration engineering and facilitation practitioners . Collaboration engineering has developed approaches largely based in practice that was developed utilizing group support systems ( GSS ) and then began exploring a broader set of facilitation approaches . General facilitation practitioners on the other hand have developed approaches out of multiple theoretical frameworks independent of technological support . This research seeks to close this gap by developing a theoretically based reporting tool that brings more relevance to current theoretical research in CE and more rigor to practice . Practice is largely disconnected from theory and can benefit from a more rigorous definition of facilitation method and application . 2 . 4 . Design as a search process and an artifact The application described here is in a second iteration of development . The first phase of development established the database and a web 2 . 0 based user interface that was used by researchers and contributors to identify and document some 450 + methods . The intention of the first phase was to support practitioners in reporting and finding usable methods of facilitation . This provided a basis for additional requirements definition as limitations of the first implementation became apparent . These limitations were both technical and functional . A different technical platform that supported easier modification and development of the user interface was needed to support additional features needed by users . The next iteration of the application needs to meet functional requirements developed in response to Collaboration theory research . In the light of design pattern concepts a redesign of the database schema was indicated . This is an iterative dialogue between a general design pattern for facilitation practice and the database schema for the methods database . Thus this is an iterative search process that is theory driven resulting in a specific artifact implemented as a methods database . 2 . 5 . Design evaluation The current design has benefited from a number of research projects aimed at refining the application both theoretically and practically . The data requirements and processing requirements for contributor input and user query activities have been refined based on critical evaluation and user based research . The current evaluation from the perspective of collaboration engineering research seeks to further refine these functions and clarify the structure of the database . 2 . 6 . Research contribution This research makes several contributions . First is the IAF methods database . Hevner et al . [ 11 ] note that , in the design - science paradigm , the artifact ( in this case the database ) is itself a research contribution . In short , we are contributing a new research tool for reporting facilitation practice based on accepted theory of collaboration engineering and specifically aimed at closing the gap between theory and practice . Additionally , the research contributes to efforts to document and link reported facilitation practice to new tool sets for virtual facilitation . 3 . Pattern Language for Facilitation Collaboration engineering theory draws from the concept of design patterns introduced by Christopher Alexander . Christopher Alexander’s Original Pattern Structure Name A short familiar , descriptive name or phrase , usually more indicative of the solution than of the problem or context . Examples include Alcoves , Main entrance , Public outdoor room , Parallel roads , Density rings , Office connections , Sequence of sitting spaces , and Interior windows . Example One or more pictures , diagrams , and / or descriptions that illustrate prototypical application . Context Delineation of situations under which the pattern applies . Often includes background , discussions of why this pattern exists , and evidence for generality . Problem A description of the relevant forces and constraints , and how they interact . In many cases , entries focus almost entirely on problem constraints that a reader has probably never thought about . Design and construction issues sometimes themselves form parts of the constraints . Solution Static relationships and dynamic rules ( micro - process ) describing how to construct artifacts in accord with the pattern , often listing several variants and / or ways to adjust to 2 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 circumstances . Solutions reference and relate other higher - and lower - level patterns . Table 1 Christopher Alexander’s Original Pattern Structure This rather simple definition of a design pattern is elaborated for our purposes to a more complete format for collaboration based on facilitation practice . Table 2 compares Alexander’ basic design pattern with design patterns for Thinklets [ 5 ] , Systems Engineering [ 7 ] , and Web Engineering [ 23 ] . From this comparison we derive a proposed general design pattern that can be used to analyze the IAF methods database schema . Compared pattern structures Think - Lets Alexander Systems Engineering Web Engineering Proposed Pattern Parameters Name Name Pattern Name Name Name Also Known As Synonyms Intent Forces Purpose or Intent of Pattern When to use Context Motivation Background Context when to use When Not to use Problem Applicability Problem Context of when not to use Inputs Data Structures Input data structures Outputs Output data structures Setup Solution Structure Solution Steps Pre - session setup requirements Steps : say this ; do this Activity steps ( say this / do this ) and decisions rules Insights Consequences Insights about use / FAQ Participants Stakeholders or classes of user roles Collaborations Other Patterns to Consider Other Patterns / Thi nkLets to consider Success Stories Example Picture Examples of use Table 2 Compared pattern structures Using this comparison we looked at the existing IAF database and developed a design patter for the database . This process was tested with a group of practitioners who began using the design pattern to document their facilitation practice . This step is in anticipation of linking standard facilitation methods to virtual toolsets that are increasingly available in web 2 . 0 form . The following section details the design pattern developed for the IAFMD . 4 . Design pattern of the existing IAF methods database . The database [ 13 ] is divided into 3 Levels : Applications , Methods and Models , and Interventions . Those listed as Methods and Models are of similar level of abstraction and can be compared with ThinkLets [ 5 ] . An application is a facilitated process that is complete in itself . The process produces a complete product ; no other process is required except using the results . Examples of this are Scenario planning , the critical path method , strategic planning and the Institute for Cultural Affair’s ICA project planning approach . Methods and Models are standardized process that produce a product but are usually used in conjunction with other Methods and Models to create a final product . Examples of this are brainstorming , paired comparisons , and gap analysis . Some 215 of the Methods and Models are comparable to specific ThinkLets [ 9 ] . Interventions are actions that the facilitator takes in order to deal with unexpected behavior on the part of individuals or members of the group that are detrimental to the process of the event . In technical terms , the IAF Methods Database currently runs on a content management platform . Such platforms , often open source , enable quick implementation of site specific data models . They also come with basic editor functionality for lay out , user management , content management , etc . and end user functionality such as account management , menu’s and discussion forums . In 2004 the first edition of the IAFMD was constructed on an open source CMS platform called Postnuke . During 2009 the database was migrated to another CMS platform named Drupal . Postnuke had been a practical starting point for the database , but lacked flexibility and functionality needed for the growing ambitions of IAFMD . Moreover , development of Postnuke was discontinued by its creators so a migration was inevitable . 3 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Starting the redesign project , general and specific requirements were set . General requirements were about common functions and are not detailed here . Specific requirements included the availability of mechanisms to enter and manage complex relations between entities . This required considerable amounts of additional coding and maintenance in Postnuke and there was a need to eliminate this . Methods are a good illustration here . Methods need connections to other methods , to suppliers , bibliographies , research projects , ThinkLets , tools , etc . These relations are often many - to - many and the number of entities is expected to grow further with ThinkLets , software tools and hardware tools . Also , a categorization mechanism per entity should be available , with enough flexibility to add categories and to restructure categories into hierarchies later on . Another priority was the availability of a report generator , to create specific views on combined data from multiple entities . Drupal was able to meet all of these requirements , and was therefore chosen as the new platform . The ability of Drupal to set up and handle entities , attributes and relations is widely recognized , just as its category management system ( taxonomy ) . Another important aspect is the presence of an active developer community . By the time of writing of this paper , the migrated IAF Methods Database is mainly a copy of the old setup , with some additional sections ( Schools , Bibliography , and Research Projects ) . Next steps are to conceive a data model covering applicatoins , ThinkLets and tools , to re - analyze the contributor input process and the end user query process and develop interfaces ( including wizards ) for this . The following is the list of primary fields used by the Database in describing and reporting a method . The fields that are followed by a list in parentheses are selectable options : IAF Methods Database Common name This is the most common name of the method . Alternative names Sometimes a method will have more than one name such as The Focused Conversation Method is also known as the Basic Conversation Method , ORID , and the Art Form Method . Intent or Purpose The outcome of the method . I put the Rational Objective here and follow it with the Existential Aim Level of Process Check the appropriate level of the process . For example a strategic planning process would have the Application box checked , a session opening would have methods and models checked and dealing with a difficult person would have Intervention checked . Application ( see Application Focus ) These are complete process such as strategic planning Method and Model ( see Method and Model Focus ) These have products but generally do not produce an end product . Examples of this are brainstorming or ice breakers such as the expert game . Intervention ( see Intervention Focus ) These are activities the facilitator does based on the need of the session . For example , when a person becomes difficult the facilitator will intervene but it is not part of the plan of the session . Application Focus One or more of the items under this field are checked . Action planning This produces a plan including , steps or action , time , and who is responsible . Basic meeting facilitation This is the process of leading a regular meeting Basic Workshop Method This has a context , idea generating , clustering or prioritizing , naming and a conclusion Team and Community Building These are team or community building activities such as workdays . Conflict resolution Techniques that resolve a conflict Model Building These techniques result in a model such as the social processes or a course design Organizational development These techniques are used in improving the performance of an organization Product development These techniques result in new products . Process development These result in new processes for an organization Problem solving These are problem analysis and solving techniques . Process improvement These take existing organizational processes and improve them Project planning These are the various project planning techniques Strategic planning These result in a strategic plan . System design These will end up with the design of a system such as the design of a new software application . Environmental Analysis These analyze the environment in which an organization is operating 4 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Method or Model Focus Check one or more of the following if it is a method or model . Openings Methods for starting meetings . Ice Breakers and Energizers These are ice breakers and energizers Sharing Information These are techniques for groups to share information Analysis These are analytical processes Idea Generating These are idea generating or creativity techniques Reflection / Dialogue These help groups to reflect on a situation . Combining Ideas These are types of clustering ideas . Selection / Prioritizing Processes These enable a group to select or prioritize a list of ideas . Assignments These are ways of making assignments to actions or areas of responsibility . Evaluation of Work These help a group analyze their work such a project Consensus These are techniques for reaching a consensus such as Sam Kaner’s decision ruler . Closings These are methods for closing meetings . Intervention Focus Check one or more of these if it is a intervention Difficult People and / or Situations These are techniques for dealing with difficult situations or people Directing Traffic These are used when more than one person wants to talk at the same time . Creativity These are activities that product creative ideas . Disagreements These are ways of dealing with disagreements Conflicts These are ways of dealing with conflicts that go beyond disagreements Contexts These are ways of setting the context for a session . Process Interventions These are techniques for intervening in groups processes Avoidance of Making Decisions These deal with groups who are refusing to make a decision either consciously or unconsciously . Deciding too Quickly These are ways of dealing with groups who are making decisions too quickly or without looking into the consequences . Undiscussable Topics These are techniques for raising issues that no one wants to talk about . Running in a Rut These are techniques for dealing with groups who go over the same ideas or arguments over and over . Little Group Participation These are ways of increasing group participation when it is low Silent Participant These are methods for dealing with people who seem to be not participating . Used as component of Some methods are normally used in specific processes and these processes are mentioned here ( this box is not used much ) . Recognizable Components These components of the technique that are recognizable as part of other methods . Types of Participants What kinds of participants normally participate in this kind of workshop ? ( this box is not used much ) Recommended Size of Group This is the optimal size of the group . If you don’t know put 12 – 25 Optimal Amount of Time needed This the amount of time to do the technique in normal groups the size mentioned above . If you don’t know say 30 to 90 minutes Level of Participation Normally this is high . Usual or Expected Outcomes These are the results of the workshop in concrete terms . Ideal Conditions These are the best circumstances . ( this box is not used much ) Potential Pitfalls Potential problems or things that can go wrong are put in this box . ( This box is not used much ) How is success evaluated This is the criteria for evaluating the success or failure of the session . ( This box is not used much ) Examples of successes and failures These are life examples and should be left blank if you don’t have any . Level of Difficulty to Facilitate Check one of the boxes below . No specific skills required Anyone who can works with a group should be able to do this method . 5 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Facilitation skills required Some skills are needed to facilitate this technique . Specialized skills required These techniques need specialist information if they are to be facilitated effectively . Type of Facilitator - Client Relationship ( This box is not used much ) but when it is it describes any special relationships that are needed for this technique to work well . Facilitator Personality Fit Not all facilitators fit well with some kinds of workshops . What kind of personality does the facilitator need ? Setting and Materials What are the normal room , table and chair setting for this session ? This would include things like white boards or overhead projectors Resources Needed These are things like forms , special equipment , etc . Pre - Work Required What needs to be done beyond the normal preparation ? This might include things like preparing charts or worksheets . Procedures These are the step by step procedures for the technique . This should include for example the opening and closing and any reflections Follow - Up Required Are there follow up sessions or activities that are necessary ? How flexible is the process ? Can the process be used in a variety of settings , topics and facilitators ? Developer Who developed this technique Derived from If it was gotten from somewhere else or is a modification of another method this should be stated here History of Development How the method was created and how it developed over time . Epistemological Framework What are the philosophic assumptions behind the technique ? ( This box is not used much ) ISBN numbers If the method is found in a book or referred to in a book put the ISBN number here References This should be a standard APA citation . License Model Check one of the below . Closed These methods are legal property and only the owners can use them . Licensed These techniques are licenses for other to use them . Open These techniques can be used by anyone but the user should mention the source of the method while using it . Free ( or unattributable ) These techniques are use widely and the developer is not known or is not concerned about recognition Website This is a website where the method is found or discussed . If there is none then use the IAFMD website Table 3 IAF Methods Database Comparing ThinkLets with IAF methods design patterns we find that : 1 ) A large number of new ThinkLets may be developed from the Database and some Database entries may be developed from ThinkLets . The Database needs to include tools / configuration as an expansion of reporting to provide for a more complete view of technological support . 2 ) ThinkLets are not designed to work at the Applications level of the Database new pattern languages can be developed at these levels . 3 ) The Template used for ThinkLets may inform the Template used for the Database and the reverse may also true . 4 ) ThinkLets are tool independent the Database entries that most easily correspond to ThinkLets are methods and interventions . The variety of methods reported in the database is a rich source of validation and possible extension of CE ThinkLet design patterns and patterns of interaction . 5 . The proposed architecture for redesign . The database is currently undergoing redesign to more adequately address the following questions : • What is the optimal way of describing a method so that a competent group leader can successfully use it ? • Can the IAF Methods Database incorporate the concept of ThinkLets into the database so that it is accessible to both traditional face - to - face and technology supported uses ? • What is the relationship between the application level and methods level in the database from a collaboration engineering perspective ? This is primarily a design requirements problem . We show how Alexander’s [ 1 ] concept of design patterns can help provide a template for sensible reporting that is consistent with current innovations in collaboration engineering [ 15 ] . The methods and models level in the database is most closely related to the concept of basic ThinkLets in collaboration engineering though research by deVreede , Kolfschoten and Briggs [ 8 ] suggests a full extension of the ThinkLet pattern language that could encompass applications , methods , and interventions . 6 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 The Level of Process list of Applications , Methods and Models , and Interventions classify methods into some 40 categories of methods . 5 . 1 . Application Layer : Action planning , Basic meeting facilitation , Basic Workshop Method , Team and Community Building , Conflict resolution , Model Building , Organizational development , Product development , Process development , Problem solving , Process improvement , Project planning , Strategic planning , System design , and Environmental Analysis . Figure 1 Facilitation Methods Database Design Architecture 5 . 2 . Thinklets Layer : Methods : Openings , Ice Breakers and Energizers , Sharing Information , Analysis , Idea Generating , Reflection / Dialogue , Combining Ideas , Selection / Prioritizing Processes , Assignments , Evaluation of Work , Consensus , and Closings . Interventions : Difficult People and / or Situations , Directing Traffic , Creativity , Disagreements , Conflicts , Contexts , Process Interventions , Avoidance of Making Decisions , Deciding too Quickly , Undiscussable Topics , Running in a Rut , Little Group Participation , and Silent Participant . 5 . 3 . Tools Layer : This layer does not exist in the current implementation but is a direct implication of the ThinkLet’s approach . The proposal is to incorporate other tool lists that exist into the IAFMD . This would , with the cooperation of the owner of existing lists , set up a section for tools and import the lists , including its categories . An editor role would be established as either one person or a small group . Registered users would be given permission to create tools and modify their own tools , while informing the editors of each mutation . The section would have a short introduction text explaining the editorial process and contribution procedures . While several hundred , if not more than a thousand , collaboration products are currently available in the marketplace , the selection of a given product as method tool is not a simple matter . Specific method execution requirements are listed in the database . These requirements map to tool affordances [ 18 ] . Tool affordances group into accepted tool categories , many of which are listed below . o For meeting support : • Web Conferencing ( WebEx , LiveMeeting ) • Audio Conferencing ( Skype , FreeConference . com ) • Video Conferencing ( CU - SeeMe , Elluminate ) • Text Conferencing , including Microblogging / IM / SMS ( AIM , Twitter ) • Desktop Sharing ( realVNC , TeamViewer ) • Mind Mapping ( MindMeister , MindJet ) • Group Support Systems ( ThinkTank , ynSite , Facilitate . com ) • Polling / Survey ( SurveyMonkey , Zoomerang ) • Wiki / Collaborative Writers ( Google Docs , PBWiki ) • Collaborative Markup ( ConceptShare , Flowchart . com ) o For Project Support : • Scheduling ( TimeBridge , AgreeADate ) • Task Management ( BaseCamp , @ task ) • Social Network ( Ning , HiveLive ) • Document Sharing ( Zoho Docs , OfficeZilla ) • Blogs ( Blogger , WordPress , Typepad ) While exemplar products 1 are listed in brackets above , the mapping of commercial product to tool category is problematic as many product vendors equip their offerings with functionality that crosses tool categories . For example , while Skype is known as an audio conferencing product , it also includes excellent text conferencing and limited video conferencing functionality . Skype add - ons support web conferencing . The database would be modified to create many - to - many links between IAFMD methods and tools in the new section . Setting those relations initially will be an initial research project , to create added value rather than confusion when starting from an empty set . As the tools sections grow and contributors discover linkages between methods and tools this section will become increasingly integrated into the database . A voting system would also be possible as well so users can sort tools on popularity or a double rating system : users’ votes and editors’ choice . There should be a communication plan as well to inform the community and attract people . 1 Two products are listed for each category to illuminate the description of the category . Many more viable products exist for each category , and most products cross categories . Wikipedia is a good source for lists of products in a given category . 7 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 5 . 4 . Additional Notes A design pattern for interventions is comparable to the design pattern for basic methods or ThinkLets . Design patterns for Applications however are more complex and are compositions of fundamental design patterns at the methods level . This makes the database a valuable research tool for identifying the interrelationships in successful practice between ThinkLets , but represents a challenge in interface design to successfully capture reported applications with sufficient clarity at the basic methods level . Practitioners are not accustomed to thinking about application level processes as linked repeatable patterns of basic interaction or ThinkLets . 5 . 5 . User Interface components The architecture also addresses two primary processes ; contributions to the database by practitioners and a query construction process for database users seeking usable techniques . The contribution process is detailed in Figure 2 . Originally , the Database was intended to be a community of facilitators interested in sharing techniques and insights about specific methods in order to improve the profession . While the number of users , those who sign up to the Database , is over 5000 and continues to grow at about 100 new users per month the number of suppliers , those who contribute to the Database , has been disappointing as there are only 120 suppliers and few of those contribute methods to the database . Figure 2 Contribution Process The group that has contributed the largest number of methods are the editors of the database who have added more than half . The next largest group is made up of students from The Hanze University of Applied Sciences , School of Communications and Media , Department of Intercultural Communications . This group has contributed about 110 methods . The rest have been from other facilitators . The query process is detailed in Figure 3 . The Database seems to be used for a number of reasons . Professional facilitators come in search of inspiration about a facilitation issues they face with a client . They are not interested in any specific method but simply browse through the various categories in search of ideas . Others are searching for a specific method to deal with a hole in a design they have . A seemingly small group puts together a complete program using methods from the database . About 25 % of the users are not professional facilitators but managers or team leaders who are looking for answers to specific meeting problems , such as increasing creativity in a group or a new icebreaker that has not been seen before by the group they have in mind . A final group are people who are doing research about facilitation methods , about the database or about the International Association of Facilitators . The Database Editors are interested in furthering research into methods and so a specific section has been created for research where discussions between researchers can take place . They also have access to the bibliography and other research done in conjunction with the Editors . User Query Interfaces Figure 3 User Interface Standard search in fields is the most common of the user’s queries . This search only looks in the Methods section of the Database . There is a Database wide search engine . The Key Word Search searches the entire Database including the Methods , Suppliers , and Bibliography sections . For researchers this has the potential of finding Methods that are related to books , articles , etc . and vice versa . “Schools of Thought” is a new concept based on the assumption that sets of methods share similar values and assumptions and these can be categorized . These methods are often developed by the same person or group of people . Suppliers can list methods that they use in their facilitation practice . It is also possible to search for suppliers that use the methods . The following are under development Business Questions Query suggests methods as answers to questions that managers have about running meetings . When the suggested method is rejected the Query engine suggests everything in the database that fits the criteria of the Query . Images search the Database for similar operating images that a method addresses . 8 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Cultural Perspective Queries search the Database along the lines of Hofstede’s [ 12 ] five dimensions of culture [ 2 ; 19 ] Figure 4 Query Process 6 . Summary of findings We developed a pattern language for methods that operates at three levels : application , ThinkLets and Tools . This pattern language is imbedded as the new proposed structure of the database . We identified several additional features necessary to completely capture methods in practice that can inform work on ThinkLets . The database is now consistent with the ThinkLet paradigm and we can extend both the types of patterns of interaction and the number of documented Thinklets . We also have a basis for further validation of patterns of interaction and potentially a richer classification scheme for patterns of interaction . Additional research is needed to : • Create an input interface that allows facilitation practitioners to report specific methods at the methods level that can be combined into Applications . • What is the Pattern Language of Interventions ( for example , what do you do when someone is monopolizing the communications channel ) ? 7 . References [ 1 ] . Alexander , C . ( 1979 ) . The Timeless Way of Building . New York : Oxford University Press . [ 2 ] . Baanstra , M . ( 2008 ) . " Improving the Quality of the IAF Methods Database " ( Masters Thesis ) Groningen , The Netherlands : University of Groningen . [ 3 ] . Berente , N . and K . Lyytinen ( 2006 ) . " The Iterating Artifact As a Fundamental Construct in Information System Design " , In Proceedings DESRIST , Claremont , CA : Claremont Graduate University . http : / / ncl . cgu . edu / designconference / DESRIST % 202006 % 20Pr oceedings / 6B _ 3 . pdf [ 4 ] . BlueOxen Research ( 2009 ) . " Pattern Repository " , http : / / collab . blueoxen . net / cgi - bin / wiki . pl ? PatternRepository [ 5 ] . Briggs , R . O . and G . J . de Vreed ( 2009 ) . ThinkLets : Building Blocks for Concerted Collaboration . [ 6 ] . Carlsson , S . A . ( 2006 ) . " Towards an Information Systems Design Research Framework : A Critical Realist Perspective " , In Proceedings DESRIST 2006 , Claremont , CA : Claremont Graduate University . http : / / ncl . cgu . edu / designconference / DESRIST % 202006 % 20Pr oceedings / 6B _ 1 . pdf [ 7 ] . Cunningham , W . and K . Beck ( 1988 ) . " Using a Pattern Language for Programming " , In OOPSLA ' 87 : ACM SIGPLAN Notices . [ 8 ] . De Vreed , G . - J . , G . L . Kolfschoten , and R . O . Briggs ( 2006 ) . " ThinkLets : a Collaboration Engineering Pattern Language " , International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology , ( 25 ) 2 / 3 , pp . 140 - 154 . [ 9 ] . de Vreede , G . J . , R . O . Briggs , and A . P . Massey ( 2009 ) . " Collaboration Engineering : Foundations and Opportunities : Editorial to the Special Issue on the Journal of the Association of Information Systems " , Journal of the Association for Information Systems , ( 10 ) 3 . [ 10 ] . Gregor , S . and D . Jones ( 2007 ) . " The Anatomy of a Design Theory " , Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( JAIS ) , ( 8 ) 5 , p . Article 19 . [ 11 ] . Hevner , A . R . , S . T . March , J . Park et al . ( 2004 ) . " Design Science in Information Systerms Research " , MIS Quarterly ( 28 ) 1 . [ 12 ] . Hofstede , G . ( 1991 ) . Cultures and Organiztions : Software of the Mind : Intercultural Cooperation and Its Importance for Survival . London : McGraw - Hill Book Company . [ 13 ] . Jenkins , J . C . ( 2008 ) . " IAF Methods Database " , http : / / www . iaf - methods . org / [ 14 ] . Jenkins , J . C . , Bootsman , P . , and Coerts , J . ( 2004 ) . " IAF Methods Database : Explanation of Taxonomy " , [ Computer software ] . Groningen , Netherlands . [ 15 ] . Kolfschoten , G . L . ( 2007 ) . Theoretical Foundations for Collaboration Engineering . Delf , Netherlands : Delft University of Technology . [ 16 ] . Kuhn , T . ( 1996 ) . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . [ 17 ] . Lightsmith , J . ( 2008 ) . " Facilitation Patterns " , http : / / facilitationpatterns . org [ 18 ] . Mittleman , D . , R . O . Briggs , J . Murphy et al . ( 2008 ) . " Toward a Taxonomy of Groupware Technologies " , In Omaha , NE : Collaboration Researchers International Workshop on Groupware . 9 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 [ 19 ] . Nessmar , J . ( 2009 ) . IAF - Cultural relevance of facilitation methods : A research study on how IAF Facilitation Methods Database can be classified according to cultural relevance ( Bachlors Thesis ) Groningen , The Netherlands : Hanze University of Applied Sciences . [ 20 ] . Simon , H . ( 1996 ) . The Sciences of the Artificial . ( Third Edition ed . ) Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 21 ] . Straus , D . and T . Layton ( 2002 ) . How to Make Collaboration Work : Powerful Ways to Build Consensus , Solve Problems , and Make Decisions . San Francisco : Berret - Koehler Publishers . [ 22 ] . Vahidov , R . ( 2006 ) . " Design Researcher ' s IS Artifact : a Representational Framework " , In Proceedings DESRIST 2006 , Claremont , CA : Claremont Graduate University . http : / / ncl . cgu . edu / designconference / DESRIST % 202006 % 20Pr oceedings / 2A _ 2 . pdf [ 23 ] . Van Duyne , D . , J . Landay , and J . Hong ( 2007 ) . The Design of Sites ( 2nd Ed . ) . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 10 Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010