Mutations in Human Dynamin Block an Intermediate Stage in Coated Vesicle Formation Alexander M . van der Bliek , * Thomas E . Redelmeier , * Hanna Damke , * Ellen J . Tisdale , * Elliot M . Meyerowitz , * and Sandra L . Schmid * * Division of Biology 156 - 29 , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , California 91125 ; * Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La JoUa , California 92037 Abstract . The role of human dynamin in receptor - mediated endocytosis was investigated by transient ex - pression of GTP - binding domain mutants in mam - malian cells . Using assays which detect intermediates in coated vesicle formation , the dynamin mutants were found to block endocytosis at a stage after the initia - tion of coat assembly and preceding the sequestration of ligands into deeply invaginated coated pits . Mem - brane transport from the ER to the Golgi complex was unaffected indicating that dynamin mutants specifically block early events in endocytosis . These results dem - onstrate that mutations in the GTP - binding domain of dynamin block Tfn - endocytosis in mammalian cells and suggest that a functional dynamin GTPase is re - quired for receptor - mediated endocytosis via clathrin - coated pits . ECEPTOR - mediated endocytosis occurs via the forma - tion of clathrin - coated vesicles and involves coat as - sembly , receptor recruitment , coated pit invagina - tion , and finally vesicle budding ( Smythe and Warren , 1991 ; Robinson , 1992 ; Schmid , 1993 ) . The major structural pro - teins of the coat , clathrin , and AP complexes have been well characterized ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Keen , 1990 ; Brodsky , 1988 ) . While proteins that regulate coated vesicle formation have not been identified ( Schmid , 1992 ) , a cell - free assay which reconstitutes reeeptor - mediated endocyto - sis has recently revealed a requirement for multiple GTP - binding proteins ( Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Dynamin , a GTP - binding protein first isolated from bo - vine brain tissue ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ; Obar et al . , 1990 ; Scaife and Margolis , 1990 ; Nakata et al . , 1991 ) is a strong candidate for a GTPase that acts early in endocytosis . Dynamin is a member of a subfamily of structurally related GTP - binding proteins which share considerable sequence homology ( 43 - 66 % ) in the amino - terminal GTPase domain , but more limited homology ( < 10 - 30 % ) in their COOH - terminal regions . Other members of this family ( for review see Collins , 1991 ) include the mammalian Mx - 1 related , interferon - inducible proteins which confer viral resistance ( Arnheiter and Meier , 1990 ) , MGM1 which plays a role in yeast mitochondrial DNA maintenance ( Jones and Fang - man , 1992 ) and VPSlp , a protein involved in vacuolar sort - Please address all correspondence to Dr . S . Schmid , Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , 10666 N . Torrey Pines Rd . , La Jolla , CA 92037 . Dr . van der Bliek ' s current address is Department of Biological Chemis - try , UCLA School of Medicine , Los Angeles , CA 90024 . ing in yeast ( Rothman et al . , 1990 ; Yeh et al . , 1991 ) . Whether these proteins have related functions or simply share a common GTPase domain driving divergent functions remains to be determined . Evidence for the role of dynamin in endocytosis came from the discovery that the Drosophila homologue of dyna - min is encoded by the shibire locus ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) . Adult flies with a mu - tation that causes the shibire gene product to be temperature sensitive exhibit rapid and reversible paralysis at elevated temperatures ( Grigliatti et al . , 1973 ) . Morphological analy - sis of nerve terminals from affected flies revealed a depletion of synaptic vesicles and an accumulation of membrane in - vaginations and coated pits at the cell surface ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) . Other shibire - derived tissue and cell lines are similarly affected , demonstrating that the defect is pleiotropic . Results from the fluid - phase uptake of morphological tracers also suggest a specific defect in endocytosis but not secretion ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Tsuruhara et al . , 1990 ) . However , a direct role for dynamin in receptor - mediated endocytosis has not been demonstrated in either Drosophila or mam - malian cells . The phenotypic analysis of the shibire mutation and the identity of the shibire gene product as dynamin present a paradox . Dynamin has been characterized in vitro as a microtubule - stimulated GTPase and a putative microtubule - based mechanochemical motor protein ( Shpetner and Val - lee , 1989 ; 1992 ) , although the latter activity has not been reproduced with highly purified protein ( Maeda et al . , 1992 ) . Several studies have shown that polymerized microtubules are not required during the early stages of endocytosis ( Oka © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 931081553111 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , Number 3 , August 1993 553 - 563 553 and Weigel , 1983 ; Morgan and Iacopetta , 1987 ) but are in - stead involved in later trafficking events along the endocytic pathway ( Matteioni and Kreis , 1987 ) . Thus , if dynamin is a microtubule - dependent GTPase , then the defect in early en - docytosis could be an indirect consequence of a block more distal in the endocytic pathway . This paradox can be resolved by identifying the specific stage where dynamin acts . To provide functional evidence for a direct role of dynamin in receptor - mediated endocytosis , we have used transient expression of mutant dynamin in HeLa cells . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin was followed using newly developed assays which enable detection of intermediates in coated vesicle formation . We show that transient expression of dynamin mutants containing an altered GTPase domain caused a marked decrease in the rate of endocytosis without affecting protein traffic along the exocytic pathway . Endocy - tosis was blocked at an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . These results provide the first biochemical evi - dence that dynamin is directly involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis and that the GTP - binding domain is required for its activity . Materials and Methods Materials Anti - Tfn receptor monoclonal antibody , D65 was a kind gift of I . S . Trow - bridge and S . White ( Salk Institute , San Diego , CA ) . Anti - clathrin mono - clonal antibody , X22 , and anti - c ~ - adaptin antibody , AP6 , were generous gifts of E M . Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco ) . Human diferric transferrin ( Tfn ) 1 was biotinylated as previously described ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . All other reagents were obtained from Sigma Chem . Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Molecular Analysis and Preparation of Constructs A human dynamin cDNA fragment had previously been isolated using Dro - sophila cDNA as a heterolngous probe ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . This fragment was used to screen a cDNA library made from human temporal cortex ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) after standard protocols ( Sam - brook et al . , 1989 ) . The newly isolated cDNAs were characterized by se - quence analysis using oligonucleotides synthesized on a Cyclone Plus DNA synthesizer ( Milligen / Bioseareh ) and Sequenase ( Un . States Biochem . Corp . , Cleveland , OH ) . For expression purposes , a linker with the optimal Kozak - consensus and an NcoI site at the AUG initiation codon was inserted into pBluescript ( Stratagene ) . A 1 , 200 - bp NcoI fragment with the 5 ' - part of human eDNA ( starting at the AUG - start codon ) was inserted into the NcoI site of the linker followed by selection of a clone with the proper orien - tation for expression . A 2 , 550 - bp BstXI - HindIH fragment with the Y - part of the cDNA was added to make the cDNA full - length . The Vaccinia ex - pression construct , pTM1 ( kindly provided by Dr . B . Moss ) , was modified to remove the existing AUG . Full - length human dynamin cDNA with the synthetic Kozak - consensus was re . cloned into the modified pTMl - vector using flanking SpeI and SalI sites . This is the " wild type " construct , called pTM1 - Hwt . Mutations were introduced as follows : a complementary pair of oligonucleotides in which the desired mutation had been incorporated was used in two different PCRs with Pfu polymerase ( Stratagene ) . Either of the two mutagenic oligos was combined with an appropriate up - stream or downstream primer yielding two PCR products that were then fused by PCR in a second step with the upstream and downstream primers , but without the mutagenic primers . Products of the fusogenic PCR reactions were cleaved with SacII to yield 1 , 350 bp fragments , which were then recloned into SacII - cut and dephosphorylated pTMl - wild - type construct . The recloned constructs were sequenced to identify mutants and to ensure that they contained only the intended mutations . Supercoiled plasmid DNA , necessary for transient expression , was isolated with alkaline lysis followed by CsCl - gradient purification ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . The cDNA that was 1 . Abbreviations used in thispaper : endo H , endoglycosidase H ; Tfn , trans - ferrin ; VSV - G , Vesicular Stomatitis virus G . chosen for the pTM1 - Hwt construct corresponds to the most prevalent COOH - terminal splice variant , i . e . , without an insert ( see Fig . 1 ) . The in - ternal splice variants were represented equally among the cDNAs ; pTM1 - Hwt has the second of the two in Fig . 1 . To confirm that the variants were products of alternative splicing , cross - hybridizing phage was isolated from a library of human lymphocyte ganomic DNA inserted in lambda DASH ( Stratagene ) . G - enomic EcoRI fragments were then subcloned into pBlue - script and the splice sites were sequenced using oligonncleotides generated while sequencing the cDNAs . RNA expression was analyzed by hybridizing a human multiple tissue Northern blot ( Clontech laboratories , Palo Alto , CA ) with a radiolabeled 1 , 400 - bp fragment of human dynamin eDNA cor - responding to the 5 " half of the mRNA . The blot was washed with a final wash at high stringency ( 0 . 2 × SSPE at 65 " C ) . The blot contained 2 ~ g poly ( A ) + RNA per lane with size markers of 9 . 5 , 7 . 5 , 4 . 4 , 2 . 4 , and 1 . 35 kb . Transfection Procedure HeLa cells were maintained in DMEM ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) supplemented with 10 % FBS and 100 U / ml each of penicillin and strep - tomycin in a 5 % humidified COz incubator . HeLa cells ( 1 . 5 × 106 ) were plated in 60 - mm dishes containing a coverslip the day before transfection . On occasion , cells were used 2 . 5 h after plating 1 . 5 × 106 eells / 60 - mm dish . Before infection , the cells were washed twice with DMEM , and then infected with vaecinia T7 RNA polymerase recombinant virus ( vTFT - 3 , Fuerst et al . , 1986 ) , at a multiplicity of 10 PFU / cell for 30 rain with inter - mittent rocking in a 37 " C incubator . The inoculum was removed and the cells transfected with 7 # g pTM1 plasmid DNA containing dynamin con - structs prepared as described above that had been previously mixed for 15 min at room temperature in 1 ml of DMEM and 20 # 1 of transfection reagent ( TransfectACE ) prepared as described ( Rose et al . , 1991 ) . 2 h after infec - tion , rifampicin ( 100 # g / ml final concentration ) was added to the cells and expression was allowed to proceed for the indicated times . Anti - Dynamin Antibodies and Western Analysis E . coli carrying the expression vector pETI ID containing a Drosophila dy - namin fragment ( residues 359 - 615 ) produced an abundant 30 - kD protein upon induction by IPTG . The protein was gel - purified , electroeluted , and used as antigen to generate polyclonal antibodies ( 748 ) from rabbits by stan - dard procedures . Serum from this rabbit contained an antibody immuno - reactive against the 30 - kD protein and a 100 - kD protein in HeLa cells and bovine brain extracts ( data not shown ) . The antibody also recognized recombinant wild - type and mutant molecules . For Western blot analysis , samples from the resuspended cells used in transport assays were lysed by the addition of 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS , containing 5 m _ M MgCI2 and 1 mM AEBSF ( Calbiochem , La Jolla , CA ) . The samples were pelleted to clear the nuclei , precipitated with 10 % " IV _ A , washed with ice cold acetone , resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer , and then analyzed by SDS - PAGE . The gels were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose , blocked with 5 % nonfat dry milk powder in TBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 incubated with a 1 : 1 , 500 dilution of the rabbit anti - dynamin antibody ( 748 ) followed by detection with an HRP - conjngated secondary antibody ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) , and then developed with ECL detection system ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , IL ) according to the manufacturer ' s directions . Signals from vari - ous exposure times were quantitated using a scanning densitometer ( Model GS300 , Hoefer Sci . Instrs . , San Francisco , CA ) connected to an IBM - XT with the integrating software ( Model GS350 , Hoefer Sei . Instrs . ) . Linearity was established using bovine brain cytosolie fractions to generate a standard curve . SubceUular Fractionation Cells from one 60 - mm dish were harvested at room temperature in PBS containing 5 mM EDTA and washed at 4 " C by centrifugation , and resuspended in 0 . 5 ml 0 . 25 M sucrose , 1 mM MgCt ~ , 2 mM EGTA , 25 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 . Cells were then lysed by rapid freezing in liquid nitro - gen , followed by slow thawing in a room temperature water bath . Soluble and particulate fractions were obtained after centrifugation for 30 min at 50 K rpm ( 110 k g ) in a TLAI00 . 2 ( Beckman Instrs . Inc . , Fullerton , CA ) rotor . Pellets were resuspended in 0 . 5 ml and equal amounts of pellet and supernatant fractions were solubilized in 0 . 5 % TX - 100 and precipitated with 10 % ' IV _ A . SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis were performed as described above . Assay of Tfn Endocytosis After the appropriate period of protein expression ( usually 5 h ) , the cells The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 554 were washed I x in dPBS , harvested at room temperature in dPBS contain - ing 5 mM EDTA , pelleted in a Beckman J6 - B centrifuge at 1 , 000 rpm , and resuspended in dPBS containing 1 mM CaCI2 , 1 mM MgCI2 , 5 mM glu - cose , and 0 . 2 % BSA . For endocytosis assays , aliquots of cells were in - cubated at 37°C for the indicated times in the presence of BSST ( 2 / zg / ml final concentration ) . The cells were then returned to ice , pelleted , and the supernatant aspirated . Latency to MesNa and avidin was determined as pre - viously described ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Internalized Tfn was expressed as the percent of total surface - bound " lYn . The level of Tfn internalization was normalized to the amount of internalization for mock - infected cells to account for day to day variation ; however , the rate and extent of internalization after 5 h of vaccinia infection in the presence of rifampicin was typically between 60 - 90 % of that observed for control cells which had not been infected . Assay of ER - to - Golgi Transport HeLa ceils were infected and transfected as described above using 5 / ~ g of dynamin containing plasmid and 5 / ~ g of a plasmid encoding Vesicular Sto - matitis virus G ( VSV - G ) protein ( pAR - G , Tisdale et al . , 1992 ) . After the transfection period , the cells were pulse - labeled for 10 min in methionine - free media containing 20 / ~ Ci TRANS 35S - label , and then chased for 1 h in DMEM / 10 % FCS . The chase was terminated by the addition of lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCI , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM PMSF ) and VSV - G protein was immunoprecipitated using a monoclonal antibody to VSV - G ( clone 8 ( 35 ) . Immune precipitates were washed , boiled , and eluted VSV - G protein was digested with endoglycosidase H ( endo H ) ( Boehringer Mannheim , Indianapolis , IN ) , and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and fluorography ( Tisdale , 1992 ) . Indirect lmmunofluorescence Coverslips containing transfected cells were incubated with 4 t ~ g / ml anti - Tfn receptor monoclonal antibody ( D65 ) for 30 min at 37°C in dPBS + + ( with 1 mM CaCI2 , 1 mM MgCI2 ) containing 5 mM glucose and 0 . 2 % BSA . Ex - cess antibody was removed by washing at 40C and the cells were incubated with 50 ttg / ml avidin in dPBS / BSA . Excess avidin was removed by washing and the cells were fixed for 20 rain at room temperature with 2 . 5 % formal - dehyde . Internalized biotinylated - HTR - D65 was detected by permeabilizing the fixed cells with 0 . 05 % saponin and probing with Texas red - conjugated ultraavidin ( Leinco Technologies , 2 ttg / rnl ) in permeabilization buffer ( PBS + + / 0 . 05 % saponin and 4 % goat serum ) . The ceils were then washed extensively and mounted in Aqua - Polymount ( Folysciences , Warrington , PA ) and viewed under a BioRad confocal scanning microscope . For indirect immunofluorescence of coat proteins , cells were fixed for 30 rain in 2 . 5 % formaldehyde , permeabilized as described above , and in - cubated with primary antibody ( 5 # g / ml AP . 6 , 20 # g / ml X22 ) in perrneabili - zation buffer for 30 - 60 rain at room temperature . Primary antibodies were visualized with Texas red goat anti - mouse IgG secondary reagents ( Molec - ular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Results Molecular Analysis of Human Dynamin Human dynamin cDNA was cloned for use in the functional studies in HeLa cells described below , to avoid problems that might have arisen with a heterologous expression system . A human brain cDNA library was probed with radiolabeled Drosophila shibire cDNA , followed by reprobing with the human fragments that were initially obtained . A cDNA spanning the entire coding region of the human shibire homologue was constructed from two overlapping frag - ments , and then sequenced . The deduced protein is 864 amino acids of which 99 % are identical to rat dynamin ( Fig . 1 ) . Both human and rat sequences are similar to the Dro - sophila shibire sequence ( 69 % ) and this similarity extends throughout the molecule , strongly suggesting that function is conserved . Similar to rat and Drosophila , human dynamin has an NH2 - terminal GTPase domain that is highly con - served in VPSlp , MX - proteins , and MGMlp . The remainder of the molecule is divergent compared to these other family members and includes a proline / arginine - rich COOH - ter - minal domain specific to the dynamin homologues . Analysis of a large collection of cDNAs revealed alterna - tive splicing at two positions in the coding region ( shown in Fig . 1 ) . This has not been reported for rat dynamin , but is comparable to the alternative splicing found in Drosophila ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) . Each human variant cDNA was found in multiple copies and the points of divergence correspond to exon - intron bound - aries that include splice - site consensus sequences in the cor - responding genomic DNA ( data not shown ) . Thus it is un - likely that these represent cloning artifacts or incomplete processing . The first variation is the replacement of a 139 - nt exon in the middle domain by an alternative exon of equal length . These two exons were equally represented in the cloned cDNA collection . Both exons encode 47 - amino acid segments which differ by 15 amino acids ( Fig . 1 ) . The second splice variation occurs at a position close to the COOH - terminus and involves the insertion of mini - exons . Surprisingly , Drosophila RNA is also alternatively element I MGNRGMED L I P LVNRLQDAFSAI GQNAD LDLPQ IAWGGQSAGKS SVLENFVGRDF LPRGSG IVTRRP LVLQLVNATTEYAEF LHCKGKK 90 S element II FTDFEEVRLE I EAETDRVTGTNKG I SPVP I NLRVYSP HVLNLTLVD LP GMTKVP VGDQP P D IEFQ I RDMLMQFVTKENCL I LAVS PANSD 180 element Ill LANSDALKVAKEVDPQGQRT I GV I TKLD LMDEGTDARDVLENKLLP LRRGY I GVVNRSQKD I DGKKD ITAALAAERKFF LSHP S YRHLAD 270 x RMGTP YLQKVLNQQLTNH I RDTLP GLRNKLQSQLLS I EKEVEE YKNFRP DDPARKTKALLQMVQQFAVDFEKR I EGSGDQ I DTYEL SGGA 360 D internal variants S RTGLFTPDLAFEATVKKQVQKLKEP S I KCVDMVVSELTAT I RKCSEK RINRIFHERFPFELVKMEFDEKELRREISYAIKNIHGI • • • • • • • • • • • . . LQQYP 450 RTGLFTPDMAFET I VKKQVKKI REPCLKCVDMV I SELI STVRQCTKK RLREEMERI VTTH IREREGRTKEQVMLL I D I ELAYMNTNHEDF I GFANAQQRSNQMNKKKTSGNQDE I LVI RKGWLT INN I G IMKGGSKE 540 yWFVLTAENLSWYKDDEEKEKKYMLSVDNLKLRDVEKGFMS SKH IFALFNTEQRNVYKDYRQLELAC ETQEEVD SWKASF LRAGVYPERV 630 GDKEKASETEENGSD SFMHSMDPQLERQVE T I RNLVD SYMAIVNKTVRDLMPKT IMHLMINNTKEF I F SE LLAN LYSCGDQNTLMEESAE 720 QAQRRDEMLRMYHALKEALS I I GN INTTTVSTPMPPP VDD SWLQVQSVP AGRRSP TS SPTP QRRAPAVPpARP GSRGPAP Gpp PAGSALG 810 D C - terminal variants mRNA has SRSGQASP SRPESPRPPFDL 864 no insert GAPPVP SRP GASP DP FGPPPQVP SRPNRAPPGVP SQP I GSGKS IF S 856 4 bp insert RITISDP 851 37 bp insert Figure 1 . Deduced amino acid sequence of human dynamin . Sequences that are conserved within the GTPase superfam - ily are indicated as element I , II , and IlL The five amino acids that are different in rat dynarnin are indicated above or below the main sequence in bold type . The two points of alternative splicing are shown as alternate translation . In the internal variants a segment of 47 amino acids is replaced . At the COOH - terminus , the prevalent variant has no in - sert , the second variant has a 4 - bp insert that changes the reading frame , and the third variant has a short insert with its own stop codon . van der Bliek et al . Dynamin Functions in Endocytosis 555 of expression in the brain may reflect a high demand for membrane retrieval at the synapse . Dynamin expression in all tissues , at various levels , is consistent with the pleiotropic phenotype found in Drosophila mutants ( Poodry et al . , 1973 ) . Figure 2 . RNA blot analysis of human dynamin expression . An RNA blot containing poly ( A ) + RNA from human heart , brain , placenta , lung liver , skeletal muscle , kidney , and pancreas was hy - bridized with radiolabeled cDNA corresponding to the 5 ' - half of the dynamin sequence . The size of the dynamin RNAs was deter - mined with an RNA ladder . A comparison between the high level of expression in brain and lower levels in other tissues was made using different exposure time ( 30 min vs 14 h ) . spliced at this position , although it is through replacement of alternative Y - exons rather than through the insertion of mini - exons ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . In a col - lection of 16 human cDNAs we found four variations at this position : ( 1 ) without a mini - exon ( in 10 cDNAs ) , ( 2 ) with a 4 - bp insertion which results in a frameshift and thus a differ - ent COOH - terminus ( in 4 cDNAs ) , ( 3 ) a 37 - bp insertion which contains a stop codon ( in 1 eDNA ) , and ( 4 ) the same insertion encoding an identical COOH - terminus but with ad - ditional noncoding sequence ( in 1 eDNA ) . The 37 - bp inser - tion is present in the published sequence of rat dynamin ( Obar et al . , 1990 ) . It seems likely that the other splice vari - ants will also be found in rat . The 3 ' - untranslated sequence is common to all cDNAs . The eDNA that we have used for the experiments described below was the most abundant in the collection . It has the second of the two internal variants shown in Fig . 1 and lacks the COOH - terminal mini - exon . Human dynamin is expressed in all tissues that were exam - ined by RNA blot analysis ( Fig . 2 ) . The RNA levels are simi - lar in most tissues , except in the human brain where it is at least 30 - fold higher . High levels of dynamin expression were also found in rat brain ( Seaife and Margolis , 1990 ; Nakata et al . , 1991 ) and in the Drosophila nervous system ( Chen et al . , 1992 ; Ding , D . , and A . M . v . d . Bliek , unpublished results ) . Human dynamin RNAs are 4 , 200 nt , except in the brain which has a 3 , 900 - nt and a 4 , 600 - nt transcript . These differences in length are not accounted for by the known pat - terns of alternative splicing and possibly reflect the use of al - ternative transcriptional initiation sites . The elevated levels Transient Expression of Dynamin in HeLa Cells To determine if dynamin is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in HeLa cells , we expressed wild - type and mu - tant human dynamin constructs using a transient expression system ( Fuerst et al . , 1986 , 1989 ) . The generation and func - tional analysis of trans - dominant mutations in several GTP - ase family members has established the validity of this ap - proach ( Der et al . , 1988 ; Bucci et al . , 1992 ; van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ; Tisdale et al . , 1992 ) . Site - directed mutagenesis was performed to introduce two mutations which signifi - candy reduce nucleotide - binding affinities in all members of the GTPase superfamily so far studied ( Fig . 3 a and refer - ences therein ) . The two mutations are designated element I ( K44 - - ' A ) and element HI ( K2° ~ - , D ) and involve replacing critical lysine residues required for nucleofide binding . Iden - tical results were obtained with both mutants ( data not shown ) and so studies presented here focus on the element I muta - tion . This nucleotide - binding element is also conserved in ATPases ( Walker et al . , 1982 ; Fry et al . , 1986 ) . While GTP binding has not been directly measured for the transiently expressed wild - type and mutant dynamin molecules , the conserved lysine residue directly interacts with the bound nucleotide and its mutagenesis reduces both ATP ( Meluh and Rose , 1990 ) and GTP ( Bourne et al . , 1990 , 1991 ) binding . For expression studies , HeLa cells were first infected with vaccinia T7 RNA polymerase recombinant virus ( vTF7 - 3 , Fuerst et al . , 1986 ) , and then transfected with the expression vector pTM1 containing a eDNA fragment encoding wild - type or mutant dynamin . Rifampicin was added to the cul - ture medium to block maturation of the vaccinia capsid and to reduce vaccinia - associated cytotoxic events ( Moss et al . , 1969 ) . Transfection efficiencies ranged from 25 to 60 % . Since an antibody capable of recognizing dynamin by im - munofluorescence was not available , transfection efficiencies were assessed by immunofluorescence of cells transfected with VSV - G protein in parallel ( data not shown , see Tisdale et al . , 1992 ) . Expression of mutant and wild - type dynamin was moni - tored by Western blot analysis using a rabbit polyclonal anti - body ( 748 ) , which is monospecific for dynamin . A 100 - kD protein , corresponding to dynamin , was de - tected in nontransfected HeLa cells and was substantially in - creased in cells transfected with either the wild - type or the mutant dynamin constructs ( Fig . 3 b ) . This band was not de - tected by preimmune serum ( data not shown ) . Detection of a minor band at (cid:127)45 kD was variable and levels of this pro - tein were unaffected by infection or transfection . Dynamin expression was observed 3 h after transfection and continued to accumulate over 12 h . By 5 h after transfection , both wild - type and mutant dynamin accumulated in the cell popula - tion to 3 . 5 - 14 - fold higher than endogenous levels ( average ~ 7 . 5 - fold ) . Subcellular fracfionation of HeLa cells in isotonic sucrose indicated that dynamin was approximately equally distrib - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 556 uted between the particulate and the soluble fraction ( Fig . 3 c , lanes a ) as determined by densitometric analysis ( see Materials and Methods ) . This distribution was similar to that reported for brain tissue and PC12 cells ( Scaife and Mar - golis , 1990 ) . Tubulin served as a control for the almost quan - titative release of soluble proteins . The distribution of dyna - min was unaltered in virally infected and mock - transfected cells ( Fig . 3 c , lanes b ) . At high levels of expression ( (cid:127)13 - fold over endogenous ) , the amount of sedimentable wild - type dynamin increased ~ 4 - fold ( Fig . 3 c , lanes c ) , while most of the excess dynamin was present in the soluble pool . Similar results were obtained with mutant dynamin except that the amount of sedimentable dynamin was approximately eightfold over endogenous ( Fig . 3 c , lanes d ) . Lysis under higher salt conditions results in complete redistribution of dynamin into the soluble pool ( data not shown ) . These results suggest that dynamin interacts peripherally with a saturable component on membranes and that this interaction might be modulated by GTP binding . Expression of Mutant Dynamin Inhibits Receptor - mediated Endocytosis of Transferrin To follow receptor - mediated endocytosis in transfected HeLa cells , Tfn was biotinylated via a cleavable disulphide bond ( the complex is referred to as BSST ) for use as a ligand . Internalization was measured by following the latency of transferrin to the low molecular weight reducing agent , MesNa ( / ~ - mercaptoethane sulfonic acid ) as previously de - scribed ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . The ex - periment presented in Fig . 4 demonstrates that both the rate and extent of endocytosis of transferrin were inhibited by > 40 % in cells overexpressing mutant dynamin as compared to mock - transfected cells ( i . e . , vaccinia - infected cells treated with TransfectAce ) . HeLa cells overexpressing wild - type dy - namin showed neither inhibition nor stimulation of endocy - tosis over mock - infected cells , indicating that the level of dy - namin expression was not rate - limiting . In general , mock transfection or transfection with wild - type dynamin resulted Figure 3 . Transient expression of wild - type and mutant dynamin constructs in HeLa cells . ( A ) Point mutations in the nucleotide - binding region of dynamin family members which interfere with function . Shown are the domain structure of dynamin and the three GTP - binding elements conserved among all members of the GTPase superfamily . The invariant lysines in element Iand element III interact directly with bound nucleotides ( Pal et al . , 1990 ) . Two dynamin mutations , K44 - * A in element I and K2° ~ - ' D , predicted to have impaired guanine - nucleotide - binding affinities were gen - erated by site - directed mutagenesis . Analogous point mutations shown to result in a severely impaired guanine - nucleotide binding in dynamin family members are boxed . References to the mutations are as follows : SRP54 , Bemstein , H . , and Walter , P . , personal com - munication ; SRP - Ro ~ , Rapiejko and Gilmore , 1992 ; Ha - ras , Der et al . , 1988 ; Sigal et al . , 1986 . ( B ) Western blot analysis of wild - type and mutant dynamin overexpression . Vaccinia - infected cells trans - fected with a plasmid encoding wt or mutant constructs of dynamin were allowed to express protein for 5 h , harvested and processed for Western blot analysis as described in Materials and Methods . Lane a , a ' untreated cells ; lane b , b ' , mock - transfected ceils ( which were infected with vaccinia virus and transfected without plasmid ) ; lane c , c ' , cells transfected with wild - type dynamin ; and lanes d , d ' cells transfected with the element I mutation , a - d , 10 # g of cell lysate protein , a ' - d ' , 50 # g of cell lysate protein . ( C ) Subcellular distribution of endogenous and overexpressed dynamin . Control , mock - transfected , and transfected cells were lysed by a freeze - thaw cycle and lysates were resolved into particulate and soluble frac - tions as described in Materials and Methods . Equal amounts of soluble ( S ) and particulate ( P ) fractions were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . Tubulin , detected with a polyclonal anti - tubulin antibody ( ICN , Irvine , CA ) was used as a control to monitor release of soluble contents . Lanes a , untreated cells ; lanes b , mock - transfected cells ; lanes c , cells transfected with wild - type dynamin ; and lanes d , cells transfected with the element I mutation . van der Bliek et al . Dynamin Functions in Endocytosis 557 100 " / D 80 i ° 20 ' 0 I I I 0 5 10 15 Time ( min ) Figure 4 . Inhibition ofTfn endocytosis caused by expression of mu - tant dynamin . HeLa cells were harvested after 5 h of protein ex - pression and assayed for Tfn internalization as described in Ma - terials and Methods . ( D ) untreated cells ; ( o ) mock - transfected cells ; ( o ) cells transfected with wild - type dynamin ; and ( A ) cells transfected with mutant dynamin . In this experiment , the level of overexpression of transfected dynamin was six - fold over endog - enous . in partial reduction of endocytosis as compared to untreated cells . While significant inhibition of receptor - mediated en - docytosis was always observed in cells overexpressing mu - tant dynamin molecules , the extent of inhibition varied . In all experiments ( n = 12 ) , the extent of inhibition as com - pared to cells expressing equivalent levels of wild - type dyna - min was 38 + 13 % ( range 19 - 59 % ) . A correlation between the extent of inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis and the levels of expression of mutant dynamin molecules in the transfected population is shown in Fig . 5 . Overexpression from the transfected dynamin con - structs could be detected at 3 h after transfection and dyna - min continued to accumulate in the transfected cell popula - tion over the 5 - h time course shown ( Fig . 5 B ) . At the indicated times , cells expressing either wild - type or mutant dynamin were harvested and incubated for 15 min with BSST . As can be seen in Fig . 5 A ( solid bars ) , the inhibition of Tfn internalization relative to mock - transfected controls increased with increasing levels of expression of mutant dy - namin . The degree of inhibition of receptor - mediated en - docytosis in cells overexpressing mutant dynamin was 31 , 59 , and 65 % at 3 , 4 , and 5 h after transfection , respectively . At 5 h after transfection , cells expressing wt dynamin ex - hibited partially reduced endocytosis , possibly due to pro - longed viral infection . Inhibition due to expression of mutant dynamin is therefore measured relative to cells expressing wt dynamin . These results demonstrate that expression of mu - tant dynamin greatly reduces receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . lmmunofluorescence Assay Reveals a Subpopulation of Cells with Severely Inhibited Endocytosis The most likely explanation for the partial block in endocy - 60 2O 0 3 ( I ) _ . 2 & 4 5 3 4 5 Time Post - transfection ( h ) Figure 5 . Time course of dynamin expression and inhibition of en - docytosis . Vaccinia - virus infected HeLa cells were transfected with either wild - type dynamin ( striped bars ) or ele I GTP - binding do - main mutant dynamin ( solid bars ) , and incubated for the indicated times before harvesting . ( A ) Inhibition ofTfn endocytosis expressed relative to the level of endocytosis in mock - transfected cells at 3 h was determined as described in Materials and Methods . ( B ) Dyna - min expression relative to endogenous levels was determined by Western blotting analysis as described in Materials and Methods . tosis in the cell population , given that transfection efficien - cies are 25 - 60 % , is cell - to - cell variability in the levels of dy - namin expression . For this reason , an immunofluorescence assay was developed to demonstrate that receptor - mediated endocytosis is strongly inhibited in a subpopulation of cells . In this single cell assay , transfected HeLa cells expressing mutant and wild - type dynamin were incubated for 30 min at 37°C with a biotinylated - monoclonal antibody ( HTR - D65 ) which recognizes the ectodomain of the Tfn receptor ( White et al . , 1990 ) . Unlike BSST , this antibody ligand will not be recycled and will accumulate in cells capable of efficient en - docytosis ( Weissman et al . , 1986 ) . Subsequently , the cells were washed and incubated for 30 min at 4°C with avidin to mask accessible biotin residues . The cells were washed , fixed , permeabilized , and incubated with Texas - red - con - jugated - avidin to detect the internalized , biotinylated - anti - TfR antibody . These results illustrated in Fig . 6 , demonstrate that mock - transfected cells ( Fig . 6 ; A ) or transfected cells overexpressing wild - type dynamin ( Fig . 6 ; B ) showed effi - cient and uniform internalization of receptor - bound anti - body . In marked contrast , a subpopulation of transfected cells expressing the mutant dynamin failed to internalize any detectable anti - TfR rnAbs ( Fig . 6 , C and D , arrowheads ) . The extent of inhibition determined biochemically corres - ponded to the fraction of cells unable to internalize HTR - D65 as detected by immunofluorescence . For example , in two experiments in which endocytosis was inhibited in cells expressing mutant dynamin by 29 and 37 % as compared to cells expressing wild - type dynamin , 23 and 32 % of ' ~ 400 cells counted for each condition showed inhibited endocyto - sis by immunofluorescence . Taken together , these assays provide strong evidence that functional dynamin is required for endocytosis of the Tfn receptor . Mutant Dynamin Blocks an Intermediate Stage in Coated Vesicle Formation We have previously shown that early and late stages in coated vesicle formation can be distinguished by determining the in - accessibility of bound ligand either to bulky probes such as The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 558 Figure 6 . Complete inhibition of Tfn - receptor internaliza - tion in a subpopulation of cells expressing mutant dynamin . Cells grown , infected , and transfected on coverslips as described in Materials and Methods were allowed to in - ternalize surface bound bi - otinylated anti - Tfn - R anti - body , HTR - D65 , for 30 min at 37 " C . Residual surfaeebound biotinylated antibody was masked with avidin , cells were fixed , permeabilized , and internalized HTR - D65 was subsequently detected with a Texas - red - conjugated ultra - avidin as described in Materials and Methods . Mock - transfected cells ( A ) and cells expressing wild - type dynamin ( B ) showed uni - formly high levels of intracel - lular HTR - D65 . In contrast , a subpopulation of ceils trans - fected with ele I GTP - binding domain mutant dynamin ( C and D ) were incapable of in - ternalizing detectable HTR - D65 ( open arrowheads ) . The level of inhibition determined biochemically in this experi - ment was 38 % over wild - type . avidin or antibodies , or to small probes such as MesNa . In - ternalization of biotinylated ligands into coated vesicles renders them inaccessible to both large and small probes ; however , ligands sequestered into deeply invaginated coated pits become inaccessible to avidin while remaining acces - sible to MesNa ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ; Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Under normal conditions , the rate and extent of endocytosis as measured using the two probes is identical . However , in cells depleted of ATE membrane fission is selectively blocked resulting in fivefold greater sequestration from avidin as compared to MesNa ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) . These two probes were used to determine the stage at which coated vesicle formation was blocked in cells ex - pressing mutant dynamin . The results , illustrated in Fig . 7 , demonstrate that the sequestration of Tfn into deeply invagi - nated coated pits was as effectively inhibited as Tfn internali - zation in HeLa cells expressing mutant dynamin . These ex - periments suggest that dynamin activity is required for a relatively early stage of endocytosis , preceding both coated pit invagination and the membrane fission event leading to coated vesicle formation . The effect of overexpression of dynamin mutants on coat assembly , an earlier stage of endocytosis , was examined by indirect immunofluorescence of the AP2 complex , a major plasma membrane coat protein . The results are shown in Fig . 8 . The punctate staining pattern characteristic of cell sur - face - coated pits was uniformly observed in untreated cells ( Fig . 8 ; A ) and was unaltered in transfected cells expressing 120 - 100 ' 80 ' 60 ' 40 ' 20 0 0 O I I I 5 10 15 Time ( rain ) Figure 7 . Expression of mutant dynamin blocks Tfn internalization at an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . Ceils express - ing either ( o , e ) wild - type dynamin or de I GTP - binding domain mutant dynamin ( zx , A ) were harvested after an 8 - h expression and incubated with BSST for the indicated times . The extent of Tfn in - ternalization was assessed either by MesNa - resistance ( e , A ) or avidin accessibility ( o , zx ) as described in Materials and Methods . van der Bliek et al . Dynamin Functions in Endocytosis 559 either wild - type ( Fig . 8 , B ) or mutant dynamin ( Fig . 8 , C ) . This distribution was uniformly observed throughout the population even though endocytosis of Tfn in these cells was 40 % inhibited . The distribution of clathrin , as detected by indirect immunofluorescence was similarly unaffected ( data not shown ) . These results are consistent with the accumula - tion of coated pits seen by EM of Drosophila shibire mutants ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) and suggest that the initiation of coat assembly is unaltered by mutant dynamin . Mutant Dynamin Does Not Inhibit Transport from ER to the Golgi Complex Proteins involved in vesicular transport could be specific to a single step or could participate in multiple membrane trafficking events ( Rothman and Orci , 1992 ) . To determine whether mutant dynamin had a specific effect on the endo - cytic pathway , we investigated the consequence of its overex - pression on the secretory pathway . Transport along the early part of the secretory pathway was monitored by cotransfect - ing vaccinia - infected HeLa cells with T7 - expression con - structs encoding VSV - G and constructs encoding wild - type or mutant dynamin . VSV - G which serves as a marker for transport , acquires two endoglycosidase H ( endoH ) - sensitive N - linked oligosaccharide chains in the ER that are processed to endoH - resistant forms upon transport to the cis / medial Golgi compartments . The results presented in Fig . 9 demon - strate that pulse - labeled VSV - G was quantitatively ( > 90 % ) converted to the endoH resistant form after a 60 - min chase . The extent of transport to the Golgi was unaffected in cells cotransfected with either wild - type or mutant dynamin con - structs . In parallel experiments , endocytosis was inhibited by 30 - - 40 % ( data not shown ) . Preliminary immunofluorescence showed an unaltered distribution of VSV - G protein in cells expressing mutant and wild - type dynamin suggesting that export from the Golgi and delivery to the cell surface was also unaffected ( data not shown ) . More thorough examina - tion of the effects of dynamin on post - Golgi trafficking to the cell surface or to lysosomes awaits the generation of sta - ble transformants . These results rule out the possibility of nonspecific cytotoxic effects and indicate that mutant dyna - min expression causes a specific reduction in the early stages of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Discussion Dynamin Is Required for Receptor - mediated Endocytosis We have shown that receptor - mediated endocytosis is in - hibited in mammalian cells that overexpress mutant dyna - min . Using assays which enable detection of intermediates in coated vesicle formation , the dynamin mutants were found to block endocytosis at a stage preceding the seques - tration of ligands into deeply invaginated coated pits . The distribution of clathrin and APs , the major coat constituents , was unaffected in cells overexpressing these dynamin mu - tants , suggesting that the block follows coat assembly . These results demonstrate that mutations in the GTP - binding do - main of dynamin block Tfn - endocytosis in mammalian cells , suggesting that a functional dynamin GTPase is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis via clathrin - coated pits . Figure 8 . The distribution of c ~ - adaptins is unaffected by overex - pression of mutant dynamin . The distribution of ct - adaptins was de - termined by indirect immunofluorescenee using the AP . 6 mAb as described in Materials and Methods . ( A ) mock - transfected cells ; ( B ) ceils expressing wild - type dynamin ; ( C ) cells expressing mu - tant dynamin . The level of inhibition determined bioehemically in this experiment was 40 % over wild - type . The mutations constructed in elements I and III of the dy - namin GTP - binding domain were predicted , by analogy to ms ( Sigal et al . , 1986 ; Der et al . , 1988 ) , SRP - R ot - subunit ( Rapiejko and Gilmore , 1992 ) , and SRP54 ( Bernstein , H . , and P . Walter , personal communication ) to reduce its affinity for both GTP and GDP . Here we report that point mutations in dynamin predicted to reduce GTP - binding have a domi - nant negative effect on endocytosis when overexpressed in mammalian cells . Interestingly , a number of mutations in the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 560 Figure 9 . Dynamin mutants do not inhibit VSV - G transport between the ER and the Golgi stack . Vaccinia - infected cells were transfected with a plasmid containing the indicated dynamin construct and a plasmid encoding VSV - G protein ( pAR - ts ) . Conversion of pulse - labeled VSV - G protein from an EndoH sensitive form found in the ER to an EndoH resistant form associated with the Golgi complex was determined as described in Materials and Methods . GTP - binding domain of VPSlp , a dynamin - related protein in yeast , including some which do not affect GTP - binding , have dominant negative effects on vacuolar sorting ( Vater et al . , 1992 ) . This result supports the importance of the GTPase domain for dynamin function . In contrast to the stimulatory effect of overexpression of the small GTP - binding proteins rab5 ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) and rab4 ( van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ) on endocytosis in mammalian cells , overexpression of wild - type dynamin had no detectable effect . This result sug - gests that the level of dynamin is not normally " rate - limiting " for endocytosis in mammalian cells . Dynamin was originally identified as a microtubule - stimulated GTPase ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 , 1992 ; Maeda et al . , 1992 ) , however the significance of this associa - tion is unclear ( Vallee , 1992 ) . Drugs which influence the po - lymerization or depolymerization of microtubules do not al - ter the rate or extent of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Oka and Weigel , 1983 ; Morgan and Iacopetta , 1987 ) . Our find - ing that dynamin is required for receptor - mediated endo - cytosis in mammalian cells is therefore inconsistent with its previously suggested role as a microtubule - based mech - anochemical motor ( Shpetner and Vailee , 1989 ) . Recent results have shown that while highly purified preparations of dynamin retain their microtubule - stimulated GTPase activ - ity , they lack microtubule - based motor activity ( Maeda et al . , 1992 ) . Given our results , it remains likely that other , as yet unidentified proteins or protein complexes regulate dyna - min GTPase activity in vivo . Overexpression of mutant dynamin appeared to spe - cifically inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis : transport of VSV - G protein from the ER to the Golgi was unaffected and preliminary results suggested that delivery to the cell surface was also unaffected . Given the incomplete inhibition in these transient transfection assays , more thorough analysis of the effects of overexpression of these dynamin mutants on other vesicular trafficking pathways , including fluid - phase endocy - tosis , receptor - recycling , post - Golgi trafficking , and lyso - somal targeting will await the generation of inducible stably transformed cell lines . The Shibire Phenotype and the Role of Dynamin in Endocytosis Dynamin was first linked to endocytosis through the discov - ery that the Drosophila homologue of dynamin is encoded by the shibire gene ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) . Shibire was identified earlier as a muta - tion that causes temperature sensitive paralysis in adult flies ( Grigliatti et al . , 1973 ) and was shown to affect development if the temperature was shifted at a critical time ( Poodry et al . , 1973 ) . Evidence suggesting that shibire affects endocy - tosis has come largely through morphological studies which have shown that conditional paralysis correlates with a de - pletion of synaptic vesicles , and a concomitant increase in coated pits at nerve endings ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ) . In other cell types , for example , nephrocytes ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ) or oocytes ( Kessel et al . , 1989 ) , shift to the nonpermissive temperature also leads to the apparent disappearance of the endosomal compart - ment and an increase in cell surface area , reflected by the for - mation of large membrane infoldings . Coated pits , which ap - pear normal , are often seen at the bottom of these membrane invaginations . These electron microscopic observations , coupled to the rapid kinetics of paralysis and its reversal in shibire mutants ( < 1 min ) are compatible with a defect in the early stages of endoeytosis . For lack of a suitable receptor in Drosophila , functional studies have been limited to morphological studies after the uptake of electron dense fluid phase mark - ers . These studies support the hypothesis that the shibire mu - tation is defective in endocytosis ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Tsurahura et al . , 1990 ) . By testing the effect of mutant dyna - min on transferrin uptake in HeLa cells , we have provided the first functional evidence that the mutant protein blocks receptor - mediated endocytosis at an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . Human Dynamin Expression and Alternative Splicing The human cDNA is the third dynamin homologue to be cloned . What distinguishes dynamin from related proteins ( for review see Collins , 1991 ) is a proline rich ( 30 % ) and highly basic COOH - terminus that extends , ~ 100 amino acids . This domain is similar in composition to the COOH - terminal domain of synapsin I , which has been implicated in the binding of synapsin I to a synaptic vesicle protein ( Ben - fenati et al . , 1992 ) . The extreme COOH - termini of both dy - namin and synapsin I are alternatively spliced ( Sudhof et al . , 1989 ) . Whether this reflects a common function in mem - brane binding remains to be tested . Multiple electrophoreti - cally distinct isoforms of dynamin have been detected in both rat and Drosophila protein extracts ( Scaife and Margolis , 1990 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ; Faire et al . , 1992 ) . These may cor - respond to the splice variants detected in Drosophila ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) and in humans . Given that mutations in dynamin disrupt endocytosis , it is of no surprise that the gene is expressed in all tissues exam - ined thus far . However , it is striking that expression is at least 30 - fold higher in the human brain . The coat proteins clathrin and APs , by comparison , are expressed at 5 - 10 - fold higher levels in brain ( Kirschhausen et al . , 1987 ; Robinson , 1989 ) . Whole - mount in situs of Drosophila embryos show very high dynamin expression throughout the nervous system ( Chen et al . , 1992 ; Ding , D . , and A . M . v . d . Bliek , unpublished results ) . Dynamin is highly expressed in the rat cerebellar van der Bliek et al . Dynarain Functions in Endocytosis 561 cortex , the hippocampus , and the cerebral cortex ( Nakata et al . , 1991 ; Falre et al . , 1992 ) similar to the distribution of AP subunit transcripts ( Robinson , 1989 ) . Recent studies have demonstrated that coated vesicles isolated from synaptic ter - mini are almost exclusively involved in recycling the constit - uents of synaptic vesicles ( Maycox et al . , 1992 ) . Thus , high levels of dynamin expression in nerve cells are consistent with its role in expediting synaptic vesicle recycling . Conclusion What role might dynamin play in receptor - mediated endocy - tosis and coated vesicle formation ? Our results show that mutant dynamin blocks endocytosis after the initiation of coat assembly but before coated pit invagination . This specifically assigns a role for dynamin in the intermediate stages on the temporal sequence of events that can be dis - tinguished biochemically : coat assembly , receptor recruit - ment , coated pit invagination and vesicle budding ( Schmid , 1993 ) . Consistent with this assignment and with the known affinity of dynamin for GTP , coated pit invagination in vitro requires , x , 10 / zM GTP ( Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Members of the GTPase superfamily , in general , act as monitors and molec - ular switches which either trigger an event or ensure the fidelity of vectorial reactions ( Bourne et al . , 1990 , 1991 ) . During coated pit invagination dynamin might monitor receptor recruitment , necessary coat protein rearrange - ments , or the assembly of a molecular complex required for invagination or budding . In response to completion of these requisites to vesicle formation , dynamin might trigger in - vagination . While we cannot rule out that dynamin plays an active , mechanochemical role in the invagination and / or pinching process , this seems less likely given its membership in the GTPase superfamily . Our observation that dynamin is equally distributed in particulate and soluble fractions sug - gests cycling on and off the membrane as part of its function . Further characterization of the role of dynamin will follow from identification of interacting proteins . Genbank Accession Numbers The human dynamin eDNA sequences are accessible under GenBank accession numbers L07807 - L07810 . The first two authors contributed equally to this work . We world like to thank Drs . Reid Gilmore , Harris Berustein , and Peter Walter for helpful discussions and for communicating their results before publication , E . Koh for technical assistance and George Klier for assistance with confocal mi - croscopy and photography . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant GM42445 and a grant from the LuciUe P . Markey Charitable Trust to S . L . Schmid , and an NIH Program Project grant GM40499 to E . M . Meyer - owitz . S . L . Schmid is a Lucille P . Markey Scholar . E . J . Tisdale was sup - ported by an NIH Postdoctoral Fellowship CA09 ' 270 . A . M . v . d . Bliek was supported by a Long Term Fellowship from the Human Frontier Science Program . H . Damke was supported by a fellowship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschafl . This is manuscript 7711 - CB from The Scripps Research Institute . Received for publication 15 April 1993 and in revised form 27 April 1993 . References Arnheiter , H . , and E . Meier . 1990 . MX proteins : antiviral proteins by chance or by necessity ? The New Biologist . 2 : 851 - 857 . Benfenati , F . , F . Valtorta , J . L . Rubanstein , F . S . Gorelick , P . Greengard , and A . J . Czernik . 1992 . Synaptic vesicle - associated Ca2÷ / caimodulin - depen - dent protein kinase II is a binding protein for synapsin I . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 417 - 420 . Bourne , H . R . , D . A . Sanders , and F . McCormick . 1990 . The GTPase super - family : a conserved switch for diverse cell functions . Nature ( Lond . ) 348 : 125 - 132 . Bourne , H . R . , D . A . Sanders , and F . McCormick . 1991 . The GTPase super - family : conserved strnctum and molecular mechanism . Nature ( Lond . ) 349 : 117 - 127 . Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracelinlar membrane traffic . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 1396 - 1402 . Bucci , C . , R . G . Parton , I . H . Mather , H . Stannenberg , K . Simons , B . Hoflack , and M . Zeriai . 1992 . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell . 70 : 715 - 728 . Carter , L . L . , T . E . Redelmeier , L . A , Woollenweber , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in clathrin - coated vesicle - mediated endocytusis . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 37 - 45 . Chen , M . S . , R . A . Obar , C . C . Schroeder , T . W . Austin , C . A . Poodry , S , C . Wadsworth , and R . B . Vailee . 1991 . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by Shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 351 : 583 - 586 . Chen , M . S . , C . C . Burgess , R . B . Vallce , and S . C . Wadsworth . 1992 . De - velopmental stage - and tissue - specific expression of shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 619 - 628 . Collins , C . A . 1991 . Dynamin : a novel microtubule associated GTPase . Trends Cell Biol . 1 : 57 - 60 . Der , C . J . , B . Weissman , and M . J . MacDonald . 1988 . Altered guanine nucleo - tide binding and H - ras transforming and differentiating activities . Oncogene . 3 : 105 - 112 . Faire , K . , F . Trent , J . M . Tepper , and E . M . Bonder . 1992 . Analysis of dyna - rain isoforms in mammalian brain : dynamin - 1 expression is spatially and temporally regulated during postnatal development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 8376 - 8380 . Fry , D . C . , S . A . Kuby , and A . S . Mildvan . 1986 . ATP - binding site of adenyl - ate kinase : mechanistic implications of its homology with ras - encoded p21 , F ~ - ATPase , and other nucleotide - binding proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 907 - 911 . Fuerst , T . R . , and B . Moss . 1989 . Structure and stability of mRNA synthesized by vaccinia virus - encoded bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase in mammalian cells . J . Mol . Biol . 206 : 333 - 348 . Fuerst , T . R . , E . G . Niles , F . W . Studier , and B . Moss . 1986 . Eukaryotic transient - expression system based on recombinant vaceinia virus that synthe - sized bacteriophage " IV / RNA polymerase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 8122 - 8126 . Grigliatti , T . A . , L . Hall , R . Rosenbluth , and D . T . Suzuki . 1973 . Tem - perature - sensitive mutations in Drosophila melanogaster . XV . Selection of immobile adults . Mol . & C - en . Genet . 120 : 107 - 114 . Jones , B . A . , and W . L . Fangman . 1992 . Mitochondrial DNA maintenance in yeast requires a protein containing a region related to the GTP - binding do - main of dynamin . Genes & Dev . 6 : 380 - 389 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - 438 . Kessel , I . , B . D . Hoist , and T . F . Roth . 1989 . Membranous intermediates in endocytosis are labile , as shown in a temperature - sensitive mutant . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 4968 - 4972 . Kirchhausen , T . , S . C . Harrison , E . Pig Chow , R . J . Mattaiiano , and K . L . Ramachandran . 1987 , Ciathrin heavy chain : molecular cloning and complete primary structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 8805 - 8809 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1989 . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible block - age of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 11 : 3844 - 3860 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1990 . Transformational process of the endosomai compartment in nephrocytes of Drosophila melanogaster . Cell Tissue Res . 262 : 233 - 244 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983 . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J . Neurobiol . 14 : 207 - 225 . Maeda , K . , T . Nakata , Y . Noda , R . Sato - Yoshitake , and N . Hirokawa . 1992 . Interaction of dynamin with microtobules : its structure and GTPase activity investigated by using highly purified dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 3 : 1181 - 1194 . Matteoni , R . , and T . E . Kreis . 1987 . Tsanslocation and clustering of endosomes and lysosomes depends on microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1253 - 1265 . Maycox , P . R . , E . Link , A . Reetz , S . A . Morris , and R . Jabn . 1992 . Clathrin - coated vesicles in nervous tissue are involved primarily in synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1379 - 1388 . Meluh , P . B . , and M . D . Rose . 1990 . KAR3 , a kinesin - related gene required for yeast nuclear fusion . Cell . 60 : 1029 - 1041 . Morgan , E . H . , and B . J . Iacopetta . 1987 . Vinhiastine but not other microtubule inhibiturs block transferrin endocytosis and iron uptake by reticulocytes . Clin . Exp . Pharm . Physiol . 14 : 119 - 126 . Moss , B . , E . N . Rosenblum , and E . Katz . 1969 . Rifampicin : a specific inhibitor of vaccinia virus assembly . Nature ( Lond . ) . 224 : 1280 - 1284 . Nakata , T . , A . Iwamoto , Y . Noda , R . Takemura , H . Yoshikura , and N . Hirokawa . 1991 . Predominant and developmentally regulated expression of dynamin in neurons . Neuron . 7 : 461 - 469 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 562 Obar , R . A . , C . A . Collins , J . A . Hammarback , H . S . Shpetner , and R . B . Vallee . 1990 . Molecular cloning of the microtubule - associated mechano - chemical enzyme dynamin reveals homology with a new family of GTP - binding proteins . Nature ( Lond . ) . 347 : 256 - 261 . Oka , J , A . , and P . H . Weigel . 1983 . Microtubule - depolymerizing agents inhibit asialoorosomucoid delivery to lysosomes but not its endocytosis or degrada - tion in isolated rat hepatocytes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 763 : 368 - 376 . Pal , E . F . , U . Krengel , G . A . Petsko , R . S . Goody , W . Kabsch , and A . Witting - hofer . 1990 . Refined crystal structure of the triphosphate conformation of H - ras p21 at 1 . 35 A resohition : implications for the mechanism of GTP hy - drolysis . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 9 : 2351 - 2359 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Poodry , C , A . , L . Hall , and D . T . Suzuki . 1973 . Developmental properties of shibire ts - 1 : a pleiotropic mutation affecting larval and adult locomotion and development . Dev . Biol . 2 : 373 - 386 . Rapiejko , P . J . , and R . Gilmore . 1992 . Protein translocation across the ER re - quires a functional GTP binding site in the ct subunit of the signal recognition particle receptor . J . Cell Biol . 1171493 - 503 . Robinson , M . S . 1989 . Cloning ofcDNAs encoding two related 100 - kD coated vesicle proteins ( o ~ - adaptins ) . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 833 - 842 . Robinson , M . S . 1992 . Adaptins . Trends Cell Biol . 2 : 293 - 297 . Rose , J . K . , L . Cuonocore , and M . S . Whitt . 1991 . A new cationic liposome reagent mediating nearly quantitative transfection of animal cells . Biotech - niques . 10 : 520 - 525 . Rothman , J . E . , and L . Orci . 1992 . Molecular dissection of the secretory path - way . Nature ( Lond . ) . 3551409 - 415 . Rothman , J . H . , C . K . Raymond , T . Gilbert , P . O ' Hara , and T . Stevens . 1990 . A putative GTP binding proteins homologous to interferon - inducible Mx proteins performs an essential function in yeast protein sorting . Cell . 61 : 1063 - 1074 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , andT . Maulatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Lab - oratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , New York . 545 pp . Scaife , R . , and R . L . Margolis . 1990 . Biochemical and immunochemical analy - sis of rat brain dynamin interaction with microtubules and organelles in vivo and in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 3023 - 3033 . Schmid , S . L . 1992 . The mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis : more questions than answers . Bioessays . 14 : 589 - 596 . Schrnid , S . L . 1993 . Coated - vesicle formation in vitro : conflicting results using different assays . Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 145 - 148 . Schmid , S . L . , and L . L . Carter . 1990 . ATP is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in intact cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2307 - 2318 . Schmid , S . L . , and E . Smythe . 1991 . Stage - specific assays for coated pit forma - tion and coated vesicle budding in vitro . J , Cell Biol . 114 : 869 - 880 . Sigal , I . S . , J . B . Gibbs , J . S . D ' Alonzo , G . L . Temelese , B . S . Wolanki , S . H . Socher , and E . M . Scolnik . 1986 . Mutant ras - encoded proteins with altered nucleotide binding exert dominant biological effects . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 952 - 956 . Shpetner , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1989 . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell . 591421 - 432 . Shpetuer , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1992 . Dynamin is a GTPase stimulated to high levels of activity by microtubules . Nature ( Lond . ) . 355 : 733 - 735 . Smythe , E . , and G . Warren . 1991 . The mechanism of receptor - mediated en - docytosis . Eur . J . Biochem . 202 : 689 - 699 . Smytbe , E . , T . E . Redelmeier , and S . L . Schmid . 1992 . Receptor - mediated en - docytosis in semi - intact cells . Methods Enzymol . 219 : 223 - 234 . Sudhof , T . C . , A , J . Czernik , H . - T . Kao , K . Takei , P . A . Johnston , A . Hori - uchi , S . D . Kanazir , M . A . Wagner , M . S . Perin , P , De Camllli , P . Green - gard . 1989 . Synapsinsl mosaics of shared and individual domains in a family of synaptic vesicle pbosphoproteins . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 24511474 - 1480 . Tisdale , E . J . , J . R . Bourne , R . Khosravi - Far , C . J . Der , and W . E . Balch . 1992 . GTP - binding mutants of Rabl and Rab2 are potent inhibitors of vesic - ular transport from the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to the Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 749 - 761 . Tsurnhara , T . , J . H . Koenig , and K . Ikeda . 1990 . Synchronized endocytosis in the oocyte of a temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster . Cell Tissue Res . 2591199 - 207 . Vallee , R . B . 1992 . Dynamin : motor protein or regulatory GTPase . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 13 : 493 - 496 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and E . M . Meyerowitz . 1991 . Dynamin - like protein en - coded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 351 : 411 - 414 . van der Sluijs , P . , M . Hull , P . Webster , P . Male , B . Good , and I . Mellman . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein tab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell . 70 : 729 - 740 . Vater , C . A . , C . K . Raymond , K . Ekana , I . Howald - Stevenson , and T . H . Stevens . 1992 . The VPS 1 protein , a homolog ofdynamin required for vacuo - lar protein sorting in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , is a GTPase with two func - tionally separable domains . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 773 - 786 . Walker , J . E . , M . Saraste , M . J . Runswick , and N . J . Gay . 1982 . Distantly related sequences in the ct and / ~ - subunits of ATPsynthase , myosin , kinases and other ATP - requiring enzymes and a common nucleotide binding fold . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 1 : 945 - 951 . Weissman , A . M . , R . D . Klausner , R . Krishnamurthey , and J . B . Harford . 1986 . Exposure of K562 cells to anti - receptor monoclonal antibody OKT9 results in rapid redistribution and enhanced degradation of the transferrin receptor . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 951 - 958 . White , S . , R . Taetle , P . A . Seligman , M . Rutherford , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1990 . Combinations of anti - transferrin receptor monoclonal antibodies in - hibit human tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo : evidence for synergistic antiproliferative effects . Cancer Res . 5016295 - 6301 . Yeh , E . , R . Driscol , M . Coltrera , A . Olins , and K . Bloom . 1991 . A dynamin - like protein encoded by the yeast spornlation gene SPOIS . Nature ( Lond . ) . 349 : 254 - 266 . van der Bliek et al . Dynamin Functions in Endocytosis 563