Course Description This course offers students further exploration of concept development and the language of symbols combined with further exploration into the aesthetic issues of type . Emphasis will be placed on content , form and technique for effective use of graphic design and typography in ads , posters , newsletters , desktop publishing and other visual communications . Statement of Prerequisites ART 1110 , ART 2122 and a working knowledge of Adobe CC . May be taken concurrently with Graphic Design Solutiuons ART2025 . Goal Graphic Design Concepts is a continued comprehensive introduction to the medium of visual communication design . The focus of this course is demonstrating how key elements and principles of design are used to communicate clearly and memorably through imagery and type . Students will be introduced to methods , modes of thought , and products common to professional graphic design . The primary focus will be on developing design skills through concentrating on concepts , production , and presentation . Outcomes Upon successful completion of this course , you will be able to : • Effectively combine conceptual and creative abilities in using imagery and type to communicate visually and verbally through the integration of form and meaning . • Successfully execute a design research process of problem solving , brainstorming , and iterations , ending in a finished visual design . • Demonstrate increased technical facility in using various hardware and software to design and produce graphic works , such as , Adobe Photoshop , Illustrator , and InDesign . ( This also includes low tech and hand tools too . ) • Critically analyze visual media . • Present your own work and critically analyze your work and the work of your peers . • Solve problems using critical thinking and creativity • Appreciate aesthetic and creative activities Methodology : Students will complete a series of assignments that build up to a final project that is the culmination of the skills learned during the course . Students will also practice critical thinking in the presentation of their own work , conducting self - critique , and critiquing the work of their peers . The course is primarily studio and project based with additional reading and writing assignments . The hands - on focus of doing design will be supplemented with lectures / discussions , demonstrations , and critiques . At least once during the semester individual conferences will be held to discuss each student’s progress . Casper College may collect samples of student work demonstrating achievement of the above outcomes . Any personally identifying information will be removed from student work . ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 119 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 Course Objectives Upon completion of this course , students should be able to : 1 . Solve creative problems related to the design process . 2 . Demonstrate , in work created for class , knowledge of the elements and principles of design . 3 . Use the computer hardware and software as effective tools for problem solving , exploration , and the creation of a final graphic design product . 4 . Develop solutions to design problems that go beyond the most obvious . Required Text Graphic Design School : The Principles and Practice of Graphic Design Paperback : 208 pages Publisher : Wiley ; 5 edition ( August 26 , 2013 ) ISBN - 10 : 1118134419 ISBN - 13 : 978 - 1118134412 C O N C E P T S Warning – Workload This course requires time outside of class time per week . A major component of the class is participation ( attendance , discussion , readings , writings , and personal exploration ) . Evaluation You will not receive a grade for each individual assignment . Instead you will be assessed on your process , attendance and on the final body of work you produce . You must demonstrate : an understanding of fundamental design concepts , thoughtful and original outcomes to assignments and its effectiveness , active participation in critiques and discussions , and finally professional technique and presentation . You will receive a preliminary midterm grade to help you assess your performance . Final grades are weighted 60 % on completed work 20 % on process ( consistency of effort and exploration ) 20 % on class participation Evaluation Criteria You will not receive a grade for each individual assignment . Instead you will be assessed on your process , attendance and on the final body of work you produce . You must demonstrate : an understanding of fundamental design concepts , thoughtful and original outcomes to assignments and its effectiveness , active participation in critiques and discussions , and finally professional technique and presentation . . Casper College may collect samples of student work demonstrating achievement of the above outcomes . Any personally identifying information will be removed from student work . Concept Concept reflects the strengths and weaknesses of your ideas for each assignment . The qualities of your ideas are reflected in the visual statement of your ideas . The slickest visual design cannot replace the lack of strong concepts that drive your rationale for your use of type , image , line , color and form , etc . Your use of these design elements is measured against the stated aspirations of your concept and the appropriateness to the requirements of the assignment or design challenge . Process Concepts rarely arrive fully formed . Ideas require a research process of exploration and trial and error to develop into mature finished work . What range of idea development did you use in creating effective work ? Did you take risks ? Assessment of your process will be judged by the aggressiveness and depth spent in development through written statements , rough sketches , mock - ups or comps , and any other collateral materials . Technique The technique score reflects the craftsmanship , exactitude , and neatness with which the final product is executed . This includes the appropriate and skillful use of technical software to achieve the final product . Design principles Your adeptness at thoughtfully employing design principles and spatial relationships will also be assessed . ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 119 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 C O N C E P T S Outcome The outcome score reflects assessment of the finished product , which is the sum of your entire process as applied to the particular assignment or design challenge . Grading as follows Grade Percentage A 90 - 100 Exceptional performance , effort and accomplishment beyond expectations . B 80 - 89 Very good work , consistent effort and participation , full attendance . C 70 - 79 Satisfactory work , average effort , good attendance . D 60 - 69 Poor work , effort , or attendance . F 0 - 59 Unacceptable work or excessive absence . Plus and minus additions to the letter grades will be used to further differentiate the above . Late assignments will lose one letter grade if something is not presented during class critique , and one additional letter grade for each class period late – that’s TWO letter grades if turned in the following class after it is due . ( Ouch ! ) Grades are not subject to negotiation . Art courses are rigorous academic courses and not an easy A . Attendance ( Single most common cause of poor grade or failure of this class ! ! ) Attendance is very important and will reflect on your grade . You are allowed three ( 3 ) absences for any reason without penalty . On the fourth absence , you drop one letter grade for the course ( ex . A to B ) . If you miss five , of any combination of lecture or lab ( for any reason ) you will fail ( ex . A to F ) . This is a result of missing too large of a portion of the course to make up . You can fail a class due to lack of attendance alone . Three late arrivals ( 15 mins or more ) to class , count as an absence . YOU CAN FAIL A CLASS DUE TO LACK OF ATTENDANCE ALONE . Two late arrivals ( 15 min or more ) to class , count as an absence . ABSENCE 4 , HIGHEST GRADE POSSIBLE : B ABSENCE 5 , HIGHEST GRADE POSSIBLE : C ABSENCE 6 , HIGHEST GRADE POSSIBLE : D ABSENCE 7 , FAIL CLASS THIS IS NON - NEGOTIABLE ( UNLESS THERE IS A MEDICAL EMERGENCY OR OTHER EXTREME EVENT ) Cell phone policy : All students are expected to conduct themselves professionally during class time . Please turn off cell phones or put them on vibrate ; you are welcome to check your messages during class breaks . If for some reason there is an emergency call you need to take while I am lecturing please QUIETLY step out of the room and quietly return . NO TEXTING DURING LECTURES OR CRITIQUE . ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 119 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 C O N C E P T S Classroom Expectations Classroom expectations will model professional work place behaviors based on mutual respect . Our goal is to create a climate similar to a professional design studio . We will do that by using the following a format . • Work hours during this course are to complete assignments for THIS course only . If you have finished your work , then and only then do you have permission to work on other assignments . Projects can always be further refined and perfected . • Having too much homework in another instructor’s class is not an excuse for not doing the work for this class . Time management is key in this profession . • Students are encouraged to contribute to classroom discussions . The instructor will set the pace for discussions and the course will advance in a manner best serving the class as a whole . Individual concerns can be addressed during office hours . • Music may be played to inspire students’ creativity . Students may make requests . If this is not to the student’s liking , please bring headphones . For the student’s own safety and the consideration of other students in the room , if I can hear the music through your headphones , I will ask you to turn it down . There will be NO EAR BUDS IN YOUR EARS DURING LECTURES . . • You may listen to music while working in class . HOWEVER , you may NOT watch YouTube or other videos unless they are instructional and pertain to the current project . • Gaming is not permitted . • It is the student’s responsibility to ask informed questions . Often other students have the same questions . • Please be respectful to each other & to me , as I will give you the same courtesy . • You are responsible for acquiring information you missed during an absence or if you come to class late . Make friends with your neighbors sitting next to you they will be a good source of missed information . Lectures will not be repeated to accommodate a single student’s absence . • If you have a question during work periods and I stop the class and give the answer to everyone , please do not take it personally . I am doing this because it was an excellent question that everyone will benefit from or the same question has been asked multiple times and it is my job to clarify with the entire class so everyone understands . Classroom Conduct : If for some reason there is an incident or incidences where I have to address a disruptive behavior there will be steps taken to rectify the situation . 1 . Following a first incident , I will discreetly as possible call you into my office and discuss the issue . At which point you will be welcome to come back to class . This incident will be documented with an email to you , copying the department chair , the dean and the disciplinary committee , summarizing the incident and what would be best practices for the future . 2 . Following a second incident , I will discreetly invite you to discuss the incident with the department chair and myself . After which point you will be welcome to come back to class . ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 119 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 C O N C E P T S ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 119 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 C O N C E P T S This incident will be documented with an email to you , copying the department chair , the dean and the disciplinary committee , summarizing the incident and what would be best practices for the future . 3 . Following a third incident , I will ask you to leave the classroom for the day and ask that you not return until we have time to schedule an appointment with the dean and a member of the disciplinary committee at which point further action will be taken . Once a decision is made , you will be then welcome to come back to class . Materials This is a basic list . Students may need to purchase other materials as projects dictate . All of supplies do not need to be purchased immediately but as the need arises . • Black cold press mounting board , black foam core board • Hand production tools ( ruler , x - acto knife or utility knife , tape , metal ruler ) • 1 jump drive or a portable hard - drive . • A sketchpad or binder with drawing paper so that you can sketch ideas and do brainstorming activities . • Some kind of binder to turn in sketches , written statements , and any other pertinent collateral gathered during the research process . Note : your final project will require additional materials depending on the format you choose to present your work – mattes , mounts , frames , book materials , etc Class Policies : Last Date to Change to Audit Status or to Withdraw with a W Grade : ( college deadline or yours , if different ) ( Your attendance policy , exam , homework , assignment make - up policy , anything particular to your class ) Automatic Withdrawal Statement : Students who have not attended and / or participated in a class they are enrolled in during the first week of the semester will be automatically dropped from that class at the beginning of the second week . If you have questions about this matter please contact your instructor . Chain of Command : If you have any problems with this class , you should first contact the instructor to attempt to solve the problem . If you are not satisfied with the solution offered by the instructor , you should then take the matter through the appropriate chain of command starting with the Department Head / Program Director , the Dean , and lastly the Vice President for Academic Affairs . Academic Dishonesty : ( Cheating & Plagiarism ) Casper College demands intellectual honesty . Proven plagiarism or any form of dishonesty associated with the academic process can result in the offender failing the course in which the offense was committed or expulsion from school . See the Casper College Student Code of Conduct for more information on this topic . Official Means of Communication : Casper College faculty and staff will employ the student’s assigned Casper College email ART2130 syllabus Spring 2019 Graphic DESIGN CYNTHIA HARRISON 307 - 268 - 2673 307 - 277 - 6070 cynthiaharrison @ caspercollege . edu Lecture Hours : 2 Lab Hours : 4 Credit Hours : 3 Class Time : 9 : 00 - 11 : 50PM Days : T / TH Room : VA 115 Office Hours : M 12 : 00 p . m . – 2 : 00 p . m Room VA 115 C O N C E P T S account as a primary method of communication . Students are responsible to check their account regularly . This is also , where you will find course evaluation links during course evaluation periods . ADA Accommodations Policy : If you need academic accommodations because of a disability , please inform me as soon as possible . See me privately after class , or during my office hours . To request academic accommodations , students must first consult with the college’s Disability Services Counselor located in the Gateway Building , Room 344 , ( 307 ) 268 - 2557 , bheuer @ caspercollege . edu . The Disability Services Counselor is responsible for reviewing documentation provided by students requesting accommodations , determining eligibility for accommodations , and helping students request and use appropriate accommodations . In case of emergencies : • In case of fire , please evacuate to the Thunderbird statue to the east of the Visual Arts building . • In case of shelter in place , if possible please use VA 127 ( Photography lecture classroom ) or the Kiln Room beyond VA 110 ( Ceramics classroom ) . • For any emergency or to report and accident , please call Campus Security at 307 - 268 - 2688 . Assignment Breakdown Week 1 - 5 Magazine Redesign Week 5 - 8 Jazz Night Poster , etc . The second half of the semester is meant to ready you for transfer and or to prepare you for employment . These things are essential for job hunting success . Week 8 - 12 Portfolio / Resume Create your graphic design resume / portfolio / linkedIns Week 12 - 15 Squarespace / WordPress / Website Show off your work ! This is all about you ! ! All Assignments and Due dates are subject to change at the instructors discretion .