Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming This article examines the problem of hate and toxic behavior in gaming . Videogames have risen to become a dominant cultural form , seeing significant increases in players , playtime , and revenue . More people are playing games than ever before , broadening “gamers” into a highly diverse demographic . Yet this rise has been accompanied by a growing recognition of the racism , sexism , xenophobia , and other forms of harassment taking place on these platforms . Hate within gaming creates toxic communities and takes a toll particularly on marginalized groups , raising both ethical and financial issues for the industry , who seek to address this problem in multiple ways . This paper surveys and synthesizes recent research on the topic from both inside and outside academia , laying out the problem , its manifestations , key drivers , and current responses . It concludes with a research agenda that offers a foundation for researchers , policy - makers , and companies to build from . Contents IntroductionGaming’s expansion Measuring hate , feeling hate Intense hate , organized hate Industry acknowledgment Potential drivers Responses and challenges Learnings and future research Conclusion Introduction This article examines the problem of hate speech and toxic behavior in gaming contexts . While videogames have risen to become a dominant cultural form in terms of popularity and play time , there has been a growing recognition of the racism , sexism , xenophobia , and other forms of harassment occurring through them . This abuse takes a toll on its victims , contributes to the normalization of toxic behavior , and raises ethical and financial issues for the industry . This article surveys and synthesizes recent research on the topic from both inside and outside academia , laying out the problem , its manifestations , key drivers , and current responses . In doing so , it aims to provide a foundation for researchers , policy - makers , and companies to build from . While the definitions of “toxic” vary , toxic behavior is generally considered an umbrella term for a wide variety of negative activities that abuse other players , violate rules , or break social norms ( Beres , et al . , 2021 ) . Flaming , trolling , griefing , and harassment are commonly given examples of toxic behavior . Certainly such antagonistic or antisocial activities contribute to a climate of toxicity within any particular videogame context . However , by placing “hate” alongside this term , I want to also encompass more explicit and formalized forms of derogation ranging from misogyny and anti - Muslim sentiment to antisemitism and homophobia . Indeed , the rise of videogames as a culture and medium has made them an important new vector for the spread and uptake of these ideologies ( Munn , 2019 ) . This means that radicalization and extremism should figure into any discussion of hate and toxicity within gaming contexts . Methodologically , this paper adheres closely to the traditional literature review . It “extracts and synthesizes the main points , issues , findings and research methods which emerge from a critical review of the readings” [ 1 ] . The aim , as with other literature reviews , is the identification of a problem domain , a critical discussion of what has been done , and the identification of knowledge gaps within this domain [ 2 ] . This article also takes inspiration from the two S’s approach , seeking to map a broad cross - section of state of the art research and lay out a stimulating set of issues that future research can take forward ( Paul , et al . , 2021 ) . In doing so , this work offers a platform for knowledge advancement and further research ( Palmatier , et al . , 2018 ) . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming While the method is traditional , I deliberately adopt a more expansive or unorthodox approach of selecting “literature” to survey . When it comes to the topic of hate and gaming , there tends to be a bifurcation of research material . On the one hand , there are articles in academic journals , which primarily draw on other scholarly work . On the other hand , there is research outside academia : studies from gaming companies , industry bodies , independent institutes , and others . Journalistic articles are also in this category and often contain interviews with gamers , developers , and other industry insiders who describe the problem and their experiences in their own words , a viewpoint I have consistently championed in previous work ( Munn , 2020 , 2019 ) . Both academic and non - academic research thus offer important insights into the problem of hate within gaming contexts . For this reason , this paper draws from both strands , highlighting points where personal experiences and survey statistics resonate strongly with scholarly studies . The article itself is structured as a kind of meta - case study . The first section stresses the stakes of this issue by highlighting the growth and diversification of gaming . The next two sections unpack the problem of hate and radicalization within gaming contexts by drawing on a mixture of research reports , academic scholarship , and gamers’ experiences . The next three sections examine the recognition of this issue in the gaming industry , lay out potential drivers of toxicity , and discuss current responses to this problem . The final section concludes by summarizing key insights and setting out a research agenda and notional research questions . The aim of this structure is not to suggest any single solution or approach , but rather to provide a robust portrait of toxicity within gaming and highlight issues for the development studios , community groups , policy - makers , and other stakeholders who wish to engage with it . Gaming’s expansion The last two decades have seen gaming ascend as an industry , a cultural form , and a popular activity . Video games can no longer be dismissed as an escapist niche , but have proliferated into everyday life in many ways ( Bogost , 2011 ) . So while hate to any degree is an issue , the expansion and diversification of gaming shown below makes this problem more acute ( Nakamura , 2019 ) . On the one hand , this exposes new populations ( women , people of color , queer communities ) to damaging forms of racism , sexism , and harassment . On the other hand , it extends the potential reach of hate to a far broader population . Player counts provide one indicator of gaming’s expansion . Microsoft’s gaming platform , Xbox Live , has over 100 million monthly active users ( Lilly , 2021 ) . Steam , a popular game distribution service , has over 120 million monthly active users ( Yin - Poole , 2021 ) . Such massive numbers do not even capture the extent of casual and hypercasual games on mobile devices and social media , which are also experiencing unprecedented growth ( Koetsier , 2020 ) . The rise of streaming and chat platforms also showcase gaming’s foray into the mainstream . In 2020 Twitch reached 143 million viewers in total ( Iqbal , 2023 ) . It attracted 2 . 58 million concurrent viewers on average in 2022 , a figure that makes it bigger than cable channels like Fox , MSNBC , and CNN ( Gilbert , 2018 ) . Discord now has 140 million monthly active users and a new peak of 10 . 6 million concurrent users , with four billion minutes of conversation happening every day on the platform ( Curry , 2023 ) . Playtime is also on the rise . A recent study ( Limelight Networks , 2021 ) surveying 4 , 000 consumers in China , Vietnam , Germany , India , Indonesia , South Korea , the U . K . , and the U . S . found that players spent an average of eight hours and 27 minutes playing per week , an increase of 14 percent from the previous year . The same study ( Limelight Networks , 2021 ) also highlighted a growing trend of “binge gaming , ” with a third of respondents stating they have played for more than five consecutive hours . Growth in players and playtime has only been intensified by the recent COVID - 19 global pandemic . A week after quarantine orders were issued in the U . S . , Verizon reported that video game usage during peak hours had risen 75 percent ( Shanley , 2020 ) . Other articles noted how stay - at - home mandates meant that video games were being played at “record levels” ( Perez , 2020 ) . Alongside the growth of gaming is a broadening of the “gamer . ” In the early days of gaming , the stereotypical gamer was young , white , and male ( Paaßen , et al . , 2017 ) . While this association continues to be significant , particularly when it comes to racism , misogyny , and gaming ( discussed later ) , recent demographics of gamers tell a very different story . A recent survey ( Accenture , 2021 ) of over 4 , 000 gamers across China , Japan , U . S . , and the U . K . found that there are now nearly as many female gamers ( 46 percent ) as there are male ( 52 percent ) . The same survey also noted that one third of “new gamers , ” who have only started playing in the last four years , identify as non - white ( Accenture , 2021 ) . Another recent survey ( Entertainment Software Association , 2020 ) echoed this demographic shift , reporting that women make up 41 percent of 214 million gamers in the United States , and that their average age range is now between 35 and 44 years old . Such statistics indicate that the once monolithic “gamer” now encompasses a highly diverse population of different ages , races , and genders . All of these statistics underscore a key point : more people are playing games , a wider variety of people are playing games , and they are playing for longer durations than ever before . As the next section will show , this increase in gaming often means increased exposure to the hate that accompanies it . This also means that such hate within gaming is not a niche problem for a small segment of the population , but a significant issue that impacts broad segments of society . Measuring hate , feeling hate Gamers have long testified to the levels of hate associated with gaming . Whether playing with others on servers or streaming their play on platforms , numerous stories from players document the hate speech , toxic communication , and diverse forms of racism , sexism , homophobia , and xenophobia that they have endured ( Lorenz and Browning , 2020 ) . This is particularly the case for those who are already marginalized or seen as members of an out - group . Gaming platforms such as Twitch , for example , have been seen as a particularly harmful Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming space for women , LGBTQ + individuals , and people of color ( Taylor , 2018 ) . For this reason , game critics have characterized gaming culture as a toxic meritocracy ( Paul , 2018 ) . Recent studies have attempted to empirically measure these anecdotal and theoretical insights . In a nationally representative survey conducted by the Anti - Defamation League in the U . S . , 83 percent of respondents ages 18 – 45 experienced harassment in online multiplayer games in the last six months ( Anti - Defamation League , 2021 ) . Of particular concern was that 71 percent of adult online multiplayer gamers experienced severe abuse , including physical threats , stalking , and sustained harassment ( Anti - Defamation League , 2021 ) . The same survey also signaled a strongly gendered and racialized dimension to this hate . Compared to the previous year , the largest increases in identity - based harassment occurred among adults who identified as women , Black or African American , and Asian American ( Anti - Defamation League , 2021 ) . Such broader survey - based work has been augmented by more detailed research from computer science and related disciplines . Studies have focused on analyzing the levels of racism , sexism , and general hate speech within particular gaming communities using natural language processing and other computational methods ( Poyane , 2018 ; Ghosh , 2021 ) . Content moderation companies , such as Brand Bastion ( https : / / www . brandbastion . com ) , have also stressed how pervasive such hate is across multiple gaming platforms , highlighting the toxic comments they encounter on a daily basis , from homophobic slurs to racist insults and encouragements to commit suicide . One of the key issues with hate in gaming is how taken for granted it is . Gamers have noted how normalized this hate has become , with others dismissing episodes of bigotry and misogyny as ubiquitous and therefore insignificant ( lady _ haybear , 2019 ) . Others describe being attacked while gaming because of the color of their skin while being told such comments were simply part of gaming culture ( Suddi , 2017 ) . Such laissez - faire acceptance within gaming culture may stem partly from broader Internet culture . As Lisa Nakamura ( 2013 ) notes , racism on the Internet comes with the infrastructure and is normalized as part of the online experience : it is the signal rather than a glitch . This resignation influences the way in which hate is perceived and responded to . Gamers who are targeted by racism , such as men of color , often cope with it through desensitization , downplaying it as not serious or real ( Ortiz , 2019b ) . This insight echoes other research , which finds that gamers fail to report behavior because they see it as acceptable , typical , or not worthy of flagging ( Beres , et al . , 2021 ) . As will be discussed later , scholars see this as one of the major drivers of hate within gaming . The acceptance and normalization of toxic abuse creates a kind of feedback loop , perpetuating a culture marked by racism , sexism , and other forms of bigotry . Taken together , these insights suggest that hate in gaming contexts is often dismissed as part of the culture , a nasty side effect that has to be tolerated . Yet such “casual” racism , sexism , and misogyny online incurs a real - world fallout . In a study of 765 racial minority adults in the U . S . , time spent in online gaming predicted greater exposure to online racism , which in turn was linked to higher psychological distress ( TaeHyuk Keum and Hearns , 2022 ) , particularly among Black gamers . Similar forms of physical and emotional toll are described from those who have suffered sexist attacks while gaming . The annual “She plays he says” report has documented the widespread misogyny and rape threats targeted at female gamers , some of them as young as 14 , who say they’ve had to significantly change the way they engage with games and communities to cope ( Young Gamers & Gamblers Education Trust [ YGAM ] , 2021 ) . Those who stream their gaming have noted that “chat can be ruthless sometimes” and victims of this abuse end up “shaken to their core” ( Johnson , 2019 ) . Such testimonies from those who have suffered first hand point to the real - world impact of hate within gaming contexts . Intense hate , organized hate Hate within gaming contexts can manifest in more organized or intense ways , where certain groups are attacked , violence is endorsed , and extremist ideologies are promoted . Radicalization and extremism are not isolated topics , then , but should instead be understood within gaming’s spectrum of hate . In a three - month investigation , BBC researchers found antisemitism , racism , and homophobia on popular gaming platforms like DLive and Odysee and hateful content within popular children’s games , from a concentration camp in Minecraft to a car game in Roblox allowing players to run over ethnic minorities ( Miller and Silva , 2021 ) . When this evidence was presented to the companies , they responded by repeating their community standards and zero tolerance policies ( Miller and Silva , 2021 ) . However , the existence of this hate - driven content points to the immense challenge of meaningfully upholding such policies , even with large teams of human moderators and sophisticated algorithmic filters . Such content signals that gaming companies may struggle to maintain safe , healthy communities , particularly as both the population of players and the content on each platform continues to rapidly expand . The increasing use of gaming for radicalization suggests that such gaps in governance will be actively exploited . To explore these more structured forms of hate , we can briefly examine how they manifest on two gaming platforms . Steam , as noted , is a highly popular gaming platform with millions of active users . While Steam originally began solely as a digital store and distribution service for games , it has since added a host of features , allowing users to communicate with each other and post content . This functionality has made it a de facto social media platform , yet one without the same level of content moderation and safeguards employed by giants like Facebook and Twitter . The Institute for Strategic Dialogue ( Vaux , et al . , 2021 ) noted that Steam has an “entrenched and long - lasting extreme right community” with many groups on the platform dating back to 2016 or even earlier ; the report noted that groups used the platform more as a space for community building than deliberate recruitment , though the platform did provide “off - ramps” to podcasts , social media , and articles that groups could use to further their cause . For Vaux , et al . ( 2021 ) , the platform’s “permissive attitude to this harmful activity means that these communities have a safe haven to promote and discuss extremist ideology and content . ” The same kind of organic development can be seen with Discord . Discord began life in 2015 as a service that provided text and voice - based chat for gamers , allowing them to coordinate and communicate , particularly in team or squad - based games . Discord enjoyed significant success over the next few years , both in terms of venture capital funding and a growing user base . But the platform’s relatively autonomous technical architecture , which allows users to setup “servers” with thousands of users , already began to give it a reputation as a haven for Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming hate - based communities . One Discord server was used to organize the infamous 2017 white supremacist rally in Charlottesville , Virginia ( Glaser , 2018 ) . Although the platform has fought these communities and shut servers down , white nationalism , antisemitism , and pro - Nazi content still appear ( Patterson , 2019 ) . In 2020 , the platform announced a new slogan , “your place to talk , ” signaling a move beyond gaming and a shift into a more general - purpose communication platform ( Chin , 2020 ) . But this expansion has only seemed to increase the platform’s potential for extremist groups and organizations . In 2021 , the Institute for Strategic Dialogue released a similar report on Discord , finding that the platform was a “hub for extreme right - wing socializing and community building” ( Gallagher , et al . , 2021 ) . As with Steam , then , we see a pattern in which “gaming” platforms become a broader communication infrastructure used by a wide variety of people , becoming a potent new recruitment and organizational space for movements associated with hate , extremism , and radicalization . In recognition of this threat , the U . N . ’s Office of Counter - Terrorism ( 2021 ) held a roundtable on this topic , stating that “violent extremists are increasingly exploiting these expanding spaces in attempts to recruit , radicalize , and disseminate propaganda . ” Similarly , the recently launched Extremism and Gaming Research Network ( Royal United Services Institute [ RUSI ] , 2021 ) noted that “violent extremist organizations are actively exploiting online gaming across the world” but “research into gaming and radicalization is sparse and outdated . ” Gaming , as noted earlier , has expanded to become a highly popular cultural form , with millions of people spending significant periods of time in gaming contexts . Because of this , gaming platforms are natural spaces for extremist groups to engage and mobilize others , making gaming the “latest frontier in radicalization” ( Shurin , 2022 ) . And yet , as many organizations suggest , research on this urgent issue — how often it occurs , what forms it takes , and how it might be counteracted — is limited or only just emerging . Industry acknowledgment How is this issue perceived in the gaming industry ? For the gaming industry , hate and toxic behavior is not just an ethical issue , but a financial and practical one . Receiving harassment in the form of racism , sexism , xenophobia , or other attacks is an unpleasant or even traumatic experience for players . As a result , players may reduce their play or quit the game entirely , seeking more inclusive and welcoming spaces . As Kuipers , et al . [ 3 ] note , a negative experience may mean that players “leave for another game operator or even trigger through their social ties departures of large groups of players . ” Regardless of a company’s moral stance , then , there are clear economic advantages to avoiding “churn , ” reducing harassment , and maintaining safe spaces where play is not disrupted . And yet the industry has often struggled to curb toxicity ( Smith , 2019 ) . Some insiders see a growing acknowledgement in the industry that toxic behavior undermines healthy communities , hurting the gaming business ( Figueiredo , quoted in Smith , 2019 ) . For instance , a gaming platform recently aligned with industry bodies to conduct a mental health survey of players , a move that in itself admits the growing role of games and their ability to shape lives in positive and negative ways . The survey , resonating with others presented in this article , unsurprisingly found that significant numbers of players encountered insults ( 57 percent ) , trolling ( 53 percent ) , and aggressive behavior ( 52 percent ) ( MY . Games 2021 ) . After seeing the findings , the Executive Director of the International Game Developers Association responded by openly acknowledging that “toxicity in game communities is still an issue for our industry” ( MY . Games , 2021 ) . This growing recognition can be seen in recent initiatives launched by the gaming industry to address the problem of hate . In Europe , these range from Game Over Hate in Austria to Play Your Role in Portugal , a project aiming to be a “counter - action” to hate speech in gaming contexts . Most recently , Deutsche Telekom ( 2021 ) launched a major campaign of no hate speech in gaming , collaborating with an esports foundation and 44 other partners . But the most ambitious of these is undoubtedly the Fair Play Alliance , an association founded in 2017 that describes itself as a “cross - industry initiative of nearly 200 gaming companies working together to encourage healthy communities and player interactions” ( Fair Play Alliance , 2021 ) . Members include major studios such as Blizzard , Electronic Arts , Epic Games , and Riot Games . In 2020 , the Fair Play Alliance published their “Disruption and harms in online gaming framework . ” One aim of the Framework is to improve fuzzy or subjective terms like “toxic” and articulate more precisely what constitutes disruptive behavior in gaming . For instance , the Framework sees “hate” as a distinct subset of disruptive behavior alongside other practices such as “criminal or predatory conduct , ” “cheating , ” “harassment , ” and “extremism” [ 4 ] . Such definitional work seeks to establish an industry - wide understanding of this issue , striving to build consensus around key terms . But the Framework also presents a series of concrete steps that companies can take to address and improve disruptive behavior in their products . These steps include “Assessing the behavior landscape” to define problems and goals , “Planning and building a penalty and reporting system , ” and “Creating and maintaining community guidelines” [ 5 ] . Such recommendations include pragmatic in - game mechanisms like reporting while also underscoring the broader sociocultural dynamics that feed into a healthy gaming community . Potential drivers What drives the pervasive toxicity and forms of hate that appear consistently in gaming contexts ? While there is no single reason , scholarship has identified an array of key issues that seem to contribute to toxic cultures . The “Gamer” Both scholars and gamers often point to the history of gaming culture and the hardcore gamer who was consistently catered to ( Braegger and Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming Moeller , 2021 ) . If the demographic of gaming has expanded significantly in recent years , the figure of the white heterosexual male gamer continues to linger in gaming culture ( Paaßen , et al . , 2017 ) , a legacy defining who is accepted and who is attacked . In fact , one of the most visible forms of hate and gaming culture in the last decade was GamerGate , an online harassment campaign targeting female gaming journalists . GamerGate has been covered extensively , both in academic articles ( Phidd , 2019 ) and the popular press ( Dewey , 2014 ) ; its complex story will not be repeated here . It suffices to note that the driving force behind this “movement” was a fear of feminization ( Vanderhoef , 2013 ) and a sense that gaming was slipping away from a core white masculine base . Gamers responded with abuse , signaling a refusal of the diversity and progressive values that have encroached on “their” space in recent years . As scholars have argued , these events showcased that , at the heart of gaming culture , there was still a deep connection between geek masculinity and online abuse ( Salter , 2018 ) , a connection between antifeminism and toxic technocultures ( Massanari , 2017 ) . Exposure As this paper has already touched on , hate - driven behavior in gaming is so pervasive that it often becomes normalized . This suggests that racist , sexist , or otherwise hateful behaviors are no longer considered taboo , but are framed as commonplace or even inevitable . For this reason , Kordyaka , et al . ( 2020 ) suggests that recipients of toxic behavior may come to accept toxic behavior and even emulate it in the future . Such a pattern would certainly align with scholarship on analogous issues like bullying , where there is a consistent overlap between those who are victimized , and those who go on to perpetuate this behavior ( Falla , et al . , 2022 ) . Beres , et al . ( 2021 ) describe toxicity as cyclical : toxicity in gaming contexts breeds more toxicity . This insight echoes other studies which argue that toxicity is contagious ( Shen , et al . , 2020 ) . The presence of hateful comments and antagonistic behavior by some players “set the tone” for others and can lead to it being replicated . Players employ a sophisticated array of reasons to justify this amoral , immoral , or otherwise problematic behavior in games ( Sparrow , et al . , 2019 ) . This scholarship suggests that players internalize a toxic culture of intimidation and abuse through hours and hours of online play , allowing them to reproduce this kind of speech and action when desired . These players then dish out this toxicity to others and , in doing so , contribute to its pervasiveness and persistence in that gaming context . Competition For some scholars , gaming’s toxicity is connected to its high - stakes context , which encourages antagonism and hostility rather than cooperation and civility . Adachi and Willoughby ( 2011 ) suggested that competition rather than violence was the video game characteristic that has the greatest influence on aggressive behavior . Grandprey - Shores , et al . ( 2014 ) developed a metric to identify highly toxic players and found that these players tended to play in more competitive game modes . In a study of millions of instances of toxic behavior perpetuated by hundreds of thousands of accused toxic players , Kwak , et al . ( 2015 ) found that competition was key , with in - group favoritism and out - group hostility shaping the level of reporting . Similarly , Shen , et al . ( 2020 ) found that teams who are losing or have a high internal skill disparity ( i . e . , some players are much better than others ) tend to breed toxicity . In high pressure situations , lashing out with insults and abuse becomes a way of deferring blame and dealing with loss . Disinhibition Other scholars suggest that online gaming environments lack some of the key mechanisms in real world settings that foster prosocial behavior . For instance , Suler ( 2004 ) suggests that the anonymity ( “you don’t know me” ) and invisibility ( “you can’t see me” ) provided by online spaces fosters a strong sense of disassociation , allowing users to disown their behavior and its consequences . The precise impact of anonymity has been debated . On social media , for instance , Rösner and Krämer ( 2016 ) find that anonymity doesn’t have a direct effect , but that users do tend to conform to a more aggressive social norm when commenting in anonymous environments . Based on these results , we could speculate that anonymity combines with other factors ( invisibility , mediation , competition , and so on ) to create a sense of distance and erode social contracts in various ways . This is certainly the dynamic witnessed by some gamers in their daily encounters . “Players often berate , belittle , bully , and threaten others with no fear of repercussions , ” one gamer wrote [ 6 ] , “they view their toxic behavior as part of the gaming culture and readily dismiss their wrongdoings with little or no guilt . ” More recent research on videogames specifically has echoed this finding . In a survey of 320 participants , ( Kordyaka , et al . , 2020 ) found that online disinhibition provided the best explanation for toxic behavior . Industry While the gaming industry has begun to take steps to address hate , some critics suggest that the industry itself must take part of the blame . For the Anti - Defamation League ( 2021 ) there is a connection between the harassment that many gamers experience and harassment that persists within the gaming industry . High - profile episodes of sexual harassment and toxic work cultures within the gaming industry have occurred recently , from Riot Games in 2018 to Ubisoft in 2020 ( Dealessandri , 2020 ) . The most recent was an incident at Activision Blizzard in 2021 , when a women who experienced intense sexual harassment on a company trip tragically took her own life . For one games scholar , the resulting lawsuit was a “display window into misogyny in the digital - gaming industry , ” with toxic behavior extending to the highest places ( Kukumbergovà , 2021 ; see also Allsup , 2021 ) . de Castell and Skardzius ( 2019 ) draw on testimonies from women in the gaming industry to document the pervasive abuse against them , an all - too - frequent occurrence in an industry with a long history of exclusion , marginalization , and hostility toward women . Together , these incidents and scholarship suggest a pattern rather than isolated anomalies , a deep - seated problem that requires serious and sustained attention from the industry . A key argument here is that a toxic industry tends to produce toxic products . Based on interviews with industry insiders , Tompkins and Martins ( 2021 ) draw a line between game studios dominated by white heterosexual men and the games they produce largely for other young men , where women are hypersexualized and objectified and diversity in character design is seen as risky . Boudreau ( 2022 ) also draws a connection between the problematic , toxic , and exclusionary behaviors evidenced in the gaming industry and the kinds of games and Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming cultures that it gives rise to—yet she also argues that this link can be productive , with progressive studios and inclusive game jams shaping the culture in positive ways . Certainly the connection between hate within the industry and hate experienced by gamers is complex and requires further research . However , for the journalists and scholars above , there is a kind of bleed through between the culture of those who make games and those who play them . Responses and challenges How can hate in gaming contexts be addressed effectively ? Is it possible to mitigate some of the most toxic behaviors and foster cultures which are instead civil , safe , and even respectful ? This section sets out recent interventions and key hurdles . Flagging One of the dominant responses to address forms of online abuse has been establishing reporting systems . The seemingly straightforward solution offered through reporting is compelling : flag something and it will be dealt with . Yet as Crawford and Gillespie ( 2016 ) noted early on in the context of social media , flagging entails a complex interplay of users , platforms , norms , and regulatory structures — as a mechanism for contestation and complaint , it is both complex and limiting . In addition , the success of reporting is not guaranteed , but instead relies on automated systems to deal with it appropriately or on human moderators to make correct judgements and take effective actions . The flag hides a vast infrastructure required for it to function . In a gaming context , flagging interacts with gaming norms already discussed . Several studies already cited here found that reporting is uneven , with incidents going unreported or underreported because of the normalization of toxic behavior in gaming contexts ( Hilvert - Bruce and Neill , 2020 ; Beres , et al . , 2021 ) . In other words , abuse and vitriol are downgraded to “banter , ” and seen as not worthy of flagging . In some games , reporting systems can be taken up in highly strategic and perhaps undesirable ways . In their study on League of Legends , Kou and Gui ( 2021 ) found that reporting or “flagging” was used in an instrumental way to punish other players . In this sense , reporting is not a communal effort to improve civility and respect in a gaming environment , but rather appropriated as a weapon to gain an edge in LoL’s highly competitive environment . Flagging then is far from being a straightforward or catch - all solution . Design nudges Other work stresses that toxic behavior must be dealt with at the level of design . Kordyaka and Kruse ( 2021 ) have collaborated with game developers and industry experts , putting forward a range of design interventions that could be beneficial . One suggestion is that player profiles should be more holistic or even tied to real world identities ( as is the case in South Korea ) , countering disinhibition by creating social / reputational cues and signaling consequences for in - game activity . A second recommendation is to have interfaces which are more transparent about the balancing / fair mechanisms built into the game , discouraging blaming of others . Another suggestion is to reward prosocial or positive behavior in the gaming context through badges , rewards , or other items . Clearly , none of these interventions is a “silver bullet , ” eradicating toxic behavior by itself . These recommendations instead suggest a cumulative effect , in which small design decisions come together to shape the culture of a gaming community in subtle but significant ways . Riot Games provides one example of this design - centric approach and is often cited as an exemplary case study of addressing hate ( Maher , 2016 ; Campbell , 2021 ) . Riot is the developer of League of Legends , a highly popular game with millions of active players . However , in 2016 the company noted the growing presence of hate speech and toxic comments within the game , and set out to address it . While several techniques were tried , the company experienced most success with a red warning message about harassment , which reduced offensive language by 11 percent and a positive message about player cooperation , which reduced offensive language by 6 . 2 percent ( Maher , 2016 ) . Such results may be promising , but they are far from being a comprehensive solution . In a 2020 player - created survey ( Clanaria , 2020 ) of 3 , 784 League of Legends players , 98 percent of participants reported they had been flamed during the game and 79 percent said they had been harassed after the game . Yet if hate is far from being “solved , ” Riot’s work in this space is worth noting for its restorative approach . Rather than simply penalizing or banning players ( who may quickly sign up with another account ) , the company seeks to reform its player base over time , encouraging prosocial activity and discouraging toxic or hateful comments . Automation and contextualization Alongside notifications and nudging techniques ( Thaler and Sunstein , 2009 ) , companies are also experimenting with fully automated solutions . In 2021 , Intel launched Bleep , an AI - powered tool that aims to identify and filter out toxic speech on gaming platforms ( Porter , 2021 ) . While a number of companies have employed similar tools for text - based speech , Bleep is the first initiative to tackle voice - chat . Voice - chat is a core feature of online gaming used for team communication and built into many popular titles , but it is also a major channel for harassment and abuse . The product aims to listen for and censor various forms of toxic speech , from “LGBTQ + hate” to “Misogyny , ” “Body Shaming , ” “Racism , ” “White Nationalism , ” and others . Yet while the product has yet to be released in the final version , it has already received criticism for sliders which allow users to hear “none , ” “some , ” or “all” of this hate speech — and even features an on / off toggle for the N - word ( Diaz , 2021 ) . Such customization gestures to the problem of over - filtering and the complexity and nuance of language . Firstly there is the issue of accurately decoding speech into text , a non - trivial task particularly when voices are shouting , clipped , or non - native speakers ( Radzikowski , et al . , 2019 ) . But secondly and more fundamentally , there is the issue of the context and intent of language , something that machine learning and other AI - based approaches still struggle with ( Knight , 2016 ) and a known issue in hate speech recognition ( MacAvaney , et al . , 2019 ) . A sentence can be intensely racist or sexist without explicitly using slurs . Similarly , a sentence can endorse xenophobia or homophobia without using flagged phrases . Given these limitations , automatic evaluation of hateful versus benign speech presents high demands . This is Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming particularly the case within gaming contexts , where “trash talk” and aggressive behavior is seen as part of the culture ( Hilvert - Bruce and Neill , 2020 ) . Banter has always been highly subjective and prone to rapidly shift from playful to hateful , particularly for women , people of color , or anyone whose identities don’t cleanly conform to the legacy “gamer” stereotype ( Ortiz , 2019a ) . Simple dictionary - based techniques are insufficient and a high degree of context awareness is needed to make nuanced distinctions between trolling and intentionally abusive language ( Sengün , et al . , 2019 ) . Such ambiguity suggests that technical approaches to hate speech in gaming will remain challenging for some time to come . From representation to operation How can gaming cultures become less hateful and more inclusive ? A significant strain of gaming scholarship has focused on the “visual politics” ( Murray , 2017 ) of “gaming representation” ( Malkowski and Russworm , 2017 ) . Who is included and who is excluded from games ? How are race , sexuality , and gender presented ? And how does this representation , skewed representation ( e . g . , sexualized women ) , or total lack of representation ( e . g . , queer people of color ) negatively affect players ( Smith and Decker , 2018 ; Gestos , et al . , 2018 ) ? Broadly speaking , this work suggests that gaming’s toxic culture derives in part from its privileging of white , heteronormative , hypermasculine characters . The argument , while often implicit , is that more diverse representations in this media would equate to a more tolerant and respectful gaming culture . However , as Kelley ( 2020 ) notes , it’s important to distinguish between games as media and games as social spaces . A game may feature diverse representation or progressive values , but this content may have minimal impact on the hate that gamers experience on the platform . Overwatch , for instance , is an incredibly popular title that features several LGBTQ + characters , rainbow icons , and celebrates Pride Month in game . However , Kelley ( 2020 ) notes that 75 percent of the Overwatch players in their recent ADL survey experienced harassment in the game . In this sense , progressive characters or inclusive icons are largely symbolic , failing to translate to an inclusive and accepting space for players . Such a dynamic runs counter to the representation - in - games scholarship above . In fact , Robinson and Whitaker ( 2021 ) argue that existing scholarship has overly privileged the “reading” of in - game representations . While games themselves may feature inclusive elements or support progressive values , racism , sexism , and other forms of hatred may be deeply embedded in the community and culture surrounding them . For those seeking to counteract such hate , inclusive or progressive content needs to be matched with an equally inclusive and affirming community . Alongside representation , we should equally focus on the hard , day - to - day work of community management within gaming contexts , a difficult role that requires experience and emotional labor ( Kerr and Keleher , 2015 ) . Learnings and future research Drawing on the wealth of research and testimony above , we can summarize a set of key learnings : 1 . More people ( and more diverse people ) are playing games , increasing the likelihood of being exposed to toxic behavior , and elevating the impact and significance of hate as a problem 2 . Hate includes antisocial behaviors ( trolling , griefing ) yet also encompasses more organized and explicit forms of hate ( racism , radicalization , extremism ) 3 . Hate within gaming is widespread ; and this ubiquity contributes towards normalizing hate as an inevitable aspect of gaming culture 4 . The industry is increasingly recognizing and responding to this problem through various initiatives , yet consensus and effective mitigation remains challenging 5 . The reasons for hate within gaming are contested but frequently listed are : a . a historically homogenous culture ( white , male , heterosexual ) with its related issues b . exposure to hate , which normalizes it and establishes a victim > perpetrator loop c . competition that fosters antagonism and out - group hostility d . disinhibition which removes social safeguards and allows action without repercussion e . overlap between a toxic industry ( production ) and toxic cultures ( consumption ) 6 . Responses to hate vary from automation to content - moderation and range in efficacy ; hate is far from being solved and requires holistic , context - sensitive interventions Based on these insights , we can identify gaps in current research and suggest some productive questions that might guide future investigations . Toxic - hate connections What is the relationship between antisocial behaviors such as griefing and cheating and more intense or organized forms of hate such as racism and extremism ? Research on “toxicity” within gaming has tended to focus on the former while bracketing out the later . In other words , scholarship has closely examined rule breaking and disruption and partially neglected powerful and historical forms of hate such as white supremacy or antisemitism ( Sartre , 1948 ) . However , as some studies gesture ( Sengün , et al . , 2019 ) , “casual” forms of anti - Muslim sentiment , for example , are precisely the ways in which some players are harassed or trolled . If this is the case , then are antisocial or aggressive players more likely to take up and propagate extremist ideologies ? Impacts on new gamers How are marginalized communities impacted by hate within gaming ? There has only been nominal work on this issue to date . The Anti - Defamation League ( 2021 ) report , for instance , quantified the prevalence of abuse in gaming on people of color . Some studies have recognized this issue and explored how black men respond to these toxic attacks ( Ortiz , 2019b ) . However , such work remains nascent . It Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming would be particularly powerful to combine quantitative techniques ( who is playing , how many hours they play , how frequently abuse occurs ) , with qualitative techniques ( what is the nature and psychological impact of this abuse ) to develop a rich portrait of toxicity in communities who are marginalized and / or relatively new to gaming . Holistic theories Is it possible to synthesize the causes of toxicity in gaming into a cohesive theory ? Recent papers have pointed to this as a gap in existing research and begun to develop a more unified theory of toxic behavior in videogames ( Kordyaka , et al . , 2020 ) . However , this work is emergent and the work - to - date around disinhibition has shown less awareness of how powerful historical hate - forms ( racism , nationalism , antisemitism , etc . ) are being repackaged in new ways ( Munn , 2019 ) and contributing to these toxic cultures . Theorizations that brought together key drivers of toxic gaming cultures in a systematic way would be a valuable foundation that helps us understand ( and counteract ) these drivers . Resisting normalization How might we push against the normalization of toxicity in gaming cultures ? In other words , what interventions could render hateful behaviors unacceptable ? On an individual level , studies have explored the potential of counterspeech , with users speaking back directly against hateful communication ( Schieb and Preuss , 2016 ) . On a group level , the use of clear standards which are consistently upheld through moderation and banning have been successful in mitigating some of the most overtly toxic elements within communities ( Chandrasekharan , et al . , 2017 ) . Such mechanisms may be labor intensive and arguably heavy handed ( deletion and removal ) , but they do seem to draw a line regarding acceptable and unacceptable activity . On a societal level , nascent programs like Game Over Hate ( https : / / gameoverhate . tumblr . com ) suggest that there is appetite for educational initiatives which provide young gamers with the tech literacy and skills to recognize and reject particular behaviors . More research is needed to identify the most effective ways to develop a zero - tolerance policy for hate , both at the cultural and technical levels . Design - centric solutions How can the design of games reduce toxicity and nurture a respectful culture ? Interfaces , prompts , filters , and safety features are all design mechanisms that could contribute to this goal , shaping cultural norms by signaling that some behavior is damaging and other behavior is desirable . Recent studies have started to investigate how design principles could do this more consciously and effectively ( Kordyaka and Kruse , 2021 ) . Yet such work is emergent and often narrow in application , with suggestions aimed at particular subgenres of games . This research might draw from more mature work on social media platforms , which have long employed interface prompts and reputation systems as one way to foster civil cultures and communication . Research on gaming that employed a design - centric lens , with concrete case studies demonstrating effectiveness , would be highly valuable . Conclusion This article examined the problem of hate speech and toxic behavior within gaming contexts , aiming to provide a starting point for researchers , policy - makers , and companies to build from . In recent years , the video game industry has enjoyed significant growth with gaming rising to become a major cultural form . Such growth means that more — and more diverse — people are playing than ever before . Yet along with this growth , there is a growing recognition of the widespread racism , sexism , xenophobia , and other forms of harassment taking place on these platforms . While such hate is often dismissed as part of the culture , it nevertheless incurs a significant psychological and emotional impact . The most frequently and intensely affected are those from already marginalized groups : women , people of color , queer individuals , and so on . Hate has ethical but also financial implications in terms of creating negative player experiences and hurting business prospects . As a result , the gaming industry has begun to recognize this issue , albeit slowly and unevenly , conducting their own studies , forming alliances , creating safety frameworks , and highlighting some of the toxic culture within studios and the industry itself . Alongside this acknowledgement , initiatives to reduce or remove hate within gaming contexts are also being trialed , from community management to automated software . While some responses have seen marginal success , hate is articulated in complex and context - specific ways , often frustrating both human regulations and technical solutions . Hate is not simply a slur that can be “fixed” through censorship , but is rather deeply tied to emotion and identity , a phenomenon with social , cultural , and political dimensions . For this reason , more research is urgently needed to advance our understanding of the links between gaming and specific forms of racism , sexism , and xenophobia . Such research would not just address the end - products of hate but understand its logics and drivers , laying the groundwork for more systematic and effective interventions . About the author Luke Munn is a Research Fellow in Digital Cultures & Societies at the University of Queensland . His wide - ranging work investigates digital cultures , critically combining diverse methods with analysis drawing on media , race , cultural , and environmental studies . This research , spanning 40 + articles and six books , has been published in highly regarded journals and with a variety of academic presses as well as referenced in popular news media . E - mail : luke [ dot ] munn [ at ] gmail [ dot ] com Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming Notes 1 . Nunan , 1992 , p . 217 . 2 . Maier , 2013 , p . 4 . 3 . Kuipers , et al . , 2016 , p . 314 . 4 . Fair Play Alliance , 2021 , p . 17 . 5 . Fair Play Alliance , 2021 , p . 8 . 6 . Fu , 2019 , p . 11 . References Accenture , 2021 . “Gaming : The next superplatform , ” at https : / / www . accenture . com / _ acnmedia / PDF - 152 / Accenture - Gaming - Article . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Paul J . C . Adachi and Teena Willoughby , 2011 . “The effect of video game competition and violence on aggressive behavior : Which characteristic has the greatest influence ? ” Psychology of Violence , volume 1 , number 4 , pp . 259 – 274 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0024908 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Maeve Allsup , 2021 . “Activision Blizzard sued over ‘frat boy’ culture , harassment , ” Bloomberg Law ( 22 July ) , at https : / / news . bloomberglaw . com / daily - labor - report / activision - blizzard - sued - by - california - over - frat - boy - culture , accessed 11 September 2023 . Anti - Defamation League , 2021 . “Hate is no game : Harassment and positive social experiences in online games 2021” ( 13 September ) , at https : / / www . adl . org / hateisnogame , accessed 11 September 2023 . Nicole A . Beres , Julian Frommel , Elizabeth Reid , Regan L . Mandryk , and Madison Klarkowski , 2021 . “Don’t you know that you’re toxic : Normalization of toxicity in online gaming , ” CHI ’21 : Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , article number 438 , pp . 1 – 15 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445157 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Ian Bogost , 2011 . How to do things with videogames . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Kelly Boudreau , 2022 . “Beyond deviance : Toxic gaming culture and the potential for positive change , ” Critical Studies in Media Communication , volume 39 , number 3 , pp . 181 – 190 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15295036 . 2022 . 2080848 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Victoria L . Braegger and Ryan M . Moeller . 2021 . “The hardcore gamer is dead : Long live gamers , ” In : Richard Colby , Matthew S . S . Johnson , and Rebekah Shultz Colby ( editors ) . The ethics of playing , researching , and teaching games in the writing classroom . Cham , Switzerland : Palgrave Macmillan , pp . 195 – 1211 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 63311 - 0 _ 12 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Oliver - James Campbell , 2021 . “Tech companies want to tackle harassment in gaming , ” Wired ( 20 June ) , at https : / / www . wired . com / story / tech - companies - harassment - gaming - riot - intel - microsoft / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Umashanthi Pavalanathan , Anirudh Srinivasan , Adam Glynn , Jacob Eisenstein , and Eric Gilbert . 2017 . “You can’t stay here : The efficacy of Reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , volume 1 , number CSCW , article number 31 , pp . 1 – 22 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134666 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Monica Chin , 2020 . “Discord raises $ 100 million and plans to move beyond gaming , ” The Verge ( 30 June ) , at https : / / www . theverge . com / 2020 / 6 / 30 / 21308194 / discord - gaming - users - safety - center - video - voice - chat , accessed 11 September 2023 . Clanaria , 2020 . “League of Legends survey results , ” Imgur ( 7 February ) , at https : / / imgur . com / a / X6iR4WE , accessed 11 September 2023 . Kate Crawford and Tarleton Gillespie , 2016 . “What is a flag for ? Social media reporting tools and the vocabulary of complaint , ” New Media & Society , volume 18 , number 3 , pp . 410 – 428 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444814543163 , accessed 11 September 2023 . David Curry , 2023 . “Discord revenue and usage statistics ( 2023 ) , ” Business of Apps ( 9 January ) , at https : / / www . businessofapps . com / data / discord - statistics / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Suzanne de Castell and Karen Skardzius , 2019 . “Speaking in public : What women say about working in the video game industry , ” Television & New Media , volume 20 , number 8 , pp . 836 – 847 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1527476419851078 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming Maria Dealessandri , 2020 . “Toxic culture at Ubisoft connected to dysfunction in HR department , ” GamesIndustry . Biz ( 14 July ) , at https : / / www . gamesindustry . biz / articles / 2020 - 07 - 14 - toxic - culture - at - ubisoft - connected - to - dysfunction - in - hr - department , accessed 11 September 2023 . Deutsche Telekom , 2021 . “No hate speech in gaming : Deutsche Telekom looks at the point where the fun stops” ( 10 May ) , at https : / / www . telekom . com / en / media / media - information / archive / no - hate - speech - in - gaming - deutsche - telekom - looks - at - the - point - where - the - fun - stops - 626342 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Caitlin Dewey , 2014 . “The only guide to Gamergate you Will ever need to read , ” Washington Post ( 14 October ) , at https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / news / the - intersect / wp / 2014 / 10 / 14 / the - only - guide - to - gamergate - you - will - ever - need - to - read / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Ana Diaz , 2021 . “Intel responds to hate speech tool getting roasted by the Internet , ” Polygon ( 9 April ) , at https : / / www . polygon . com / 22374120 / intel - bleep - voice - chat - hate - speech - censor - spirit - ai , accessed 11 September 2023 . Entertainment Software Association , 2020 . “2020 essential facts about the video game industry , ” at https : / / www . theesa . com / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 07 / 2020 - ESA _ Essential _ facts _ 070820 _ Final _ lowres . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Fair Play Alliance , 2021 . “Disruption and harms in online gaming , ” at https : / / fairplayalliance . org / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 12 / FPA - Framework . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Daniel Falla , Rosario Ortega - Ruiz , Kevin Runions , and Eva M . Romera , 2022 . “Why do victims become perpetrators of peer bullying ? Moral disengagement in the cycle of violence , ” Youth & Society , volume 54 , number 3 , pp . 397 – 418 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0044118X20973702 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Daniel Fu , 2019 . “A look at gaming culture and gaming related problems : From a gamer’s perspective , ” UCLA Center for Mental Health in Schools , at http : / / smhp . psych . ucla . edu / pdfdocs / gaming . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Aoife Gallagher , Ciaran O’Connor , Pierre Vaux , Elise Thomas , and Jacob Davey , 2021 . “The extreme right on Discord , ” Institute for Strategic Dialogue , at https : / / www . isdglobal . org / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 08 / 04 - gaming - report - discord . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Meghan Gestos , Jennifer Smith - Merry , and Andrew Campbell , 2018 . “Representation of women in video games : A systematic review of literature in consideration of adult female wellbeing , ” Cyberpsychology , Behavior , and Social Networking , volume 21 , number 9 , pp . 535 – 541 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / cyber . 2017 . 0376 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Ayushi Ghosh , 2021 . “Analyzing toxicity in online gaming communities , ” Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education , volume 12 , number 10 , pp . 4 , 448 – 4 , 455 , and at https : / / turcomat . org / index . php / turkbilmat / article / view / 5182 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Ben Gilbert , 2018 . “Amazon’s streaming service Twitch is pulling in as many viewers as CNN and MSNBC , ” Business Insider ( 13 February ) , at https : / / www . businessinsider . com / twitch - is - bigger - than - cnn - msnbc - 2018 - 2 , accessed 11 September 2023 . April Glaser , 2018 . “White supremacists still have a safe space online . It’s Discord , ” Slate ( 9 October ) , at https : / / slate . com / technology / 2018 / 10 / discord - safe - space - white - supremacists . html , accessed 11 September 2023 . Kate Grandprey - Shores , Yilin He , Kristina L . Swanenburg , Robert Kraut , and John Riedl , 2014 . “ The identification of deviance and its impact on retention in a multiplayer game . ” CSCW ’14 : Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , pp . 1 , 356 – 1 , 365 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531724 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Zorah Hilvert - Bruce and James T . Neill , 2020 . “I’m just trolling : The role of normative beliefs in aggressive behaviour in online gaming , ” Computers in Human Behavior , volume 102 , pp . 303 – 311 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2019 . 09 . 003 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Mansoor Iqbal , 2023 . “Twitch revenue and usage statistics ( 2023 ) , ” Business of Apps ( 18 July ) , at https : / / www . businessofapps . com / data / twitch - statistics / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Mark R . Johnson , 2019 . “Inclusion and exclusion in the digital economy : Disability and mental health as a live streamer on Twitch . tv , ” Information , Communication & Society , volume 22 , number 4 , pp . 506 – 520 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2018 . 1476575 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Daniel Kelley , 2020 . “Getting the hate out of games , ” GamesIndustry . Biz ( 8 April ) , at https : / / www . gamesindustry . biz / articles / 2020 - 04 - 08 - getting - the - hate - out - of - games , accessed 11 September 2023 . Aphra Kerr and John D . Kelleher , 2015 . “The recruitment of passion and community in the service of capital : Community managers in the digital games industry , ” Critical Studies in Media Communication , volume 32 , number 3 , pp . 177 – 192 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15295036 . 2015 . 1045005 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Will Knight , 2016 . “AI’s language problem , ” MIT Technology Review ( 9 August ) , at Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming https : / / www . technologyreview . com / 2016 / 08 / 09 / 158125 / ais - language - problem / , accessed 11 September 2023 . John Koetsier , 020 . “Casual games : ‘Unprecedented growth curve in an already massive industry’ , ” Forbes ( 10 June ) , at https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / johnkoetsier / 2020 / 06 / 10 / hyper - growth - for - hyper - casual - mobile - games - 2x - installs - 72 - more - sessions / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Bastian Kordyaka and Björn Kruse , 2021 . “Curing toxicity — Developing design principles to buffer toxic behaviour in massive multiplayer online games , ” Safer Communities , volume 20 , number 3 , pp . 133 – 149 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / SC - 10 - 2020 - 0037 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Bastian Kordyaka , Katharina Jahn , and Bjoern Niehaves , 2020 . “Towards a unified theory of toxic behavior in video games , ” Internet Research , volume 30 , number 4 , pp . 1 , 081 – 1 , 102 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / INTR - 08 - 2019 - 0343 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Yubo Kou and Xinning Gui . 2021 . “Flag and flaggability in automated moderation : The case of reporting toxic behavior in an online game community , ” CHI ’21 : Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , article number 437 , pp . 1 – 12 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445279 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Fernando Kuipers , Marcus Märtens , Ernst van der Hoeven , and Alexandru Iosup , 2018 . “The power of social features in online gaming , ” In : Kiran Lakkaraju , Gita Sukthankar , and Rolf T . Wigand ( editors ) . Social interactions in virtual worlds : An interdisciplinary perspective . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , pp . 313 – 336 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / 9781316422823 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Alexandra Kukumbergovà , 2021 . “Two steps forward , one step back : What the recent lawsuit against Activision Blizzard tells us about the state of the industry , ” Acta Ludologica , volume 4 , number 2 , pp . 125 – 128 , and at https : / / actaludologica . com / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 12 / AL _ 2021 - 4 - 2 _ News - 3 _ Kukumbergova . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Haewoon Kwak , Jeremy Blackburn , and Seungyeop Han , 2015 . “Exploring cyberbullying and other toxic behavior in team competition online games , ” CHI ’15 : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3 , 739 – 3 , 748 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702529 , accessed 11 September 2023 . lady _ haybear , 2019 . “People need to stop normalizing toxicity in video games . It’s beyond infuriating , ” r / GirlGamers , at https : / / www . reddit . com / r / GirlGamers / comments / btzz19 / people _ need _ to _ stop _ normalizing _ toxicity _ in _ video / ? rdt = 33060 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Paul Lilly , 2021 . “Xbox Live surpasses 100 million active monthly users as game pass adoption soars , ” HotHardware ( 27 January ) , at https : / / hothardware . com / news / xbox - live - surpasses - 100 - million - active - monthly - users - gamepass , accessed 11 September 2023 . Limelight Networks . 2021 . “The state of online gaming” ( 10 March ) , at https : / / investors . edg . io / node / 12601 / pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Taylor Lorenz and Kellen Browning , 2020 . “Dozens of women in gaming speak out about sexism and harassment , ” New York Times ( 23 June ) , at https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2020 / 06 / 23 / style / women - gaming - streaming - harassment - sexism - twitch . html , accessed 11 September 2023 . Sean MacAvaney , Hao - Ren Yao , Eugene Yang , Katina Russell , Nazli Goharian , and Ophir Frieder , 2019 . “Hate speech detection : Challenges and solutions , ” PLoS ONE , volume 14 , number 8 , e0221152 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0221152 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Brendan Maher , 2016 . “Can a video game company tame toxic behavior ? ” Scientific American ( 31 March ) , at https : / / www . scientificamerican . com / article / can - a - video - game - company - tame - toxic - behavior / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Holger R . Maier , 2013 . “What constitutes a good literature review and why does its quality matter ? ” Environmental Modelling & Software , volume 43 , pp . 3 – 4 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . envsoft . 2013 . 02 . 004 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Jennifer Malkowski and TreaAndrea M . Russworm ( editors ) , 2017 . Gaming representation : Race , gender , and sexuality in video games . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Adrienne Massanari , 2017 . “ # Gamergate and The Fappening : How Reddit’s algorithm , governance , and culture support toxic technocultures , ” New Media & Society , volume 19 , number 3 , pp . 329 – 346 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444815608807 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Carl Miller and Shiroma Silva , 2021 . “Extremists using video - game chats to spread hate , ” BBC News ( 22 September ) , at https : / / www . bbc . com / news / technology - 58600181 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Luke Munn , 2020 . “Angry by design : Toxic communication and technical architectures , ” Humanities and Social Sciences Communications , volume 7 , article number 53 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 020 - 00550 - 7 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming Luke Munn , 2019 . “Alt - right pipeline : Individual journeys to extremism online , ” First Monday , volume 24 , number 6 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5210 / fm . v24i6 . 10108 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Soraya Murray , 2017 . On video games : The visual politics of race , gender and space . London : I . B . Tauris . MY . Games 2021 . “MY . GAMES , Fair Play Alliance and IGDA conclude mental health gamers study , ” Bastian ( 18 February ) , at https : / / www . mynewsdesk . com / uk / bastion - uk / pressreleases / my - dot - games - fair - play - alliance - and - igda - conclude - mental - health - gamers - study - 3074501 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Lisa Nakamura , 2019 . “Gender and race in the gaming world , ” In : Mark Graham and William Dutton ( editors ) . Society and the Internet : How networks of information and communication are changing our lives . Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp . 127 – 145 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oso / 9780198843498 . 003 . 0008 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Lisa Nakamura , 2013 . “Glitch racism : Networks as actors within vernacular Internet theory , ” Culture Digitally ( 10 December ) , at https : / / culturedigitally . org / 2013 / 12 / glitch - racism - networks - as - actors - within - vernacular - internet - theory / , accessed 11 September 2023 . David Nunan , 1992 . Research methods in language learning . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Stephanie M . Ortiz , 2019a . “The meanings of racist and sexist trash talk for men of color : A cultural sociological approach to studying gaming culture , ” New Media & Society , volume 21 , number 4 , pp . 879 – 894 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444818814252 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Stephanie M . Ortiz , 2019b . “‘You can say I got desensitized to it’ : How men of color cope with everyday racism in online gaming , ” Sociological Perspectives , volume 62 , number 4 , pp . 572 – 588 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0731121419837588 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Benjamin Paaßen , Thekla Morgenroth , and Michelle Stratemeyer . 2017 . “What is a true gamer ? The male gamer stereotype and the marginalization of women in video game culture , ” Sex Roles , volume 76 , number 7 , pp . 421 – 435 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11199 - 016 - 0678 - y , accessed 11 September 2023 . Robert W . Palmatier , Mark B . Houston , and John Hulland , 2018 . “Review articles : Purpose , process , and structure , ” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , volume 46 , p . 1 – 5 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11747 - 017 - 0563 - 4 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Dan Patterson , 2019 . “8chan users are moving to Discord , where your kids are playing video games , ” CBS News ( 26 August ) , at https : / / www . cbsnews . com / news / 8chan - users - are - moving - to - discord - where - your - kids - are - playing - video - games / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Christopher A . Paul , 2018 . The toxic meritocracy of video games : Why gaming culture is the worst . Minneapolis : University Of Minnesota Press . Justin Paul , Weng Marc Lim , Aron O’Cass , Andy Wei Hao , and Stefano Bresciani , 2021 . “Scientific procedures and rationales for systematic literature reviews ( SPAR - 4 - SLR ) , ” International Journal of Consumer Studies , volume 45 , number 4 , pp . 1 – 16 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ijcs . 12695 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Matt Perez , 2020 . “Video games are being played at record levels as the coronavirus keeps people indoors , ” Forbes ( 16 March ) , at https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / mattperez / 2020 / 03 / 16 / video - games - are - being - played - at - record - levels - as - the - coronavirus - keeps - people - indoors / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Natasha N . Phidd , 2019 . “A call of duty to counterstrike : Cyberharassment and the toxic gaming culture plaguing female gamers and developers , ” William & Mary Journal of Race , Gender , and Social Justice , volume 25 , number 2 , pp . 461 – 491 , and at https : / / scholarship . law . wm . edu / wmjowl / vol25 / iss2 / 8 / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Jon Porter , 2021 . “Today I learned about Intel’s AI sliders that filter online gaming abuse , ” The Verge ( 8 April ) , at https : / / www . theverge . com / 2021 / 4 / 8 / 22373290 / intel - bleep - ai - powered - abuse - toxicity - gaming - filters , accessed 11 September 2023 . Roman Poyane , 2018 . “Toxic communication during streams on Twitch . Tv . The case of Dota 2 , ” Mindtrek ’18 : Proceedings of the 22nd International Academic Mindtrek Conference , pp . 262 – 265 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3275116 . 3275152 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Kacper Radzikowski , Robert Nowak , Le Wang , and Osamu Yoshie , 2019 . “Dual supervised learning for non - native speech recognition , ” EURASIP Journal on Audio , Speech , and Music Processing , volume 2019 , article number 3 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13636 - 018 - 0146 - 4 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Nick Robinson and Joe Whittaker , 2021 . “Playing for hate ? Extremism , terrorism , and videogames , ” Studies in Conflict & Terrorism ( 11 January ) . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1057610X . 2020 . 1866740 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Leonie Rösner and Nicole C . Krämer , 2016 . “Verbal venting in the social Web : Effects of anonymity and group norms on aggressive language use in online comments , ” Social Media + Society ( 16 August ) . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2056305116664220 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Royal United Services Institute ( RUSI ) , 2021 . “Extremism and gaming , ” at https : / / rusi . org / explore - our - research / projects / extremism - and - gaming - research - network , accessed 11 September 2023 . Michael Salter , 2018 . “From geek masculinity to Gamergate : The technological rationality of online abuse , ” Crime , Media , Culture , volume 14 , number 2 , pp . 247 – 264 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1741659017690893 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Jean - Paul Sartre , 1948 . Anti - semite and Jew . Translated by George J . Becker . New York : Schocken Books . Carla Schieb and Mike Preuss , 2016 . “Governing hate speech by means of counterspeech on Facebook , ” at https : / / www . researchgate . net / profile / Carla - Schieb / publication / 303497937 _ Governing _ hate _ speech _ by _ means _ of _ counterspeech _ on _ Facebook / links / 5761575408aeeada5bc4f783 / Governing - hate - speech - by - means - of - counterspeech - on - Facebook . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Sercan Sengün , Joni Salminen , Soon - gyo Jung , Peter Mawhorter , and Bernard J . Jansen , 2019 . “Analyzing hate speech toward players from the MENA in League of Legends , ” CHI EA ’19 : Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , paper number LBW0173 , pp . 1 – 6 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3312924 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Patrick Shanley , 2020 . “Gaming usage up 75 percent smid coronavirus outbreak , Verizon reports , ” Hollywood Reporter ( 17 March ) , at https : / / www . hollywoodreporter . com / news / general - news / gaming - usage - up - 75 - percent - coronavirus - outbreak - verizon - reports - 1285140 / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Cuihua Shen , Qiusi Sun , Taeyoung Kim , Grace Wolff , Rabindra Ratan , and Dmitri Williams , 2020 . “Viral vitriol : Predictors and contagion of online toxicity in World of Tanks , ” Computers in Human Behavior , volume 108 , 106343 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2020 . 106343 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Jared Shurin , 2022 . “The latest frontier in radicalization : Gaming , ” Rantt Media ( 10 January ) , at https : / / rantt . com / the - latest - frontier - in - radicalization - gaming , accessed 11 September 2023 . Noah Smith , 2019 . “Racism , misogyny , death threats : Why can’t the booming video - game industry curb toxicity ? ” Washington Post ( 26 February ) , at https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / technology / 2019 / 02 / 26 / racism - misogyny - death - threats - why - cant - booming - video - game - industry - curb - toxicity / , accessed 11 September 2023 . Roger Smith and Adrienne Decker , 2016 . “Understanding the impact of QPOC representation in video games , ” 2016 Research on Equity and Sustained Participation in Engineering , Computing , and Technology ( RESPECT ) , pp . 1 – 8 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RESPECT . 2016 . 7836164 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Lucy Sparrow , Martin Gibbs , and Michael Arnold , 2019 . “Apathetic villagers and the trolls who love them : Player amorality in online multiplayer games , ” OzCHI ’19 : Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction , pp . 447 – 451 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3369457 . 3369514 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Arran Suddi , 2017 . “Let’s talk about the normalisation of racism in the gaming community , ” TheSixthAxis ( 14 March ) , at https : / / www . thesixthaxis . com / 2017 / 03 / 14 / lets - talk - about - the - normalisation - of - racism - in - the - gaming - community / , accessed 11 September 2023 . John Suler , 2004 . “The online disinhibition effect , ” CyberPsychology & Behavior , volume 7 , number 3 , pp . 321 – 326 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / 1094931041291295 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Brian TaeHyuk Keum and Maynard Hearns , 2022 . “Online gaming and racism : Impact on psychological distress among Black , Asian , and Latinx emerging adults , ” Games and Culture , volume 17 , number 3 , pp . 445 – 460 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 15554120211039082 , accessed 11 September 2023 . T . L . Taylor , 2018 . Watch me play : Twitch and the rise of game live streaming . Princeton , N . J . : Princeton University Press . Richard H . Thaler and Cass R . Sunstein . 2009 . Nudge : Improving decisions about health , wealth , and happiness . New York : Penguin Books . Jessica E . Tompkins and Nicole Martins , 2022 . “Masculine pleasures as normalized practices : Character design in the video game industry , ” Games and Culture , volume 17 , number 3 , pp . 399 – 420 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 15554120211034760 , accessed 11 September 2023 . United Nations . Office of Counter - Terrorism , 2021 . “Expert roundtable event on video games and violent extremism” ( 6 December ) , at https : / / www . un . org / counterterrorism / events / expert - roundtable - event - video - games - and - violent - extremism , accessed 11 September 2023 . John Vanderhoef , 2013 . “Casual threats : The feminization of casual video games , ” Ada New Media , number 2 , at https : / / scholarsbank . uoregon . edu / xmlui / handle / 1794 / 26294 , accessed 11 September 2023 . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming Pierre Vaux , Aoife Gallagher , and Jacob Davey , 2021 . “The extreme right on Steam , ” Institute for Strategic Dialogue , at https : / / www . isdglobal . org / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 08 / 02 - revised - gaming - report - steam . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Wesley Yin - Poole , 2021 . “Steam has over 120m monthly active users , ” Eurogamer ( 7 January ) , st https : / / www . eurogamer . net / articles / 2021 - 01 - 14 - steam - has - over - 120m - monthly - active - users , accessed 11 September 2023 . Young Gamers & Gamblers Education Trust ( YGAM ) , 2021 . “She plays he says , ” at https : / / www . ygam . org / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 06 / She - plays - He - says - YGAM - Report . pdf , accessed 11 September 2023 . Editorial history Received 18 May 2022 ; revised 21 September 2022 ; accepted 11 September 2023 This paper is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - ShareAlike 4 . 0 International License . Toxic play : Examining the issue of hate within gaming by Luke Munn . First Monday , volume 28 , number 9 ( September 2023 ) . doi : https : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5210 / fm . v28i9 . 12508