29 A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities PUJAN ZIAIE , Technical University of Muni´ch Open production communities ( OPCs ) provide technical features and social norms for a vast but dispersed anddiversecrowdtocollectivelyaccumulatecontent . InOPCs , certainmechanisms , policies , andtechnologies are provided for voluntary users to participate in community - related activities including content generation , evaluation , qualiﬁcation , and distribution and in some cases even community governance . Due to the known complexities and dynamism of online communities , designing a successful community is deemed more an art than a science . Numerous studies have investigated different aspects of certain types of OPCs . Most of these studies , however , fall short of delivering a general view or prescription due to their narrow focus on a certain type of OPCs . In contribution to theories on technology - mediated social participation ( TMSP ) , this study synthesizes the streams of research in the particular area of OPCs and delivers a theoretical framework as a baseline for adapting ﬁndings from one speciﬁc type of community on another . This framework consists of four primary dimensions , namely , platform features , content , user , and community . The corresponding attributes of these dimensions and the existing interdependencies are discussed in detail . Furthermore , a decision diagram for selecting features and a design guideline for “decontextualizing” ﬁndings are introduced as possible applications of the framework . The framework also provides a new and reliable foundation on which future research can extend its ﬁndings and prescriptions in a systematic way . Categories and Subject Descriptors : H . 5 . 3 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : Computer - supported cooperative work General Terms : Design , Theory , Human Factors Additional Key Words and Phrases : TMSP , design , knowledge sharing , user - generated content ACM Reference Format : Pujan Ziaie . 2014 . A model for context in the design of open production communities . ACM Comput . Surv . 47 , 2 , Article 29 ( November 2014 ) , 29 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661642 1 . INTRODUCTION Thanks to the interactive features of Web2 . 0 , technology - mediated social participation ( TMSP ) [ Preece and Shneiderman 2009 ] has turned into a common practice to generate valuable content by facilitating the potential creativity , knowledge , and stamina of a vast crowd . Respectively , online or virtual communities are ubiquitous platforms to support TMSP in order to create , organize , and share knowledge ; develop ideas ; and solve problems [ Hargadon and Bechky 2006 ] . Focusing on content development as the main purpose of a community , open production communities ( OPCs ) provide necessary mechanisms and features to support collaborative ( peer - to - peer ) , creative , or even competitive creation of open content in particular topics of interest [ Ziaie and Krcmar 2013b ] . The type of generated content can vary from text ( e . g . , Wikipedia or Author’s address : Lehrstuhl f¨ur Wirtschaftsinformatik ( I 17 ) , Technical University of Munich , Boltzmannstr . 3 , 85748 Garching b . M¨unchen ; email : ziaie @ mytum . de . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , to redistribute to lists , or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept . , ACM , Inc . , 2 Penn Plaza , Suite 701 , New York , NY 10121 - 0701 USA , fax + 1 ( 212 ) 869 - 0481 , or permissions @ acm . org . c (cid:2) 2014 ACM 0360 - 0300 / 2014 / 11 - ART29 $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661642 ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 2 P . Ziaie Slashdot ) and code ( e . g . , open source software [ OSS ] communities ) to architectural sketching , video and audio editing , and geographical maps [ De Alfaro et al . 2011 ] . With the concept of user - generated content ( UGC ) gaining interest , there has been increased attention among scholars and practitioners to OPCs . As a result , a vast body of literature has been devoted to investigating certain aspects of these communities . These aspects include user behavior [ Vassileva 2012 ; von Krogh et al . 2012 ] , community governance [ Schwagereit et al . 2011 ] , content crowdsourcing [ Haythornthwaite 2009 ] , content quality assessment [ Yaari et al . 2011 ] , community lifecycle [ Iriberri and Leroy 2009 ] , constructive collaboration [ Forte and Lampe 2013 ; McKenzie et al . 2012 ] , and design guidelines [ Kraut and Resnick 2011a ; Ziaie and Krcmar 2014 ] . Most of these studies have focused on one particular type of production community , for example , OSS communities , social media , Wikipedia , or open innovation communities . Regarding the intriguing matter of designing OPCs , important steps have been taken in recent years to provide a more systematic view and prescriptive approaches [ Gurzick and Lutters 2009 ] . Various empirical methodologies were applied to examine the exist - ing socio - technical effects including multisite studies , longitudinal research , controlled experiments , computational modeling , programmatic research , or data mining to de - velop relevant theories [ Fulk and Gould 2009 ] . Observing the current dispersed liter - ature and lack of an all - encompassing view , scholars such as Kraut et al . [ 2010 ] and Forte et al . [ 2013 ] urged more consolidated theories and concepts to be developed to address different aspects of their intricate design possibilities . Designing OPCs , how - ever , is more of an art than science [ Vassileva 2012 ] , since numerous contextual , social , individual , and technological factors evolve together and with a mutual impact on each other [ Lev - On 2013 ; O’Day et al . 1996 ] . Furthermore , the intertwined requirements of different technical , personal , and social levels result in a situation where a narrow focus on one part or dimension can produce diminishing returns or cause problems to arise elsewhere [ Whitworth 2009 ] . This is why in many cases , seemingly small changes in features have resulted in signiﬁcantly different reactions [ Butler et al . 2010 ] . Respec - tively , Faraj et al . [ 2011 ] point out the ﬂuidity of online communities , since user - based resources including passion , time , or identity present a dynamic ﬂow in and out of the community . Also , structural mechanisms like community size and rules , quality control , and user roles and needs vary perpetually during the lifecycle of a community [ Ziaie and Imamovic 2013 ] . All these factors make the parameterization of pertinent theories and their gener - alization a nontrivial task [ Ling et al . 2005 ] . Adding to the complication is that many developed theories have been based on ﬁndings from one speciﬁc type of OPC ( e . g . , OSS communities ) and , therefore , their validity for other contexts is questionable due to the underlying , sometimes fundamental differences . An essential prerequisite for developing more holistic and general theories is a common framework to structure , organize , and cumulate isolated knowledge in order to quantify the characteristics of the target systems . “Decontextualization” of ﬁndings is one solution to this problem . Decontextualization here refers to a systematic approach to generalize the ﬁndings on one speciﬁc community ( a certain context ) so that it can be used in another , perhaps completely different set of communities ( another context ) . This can be performed by elucidating and quantifying the contextual factors ( attributes and their corresponding values ) in OPCs to specify the context and then generalizing existing theories , hypothe - ses , or design assertions by reanalyzing them based on the different values of these attributes in another context . In this article , Whitworth’s framework for socio - technical systems ( STSs ) [ Whitworth 2009 ] is extended for OPCs by adding a new dimension for “content . ” The conceptual - ized framework consists of four primary design dimensions , namely , platform features ( technology ) , content , user , and community . By identifying existing attributes for each ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 3 dimension and the discovered interdependencies between them , a novel approach is introduced to decontextualize and generalize theories and empirical ﬁndings . Accumu - lating current dispersed knowledge in a structured framework also paves the way for the scientiﬁc community to consider new perspectives and gain a better generic insight of the key design factors in this area . Furthermore , community designers may beneﬁt from the proposed design concept by gaining a ﬁner view on the pertinent attributes of OPCs . They can select and prioritize various features from best practices of other communities only after drawing an analogy between the communities and comparing the values of pertinent attributes . This may increase the success of their community by raising awareness of the possible interdependencies and context - dependent measures and concerns in this multidisciplinary ﬁeld . The rest of this article is organized into four sections . The next section provides detailed descriptions of the theoretical framework for OPCs and its four design dimen - sions ( platform features , content , user , and community ) . Then , the interdependencies between the attributes of each dimension are elaborated upon based on the theories and ﬁndings from the literature . In the following section , a systematic way for de - contextualizing ﬁndings is introduced in the form of a decision diagram and a design model . Pertinent examples are also provided to elucidate the results . Finally , the ar - ticle is concluded with a summary and a discussion of the theoretical and practical implications , common issues , and suggestions for future works . Also , in order to keep the number of citations tractable , prestigious international conferences and journals were focused on rather than workshop papers . Preference was given to more recent works , considering the rapid changes in technology and user behavior . 2 . CONTEXT - AWARE DESIGN OF OPCS 2 . 1 . Research Focus : Open Production Communities Communities can generally be distinguished by following an approach based on users’ needs , such as socialization , gaming , content or knowledge sharing , activism , develop - ment , and exchange [ Hinds and Lee 2008 ] . The communities of interest in this study are OPCs , which have the primary goal of accumulating and sharing user - generated content . The term was inspired by the deﬁnition provided by Oreg and Nov [ 2008 ] and Wilkinson [ 2008 ] , emphasizing the crowdsourcing of content and its openness as a public good [ Andreoni 1990 ] . OPCs can be generally divided into two primary categories : collaborative ( peer to peer ) and creative [ McKenzie et al . 2012 ] . In collaborative communities , content can be devel - oped collaboratively and by more than one user . The type of content that can nowadays be created collaboratively is not limited to text and ranges all the way from knowledge generation ( e . g . , Wikipedia ) to architectural sketching , product design , movie making , and geographical maps [ De Alfaro et al . 2011 ] . In creative communities , however , each user is basically the “owner” of his or her generated content and other members may only contribute in the form of comment ( discussion ) , ratings , recommendations , and other auxiliary forms . Table I shows popular types of OPCs with the corresponding content and examples . Each of these categories and their corresponding subcategories have their own unique characteristics . The primary desires of users may differ as well . Still , it is safe to believe that all these communities follow some general patterns that can be availed upon to draw a generic framework for certain aspects of their design . Therefore , unlike many empirical studies that have focused on a certain type of community , the goal of this study is to provide a way to “decontextualize” [ Hughes and Lang 2006 ] the ﬁndings that pertain to their design and characteristics based on a general framework . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 4 P . Ziaie Table I . General Categories and Types of OPCs 2 . 2 . Theoretical Framework OPCs , in general , ﬁt in the notion of socio - technical systems , where , as the name suggests , individual activities and interactions are facilitated by technical features in a social context [ Trist 1981 ] . Here two theories are drawn upon to propose a four - dimensional model as a baseline for OPCs . First is Kuutti’s [ 1996 ] Activity Theory [ Engestr¨om 1999 ] in the context of human – computer interaction ( HCI ) research and design that encompasses three actors ( subject , community , and object ) . The relations between these actors are mediated by three elements of tools , rules , and division of labor . The elements of this model can be adopted for the context of OPC by considering a new dimension for content , derived from the “object” element . In this way , users ( subjects ) utilize features ( tools ) within a community rule and norms ( rules ) to develop content ( object ) . The second theory is Whitworth’s [ 2009 ] four - layer model for socio - technical systems that consists of physical ( hardware ) , informational ( software ) , personal ( user ) , and com - munal ( community ) requirements . By merging hardware and software ( infrastructure and platform ) into a broader dimension of “technology , ” the abstraction levels of this model can be used to theorize an extended model that is suitable for addressing the de - sign aspects of OPCs . In this model , platform features represent the central dimension of OPC design , where the activities and processes stem from the interaction of user , content , and community and are supported or enabled by the underlying features . The focus of the technology dimension is , therefore , unlike Whitworth’s model , on the tangible features of the platform instead of its underlying infrastructure . Hard - ware and software requirements can be derived from the general corresponding factors including the size of the community , the importance of data security , and the volumes of interactions . Therefore , the requirements of the underlying software and hardware infrastructure and their pertinent issues including scalability , interoperability , relia - bility , and security fall outside the abstraction layer of OPC design 1 that is addressed in this study . In a nutshell , based on this model , a community designer should select , prioritize , implement , and adjust features based on the pertinent attributes of content , user , and community ( contextual factors ) . Figure 1 depicts the proposed extended framework with platform features as the cornerstone of community design . The mutual relations and interactions between each 1 Issues such as interoperability , reliability , or security should be addressed in all types of OPCs and therefore are less relevant for the purpose of “decontextualization . ” ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 5 Fig . 1 . Theoretical framework for designing OPCs . of the identiﬁed dimensions and the corresponding activities and processes are shown with an arrow representing the direction of interaction . Rules and policies in this framework act as a glue by providing certain disciplines and regulations for the community to prosper . They often have a mediatory role in regulating the interactions of users and other dimensions . This is facilitated by provid - ing a suitable and viable frame for actions [ Couger 1996 ] , balancing the rights of both contributors and end - users [ McNally et al . 2012 ] , and strengthening the responsibility norms as a way of monitoring [ Cheshire and Cook 2004 ] . In the next section , the essential design - related attributes of each dimension are addressed . The potential or possible interdependencies will be discussed as well . 3 . DESIGN DIMENSIONS OF OPCS AND THE UNDERLYING INTERDEPENDENCIES When designing OPCs , every decision should be made in line with the existing con - textual factors . It is therefore of great importance to identify and be aware of these factors that fundamentally shape the essence of a community . Based on the concep - tualized theoretical framework , these factors can be divided into four dimensions of platform features , content , user , and community ( see Figure 1 ) . A comprehensive list of the respective attributes not only helps explain the dynamics of OPCs but also can be used to address the discrepancies between different types of communities . In order to identify these attributes , the literature was surveyed from a design perspective . In the following , standalone and interdimensional attributes of every dimension are pro - vided . Interdimensional attributes are those that stem from the interaction between two or more dimensions . These attributes can be later used as decision nodes to ad - dress differences between contexts and decontextualize ﬁndings , recommendations , or statements . Figure 2 depicts a summary of the standalone and interdimensional attributes of each design dimension in the form of a matrix . These attributes are presented in the rows pertaining to their dimension , meaning that the interdependent dimensions are categorized in the columns of this matrix . In the following , the detailed deﬁnition and relevance of all the attributes of each dimension will be elaborated upon . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 6 P . Ziaie Fig . 2 . Design attributes stemming from mutual interdependencies . 3 . 1 . Platform Features 3 . 1 . 1 . StandaloneAttributesofPlatformFeatures . A considerable body of recent empirical research embodies information technology and technological interventions to empower users for activities such as communication , coordination [ Hinds and McGrath 2006 ] , and knowledge management [ Sambamurthy and Subramani 2005 ] . As mentioned ear - lier , platform features are the relevant part of the technology layer that refers to all technical aspects of OPCs , from hardware and software infrastructure ( e . g . , servers and operating systems ) to the underlying platform ( software and algorithms ) . The platform 2 here provides the highest abstraction layer consisting of the necessary tools and structures for a community to achieve its goals . Table II shows a list of identiﬁed ( standalone ) attributes for platform features in the context of OPCs . 2 In this article , the term “platform” is used to refer to the “software platform . ” “Feature” also represents “software platform features , ” unless stated otherwise . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 7 Table II . Attributes of Platform Features of OPCs Attribute Description Purpose Generally , the purpose of a feature can be user , content , or community oriented ( see Figure 1 ) . For user - oriented features , to avoid imposing cognitive burden , the feature’s purpose should be in line with the needs and desires of users [ Deng and Chi 2012 ] . Some common user - oriented purposes are facilitating navigation [ Preece 2001 ] ; addressing user desires to enhance participation and loyalty [ Ziaie and Krcmar 2014 ] ; facilitating personalization [ Paliouras 2012 ] , reputation [ De Alfaro et al . 2011 ; Ma and Agarwal 2007 ] , and socialization [ Farzan et al . 2012 ] ; enabling coordination of user activities [ Herbsleb 2007 ] ; and securing privacy [ Awad and Krishnan 2006 ] . Content - oriented features are primarily used for importing , maintaining , generating , evaluating , reporting , ﬁltering , searching , recommending , and distributing content [ McKenzie et al . 2012 ] and ensuring an acceptable level of quality for content [ Varlamis 2010 ] . Community - oriented features focus on the community’s needs and collective actions of users . These include , but are not limited to , managing subcommunities and projects [ Crowston et al . 2006 ; Kittur et al . 2009 ] , managing users and enforcing norms [ Sternberg 2012 ] , signaling credibility [ Benlian and Hess 2011 ] , monitoring and visualizing activities and roles [ Vassileva and Sun 2007 ; Welser et al . 2007 ] , and increasing transparency [ Bolici et al . 2009 ] . Visibility Features can be visible or hidden within a community . Visible features are those that can be explicitly interacted with ( e . g . , search , content modiﬁcation , discussion , etc . ) . Hidden features run in the background and are not in direct interaction with users or community . Bots to import content into Wikipedia [ Niederer and van Dijck 2010 ] or automatic content - tagging functions [ Siersdorfer et al . 2009 ] are a few examples of hidden features . Autonomy Features can be applied in combination with other features or autonomously . If a feature is not autonomous and relies on other systems or features to function , the attributes of those accompanying features should be taken into account as well . This includes their interdependencies with the respective attributes of other dimensions in the decontextualization process . Mobilesuitability In recent years and after the introduction of smartphones and tablets , a considerable amount of people use these mobile devices to access and avail themselves of certain services and networks . OPCs often need complex mechanisms to develop content that are not easy to employ via a browser on a mobile device . Therefore , well - designed and self - contained apps are required to replace detailed and interconnected webpages [ Simonite 2013 ] . 3 . 1 . 2 . InterdimensionalAttributesofPlatformFeatures . Content - related attributes of features Some features can function merely based on a sufﬁciently large pool of content . This content dependency is a crucial attribute , since the performance of a feature is highly dependent on existing relevant and useful content . For example , the performance of con - tent recommendation features , automatic tagging , and autocorrections depends heavily on a substantial pool of content [ Konstan and Riedl 2012 ; Siersdorfer et al . 2009 ] . User - related attributes of features User - oriented features are principally employed by users to receive useful information or engage in community - related activities . Features also have an impact on users . Tech - nology , in socio - technical systems , is not merely a tool to accomplish certain tasks and enable speciﬁc activities . It can practically shape the behavior of its users [ Blanchard and Markus 2007 ] . In other words , our identity , behavior , and subjectivity are increas - ingly inﬂuenced by technological interventions [ Dovey and Kennedy 2006 ] . Under - standably , this only occurs if these features are actively utilized . Many technologies and features that have been developed with labor - intensive efforts remain largely underutilized [ Keinz and Pr¨ugl 2010 ] . The reason is that they are not perceived by users as useful or easy - to - use tools . This is an important issue , since poor usability and ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 8 P . Ziaie “requirement mess” [ Lindquist 2005 ] often result in the failure of a community [ Benbya et al . 2004 ] . Respectively , one of the most promising and widely used models with regard to tech - nology in a social context is an extension of the technology acceptance model ( TAM ) [ Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ] . A recent version of this model points out perceived tech - nology usability , usefulness , and user technology efﬁcacy as signiﬁcant attributes to explain the adaptation of technology [ Venkatesh and Goyal 2010 ] . Perceived usability refers to the extent to which a user believes a feature is easy to learn and work with within a speciﬁc context [ Karat 1997 ] . Usefulness is deﬁned as the degree to which a user believes a feature would enable him or her to perform certain actions more efﬁciently or effectively and therefore increase his or her performance [ Davis et al . 1989 ] . These are critical attributes to consider when implementing new user - oriented features . For visible features , it is also of great importance how they are introduced and pre - sented . The perceived style and aesthetic quality of features and / or their formulation can have signiﬁcant effects on their effectiveness and perceived ease of use . For exam - ple , Mamykina et al . [ 2011 ] found out that in Stack Overﬂow , a popular Q & A site for technical domains , the details of the features’ design effectively induced desirable be - haviors of users and discouraged undesirable ones . In line with this ﬁnding , Cyr [ 2014 ] suggests that features’ graphical design and integrity can have a positive impact on trust , satisfaction , and loyalty of users . Another reason for a possible failure or abandonment of features lies in the lack of possibility to apply them in a target - oriented and customized way . Many incentives , 3 for example , are ineffective or even counterproductive when applied to speciﬁc groups of users within the same community . For instance , Chen et al . [ 2010 ] show that in a movie - rating community , social comparisons are only effective for those users whose contributions are below the average , emphasizing the importance of target - oriented application of certain features . Different layers of features can also be customized , including their presentation ( appearance and formulation ) or frequency [ Chung and Nah 2009 ; Paliouras 2012 ] . Finally , availability of features ( whether available only online or also ofﬂine ) can inﬂuence user behavior as well . For example , Lin [ 2007 ] showed that nonproﬁt virtual communities that offer ofﬂine features have a better chance of survival . Features , similar to technology in a broader context , can be employed by being pushed on users or being pulled by them on demand [ Parikh and Verma 2002 ] . For instance , features such as notiﬁcations and content recommendations are considered push fea - tures , while discussion , content generation , and messaging are deemed pull features . Introducing a push feature is a delicate matter and its success strongly depends on the characteristics of target users and the way these features are personalized and presented [ Cyr 2014 ] . Community - related attributes of features Many features can enable communities to secure a competitive advantage . Wikipedia’s advance , for instance , is empowered by not only the vast number of contributors but also the technologies behind its structure to import and maintain content ( e . g . , by using bots ) and facilitate coordination [ Niederer and van Dijck 2010 ] . The features should be introduced in line with a community’s state and characteristics . Some of these fea - tures , for example , may be lifecycle dependent . This means that their success depends 3 The term “incentive” in this article refers to features and measures that motivate users to join a community and / or participate with their presence , actions , and contributions ( see Ziaie and Krcmar [ 2014 ] for a detailed essay on user motivations and incentive systems ) . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 9 signiﬁcantly on when and under what conditions they are introduced to a community [ Iriberri and Leroy 2009 ] . For instance , in the context of social news aggregators ( open media ) , Lerman [ 2007 ] showed that leaderboards ( lists of top active users ) are only effective in the early stages of a community ( see “stage of lifecycle” in Table V ) . Some features may also be size dependent and prove useful only when a community is small or large enough . A feature for ﬁltering information or monitoring user activities may , for example , only make sense when a community is large enough [ Jones et al . 2004 ] . This also holds true for features to create and manage subcommunities , projects , and groups to divide tasks , increase familiarity , and facilitate coordination [ Bateman et al . 2011 ] . 3 . 2 . Content 3 . 2 . 1 . StandaloneAttributesofContent . Content 4 is the end - product of OPCs and its de - velopment their main objective . As Jay Marathe once mentioned , content is “the king” in production communities and the new concept of user - generated content has in - evitably changed our perception of many notions including collaboration , ownership , privacy , and quality [ Fischer 2009 ] . In many OPCs , not only content generation but also content evaluation and qualiﬁcation processes have been transferred from experts to the information - seeking public [ Metzger 2007 ] . A comprehensive list of standalone content - related attributes can be viewed in Table III . These attributes are of great importance when selecting content - oriented features . 3 . 2 . 2 . Interdimensional Attributes of Content . In order to study the interdependencies of content with other dimensions , a suitable model for representing content in the context of production communities is required . For this purpose , Ziaie and Krcmar’s [ 2013a ] model for production communities is drawn upon . According to this model , content ( as a whole ) is divided into four components : content essence or main content ( main body of content ) , metacontent ( additional descriptive or evaluative information such as tags , categories , ratings , etc . ) , subcontent ( discussions pertaining to the content ) , and metainformation ( statistical and context - dependent information such as location of generators , number of viewers , etc . ) . The ﬁrst three components are created and modiﬁed primarily by users , whereas the last part ( metainformation ) is generated automatically by the system ( platform ) ( see Figure 3 ) . Feature - related attributes of content The very nature of content can sometimes restrain the applicability of some of the features such as search or QA functions . This attribute can be called content process - ability . For instance , textual items have high processability . As a result , features that are based on algorithms to search or assess them are relatively easy to implement . For images and audio and video ﬁles , on the other hand , the same processes are rel - atively complicated to implement . Considering content with lower processability , sup - plementary information including metacontent and metainformation is often required to deliver acceptable results [ Bischoff et al . 2008 ] , which in turn accentuates the user dimension . 4 A broader deﬁnition of content can encompass user - related ( proﬁle ) data or educational information for the community ; however , in the literature , the term “content” is often used as the information that is added or generated by users or experts for the sake of expanding and enriching the knowledge pool of the community . In this article , we follow the taxonomy proposed by Ziaie and Krcmar [ 2013 ] and use “user proﬁle data” or “educational material” for other cases . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 10 P . Ziaie Table III . Attributes of Content in OPCs Attribute Description Type ( format ) Content can be presented in different types or formats including text , image , audio , video , code , design sketches , and 3D models [ Fischer 2009 ] . The type of content has a direct inﬂuence on its modiﬁability and an indirect impact on its quality criteria and “searchability . ” The abstraction level for content type depends on the context and can be sketched in a more general fashion as in “textual vs . nontextual” or “compilable vs . noncompilable” content . For instance , scholars have noted that in communities with nontextual content , more attention is paid to supplementary information ( metacontent ) , since it plays an important role in describing the content and providing a powerful tool to enable clustering [ Han et al . 2012 ] , indexing , and searching algorithms [ Khabiri et al . 2009 ] . Function ( form ) The function or form of content refers to the purpose of its application . Content can be intended as news , essays , entertainment , maps , designs , discussion topics , products , ideas ( innovations ) , applications , and so forth . The function of content along with its type can sometimes determine its quality criteria and the primary desires of contributing users [ McKenzie et al . 2012 ] . Also , it has been shown that the form or function of content may determine user attitudes toward information sharing [ Constant et al . 1994 ] . Subjectivityofquality The degree of subjectivity of content quality refers to the extent to which the quality can be assessed based on objective criteria . User - generated content has been argued to have a “subjective nature” per se [ Hilligoss and Rieh 2008 ] , suggesting that reaching a consensus on objective criteria to determine its quality is not an easy task . Still , in some contexts , certain criteria can be employed to estimate the quality ( e . g . , evaluating the quality of an essay by assessing the formality of the language ) [ Emigh and Herring 2005 ] . The higher the subjectivity of quality is , the more crucial the role of users or experts becomes in determining the quality through quantitative or qualitative measures [ Diakopoulos and Naaman 2011 ] . Qualitycriteria High - quality content is one of the major success factors of online communities [ Leimeister et al . 2006 ] . Deﬁning apt criteria ( metrics ) to assess and ensure quality is , therefore , of crucial importance . These criteria can be generally divided into two main categories : measurable or automatically deducible ( via beﬁtting algorithms ) and nonmeasurable or human dependent ( their value can only be estimated by users ) [ Yaari et al . 2011 ] . Also , quality criteria can be content based ( pertaining to the components of content ) , usage based , or user based ( estimated by the credibility or reputation of the contributors ) [ Agichtein et al . 2008 ] . Human - dependent criteria include novelty [ Carmel et al . 2010 ] , relevance , comprehensiveness [ Riedl et al . 2010 ] , accuracy , interactivity [ Zheng et al . 2010 ] , usefulness [ Lin 2007 ] , and objectivity [ Stvilia et al . 2007 ] . Timeliness Timeliness indicates whether the value or quality of content alters with time [ Ballou et al . 1998 ] . For example , news or innovations are time dependent , whereas content aimed for entertainment or scientiﬁc articles and essays are , rather , timeless . Timeliness is an important factor or determinant for incentive systems and also predicting user behavior ( for an example see Szabo and Huberman [ 2010 ] for a comparison between Digg and YouTube in modeling user behavior ) . Layerability ( interdepen - dencies ) Content can consist of independent items or items with functional or utility dependency [ Howison and Crowston 2014 ] . For communities with high layerability of content ( e . g . , OSS communities ) , content quality assurance ( QA ) processes are signiﬁcantly different and more stringent than communities with low or no layerability ( e . g . , ﬁle sharing communities like YouTube ) . In communities that focus on content with low layerability , coordination between users is either not necessary or not complex [ Malone and Crowston 1994 ; Van de Ven et al . 1976 ] . Interactivity Content can be static or interactive . Interactivity has been shown to have a positive effect on the perceived satisfaction of users in some communities ( see , e . g . , Chung and Nah [ 2009 ] for open media communities ) . User - related attributes of content User dependency of content refers to the degree of users’ involvement in generating content . Content may be generated by users ( e . g . , OSS communities ) , users and experts ( e . g . , UrbanDictionary . com ) , or users and bots ( e . g . , Wikipedia ) . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 11 Fig . 3 . Content construct and relevant actors [ Ziaie and Krcmar 2013a ] . Collectivity of content [ Olsson 2009 ] is another essential attribute of content . It cor - responds to the depth of user collaboration to develop content . In other words , it refers to the components of content that can be collaboratively modiﬁed or extended ( see Figure 3 ) . The highest collectivity takes place in collaborative communities such as Wikipedia or OSS communities [ De Alfaro et al . 2011 ] , where any eligible user can alter and update content essence . Lastly , the perceived quality of content may also inﬂuence the perceived credibility of a community and consequently the contribution behavior of users and their level of trust [ Zheng et al . 2013 ] . Community - related attributes of content With regard to the community dimension , the originality of content is an important attribute . Originality here means to what extent is this content created and developed within the community . Some communities are largely functioning as content propaga - tors ( e . g . , social media or open ﬁle sharing ) , and as a result the accumulated content is derivative . Users of these communities submit items that have been developed in other communities or by other individuals . Other communities may serve as remixing tools to develop and enhance already generated ( unoriginal ) items into something new and original 5 [ Benkler 2006 ] . Remixing practices often play a signiﬁcant role in new forms of innovation [ Hill and Monroy - Hern´andez 2013 ] . Originality is usually interrelated with content licensing and may have an impact on the contribution behavior of users . Finally , level of accessibility was also identiﬁed as an inﬂuential attribute for content . In most of the OPCs , as the term “open” suggests , content is open to everyone ( user and nonuser ) . However , some communities may develop a hierarchy for accessing content . This has been shown to have considerable effects on users’ perceptions of the community and their behavioral intention [ Teo et al . 2003 ] . 3 . 3 . User 3 . 3 . 1 . StandaloneAttributesofUser . Users are one of the pillars and shapers of online communities . The term “users” here refers to all groups of individuals who use the features in a community . This includes guests ( unregistered users ) , normal users , and privileged users ( e . g . , admins and operators ) . The distinction between privileged and 5 A good example here is the “ Scratch Online Community , ” endorsed by MIT , in which users can create new interactive animations or videos by using already made pieces of animations or videos ( see scratch . mit . edu ) . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 12 P . Ziaie Table IV . Attributes of User in OPCs Attribute Description Internetefﬁcacy Efﬁcacy refers to an individual’s perceived ability or sense of personal competence to perform certain actions [ Bandura 2001 ] . Internet self - efﬁcacy of users is believed to have a signiﬁcant effect on the amount and type of their participation [ Wang et al . 2011 ] . Basicdesires User desires are deemed essential in research pertaining to user participation and conﬂict management [ Kraut and Resnick 2011b ] . User desires can be used to predict their primary motivations within a community [ Lampe et al . 2010 ] , since individuals often behave in such manners that are appealing to both other members and their own desires [ Wang and Fesenmaier 2003 ] . In line with Reiss’s [ 2004 ] theory of 16 basic desires , Ziaie and Krcmar [ 2014 ] identify seven relevant desires in the context of OPCs : self - development , self - importance , fun , vindication , socialization , group identity , and uniqueness . Identifying the basic desires of users sheds ample light on their motivation to participate and can predict or explain their behavior in a community and their reaction to certain features . More interestingly , the primary basic desires of users in a certain type of OPC might differ from another one . For example , in open source software development communities , self - development , socialization , and group identity are primary user desires [ Oreg and Nov 2008 ; von Krogh et al . 2012 ] , while in open discussion communities , self - importance , socialization , and fun can be highlighted [ Lou et al . 2013 ] . Gender The gender of users determines their perception of features [ Benlian and Hess 2011 ] , trust [ Porter et al . 2012 ] , preferred form of communication or layout , desires [ Ma and Yuen 2011 ] , and sometimes even rating behavior [ Stumpf and London 1981 ] . Age Studies conducted on digital divide show that demographic differences in general and age in particular play a major role in the suitability and effectiveness of certain design components of online communities [ Gurzick and Lutters 2009 ] . Users’ age may also be used as an indicator to predict their interests , values [ Lam et al . 2011 ] , and reactions to certain incentives [ Gefen and Ridings 2005 ] . For example , Chung et al . [ 2010 ] found negative relations between age and Internet self - efﬁcacy of users and the perceived quality of content . normal users fades particularly in collaborative OPCs , where usually users can be pro - moted to higher levels in the organizational hierarchy based on their accomplishments [ Ziaie and Krcmar 2012 ] . Users bring various and diverse skills , experiences , interests , desires , and biases into the community [ Fulk and Gould 2009 ] . This diversity brings different desires and needs that should be addressed accordingly . Several standalone attributes of users were identiﬁed that have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on their behavior to each other and the community . These include Internet efﬁcacy , basic desires , gender , and age . In Table IV , a summary of these attributes and some of their more common values are listed . It should be noted that these attributes are not completely independent and the values of one might have an impact on another . For example , the primary desires of users within a community can be predicted by their entrenched desires and beliefs [ Kraut and Resnick 2011b ] . Furthermore , relational properties between users imply cross - level or multiple - level relations [ Contractor et al . 2006 ] , as depicted in the theo - retical framework ( Figure 1 ) by the “socialization” arrow . The age of a user might also indicate his or her Internet efﬁcacy or vice versa . 3 . 3 . 2 . InterdimensionalAttributesofUser . Feature - related attributes of user Similar to Internet efﬁcacy , technology efﬁcacy of users indicates their perceived fa - miliarity with features of a community and the comfort of using them [ Jarvenpaa and Staples 2000 ] . This perception sometimes determines their affection toward the com - munity and inﬂuences the quality , quantity , and type of their contributions [ Lai and Hsieh 2013 ; Leung 2009 ] . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 13 Content - related attributes of user With regard to content , the contribution 6 behavior of users represents the type and orientation of their behavior toward content development and usage . Depending on the context , different terms have been used in the literature to distinguish between different behavioral patterns . A well - known framework , introduced by Preece and Shneiderman [ 2009 ] , categorizes users’ behavior into readers , contributors , collabo - rators , and leaders . According to this framework , new users mostly start by passively reading and exploring the content in order to acclimate themselves with the community and its culture , and eventually start contributing [ Preece and Shneiderman 2009 ] . De - pending on the type of community , other terms and deﬁnitions may be used including passive users , peripheral members , core members , and leaders [ Hinds and Lee 2008 ] or consumers , contributors , collaborators , and meta - designers [ Fischer 2009 ] . There are also additional roles such as bug reporters , active developers [ Ye et al . 2005 ] , shapers [ Yates et al . 2010 ] , cleaners , and testers [ Jensen and Scacchi 2007 ] that exist solely in certain contexts ( e . g . , bug reporters in OSS communities or cleaners in Wikipedia ) . Community - related attributes of user Most of the attributes of users can be identiﬁed by studying their interaction with the community . These include level of trust , tenure ( lifecycle ) , attentiveness , rank , roles , and status . Trust can generally be divided into two dimensions : 7 system trust ( trust in the community as a system ) and interpersonal trust ( trust in other members ) [ Benlian and Hess 2011 ] . Level of trust , whether in the system or in other members , has been identiﬁed as one of the most important attributes that has a signiﬁcant impact on participation and loyalty in online communities [ Leimeister et al . 2006 ; Ridings et al . 2002 ] . For example , level of trust determines the expectation for reciprocity , which is positively related to positive attitudes toward contributions [ Bock et al . 2005 ] . In line with users’ contribution behavior , they may also take organizational roles including leaders or moderators [ Holmes and Cox 2011 ; Zhu et al . 2012b ] . Furthermore , tenure of users ( their stage of lifecycle ) may sometimes reﬂect the course of their active partic - ipation and their adapted role in a community ( contribution as well as organizational ) [ Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . 2013 ; Hsieh et al . 2013 ; Velasquez et al . 2014 ] . For ex - ample , attentiveness or the willingness to help others out can often be associated with users’ tenure , desires , and level of trust . On this matter , Hsieh et al . [ 2013 ] show that in Wikipedia , attentiveness has a quadratic effect on the socialization behaviors of users , meaning that new and long - time members are both more likely to help socializing newcomers than those in between . Users are also attached to a community in two general ways : identity based and bond based [ Ren et al . 2012 ] . This type of attachment has been shown to have a considerable effect on users’ behavior toward others and the community [ Amichai - Hamburger 2005 ; Michinov et al . 2004 ] . For instance , attention to others’ behavior and enforcing norms is stronger in identity - based attachment in comparison with bond - based attachment [ Dabbish et al . 2012 ] . Finally , the rank of a user refers to the ofﬁcial position of him or her within a commu - nity [ Shin et al . 2010 ] . Rank often corresponds to a user’s access level ( privileges ) . The most basic ranks in online communities are guest , normal user , and admin . Similar to a rank , s tatus is also assigned to users based on their preferences or past achievements [ Introne and Alterman 2006 ] . However , unlike ranks , it is a symbolic badge and does not give users any privileges over others [ Ziaie and Krcmar 2012 ] . 6 In recent years , “contribution” has been used to refer to a particular kind of participation ( activity ) that culminates in the generation of content ( see Reiser [ 2008 ] ) . 7 We excluded “dispositional trust , ” since it is independent of any party or context . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 14 P . Ziaie 3 . 4 . Community 3 . 4 . 1 . StandaloneAttributesofCommunity . Community , as a design dimension , is the con - text in which users utilize the existing features to perform certain activities to reach speciﬁc goals . In OPCs , the main goal is to develop content either individually or col - lectively . A community encompasses an established yet dynamic structure including workﬂows , hierarchy , rules and norm , quality control , requisites , and other contextual factors [ Kittur et al . 2013 ] . A number of design attributes were identiﬁed in the liter - ature . These include community vision ( philosophy of existence ) , goals , ownership and sponsorship ( business model ) , lifecycle , popularity , condition , and size or volume . An aptly enforced harmony between these attributes and those of other dimensions has a direct or indirect inﬂuence on a community’s success [ Kim and Han 2009 ] . Table V provides a list of the most essential standalone attributes of communities . 3 . 4 . 2 . InterdimensionalAttributesofCommunity . Feature - related attributes of community Similar to other dimensions , several attributes of communities are shaped with regard to and with interplay with other dimensions . Level of integration is a relatively re - cent trend that indicates the extent of integration and interaction of the features of a community with other communities . Integration can be realized by utilizing other com - munities’ features or offering certain features to other communities by means of APIs , online gadgets , or other kinds of technological interfaces . Integration appears to be an effective strategy to obviate the need or minimize the effort for implementing features for socializion , authentication , or announcements [ Spagnoletti and Resca 2012 ] . It can also compensate for communities’ possible lack of resources for supporting collective action [ Lev - On 2013 ] . Respectively , integrating features from well - known social net - works can have a positive effect on motivating users to be more active by satisfying their desire to show off ( self - importance ) [ Huberman et al . 2009 ] . Content - related attributes of community Critical mass of ( relevant and up - to - date ) content is another essential attribute that is associated with the content dimension , particularly in the early stages of a community [ Rainie and Tancer 2007 ] . In OPCs , one of the critical success factors is how to establish this critical mass in the Rising stage of their lifecycle ( see “stage of lifecycle” in Table V ) [ Ziaie and Imamovic 2013 ] . Publication or release policy is another content - related attribute of communities . Publication , in this context , refers to making content avail - able to the public or to other websites . Publication normally follows one of two general policies : open gate and closed gate [ Bruns 2005 ] . In open - gate communities , content will be published instantly after being submitted with no prior review procedures . In closed - gate communities , however , the generated content must ﬁrst be approved be - fore it can be published . Most OPCs adapt certain measures to qualify content if an open - gate policy is implemented [ Valcke and Lenaerts 2010 ] . Lastly , the kind of content licensing policy ( ownership ) is believed to have a great inﬂuence on promoting a community and motivating its users . Especially in collabora - tive OPCs where content has a high collectivity ( see Section 3 . 2 . 2 ) , the openness and freeness of using , disturbing , and modifying content may have a positive effect on vol - untary participation [ von Krogh et al . 2012 ] . It can have an impact on the motivation of users by deﬁning appropriate rights and preventing plagiarism [ Colazo and Fang 2009 ; Kittur and Kraut 2010 ] . User - related attributes of community Most of the interdimensional attributes of OPCs hold meaning with regard to users . These attributes are often related to the way these communities are governed . Users ﬁnd it at times necessary to create new forms of governance to protect interests as the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 15 Table V . Attributes of Community in OPCs Attribute Description Vision ( philosophy of existence ) There is a vision or philosophy of the existence for every online community , including OPCs . The vision of a community should be adequately communicated with users and the outside world to increase the likelihood of its success [ Kim 2000 ] . An attractive , novel , and universal vision has a positive effect on the commitment and motivations of users [ Bryant et al . 2005 ; Dholakia et al . 2004 ] . A sound vision should be interpretable , plausible , paramount , and persistent [ Ramiller and Swanson 2003 ] . Goal ( s ) Goal ( s ) of a community can be deduced from its vision and be adopted in terms of the existing contextual factors . Common goals for OPCs include attracting more users , enhancing content quality , increasing content quantity , increasing metacontent quantity , increasing user commitment , increasing organizational activities ( e . g . , managing users and subcommunities ) , enhancing content visibility , or achieving timely contribution . The purpose of a feature should be in line with a community’s current goals and focus . Communityownership or sponsorship How a community is sponsored and / or who or what organization stands behind it is a determining factor for enhancing a community’s credibility and gaining users’ trust [ Poorisat et al . 2009 ] . In communities that are sponsored or operated by commercial companies , “ﬁrm recognition” is believed to be a strong motivating factor [ Jeppesen and Laursen 2009 ] . Furthermore , in OSS communities , sponsored projects have been shown to be more likely to be successful [ Stewart and Ammeter 2002 ] . In other types of communities , the involvement of commercial companies as sponsors might lessen their credibility [ Metzger et al . 2010 ] and devalue their vision . Stage of lifecycle All communities exhibit distinguished stages / phases during their lifecycle . Success factors and user needs often change during this lifecycle . Iriberri and Leroy [ 2009 ] conceptualize four stages of inception , creation , growth , and maturity for successful communities . As for collaborative OPCs , three distinct stages of Rising , Organizing , and Stabilizing have been identiﬁed [ Ziaie and Imamovic 2013 ] , each with a different focus that demands the addition or removal of some features . How popular ( well known ) a community is also has a signiﬁcant effect on its objectives and the motivation of users . Empirical data suggest that when users believe that their contributions may reach a wider audience or be presented at a well - known website , they tend to be more motivated to contribute [ Raban et al . 2010 ] . Popularity can be derived from the stage of lifecycle . A community is popular after the stage of Rising ( or Creation ) . Condition Empirical studies in the literature primarily focus on two kinds of communities : real communities , where the focus of study is an actual and usually active community , and artiﬁcial communities . Artiﬁcial communities are short - term communities that are created with a limited number of users for laboratory experiments . Short - term experimental communities mostly focus on one particular feature or user behavior ( see , e . g . , Riedl et al . [ 2010 ] ) . It is of the utmost importance that the results of artiﬁcial communities be investigated carefully before being applied to real communities . Regardless of the often poor construct and invalid pool of users , the lifecycle and dynamism of a real community are not reﬂected in such experiments . Long - term artiﬁcial communities are more legitimate , since they run for a longer period of time to test sustained behavior of users or effects of features ( see , e . g . , Cheng and Vassileva [ 2006 ] ) . Size Size of a group ( whether a community of a subcommunity ) is an important attribute when introducing new features . An increase in the size of a community inevitably reduces the users’ familiarity with each other [ Espinosa et al . 2007 ] . Furthermore , coordination is more complex and difﬁcult in larger teams [ Hinds and McGrath 2006 ] . Therefore , if moderating the effect of the size of a community ( or target group ) is the purpose of introducing certain features in a speciﬁc community , this should be taken into account when these features are applied in other contexts with different sizes . community grows and they confront new challenges [ Chen 2009 ] . In addition to gover - nance , the community itself evolves during its lifecycle as well . Many attributes change , including democraticness , diversity , multinationality , expertise orientation , required skills ( from users ) , and critical mass of active users . Democraticness of a community indicates how the leadership is shared and how much users have inﬂuence in the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 16 P . Ziaie decision - making process [ Luther et al . 2013 ] . Particularly in collaborative commu - nities , users are more motivated to contribute if they have sufﬁcient inﬂuence over decisions and policies in the community [ Malone et al . 2010 ] ( see also O’Mahony and Ferraro [ 2007 ] for an example in the context of OSS communities ) . How leadership is shared and distributed may have a signiﬁcant impact on users’ contributions [ Zhu et al . 2012a ] and be a critical factor for a community’s success [ Forte and Lampe 2013 ] . Despite increasing satisfaction , it should be noted that in some cases shared leadership may also actually reduce team performance [ Robert 2013 ] . Diversity of users , if managed properly , also has a considerable impact on knowledge transfer , including content quality [ Arazy et al . 2011 ] and the scope of contributions [ Cummings 2004 ] . This is why Jimmy Wales , the founder of Wikipedia , named “editor diversity” as his biggest issue in developing content [ Simonite 2013 ] . In the literature , diversity has often been divided into two general categories : surface level and deep level [ Mannix and Neale 2005 ] . Surface - level diversity represents possible varieties in demographic characteristics , while deep - level diversity refers to the differences in educational or functional background and knowledge . Deep - level diversity can be di - vided further into social , value - based , or informational categories [ Jehn et al . 1999 ] . Both kinds of diversity can inﬂuence knowledge sharing and social integration within communities [ Guillaume et al . 2012 ] , although the effect and interdependencies may differ in different contexts ( see , e . g . , Daniel et al . ’s [ 2013 ] study of diversity in OSS communities ) . In addition to diversity , many aspects of online collaborations are inﬂuenced by preexisting cultural similarities or differences between users [ Pfeil et al . 2006 ] . This makes multinationality another relevant attribute . For communities that are being used solely within a particular country , national culture plays an apparent role in shaping the dynamics of communities [ Koh et al . 2007 ] . Expected expertise is another essential attribute in OPCs . It indicates the expected level of expertise and skillfulness from users within a community . Different OPCs demand varying expertise and investments from the users as the main content con - tributors [ Lev - On 2013 ] . In OSS communities , for example , the expected expertise is high . Open media or open ﬁle sharing communities require less or no expertise of users . Expected expertise may indicate or accentuate the primary desires of users . For instance , self - development is shown to be a primary desire of users in OSS communities [ Hars and Ou 2002 ] , where the expected expertise is high . Similar and pertinent to the critical mass of content , critical mass of active users also has a signiﬁcant role in the growth and success of communities [ Butler 2001 ] . Similar to many other projects and start - ups , communities have a tipping point [ Gladwell 2006 ] from which they take off and move from the Rising or Creation phase to the Growth or Organizing phase of their lifecycle [ Iriberri and Leroy 2009 ; Ziaie and Imamovic 2013 ] . This transition is believed to be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by a critical mass of active users [ Bruns 2006 ; Butler 2001 ] . Moreover , if a community loses these core users , there is a good chance that it gradually heads toward failure [ Haythornthwaite 2009 ] . 4 . ATTRIBUTE - BASED FEATURE SELECTION 4 . 1 . Design Dynamics and Multiple Interdependencies As discussed earlier , there is a constant interplay between two or more dimensions of a community . The introduced features should support , enhance , or enable these interactions and be perceived useful and usable to be successful and add real value to the community . Features , for instance , can be introduced to facilitate leadership [ Luther et al . 2013 ] and to monitor and visualize user contributions [ Vassileva and Sun 2007 ] . The perceived quality of the features may also inﬂuence users’ perception ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 17 Table VI . Common Differences in Attributes of Collaborative and Creative Communities of the credibility of a community and the quality of its content [ Flanagin and Metzger 2007 ] . Users often rely on the neat implementation of features and on content - related signals to assess a community’s credibility [ Benlian and Hess 2011 ] and content quality [ Fogg et al . 2003 ] . Content quality assurance is another essential mechanism in which the roles of content , users , and features are inseparable . Users provide subjective assessments for nonmeasurable metrics and features can support automatic assessments , corrections , and necessary normalizations . Correspondingly , a community’s stage of lifecycle may also have an impact on users’ contribution behavior [ Quigley et al . 2007 ] and , in some cases , on the perceived quality of content [ W¨ohner and Peters 2009 ] . As a result , in order to have a dynamic and productive community , the pool of con - tent , the set of features , and the behavior of users should be in line with the goals of a community [ Ostrom 2009 ] . In other words , features should be selected based on the values of their standalone attributes and the respective values of the interdependent attributes of other dimensions . The key question here is , as elaborated in the Introduc - tion , how one can aptly and systematically select features that have been utilized in other communities , particularly in a different type of community . 4 . 2 . Collaborative Versus Creative : Salient Differences of Attribute Values One of the applications of the theorized framework is to describe the different worlds of collaborative versus creative OPCs . Before adapting a successful feature from one of these categories in the other , the differences between the values of those attributes that have interdependencies and the attributes of the adapted feature should be studied carefully . Table VI shows the identiﬁed usual differences in common types of both categories . This table only points out the general and common differences between the two categories . Certainly , differences in exact types of the selected communities should be identiﬁed during the feature selection process to increase the success of features . By zeroing in on the differences within each type , several other attributes can be found that might have different values . For instance , when comparing OSS development and ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 18 P . Ziaie Fig . 4 . A simpliﬁed decision - making process for selecting a feature based on a speciﬁc purpose . collaborative content development communities , other attributes including content dependency of features ; type , quality criteria , and level of accessibility of content ; attachment type of users ; and stage of lifecycle of the community should also be taken into account . In the next section , a general and simpliﬁed decision - making diagram for feature selection is explained to further clarify the decision process based on the introducing framework . 4 . 3 . Decision Diagram for Feature Selection In Figure 4 , the general decision - making steps toward selecting a feature are shown . The feature is selected from another context based on a speciﬁc expected purpose . Examining the values of different attributes is based on the interdependencies of the selected features with content , user , and / or community dimensions ( see Section 3 . 1 . 1 ) . The purpose of the feature is deemed the same in both contexts . As depicted in Figure 4 , the decision - making process starts by selecting a feature from another context ( another type of community ) with the same purpose as the target community’s . This purpose , as referred to in Table II , can be anything including , for example , addressing user desires to enhance participation , facilitating personalization , enabling coordination of user activities , enhancing content quality , enforcing norms signaling credibility , and so on . The next step is to check the dependencies of the selected feature and see whether it is size , lifecycle , target user , or content dependent . For each existing or assumed dependency , the values of pertinent attributes and their analogy to the corresponding attributes in the target community should be veriﬁed . For example , if a feature is lifecycle dependent and it has been used in the Stability stage of the source community , it may not be applicable to a community in its Rising stage . Therefore , it should be discarded . The process will be continued with a new feature ( obviously with the same purpose ) until all dependencies are met . Figure 5 demonstrates a more general layout of these processes . Decontextualization is basically extracting the signiﬁcant attributes and making sure of their analogy . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 19 Fig . 5 . A general design guideline for selecting and introducing new features . 4 . 4 . Determining Values and Interdependencies The value of many of the identiﬁed attributes can be generally categorized into broad sets , such as “low , ” “medium , ” and “high . ” Few attributes may require speciﬁc values . For example , the purpose of a feature may comprise diverse values extending from increasing quantity or enhancing quality of content ( content oriented ) , to facilitating participation by addressing user desires ( user oriented ) , to helping with a community’s decision - making processes or rank management ( community oriented ) . These values are only important as long as the pertaining attributes have compelling interdepen - dencies with each other . Moreover , knowing the threshold at which the user behavior or community condition deviates from one assumption to another is of great importance to characterize the overall context to deploy new features [ Bolton and Ockenfels 2000 ] . The values of attributes can be determined based on available statistics and the experience of community operators and designers . A detailed explanation of how these values can be estimated or derived is not within the scope of this article . Yet , the pro - posed attributes in this study can be employed as a theoretical ground to start the analysis . Furthermore , new hypotheses on possible correlations and dependencies can be made to shed light on the design intricacies in each type or category of OPC . In the next section , a concrete application of the framework in the ﬁeld of incentive systems will be elaborated upon . 5 . APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK IN INCENTIVE SYSTEMS As remarked in the Introduction , one major problem in designing online communities and introducing beﬁtting features is the lack of apparent contextualization and decon - textualization methods to facilitate the application of one successful feature in one type of community to another . Incentive systems are vital systems in many OPCs to sus - tain participation [ Koh et al . 2007 ] . A systematic assessment of new incentive features can be enormously helpful by decreasing the likelihood of feature underutilization or users’ disappointments . The key question here is : would a successful incentive in one speciﬁc type of community prove effective in another ? For instance , if a feature such as leaderboard has increased users’ contribution in the early stages of an open media community , would that yield the same results in the context of OSS or open ﬁle sharing communities in later stages ? Here , a general design guideline is provided based on Figure 5 to be followed in order to increase the success of a selected feature . Step 1 : Clarifying the purpose The objectives of incentive systems are often deﬁned and redeﬁned according to the confronted challenges and the primary needs of the community and users . Based on these objectives , suitable incentives with a speciﬁc purpose should be selected and prioritized . Correspondingly , target groups should be determined . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 20 P . Ziaie The ﬁrst step before introducing any feature , therefore , is to specify the purpose of making a new addition . This purpose should be clear and in line with the commu - nity’s goals and users’ desires . Otherwise , showering users with unnecessary features may culminate in users being cognitively overloaded and features being underutilized 8 [ Deng and Chi 2012 ] . Step 2 : Selecting a Feature After clarifying the purpose , a set of features can be prepared based on the best practices of other communities . This list can be ﬁltered according to the relevance , viability , and affordability of the identiﬁed features . Step 3 : Identifying interdependencies in the source community Interdependencies or correlations of the attributes of the selected feature with other attributes in the source community are of great importance . This list of identiﬁed interdependent attributes will be used in the next step to address possible disparities . Step 4 : Finding attributes with divergent values In this step , the values of the pertinent attributes in the target community are de - termined or estimated . Then , those attributes with divergent values ( compared to the source community ) should be identiﬁed . For instance , if the related attributes of a feature ( in the source community ) are user dependency ( value : high ) and technology efﬁcacy ( value : high ) , and the value of technology efﬁcacy in the target community is “low , ” then technology efﬁcacy is added to the list as a disparate attribute . Step 5 : Identifying interdependencies in the target community The last step in deciding whether a feature can be applied with no considerable negative consequences is to identify the correlations of the disparate attributes in the target community . Following the previous example , if the majority of the users of the target community have low technology efﬁcacy , this has a direct impact on the usability attribute and nulliﬁes the purpose of the feature . Therefore , applying such a feature is not recommended . On the other hand , if there are no disparities or the disparate attributes do not show a signiﬁcant impact on the use and particularly the purpose of a feature , it can be applied accordingly . Also , it should be remarked that features that have high target orientation may still be suitable merely for a certain group of users . Considering the aforementioned example , the selected feature should preferably be offered to only to users with high technology efﬁcacy . Indeed , all these are viable if the interdependencies and values of the relevant at - tributes have been identiﬁed and are available . As mentioned in the previous section , this can be made possible by completing the list of interdependencies of attribute for all types of OPCs in future works . Until then , the experience and “gut feeling” of designers in assessing the values and assuming the interdependencies may determine the suc - cess of a community . Nevertheless , the provided attributes provide a clear image and a structured framework to address design issues . 6 . CONCLUSION , IMPLICATIONS , AND LIMITATIONS In this article , a theoretical framework for OPCs and a model for adapting successful features from other communities were conceptualized . The main objective of an OPC is to produce relevant and reliable content by maximizing voluntary user participation . Designing OPCs requires well - thought - out , target - oriented , and context - dependent 8 This lavish and ad hoc introduction of features used to happen very often , particularly in communities that were based on an open source platform . The corresponding designers of these communities try to include as many free and available features as possible with the intention of making their community more appealing to a wider range of users . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 21 features . Numerous studies were surveyed on factors that support or restrict the growth of OPCs . These factors were characterized as different attributes classiﬁed into different dimensions . The interdependencies and signiﬁcance of each attribute were addressed in different types of OPCs and a general model of the contexts was de - veloped in which these attributes could be situated . The theoretical framework consists of four primary design dimensions : platform features , content , user , and community . The literature was studied in terms of their interactions and interdependencies rather than merely their main or additive effects . Finally , a decision model for selecting fea - tures and a design guideline for incentive systems were introduced to show how the identiﬁed attributes and their interdependencies can be applied in practice . The results contribute to our understanding of design complications and how various practices play together in the context of OPCs . The invaluable yet dispersed knowledge on this matter was accumulated and synthesized to theorize the introduced framework . This framework basically provides a new baseline on which future research can build more holistic and prescriptive theoretical models . Moreover , by elucidating the contextual factors ( values of the attributes ) that lead to a certain conclusion , the identiﬁed attributes can be employed to make hypotheses or design assertions more accurate ( contextualization ) . Furthermore , the identiﬁcation of certain attributes of technology and context is deemed necessary to make comparisons with other technologies and contexts possible [ Nass and Mason 1990 ] . The ﬁndings provide a collection of important attributes for community designers to pay attention to when introducing new features and setting new policies . There are several theoretical and practical implications to address . One theoretical implication is that the studies relating to a speciﬁc type of community may not be generalizable and applicable to other communities with different attributes on one or more of the proposed design dimensions . For example , the effect of gender on user motivation or contribution pattern is different in various contexts and not always supported [ Yukselturk and Bulut 2009 ] . The same is true for the age of users [ Bateman et al . 2011 ] . This fact should not be neglected when designing online communities or providing design principles or claims for them . Also , depending on the purpose of study , different levels of detail may be necessary . For example , whether the lifecycle of a community should be divided into two ( before and after tipping point ) , three ( Rising , Organizing , and Stabilizing ) , or four ( inception , creation , growth , and maturity ) stages signiﬁcantly depends on the goal of a designer or the context of research . Another theoretical implication is a call for categorizing communities in parallel with the proposed attributes . New categorizations may follow based on similar values for some of these attributes rather than in terms of one aspect ( e . g . , motivation ) or dimension ( e . g . , content ) . As for practice , one implication is to ﬁnd and conceptualize apt methods to estimate the values of the proposed attributes . The introduced model for context suggests looking for features with compatible values on signiﬁcant attributes . While for some attributes these values might be obvious or easy to extract , some others , particularly those related to users , might not be easily assessable . How this compatibility would be assessed in practice for tricky attributes such as user desires [ Gauch et al . 2007 ] is an area to be further investigated in the future . Moreover , redeﬁnitions and rethinking of the meaning and value of some of the attributes in the context of OPCs may be necessary [ George and Scerri 2007 ] . There are still many open and interesting issues that call for attention . The di - rection of causality between many attributes is still not clear [ Nov et al . 2010 ] . For instance , Brandtzæg and Heim [ 2008 ] argued that the correlation between user tenure and contribution patterns is not apparent in many cases . Also , as remarked earlier , further investigations are needed to identify the correlations between attributes for ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 22 P . Ziaie each identiﬁed type of OPC . This may be due to the fact that no ﬁne lines were hitherto set to distinguish different types of communities . There is valuable research on sev - eral attributes in a few contexts . For example , Luther and Bruckman [ 2008 ] showed the correlation between publication policy and leadership in the speciﬁc community type of collaborative artifact development . These correlations are of great importance for a systematic examination of existing interdependencies between attributes of social structures and understanding their long - term effects and constant evolution . However , the list is still incomplete and the interdependencies and causal correlations are un - clear for many attributes and many types ( contexts ) . Furthermore , this study merely focuses on OPCs . The list of attributes along with the pertinent interdependencies and values can be extended to be used in other online communities ( e . g . , online gaming communities ) . Another issue is the ﬁnancial independence of a community . What are the possible scenarios to effectively involve users , with regard to the community lifecycle , to ﬁnd new revenue streams ? OPCs rely mostly on donation and advertisement , and in the early stages of a community neither of these two methods has been proven effective . I am conﬁdent that these issues will be easily addressed by the research community in future studies to shed light on this relatively new and complex ﬁeld of study . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to gratefully thank Professor Helmut Krcmar for his active support and guidance . Also , special thanks to ProfessorPhilip Yetton for his valuable feedback and insightful suggestionsthat helped me improve the quality of this work . REFERENCES E . Agichtein , C . Castillo , D . Donato , A . Gionis , and G . Mishne . 2008 . Finding high - quality content in social media . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining . ACM , 183 – 194 . Y . Amichai - Hamburger . 2005 . Internet minimal group paradigm . CyberPsychology & Behavior 8 , 2 , 140 – 142 . J . Andreoni . 1990 . Impure altruism and donations to public goods : A theory of warm - glow giving . Economic Journal 100 , 401 , 464 – 477 . O . Arazy , O . Nov , R . Patterson , and L . Yeo . 2011 . Information quality in wikipedia : The effects of group composition and task conﬂict . Journal of Management Information Systems 27 , 4 , 71 – 98 . N . F . Awad and M . Krishnan . 2006 . The personalization privacy paradox : An empirical evaluation of infor - mation transparency and the willingness to be proﬁled online for personalization . MIS Quarterly 30 , 1 , 13 – 28 . D . Ballou , R . Wang , H . Pazer , andG . Kumar . 1998 . Modelinginformationmanufacturingsystemstodetermine information product quality . Management Science 44 , 4 , 462 – 484 . A . Bandura . 2001 . Social cognitive theory : An agentic perspective . Annual Review of Psychology 52 , 1 , 1 – 26 . P . J . Bateman , P . H . Gray , and B . S . Butler . 2011 . The impact of community commitment on participation in online communities . Information Systems Research 22 , 4 , 841 – 854 . H . Benbya , G . Passiante , and N . Aissa Belbaly . 2004 . Corporate portal : A tool for knowledge management synchronization . International Journal of Information Management 24 , 3 , 201 – 220 . Y . Benkler . 2006 . The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . Yale University Press . A . Benlian and T . Hess . 2011 . The signaling role of it features in inﬂuencing trust and participation in online communities . International Journal of Electronic Commerce 15 , 4 , 7 – 56 . K . Bischoff , C . S . Firan , W . Nejdl , and R . Paiu . 2008 . Can all tags be used for search ? In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management . ACM , 193 – 202 . A . L . Blanchard and M . L . Markus . 2007 . Technology and community behavior in online environments . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & T’07 ) . Springer , 323 – 350 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 23 G . W . Bock , R . W . Zmud , Y . G . Kim , and J . N . Lee . 2005 . Behavioral intention formation in knowledge sharing : Examining the roles of extrinsic motivators , social - psychological forces , and organizational climate . MIS Quarterly 29 , 1 , 87 – 111 . F . Bolici , J . Howison , and K . Crowston . 2009 . Coordination without discussion ? Socio - technical congruence and stigmergy in free and open source software projects . In Proceedings of Socio - Technical Congruence Workshop in Conjunction with the International Conference on Software Engineering . G . E . Bolton and A . Ockenfels . 2000 . Erc : A theory of equity , reciprocity , and competition . American Economic Review 90 , 1 , 166 – 193 . P . B . Brandtzæg and J . Heim . 2008 . User loyalty and online communities : Why members of online commu - nities are not faithful . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment , ICST ( Institute for Computer Sciences , Social - Informatics and Telecommu - nications Engineering ) , 11 . A . Bruns . 2005 . Gatewatching : Collaborative Online News Production . Peter Lang . A . Bruns . 2006 . Towards produsage : Futures for user - led content production . In Proceedings of Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication and Technology , F . Sudweeks , H . Hrachovec , and C . Ess ( Eds . ) . S . L . Bryant , A . Forte , and A . Bruckman . 2005 . Becoming wikipedian : Transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia . In Proceedings of the International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work ( SIGGROUP’05 ) . ACM , 1 – 10 . B . S . Butler . 2001 . Membership size , communication activity , and sustainability : A resource - based model of online social structures . Information Systems Research 12 , 4 , 346 – 362 . B . S . Butler , N . Sharma , J . Irwin , and H . Spallek . 2010 . “You are not alone” : Effects of highlighting social as - pects on responsiveness , joining , and proﬁle information sharing in an information portal . In Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology ( ASIST’10 ) . 1 – 9 . D . Carmel , H . Roitman , and E . Yom - Tov . 2010 . On the relationship between novelty and popularity of user - generated content . In ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ( TIST ) , 3 , 4 , 1509 – 1512 . Y . Chen , F . M . Harper , J . Konstan , and S . Xin Li . 2010 . Social comparisons and contributions to online communities : A ﬁeld experiment on movielens . American Economic Review 100 , 4 , 1358 – 1398 . R . Cheng and J . Vassileva . 2006 . Design and evaluation of an adaptive incentive mechanism for sustained educational online communities . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction 16 , 3 , 321 – 348 . C . Cheshire and K . S . Cook . 2004 . The emergence of trust networks under uncertainty – implications for internet interactions . Analyse & Kritik 26 , 1 , 220 – 240 . D . S . Chung and S . Nah . 2009 . The effects of interactive news presentation on perceived user satisfaction of online community newspapers . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 14 , 4 , 855 – 874 . J . E . Chung , N . Park , H . Wang , J . Fulk , and M . McLaughlin . 2010 . Age differences in perceptions of online community participation among non - users : An extension of the technology acceptance model . Computers in Human Behavior 26 , 6 , 1674 – 1684 . J . Colazo and Y . Fang . 2009 . Impact of license choice on open source software development activity . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60 , 5 , 997 – 1011 . D . Constant , S . Kiesler , and L . Sproull . 1994 . What’s mine is ours , or is it ? A study of attitudes about information sharing . Information Systems Research 5 , 4 , 400 – 421 . N . S . Contractor , S . Wasserman , and K . Faust . 2006 . Testing multitheoretical , multilevel hypotheses about organizational networks : An analytic framework and empirical example . Academy of Management Re - view 31 , 3 , 681 – 703 . J . D . Couger . 1996 . Creativity & Innovation in Information Systems Organizations . Boyd & Fraser . K . Crowston , K . Wei , Q . Li , and J . Howison . 2006 . Core and periphery in free / libre and open source software team communications . In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS’06 ) . IEEE , 118a . J . N . Cummings . 2004 . Work groups , structural diversity , and knowledge sharing in a global organization . Management Science 50 , 3 , 352 – 364 . D . Cyr . 2014 . Return visits : A review of how web site design can engender visitor loyalty . Journal of Infor - mation Technology 29 , 1 . L . Dabbish , R . Farzan , R . Kraut , and T . Postmes . 2012 . Fresh faces in the crowd : Turnover , identity , and commitment in online groups . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’12 ) . ACM , 245 – 248 . C . Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , R . West , D . Jurafsky , J . Leskovec , andC . Potts . 2013 . Nocountryforoldmembers : User lifecycle and linguistic change in online communities . In Proceedings of the 22nd International World Wide Web Conference ( WWW’13 ) . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 24 P . Ziaie S . Daniel , R . Agarwal , and K . J . Stewart . 2013 . The effects of diversity in global , distributed collectives : A study of open source project success . Information Systems Research 24 , 2 , 312 – 333 . F . D . Davis , R . P . Bagozzi , and P . R . Warshaw . 1989 . User acceptance of computer technology : A comparison of two theoretical models . Management Science 35 , 8 , 982 – 1003 . L . De Alfaro , A . Kulshreshtha , I . Pye , and B . T . Adler . 2011 . Reputation systems for open collaboration . Communications of the ACM 54 , 8 , 81 – 87 . X . Deng and L . Chi . 2012 . Understanding postadoptive behaviors in information systems use : A longitudinal analysisofsystemuseproblemsinthebusinessintelligencecontext . JournalofManagementInformation Systems 29 , 3 , 291 – 326 . U . M . Dholakia , R . P . Bagozzi , and L . K . Pearo . 2004 . A social inﬂuence model of consumer participation in network - and small - group - based virtual communities . International Journal of Research in Marketing 21 , 3 , 241 – 263 . N . Diakopoulos and M . Naaman . 2011 . Towards quality discourse in online news comments . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’11 ) . ACM , 133 – 142 . J . Dovey and H . W . Kennedy . 2006 . Game Cultures : Computer Games as New Media . McGraw - Hill . W . Emigh and S . C . Herring . 2005 . Collaborative authoring on the web : A genre analysis of online encyclo - pedias . In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . IEEE , 99a - 99a . Y . Engestr¨om . 1999 . Activity theory and individual and social transformation . Perspectives on Activity Theory 19 – 38 . J . A . Espinosa , S . A . Slaughter , R . E . Kraut , and J . D . Herbsleb . 2007 . Familiarity , complexity , and team performance in geographically distributed software development . Organization Science 18 , 4 , 613 – 630 . S . Faraj , S . L . Jarvenpaa , and A . Majchrzak . 2011 . Knowledge collaboration in online communities . Organi - zation Science 22 , 5 , 1224 – 1239 . R . Farzan , R . Kraut , A . Pal , and J . Konstan . 2012 . Socializing volunteers in an online community : A ﬁeld experiment . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’12 ) . G . Fischer . 2009 . End - user development and meta - design : Foundations for cultures of participation . In End - User Development . 3 – 14 . A . J . Flanagin and M . J . Metzger . 2007 . The role of site features , user attributes , and information veriﬁcation behaviors on the perceived credibility of web - based information . New Media & Society 9 , 2 , 319 – 342 . B . Fogg , C . Soohoo , D . R . Danielson , L . Marable , J . Stanford , and E . R . Tauber . 2003 . How do users evaluate the credibility of web sites ? : A study with over 2 , 500 participants . In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Designing for User Experiences . ACM , 1 – 15 . A . Forte and C . Lampe . 2013 . Deﬁning , understanding , and supporting open collaboration : Lessons from the literature . American Behavioral Scientist 57 , 5 . J . Fulk and J . J . Gould . 2009 . Features and contexts in technology research : A modest proposal for research and reporting . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 14 , 3 , 764 – 770 . S . Gauch , M . Speretta , A . Chandramouli , and A . Micarelli . 2007 . User proﬁles for personalized information access . The Adaptive Web 54 – 89 . D . Gefen and C . M . Ridings . 2005 . If you spoke as she does , sir , instead of the way you do : A sociolinguistics perspective of gender differences in virtual communities . ACM SIGMIS Database 36 , 2 , 78 – 92 . C . George and J . Scerri . 2007 . Web 2 . 0 and user - generated content : Legal challenges in the new frontier . Journal of Information , Law and Technology 2 . M . Gladwell . 2006 . The Tipping Point : How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference . Little , Brown . Y . R . Guillaume , F . C . Brodbeck , and M . Riketta . 2012 . Surface - and deep - level dissimilarity effects on social integration and individual effectiveness related outcomes in work groups : A meta - analytic integration . Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 85 , 1 , 80 – 115 . D . Gurzick and W . G . Lutters . 2009 . Towards a design theory for online communities . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems and Technology . ACM , 11 . J . Han , T . Abdelzaher , C . Zhai , and J . Yu . 2012 . Mining the Relation and Implication of User Generated Content in Social Media . Graduate College Doctor of Philosophy . Thesis . A . B . Hargadon and B . A . Bechky . 2006 . When collections of creatives become creative collectives : A ﬁeld study of problem solving at work . Organization Science 17 , 4 , 484 . A . Hars and S . Ou . 2002 . Working for free ? Motivations of participating in open source projects . International Journal of Electronic Commerce 6 , 3 , 25 – 39 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 25 C . Haythornthwaite . 2009 . Crowds and communities : Light and heavyweight models of peer production . In Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . IEEE , 1 – 10 . J . D . Herbsleb . 2007 . Global software engineering : The future of socio - technical coordination . In Proceedings of Future of Software Engineering ( FOSE’07 ) . IEEE Computer Society , 188 – 198 . B . M . Hill and A . Monroy - Hern´andez . 2013 . The remixing dilemma the trade - off between generativity and originality . American Behavioral Scientist 57 , 5 , 643 – 663 . B . Hilligoss and S . Y . Rieh . 2008 . Developing a unifying framework of credibility assessment : Construct , heuristics , and interaction in context . Information Processing & Management 44 , 4 , 1467 – 1484 . D . Hinds and R . M . Lee . 2008 . Social network structure as a critical success condition for virtual communities . In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . IEEE Computer Society , 323 . P . Hinds and C . McGrath . 2006 . Structures that work : Social structure , work structure and coordination ease in geographically distributed teams . In Proceedings of the ACM 2006 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’06 ) . ACM , 343 – 352 . P . Holmes and A . M . Cox . 2011 . Every group carries the ﬂavour of the admins : Leadership on ﬂickr . Interna - tional Journal of Web Based Communities 7 , 3 , 376 – 391 . J . Howison and K . Crowston . 2014 . Collaboration through superposition : How the IT artifact as an object of collaboration affords technical interdependence without organizational interdependence . MIS Quarterly 38 , 1 , 29 – 50 . G . Hsieh , Y . Hou , I . Chen , and K . N . Truong . 2013 . Welcome ! : Social and psychological predictors of volunteer socializers in online communities . In Proceedings of the ACM 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . ACM , 827 – 838 . B . A . Huberman , D . M . Romero , and F . Wu . 2009 . Crowdsourcing , attention and productivity . Journal of Information Science 35 , 6 , 758 – 765 . J . Hughes and K . Lang . 2006 . Transmutability : Digital decontextualization , manipulation , and recontextu - alization as a new source of value in the production and consumption of culture products . In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS’06 ) . IEEE , 165a . J . Introne and R . Alterman . 2006 . Using shared representations to improve coordination and intent inference . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction 16 , 3 , 249 – 280 . A . Iriberri and G . Leroy . 2009 . A life - cycle perspective on online community success . ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) 41 , 2 , 11 : 11 – 11 : 29 . S . L . Jarvenpaa and D . S . Staples . 2000 . The use of collaborative electronic media for information sharing : An exploratory study of determinants . Journal of Strategic Information Systems 9 , 2 , 129 – 154 . K . A . Jehn , G . B . Northcraft , and M . A . Neale . 1999 . Why differences make a difference : A ﬁeld study of diversity , conﬂict and performance in workgroups . Administrative Science Quarterly 44 , 4 , 741 – 763 . C . Jensen and W . Scacchi . 2007 . Role migration and advancement processes in ossd projects : A comparative case study . In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE’07 ) . IEEE Computer Society . L . B . Jeppesen and K . Laursen . 2009 . The role of lead users in knowledge sharing . Research Policy 38 , 10 , 1582 – 1589 . Q . Jones , G . Ravid , and S . Rafaeli . 2004 . Information overload and the message dynamics of online interaction spaces : A theoretical model and empirical exploration . Information Systems Research 15 , 2 , 194 – 210 . J . Karat . 1997 . Evolving the scope of user - centered design . Communications of the ACM 40 , 7 , 33 – 38 . P . Keinz and R . Pr¨ugl . 2010 . A user community based approach to leveraging technological competences : An exploratory case study of a technology start up from mit . Creativity and Innovation Management 19 , 3 , 269 – 289 . E . Khabiri , C . F . Hsu , and J . Caverlee . 2009 . Analyzing and predicting community preference of socially generated metadata : A case study on comments in the digg community . In Proceedings of the 3rd International ICWSM Conference . San Jose , CA . A . J . Kim . 2000 . Community Building on the Web : Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communities . Peachpit Press , Berkeley , CA . B . Kim and I . Han . 2009 . The role of trust belief and its antecedents in a community driven knowledge environment . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60 , 5 , 1012 – 1026 . A . Kittur and R . E . Kraut . 2010 . Beyond wikipedia : Coordination and conﬂict in online production groups . In Proceedings of the ACM 2010 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’10 ) . ACM , 215 – 224 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 26 P . Ziaie A . Kittur , J . V . Nickerson , M . Bernstein , E . Gerber , A . Shaw , J . Zimmerman , M . Lease , and J . Horton . 2013 . The future of crowd work . In Proceedings of the ACM 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . ACM , 1301 – 1318 . A . Kittur , B . Pendleton , and R . E . Kraut . 2009 . Herding the cats : The inﬂuence of groups in coordinating peer production . In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration . ACM , Article number 7 . J . Koh , Y . - G . Kim , B . Butler , and G . - W . Bock . 2007 . Encouraging participation in virtual communities . Communications of the ACM 50 , 2 , 68 – 73 . J . A . Konstan and J . Riedl . 2012 . Recommender systems : From algorithms to user experience . In User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction . 1 – 23 . R . Kraut , M . L . Maher , J . Olson , T . W . Malone , P . Pirolli , and J . C . Thomas . 2010 . Scientiﬁc foundations : A case for technology - mediated social - participation theory . Computer 43 , 11 , 22 – 28 . R . E . Kraut and P . Resnick . 2011a . Building Successful Online Communities : Evidence - Based Social Design . MIT Press . R . E . Kraut and P . Resnick . 2011b . Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities . Building Successful Online Communities . MIT Press . K . Kuutti . 1996 . Activity theory as a potential framework for human - computer interaction research . In Context and Consciousness : Activity Theory and Human - Computer Interaction . 17 – 44 . H . - M . Lai and P . - J . Hsieh . 2013 . The decision to continue sharing knowledge in virtual communities : The moderating role of knowledge - sharing experience and knowledge self - efﬁcacy . In Proceedings of the Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Information Systems ( PACIS’13 ) . S . T . K . Lam , A . Uduwage , Z . Dong , S . Sen , D . R . Musicant , L . Terveen , and J . Riedl . 2011 . Wp : clubhouse ? : An exploration of wikipedia’s gender imbalance . In Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration . ACM , 1 – 10 . C . Lampe , R . Wash , A . Velasquez , and E . Ozkaya . 2010 . Motivations to participate in online communities . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’10 ) . ACM , 1927 – 1936 . J . M . Leimeister , P . Sidiras , and H . Krcmar . 2006 . Exploring success factors of virtual communities : The perspectives of members and operators . Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce 16 , 3 , 279 – 300 . K . Lerman . 2007 . User participation in social media : Digg study . In Proceedings of the International Confer - ences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology . IEEE , 255 – 258 . L . Leung . 2009 . User - generated content on the internet : An examination of gratiﬁcations , civic engagement and psychological empowerment . New Media & Society 11 , 8 , 1327 – 1347 . A . Lev - On . 2013 . Communities , crowds and focal sites : Fine - tuning the theoretical grounding of collaboration online . Journal of Community Informatics 9 , 3 . H . - F . Lin . 2007 . The role of online and ofﬂine features in sustaining virtual communities : An empirical study . Internet Research 17 , 2 , 119 – 138 . C . Lindquist . 2005 . Fixing the requirements mess . CIO Magazine , 52 – 60 . K . Ling , G . Beenen , X . D . Wang , K . Chang , D . Frankowski , P . Resnick , and R . Kraut . 2005 . Using social psy - chology to motivate contributions to online communities . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , 4 . J . Lou , Y . Fang , K . H . Lim , and J . Z . Peng . 2013 . Contributing high quantity and quality knowledge to online Q & a communities . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 64 , 2 , 356 – 371 . K . Luther and A . Bruckman . 2008 . Leadership in online creative collaboration . In Proceedings of the ACM 2008 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’08 ) . ACM , 343 – 352 . K . Luther , C . Fiesler , and A . Bruckman . 2013 . Redistributing leadership in online creative collaboration . In Proceedings of the ACM 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . M . Ma and R . Agarwal . 2007 . Through a glass darkly : Information technology design , identity veriﬁcation , and knowledge contribution in online communities . Information Systems Research 18 , 1 , 42 – 67 . W . Ma and A . Yuen . 2011 . Gender differences of knowledge sharing in online learning environment . In Hybrid Learning . 116 – 128 . T . W . Malone and K . Crowston . 1994 . The interdisciplinary study of coordination . ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR’94 ) 26 , 1 , 87 – 119 . T . W . Malone , R . Laubacher , and C . Dellarocas . 2010 . The collective intelligence genome . IEEE Engineering Management Review 38 , 3 , 38 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 27 L . Mamykina , B . Manoim , M . Mittal , G . Hripcsak , and B . Hartmann . 2011 . Design lessons from the fastest Q & a site in the west . In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2857 – 2866 . E . Mannix and M . A . Neale . 2005 . What differences make a difference ? The promise and reality of diverse teams in organizations . Psychological Science in the Public Interest 6 , 2 , 31 – 55 . P . J . McKenzie , J . Burkell , L . Wong , C . Whippey , S . E . Trosow , and M . B . McNally . 2012 . User - generated online content 1 : Overview , current state and context . First Monday 17 , 6 – 4 , June 4 , 2012 . M . B . McNally , S . E . Trosow , L . Wong , C . Whippey , J . Burkell , and P . J . McKenzie . 2012 . User - generated online content 2 : Policy implications . First Monday 17 , 6 . M . J . Metzger . 2007 . Making sense of credibility on the web : Models for evaluating online information and recommendations for future research . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 , 13 , 2078 – 2091 . M . J . Metzger , A . J . Flanagin , and R . B . Medders . 2010 . Social and heuristic approaches to credibility evaluation online . Journal of Communication 60 , 3 , 413 – 439 . N . Michinov , E . Michinov , and M . C . Toczek - Capelle . 2004 . Social identity , group processes , and performance in synchronous computer - mediated communication . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice 8 , 1 , 27 . C . Nass and L . Mason . 1990 . On the study of technology and task : A variable - based approach . Organizations and Communication Technology 46 , 67 . S . Niederer and J . van Dijck . 2010 . Wisdom of the crowd or technicity of content ? Wikipedia as a sociotechnical system . New Media & Society 12 , 8 ( December 2010 ) , 1368 – 1387 . O . Nov , M . Naaman , and C . Ye . 2010 . Analysis of participation in an online photo sharing community : A multidimensional perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 , 3 , 555 – 566 . V . L . O’Day , D . G . Bobrow , and M . Shirley . 1996 . The social - technical design circle . In Proceedings of the ACM 1996 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’96 ) . ACM , 160 – 169 . S . O’Mahony and F . Ferraro . 2007 . The emergence of governance in an open source community . Academy of Management Journal 50 , 5 , 1079 – 1106 . T . Olsson . 2009 . Understanding collective content : Purposes , characteristics and collaborative practices . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & T’09 ) . ACM , 21 – 30 . S . Oreg and O . Nov . 2008 . Exploring motivations for contributing to open source initiatives : The roles of contribution context and personal values . Computers in Human Behavior 24 , 5 , 2055 – 2073 . E . Ostrom . 2009 . A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social - ecological systems . Science 325 , 5939 , 419 . G . Paliouras . 2012 . Discovery of web user communities and their role in personalization . In User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction . 1 – 25 . M . Parikh and S . Verma . 2002 . Utilizing internet technologies to support learning : An empirical analysis . International Journal of Information Management 22 , 1 , 27 – 46 . U . Pfeil , P . Zaphiris , and C . S . Ang . 2006 . Cultural differences in collaborative authoring of Wikipedia . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 12 , 1 , 88 – 113 . T . Poorisat , B . H . Detenber , V . Viswanathan , and H . Nofrina . 2009 . Perceptions of credibility : A comparison of user - generated and expert - generated websites . In Proceedings of the International Communication Association . C . E . Porter , N . Donthu , and A . Baker . 2012 . Gender differences in trust formation in virtual communities . Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 20 , 1 , 39 – 58 . J . Preece . 2001 . Sociability and usability in online communities : Determining and measuring success . Be - haviour & Information Technology 20 , 5 , 347 – 356 . J . Preece and B . Shneiderman . 2009 . The reader - to - leader framework : Motivating technology - mediated social participation . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , 1 , 13 – 32 . N . R . Quigley , P . E . Tesluk , E . A . Locke , and K . M . Bartol . 2007 . A multilevel investigation of the motivational mechanisms underlying knowledge sharing and performance . Organization Science 18 , 1 , 71 – 88 . D . R . Raban , M . Moldovan , and Q . Jones . 2010 . An empirical study of critical mass and online community sur - vival . In Proceedings of the ACM 2010 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’10 ) . ACM , 71 – 80 . L . Rainie and B . Tancer . 2007 . Wikipedia : When in doubt , multitudes seek it out . Pew Internet & American Life Project 12 , 2007 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . 29 : 28 P . Ziaie N . C . Ramiller and E . B . Swanson . 2003 . Organizing visions for information technology and the information systems executive response . Journal of Management Information Systems 20 , 1 , 13 – 50 . P . Reiser . 2008 . Community Equity Overview . Sun Microsystems Inc . S . Reiss . 2004 . Multifaceted nature of intrinsic motivation : The theory of 16 basic desires . Review of General Psychology 8 , 3 , 179 . Y . Ren , F . M . Harper , S . Drenner , L . Terveen , S . Kiesler , J . Riedl , and R . E . Kraut . 2012 . Building member attachment in online communities : Applying theories of group identity and interpersonal bonds . MIS Quarterly 36 , 3 . C . M . Ridings , D . Gefen , and B . Arinze . 2002 . Some antecedents and effects of trust in virtual communities . Journal of Strategic Information Systems 11 , 3 , 271 – 295 . C . Riedl , I . Blohm , J . M . Leimeister , and H . Krcmar . 2010 . Rating scales for collective intelligence in inno - vation communities : Why quick and easy decision making does not get it right . In Proceedings of 31st International Conference on Information Systems . L . P . Robert . 2013 . A multi - level analysis of the impact of shared leadership in diverse virtual teams . In Proceedings of the ACM 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . ACM , 363 – 374 . V . Sambamurthy and M . Subramani . 2005 . Special issue on information technologies and knowledge man - agement . MIS Quarterly 29 , 2 , 193 – 195 . F . Schwagereit , A . Scherp , and S . Staab . 2011 . Survey on governance of user - generated content in web communities . In Proceedings of the ACM WebSci’11 . H . Shin , J . Lee , and K . Hwang . 2010 . Separating the reputation and the sociability of online community users . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing ( SAC’10 ) . ACM , 1807 – 1814 . S . Siersdorfer , J . San Pedro , and M . Sanderson . 2009 . Automatic video tagging using content redundancy . In Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . ACM , 395 – 402 . T . Simonite . 2013 . The decline of wikipedia . MIT Technology Review 116 , 6 . P . Spagnoletti and A . Resca . 2012 . A design theory for it supporting online communities . In Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Science . IEEE , 4082 – 4091 . J . Sternberg . 2012 . Misbehavior in Cyber Places : The Regulation of Online Conduct in Virtual Communities on the Internet . University Press of America . K . J . Stewart and T . Ammeter . 2002 . An exploratory study of factors inﬂuencing the level of vitality and popularity of open source projects . In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Information Systems . 853 – 857 . S . A . Stumpf and M . London . 1981 . Capturing rater policies in evaluating candidates for promotion . Academy of Management Journal 24 , 4 , 752 – 766 . B . Stvilia , L . Gasser , M . B . Twidale , and L . C . Smith . 2007 . A framework for information quality assessment . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 , 12 , 1720 – 1733 . G . Szabo and B . A . Huberman . 2010 . Predicting the popularity of online content . Communications of the ACM 53 , 8 , 80 – 88 . H . - H . Teo , H . - C . Chan , K . - K . Wei , and Z . Zhang . 2003 . Evaluating information accessibility and commu - nity adaptivity features for sustaining virtual learning communities . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 59 , 5 , 671 – 697 . E . Trist . 1981 . The evolution of socio - technical systems . Occasional Paper . 2 . Perspectives on Organizational Design and Behavior . P . Valcke and M . Lenaerts . 2010 . Who’s author , editor and publisher in user - generated content ? Applying traditional media concepts to ugc providers . International Review of Law , Computers & Technology 24 , 1 , 119 – 131 . A . H . Van de Ven , A . L . Delbecq , and R . Koenig Jr . 1976 . Determinants of coordination modes within organizations . American Sociological Review 322 – 338 . I . Varlamis . 2010 . Quality of content in Web 2 . 0 applications . In Knowledge - Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems . 33 – 42 . J . Vassileva . 2012 . Motivating participation in social computing applications : A user modeling perspective . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction 22 , 1 – 2 , 1 – 25 . J . Vassileva and L . Sun . 2007 . Using community visualization to stimulate participation in online commu - nities . E - Service Journal 6 , 1 , 3 – 39 . A . Velasquez , R . Wash , C . Lampe , and T . Bjornrud . 2014 . Latent users in an online user - generated content community . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 23 , 1 , 21 – 50 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 . A Model for Context in the Design of Open Production Communities 29 : 29 V . Venkatesh and F . D . Davis . 2000 . A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model : Four longitudinal ﬁeld studies . Management Science 46 , 2 , 186 – 204 . V . Venkatesh and S . Goyal . 2010 . Expectation disconﬁrmation and technology adoption : Polynomial modeling and response surface analysis . MIS Quarterly 34 , 2 , 281 . G . S . von Krogh , S . Haeﬂiger , S . Spaeth , and M . W . Wallin . 2012 . Carrots and rainbows : Motivation and social practice in open source software development . MIS Quarterly 36 , 2 , 649 – 676 . H . Wang , J . E . Chung , N . Park , M . L . McLaughlin , and J . Fulk . 2011 . Understanding online community participation : A technology acceptance perspective . Communication Research 39 , 6 . Y . Wang and D . R . Fesenmaier . 2003 . Assessing motivation of contribution in online communities : An empir - ical investigation of an online travel community . Electronic Markets 13 , 1 , 33 – 45 . H . T . Welser , E . Gleave , D . Fisher , and M . Smith . 2007 . Visualizing the signatures of social roles in online discussion groups . Journal of Social Structure 8 , 2 , 1 – 32 . B . Whitworth . 2009 . The social requirements of technical systems . Handbook of Research on Socio - Technical Design and Social Networking Systems . Vol . 1 . IGI , 3 . D . M . Wilkinson . 2008 . Strongregularitiesinonlinepeerproduction . In Proceedingsofthe9thACMconference on Electronic Commerce ( EC ) , Stanford , CA : ACM , 302 – 309 . T . W¨ohner and R . Peters . 2009 . Assessing the quality of wikipedia articles with lifecycle based metrics . In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration . ACM , 16 . E . Yaari , S . Baruchson - Arbib , and J . Bar - Ilan . 2011 . Information quality assessment of community generated content : A user study of wikipedia . Journal of Information Science 37 , 5 , 487 – 498 . D . Yates , C . Wagner , and A . Majchrzak . 2010 . Factors affecting shapers of organizational wikis . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 , 3 , 543 – 554 . Y . Ye , K . Nakakoji , Y . Yamamoto , and K . Kishida . 2005 . The co - evolution of systems and communities in free and open source software development . Free / Open Source Software Development 59 – 82 . E . Yukselturk and S . Bulut . 2009 . Gender differences in self - regulated online learning environment . Educa - tional Technology & Society 12 , 3 , 12 – 22 . Y . Zheng , K . Zhao , and A . Stylianou . 2013 . The impacts of information quality and system quality on users’ continuance intention in information - exchange virtual communities : An empirical investigation . Decision Support Systems 56 , 513 – 524 . Y . M . Zheng , K . Zhao , and A . Stylianou . 2010 . Building social capital in online communities : A perspective of information and system quality . In Proceedings of the Americas Conference on Information Systems ( AMCIS’10 ) . H . Zhu , R . Kraut , and A . Kittur . 2012a . Effectiveness of shared leadership in online communities . In Pro - ceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’12 ) . H . Zhu , R . Kraut , and A . Kittur . 2012b . Organizing without formal organization : Group identiﬁcation , goal setting and social modeling in directing online production . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’12 ) . P . Ziaie and M . Imamovic . 2013 . Lifecycle - based evolution of features in collaborative production commu - nities : The case of wikipedia . In Proceedings of the 21st European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS’13 ) . P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar . 2012 . Introducing a design framework for reputation systems in multi - tier production communities . Digital Creativity , Special Issue on Collaboration and Community 23 , 2 , 144 – 157 . P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar . 2013a . Content in open production communities : Taxonomy and construct . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Applications Technology ( ICCAT’13 ) . P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar . 2013b . Introducing a design - oriented categorization of online voluntary production communities . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Innovative Computing Technology ( INTECH’13 ) . P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar . 2014 . Designingtarget - oriented incentive systems for online production communities . In Proceedings of Die Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik ( MKWI’14 ) . Received August 2013 ; revised August 2014 ; accepted August 2014 ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 47 , No . 2 , Article 29 , Publication date : November 2014 .