7 having a socio - cultural foundation . But , I think , this does not by any means make it less objective , since externalizing by reencoding is the only means of mak - ing private subjective knowledge public and potentially objective . By interpreting Wittgenstein’s argument as it applies only to semantic memory and not episodic , I suggest a transformation mechanism in terms of rep - resentational redescription , which explains one of the mechanisms involved in learning and discovery . A co - gent and complete understanding of learning and dis - covery cannot be accomplished without responding to Wittgenstein’s challenge . References Carey , S . and R . Gelman , Eds . ( 1991 ) The Epigenesis of Mind : Essays on Biology and Cognition . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Carey , S . ( 1985 ) Conceptual Change in Childhood . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Carruthers , P . , and P . Smith , Eds . ( 1995 ) Theories of Theory of Mind . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Davidson , D . ( 1980 ) Mental events . In D . Davidson , Essays on Actions and Events . Oxford : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Dennett , D . C . ( 1987 ) The Intentional Stance . Cam - bridge , MA : Bradford Books / MIT Press . Donald , M . ( 2001 ) Origins of the Modern Mind : Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition . Harvard University Press . Gardenfors , P . ( 2003 ) How Homo Became Sapiens ? : On the Evolution of Thinking . Oxford : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Fodor , J . A . ( 1983 ) The Modularity of Mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fodor , J . A . ( 2001 ) The Mind Doesn’t Work that Way : The Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology . Bradford books / MIT Press . Gopnik , A . , and A . N . Meltzoff . ( 1997 ) Words , Thoughts and Theories . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) Beyond Modularity : A De - velopmental Perspective on Cognitive Science . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Keil , F . C . ( 1989 ) Concepts , Kinds and Cognitive Devel - opment . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Piaget , J . ( 1967 ) Piaget’s theory . In J . Mussen , Ed . , Carmichael’s Manual of Child Psychology , vol . 1 . New York : Basic Books . Pinker , S . ( 1994 ) The Language Instinct . London : Lane . Pinker , S . ( 1999 ) How the Mind Works . W . W . Norton & Company . Wittgenstein , L . ( 1953 ) Philosophical Investigations . English translation by Anscombe , G . E . M . . 2002 , Lon - don : Basil Blackwell . The Challenge of Knowledge Soup John F . Sowa Ex - IBM , Croton - on - Hudson , NY , USA People have a natural desire to organize , classify , la - bel , and define the things , events , and patterns of their daily lives . But their best - laid plans are overwhelmed by the inevitable change , growth , innovation , progress , evolution , diversity , and entropy . When the Académie Française attempted to legislate the vocabulary and definitions of the French language , their efforts were undermined by uncontrollable developments : rapid growth of slang that is never sanctioned by the au - thorities , and wholesale borrowing of words from Eng - lish , the world’s fastest growing language . In Japan , the pace of innovation and borrowing has been so rapid that the older generation of Japanese can no longer read their daily newspapers . These rapid changes , which create difficulties for people , are far more dis - ruptive for the fragile databases and knowledge bases in computer systems . The term _ knowledge soup _ better characterizes the fluid , dynamically changing nature of the information that people acquire , reason about , act upon , and communicate . This talk addresses the complexity of the knowledge soup , the problems it poses for intelligent systems , and the methods for man - aging it . The most important measure for any intelli - gent system is its flexibility in accommodating and making sense of the knowledge soup . Review Talks