Upon stimulation , certain protein kinases , phos - phatases and other players in signal transduction relo - cate to membranes , cytoskeletal structures , scaffolding proteins or organelles 1 – 3 . Here we take receptor tyro - sine kinase ( RTK ) signalling as our main example ( Fig . 1 ) . Stimulation of RTKs is linked to the activation of mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) cascades through a cytoplasmic protein Sos ( a homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster ‘Son of sevenless’ protein ) and the small GTP - hydrolysing protein Ras , anchored to the cell membrane 4 . Sos is a GDP / GTP exchange fac - tor that catalyses the conversion of inactive Ras ( i . e . its GDP - bound form ) to active Ras ( its GTP - bound form ) . The adaptor protein Grb2 ( growth - factor - re - ceptor - binding protein 2 ) mediates the binding of Sos to activated RTKs , such as the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) . Grb2 binds to the activated EGFR directly or through another adaptor protein , tyrosine - phosphorylated Shc ( src homology and collagen domain protein ) . The EGFR does not phos - phorylate Sos , nor does the catalytic activity of Sos towards Ras change upon Sos binding to the receptor 5 . When Sos is recruited to the membrane by activated EGFR , Sos can interact with the membrane poly - phosphoinositides through an N - terminal pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain . This interaction pattern raises a number of ques - tions about the role of the plasma membrane re - location in signal transduction . Why should the Grb2 – Sos complex bind to the membrane receptor if Sos catalytic activity is not activated by the recep - tor ? What prevents direct interaction of cytosolic Sos with the membrane - bound Ras from activating the latter ? Why is Ras anchored to the membrane ? Should anchoring itself be a regulatory event ? What is essentially different in the activated versus the nonactivated RTK ? It has been proposed that the re - cruitment of Sos to the proximity of the membrane - bound Ras is a key feature in the activation of Ras by phosphorylated EGFR 6 – 8 . But what does recruit - ment mean ? If it means that Sos is first bound to the EGFR and then moves to Ras by two - dimensional diffusion , then why should this accelerate signal transduction ? Cytosolic Sos still requires the same amount of time to reach the EGFR . Binding to EGFR would slow down its diffusion unless Sos dissociated again , but then Sos would escape back to the cytosol rather than bind to Ras . To clarify the effect of membrane localization , we consider two extremes . When two protein molecules form a productive complex ( i . e . transduce the signal ) after each diffusive encounter , the signal - transduction process is ‘diffusion - limited’ . If only a small fraction of the collisions leads to binding that lasts long enough to transfer the information , the signal trans - duction is ‘reaction - limited’ . In this case , the reaction rate is controlled by the alignment of reactive patches in the correct orientation or by the intrinsic chemical transformation rather than by the Brownian colli - sions of the molecules . The two protein molecules then associate and dissociate several times before signal transduction takes place . We will now analyse the consequences of the membrane translocation for diffusion - and reaction - limited signal transduction . Does membrane localization enhance diffusion - limited signal transduction ? Adam and Delbrück suggested that the reduction in dimensionality might enhance reaction rates be - tween solutes that bind to membranes and membrane - bound species 9 ; the solutes should not get lost by wandering off into the bulk phase . The relevance and magnitude of this enhancement has been studied extensively in various biological systems 10 – 12 . Conservative estimates can be made of the time taken by signal transduction proteins in the cell F O R U M h y p o t h e s i s trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 0962 - 8924 / 00 / $ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . 173 PII : S0962 - 8924 ( 00 ) 01741 - 4 Why cytoplasmic signalling proteins should be recruited to cell membranes Boris N . Kholodenko , Jan B . Hoek and Hans V . Westerhoff It has been suggested that localization of signal - transduction proteins close to the cell membrane causes an increase in their rate of encounter after activation . We maintain that such an increase in the first - encounter rate is too small to be responsible for truly enhanced signal transduction . Instead , the function of membrane localization is to increase the number ( or average lifetime ) of complexes between cognate signal transduction proteins and hence increase the extent of activation of downstream processes . This is achieved by concentrating the proteins in the small volume of the area just below the plasma membrane . The signal - transduction chain is viewed simply as operating at low default intensity because one of its components is present at a low concentration . The steady signalling level of the chain is enhanced 1000 - fold by increasing the concentration of that component . This occurs upon ‘piggyback’ binding to a membrane protein , such as the activated receptor , initiating the signal - transduction chain . For the effect to occur , the protein translocated to the membrane cannot be free but has to remain organized by being piggyback bound to a receptor , membrane lipid ( s ) or scaffold . We discuss an important structural constraint imposed by this mechanism on signal transduction proteins that might also account for the presence of adaptor proteins . FORUM hypothesis 174 trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 membrane or in the cytosol to encounter their first partner molecule by free diffusion 13 . A spherical cell with a radius of 10 m m has a surface area of 1260 m m 2 . If it contains 10 000 copies of each signal transduction protein in its membrane , then at 0 . 35 m m spacing the protein molecules occupy the entire cell surface . Partners in signal transduction should then be ap - proximately L 5 0 . 25 m m apart . The average time for them to meet a neighbour should be approximately L 2 / 2 D , where D is the lateral diffusion coefficient . As the membrane diffusion coefficient of the protein is approximately 10 – 9 – 10 – 10 cm 2 / s ( Refs 14 and 15 ) , it should take about 0 . 3 – 3 s before the partner proteins hit each other when diffusing in two dimensions . For three - dimensional signal transduction with 10 000 proteins per cytosol , the partner proteins will be on average 0 . 6 m m apart . Using a diffusion coefficient of 10 – 8 cm 2 / s for cytosol diffusion ( see Ref . 16 and refer - ences therein ) , this leads to a time of L 2 / ( 3 D ) 5 0 . 1 s , which is faster , not slower , than the 0 . 3 – 3s for the 2 - D scenario . These estimates show that , for homogeneous pro - tein distribution , hooking proteins up to the plasma membrane causes very little , if any , increase in their encounter rates . Indeed , it has been argued that the fastest route to diffusion is through the cytosol , not the membrane , because of two orders of magnitude difference in the diffusion coefficients 17 . In Box 1 , a more rigorous comparison of the rates of diffusion - limited protein associations in the cell membrane and in the cytosol leads to the same conclusion : the function of attachment to the plasma membrane is unlikely to be an enhancement of the encounter rates of signal transduction proteins . Membrane association might enhance reaction - limited signal transduction In the reaction - limited extreme , the catalytic rate is much slower than the association and dissociation rates . The influence of first - encounter rates controlled by diffusion on the overall reaction rate can be neglected , and the signal transduction rate is deter - mined by the fraction of molecules in the associated state multiplied by a reaction rate constant 13 . The effect of association to the membrane is that of an increased local concentration . This causes an increase in the apparent affinity and can enhance the associ - ation of two membrane - associated proteins compared with two cytosolic proteins . Using order - of - magnitude reasoning , Haugh and Lauffenburger estimated that the increase in reaction - limited protein association could be as high as 10 2 – 10 3 ( Ref . 20 ) . The enhance - ment depends on many molecular details including the reversibility of the binding 12 , which implies that the dissociation rate constant might also change upon membrane relocation . For instance , affinity enhancement due to ‘macromolecular crowding’ appeared to be caused partly by a decrease in the dissociation rate constant 22 . A gain in the number of signalling complexes is more important than an increase in the encounter rate The calculations above showed that encounter times are of the order of 0 . 1 – 1 s . Thus , an increase in first - encounter rate can be important for very fast signalling processes , which are diffusion - limited . For example , a rapid onset of EGFR phosphorylation in response to growth factors implies that receptor dimerization proceeds as an almost diffusion - limited step 23 . For reaction - limited processes , which are slower , a change in first - encounter rate is irrelevant . Instead , the mechanism underlying an increase in signal transfer rate involves an increase in the number of signalling complexes that act as catalysts activating downstream processes . We submit that membrane localization serves to enhance the extent of complex formation of signal - transduction proteins and hence increases the intensity of the signal being trans - duced . If the extent of complex formation is indeed the important issue , then the following , compara - tively simple , analysis can be made of the effect of membrane localization . Membrane anchoring of only one of two interacting proteins does not lead to a gain in the number of signalling complexes Does the number of complexes formed by signalling proteins depend on whether one of the interacting proteins is bound to the membrane ( rather than both proteins diffusing in the cytosol ) ? We assume that the standard free - energy difference of the binding reaction does not depend on the spatial localization of the complex , so that the equilibrium constant K d is the same regardless of whether one of the proteins is associated with the membrane . Boris N . Kholodenko and Jan B . Hoek are in the Dept of Pathology , Anatomy and Cell Biology , Thomas Jefferson University , 1020 Locust St , Philadelphia , PA 19107 , USA ; and Hans V . Westerhoff is in the Dept of Molecular Cell Physiology and Mathematical Biochemistry , BioCentrum Amsterdam , De Boelelaan 1087 , NL - 1081 HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands . E - mails : boris . kholodenko @ mail . tju . edu ; hw @ bio . vu . nl trends in Cell Biology Ligand Ligand Raf MEK MEK Shc Shc Erk Erk SO RTK SO SO Raf Ras Ras Grb2 Grb2 Grb2 Grb2 RTK SO FIGURE 1 Receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) - mediated activation of mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) cascade through Ras . The upper part of the figure emphasizes the situation where signal transduction occurs at the membrane surface . The bottom part of the figure indicates that some of the signal transduction proteins might also reside in the cytosol , raising the question of whether a signal could be transmitted through the cytosol or why binding of Grb2 / Sos to the activated receptor might be required . SO , Sos . FORUM hypothesis trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 175 BOX 1 – COMPARISON OF THE RATES OF DIFFUSION - LIMITED PROTEIN ASSOCIATIONS IN THE CELL MEMBRANE AND IN THE CYTOSOL Modern theories of diffusion - limited reactions show that a two - dimensional association rate constant is not a constant pa - rameter but depends slightly on time 18 . Based on these theories , Lamb and Pugh estimated the encounter rate between membrane proteins using the sum of their diffusion coefficients ( D m ) and the sum of their radii ( r prot ) 19 . If we express the concentrations of the proteins based on the whole cell volume , the association rate constant is predicted to be : ( 13 ) where t is the time from the onset of reaction , N A is Avogadro’s number , V is the volume of the cell , M is the surface area of the membrane and g 5 0 . 58 is Euler’s constant . When the time increases from 0 . 05 to 100 s , the association rate constant decreases by a factor of 2 ( for typical values of D m and r prot ) 19 . Therefore , in the time frame of seconds , the time dependency of the two - dimensional rate constant can be neglected . The encounter rate in three dimensions is described by the following expression for the second - order rate constant , k c 5 4 p N A D c r prot , where D c is the sum of the diffusion coefficients of the encountering cytosolic proteins . The rate enhance - ment due to the confinement of proteins to the plasma membrane can be estimated as the ratio ( h ) of the association rate constant in two dimensions to that in three dimensions . For diffusion - limited association of two proteins located in the plasma membrane of a spherical cell or delocalized over the cytosol volume , the ratio h can be approximated as h 5 ( 0 . 02 – 0 . 05 ) ( D m / D c ) ( r cell / r prot ) . The cell radius , r cell , appears in the equation as the result of dividing the cell volume by the cell surface area . For r cell of 10 m m and r prot of about 10 – 2 m m , h » ( 20 – 50 ) D m / D c . Because the diffusion coefficients of proteins in the membrane are two orders of magnitude lower than in the cytosol , the rate enhancement due to association with the membrane ( if any ) is moderate for protein – protein associations limited by diffusion . The diffusion - limited association rate might actually decrease in the membrane 20 . We conclude that the function of localization at the plasma membrane is unlikely to be an enhancement of diffusion rates . However , if both interacting proteins are targeted to specific membrane domains ( e . g . membrane rafts 21 ) constituting a small fraction of the whole plasma membrane , then an increase in diffusion - limited association rates can be significant . k t D N V M D t r m m A m prot ( ) ( / ) ( / ) = - 4 4 2 2 p g ln BOX 2 – INTERACTIONS OF A AND T RESULTING IN THE FORMATION OF AN AT COMPLEX Let A be a cytoplasmic protein and T a membrane - associated target protein that contains a specific A - binding domain ( Fig . 2 ) . We denote by V m the volume of a water layer adjacent to the membrane to which protein T is confined and by V c the cytosol volume . At equilibrium , the law of mass action relates the concentrations of A , T and the complex AT to the dissociation constant , K d ( the number of molecules in the cell will be designated by the same symbols as the corresponding species , in italics ) : ( 1 ) The numbers A , T and AT of the corresponding molecules in the cell are restricted by the total numbers , A tot , T tot , as follows : ( 2 ) ( 3 ) As only V c remains in Eqns 1 – 3 , it follows that the number of complexes AT does not depend on whether one of the in - teracting proteins is anchored to the plasma membrane or both proteins are in the cytosolic fraction of the cell . To compare direct interactions with receptor - mediated interactions of cytoplasmic A with T , we estimate the K d value , which allows more than 50 % of the total A protein to be associated with T . It follows from Eqns 1 – 3 that more than half of the molecules of A tot will be in the complex AT if T tot ‡ A tot / 2 and if the dissociation constant of specific binding is less than : ( 4 ) K direct binding AT A A T T V d tot tot tot tot c , ( . ) ( / ) ‡ £ - (cid:215) (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł 0 5 1 2 T AT T tot + = A AT A tot + = K AV TV ATV V A T AT d c m m c = (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:215) (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł = (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:215) (cid:215) ( ) 1 FORUM hypothesis 176 trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 The analysis in Box 2 shows that the fraction of a cytosolic protein A that is complexed to a membrane target T ( Fig . 2 ) is independent of whether T is confined to the membrane or allowed to delocalize all over the cytosol . Direct interaction of A and T will result in significant binding only if K d does not exceed the concentration of the target protein dis - solved in the cytoplasmic volume ( Eqn 4 ) . We con - clude that membrane localization of only one of the interacting proteins does not enhance complex formation and signal transduction . Membrane anchoring of both interacting proteins might increase the number of signalling complexes If both signal transduction partners are anchored to the membrane , then they exist in a reduced vol - ume and association should be favoured . The analy - sis is given by the equations in Box 2 , provided that the cytosolic volume V c is replaced by volume of the shell near the membrane that is accessible to the proteins , V m . A consequence is that the dissociation constant K d required for a certain degree of associ - ation of two membrane - linked proteins exceeds that required for the same degree of association of two cytosolic proteins , by the ratio V c / V m . For a spherical cell of radius 10 m m and a submembrane layer of thickness 3 nm ( corresponding to the dimensions of an anchored protein ) , the ratio V c / V m might well amount to 1000 ( Ref . 2 ) . Therefore , one possibility for a signal - transduction chain to enhance the extent of association of its proteins ( or reduce the number of protein molecules per cell required to achieve the same extent of association ) is to have these proteins anchored to the membrane . Piggyback riding : receptor - mediated membrane localization increases the number of complexes formed by a cytoplasmic protein and a membrane - anchored protein A gain in the number of signalling complexes in - volving a cytosolic protein A and its target T can also be brought about by a reversible , ‘piggyback’ mecha - nism . Here , A binds to a ‘piggy’ protein receptor ( R ) that is itself bound irreversibly to the membrane ( Fig . 3 ) . Protein A then rides piggyback until it meets membrane - bound target T . It then forms a complex with T , while continuing to ride piggyback on R . A simple analysis of quasi - equilibrium binding is given in Box 3 . Equations 10 and 12 in Box 3 demonstrate that piggyback riding leads to a strong reduction of the apparent ( dissociation ) equilibrium constant . The factor decrease can be as high as the factor V c / V m . Consequently , under conditions where nonmembrane - associated proteins A and T would fail to bind to each other , a significant fraction of piggy - back riding A should bind to membrane - anchored T . Active compartmentation : a tool to activate signal transduction In signal transduction , it is the extent of activation – defined as the signal ratio between the active and the inactive state of the pathway – that matters . A 100 – 1000 - fold activation can constitute an effective switch between the ‘on’ and ‘off’ states of a phos - phorylation cascade 26 , 27 . The piggyback effect should be suitable for the switch between the active and the inactive states of the signal transduction chain . For this to occur the receptor should have affinity for A only after activation by its own signal . Such regulated translocation of the kinases and phos - phatases can generate switch - like responses due to enzyme - saturation effects 28 . The simple principle for signal transduction is as follows . Upon binding of its extracellular ligand , a receptor protein develops an affinity for a cytosolic membrane protein A . This leads to an increased steady - state concentration of A ( as the receptor – protein complex RA ) near the membrane for as long as the receptor remains activated . Because of this enhanced concentration , more of the target signal - transduction protein complexes with A , enhancing its signal more than 100 - fold . In this picture , diffusion rates are irrelevant ; it is all mass - action balance at steady state , the balance being tipped by concentrating A close to the membrane . Structural constraints and scaffolds In the analysis above , it was RA ( the receptor – protein complex ) and not just A ( the free protein ) that bound the target T . If only free A was able to bind to T , the presence of the receptor should decrease rather than increase association of A and T and hence decrease the trends in Cell Biology A T AT FIGURE 2 Direct interaction between a cytosolic protein A and a membrane - anchored target protein T , leading to the formation of the complex AT . T R A RA RAT T ( 1 ) ( 2 ) trends in Cell Biology FIGURE 3 Piggyback mechanism of the complex formation between a cytosolic protein A and a membrane - anchored target protein T . Interaction of A and T is promoted by first binding A to the receptor R after activation of R , which recruits A to the membrane surface . FORUM hypothesis trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 177 activation of T : a membrane protein with affinity to a cytosolic protein cannot increase the free concentra - tion of the latter near the membrane . A must be a two - domain protein , where the binding of one domain to R should not occlude the other domain from T . Perhaps this structural constraint is sometimes met by so - called adaptor proteins . Recruitment of a protein to the membrane by binding to another functional pro - tein has the potential disadvantage that one face of either protein is occluded from its normal activity . Adaptor proteins might serve to bind to proteins while keeping them far enough apart for their surface to retain their normal activity . In addition , they might orient A so as to enhance its affinity to T . Our analysis also applies to translocation to scaf - folds . Scaffolds bring together signalling proteins , organizing and coordinating the function of entire signalling cascades 17 . Again , binding to a scaffold should not compromise the ability of the signal - transducing proteins to bind to each other . Adaptor proteins might also be required to achieve this end . Are membrane rafts required for promoting fast , diffusion - limited signalling processes ? For most cell geometries and with homogeneous protein distribution in the membrane , the trans - location to the plasma membrane cannot increase first - encounter rates significantly ( if at all ) . However , BOX 3 – PIGGY - BACK MECHANISM OF THE FORMATION OF A COMPLEX INVOLVING A CYTOSOLIC A AND A MEMBRANE - ANCHORED T We designate by R , RA and RAT the numbers of molecules of the receptor R , of its complex with A and of the ternary com - plex RAT per cell ( Fig . 3 ) . R tot is the total number of activated receptor molecules . The binding of A and R is characterized by the dissociation constant K dR . To compare a direct binding of A and T with a two - step interaction involving the associ - ation of A and R , we assume that the association of both cytoplasmic A and the complex RA with membrane - bound T is characterized by the same dissociation constant , K d . At equilibrium , the concentrations of interacting molecules and their complexes are related through the law of mass action : ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) If all A molecules were bound to the receptor R , Eqn 1 ( Box 2 ) and Eqn 6 ( Box 3 ) would be identical after multiplying Eqn 6 by V m / V c and substituting K d by K dapp 5 K d ( V m / V c ) . However , only part of A is bound to R . When A tot is significantly less than R tot , the changes in R due to the variation in RA and RAT complexes can be neglected . In this case Eqn 7 can be omitted and R is approximated as R tot . Using Eqn 5 to express A in terms of RA and substituting into Eqn 8 , Eqns 5 – 9 are reduced to three relations that are identical to Eqns 1 – 3 after substitution of K d by the apparent dissociation constant K dapp , defined as : ( 10 ) The value of the dimensionless factor a is determined by the ratio of the dissociation constant for the interactions of A with R and the concentration of the activated receptor based on the whole cytoplasmic volume . Data obtained for re - ceptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) show that K d is in the range 1 – 100 n M ( Refs 24 , 25 ) . The total concentration of RTKs ( nor - malized to the cell volume ) is in the order of 100 n M and ~ 20 – 50 % of the total amount is activated by the stimuli ( see Ref . 23 and references therein ) . We conclude that for membrane recruitment by RTKs , the value of a does not exceed 1 . In the general case , the number of activated receptor molecules ( R tot ) might be comparable to the number of A molecules ( A tot ) . For a two - step mechanism of A and T interaction involving the binding of A and R , we can estimate the value of K d that allows ‡ 50 % of A molecules to be bound to T ( in the complex RAT ) . Obviously , this requires the total numbers of the interacting molecules ( A , T and R ) to satisfy the restrictions : R tot ‡ A tot / 2 ; T tot ‡ A tot / 2 . Substituting the inequality RAT / A tot ‡ 0 . 5 into Eqns 5 – 9 and expanding the solution of the resulting quadratic equation using the above restrictions , we find that the corresponding K d should satisfy the inequality : ( 11 ) Equations 11 and 4 ( Box 2 ) can be used to compare the values of K d that allow ‡ 50 % of A molecules to be bound to T for a piggyback or direct mechanism of binding : ( 12 ) K piggy back mechanism RAT A K direct binding AT A V V A R d tot d tot c m tot tot ( . ) ( . ) / ( ) - ‡ ‡ » (cid:230) Ł(cid:231) (cid:246) ł(cid:247) (cid:215) - ( ) + , , 0 5 0 5 1 2 1 a K RAT A A T A R T V d tot tot tot tot tot tot m ( . ) ( / ) ( / ) ( ) ‡ £ - (cid:215) - + (cid:215) (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł 0 5 1 2 1 2 1 a K K V V K R V dapp d m c dR tot c = (cid:215) (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:215) + ( ) , 1 a a = T RAT Y tot + = A RA RAT A tot + + = R RA RAT R tot + + = K V RA T RAT d m = (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:215) (cid:215) ( ) 1 K V A RRA dR c = (cid:230)Ł (cid:246)ł (cid:215) (cid:215) ( ) 1 FORUM hypothesis 178 trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) May 2000 as noted above ( Box 1 ) , when signalling molecules are concentrated within special membrane domains , such as membrane ‘rafts’ 21 , diffusion rates increase as the ratio of the membrane surface to the total do - main area . If this ratio is much greater than one , the diffusion - limited rates will exceed such rates in the cytosol . Therefore , targeting all participants of a sig - nalling chain to a limited area within a raft will en - hance very fast diffusion - limited signalling pro - cesses . However , the number of signalling complexes formed within these domains would also increase by the same factor . Therefore , the rate of reaction - limited signal transduction that does not depend on first - encounter rates will also increase by a factor equal to the membrane surface / domain area , i . e . over a f actor of 1000 compared with such a rate in the cytosol . Specifics of Sos – Ras interactions Our example of the EGFR - signalling pathway is used to explain why activation of membrane - bound Ras by direct action of Sos from the cytosol is two or three orders of magnitude less effective than EGFR - mediated Sos association with Ras . It also explains why activation of Sos by EGFR does not require any modification of Sos ; it arises from concentrating Sos near the membrane . As the partners Ras and Sos are to be localized for effective catalysis , the membrane anchoring of Ras might be a regulatory process 2 . Indeed , the inhibition of farnesyltransferase blocks Ras function by preventing its posttranslational far - nesylation , and has been suggested as a potential anticancer treatment 29 . An interesting variation on the topic of Ras acti - vation by RTKs has been described for fibroblast - growth - factor ( FGF ) receptors ( FGFRs ) 30 . Stimulation of FGFRs by various FGFs induces cell proliferation , differentiation and migration by activation of the Grb2 – Sos – Ras – MAPK signalling pathway . However , unlike other RTKs , activated FGFR cannot bind to Grb2 directly . Recently , a membrane - anchored pro - tein known as FRS2 ( FGFR substrate 2 ) has been discovered 30 . Activated FGFR phosphorylates FRS2 protein . Tyrosine - phosphorylated FRS2 is able to bind to Grb2 and , therefore , the Grb2 – Sos complex . In a familiar twist , the juxtaposition of the FRS2 – Grb2 – Sos complex on the membrane might facili - tate the Ras activation by Sos , providing a feasible mechanism for linking FGFRs to the Grb2 – Sos – Ras – MAPK pathway . Outlook The advantages of membrane localization of sig - nalling complexes are not limited to the specific ex - ample of Ras activation by Sos examined here . Recruitment of signalling proteins to the membrane occurs widely and several mechanisms are used to regulate these events , including not only protein – protein domain interactions but also recognition of specific lipid species , covalent modification by acylation or prenylation . Our analysis provides a logical rationale to interpret these localization pro - cesses as switching devices to activate a particular signalling pathway . References 1 Mochly - Rosen , D . ( 1995 ) Localization of protein kinases by anchoring proteins : a theme in signal transduction . Science 268 , 247 – 251 2 McLaughlin , S . and Aderem , A . ( 1995 ) The myristoyl - electrostatic switch : a modulator of reversible protein membrane interactions . Trends Biochem . Sci . 20 , 272 – 276 3 Carraway , K . L . and Carraway , C . A . ( 1995 ) Signalling , mitogenesis and the cytoskeleton : where the action is . BioEssays 17 , 171 – 175 4 Egan , S . E . et al . ( 1993 ) Association of Sos Ras exchange protein with Grb2 is implicated in tyrosine kinase signal transduction and transformation . Nature 363 , 45 – 51 5 Buday , L . and Downward , J . ( 1993 ) Epidermal growth factor regulates p21ras through the formation of a complex of receptor , Grb2 adaptor protein , and Sos nucleotide exchange factor . Cell 73 , 611 – 620 6 McCormick , F . ( 1993 ) Signal transduction . How receptors turn Ras on . Nature 363 , 15 – 16 7 Aronheim , A . et al . ( 1994 ) Membrane targeting of the nucleotide exchange factor Sos is sufficient for activating the Ras signalling pathway . Cell 78 , 949 – 961 8 Joneson , T . and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 1997 ) Ras effectors and their role in mitogenesis and oncogenesis . J . Mol . Med . 75 , 587 – 593 9 Adam , G . and Delbrück , M . ( 1968 ) Reduction of dimensionality in biological diffusion processes . Struct . Chem . Mol . Biol . 198 – 215 10 Berg , H . C . and Purcell , E . M . ( 1977 ) Physics of chemoreception . Biophys . J . 20 , 193 – 219 11 Wang , D . et al . ( 1992 ) Reaction rate enhancement by surface diffusion of adsorbates . Biophys . Chem . 43 , 117 – 137 12 Axelrod , D . and Wang , M . D . ( 1994 ) Reduction - of - dimensionality kinetics at reaction - limited cell surface receptors . Biophys . J . 66 , 588 – 600 13 Westerhoff , H . V . and Welch , G . R . ( 1992 ) Enzyme organization and the direction of metabolic flow : physicochemical considerations . Curr . Top . Cell . Regul . 33 , 361 – 390 14 Cherry , R . J . ( 1979 ) Rotational and lateral diffusion of membrane proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 559 , 289 – 327 15 Kusumi , A . et al . ( 1993 ) Confined lateral diffusion of membrane receptors as studied by single particle tracking ( nanovid microscopy ) . Effects of calcium - induced differentiation in cultured epithelial cells . Biophys . J . 65 , 2021 – 2040 16 Brown , G . C . and Kholodenko , B . N . ( 1999 ) Spatial gradients of cellular phospho - proteins . FEBS Lett . 457 , 452 – 454 17 Bray , D . ( 1998 ) Signalling complexes : biophysical constraints on intracellular communication . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 27 , 59 – 75 18 Torney , D . C . and McConnell , H . M . ( 1983 ) Diffusion - limited reaction rate theory for two - dimensional systems . Proc . R . Soc . London Ser . A 387 , 147 – 170 19 Lamb , T . D . and Pugh , E . N . , Jr . ( 1992 ) A quantitative account of the activation steps involved in phototransduction in amphibian photoreceptors . J . Physiol . 449 , 719 – 758 20 Haugh , J . M . and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1997 ) Physical modulation of intracellular signalling processes by locational regulation . Biophys . J . 72 , 2014 – 2031 21 Rietveld , A . and Simons , K . ( 1998 ) The differential miscibility of lipids as the basis for the formation of functional membrane rafts . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1376 , 467 – 479 22 Rohwer , J . M . et al . ( 1998 ) Implications of molecular crowding for signal transduction and metabolite channeling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 10547 – 10552 23 Kholodenko , B . N . et al . ( 1999 ) Quantification of short term signalling by the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 30169 – 30181 24 Panayotou , G . et al . ( 1993 ) Interactions between SH2 domains and tyrosine - phosphorylated platelet - derived growth factor beta - receptor sequences : analysis of kinetic parameters by a novel biosensor - based approach . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 3567 – 3576 25 Ladbury , J . E . et al . ( 1995 ) Measurement of the binding of tyrosyl phosphopeptides to SH2 domains : a reappraisal . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 3199 – 3203 26 Ferrell , J . E . , Jr . ( 1998 ) How responses get more switch - like as you move down a protein kinase cascade . Trends Biochem . Sci . 22 , 288 – 289 27 Kholodenko , B . N . et al . ( 1997 ) Quantification of information transfer via cellular signal transduction pathways . FEBS Lett . 414 , 430 – 434 28 Ferrell , J . E . , Jr . ( 1998 ) How regulated protein translocation can produce switch - like responses . Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , 461 – 465 29 Cox , A . D . and Der , C . J . ( 1997 ) Farnesyltransferase inhibitors and cancer treatment : targeting simply Ras ? Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1333 , F51 – F71 30 Kouhara , H . et al . ( 1997 ) A lipid - anchored Grb2 - binding protein that links FGF - receptor activation to the Ras / MAPK signalling pathway . Cell 89 , 693 – 702 Acknowledgements We dedicate this paper to the memory of Paul Srere , teacher of the importance of macromolecularorganization for cell function . We thank Frank Bruggeman , Oleg Demin , Jorrit Hornberg , Jan Lankelma and Oscar Somsen for discussions , and NIH grants GM59570 - 01A1 , AA01786 , AA07215 , AA08714 and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research ( NWO ) for support .