1 Cytohesin - 1 controls the activation of RhoA and modulates integrin - dependent adhesion and migration of dendritic cells Thomas Quast 1 # , Barbara Tappertzhofen 1 # , Cora Schild 1 , Jessica Grell 1 , Niklas Czeloth 2 , Reinhold Förster 2 , Ronen Alon 4 , Line Fraemohs 3 , Katrin Dreck 1 , Christian Weber 3 , Tim Lämmermann 5 , Michael Sixt 5 and Waldemar Kolanus 1 * 1 Life and Medical Sciences ( LIMES ) Institute Laboratory for Molecular Immunology University of Bonn Karlrobert - Kreitenstr . 13 53115 Bonn Germany 2 Institute of Immunology , Hannover Medical School , Germany 3 Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research ( IMCAR ) , RWTH University Aachen 4 Department of Immunology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel 5 Max - Planck - Institute for Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany Short title : Cytohesin - 1 function in dendritic cell migration Subject category : Immunobiology * Corresponding author : Phone : + 49 - 228 - 733053 ; Fax : + 49 - 228 - 735499 ; e - mail : wkolanus @ uni - bonn . de # the contributions of these authors should be considered equal Blood First Edition Paper , prepublished online April 3 , 2009 ; DOI 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 08 - 176123 Copyright © 2009 American Society of Hematology For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 2 Abstract Adhesion and motility of mammalian leukocytes are essential requirements for innate and adaptive immune defence mechanisms . We show here that the guanine nucleotide exchange factor cytohesin - 1 which had previously been demonstrated to be an important component of beta - 2 integrin activation in lymphocytes , regulates the activation of the small GTPase RhoA in primary dendritic cells ( DC ) . Cytohesin - 1 and RhoA are both required for the induction of chemokine - dependent conformational changes of the integrin beta - 2 subunit of DC during adhesion under physiological flow conditions . Furthermore , employment of RNAi in murine BM - DC revealed that interference with cytohesin - 1 signaling impairs migration of wild type dendritic cells in complex 3D environments and in vivo . This phentoype was not observed in the complete absence of integrins . We thus demonstrate an essential role of cytohesin - 1 / RhoA during amoeboid migration in the presence of integrins and further suggest that DCs without integrins switch to a different migration mode . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 3 Introduction Integrin - mediated adhesion is an essential function of most metazoan cells , and plays a key role in e . g . organ development , the maintenance of tissue architecture , blood clotting and in many aspects of leukocyte biology . The mammalian integrin family consists of 24 hetero - dimeric cell surface receptors which bear distinct functional binding specificities for extra - cellular matrix proteins and plasma membrane counter - receptors 1 . Immune cells have highly specific requirements for timing and location of cell - cell and - matrix contacts , which need to be finely tuned to variable conditions of homeostasis and inflammation . An important hallmark of integrin function in the immune system is the rapid adhesion of leukocytes to activated endothelia , a process which is essential for immune cell egress from the vasculature into either lymphoid organs or into infected tissues . To perform such functions , integrins on leukocytes have to be activated by a process which has been termed “inside - out” - signaling . It is now generally believed that integrins on circulating , resting leukocytes are conformationally restricted , so that they normally can not bind to their protein ligands , such as ICAM - 1 or VCAM - 1 . However , if a leukocyte becomes tethered to an endothelial cell , e . g . by selectin - mediated adhesive “rolling” , immune - cell chemokine receptors such as CCR7 or CXCR4 may be activated by chemokines present on the activated vessel wall 2 , 3 . This , in turn , results in intracellular , heterotrimeric G - protein - coupled signal transduction which enables very fast conformational changes and ligand - binding of cell surface integrins , resulting in a robust firm adhesion , the so called integrin - mediated leukocyte “arrest” 3 . Shear forces imposed by the blood flow apparently play an important role in the regulation of this process 4 . The mode of activation of immune cell integrins is incompletely understood . A number of intracellular proteins which directly or indirectly interact with the cytoplasmic domains of the leukocyte - specific beta - 2 integrins , such as LFA - 1 , have been implicated in this function . These include the actin - and integrin - binding protein talin which is important for the general coupling of integrin - mediated cell adhesion to the actin cytoskeleton 5 - 7 , the GTPase Rap1 7 - 9 and its effector proteins RAPL and RIAM 9 - 11 , the ADAP / Vav / SLP76 complex in T cells 12 - 14 , the RhoGTPases RhoA 15 and CdC42 16 , and , recently , the so - called kindlin proteins 17 , 18 . Our lab has identified the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP - ribosylation factor ( ARF ) GTPases , cytohesin - 1 , as an LFA - 1 interacting protein . Cytohesin - 1 binds specifically For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 4 to the cytoplasmic portion of the integrin beta - 2 subunit CD18 19 . In Jurkat T cells , over - expression of cytohesin - 1 results in up - regulation of LFA - 1 adhesion to ICAM - 1 , whereas the expression of the isolated PH domain of cytohesin - 1 , which is required for inositol - phospholipid mediated membrane - recruitment of the protein , abrogates LFA - 1 activation 20 , 21 . Cytohesin - 1 was also found to be an important regulator of beta - 2 integrin mediated recruitment of monocytic cells to human endothelial cells under physiological flow conditions 22 . The precise mechanism of integrin activation by cytohesin - 1 is not understood but it involves both direct interactions , possibly resulting in triggering conformational switches , and signal transduction through its GEF domain which activates ARF GTPases , a function which is important for cell spreading 23 . Another important requirement for immune cell functionality is their ability to rapidly move through complex environments in the interstitium . So - called dendritic cells ( DC ) of myeloid origin become activated by pathogen encounter in infected tissues through Toll - like receptor and inflammatory cytokine signaling . During this process , DC “mature” , i . e . they undergo massive changes in morphology which enables their rapid motility . At the same time , DC up - regulate surface proteins which enable their trafficking to lymphoid organs , e . g . chemokine receptors such as CCR7 , as well as co - stimulatory receptors and MHC molecules which are required for proper T cell activation by DC in secondary lymphoid organs . The importance of integrins in coupling ECM recognition to cytoskeletal rearrangements in interstitial immune cell migration has been subject to debate . A number of years ago , seminal work by Friedl et al . 24 suggested that integrins might not be required for interstitial motility of T cells . Recently , an elegant study published by Lämmermann et al . 25 , which employed dendritic cells and neutrophil granulocytes from mice that lack all integrins on the leukocyte surface , showed that integrin deficient immune cells apparently migrate normally in vitro and in vivo . However , rapid interstitial migration of these cells was shown to be dependent on rapid forward flow of actin at the cell front , and on their capacity to deform organelles such as the nucleus in order to “squeeze” through narrow passages in collagen / matrix webs . This latter ability was dependent on intracellular signaling pathways controlled by the GTPase RhoA 25 . We show here that the ARF - GEF and beta - 2 integrin binding protein cytohesin - 1 serves a novel , dual role in mediating dendritic cell adhesion and migration , and the common denominator of both functions is the positioning of the protein upstream of RhoA . The expression of cytohesin - 1 protein has been efficiently silenced by RNAi in mature dendritic For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 5 cells of both human and murine origin . Interestingly , mature DC are capable of activating their beta - 2 integrins by chemokine - signaling under physiological flow conditions , a function which is linked to PI3 - kinase and cytohesin - 1 - mediated inside - out signal transduction . Furthermore , cytohesin - 1 is shown for the first time to control DC migration in 3D collagen gels , and to regulate mature DC migration in vivo by functioning up - stream of RhoA activation . Strikingly , cytohesin - 1 is apparently not required for 3D migration of integrin knock - out DC ( quadruple ablation of the integrin alpha - v , beta - 1 , beta - 2 and beta - 7 genes , respectively , 25 ) . These findings suggest that immune cell migration may also be sub - classified into distinct modes , and that the integrin - dependent mode selectively requires the function of cytohesin - 1 upstream of RhoA . Materials and methods Generation of human monocyte - derived dendritic cells ( Mo - DC ) See supplementary materials . Animal care and experiments were done in compliance with institutional guidelines and the German law for Welfare of Laboratory Animals . Isolation of primary cells was approved by the University of Bonn ethics committee . Generation of murine bone marrow - derived DCs ( BM - DC ) See supplementary materials . Generation of integrin - deficient BM - DC Generation of integrin alpha - v , beta - 1 , beta - 2 and beta - 7 - deficient BM - DC has been described by Lämmermann et al . 25 . Antibodies The following monoclonal antibodies were used against the human antigens : HLA - DR , CD80 , CD86 ( all from BD Pharmingen ) , anti - CCR7 and anti - CXCR4 ( both from R & D Systems ) , anti - CD18 MHM23 ( Dako ) . The 327C 26 , 27 specific for activated human CD 18 epitopes was a gift from D . Staunton ( Seattle , USA ) . E . Kremmer ( Munich , Germany ) generated a rat monoclonal antibody ( 7H2 ) against human cytohesin - 1 as previously described 23 and 2D7 which also detects cytohesin . These monoclonal antibodies were against the mouse antigens : MHCII , CD80 ( clone 16 - 10A1 ) , CD86 ( clone B7 - 2 ) ( all from eBioscience ) . These monoclonal antibodies were against both , human and mouse antigens : For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 6 anti - RhoA ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - Rac ( Chemicon ) . For flow cytometry analysis the following isotype - matched antibody controls were employed : rat IgGI PE ( BD Pharmingen ) and rat IgGI FITC ( clone eBRG1 , eBioscience ) . Oligonucleotide Sequences , Plasmids See supplementary materials . siRNA Transfections Oligonucleotides ( 5 µg siRNA against the target sequence of Cytohesin - 1 ; 10 µg against the target sequence of RhoA or Rac1 , respectively ) were transferred to a 4 mm cuvette ( Bridge ) and incubated for 3 min with 4x10 6 imDC in 100 µl Optimem ( Invitrogen ) prior to electroporation in a Gene Pulser X cell + CE module ( Bio - Rad ) . Pulse conditions were square wave , 1000 V , 2 pulses and 0 . 5 ms pulse length . 48 h after electroporation imDC were stimulated to mature ( see supplementary materials ) . 72 - 96 h after electroporation RNAi efficiency was tested using a standard western blot protocol and silenced mature DC ( mDC ) were used for functional assays . Transfection of Mo - DC with plasmid DNA See supplementary materials . Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy See supplemetary materials . Static adhesion assays See supplementary materials . Static adhesion assay with GFP - transfected Mo - DC See supplementary materials . Laminar Flow Assays See supplementary materials . BM - DC - T cell adhesion See supplementary materials . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 7 Transwell migration assay See supplementary materials . Migration assay with GFP - transfected Mo - DC See supplementary materials . In vivo migration assays See supplementary materials . 3D collagen gel chemotaxis assay 3D chemotaxis assays were processed as described by Friedl et al . 24 with the following modifications . Collagen I ( Pure Col , Inamed ) was mixed with 0 . 7 % sodium bicarbonate ( Invitrogen ) and 1x MEM ( Sigma - Aldrich ) on ice . BM - DC in VLE - RPMI / 0 . 5 % FCS were carefully mixed with the collagen solution at a 2 : 1 ratio , resulting in gels with a collagen concentration of 1 . 6 mg / ml and a final cell concentration of 1 . 5x10 6 cells / ml gel . Collagen - BM - DC mixtures were placed in custom - made chemotaxis chambers and incubated at 37 ºC / 5 % CO 2 for 90 min . After collagen - polymerization , 600 ng / ml CCL19 ( R & D Systems ) in VLE - RPMI / 0 . 5 % FCS was added on top of the gel . Time - lapse series of motile BM - DC in 3D collagen gel were recorded using a fully automated inverted TE Eclipse microscope ( Nikon ) , equipped with a 10x phase contrast objective ( Nikon ) , motorized xyz - stage ( Märzhäuser ) , a climate chamber ( 37 ºC / 5 % CO 2 , humidity ) and a CCD - 1300 camera ( Vosskühler ) . For every single experiment 60 individual BM - DC were tracked over 3 h ( 5 min / frame ) using the manual tracking plugin of ImageJ . Subsequently cell directionality , forward migration index and velocity were calculated and visualized as plots and videos by analysing the acquired data with the Chemotaxis and Migration tool plugin ( Ibidi ) for ImageJ . GTPase Activation Assays See supplementary materials . Statistical analysis Statistical significance between data groups was determined by analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with the Instat software and considered to be significantly different at values For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 8 p < 0 . 05 . The p values are depicted as asterisks in the figures . * * * indicates p < 0 . 001 , * * indicates p < 0 . 01 , * indicates p < 0 . 05 , respectively . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 9 Results Efficient RNAi of cytohesin - 1 does not affect maturation of human or murine dendritic cells The mRNA of Cytohesin - 1 is up - regulated in human Mo - DC upon maturation induced by lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and TNF - α 26 . We performed western blot analysis to establish the up - regulation on the protein level ( Figure 1A ) . On day 7 after isolation of monocytes , expression of cytohesin - 1 was detectable in immature dendritic cells by the specific anti - cytohesin - 1 antibody 7H2 . Incubation of the cells with LPS and TNF - α yielded a strong increase of cytohesin - 1 expression which reaches peak levels at day 9 . The maturation of DC was determined by controlling the expression of the characteristic markers HLA - DR , CD80 and CD86 by FACS analysis ( see below ) . RNA interference can be used to specifically inhibit gene expression and to analyze gene function 27 . Using electroporation , we silenced cytohesin - 1 protein expression during maturation of DC . Compared to Mo - DC which were transfected with a control siRNA , RNAi of cytohesin - 1 dramatically reduced specific protein expression , as detected by western blot analysis ( Figure 1B ) . In contrast to human Mo - DC , cytohesin - 1 is constitutively expressed in murine BM - DC ( not shown ) . Nonetheless , RNAi - mediated silencing of cytohesin - 1 yielded a similar reduction of specific protein expression in this cell type ( Figure 1C ) . To test whether RNAi of cytohesin - 1 interferes with maturation of DC , we measured the cell surface expression of maturation markers with the help of flow cytometry ( FACS ) . Supplementary Figure 9A shows that maturation of Mo - DC is not altered following transfection with a cytohesin - 1 - specific siRNA , as compared to control cells . Furthermore , we assessed potential effects of cytohesin - 1 knock - down on the expression of CCR7 and CXCR4 on mature Mo - DC . CCR7 and CXCR4 are receptors for the chemokines CCL19 and CXCL12 , respectively , which are important mediators of mDC migration in vivo . As shown in Figure Sup _ 9A , RNAi of cytohesin - 1 does neither interfere with the expression of CCR7 , nor with that of CXCR4 . Hence , the reduction of cytohesin - 1 protein expression does not affect the cellular levels of a variety of important surface proteins of mature Mo - DC . Consistently , RNAi of cytohesin - 1 does not significantly affect maturation marker expression of murine BM - DC , as compared to control samples ( Figure Sup _ 9B ) . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 10 Cytohesin - 1 mediates chemokine - induced activation of CD18 in mature Mo - DC We have previously shown that over - expressed cytohesin - 1 co - localizes with CD18 in Jurkat cells and activates LFA - 1 adhesion to ICAM - 1 23 . Here , we demonstrate that endogenous cytohesin - 1 co - localizes with the beta - 2 integrin subunit CD18 in mature Mo - DC upon chemokine stimulation ( Figure 2A ) . Immunofluorescence tracings reveal that endogenous cytohesin - 1 is predominantly located in the cytoplasm in Mo - DC . However , stimulation of mature Mo - DC with the chemokine CCL19 induces translocation of cytohesin - 1 to the plasma membrane ( Figure 2A , middle panel ) where it remains co - localized with CD18 following antibody - mediated clustering of the integrin ( Figure 2A , lower panel ) . To elucidate the functional significance of this finding , we analyzed the affinity state of beta - 2 integrins on mature Mo - DC following stimulation with CCL19 . Chemokines induce a rapid affinity increase of LFA - 1 , which is sufficient to cause an arrest of circulating lymphocytes on endothelial cells 28 . Integrin activation is accompanied by conformational changes . The antibody 327C may be used to report CD18 epitopes which are only expressed on activated beta - 2 integrins because 327C detects the high affinity state of LFA - 1 29 , 30 . Using this antibody , we performed FACS staining of unstimulated and CCL19 - stimulated mature Mo - DC ( Figure 2B ) . Unstimulated Mo - DC showed partial activation of CD18 , the level of which differed between cell donors ( data not shown ) . However , CCL19 strongly increased the expression of the 327C epitope in Mo - DC whereas RNAi of cytohesin - 1 completely abrogates expression of this epitope ( Figure 2B ) . To test whether RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces surface expression of CD18 , we also analyzed steady - state beta - 2 integrin expression on Mo - DC , using antibody MHM23 which recognizes a constitutive CD18 epitope . CD18 expression is not altered after RNAi of cytohesin - 1 , compared to control cells ( Figure 2B ) . Therefore , cytohesin - 1 is an important positive regulator of CD18 affinity in mature Mo - DC and mediates chemokine induced inside - out activation of beta - 2 integrins on this cell type . Cytohesin - 1 regulates adhesion of human and murine dendritic cells We then assessed static cell adhesion to ICAM - 1 using cytohesin - 1 knock - down Mo - DC and control cells . Our results clearly establish cytohesin - 1 as an endogenous regulator of beta - 2 integrin mediated adhesion , since RNAi of cytohesin - 1 markedly reduced static adhesion of unstimulated and PMA stimulated Mo - DC to ICAM - 1 ( Figure 2C ) . To test whether cytohesin - 1 regulates DC adhesion in more physiological settings , we analyzed antigen For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 11 specific adhesion of BM - DC to transgenic OT - 1 T cells , which specifically recognize an epitope of the ovalbumin protein . Figure 2D shows that ovalbumin - loaded BM - DC specifically adhered to immobilized OT - 1 T cells . Importantly , this antigen - specific cell - cell interaction is abrogated if cytohesin - 1 expression is selectively silenced in the dendritic cell , suggesting that beta - 2 integrin activation on DC contributes to DC - T cell interactions . Furthermore , we analyzed the interactions of Mo - DC and BM - DC with endothelial cells under physiological flow conditions . To this end , we first tested dynamic adhesion of mature dendritic cells to HUVECs ( human umbilical vein endothelial cells ) with the help of time - lapse video - imaging employing a flow chamber . HUVECs were stimulated to express chemokines and adhesion molecules by incubation with TNF - α over - night . Additionally , CXCL12 was added , which binds to the surface of endothelial cells . Mature DC were then injected into the chamber at a steady flow rate of 0 . 2 ml / min ( 1dyn / cm 2 ) and subsequent DC interactions with HUVECs were evaluated in six different optical fields within 3 minutes . Adhesion to unstimulated HUVEC monolayers under flow was not observed ( not shown ) . RNAi of cytohesin - 1 clearly reduced adhesion of mDC to HUVECs under flow compared to control cells ( Figure 2E ) . The importance of cytohesin - 1 for the activation of DC integrins under flow conditions was also confirmed for the murine system , by assessing BM - DC adhesion to TNF - alpha activated murine brain endothelioma cells ( Figure 2F ) . All these data are in accordance with our earlier observation which revealed that cytohesin - 1 overexpression enhanced LFA - 1 mediated arrest of leukocytes on activated endothelium under flow 22 . Finally , we assessed whether the GEF function of cytohesin - 1 is important for regulating adhesive events of DC . To this end , we employed the novel mircoporation method ( see materials and methods ) to overexpress wild type cytohesin - 1 or the GEF - deficient mutant E157K 23 together with a co - transfected plasmid which directs expression of the green fluorescent protein . Figure 2G shows that overexpression of wild type cytohesin - 1 , but not of the E157K mutant , strongly enhances GFP - positive Mo - DC adhesion to ICAM - 1 . Taken togther , we show strong and coherent evidence that cytohesin - 1 - which requires an active GEF function - is an important regulator of integrin - mediated adhesion of dendritic cells in several systems . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 12 DC migration strongly depends on cytohesin - 1 function in vitro and in vivo An important hallmark of mature DC is their ability to migrate rapidly and directionally in chemokine gradients . To assess the chemotaxis of Mo - DC we first performed so - called transwell migration assays . To this end , transwell polycarbonate filters were either used uncoated , or were coated with the integrin ligands ICAM - 1 - Fc , fibronectin or collagen I , respectively . RNAi of cytohesin - 1 strongly reduced CCL19 or CXCL12 ( not shown ) stimulated migration of Mo - DC in all conditions tested ( Figure 3A - D ) . Overexpression analysis revealed that the GEF - function of the protein is also required for this function ( Figure 3E ) . Thus , a GEF - competent cytohesin - 1 strongly regulates migration of Mo - DC in vitro . We investigated whether cytohesin - 1 is important for migration of mature DC in vivo . By employing RNAi we reduced the expression of cytohesin - 1 in mature , murine bone marrow derived DC ( BM - DC ) to approximately 10 % of endogenous levels ( Figure 1C ) . Control cells and cytohesin - 1 knock - down cells were differentially labeled with either CFSE or Tamra dyes and equal numbers of these cell groups were subsequently injected into the hind footpad of wildtype C57 / BL6 mice 31 . To exclude a perturbing effect of the dyes themselves on in vivo migration of DC , the labelling of the respective populations was interchanged between experiments ( Figure 4B and C ) . 24 - 30 h after injection , the draining ( popliteal ) lymph nodes ( LN ) were extracted from these animals , single cell suspensions were prepared and analyzed by FACS . Figure 4A shows that cytohesin - 1 knock - down strongly reduced the migration of mature DC to the draining lymph node in vivo . The numbers of BM - DC which reached the LN was decreased by approximately 50 % as compared to control BM - DC ( set to 100 % migration ) . Therefore , cytohesin - 1 protein expression in DC appears highly important for efficient migration of such cells from the tissue periphery to secondary lymphoid organs . Cytohesin - 1 selectively regulates 3D migration of integrin - bearing DC Using life cell imaging microscopy we further studied the bulk migratory behaviour of mature BM - DC . Migration within tissues requires coordinated interactions with constituents of the extracellular matrix 32 . With the help of 3D collagen type I gels as a structural scaffold we modeled such complex conditions and analyzed the migration of BM - DC in these settings . Stimulation with CCL19 induced vigorous and directional migration of control DC ( Figure 5A and B and corresponding videos Sup _ 1 - 4 ) . In contrast , RNAi of cytohesin - 1 strongly For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 13 impaired CCL19 stimulated migration of BM - DC within collagen ( Figure 5C and corresponding videos Sup _ 5 and Sup _ 6 ) . Using the ImageJ plug - in for manual tracking , we detected that average migratory speed ( velocity ) , forward migration index and directionality of cytohesin - 1 knock - down DC were significantly reduced as compared to control cells ( Figure 5 , E and F ) . Since Lämmermann et al . had shown that the inhibition of the RhoA / myosin II pathway by blebbistatin resulted in the abrogation of DC contractility in 3D environments 25 , we opted to employ RNAi of RhoA in our assays . Strikingly , knock - down of RhoA yielded a highly similar phenotype as that of cytohesin - 1 ( Figure 5D - F and corresponding videos Sup _ 7 and Sup _ 8 ) . Lämmermann et al . 25 had shown that integrins are not required for BM - DC migration in 3D environments and in vivo . Employing quadruple knock - out BM - DC which do not express integrins on their surfaces 25 , we therefore assessed whether cytohesin - 1 was also required for integrin - independent migration of BM - DC in 3D collagen . Figure 5 shows that 3D migration of wild - type cells was comparable to integrin - deficient BM - DC , as expected ( Figure 5I and K ) . Most interestingly , however , we found that RNAi of cytohesin - 1 , which was similarly efficient in both cell types ( Figure 5O ) , selectively affected 3D migration of integrin - bearing wild type cells ( Figure 5J , M and N ) . These findings suggest an important limiting function of cytohesin - 1 in 3D leukocyte migration of integrin - positive DC . Cytohesin - 1 controls activation of RhoA in several cell types The apparent involvement of cytohesin - 1 in beta - 2 integrin activation and in integrin - independent interstitial migration of dendritic cells prompted us to investigate into a possible and as yet unappreciated upstream role of cytohesin - 1 in RhoA activation of dendritic cells . Giagulli et al . 15 had shown that RhoA is an important regulator of chemokine - induced T cell adhesion to activated endothelium in vitro and in vivo , possibly by inducing or by stabilizing the high affinity state of LFA - 1 . Rho GTPases are furthermore well known as key regulators of cell migration . In controlling diverse signal transduction pathways that link cell surface receptors to a variety of intracellular responses , they influence actin filament and microtubule dynamics , cell polarity , vesicular trafficking and gene expression 33 . Furthermore , Rho GTPases are essential in maintaining immune responses as they regulate lymphocyte and dendritic cell function and migration 34 . Rho GTPases cycle between an active GTP - bound and an inactive GDP - bound state . The active GTP - loaded enzyme selectively interacts with For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 14 downstream effector molecules . Activation of the GTPases was analyzed with the help of enzyme linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISA ) , employing immobilized Rac or RhoA effector proteins PAK - 1 and rhotekin , respectively . Consistent with the data described above , we observed that RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces GTP - loading of RhoA , while the activity of Rac is enhanced by cytohesin - 1 in Mo - DC ( Figure 6A ) . Furthermore , a consistent reduction of RhoA activity is observed upon cytohesin - 1 or RhoA protein knock - down ( Figure 6B ) in BM - DC . Significantly , the control of RhoA activity by cytohesin - 1 is not restricted to immune cells . Overexpression of wild type cytohesin - 1 in HeLa cells results in an increase of RhoA activity , as compared to the control sample which had been transfected with the vector . The GEF function of cytohesin - 1 is required for RhoA activation through this pathway , since overexpression of the cytohesin - 1 E157K ( GEF minus ) mutant 23 abrogates this effect ( Figure 6C ) . A role of cytohesin - 1 function up - stream of RhoA in this cell type was also confirmed by the alternative method of effector protein pull - down and subsequent western blot analysis ( Figure 6D ) . Consistent with all immune cell data shown above , Rac activity was significantly enhanced by cytohesin - 1 RNAi in HeLa cells , too ( Figure 6D ) . To corroborate a full coherence of the functional activities of RhoA and cytohesin - 1 in all test systems used , we confirmed that RNAi of RhoA also reduces a CCL19 - induced activation epitope expression of beta - 2 integrins in Mo - DC ( Figure 6E ) . Furthermore , RhoA was found to be required for BM - DC adhesion to endothelioma cells under physiological flow conditions ( Figure 6F ) . Finally , overexpression of RhoA enhances adhesion of Mo - DC to ICAM - 1 - Fc , whereas the expression of the GTP - loading deficient mutant T19N abrogates this effect ( Figure 6G ) . We had previously shown that the functional activity of cytohesin - 1 in human lymphocytes is regulated by PI3 - kinase dependent membrane recruitment of the protein 20 . Consistently , we found that CCL19 - dependent membrane recruitment of cytohesin - 1 , or LFA - 1 activation epitope expression in Mo - DC ( Supplementary Figures 10A and B ) can be blocked by employing the PI3 kinase inhibitor LY - 294002 . In accordance with these data , inhibition of PI3 - kinase in mature BM - DC yielded a reduced RhoA activity ( Figure Sup _ 10C ) . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 15 Taken together , we conclude that cytohesin - 1 acts upstream of RhoA in directing integrin - dependent dendritic cell adhesion , their migration in 3D collagen gels , and likely their migratory behaviour in inflamed tissues . Actin polymerization and the generation of membrane protrusions are not affected by cytohesin - 1 in migrating DC Cell migration highly depends on actin polymerization leading to membrane protrusions such as lamellipodia and filopodia , and is regulated by tight coordination of Rho GTPase activity 35 , 36 . Since cytohesin - 1 knock - down strongly impairs DC migration and activation of RhoA , we further analyzed whether the actin network in migrating DC is affected by cytohesin - 1 . To this end , DC were fixed by formaldehyde within 3D collagen gels and stained with Cy3 - conjugated phalloidin . Mature DC transfected with control siRNA show F - actin at the cell cortex and within membrane protrusions ( Figure 7A ) . Mature DC lack stress fibers which is known to be characteristic for leukocytes 37 . The same , unaltered phenotype can be detected when cytohesin - 1 expression in DC is repressed by RNAi ( Figure 7A ) . Thus , cytohesin - 1 does apparently not affect polymerization and arrangement of actin fibers in membrane protrusions . Similarly , RNAi of RhoA does not influence the integrity of the peripheral actin network in mature DC ( Figure 7B ) , while , in contrast , RNAi of Rac1 completely inhibits generation of actin based membrane protrusions ( Figure 7C ) . These results are in good accordance with the recently published paper by Lämmermann et al . 25 , who showed that RhoA does not regulate the front of migrating DC , but that the small GTPase instead controls contractility of the cell body which is important for flexible cell shape changes during DC migration in tissue environments . Discussion In this study we have described an important role of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor cytohesin - 1 in the regulation of cellular processes , as well as signaling pathways , which affect the regulation of adhesion and migration of human and murine dendritic cells . Over - expression analyses had implicated cytohesin - 1 early on in the activation of the beta - 2 integrin LFA - 1 in T cells 19 . We show here that cytohesin - 1 expression in dendritic cells , which were derived from primary monocytes , is required for beta - 2 integrin adhesion under static and under dynamic flow conditions , as well as for chemokine - dependent conformational activation of this adhesion receptor . Furthermore we discovered an entirely novel function of For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 16 cytohesin - 1 in controlling interstitial migration of integrin - bearing DC , but not of integrin - depleted DC . The signaling pathway discriminating between the two conditions has been identified , too : cytohesin - 1 acts upstream of the GTPase RhoA , and this novel signaling axis is required for integrin - mediated functions in the regulation of immune cell adhesion and migration . Beta - 2 integrin activation by chemokines is a complex process which involves the regulation of conformational equilibria of these proteins 28 . At least three conformations have been reported : resting ( none or very little ligand binding ) , intermediate and high affinity for ligand . Dendritic cells had been reported earlier to be much more restricted in beta - 2 integrin activation than other leukocytes under certain conditions , but these studies had not employed chemokine - dependent triggering or physiological flow conditions to test for integrin activation of DC . Woolf et al . 38 had shown that immobilized chemokines and flow forces are important requirements for the activation of circulating , as well as migrating leukocytes , even if these cells migrate in lymph nodes . Our novel data reveal that integrins of mature DC are capable of adhering to activated endothelia under physiological flow conditions in a cytohesin - 1 dependent fashion . Apparently , beta - 2 integrins of mature human dendritic cells respond normally to such stimuli , which is in full accordance with the aforementioned study . The precise sequence of events of chemokine - mediated integrin activation during physiological responses is not known but forces imposed by the blood flow apparently play an important role as well as protein binding events at the cytoplasmic tails of integrins . Cytohesin - 1 had been shown to bind to the membrane - proximal region of the beta - 2 integrin cytoplasmic tail and this is required for adhesion and activation epitope expression . Importantly , the ARF - GEF function is not required for integrin activation , but was found to be important for adhesion and spreading 23 . RhoA is a small GTPase which links integrin signaling to actin cytoskeletal rearrangements in many cell types . By employment of blocking peptides , Giagulli et al . had found that RhoA is required for leukocyte beta - 2 integrin activation in endothelial arrest . These findings were recently confirmed and extended by Pasvolsky et al . 39 , who showed that RhoA blocking peptides regulate intermediate affinity epitope expression of LFA - 1 in T cells in flow . We now show that cytohesin - 1 regulates the GTP - loading of RhoA in leukocytes and we consistently report that both cytohesin - 1 and RhoA mediate chemokine - induced activation epitope expression of CD18 in dendritic cells ( Figure 2 , Figure 6E and data not shown ) . This places cytohesin - 1 upstream of RhoA in beta - For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 17 2 integrin activation . It is important to note here that this does not rule at all against an additional direct role of cytohesin - 1 / CD18 interactions in LFA - 1 activation 23 . Taken together , our novel data reveal a signaling link between cytohesin - 1 and RhoA in beta - 2 integrin activation and adhesion of dendritic cells , which likely reflects a dual role of cytohesin - 1 in integrin - binding and in downstream signaling to RhoA . We show further and for the first time that cytohesin - 1 is required for migration of BM - DC to lymph nodes in vivo and for directional migration of BM - DC in 3D collagen gels in vitro . RhoA had been implicated in both functions . In fact , RNAi of RhoA or cytohesin - 1 resulted in a highly similar phenotype in interstitial migration of DC in our assay systems . Specific treatment of BM - DC with RhoA or cytohesin - 1 siRNA yielded a strong abrogation of chemokine - gradient direction sensing and migratory persistence ( track length ) . Most strikingly , however , our analyses show that 3D migration of leukocytes in the presence or absence of integrins is phenotypically similar but not identical . While integrin - positive cells specifically require the cytohesin - 1 / RhoA signaling axis , integrin - null DC require RhoA 25 , but not cytohesin - 1 ( shown in this study ) for 3D motility . It thus becomes apparent that leukocyte migration in 3D environments may also be sub - classified into different types or “modes” , reminiscent to what has been described for certain tumor cells 40 , 41 . The fact that cytohesin - 1 dependency discriminates between leukocytes migrating in the absence and presence of integrins raises the question how the Rho pathway is regulated when both integrins and cytohesin - 1 are absent and why this alternative pathway is not used when only cytohesin - 1 is missing ? One likely possibility is that in the absence of integrins , DCs use another migratory mode that does not depend on cytohesin as a Rho activator . This would imply that DCs can utilize phenotypically identical but molecularly distinct migratory strategies and suggest that there is more plasticity within the amoeboid migration mode than expected . In these experiments we have employed cells which lack all surface integrins to elucidate a principal role of cytohesin - 1 in 3D immune cell migration . Consistent with all of our earlier findings we furthermore show a strong functional association of this protein with beta - 2 integrins . However , these data do not exlude a possible cooperation of cytohesin - 1 with other integrins in these functions . How are cytohesin - 1 functions linked to RhoA signaling ? Cytohesin - 1 is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ARF - GTPases and GDP / GTP exchange activities for other GTPases have never been reported . It is important to note here that a large body of work implicates For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 18 cytohesin - 2 ( or ARNO ) and - 3 ( Grp1 ) in ARF6 signaling upstream of Rac - 1 42 . Cytohesin - 1 has never been implicated in direct activation of the endosomal and cytoskeletal signaling GTPase ARF6 . In fact , data from our lab rule against such a link in T cells 43 . RhoA and Rac activity are tightly coordinated in cell migration and are often controlled in a reciprocal fashion 44 - 46 . Interestingly , we did not only observe a down - regulation of RhoA activity by cytohesin - 1 knock - down but an up - regulation of Rac activity as well . This indicates that the control of Rho GTPase activities by cytohesins in immune and non immune cells might be aspects of a common theme , involving specific roles of cytohesin - 1 in the RhoA pathway and of cytohesin2 / 3 in Rac signaling . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Reinhard Fässler ( MPI for Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany ) for providing quadruple integrin knock - out mice , Percy Knolle ( IMMEI , University of Bonn , Germany ) for providing the OT - 1 mice , Don Staunton ( ICOS Corp . , Seattle , USA ) for providing antibody 327C and Elisabeth Kremmer ( Helmholtz Center Munich , Germany ) for continuous supply with anti - cytohesin - 1 antibodies . Also we would like to thank members of the lab for discussion and advice . This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( SFBs 654 and 704 ) and by grant # 105845 of the Deutsche Krebshilfe . Authorship W . K . designed the study , wrote the manuscript and acquired research funding . R . F . , R . A . , C . W . , and M . S . contributed to research design and data analysis . T . Q . , B . T . , C . S . , J . G . , T . L . , K . D . , and N . C . carried out the experiments . J . G . and L . F . established study protocols . Conflict of interest disclosure : The authors declare no competing financial interests . References 1 . Hynes RO . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell . 2002 ; 110 : 673 - 687 . 2 . Bouschet T , Martin S , Kanamarlapudi V , Mundell S , Henley JM . The calcium - sensing receptor changes cell shape via a beta - arrestin - 1 ARNO ARF6 ELMO protein network . J Cell Sci . 2007 ; 120 : 2489 - 2497 . 3 . Kim M , Carman CV , Springer TA . Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins . Science . 2003 ; 301 : 1720 - 1725 . 4 . Shamri R , Grabovsky V , Gauguet JM , et al . Lymphocyte arrest requires instantaneous induction of an extended LFA - 1 conformation mediated by endothelium - bound chemokines . Nat Immunol . 2005 ; 6 : 497 - 506 . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 19 5 . Tadokoro S , Shattil SJ , Eto K , et al . Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science . 2003 ; 302 : 103 - 106 . 6 . Calderwood DA . Talin controls integrin activation . Biochem Soc Trans . 2004 ; 32 : 434 - 437 . 7 . Katagiri K , Hattori M , Minato N , Irie S , Takatsu K , Kinashi T . Rap1 is a potent activation signal for leukocyte function - associated antigen 1 distinct from protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase . Mol Cell Biol . 2000 ; 20 : 1956 - 1969 . 8 . Reedquist KA , Ross E , Koop EA , et al . The small GTPase , Rap1 , mediates CD31 - induced integrin adhesion . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 148 : 1151 - 1158 . 9 . Lafuente EM , van Puijenbroek AA , Krause M , et al . RIAM , an Ena / VASP and Profilin ligand , interacts with Rap1 - GTP and mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion . Dev Cell . 2004 ; 7 : 585 - 595 . 10 . Katagiri K , Maeda A , Shimonaka M , Kinashi T . RAPL , a Rap1 - binding molecule that mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion through spatial regulation of LFA - 1 . Nat Immunol . 2003 ; 4 : 741 - 748 . 11 . Menasche G , Kliche S , Bezman N , Schraven B . Regulation of T - cell antigen receptor - mediated inside - out signaling by cytosolic adapter proteins and Rap1 effector molecules . Immunol Rev . 2007 ; 218 : 82 - 91 . 12 . Heuer K , Sylvester M , Kliche S , et al . Lipid - binding hSH3 domains in immune cell adapter proteins . J Mol Biol . 2006 ; 361 : 94 - 104 . 13 . Griffiths EK , Krawczyk C , Kong YY , et al . Positive regulation of T cell activation and integrin adhesion by the adapter Fyb / Slap . Science . 2001 ; 293 : 2260 - 2263 . 14 . Peterson EJ , Woods ML , Dmowski SA , et al . Coupling of the TCR to integrin activation by Slap - 130 / Fyb . Science . 2001 ; 293 : 2263 - 2265 . 15 . Giagulli C , Scarpini E , Ottoboni L , et al . RhoA and zeta PKC control distinct modalities of LFA - 1 activation by chemokines : critical role of LFA - 1 affinity triggering in lymphocyte in vivo homing . Immunity . 2004 ; 20 : 25 - 35 . 16 . Weber KS , Klickstein LB , Weber PC , Weber C . Chemokine - induced monocyte transmigration requires cdc42 - mediated cytoskeletal changes . Eur J Immunol . 1998 ; 28 : 2245 - 2251 . 17 . Montanez E , Ussar S , Schifferer M , et al . Kindlin - 2 controls bidirectional signaling of integrins . Genes Dev . 2008 ; 22 : 1325 - 1330 . 18 . Moser M , Nieswandt B , Ussar S , Pozgajova M , Fässler R . Kindlin - 3 is essential for integrin activation and platelet aggregation . Nat Med . 2008 ; 14 : 325 - 330 . 19 . Kolanus W , Nagel W , Schiller B , et al . Alpha L beta 2 integrin / LFA - 1 binding to ICAM - 1 induced by cytohesin - 1 , a cytoplasmic regulatory molecule . Cell . 1996 ; 86 : 233 - 242 . 20 . Nagel W , Zeitlmann L , Schilcher P , Geiger C , Kolanus J , Kolanus W . Phosphoinositide 3 - OH kinase activates the beta2 integrin adhesion pathway and induces membrane recruitment of cytohesin - 1 . J Biol Chem . 1998 ; 273 : 14853 - 14861 . 21 . Nagel W , Schilcher P , Zeitlmann L , Kolanus W . The PH domain and the polybasic c domain of cytohesin - 1 cooperate specifically in plasma membrane association and cellular function . Mol Biol Cell . 1998 ; 9 : 1981 - 1994 1981 - 1994 . 22 . Weber KS , Weber C , Ostermann G , Dierks H , Nagel W , Kolanus W . Cytohesin - 1 is a dynamic regulator of distinct LFA - 1 functions in leukocyte arrest and transmigration triggered by chemokines . Curr Biol . 2001 ; 11 : 1969 - 1974 . 23 . Geiger C , Nagel W , Boehm T , et al . Cytohesin - 1 regulates beta - 2 integrin - mediated adhesion through both ARF - GEF function and interaction with LFA - 1 . Embo J . 2000 ; 19 : 2525 - 2536 . 24 . Friedl P , Entschladen F , Conrad C , Niggemann B , Zanker KS . CD4 + T lymphocytes migrating in three - dimensional collagen lattices lack focal adhesions and utilize beta1 integrin - independent strategies for polarization , interaction with collagen fibers and locomotion . Eur J Immunol . 1998 ; 28 : 2331 - 2343 . 25 . Lämmermann T , Bader BL , Monkley SJ , et al . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent flowing and squeezing . Nature . 2008 ; 453 : 51 - 55 . 26 . Boehm T , Hofer S , Winklehner P , et al . Attenuation of cell adhesion in lymphocytes is regulated by CYTIP , a protein which mediates signal complex sequestration . Embo J . 2003 ; 22 : 1014 - 1024 . 27 . Elbashir SM , Harborth J , Weber K , Tuschl T . Analysis of gene function in somatic mammalian cells using small interfering RNAs . Methods . 2002 ; 26 : 199 - 213 . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 20 28 . Constantin G , Majeed M , Giagulli C , et al . Chemokines trigger immediate beta2 integrin affinity and mobility changes : differential regulation and roles in lymphocyte arrest under flow . Immunity . 2000 ; 13 : 759 - 769 . 29 . Beals CR , Edwards AC , Gottschalk RJ , Kuijpers TW , Staunton DE . CD18 activation epitopes induced by leukocyte activation . J Immunol . 2001 ; 167 : 6113 - 6122 . 30 . Kim M , Carman CV , Yang W , Salas A , Springer TA . The primacy of affinity over clustering in regulation of adhesiveness of the integrin { alpha } L { beta } 2 . J Cell Biol . 2004 ; 167 : 1241 - 1253 . 31 . Worbs T , Mempel TR , Bolter J , von Andrian UH , Forster R . CCR7 ligands stimulate the intranodal motility of T lymphocytes in vivo . J Exp Med . 2007 ; 204 : 489 - 495 . 32 . Friedl P , Brocker EB , Zanker KS . Integrins , cell matrix interactions and cell migration strategies : fundamental differences in leukocytes and tumor cells . Cell Adhes Commun . 1998 ; 6 : 225 - 236 . 33 . Raftopoulou M , Hall A . Cell migration : Rho GTPases lead the way . Dev Biol . 2004 ; 265 : 23 - 32 . 34 . Scheele JS , Marks RE , Boss GR . Signaling by small GTPases in the immune system . Immunol Rev . 2007 ; 218 : 92 - 101 . 35 . Antoshechkin I , Han M . The C . elegans evl - 20 gene is a homolog of the small GTPase ARL2 and regulates cytoskeleton dynamics during cytokinesis and morphogenesis . Dev Cell . 2002 ; 2 : 579 - 591 . 36 . Ridley AJ . Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafficking . Trends Cell Biol . 2006 ; 16 : 522 - 529 . 37 . Friedl P , Borgmann S , Brocker EB . Amoeboid leukocyte crawling through extracellular matrix : lessons from the Dictyostelium paradigm of cell movement . J Leukoc Biol . 2001 ; 70 : 491 - 509 . 38 . Woolf E , Grigorova I , Sagiv A , et al . Lymph node chemokines promote sustained T lymphocyte motility without triggering stable integrin adhesiveness in the absence of shear forces . Nat Immunol . 2007 ; 8 : 1076 - 1085 . 39 . Pasvolsky R , Grabovsky V , Giagulli C , et al . RhoA is involved in LFA - 1 extension triggered by CXCL12 but not in a novel outside - In LFA - 1 activation facilitated by CXCL9 . J Immunol . 2008 ; 180 : 2815 - 2823 . 40 . Sanz - Moreno V , Gadea G , Ahn J , et al . Rac activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell movement . Cell . 2008 ; 135 : 510 - 523 . 41 . Sahai E , Marshall CJ . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteolysis . Nat Cell Biol . 2003 ; 5 : 711 - 719 . 42 . Myers KR , Casanova JE . Regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics by Arf - family GTPases . Trends Cell Biol . 2008 ; 18 : 184 - 192 . 43 . Knorr T , Nagel W , Kolanus W . Phosphoinositides determine specificity of the guanine - nucleotide exchange activity of cytohesin - 1 for ADP - ribosylation factors derived from a mammalian expression system . Eur J Biochem . 2000 ; 267 : 3784 - 3791 . 44 . Zondag GC , Evers EE , ten Klooster JP , Janssen L , van der Kammen RA , Collard JG . Oncogenic Ras downregulates Rac activity , which leads to increased Rho activity and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 149 : 775 - 782 . 45 . Williams MJ , Habayeb MS , Hultmark D . Reciprocal regulation of Rac1 and Rho1 in Drosophila circulating immune surveillance cells . J Cell Sci . 2007 ; 120 : 502 - 511 . 46 . Herbrand U , Ahmadian MR . p190 - RhoGAP as an integral component of the Tiam1 / Rac1 - induced downregulation of Rho . Biol Chem . 2006 ; 387 : 311 - 317 . Figure legends Figure 1 Cytohesin - 1 is up - regulated in human Mo - DC during maturation , and is efficiently silenced by RNAi in both human and murine DC . Western blot analysis shows that For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 21 cytohesin - 1 expression is up - regulated in human monocyte - derived dendritic cells ( Mo - DC ) upon maturation induced by LPS ( 1 μ g / ml ) / TNF alpha ( 50ng / ml ) ( A , lanes d8 , d9 , d10 ) . Expression of cytohesin - 1 is barely detectable in immature dendritic cells ( imDC ) , but maturation results in a strong increase of cytohesin - 1 expression , reaching maximum levels at day 9 ( A ) . Employing square wave electroporation , cytohesin - 1 expression was efficiently silenced in mature DC . Western blot analysis shows that RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces specific protein expression 96 hours after electroporation in human Mo - DC ( B ) or murine bone marrow - derived DC ( BM - DC , C ) . Figure 2 Cytohesin - 1 ( red fluorescence ) co - localizes with CD18 ( green fluorescence ) and mediates both CD18 activation and adhesion . In contrast to unstimulated mature Mo - DC where cytohesin - 1 ( detected by mAb 7H2 ) localizes to the cytoplasm ( A , upper panel ) , stimulation with 200 ng / ml CCL19 for 10 min induces translocation of cytohesin - 1 to the plasma membrane ( A , middle panel ) where it colocalizes with beta - integrins , clustered by an anti - CD18 antibody ( A , lower panel , Bar 5 µm ) . All shown fluorescence staining images are confocal images , focused on the medial z - position of the respective cells , i . e . the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane ( A ) . The different fluorochromes of secondary antibodies in the co - staining of cytohesin - 1 and CD18 were acquired sequentially by the use of a confocal laser scanning microscope ( A ) . Flow cytometry analysis shows that CCL19 ( 200 ng / ml for 10 min ) strongly increases the expression of the high affinity state ( detected by mAb 327C ) of LFA - 1 ( B ) . RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces expression of the activation epitope , as compared to control cells ( B ) . In contrast , a constitutive CD18 epitope ( detected by mAb MHM23 ) is not altered following RNAi of cytohesin - 1 ( B ) . The empty profiles in the flow cytometry histograms indicate the background cell stainings by isotype controls ( B ) . RNAi of cytohesin - 1 strongly reduces static adhesion of Mo - DC to ICAM - 1 – Fc as compared to control cells ( C ) . Cytohesin - 1 siRNAs selectively down - regulate antigen - specific BM - DC adhesion to OT - 1 T cells ( D ) . Under flow conditions , RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces dynamic adhesion of Mo - DC to human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) ( E ) or of BM - DC to brain endothelioma cells ( B end5 ) ( F ) . Overexpression of wild - type cytohesin - 1 but not of the GEF - deficient E157K mutant increases static adhesion of GFP - cotransfected Mo - DC to ICAM - 1 – Fc ( G ) . In the static adhesion assays , Mo - DC were stimulated with 50 ng / ml PMA for 60 min at 37°C ( C and G ) . Error bars indicate + s . d . ( C - G ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * p < 0 . 05 . Each For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 22 experiment was repeated at least three times independently . Each single experiment was performed in duplicates . Figure 3 RNAi of cytohesin - 1 reduces chemotaxis of mature Mo - DC . Transwell migration assays show that CCL19 ( 200ng / ml ) induced chemotaxis is overall strongly reduced in cytohesin - 1 knock - down mature Mo - DC , employing integrin ligands ICAM - 1 - Fc ( approx . 10 µg / ml ) ( A ) , fibronectin ( 50 µg / ml ) ( B ) , collagen I ( 30 µg / ml ) ( C ) or uncoated filters ( D ) . Overexpression of wild - type cytohesin - 1 but not of the GEF - deficient E157K mutant increases chemotaxis of GFP - cotransfected Mo - DC ( uncoated filters ) ( E ) . Error bars indicate + s . d . * p < 0 . 05 . Each experiment was repeated at least three times independently . Each single experiment was performed in duplicates . Figure 4 RNAi of cytohesin - 1 strongly reduces in vivo migration of mature BM - DC . Mature BM - DC after transfection with control - siRNA or cytohesin - 1 - siRNA ( for silencing efficiency see western blot analysis of cytohesin - 1 expression following RNAi of cytohesin - 1 , 1C ) were labelled with 10 µM TAMRA or 1 µM CFSE , respectively . 2 . 5x10 5 cytohesin - 1 knockdown DC and 2 . 5x10 5 control DC were injected into the hind food pad of wildtype C57 / BL6 mice . Flow cytometric analysis of cell suspensions from the extracted draining ( popliteal ) lymph nodes 24 - 30 h after injection shows that in vivo migration of cytohesin - 1 knockdown BM - DC is strongly reduced , as compared to control cells ( A , B ) . To exclude fluorochrome - effects on DC migration , the staining was switched between the experiments ( C ) . Control BM - DC are set to 100 % migration ( B , C ) . Error bars indicate + s . d . Each experiment was repeated three times independently . Figure 5 RNAi of cytohesin - 1 strongly reduces chemotaxis of mature integrin ( + / + ) but not of integrin ( - / - ) BM - DC in 3 - dimensional collagen . Using 3D collagen type I gels we analyzed the role of cytohesin - 1 in BM - DC complex matrix migration . Quantification of time series after live cell imaging shows that directionality , y - forward migration index and velocity of cytohesin - 1 knock - down cells towards the chemokine CCL19 is strongly reduced ( C , E , F ) . RNAi of RhoA results in a highly similar phenotype ( D , E , F ) . Respective silencing For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 23 efficiences are shown by western blot analysis ( G , H ) . Quantification of 3D migration of integrin - deficient BM - DC shows that directionality , y - forward migration index and velocity of cytohesin - 1 knock - down cells towards the chemokine CCL19 is strongly reduced in wild - type , i . e . integrin ( + / + ) , BM - DC ( J , M , N ) but not in integrin ( - / - ) BM - DC ( L , M , N ) . Efficiency of cytohesin - 1 RNAi was comparable in both cell types , as shown by western blot analysis ( O ) . For every 3D migration experiment the tracks of 60 individual cells were monitored over a period of 3 hrs by capturing digital images every 5 min . Cell directionality , forward migration index and velocity were calculated and visualized as plots ( A - D and I - L ) and animated plots ( see supplementary videos ) by analysing the acquired data with the Chemotaxis and Migration tool plugin ( Ibidi ) for Image J . Error bars indicate + s . d . , * * * p < 0 . 001 , ns : not significant . The data are representative for three independent experiments . Figure 6 Cytohesin - 1 controls the activity of RhoA in several cell types . RhoA is an important regulator of beta - 2 integrin activation epitope expression and adhesion of DC . Using a commercial enzyme linked assay ( ELISA ) we could show that in Mo - DC the activity ( GTP - loading ) of the small GTPase RhoA is strongly reduced in cytohesin - 1 knock - down cells , as compared to control cells . As a positive control for the assay , RhoA activity of RhoA knock - down Mo - DC was analyzed which also shows the expected reduction of RhoA activity . The same system was used to measure Rac activity , where RNAi of cytohesin - 1 results in an increase of GTP - loading ( A ) . Consistently , RhoA activity of RhoA knock - down BM - DC was also found reduced ( B ) . Overexpression of wild - type cytohesin - 1 in EGF - stimulated ( 50nM , 1h ) HeLa cells results in an increase of RhoA - activity , as compared to the vector control . In contrast , overexpression of the cytohesin - 1 E157K mutant results in reduced RhoA activity ( C ) . Cytohesin - 1 knock - down downregulates RhoA activity , but upregulates GTP - loading of Rac1 in EGF - stimulated HeLa ( 50nM ; 1h ) cells , as detected by effector protein pull - down and western - blot analysis ( D , lower panels ) . Knock - down of RhoA specifically reduces expression of the CD18 327C epitope in Mo - DC ( E ) or adhesion under flow of BM - DC to brain endothelioma ( B end5 ) cells ( F ) . Overexpression of wild - type RhoA but not of the GTP - loading mutant T19N increases static adhesion of GFP - cotransfected Mo - DC to ICAM - 1 - Fc ( G ) . In the static adhesion assay , Mo - DC were stimulated with 50 ng / ml PMA for 60 min at 37°C ( G ) . Error bars indicate + s . d . * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * p < 0 . 05 . Each experiment was repeated at least three times independently . Each single experiment was performed in duplicates . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 24 Figure 7 Cytohesin - 1 is not involved in the formation of membrane protrusions . Microscopical visualization of F - actin by the use of Cy3 - phalloidin shows that the formation of membrane protrusions in mature Mo - DC is not influenced by RNAi of cytohesin - 1 , as compared to control cells ( A ) . RNAi of RhoA also shows the same unaltered phenotype ( B ) , whereas RNAi of Rac1 results in strong deficiencies in the formation of membrane protrusions ( C ) . Quantification shows that after RNAi of cytohesin - 1 respective RhoA 70 % of all mature Mo - DC have lamellipodia and do not differ from control cells ( A , B ) . In contrast , RNAi of Rac reduces formation of lamellipodia about 50 % ( C ) . Bars 5 µm . In each individual experiment 200 mature DC were counted . Each single experiment was performed in duplicates . Error bars indicate + s . d . * p < 0 . 05 . Each experiment was repeated at least three times independently . For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 08 - 176123 Prepublished online April 3 , 2009 ; Waldemar Kolanus Ronen Alon , Line Fraemohs , Katrin Dreck , Christian Weber , Tim Lammermann , Michael Sixt and Thomas Quast , Barbara Tappertzhofen , Cora Schild , Jessica Grell , Niklas Czeloth , Reinhold Forster , integrin - dependent adhesion and migration of dendritic cells Cytohesin - 1 controls the activation of RhoA and modulates http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # repub _ requests Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # reprints Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / subscriptions / index . xhtml Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : digital object identifier ( DOIs ) and date of initial publication . indexed by PubMed from initial publication . Citations to Advance online articles must include final publication ) . Advance online articles are citable and establish publication priority ; they are appeared in the paper journal ( edited , typeset versions may be posted when available prior to Advance online articles have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved . Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 . Blood ( print ISSN 0006 - 4971 , online ISSN 1528 - 0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society of For personal use only . on June 12 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From