979 - 8 - 3503 - 2024 - 4 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 ©2022 IEEE Factors Influencing Employees Trust in AI & its Adoption at Work : Evidence from United Arab Emirates Iffat Sabir Chaudhry College of Business AlAin University Abu Dhabi , U . A . E . iffat . sabir @ aau . ac . ae Rene Y . Paquibut Department of Business and Economics Modern College of Business & Science Muscat , Oman rene @ mcbs . edu . om Habib Chabchoub College of Business AlAin University Abu Dhabi , U . A . E . habib . chabchoub @ aau . ac . ae Abstract —UAE’s aspiration to be among the leading countries in artificial intelligence by 2031 calls for the identification of facilitators championing the adoption of this advanced technology in enterprises and government bodies across the country . The workforce is a major facilitator or barrier in new technology adoption at work . We need to determine if their trust in the new technology - with the competitive advantage of intelligence - influence their willingness to adopt them at work . This study investigates the impact of individual level ( generation , gender , education , knowledge , skills ) and organizational level ( ownership type , business type ) factors on employees’ trust in artificial intelligence and its adoption at work . Six hundred and thirty - eight employees from both public and private sectors participated in the survey from the Emirates of Abu Dhabi . The findings confirmed significant influence of employees’ generation , knowledge , and skills on their trust in Artificial Intelligence technology , subsequently influencing their intention to adopt the advanced technology at their respective workplaces . The findings have implications for government bodies formulating and implementing UAE’s AI strategy in the region as well as for industry practitioners . Keywords : Trust of New Technology , Adoption of New Technology , Artificial Intelligence , Intention to Use , Individual level factors , Organizational level factors I . I NTRODUCTION The United Arab Emirates’ ( UAE ) strategy for Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) introduced in 2017 , aims to place the country amongst the world leading countries in AI by 2031 [ 1 ] . Well - aligned with UAE Centennial 2071 , the AI strategy sets clear objectives to improve government performance by deploying integrated smart digital system capable of delivering rapid services to the customers and build new market with high economic value , well - connected through AI across important industries [ 2 ] . As stated by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Makhtoum - Vice President of UAE that “we ' ve created a national AI strategy to integrate AI into our enterprises , personal lives , and government operations” [ 3 ] . The UAE ' s objective is to reinforce its global AI hub status , boost the AI sector ' s competitiveness , and create an AI innovation incubator with an expectation that it will improve national economy , smart governance , data sharing , education , tourism & hospitality , energy & resources , logistics & transport , and customer services to name a few [ 2 ] . The national level AI strategy cannot be successful unless the workforce of the country from across industries and governing bodies are willing to accept the changes introduced by the new technology at their respective workplaces . UAE is a melting pot of 200 nationalities from around the world making 88 . 5 % of the country’s population , living and working here [ 4 ] [ 5 ] . UAE has earned a reputation of being a hub to diverse multinational communities which lays strong foundation for faster adaptability to new emerging technology of AI [ 6 ] . Although it can attract the best talent from around the globe for implementing AI in different sectors , it is imperative to understand how the current workforce perceives AI and if they are willing to accept this new technology at work . Previous research indicates that trust helps in acceptance of new technology by reducing uncertainty faced by them while managing it for the first time [ 7 ] [ 8 ] . There is no literature existing related to the employees trust and artificial intelligence adoption in the context of the UAE . Neither is there an investigation to comprehend the role of individual level factors like gender - differences , generation - differences , or education - level in building or sabotaging employee’s trust in artificial intelligence . Few studies have assessed the impact of organizational level factors on employees trust in new technologies [ 9 ] [ 10 ] , but they do not take into consideration the business or ownership types of the enterprises . To fill the existing knowledge gap , the current study undertakes the empirical assessment to identify if employees’ trust in AI is influenced by individual level and organizational level factors and if employees’ trust in AI influences their intention to adopt it for performing job duties . The objectives of the study are : 1 ) to evaluate if employees’ age , gender , educational level , knowledge of AI , and digital skills influence their trust in AI and intention to adopt it at work ; 2 ) to assess if organizational ownership type or business production type influences employees’ trust in the new technology and intent to use it ; and 3 ) to determine the role of trust in influencing employees’ intention to use AI at work . Starting with the literature review on the topic , we present the study framework and hypotheses ( which were tested ) , and the findings are presented and discussed with the study contributions , limitations , and future directions . II . L ITERATURE R EVIEW Reference [ 11 ] defined Artificial Intelligence as a broad field of science encompassing computer science , psychology , philosophy , linguistics , and other areas . AI is concerned with getting computers to do tasks that would normally require human intelligence . AI has four key characteristics : 1 ) big data—capable of processing massive amounts of structured and unstructured data which change constantly ; 2 ) learning— 2022 I n t e r n a t i o n a l A r a b C o n f e r e n c e o n I n f o r m a t i o n T e c hn o l o g y ( A C I T ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2024 - 4 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / A C I T 57 1 82 . 2022 . 9994226 2 ability to learn based on historical patterns , expert input , and feedback loop ; 3 ) reasoning—ability to reason ( deductive or inductive ) and to draw inference based to the situation ; and 4 ) problem solving—capable of analyzing and solving complex problems in special - purpose and general - purpose domain . The adoption of this new advanced technology is at the heart of firms looking forward to aligning their strategies with the government priority of becoming a hub of AI in the region [ 1 ] . Reference [ 12 ] confirmed that trust plays a decisive role in users’ acceptance and adoption of technology . They reported trust difference across genders ( women had higher trust than men ) as well as across generations ( with Gen Z having the highest trust ) . However , they found no trust difference among the people based on their ethnic profile . Likewise , reference [ 13 ] in their analysis on the adoption of government e - service proposed that trust and personal values contribute to the adoption of new technology . They also reported that trust is influenced by perceived ease - of - use and perceived usefulness , affecting both the attitudes and intention of the citizens to adopt the e - services offered by the government . Also , reference [ 14 ] examined the link among employees’ trust in AI and their general trust in the technology , their competence trust , and intra - organizational trust . They reported significant positive relationship of employees’ trust in AI in the company with their general trust in technology and also with intra - organizational trust in the surveyed firms . Similarly , the study by reference [ 15 ] confirmed trust as an influential factor in the new technology adoption . The study reported trust among the significant drivers influencing user’s intention to use government e - services : namely , trust of intermediary , trust of the government , trust of the internet , performance expectancy , effort expectancy , and social influence . Considering significant influence of trust in technology adoption intent , the current study hypothesizes that employees’ trust in AI influence their intention to adopt it at work . The existing studies also set the premise that individual level factors influence their trust in technology and their intention to adopt it at work . Reference [ 16 ] stated that corporate decision makers hasten or prevent the introduction of technologies into their organisations clearly due to their psychological factors and acceptance behaviours . In their psychological technology adoption framework , they identified personality factors ( innovativeness and risk aversion ) ; motivation factors ( personal incentives and fear of technology failure ) ; attitude factors ( technology attitudes and trust ) ; cognitive factors ( risk perception , technical knowledge , perceptions of certainty , and previous experiences ) ; social factors ( social influence and subjective norms ) ; and organizational factors ( leadership , collaboration culture , and technology adoption culture ) as constituents of psychological factors . The findings concluded that the decision makers’ technology attitudes , their trust in the technology , their innovativeness , their personal incentives , and their social network influence their decision to introduce a technology ( or not ) . Likewise , the risk perceived in innovation is influenced by technical knowledge and / or previous experience . The prior studies also highlight the influence of organizational factors in people’s decision to adopt technology . Their understanding can help the leaders in channeling the organisational values and resources in a way that can facilitate the adoption of technology . Reference [ 17 ] examined the role of organizational ( training needs , managerial support , and incentives for the usage ) , social ( peers assistance and social network ) and individual ( personal initiatives , prior usage experience , unique individual ability , and enjoyment in innovation ) factors in employees’ adoption of innovation . The study concluded that 1 ) management support and incentive are the two most important organizational factors that drive adoption ; 2 ) prior experience with perceived usefulness and enjoyment with the innovation are the most important individual factors that support innovation adoption . Reference [ 10 ] shared that understanding the factors that can influence individuals’ intention to utilize technology at work can assist managers to implement strategies which may improve the technology adoption process and increase the acceptance of new technology among the employees . Their findings indicate that effort expectancy , internal facilitating conditions and top management support all influence individuals’ intention to use information technology . It is not necessarily always that resistance to change or fear of change play a role in innovation adoption . As reference [ 18 ] reported that individual factors such as user’s role clarity , his / her motivation to adopt AI - based technology and his / her ability in the context of the adoption of AI - based technology increases their willingness to accept this advanced technology . However , privacy concerns related to the use of AI - based technology weaken the relationship between the role clarity and user’s willingness to accept AI technology whereas trust related to the use of AI - based technology strengthens the relationship between ability and user’s willingness to accept the technology . The above narrated findings lead to our hypotheses that individual level factors and organizational level factors influence employees’ trust in artificial intelligence technology and its adoption at work . A . Study Hypotheses Based on the study objectives , the following hypotheses were tested to determine the role of individual level and organizational level factors in developing employees’ trust in AI and their willingness to adopt it at their respective workplaces : • Hypothesis 1 ( a - e ) : Individual level factors of a ) age , b ) gender , c ) education , d ) knowledge , e ) skills influence on employee’s trust on Artificial Intelligence use at work . • Hypothesis 2 ( a , b ) : Organizational level factors of a ) ownership type , and b ) business type influence on employee’s trust on Artificial Intelligence use at work . • Hypothesis 3 ( a , b ) : a ) Individual level and b ) organizational level factors influence on employees intention to use Artificial Intelligence at work . • Hypothesis 4 : Employee’s trust on Artificial Intelligence impacts on his / her intention to use it at work . • Hypothesis 5 ( a , b ) : Employee’s Trust partially mediates the relationship between a ) individual level and b ) organizational level factors and his / her intention to use Artificial Intelligence at work . B . Study Framework The study framework ( figure 1 ) included exogenous constructs of ‘individual level factors - InLF’ , ‘organizational level factors - OrLF’ and endogenous constructs of ‘trust - Tr’ and ‘intention to use AI - ItUAI’ ; where trust construct had a 3 dual role of endogenous - being predicted by InLF and OrLF - and exogenous - while predicting ItUAI . Both individual level and organizational levels factors were operationalized as high - order constructs for making research model parsimonious [ 19 ] . Fig . 1 . Study Conceptual Framework To determine what factors at an individual level may pre - dispose his / her trust in artificial intelligence technology and its adoption at work , employee - level information pertaining to age , gender , education , familiarity with AI ( knowledge ) and IT proficiency ( skills ) were included as sub - dimensions of the high - order construct of InLF . Likewise , organizational level factors construct is operationalized as the organizational level aspects that may influence on the employee’s intention to trust artificial intelligence technology and its adoption at work . Measured formatively , its sub - dimensions included ownership type ( whether public , private , or semi - public ) and business type ( production of goods or services ) . Trust construct is operationalized as “the willingness of the user to bear the consequences of relying on a technology based on an expectation that it will help accomplish objectives expected of it that are important to the user” [ 20 ] . Intention to Use AI construct is operationalized as employees’ desire to use the artificial technology in the future . It is used as an outcome variable as it is found to be a strong predictor of actual technology use [ 21 ] . III . M ETHODOLOGY A . Study Sample & Data Collection The study adopted the quantitative approach by employing non - probability sampling techniques of snowball and self - select . The study targeted only people employed in the Abu Dhabi Emirates . Online self - administered questionnaire shared through social media tools of Instagram , Snap Chat , WhatsApp , and Facebook allowed the participation of employees from across the Emirate in a short span of time . The introductory section of questionnaire included information regarding the purpose of study and the instructions to fill the survey . The anonymity was confirmed , and email address was shared in case they had any query related to filling the survey form . Six hundred fifty - six ( 656 ) respondents participated in the survey . Initial cleaning reduced the dataset to 638 responses which were used for analysis and hypotheses testing . B . Measures The survey was divided into two sections , where section one included questions on individual level factors like , age ( baby boomers , generation - x , millennials , generation - z ) , gender ( male , female ) , educational level ( high school , diploma , graduation , post - graduation ) , knowledge of Artificial Intelligence ( Not at all familiar : 1 to Know all about AI : 4 ) , proficiency with information technology to determine individuals skill level ( Not at all proficient : 1 to Highly proficient : 5 ) . Also , it included questions regarding organizational ownership type ( public , semi - public , private ) and organizational business type ( products , services ) . Section 2 of the questionnaire measured the study variables of trust and intention to use AI . 10 items adapted from reference [ 22 ] were used to measure trust - level of the employees on artificial intelligence technology and four items were used to measure employee’s intention to use the AI technology , adapted from reference [ 23 ] and reference [ 22 ] . All fourteen items were measured on five - point Likert - scale ( 1 : Strongly Disagree to 5 : Strongly Agree ) . C . Participants’ Profile The demographic analyses highlighted balanced participation of the workforce from both the genders : men and women . Half of the study participants were millennials , compared to generation - x ( 25 % ) and generation - z ( 22 % ) . Participation from Baby Boomers was non - substantial ( 3 . 5 % ) . Likewise , half of the participants had graduation degree followed by 20 % of participants with Master level degree . Forty percent of the workforce had managerial responsibilities . Lastly , 79 % of the participants were Emiratis and the rest were expats working in the UAE . TABLE I . P ARTICIPANTS D EMOGRPAHIC P ROFILE Demographic Profile Freq . % Gender Male 319 51 % Female 301 49 % Generation 1997 - 2012 ( Gen - Z ) 140 22 % 1981 - 1996 ( Millennials ) 315 49 . 5 % 1965 - 1980 ( Gen - X ) 160 25 % 1946 - 1964 ( Baby Boomers ) 21 3 . 5 % Education High School 103 16 % D iploma 79 12 . 5 % Bachelors 326 51 % Masters 130 20 . 5 % Position Status Managerial Staff 251 40 % Non - Managerial Staff 379 60 % Nationality Emiratis 516 79 % Expatriates 122 19 % IV . T ESTING & R ESULTS SmartPLS - 4 was utilized to test the measurement models’ quality and hypothesized relationships between the study’s endogenous and exogenous constructs . The recent updates in the application have confirmed its suitability for the testing of categorical as well as continuous variables for path model estimations [ 24 ] [ 25 ] . It is also useful for assessing the impact Ind . Factors Age Gender Education level Knowledge Skills Intention of Use Trust Org . Factors Ownership type Business Type H1 ( a - e ) H2 ( a , b ) H3 ( a ) H3 ( b ) H4 H5 ( a , b ) 4 of an attribute as a whole [ 26 ] e . g . , age over gender or ownership type over business type , which helped in determining the substantial role of individual and organizational level factors on employees trust on artificial intelligence technology at work . To determine the differences between the groups based on the generation to which they belong , gender , educational level , ownership type and business type , multigroup analysis was utilized as well . The results of quality testing of measurement models followed by hypotheses testing are discussed below : A . Measurement Models’ Quality Testing Results The reflective measurements models of trust and intention to adopt AI were tested for determining their reliability and validity using SmartPLS4 . The convergent validity , average variance extracted ( AVE ) , composite reliability and discriminant validity were assessed of the constructs of Tr and ItUAI . The indicator reliability scores of all measuring items for both the variables remained above threshold of 0 . 70 ( Hair et al . , 2009 ) whereas the composite reliabilities of the constructs of Tr and ItUAI remained 0 . 96 and 0 . 92 , respectively . Likewise , AVE scores remained 0 . 75 and 0 . 82 for Tr and ItUAI , respectively , thus , meeting [ 27 ] criteria of convergent validity of the scales . Subsequently , discriminant validity of both the constructs was assessed and confirmed [ 28 ] . TABLE II . Q UALITY T ESTING R ESULTS OF THE S TUDY M EASUREMENT M ODELS Next , the formative constructs of InLF and OrLF were assessed based on their outer weight and VIF values . The outer weights of OrLF remained higher than the threshold of 0 . 6 and therefore utilized for hypotheses testing . On the other hand , the outer weights of InLF three items measuring gender , generation , and education remained lower than the acceptable value of 0 . 6 due to which their outer loadings were assessed following the advice of reference [ 29 ] . He suggested to retain the formative measure for use if its outer loading is significant , despite of non - significant outer weight . The results of outer loading were also non - significant , however , they were still utilized based on their content validity , as dropping the individual factors of age , gender and educational level would be like dropping a part of the construct which is not advisable [ 30 ] . Therefore , they were retained to assess their influence on employees trust and intention to use the new technology . The VIF and tolerance level results of all reflective and formative measures indicated that they were free from multicollinearity issues . For detailed results see table 2 . Hence , the measurement models’ reliability and validity tests results confirmed their appropriateness for measuring the study independent and dependent constructs . B . Structural Model Testing Results Bootstrapping procedure was run to test the statistical significance of path coefficient of the structural model . The findings pertaining to the hypothesized relationships are discussed one after another ( figure 2 ) . Fig . 2 . Structural Model Assessment Results Hypothesis 1 ( a to e ) tested the influence of individual level factors of age , gender , education , AI knowledge and IT skills on employee’s trust in artificial intelligence technology utilization at work . The findings confirmed the overall significant positive impact of individual level factors on employees’ trust ( t - value = 7 . 220 ; p - value = 0 . 000 ) in artificial intelligence technology . Generational based differences among the employees ( t - value = 2 . 082 ; p - value = 0 . 037 ) , their knowledge regarding Artificial Intelligence ( t - value = 5 . 463 ; p - value = 0 . 000 ) and proficiency level in Information Technology skills ( t - value = 3 . 176 ; p - value = 0 . 002 ) significantly influenced their trust towards the new technology of AI ; thus , accepting hypotheses 1a , 1d , and 1e . However , gender - based differences and employees’ level of education had no significant impact on their trust in artificial intelligence technology , which rejected our hypotheses 1b and 1c . Next , the impact of organizational level factors including ownership type ( hypothesis 2a ) and business type ( hypothesis 2b ) were tested to assess their role in influencing employees’ trust level in AI technology at work . The results confirmed overall no significant influence of organizational level factors on employees’ trust ( t - value = 1 . 332 ; p - value = 0 . 183 ) in AI utilization at work . The firm’s ownership type ( whether public , private , or semi - public ) ( t - value = 1 . 556 ; p - value = 0 . 120 ) as well as the business type ( whether producing goods or services ) ( t - value = 1 . 224 ; p - value = 0 . 221 ) made no difference on employees’ trust , thus rejecting hypotheses 2a and 2b . Subsequently , the direct influence of individual level factors ( hypothesis 3a ) as well as organizational level factors Constructs Measurement Type Items Ind . Reliability VIF AVE Co . Reliability Reflective Measurement Models Trust Reflective Item _ 1 0 . 840 1 . 12 0 . 75 0 . 96 Item _ 2 0 . 869 Item _ 3 0 . 883 Item _ 4 0 . 876 Item _ 5 0 . 822 Item _ 6 0 . 886 Item _ 7 0 . 881 Item _ 8 0 . 876 Item _ 9 0 . 856 Item10 0 . 875 Intention to Use AI Reflective Item _ 1 0 . 893 1 . 09 0 . 81 0 . 92 Item _ 2 0 . 898 Item _ 3 0 . 913 Item _ 4 0 . 913 Formative Measurement Models Indiv . Level Factors Formative Age 0 . 275 1 . 01 NA NA Gender 0 . 005 Educ . 0 . 191 Know . 0 . 644 Skills 0 . 626 Org . Level Factors Formative BusTy 0 . 602 1 . 01 NA NA OwnTy 0 . 801 5 ( hypothesis 3b ) on employees’ intention to use Artificial Intelligence was also tested . The results confirmed significant positive impact of individual level factors on employees’ intention to use AI ( t - value = 2 . 103 ; p - value = 0 . 035 ) at work , which accepted study hypothesis 3a . However , results confirmed no significant influence of organizational factors in developing employees’ intention to use artificial intelligence technology ( t - value = 0 . 932 ; p - value = 0 . 351 ) in their work processes , thus rejecting hypothesis 3b . Following , the influence of the employees’ trust in AI was assessed on their intention to use it at work ( hypothesis 4 ) . The findings reported strong significant impact of employees’ trust in AI on their intention to adopt it at work ( t - value = 42 . 432 ; p - value = 0 . 000 ) leading to acceptance of hypothesis 4 . Lastly , the analysis was conducted to determine if individual ( hypothesis 5a ) and organizational level ( hypothesis 5b ) factors impact on employees’ intention to use AI at work is mediated by their trust level in the technology . The findings confirmed significant positive mediating role of employees’ trust between respective individual level factors and their intention to use artificial intelligence at work ( t - value = 7 . 324 ; p - value = 0 . 000 ) , which accepted our study hypothesis 5a . The indirect effect of individual level factors on employees’ intention to use AI , mediated by their trust in technology remained much stronger compared to the direct effect of individual level factors on employees’ intention to use AI ( t - value = 2 . 103 ; p - value = 0 . 035 ) ; thus , stating that employees’ age , AI knowledge and IT skills influence their trust in the AI technology , which develops their intention to adopt it in their work processes . On the contrary , their trust in AI did not mediate the relationship between organizational factors and employees’ intention to adopt it ( t - value = 1 . 332 ; p - value = 0 . 183 ) at work , as the independent variable had no significant direct relationship with employees’ intention to use AI ( t - value = 0 . 932 ; p - value = 0 . 351 ) either . In essence , the findings confirmed that hypotheses 1 ( a , d , e ) , hypothesis 3 ( a ) , hypothesis 4 , and hypothesis 5 ( a ) were accepted . On the other side , hypotheses 1 ( b , c ) , hypothesis 2 ( a , b ) , hypothesis 3 ( b ) and hypothesis 5 ( b ) were rejected . The overall results are given in table 3 . TABLE III . H YPOTHESES T ESTING R ESULTS V . D ISCUSSION Our study tested the role of personal and organizational factors in developing employees’ trust in artificial intelligence technology , further influencing their intention to adopt this new technology at work in the UAE . The study findings reported that employee’s personal factors like age , knowledge about AI and skill of IT have significant impact on employees trust in AI technology ( p - value = 0 . 000 ) and their intention to adopt it at work ( p - value = 0 . 03 ) ; whereas organizational factors like ownership type and business type have no overall impact on employees trust in AI or their intention to use it . Employees’ age influences their trust level in AI significantly ( p - value = 0 . 03 ) . However , people from different generation cohorts responded differently . The non - parametric test findings highlighted that generation - x ( 1965 - 1980 ) followed by millennials ( 1981 - 1996 ) trusted AI more compared to generation - z ( 1997 - 2012 ) and baby boomer ( 1946 - 1964 ) . The study findings are contrary to what reference [ 12 ] reported in their study that generation - z demonstrates more trust in technology and its acceptance compared to older generations . Likewise , our study also confirmed that gender differences do not influence on employees’ trust in AI and its adoption at work , which again contradicts the findings reported by reference [ 12 ] that women have higher level of trust compared to men in acceptance and adoption of technology . These differences in results might be attributed to the AI technology , which was the main objective of the current study . Besides , the educational level of employees played no significant role in building employees’ trust in AI . The study made a significant contribution by highlighting that employees who are already knowledgeable about AI technology trust it ( p - value = 0 . 000 ) and show willingness to adopt this advanced technology as part of their work processes . Alongside , the employees who have higher level of proficiency in IT show trust in artificial intelligence ( p - value = 0 . 002 ) compared to those who are less expert in digital technology . These findings support the initiatives taken by UAE as part of its national program to transform the country into a world leader in AI . The strategic objective no . 5 of UAE’s AI Strategy focused on learning and skills development of public , students , and government employees in this advanced technology [ 2 ] . To do so , they initiated public training in 2018 , in which over 5000 residents participated in the free courses ran in summer camps by the government . The objective was to raise awareness and understanding of AI technologies and build capability among the masses for adopting it in their jobs and life . Next , the upskilling of at least one - third of STEM graduates ( 2000 students per year ) with specialist post - graduate trainings is already in progress , to further develop the pool of AI experts . Similarly , to enhance the AI skills of the existing employees , advanced level hands - on trainings and workshops were organized for senior leadership as well as junior employees . Also , the professionals who were expert in digital and analytic skills were provided trainings , secondments and study tours for upskilling and making them experts in AI as well . The study findings provide evidence that through knowledge enhancement and upskilling , the government can rightly build the trust among the people for this new technology , resulting in their willingness to adopt it at work . # Path Coefficients T - Stat . P - Values Status H - 1a Generation - > Trust 2 . 082 0 . 037 * Accepted H - 1b Gender - > Trust 0 . 042 0 . 966 Rejected H - 1c Education - > Trust 1 . 379 0 . 168 Rejected H - 1d AI Knowledge - > Trust 5 . 463 0 . 000 * * * Accepted H - 1e IT Proficiency - > Trust 3 . 176 0 . 002 * * Accepted H - 2a Owner . Type - > Trust 1 . 556 0 . 120 Rejected H - 2b Business Type - > Trust 1 . 224 0 . 221 Rejected H - 3a InLF - > ItUAI 2 . 103 0 . 035 * Accepted H - 3b OrLF - > ItUAI 0 . 932 0 . 351 Rejected H - 4 Trust - > ItUAI 42 . 434 0 . 000 * * * Accepted H - 5a InLF - > Trust - > ItUAI 7 . 324 0 . 000 * * * Accepted H - 5b OrLF - > Trust - > ItUAI 1 . 332 0 . 183 Rejected Non - Hypothesized Relationships T - Stat . P - Values Status InLF - > Trust 7 . 220 0 . 000 * * * Positive OrLF - > Trust 1 . 332 0 . 183 No Relation 6 Although the findings illuminated overall non - significant influence of firm’s ownership type on employees’ trust in using AI at work , substantial in - group differences existed in terms of trust in AI . The non - parametric test results confirmed that employees from public / semi - public sector had higher level of trust in AI ( chi - square = 25 . 281 ; p - value = . 000 ) and high intention of adopting it at work ( chi - square = 21 . 898 ; p - value = . 000 ) compared to those working in the private sector . These differences can be attributed to the government’s efforts to train and upskill the government employees in AI , thus , building their trust in this advanced technology . Likewise , overall business type - whether manufacturing , services , or trading - had no influence on employees’ trust in AI , yet in - group variances existed . The non - parametric test results highlighted employees associated with trading firms had higher level of trust in AI ( chi - square = 7 . 356 ; p - value = . 025 ) compared to employees from manufacturing or services . Most importantly , the study revealed that employees’ trust played a strong significant influence on their intention to use this advanced technology at their respective workplaces ( p - value = 0 . 000 ) . It is imperative for the AI strategy designers in relevant ministries to understand that AI is still a new technology and will take time in being welcomed by the entire workforce . It is often hailed as an intelligence exhibited by an artificial entity to solve complex problems . Earlier intelligence - ability to think , imagine , create , memorize , understand , recognize patterns , make choices , adapt to change , learn from experience etc . - has remained a competitive advantage for human beings to secure better status in work settings . Now AI’s concerns with making computers behave like humans but faster [ 33 ] , makes it difficult for people to put their trust on it . Therefore , it is important that people are informed and supported in accepting this new technology at their workplaces by building their trust in it , instead of using coercion and punishment approach . C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS & F UTURE D IRECTIONS In conclusion , the study affirmed that for people to adopt AI at work , they must have trust in it . Trust , then , plays a very significant role in achieving UAE’s AI objective . The government’s efforts in increasing awareness and enhancing AI related skills are aligned to building trust in AI through AI - knowledge enhancement and AI - skills development which should facilitate its adoption in workplaces . Due to limitation in its scope , the current study did not include organizational work climate or perceived organizational support in the framework while assessing the influence of organizational factors in developing trust among the employees for adoption of AI at work . It is worthwhile for future studies to take organizational culture and related factors into account as well as determining their role in building employees’ trust towards AI . Also , the study also did not consider the assessment of personality or core self - evaluation as part of personal factors in the study framework . The existing literature supports the strong role of personality aspects in being comfortable with changes , which strengthens the case for investigating the role of personalities in developing employees’ trust and intention to adopt new technology at work . Further , the current study framework should be expanded in future studies by adopting the Technology Acceptance Model to determine the influence of employees’ perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness of new technology on their trust towards AI and intention to adopt it as part of work processes , being important predictors of technology adoption [ 31 ] [ 32 ] . The outcomes will help the UAE companies and government agencies in better understanding the supportive personal and organizational factors contributing towards successful adoption of Artificial Intelligence technology in the country’s systems , to place it among the world’s leading countries in AI by 2031 . D ECLARATIONS • Funding : No funding was received for conducting this study . • Data Availability : Available upon Request . • Conflicts of interest : The authors have no relevant financial or non - financial interests to declare that are relevant to this article . • Ethical Statement : This is author’s original work which has not been published elsewhere . The work reflects authors’ own research and analysis in a truthful and complete manner . • Informed Consent : The participants were well informed about the purpose of study and their verbal consent was obtained before data collection . The information of the study participants was kept confidential to maintain anonymity of their responses . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] U . AE . “UAE Strategy for Artificial Intelligence” ( 2022 ) . Retrieved from https : / / u . ae / en / about - the - uae / strategies - initiatives - and - awards / federal - governments - strategies - and - plans / uae - strategy - for - artificial - intelligence [ 2 ] UAE - Minister of State for Artificial Intelligence . “UAE National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 2031” ( 2018 ) . Retrieved from https : / / ai . gov . ae / [ 3 ] Arabian Business . “UAE adopts new national AI strategy aimed at becoming global leader” ( 22 April 2019 ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . arabianbusiness . com / industries / technology / 418 254 - uae - adopts - new - national - ai - strategy - aimed - at - becoming - global - leader [ 4 ] Gulf News . “The UAE’s melting pot of cultures serve it well” ( July 1 , 2019 ) . Retrieved from https : / / gulfnews . com / business / analysis / the - uaes - melting - pot - of - cultures - serve - it - well - 1 . 64955916 [ 5 ] Global Media Insight . “United Arab Emirates Population Statistics” ( 2022 ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . globalmediainsight . com / blog / uae - population - statistics / [ 6 ] Chaudhry , Iffat Sabir , Rene Ymbong Paquibut , and Muhammad Nawaz Tunio . " Do workforce diversity , inclusion practices , & organizational characteristics contribute to organizational innovation ? Evidence from the UAE . " Cogent Business & Management 8 . 1 ( 2021 ) : 1947549 . [ 7 ] Bahmanziari , Tammy , J . Michael Pearson , and Leon Crosby . " Is trust important in technology adoption ? A policy capturing approach . " Journal of Computer Information Systems 43 . 4 ( 2003 ) : 46 - 54 . 7 [ 8 ] Luarn , Pin , and Wei - Jr Juo . " The role of trust in technology within the TAM in the context of NFC mobile payment . " Journal of Information and Optimization Sciences 31 . 4 ( 2010 ) : 875 - 896 . [ 9 ] Ashoori , Maryam , and Justin D . Weisz . " In AI we trust ? Factors that influence trustworthiness of AI - infused decision - making processes . " arXiv preprint arXiv : 1912 . 02675 ( 2019 ) . [ 10 ] Sargent , Kimberley , Paul Hyland , and Sukanlaya Sawang . " Factors influencing the adoption of information technology in a construction business . " Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and Building , The 12 . 2 ( 2012 ) : 72 - 86 . [ 11 ] Deloitte The Netherlands . “Artificial Intelligence” , 2018 . Retrieved from file : / / / D : / MCBS / Research / Conference % 20paper - al % 20ain / Lit % 20Review / AI / deloitte - nl - data - analytics - artificial - intelligence - whitepaper - eng . pdf on September 19 , 2022 . [ 12 ] Sousa , Sonia , and Gabriela Beltrão . " Factors Influencing Trust Assessment in Technology . " IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , Cham , 2021 . [ 13 ] Belanche , Daniel , Luis V . Casaló , and Carlos Flavián . " Integrating trust and personal values into the Technology Acceptance Model : The case of e - government services adoption . " Cuadernos de Economía y Dirección de la Empresa 15 . 4 ( 2012 ) : 192 - 204 . [ 14 ] Łapinska , J . ; Escher , I . ; Górka , J . ; Sudolska , A . ; Brzustewicz , P . Employees’ Trust in Artificial Intelligence in Companies : The Case of Energy and Chemical Industries in Poland . Energies 2021 , 14 , 1942 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / en14071942 [ 15 ] Voutinioti , Anastasia . " Determinants of user adoption of e - government services in Greece and the role of citizen service centres . " Procedia Technology 8 ( 2013 ) : 238 - 244 . [ 16 ] Roberts , Ruby , et al . " Psychological factors influencing technology adoption : A case study from the oil and gas industry . " Technovation 102 ( 2021 ) : 102219 . [ 17 ] Talukder , Majharul , and Ali Quazi . " Exploring The Factors Affecting Employees’adoption And Use Of Innovation . " Australasian Journal of Information Systems 16 . 2 ( 2010 ) . [ 18 ] Choi , Youngkeun . " A study of employee acceptance of artificial intelligence technology . " European Journal of Management and Business Economics ( 2021 ) . [ 19 ] Becker , Jan - Michael , Kristina Klein , and Martin Wetzels . " Hierarchical latent variable models in PLS - SEM : guidelines for using reflective - formative type models . " Long range planning 45 . 5 - 6 ( 2012 ) : 359 - 394 . [ 20 ] Paravastu , Narasimha . " Dimensions of Technology Trustworthiness and Technology Trust Modes . " Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology , Third Edition ( 2015 ) : 4301 - 4309 . [ 21 ] Turner , Mark , et al . " Does the technology acceptance model predict actual use ? A systematic literature review . " Information and software technology 52 . 5 ( 2010 ) : 463 - 479 . [ 22 ] Patil , Kanchan . " Retail adoption of Internet of Things : Applying TAM model . " 2016 International conference on computing , analytics and security trends ( CAST ) . IEEE , 2016 . [ 23 ] Venkatesh , Viswanath , and Fred D . Davis . " A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model : Four longitudinal field studies . " Management science 46 . 2 ( 2000 ) : 186 - 204 . [ 24 ] Schuberth , Florian , Jörg Henseler , and Theo K . Dijkstra . " Partial least squares path modeling using ordinal categorical indicators . " Quality & Quantity 52 . 1 ( 2018 ) : 9 - 35 . [ 25 ] Bodoff , David , and Shuk Ying Ho . " Partial least squares structural equation modeling approach for analyzing a model with a binary indicator as an endogenous variable . " Communications of the Association for Information Systems 38 . 1 ( 2016 ) : 23 . [ 26 ] Hair , Joseph F . , et al . " Partial least squares structural equation modeling - based discrete choice modeling : an illustration in modeling retailer choice . " Business Research 12 . 1 ( 2019 ) : 115 - 142 . [ 27 ] Fornell , Claes , and David F . Larcker . " Structural equation models with unobservable variables and measurement error : Algebra and statistics . " ( 1981 ) : 382 - 388 . [ 28 ] Gerbing , David W . , and James C . Anderson . " An updated paradigm for scale development incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment . " Journal of marketing research 25 . 2 ( 1988 ) : 186 - 192 . [ 29 ] Wong , Ken Kwong - Kay . " Partial least squares structural equation modeling ( PLS - SEM ) techniques using SmartPLS . " Marketing Bulletin 24 . 1 ( 2013 ) : 1 - 32 . [ 30 ] Freeze , Ronald , and Robyn L . Raschke . " An assessment of formative and reflective constructs in IS research . " ( 2007 ) . [ 31 ] Hamida , A . ; Abdul Razak , F . ; Abu Bakar , A . ; Abdullah , W . The Effects Of Perceived Usefulness And Perceived Ease Of Use On Continuance Intention To Use E - Government . 7th International Economics & Business Management Conference , 5th & 6th October 2015 . Procedia Economics and Finance 35 ( 2016 ) 644 – 649 . Retrieved from 1 - s2 . 0 - S2212567116000794 - main . pdf on September 21 , 2022 . [ 32 ] Fayad , Rima , and David Paper . " The technology acceptance model e - commerce extension : a conceptual framework . " Procedia economics and finance 26 ( 2015 ) : 1000 - 1006 . [ 33 ] Strong , A . I . " Applications of artificial intelligence & associated technologies . " Science [ ETEBMS - 2016 ] 5 . 6 ( 2016 ) .