Memory & Cognition 2002 , 30 ( 4 ) , 637 - 646 As peoplelearn about the world , they create conceptual representationsof the categoriesthey encounter . Thesecon - ceptualrepresentationscanbe used to interpret ( or evenpro - duce ) new concepts . For example , peoplecan combinethe concepts tin and bottle to form the combined concept tin bottle . This process of combiningtwo or more conceptsto create a combined concept is called conceptualcombina - tion . During conceptual combination , the head noun con - cept ( e . g . , bottle ) is modified in some way by the modifier concept ( e . g . , tin ) . The modifier often specifies the way in which the head noundiffers from other members of its cat - egory ( Clark , 1987 ; Gelman & Markman , 1985 ) . For ex - ample , a tin bottle differs from most bottles in that it is made of tin , rather than of plastic or glass . Theoriesof conceptualcombinationprimarily have taken two approaches : a schema - based approach and a relation - based approach . According to schema - basedtheories ( e . g . , Murphy , 1988 , 1990 ; Wisniewski , 1996 ) , a specific dimen - sion within the head noun’s representationis selected , and its value is changed to match the value present in the mod - ifier . For example , the value in the fuel dimension is changed to wood for the combination wood stove . Conse - quently , these theoriespredictthat interpretinga combined conceptshouldtake longerif the required dimensionis not presentinthehead nounschema . If relationsare represented as dimensions within the head noun concept ( as proposed by Wisniewski , 1996 ) , then the frequency with which a re - lation is used with a given head noun should play a large role in conceptual combination . In contrast , the competitionamong relationsin nominals ( CARIN ) theory emphasizesthe role of the modifier in re - lation selection ( Gagné , 2001 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) and draws on linguisticapproachesto the interpretationof modifier – noun phrases ( Downing , 1977 ; Levi , 1978 ) . Ac - cording to this theory , conceptual combination involves selecting a relation that specifies the connection between the modifier and head noun . For example , the relation head noun uses modifier is used to interpret wood stove as “a stove that uses wood . ” The relation can be used to infer more specific properties of the concept ( see Gagné , 2000 , in press ) . According to the CARIN theory , knowledge about the modifier’s past usage with various relations is called the modifier’s relational distribution , and this dis - tributionis usedto determinewhichrelationsshouldbe con - sidered during the conceptualcombinationprocess . Rela - tions compete with one another such that more strongly activated relations are more likely to be selected than are less activated relations . Once a relation is selected on the basis of the modifier’s relational distribution , the head noun is used to determine whether that relation is plausi - ble . In short , theCARIN theory suggeststhat theheadnoun plays a role in evaluating the plausibility of the relations suggested by the modifier , but it does not play a role in the initial activation of those relations . 637 Copyright 2002 Psychonomic Society , Inc . This research was supportedin part by a fellowship from the Natural Sciences and EngineeringResearch Council ( NSERC ) ofCanadaandby NSERC Research Grant 203054 - 98RGPIN to the first author . The first author is grateful to Gina Sohn for her help in data collection for Ex - periment 1 . Correspondence should be addressed to C . L . Gagné , De - partment of Psychology , University of Alberta , P - 217 Biological Sci - ences Building , Edmonton , AB , T6G 2E9 Canada ( e - mail : christina . gagne @ ualberta . ca ) . Priming relations in ambiguous noun – noun combinations CHRISTINA L . GAGNÉ University of Alberta , Edmonton , Alberta , Canada and EDWARD J . SHOBEN University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , Champaign , Illinois We conducted two experimentsto examine whether the interpretationof an ambiguous noun phrase is influenced by exposure to a similarcombination . In Experiment 1 , we found that it was easierto ver - ify a definitionfor a combination ( e . g . , adolescentdoctor , a doctor for adolescents ) when the prime used the same relation as the target ( e . g . , adolescent magazine , a magazine for adolescents ; animal doctor , a doctor for animals ) than when the prime used a different relation ( e . g . , country doctor ; adolescent experience ) . In Experiment 2 , we found that the interpretation generated for an ambiguous combina - tion was affected by prior exposure to sentences containing a combination with the same modifier or head noun as the target combination . The data are inconsistent with key predictions of schema - based theories of conceptual combination . Although the resultsdo not contradict key assumptions of relation - based theories , modifications to these theories are required to account for these data . 638 GAGNÉ AND SHOBEN Recentevidenceintheconceptualcombinationliterature appears to favor the relation - based approach . Gagné and Shoben ( 1997 ) found that a combination was more read - ily interpreted when it used a relation that was frequently used with the modifier than when it used a relation that was notoftenusedwith themodifier . There wasno evidence that the frequency with which the relation was used with the head noun influenced the ease of interpreting a com - bination . Gagné ( 2001 ) and Shoben and Gagné ( 1997 ) re - ported further evidencethat the ease of selectinga relation is based on the availabilityof that relationfor the modifier ratherthanforthehead noun . Forexample , in Gagné ( 2001 ) , combinations ( e . g . , student vote ) were preceded by a com - bination sharing either the same modifier ( e . g . , student accusation ) or the same head noun ( e . g . , employee vote ) . In addition , the prime combination used either the same relation or a different relation as the target . Althoughboth modifier and head nounprimes produced lexicalpriming , only the modifier prime yielded relation priming . Head noun primes that used the same relation as the target did not yield any more primingthan did head noun primes that used a different relation . In contrast , modifier primes with the same relation as the target produced more priming than did modifier primes usinga different relation . In sum , research presentedby Gagné ( 2001 ) and Gagnéand Shoben ( 1997 ) demonstrates that the ease of selecting a relation depends on how available that relation is for the modifier concept and is not affected by the availability of the rela - tion for the head noun concept . Both findings are consis - tent with the CARIN theory . A central tenet of the schema - based approach is that the availability of dimensions within the head noun’s schema playsa large role inconceptualcombination . Consequently , thefindingsof Gagné ( 2001 ) andGagnéandShoben ( 1997 ) that contradict this claim indicate that the role of the head noun during relation selection should be reconsidered . It is possible that the influence of the head noun is reflected not in its relationaldistribution ( as is the case for the mod - ifier ) but in its most recent usage and that this influenceis evident only when there is more than one plausible inter - pretation for a combination . Earlier studies used items for which there was a single dominant interpretation ( Gagné , 2001 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) ; that is , there was littleam - biguity about which relation was most appropriate . If a combination has multiple interpretations ( e . g . , cat rash ) , it seems likely that additional information might be re - quired to resolve the ambiguity . If the head noun has been recently used in a combination , then the selection of a re - lation during the conceptual combination might be influ - enced by thisrecent usage . Thus , forexample , if onehad re - cently encountered rash in the context of heat rash , one might be more likelyto interpret cat rash as “a rash caused by a cat . ” On the other hand , if one had encountered rash in the context of leg rash , one might interpret cat rash as “a rash on a cat . ” Our aim was to determine whether this scenario is correct , and the experiments provided an addi - tional test of schema - based and relation - basedtheories of conceptual combination . Overview of the Experiments In the present experiments , we used combinations for which there were at least two nearly equally plausibleinter - pretations . We used ambiguouscombinationsbecause it is likelythat thissituationmight require the head nounto play a greater role in the selection of the relation than was ob - served in previous studies . Our aim was to determine whether a concept’s recent usage in a combined concept affects the comprehension of a subsequent combination containing the same concept . Recall that the schema - based ( Murphy , 1988 , 1990 ; Wisniewski , 1996 ) andrelation - based ( Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) theories emphasize differ - ent constituents . It therefore is probative to examine the effect of both constituents . In Experiment 1 , we examined the time required to verify a particular definitionfor a tar - get combination following various prime combinations . The prime combinations used either the same head noun or the same modifier as the target combination . In addi - tion , the prime’s meaning was based on the target’s domi - nant relation , was based on the target’s subdominantrela - tion , or was unrelated to the target’s two most common meanings . To ensure that the results obtained in Experi - ment 1 were not specificto the verificationtask and to gen - eralize our findings to a nonspeeded task , we conducted an experiment ( Experiment 2 ) that used an off - line task in which the participants read a series of sentences contain - ing the prime combinations and then ( after a delay ) gen - erated their own interpretations for the ambiguous target combinations . EXPERIMENT 1 The goal of Experiment 1 was to determine whether repetition of either a modifier or a head noun can influ - ence subsequent comprehension of an ambiguous combi - nation . Gagné and Shoben ( 1997 ) demonstrated that head nouns and modifiers vary in terms of how much prior usage with various relations affected the ease of compre - hending novel combinations . The use of a common rela - tion rather than a rare relation for the modifier led to eas - ier comprehension of the combination . In contrast , there was no effect of frequency of relation for the head nouns on comprehension . However , these findingsdo not neces - sarily imply that the head noun neverplays a role in the se - lection of a relation . Instead , it might be that distributional information about the head noun relations is not as read - ily available as is information about how the modifier tends to be used . If so , it might still be possible for the head noun to influence the interpretation of a combined concept if there is a recent example of a combinationcon - taining the same head noun available . That is , rather than being influencedby how the head noun is used in general , the comprehension of combinationsmight be affected by how the head noun was most recently used . The presence of a recent prime might make relationalinformationabout the head noun more available , especially when there is ambiguityabout which relation should be selected . In this experiment , we examined whether a recent example of a PRIMING RELATIONS IN AMBIGUOUS COMPOUNDS 639 combinationcontainingthe same head nouninfluencesthe interpretation of a combination . For the target combinations , we selectedcombinedcon - cepts that were ambiguous in that they could have at least two meanings ( as judgedby the results of a norming study in which participantsprovideddefinitionsfor various com - binations ) . For example , adolescentdoctor could mean ei - ther “a doctor who is an adolescent” or “a doctor for ado - lescents . ” To determine whether the interpretation of this combination is influenced by a recent example of a simi - lar combination , we constructed prime combinationsthat used the target’s dominant relation , the target’s subdomi - nant relation , or a relation other than the target’s two most frequent relations . In addition to varying the type of rela - tion , we also varied whether the prime and the target used the same modifier or the same head noun . If the head noun plays an importantrole in selecting the appropriaterelation , as predictedby schema - basedtheories , then it should be easier to interpret adolescent doctor as “a doctor who is an adolescent” when the phrase male doctor has been recently seen than when the phrase ani - mal doctor has been seen . The opposite should be true if adolescentdoctor is to be interpretedas “a doctor for ado - lescents . ” However , if the head noun does not play a role in the selection of a relation during conceptual combina - tion , then it should not matter which combination pre - cedes the target combination . Instead , the meaning that is the more dominant ( or more common ) should be the eas - iest to derive . As for a recent exampleof a combinationcontainingthe same modifier as the target , previous research suggests that a combinationwith a similarmodifiershouldinfluence response time ( RT ; Gagné , 2001 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) . As previously mentioned , Gagné and Shoben ( 1997 ) have shown that conceptualcombinationis guided by informa - tionabouthow themodifiertends tobe used . In the CARIN model , this information is referred to as the modifier’s re - lational distribution . This relational distribution is based on people’s experience with combined concepts contain - ing that modifier . Thus , oneextensionof the CARIN model might lead one to expect a prime combinationto alter the interpretation of a later combination sharing the same modifier . This influence would occur if the prime combi - nation makes a particular relation more accessible in the modifier’s relational distribution . That is , a recent exam - ple of the modifier being used with a particular relation may make that relation more accessible in the relational distribution than it might be otherwise . However , it is not entirelyobviousthat the interpretationof a combined con - cept will necessarily be influenced by prior exposure to anothercombined conceptwith the same modifier . For the prime combinationto stronglyinfluencethe interpretation of a combination , the prime must make the relation more accessible than the most available relations in the modi - fier’s relational distribution , because the relation that was used in the prime combinationmust competesuccessfully against the most highly available relations in the modi - fier’s relational distribution before it can be selected dur - ing the interpretationof the target combination . Given that the modifier’s relational distribution is based on people’s lifelong experience with combined concepts containing that modifier , it might very well be that a single exposure of a particular relation will have little effect on this rela - tional distribution . Method Norming study . The authors generated 112 combinations that had at least two interpretations . For example , cloth money could refer to either “money that is made of cloth” or “money for cloth . ” Five ran - domized lists of all 112 items were created , and one list was presented to each of 37 participants at the University of Illinois . These partic - ipants provided a definition for each combination . The first author tabulated the frequency that each definition was used for a particu - lar combination . The definition that was used most often for a com - bination was deemed the dominant meaning , and the second most frequent definition was deemed the subdominant meaning . Materials . Thirty - six ambiguous combinations were selected from the items in the norming study . These combinations were used as target combinations . For each target , wecreated prime combinations that varied along two dimensions . First , the prime used either the same modifier or the same head noun as the target combination . Sec - ond , the prime could be interpreted using the same relation as the tar - get’s dominant meaning , the target’s subdominant meaning , or a rela - tion that was unrelated toeither the dominant or subdominant relation of the target . These two factors were crossed to produce six prime conditions : modifier repeated – subdominant relation ( MS ) , modifier repeated – dominant relation ( MD ) , modifier repeated – unrelated re - lation ( MU ) , head repeated – subdominant relation ( HS ) , head repeated – dominant relation ( HD ) , and head repeated – unrelated re - lation ( HU ) . Examples of the six prime types that were used for ado - lescent doctor are given in Table 1 ( see the Appendix for a complete list of experimental items ) . The subdominant meaning for this tar - getitem was “a doctor who is anadolescent , ” and the dominant mean - ing was “a doctor for adolescents . ” Although the prime items were based on either the subdominant meaning or the dominant meaning of the target , the target sentence always required the participants to verify a combination’s subdominant meaning . For the present exam - ple , the target sentence was “adolescent doctor 5 a doctor who is an adolescent . ” Onehundred eight filler pairs were also created in which theprime , the target , or both items were shown with an incorrect definition . For Table 1 Example Stimuli for Experiment 1 Prime’s Relation Repeated Constituent Subdominant Dominant Unrelated Modifier adolescent student adolescent magazine adolescent experience Head noun male doctor animal doctor country doctor Note—Thetarget combination ( adolescent doctor ) was always displayed with the subdominantmean - ing ( “a doctor who is an adolescent” ) . 640 GAGNÉ AND SHOBEN 36 filler pairs , the prime was shown with a correct definition , and the target had an incorrect definition . For 36 filler pairs , the prime had an incorrect definition , and the target had a correct definition . For the remaining 36 filler pairs , both the prime and the target were shown withanincorrect definition . In addition , theprime and thetarget shared the same modifier for half of the filler pairs . For the other half of the filler pairs , the prime and the target shared the same head noun . Procedure . Each participant saw the entire set of target combina - tions , and each target item was seen only once . Six stimulus lists were created , such that there was an equal number of each prime type on each list . Across all lists , each target was seen with each prime com - bination . The 36 experimental pairs of prime and target items were presented in a randomized order along with 108 filler pairs . The prime combination was presented first . Then , following the partici - pant’s response , the target combination was presented . There was nothing in the method of presentation to indicate that the prime and the target were connected . The way in which the prime and target combinations were displayed was identical . Each trial began with the question “Ready ? ” on the computer screen , and the participants pressed the space bar when they wanted to see the next item . After the space bar was pressed , the next combination along with a possi - ble definition ( e . g . , “adolescent doctor 5 a doctor who is an adoles - cent” ) was displayed in the center of the computer screen . The partic - ipants pressed either the“J” or the“F”key on thekeyboard to indicate whether the definition was acceptable . The keys were labeled such that the key marked “Acceptable” corresponded to the participant’s dominant hand , and the other key was labeled “Unacceptable . ” Participants . Seventy - two undergraduates from the University of Western Ontario participated in the study for partial course credit . All were native speakers of English . Results and Discussion The data for the target items are of primary interest and are shown in Table 2 . Recall that the target was alwaysseen with the subdominantrelation . There was a main effect of prime relation [ F 1 ( 2 , 142 ) 5 10 . 73 , p < . 0001 ; F 2 ( 2 , 70 ) 5 4 . 70 , p < . 01 ] . RTs to the target were 224 msec faster when preceded by the subdominant prime than when preceded by the dominant prime [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 20 . 90 , p < . 0001 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 8 . 79 , p < . 01 ] . In addition , RTs to the target were 143 msec faster when preceded by the subdominant prime than when preceded by the unrelated prime [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 8 . 62 , p < 01 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 4 . 64 , p < . 05 ] . Thus , the participants were faster to respond to the target when the prime’s definition used the same relation as the target than when the prime’s definition used a different re - lation . These results indicate that a recently viewed com - bination can influence the ease of selecting a relation for a subsequentcombinationsuch that it is easier to interpret the subsequent combinationwhen it requires the same re - lation as the previous combination . Most importantly , the analysis revealed that the influ - ence exerted by the modifier and head noun primes did not differ . Overall , the mean in the head noun condition ( 2 , 209 msec ) was nearly identicalto the mean in the mod - ifier condition ( 2 , 208 msec ) . There was no main effect of which constituentwas repeated , and there was no interac - tion between prime relation and repeated constituent ( all F s < 1 ) . Importantly , the facilitation observed from the subdominant prime was observed for both the modifier prime conditionsand the head noun prime conditions . The difference between the MS and MU conditions was 129 msec and was significant in the subject analysis [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 3 . 89 , p , . 05 ] but did not reach conven - tional significancelevels in the item analysis [ F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 2 . 08 , p . . 10 ] . Similarly , the 159 - msec difference be - tween the HS and HU conditions was reliable in the sub - ject analysis [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 5 . 83 , p , . 05 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 2 . 98 , p . . 05 ] . The dominant relation primes did not produce interfer - ence . The 56 - msec difference between the MD and MU conditions was not significant ( F s < 1 ) , nor was the 104 - msec difference between the HD and HU conditions [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 2 . 52 , p . . 10 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) < 1 ] . It is unlikely that our failure to detect a difference between these con - ditions was due to lack of power , because a power calcula - tion using GPOWER ( Erdfelder , Faul , & Buchner , 1996 ) indicated that power was . 99 , based on an alpha of . 05 and an f of . 25 ( which correspondsto a medium effect size ; see Cohen , 1988 ) . The accuracy data also indicatethat the prime combina - tion influenced the interpretation of the target combina - tion . Again , there was a main effect of prime relation [ F 1 ( 2 , 142 ) 5 40 . 29 , p , . 0001 ; F 2 ( 2 , 70 ) 5 26 . 75 , p , . 0001 ] . Accuracy rates in the subdominantconditionwere higher than in the dominantcondition [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 19 . 52 , p , . 0001 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 53 . 50 , p , . 0001 ] . In addition , ac - curacy rates were higher in the subdominant condition than in the unrelated condition [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 20 . 77 , p , . 0001 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 13 . 91 , p , . 001 ] . Thus , the accuracy data parallel the RT data in that performance was improved when the prime and the target shared the same relationrel - ative to when the prime and the target used different rela - tions . Consistentwith what was observedin the RT data , there was no main effect of which constituent was repeated ( F s < 1 ) . Importantly , both the modifier and the head noun primes yielded facilitation . The difference between the MS and MU conditionswas significant [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 4 . 84 , p , . 05 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 4 . 49 , p , . 05 ] , as was the difference between the HS and HU conditions [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 14 . 00 , p , . 05 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 14 . 58 , p , . 05 ] . Unlike the response time data , the accuracy data indi - catethat the dominantprime madethe target more difficult to interpret ; the difference between the dominant and un - related conditions was significant [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 19 . 52 , Table 2 Mean Response Times ( RTs ) , Standard Deviations ( SD s ) , and Accuracy Rates for Target Items in Experiment 1 Prime Repeated Constituent Relation RT ( msec ) SD Accuracy % Modifier Subdominant 2 , 103 457 85 Modifier Dominant 2 , 288 579 74 Modifier Unrelated 2 , 232 519 78 Head noun Subdominant 2 , 068 555 89 Head noun Dominant 2 , 331 626 66 Head noun Unrelated 2 , 227 649 78 PRIMING RELATIONS IN AMBIGUOUS COMPOUNDS 641 p , . 0001 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 12 . 85 , p , . 0001 ] , and there was a significant interaction between the repeated constituent and prime relation factors [ F 1 ( 2 , 142 ) 5 4 . 31 , p , . 05 ; F 2 ( 2 , 70 ) 5 4 . 21 , p , . 05 ] . Interference from the dominant prime was observed when the head noun was in common [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 17 . 35 , p , . 0001 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 16 . 37 , p , . 0001 ] , but not when the modifier was in common [ F 1 ( 1 , 142 ) 5 2 . 55 , p . . 10 ; F 2 ( 1 , 70 ) 5 2 . 75 , p . . 10 ] . Thus , there is some indicationin the accuracy data that the modifier and the head noun primes might yield somewhat different effects , in that interference was obtained only from the head noun prime . Taken together , the data indicate that the conceptual combination process can make use of information about how the head noun and the modifier were most recently used , even though it does not appear to make use of how the head noun is used in general ( as suggested by Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) . Apparently , information about how the head nounhas been usedis notreadilyavailableunlessthere is a very recent example of another combination contain - ing that same head noun . In addition , it appears that the in - fluence of the head noun prime occurs onlywhen the target combinationis ambiguous : Gagné ( 2001 ) used unambigu - oustarget combinationsand failedto find primingwhen the prime and target combination shared the same head noun . A second implicationis that a modifier’s relationaldis - tributioncan be altered by prior exposureto a combination containing the same modifier . In other words , general in - formation about the relations with which the modifier tends to be used is not the modifier’s only source of influ - enceon relationselection . Instead , a modifier’s recentusage can increase the availability of a particular relation such that it can be selected more readily if it is required to in - terpret a subsequent combination . EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment1 , we used an on - lineverificationtask to investigate whether the interpretationof a combined con - cept is influenced by the presence of a related combina - tion . In Experiment 2 , we examined the influence of a re - lated prime in a situation in which the participant must generate ( rather than verify ) a definitionfor an ambiguous combination . The participants read a group of sentences ( e . g . , “The tiny puppy was cold , so his owner made a dog sweater for him” ) , each of which contained a prime com - bination ( e . g . , dog sweater ) . Subsequently , theparticipants provided definitions for the corresponding target combi - nations ( e . g . , goat sweater ) . Using an interpretation task enabled us to determine whetherthe results obtainedwith the verificationtask gen - eralize to a nonspeeded task . If so , the data from the pres - ent experiment would allow us to broaden our conclusions and show that the influence of a recent modifier or a head noun prime is not confined to a situation in which the prime combination is used with a definitional statement . On the basis of the previous results , one would expect the prime combination to bias people’s interpretations of an ambiguouscombination . When defining an ambiguous combination , there shouldbe a tendencyfor peopleto pro - vide an interpretation that uses the same relation as the one embodied in the previous prime combination . For ex - ample , if people are influenced by the recent modifier prime , they should be more likely to define goat sweater as “a sweater for a goat”if they had previouslyseen a sen - tence containing goat collar ( “a collar for a goat” ) than if they had seen a sentence containing goatrug ( “a rug made of goat” ) . Likewise , if people are influenced by the recent head noun prime , they should be more likely to define goatsweater as “a sweater fora goat”if theyhad previously seen a sentence containing dog sweater ( “a sweater for a dog” ) than if they had seen a sentence containing rayon sweater ( “a sweater made of rayon” ) . Method Materials . Thirty - six ambiguous combinations were selected from the items used in the norming study ( see the Method section of Experiment 1 for a description of the norming study ) . These combi - nations were used as target combinations . For each target , wecreated prime combinations that varied along two dimensions . First , theprime used either the same modifier or the same head noun as the target combination . Second , the prime could be interpreted using the same relation as the target’s dominant meaning or the target’s subdomi - nant meaning . Crossing these two variables produced four experimen - tal conditions : modifier repeated – subdominant relation ( MS ) , mod - ifier repeated – dominant relation ( MD ) , head repeated – subdominant relation ( HS ) , and head repeated – dominant relation ( HD ) . We cre - ated a sentence for each prime combination . The sentences implied the meaning of the prime combination but did not explicitly state it . For example , animal doctor ( one of the primes for adolescent doc - tor ) was used in the following sentence : “James Herriot , author of several books , is a famous animal doctor . ” Procedure . The materials were placed into four booklets , such that , across the booklets , each target item appeared with each prime type . Each target combination was presented only once per booklet , and each participant received one booklet . Within each booklet , the items were randomized and divided into four blocks . First , the par - ticipants read nine study sentences . These study sentences were the prime sentences described above . All nine sentences were printed on a single sheet of paper , and the participants were given several minutes to read the sentences . The next page contained a list of 18 words : 9 words from the study sentences and 9 new words . None of the words was from the prime combinations . The participants were instructed to circle the words that had appeared on the previous page . This memory test was done to ensure that the participants were read - ing the study sentences and to provide a distractor task between the presentation of the prime and target combinations . Finally , the next page listed the nine target combinations that corresponded to the prime combinations used in the study sentence for that block . For ex - ample , if the sentence “James Herriot , author of several books , is a famous animal doctor” appeared among the study sentences , then the target combination adolescent doctor was presented after the distrac - tor task . The participants provided a definition for each item on the line next to the combination . This sequence was repeated for each block of items , until all 36 target combinations had been presented . Participants . Forty undergraduate students from the University of Illinois participated in the study for partial course credit . They were all native speakers of English . Results and Discussion The interpretationswere classifiedintoone of three cat - egories : dominant , subdominant , and other . The dominant 642 GAGNÉ AND SHOBEN and subdominantclassificationswere based on the results of thenormingstudyreported in the Method sectionof Ex - periment 1 . Overall , 90 % of the interpretations used ei - ther the subdominant or the dominant interpretation . The other category consisted of responses that used an inter - pretation other than the subdominant or the dominant in - terpretation or did not clearly define the combination . For example , “a basket of fruit” for fruit wrap and “a pretty lamp” for picture lamp were both classified as other be - causetheintendedmeaningwas notclear . In thedataanaly - sis , the other category was not used . Table 3 shows the proportion of dominantand subdom - inant interpretations in each condition . A key issue is whether the presence of the prime combination changes the proportion of dominant and subdominant interpreta - tions . To answer this question , we used a normal approx - imation to the binomial to determine whether the number of subdominantinterpretationscorrespondedto what would be expected on the basis of the number of subdominant interpretations that were observed in the norming study reported in the Method section of Experiment 1 ( in which the combinations were not preceded by prime combina - tions ) . On the basis of the norming study , the predicted proportion of dominant interpretations was . 62 , and the proportion of subdominant relations was . 38 ( when the other category was not includedin the analysis ) . Note that a comparison using the number of dominant interpreta - tions would yield the identical absolute z - value as a com - parison using the number of subdominantinterpretations ; so the choice of whether to use the number of subdomi - nant or dominant interpretations is arbitrary . The influence of the dominant prime on the number of subdominant interpretations was not statistically signifi - cant . When the prime used the target’s dominantinterpre - tation and the same modifier as the target , the proportion of subdominantinterpretationsdid not differ significantly from what was obtained in the norming study ( z 5 0 . 77 , p . . 10 ) . The same was true when the prime used the same head noun as the target and the target’s dominant in - terpretation ( z 5 1 . 22 , p . . 10 ) . These results suggestthat primes using the same relation as the target combination’s dominantinterpretationdid not greatlyalterthe proportion of subdominantand dominantinterpretationsgiven to the target combinations . In contrast , the primes usingthe target’s subdominantin - terpretationdid have a significantinfluence on the propor - tion of dominant and subdominant interpretations . This finding held for both the modifier prime conditionand the head noun prime condition . In the modifier prime condi - tion , the number of subdominant interpretations was sig - nificantly higher than what would be predicted by the norming study ( z 5 3 . 40 , p , . 0001 ) . In the head noun prime condition , the number of subdominant interpreta - tions was significantly higher than predicted ( z 5 4 . 76 , p , . 0001 ) . These results show a clear effect of both the modifier prime and the head noun prime . Prior exposure to a combinationthat used the same relation as the target’s subdominant interpretation increased the number of sub - dominant interpretations generated for the ambiguous combination . Overall , the results of Experiment 2 are congruentwith the results of Experiment 1 in that they demonstrate that both the modifier prime and the head noun prime influ - ence the interpretation of an ambiguous combination . Thus , the results of Experiment2 indicatethat the findings obtained in Experiment 1 are not specific to a speeded task but instead generalize to a situation in which the par - ticipants generate their own interpretations . One difference between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 is that there was no influence of the dominantprime in Ex - periment 2 . It appears that the dominant prime affects the ease of selecting a relation ( as indicated in Experiment 1 ) but does not necessarily affect the propensity to use the dominantrelation . Prior exposuretoa prime usingthedom - inant meaning of the target combination did not increase the relativenumber of dominantinterpretationsgenerated for the ambiguous target combination , even though the dominantprimes did have an influence in the on - line task ( as indicated by a lower accuracy rate following the head noun prime ) . Perhaps the number of dominant interpreta - tions generated by the participants was already at ceiling , so that the dominant prime was unable to significantlyin - crease the number of dominant interpretations provided . Recall that , in the norming study , 62 % of interpretations for the ambiguous target combinations used the dominant relation . Although this percentage is not a statistical ceil - ing , it is worth notingthat the percentageof interpretations with the dominant interpretation might be near a theoret - ical ceilingif the selection of the dominantrelationis con - strained by the availabilityof otherplausiblerelations and by other linguistic and conceptual factors ( e . g . , affor - dances ; Kaschak & Glenberg , 2000 ) . Put another way , the use of the dominant relation when the target combination is presented in isolation might already reflect the highest Table 3 Proportion of Dominant and Subdominant Interpretations in Experiment 2 Prime Interpretation Given to Target Repeated Constituent Prime’s Relation Dominant Subdominant Modifier Dominant . 60 . 40 Modifier Subdominant . 53 . 47 Head noun Dominant . 58 . 42 Head noun Subdominant . 49 . 51 PRIMING RELATIONS IN AMBIGUOUS COMPOUNDS 643 proportion of responses given to any relation for an am - biguouscombination . If so , it might be very difficult to in - crease theuse ofthisrelation . Anotherpossibilityis thatprior exposure to the subdominant relation might have increased the strengthof thisrelationrelativeto othernondominantre - lations , andthismighthaveallowedthesubdominantrelation tocompetemore successfullywiththedominantrelation . In contrast , prior exposure to the a combinationusing the tar - get’s dominantrelationmightnot have greatlyincreasedthe availabilityof the dominantrelationbecausethestrengthof the dominantrelationwas already higherthan all otherrela - tions and any additionalincrease in strength would not pro - videmuch advantageoverthe otherrelations ( relativeto the situation in which the dominant relation was not primed ) . Consequently , exposure to the dominant relation prime might not have increased the use of the dominant relation during the interpretationof thetarget , even thoughthe time required to use the dominant relation was reduced ( as ob - served in Experiment 1 ) . GENERAL DISCUSSION The results of Experiments1 and 2 demonstratethat the interpretation of an ambiguous combined concept can be influencedby recent exposureto a combinedconceptcon - tainingthe same modifieror the same head noun . Although the psychologicalliteraturecontainsmany demonstrations that prime items can influence responses to subsequent target items ( see Meyer & Schvaneveldt , 1971 ; Meyer , Schvaneveldt , & Ruddy , 1974 ; Neely , 1977 ; Onifer & Swinney , 1981 ) , much of this literature has focused on lexicalpriming with singlewords , and there have been few demonstrations that conceptual combination can be af - fected by prior exposure to related combinations . Within the conceptual combination literature , there has been some indicationthat prior discoursecontextinfluencesthe interpretation of a combined concept ( Gagné & Murphy , 1996 ; Gerrig & Bortfeld , 1999 ; Gerrig & Murphy , 1992 ) . However , our results demonstrate that a preceding dis - course context is not required to influence the interpreta - tion of a combined concept . Instead , we show that a sin - glecombinationcanaffecttheinterpretationofa subsequent combination . This finding suggests that the priming con - text need not be rich or complex for priming to occur . Another way that our results differ from the usual prim - ing effect is that the results of our off - line task demon - strate that the influence of the prime is evident not only in a verification task but also in a task in which the partici - pants generate their own interpretations . These data sug - gest that the priming observed in the on - line task is not re - stricted to lexical priming . Instead , the ability to select a particular relation is affected by prior exposure to a com - bination containing a similar relation . Our data have several implications for the viability of both the schema - based ( e . g . , Murphy , 1988 , 1990 ; Smith & Osherson , 1984 ; Smith , Osherson , Rips , & Keane , 1988 ; Wisniewski , 1996 ) and the relation - based ( e . g . Gagné , 2001 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) approaches . Before consid - ering these implications , we will first outline the differ - encesbetween the CARIN theory ( Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) and theschemamodificationtheory ( Murphy , 1988 , 1990 ) that are relevant for this set of experiments . The relation - linking process in Wisniewski’s ( 1996 ) dual - process the - ory shares the same key assumptions as the schema modi - ficationtheory , so thediscussionof theschemamodification theory also appliesto the dual - processtheory . The CARIN theory and the schema modification theory differ in two ways . The first difference between the two models is the role that the modifier and the head noun play during con - ceptual combination . The schema modificationtheory as - serts that properties of the head noun play a large role in conceptualcombination . The ease with which a combina - tion can be interpreted is influenced by the existence of a particulardimensionwithin the head noun . If the required dimension does not exist , then the combination will be judgedas nonsensicalunlessthe dimensioncan be created . The modifier’s role during conceptual combination is to fill a particular dimension within the head noun . In this respect , the influence of the modifier is tied largely to the head noun . For the CARIN theory , however , the modifier is much less dependent because it plays a strong role in the selection of a relation . The frequency with which par - ticular relations have been used with a given modifier stronglyinfluencesthe ease with which a combinationcan be interpreted ( Gagné , 2001 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) . A seconddifferenceconcernsthespecificityof the mod - ificationsthat are made during the interpretationof a com - bined concept . For the schema modification theory , con - ceptualcombinationinvolvesalteringa specificdimension withinthe head noun’s representation . For the CARIN the - ory , however , conceptual combination is primarily based on a general relation . To illustratethis difference , consider the combination wood stove . According to the schema modificationtheory , a specificdimension ( e . g . , FUEL ) is se - lected . The same dimension is selected for combinations such as diesel truck and gas lamp because the modifiers all represent types of fuel . According to the CARIN the - ory , an important component of conceptual combination is the selection of a general relation ( e . g . , noun uses mod - ifier ) . The same relation can be used for other combina - tions , such as honey remedy , steam brake , or smoke sig - nals , even though the modifiers in these examples do not denote types of fuel . Our data suggest that the relation - basedCARIN theory and the schema - based theories are inadequate . The origi - nal CARIN theory outlined by Gagné and Shoben ( 1997 ) proposes that the more frequently the required relation was used with a particular modifier , the easier it was to interpret the combination . However , our present results suggest that the modifier’s relationaldistributionis not the only source that influences the selection of a relation . A recent similar combination also plays a role . Thus , the CARIN theory must be modified to allow for the use of a recent combination . 644 GAGNÉ AND SHOBEN One way to modify the CARIN theory is to proposethat the modifier and the head noun each contribute to the se - lection of a relation in a different way . As proposed in the original CARIN model , the modifier’s relationaldistribu - tion is one source of information that is used duringthe se - lection of a relation . The presentation of a combination might alter the relational distribution that is associated with the modifier of that particular combination . That is , the strength of the relation noun for modifier in the rela - tional distribution for adolescent is somewhat increased following the presentation of the combination adolescent magazine . A second source of information that might be consulted during conceptual combination concerns the head noun . The present data suggest that the head noun’s contribution to the selection of the relation comes from the most recent combination containing that head noun , rather than from knowledgeaboutthe relationswith which the head noun tends to be used in general . That is , rather than storing a relational distribution for the head noun , peoplemight store only information about the head noun’s most recent usage . In addition , it appears that this infor - mation about the head noun’s recent usage is evident only when the target combinationis ambiguous : Gagné ( 2001 ) did not find evidence of relation priming from a head noun prime when the target combination had a single dominant interpretation . However , when a combination has two almost equally plausible interpretations , as was the case in the present experiments , previouslyviewed ex - amples are used to resolve ambiguity about which inter - pretation is most appropriate . Our results also have implications for the viability of schema - basedtheories . We will concentrateon the schema modificationtheory and dual - process theory . These theo - ries do not account for our data for a number of reasons . First , the theoriesuse dimensionsrather than relationsand therefore cannot explain the present set of results . If , for example , the dimension for gender is altered in male doc - tor , then why does prior exposure to this combination fa - cilitatethe comprehensionof adolescentdoctor where the altered dimension ( age ) is quite different ? Note , however , the CARIN theory can account for why male doctor helps the interpretation of adolescent doctor : Both combina - tions use the same relation ( noun is modifier ) . This prob - lem is not specific to the predicationrelation noun is mod - ifier . For example , the combinations Christmaswreath and home wreath both use the same general relation ( noun for modifier ) but different dimensions . Christmas is a filler for a dimension that specifies the time of year during which the wreath is displayed , but home is a filler for a di - mension that specifies the place at which the wreath is de - signedto be hung . To take anotherexample , balloongown and curtain gown both use the noun resembles modifier relation . However , balloon alters the dimensionthat spec - ifies the shape of the skirt of the gown , whereas curtain fills the dimensionthat specifies the fabric from which the gown is made . Thus , accordingto the dimension - basedthe - ories , Christmas wreath should not have aided the inter - pretation of home wreath , and balloon gown should not have aided the interpretation of curtain gown . A second problem with schema - based theories is that several aspects of these theoriessuggestthat repeating the modifier should not influence the comprehension of a subsequent combination . First , there is no mechanism whereby the representation of the modifier is altered in any way by the combination process . It is clear from the descriptionof the model that the representationof the head noun is changed as a result of the combination process . That is , existingdimensionswithin the head noun schema are altered by placing the modifier in the appropriate di - mension , or , if necessary , additionaldimensionsare added to the head noun schema . On the other hand , although the modifierprovidesthe valueswith which the dimensionsin the head nounare filled , the representationof the modifier is apparently unchanged after the combinationprocess . If so , then repeating the modifier should have no effect . Contrary to this prediction , we found that the modifier prime does influencethe accuracy with which a combined concept can be interpreted , as well as the ease of verify - ing a definition for the target ( as indicated by the subject analysis in Experiment 1 ) . In addition , a modifier prime using the same relation as the target’s subdominant inter - pretationincreases the use of that relation when peopleare asked to provide an interpretation for the target ( as indi - cated in Experiment 2 ) . One could add assumptionsto the schema modification theory and dual - process theory to allow them to predict that repeating the modifier should influence the interpre - tation of a combined concept . That is , one could assume that selecting a slot should be easier if that modifier has recently selected the same slot . However , adding this property to these two theories seems inconsistentwith the notion that the meaning of a modifier changes depending on the head noun with which it is paired . For example , the concept red is not equivalentin red hair and red apple . In - deed , Murphy ( 1990 ) criticizes the notion that a modifier should have the same effect on all nouns ( as suggested by Smith & Osherson , 1984 ) . Given that the meaning of the modifier apparently differs depending on the head noun with which it is combined , repeating the modifier should not benefit conceptual combination because , when the second time a modifier is encountered , it would not be in - terpreted in the same sense as the initial presentation . In most cases , the meaning of the modifier would not be ap - propriate for the new head noun . For example , a red apple is not a coppery - orange shade of red ( as is red hair ) . Conclusions We have demonstratedthat the selectionof a relationfor an ambiguousconceptualcombinationis influencedby re - cent exposure to constituentconcepts . Moreover , this con - clusion holds for recent exposure to both head nouns and modifiers ; we found no evidenceto suggestthat theamount of priming was greater for either of these constituents . These results require modification of relation - based the - PRIMING RELATIONS IN AMBIGUOUS COMPOUNDS 645 ories to take into account effects of prior experience on the selection of a relation . As currently constituted , the CARIN theory ascribes no role to such experientialeffects and , instead , relies exclusivelyon a relational distribution for the modifier . The most promising revision suggests that prior exposure can influence the distribution of rela - tional information and that a recent example of a combi - nation using the head noun might be retrieved to resolve relation ambiguity . The results pose more serious prob - lems for schema - basedaccounts , largelybecausewe found priming in situations in which the dimension ( a critical component of these accounts ) was not the same between prime and target . Moreover , these theories at least imply that the effects for the head noun should be greater than those for the modifier and that no priming should be ob - tained when only the modifier is in common between the prime and the target . REFERENCES Clark , E . ( 1987 ) . Theprincipleof contrast : Aconstraintonacquisition . In B . MacWhinney ( Ed . ) , Mechanismsof languageacquisition ( pp . 1 - 33 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Cohen , J . ( 1988 ) . Statisticalpower analysisforthebehavioralsciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Downing , P . ( 1977 ) . On the creation and use of English compound nouns . Language , 53 , 810 - 842 . Erdfelder , E . , Faul , F . , & Buchner , A . ( 1996 ) . GPOWER : A general power analysisprogram . BehaviorResearch Methods , Instruments , & Computers , 28 , 1 - 11 . Gagné , C . L . ( 2000 ) . Relation - based combinations versus property - based combinations : A test of the CARIN theory and dual - process theory of conceptual combination . Journal of Memory & Language , 42 , 365 - 389 . Gagné , C . L . ( 2001 ) . Relation and lexical priming during the interpre - tationofnoun – nouncombinations . Journalof ExperimentalPsychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 27 , 236 - 254 . Gagné , C . L . ( in press ) . Metaphoricinterpretationofcomparison - based combinations . Metaphor & Symbol . Gagné , C . L . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1996 ) . Influence of discourse context onfeatureavailabilityinconceptualcombination . DiscourseProcesses , 22 , 79 - 101 . Gagné , C . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1997 ) . The influence of thematic rela - tionson the comprehension of modifier – nouncombinations . Journal ofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 23 , 71 - 87 . Gelman , S . , & Markman , E . ( 1985 ) . Implicit contrast in adjectives vs . nouns : Implications for word learning . Journal of Child Language , 12 , 125 - 143 . Gerrig , R . J . , & Bortfeld , H . ( 1999 ) . Sensecreationsin and outof dis - course contexts . Journal of Memory & Language , 41 , 457 - 468 . Gerrig , R . J . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1992 ) . Contextual influences on the comprehensionofcomplexconcepts . Language & CognitiveProcesses , 7 , 205 - 230 . Kaschak , M . P . , & Glenberg , A . M . ( 2000 ) . The role of affordances and grammatical constructions in sentence comprehension . Journal of Memory & Language , 43 , 508 - 529 . Levi , J . ( 1978 ) . The syntax and semantics of complex nominals . New York : Academic Press . Meyer , D . E . , & Schvaneveldt , R . W . ( 1971 ) . Facilitation in recog - nizing pairs of words : Evidence of dependence between retrieval op - erations . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 90 , 227 - 234 . Meyer , D . E . , Schvaneveldt , R . W . , & Ruddy , M . G . ( 1974 ) . Func - tions of graphemic and phonemic codes in visual word - recognition . Memory & Cognition , 2 , 309 - 321 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1988 ) . Comprehending complex concepts . Cognitive Science , 12 , 529 - 562 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1990 ) . Nounphrase interpretationand conceptualcom - bination . Journal of Memory & Language , 29 , 259 - 288 . Neely , J . H . ( 1977 ) . Semantic priming and retrieval from lexical mem - ory : Role of inhibitionlessspreading activation and limited capacity attention . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 106 , 226 - 254 . Onifer , W . , & Swinney , D . ( 1981 ) . Accessing lexical ambiguitiesdur - ing sentence comprehension : Effects of frequency of meaning and contextual bias . Memory & Cognition , 9 , 225 - 236 . Shoben , E . J . , & Gagné , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Thematic relations and the cre - ationofcombinedconcepts . InT . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) ; Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 31 - 50 ) . Washington , DC : American PsychologicalAs - sociation . Smith , E . E . , & Osherson , D . N . ( 1984 ) . Conceptualcombinationwith prototypeconcepts . CognitiveScience , 8 , 337 - 361 . Smith , E . E . , Osherson , D . N . , Rips , L . J . , & Keane , M . ( 1988 ) . Com - biningprototypes : Amodificationmodel . CognitiveScience , 12 , 485 - 527 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Construal and similarity in conceptual com - bination . Journal of Memory & Language , 35 , 434 - 453 . ( Continued on next page ) 646 GAGNÉ AND SHOBEN APPENDIX Target Combination Subdominant Primes Dominant Primes adolescentdoctor adolescentstudent male doctor adolescentmagazine animal doctor alcoholremedy alcoholdisinfectant morphine remedy alcoholbottle cancer remedy chocolatebook chocolateegg plastic book chocolatemagazine chemistry book church signs church clothes meeting signs church pews bathroomsigns clay machine clay tool soda machine clay mixer yogurt machine college comedy college lecture hospital comedy college decision lawyer comedy cork pin cork board metal pin cork paint yarn pin cotton bag cotton press shoe bag cotton bag string bag funeraldish funeralmusic cereal dish funeralprayers picnic dish goat sweater goat collar dog sweater goat rug rayon sweater hair broom hair braid straw broom hair brush carpet broom ice bowl ice mug candy bowl ice truck rice bowl juice dye juice sweetener icing dye juice stain berry dye meat train meat pan passengertrain meat stew cattle train porch wood porch swing roof wood porch awning fire wood rag shirt rag quilt linen shirt rag towel jacket shirt steam stove steam furnace smoke stove steam cooker gas stove wool basket wool sock wicker basket wool soap vegetablebasket bed screen bed tray patio screen bed blanket window screen beef sauce beef meatball cheese sauce beef gravy sundae sauce carpenter toy carpenterhammer baby toy carpenter cabinet designertoy cat scratch cat rash dog scratch cat saliva thorn scratch celebrityrestaurant celebrity car millionairerestaurant celebrityaward family restaurant ceramic oven ceramic mold cookie oven ceramic plate tile oven cloth binder cloth knife recipe binder cloth sack leather binder curtain gown curtain door satin gown curtain scarf balloon gown drug therapy drug overdose heat therapy drug treatment depressiontherapy factorychemical factory equipment army chemical factorywaste lab chemical fruit wrap fruit box gift wrap fruit drink silk wrap home wreath home insurance Christmas wreath home office mailbox wreath juvenilestory juvenilecomplaint journaliststory juvenilecenter adult story money student money parent car student money analyst philosophystudent paper tree paper clip canoe tree paper container wax tree pickle house pickle fork fraternity house pickle plant beer house picture lamp picture album velvet lamp picture frame reading lamp studentevaluation studentgossip job evaluation studentriot supervisorevaluation ( Manuscript received September 14 , 2000 ; revision accepted for publication January 14 , 2002 . )