Biophysical model of the role of actin remodeling on dendritic spine morphology Miermans , C . A . ; Kusters , R . P . T . ; Hoogenraad , C . C . ; Storm , C . Published in : PLoS ONE DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0170113 Published : 03 / 02 / 2017 Document Version Accepted manuscript including changes made at the peer - review stage Please check the document version of this publication : • A submitted manuscript is the author ' s version of the article upon submission and before peer - review . There can be important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record . People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication , or visit the DOI to the publisher ' s website . • The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review . • The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume , issue and page numbers . Link to publication Citation for published version ( APA ) : Miermans , K . , Kusters , R . , Hoogenraad , C . C . , & Storm , C . ( 2017 ) . Biophysical model of the role of actin remodeling on dendritic spine morphology . PLoS ONE , 12 ( 2 ) , 1 - 14 . [ e0170113 ] . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0170113 General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ? Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Download date : 11 . Dec . 2018 Actin Remodeling and Polymerization Forces Control Dendritic Spine Morphology Karsten Miermans ∗ 1 , Remy Kusters 1 , Casper Hoogenraad 3 , and Cornelis Storm 1 , 2 1 Theory of Polymers and Soft Matter , Department of Applied Physics , Eindhoven University of Technology 2 Institute for Complex Molecular Systems , Eindhoven University of Technology 3 Cell Biology , Faculty of Science , Utrecht University November 2 , 2015 Abstract Keywords : biophysics | neuroscience | synapse | synaptic plasticity | structural plasticity | ﬁlopodium | dendritic spine | cytoskeleton | canham helfrich | actin Dendritic spines are small membranous structures that protrude from the neuronal dendrite . Each spine contains a synaptic contact site that may connect its parent dendrite to the axons of neighboring neurons . Dendritic spines are markedly distinct in shape and size , and certain types of stimulation prompt spines to evolve , in fairly predictable fashion , from thin nascent morphologies to the mushroom - like shapes associated with mature spines . This striking progression is coincident with the ( re ) conﬁguration of the neuronal network during early development , learning and memory formation , and has been conjectured to be part of the machinery that encodes these processes at the scale of individual neuronal connections . It is well established that the structural plasticity of spines is strongly dependent upon the actin cytoskeleton inside the spine . A general framework that details the precise role of actin in directing the transitions between the various spine shapes is lacking . We address this issue , and present a quantitative , model - based scenario for spine plasticity validated using realistic and physiologically relevant parameters . Our model points to a crucial role for the actin cytoskeleton . In the early stages of spine formation , the interplay between the elastic properties of the spine membrane and the protrusive forces generated in the actin cytoskeleton propels the incipient spine . In the maturation stage , actin remodeling in the form of the combined dynamics of branched and bundled actin is required to form mature , mushroom - like spines . Our model identiﬁes additional factors that plausibly aid the stabilization and maintenance of spine morphology . Taken together , our model provides unique insights into the fundamental role of actin remodeling and polymerization forces during spine formation and maturation . 1 Introduction A single neuron can contain hundreds to thousands of dendritic spines , actin - rich , micron - sized pro - trusions which project from dendritic shafts [ 14 ] . Mature spines consist of two basic compartments : a constricted region called the neck , supporting a bulbous head containing the postsynaptic site that makes contact with the axon of a nearby neuron . Spines come in a wide range of sizes and shapes , their lengths varying between 0 . 2 − 2 µ m and their volumes between 0 . 001 − 1 µ m 3 . Electron microscopy ∗ Corresponding author , k . miermans @ gmail . com 1 a r X i v : 1 5 10 . 08816v2 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 3 0 O c t 2015 ( EM ) studies have identiﬁed several morphological categories of spines , such as thin , ﬁlopodium - like protrusions ( ‘thin spines’ ) , and spines with a large bulbous head ( ‘mushroom spines’ ) [ 10 – 12 , 14 , 19 ] . Diﬀerent live cell - imaging techniques have demonstrated that dendritic spines are highly dynamic structures , subject to constant morphological change even after birth . Table 1 : Various ‘ball - park’ ﬁgures of dendritic spines . Code Quantity Typical Scale Source N Number of actin ﬁlaments in spine - head ( see supporting information on how this number was estimated ) ∼ 71 [ 19 ] R base Radius of the base of the spine ( viz . where the spine is connected to the dendritic membrane ) . This quantity was estimated on the basis of microscopy images published by [ 33 ] . ∼ 300 nm [ 33 ] R neck Radius of a typical spine - neck 75 ± 30 nm [ 12 ] R head Radius of a typical spine - head 220 ± 154 nm [ 12 ] L neck Length of a typical spine - neck 0 . 2 − 2 µ m [ 33 ] L ﬁlop . Length of a typical ﬁlopodium 0 . 9 − 10 µ m [ 6 ] ( mean ≈ 5 µ m [ 39 ] ) [ 6 , 39 ] (cid:96) Length that actin ﬁlament extends upon one polymerization step 2 . 2 nm [ 21 ] A neck Surface - area of a typical spine - neck 0 . 24 ± 0 . 17 µ m 2 [ 12 ] A head Surface - area of a typical spine - head 0 . 61 ± 0 . 57 µ m 2 [ 12 ] A ﬁlop . Surface - area of a typical ﬁlopodium ( this was calculated using A ﬁlop . ≈ 2 πR ﬁlop . L ﬁlop . with R ﬁlop . , L ﬁlop . from [ 6 , 39 ] ) 0 . 85 − 16 µ m 2 ( mean ≈ 6 . 3 µ m 2 ) [ 6 , 39 ] f neck Expansive force that a spine - neck of typical size exerts ( using the approximate formula f neck ≈ 4 πK b R head / R 2neck , see text ) 9 − 290 pN f head Contractile force that a spine - head of typical size exerts ( using the approximate formula f head ≈ 17 . 23 K b R neck / A head , see text ) 0 . 0007 − 0 . 05 pN f actin Average actin polymerization force 3 . 8 pN [ 21 ] K b Bending rigidity of lipid bilayer membrane 5 × 10 − 19 J [ 28 ] During neuronal development , dendrites initially appear as thin and hairlike ﬁlopodia ( ﬁgure 1 ) . They are deﬁned as having a length that is at least twice the width , and they do not display the bulbous head found on dendritic spines [ 17 , 19 , 37 ] . Filopodia are devoid of organelles and vesicles , and are composed primarily of actin ﬁlaments . These actin ﬁlaments are bundled and primarily aligned to the nascent spine . Filopodia are the precursors to dendritic spines , and their ﬂexibility allows the establishment of synaptic contacts . Once the contact between a dendritic ﬁlopodium and a neighboring axon has been established , the spine - head begins to swell , taking on a more mushroom - like morphology . Over time , such recognizable mushroom spines become the prevalent structure on the dendritic shaft , and few ﬁlopodia remain . 2 elongation maturation dendritic filopodium mature , mushroom - like spine actin patch r ( s ) s z’ ( s ) = - sin r’ ( s ) = + cos z ( s ) R ( a ) ( b ) Membrane Model forces Legend Figure 1 : Outline of the model for spine formation and maturation . Panel ( a ) : Cartoon of spine initiation , elongation and maturation . From left to right : ‘stubby spines’ ; dendritic ﬁlopodia or thin spines ; mature , mushroom - like spines . In our mathematical model , we solve the shape equation based on the energy functional ( 1 ) ( see SI , equation ( 3 ) ) . In this study we show that , at least for the purposes of the force calculations , the results of the shape equation can be reproduced using the geometries that are also displayed in this ﬁgure . Panel ( b ) : Deﬁnition of axisymmetric coordinate system that use for our models . The progressive shape change is neither random nor deterministic . Rather , it is thought to be correlated with the strength and maturity of each synapse [ 17 , 37 ] . At the level of an individual spine , strengthening of a synapse is accompanied by modiﬁcations in the size of the spine . The prime mechanisms that drives structural plasticity is the modulation of actin dynamics in dendritic spine . Although the importance of actin remodeling as well as the synaptic signaling mechanisms involved in structural synaptic plasticity are well established [ 14 , 19 , 23 ] , a general framework to correlate the state of the actin cytoskeleton to spine shape is lacking . Most importantly , it is not clear whether the actin is capable of autonomously driving the shape change , or whether the actin simply follows morphological transitions otherwise imposed . Our model for spine dynamics uses the Canham - Helfrich formalism , an approach which has proven its strength in describing , both qualitatively and quantitatively , the deformation of biological mem - branes in numerous biological systems such as red - blood cells [ 1 ] , membrane tethers [ 3 ] and binary or tertiary lipid mixtures in giant - unilamellar vesicles [ 28 ] . For a broad overview , we refer to [ 27 ] and many references therein . We analyze the interplay of the plasma membrane with the underlying actin cytoskeleton to quantify the forces that are required to prompt the initial formation of the spine , and its subsequent outward growth . We ﬁnd that the forces generated by actin polymerization are suﬃcient for it to drive ﬁlopodium formation , and that the resulting dimensioning ( quantiﬁed , for instance , by the ratio ( protrusion width ) / length ) closely resembles those reported in experiments . A related the - oretical model taking into account the interplay of the spine membrane with the actin cytoskeleton allows us , in addition , to compute the forces and energies required for spine head formation . It shows that the simultaneous presence of both branched actin ﬁlaments and bundled / aligned actin is required , and suﬃcient , to produce the typical mushroom - like spine morphology . Finally , our model also high - lights the important role of additional physical processes in stabilizing the morphological features of mature spines . We discuss several candidate factors that may eﬀect these processes , and conclude that these molecules are suﬃciently rigid to be able to constrict the spine - neck to the extent reported in experiments . Our models do point to a fundamental role for actin remodeling in the process of spine formation and maturation . This ﬁnding supports earlier claims in the literature , and our model sug - gests novel experiments to further pin down the basic principles that control the structural plasticity of the brain . 3 2 Materials and Methods Reﬂecting the approximate rotational symmetry of dendritic spines , we use an axisymmetric coordinate system consisting of an angle ψ with the horizontal , an arc - length parameter s , radial coordinate r and vertical coordinate z . The coordinate system is schematically displayed in ﬁgure 1 . The arc - length parameter s = 0 . . . S is used as the independent variable and r ( s ) and ψ ( s ) as the coordinates . This coordinate system fully determines the shape , and the vertical coordinate z ( s ) is recovered by the geometrical relation z (cid:48) ( s ) = − sin ψ ( s ) . The Canham - Helfrich energy functional that we use can be written [ 3 , 28 ] F = 12 K b ˆ d a ( 2 H ) 2 + σ ( A − A 0 ) − f ( L − L 0 ) , ( 1 ) where K b ≈ 500 pN · nm is the bending rigidity of the membrane [ 28 ] , 2 H = ψ (cid:48) ( s ) + sin ψ ( s ) / r ( s ) is the mean curvature [ 16 ] ( with ψ (cid:48) ( s ) ≡ d ψ / d s ) , σ is a surface tension , 1 A = ´ d a is the surface area , f is a point - force acting on the membrane and L = z ( S ) − z ( 0 ) is the height of the membrane . The ﬁrst term in this energy functional—the one containing the mean curvature 2 H —represents the bending energy of the membrane , which reﬂects the tendency of lipid bilayers to adopt a ﬂat shape ( or spherical in the case of vesicles ) . We use the surface tension σ and point - force f as Lagrange multipliers to enforce speciﬁc values of the surface - area A 0 and the height of the shape L 0 [ 30 ] . Within this paradigm , we interpret the surface - area , viz . amount of membrane available to the spine , as a quantity that encodes growth [ 24 , 34 ] . The height of the shape reﬂects the cytoskeletal architecture of the spine . Although there is no obvious way of interpreting the surface tension ( cf . footnote 1 ) , the point - force f is simply the mechanical force that is exerted by the cytoskeleton on the spine membrane . One of the main goals of this paper is to investigate whether these forces are attainable through actin polymerization . We will show that this is indeed the case . Our choice to work at ﬁxed total surface - area , rather than ﬁxed surface tension , is inspired by two considerations : ( i ) Dendrites are ﬁnite in size , and the membrane that envelopes the dendritic shaft can only be as small as the underlying cytoskeleton of microtubules [ 14 , 19 ] —therefore , we cannot regard the surroundings of the spine as a reservoir of freely accessible membrane . Instead , excess membrane needs to be transported , often by means of exocytic traﬃcking , in order to be available to the spine [ 24 , 34 ] . ( ii ) On the dendritic shaft , generally , many spines exist side - by - side . In open boundary settings , such as those employed in [ 3 ] , area is exchanged with a virtual bath outside the integration domain . In the dendritic shaft , however , no such bath exists as the next spine is likely also growing . Thus , a competition for membrane exists between proximate spines . For this reason , we choose to work with closed boundaries , prohibiting area to leak out of the domain of interest . We choose to work in a setting in which the amount of membrane available to the spine is conserved , i . e . membrane does not leak away from the shape . We point out that there is biological evidence that cells strive to maintain their surface - tension [ 3 , 9 , 25 ] . Although this empirical fact might seem incompatible with our simulations , the ensembles of constant surface - area and constant surface - tension are—for the purpose of modeling mushroom - like spines—approximately equivalent . The underlying reason for this similarity is simple : the energy corresponding to the surface - tension of a typical spine - head is approximately equal to the bending energy of a typical spine - neck . Hence , for mushroom - like shapes , the two ensembles can be converted to one another by swapping an energy term of the same order of magnitude . We have veriﬁed this prediction by comparing various quantitative predictions between the two ensembles . 2 Indeed , the predictions that we make in this paper are valid in both 1 This surface tension is a parameter that is used to enforce the total surface - area ( a “Lagrange multiplier” ) , and can therefore not be interpreted ( even though it has the same dimensions ) as the surface tension of ≈ 0 . 05pN / nm that is measured in experiments using e . g . membrane tethers [ 4 , 9 , 25 ] . 2 We have compared predictions of the ﬁlopodium width , the number of ﬁlaments required to support a ﬁlopodium , the neck width of a mature spine and the head width . Of these metrics , the mean values of the predictions in these two ensemble diﬀer 5 − 40 % . 4 ensembles . Using the Euler - Lagrange formalism , the energy functional ( 1 ) can be transformed into a system of diﬀerential equations . These shape equations , reproduced in the Supporting Information , have been numerically solved by means of a shooting - and - matching technique for a wide range of parameters A 0 , L 0 and several sets of boundary conditions ( we drop the subscripts to A 0 , L 0 in the remainder of the paper ) . We ignore the stretching energy since lipid bilayer membranes can be regarded as approximately inextensible [ 26 ] . Also , the pressure - term − p V that is often cited in conjunction with the Canham - Helfrich formalism [ 15 , 16 , 27 ] is not applicable since we are discussing a system that is free to exchange cytosol with the environment . 3 Results and Discussion We use the Canham - Helfrich energy functional ( 1 ) to model the growth of dendritic spine membranes . The growth sequence is schematically shown in ﬁgure 1 . We will show that this growth sequence can be explained qualitatively and quantitatively by simple models that incorporate the interaction of the actin cytoskeleton and the spine membrane . To that end , we will ﬁrst determine how ﬁlopodia are formed by application of forces that the cytoskeleton exerts on the spine membrane . Then , we will show that the forces generated by a branched cytoskeleton , located at the top of the spine , will result in a bulbous head and a thin spine - neck . Finally , we will show that actin - membrane anchoring or ring - like molecules are another scenario for constraining a large head and long , thin neck . For the model calculations , we shall make repeated use of the physiologically relevant parameters that we have tabulated ( see table 1 , Supporting Information ) . 3 . 1 Filopodium Formation It is well known that the actin cytoskeleton plays a large role in the formation of ﬁlopodia [ 14 ] . It has been hypothesized that polymerization of actin ﬁlaments and the resultant forces are suﬃcient for the formation of dendritic ﬁlopodia [ 2 ] . In order to theoretically investigate this possibility , we will present a model that includes extension of the actin cytoskeleton in growing ﬁlopodia . This is schematically displayed in the outline of our model , ﬁgure 2 . This is readily incorporated in the energy functional ( 1 ) by ﬁxing the height of the shape—thereby representing the vertical dimension of the cytoskeleton . Growth of the cytoskeleton , or change in cytoskeletal architecture , is represented by incrementing this height constraint . We will ﬁrst show that the forces that this rigid structure needs to exert on the spine membrane match the forces that are generated by actin polymerization . Then , we will show that the sequence of shapes as a consequence of polymerization of the actin cytoskeleton is similar to that of ﬁlopodium formation . The protrusive forces that the rigid actin cytoskeleton exerts on the spine - membrane , will result in tube - like shapes , as can be seen in ﬁgure 2 . Also shown are the force - extension curves of these tubes for various values of the membrane surface - area . Since growth of dendritic spines and ﬁlopodia is mediated by exocytosis of endosomes at the synapse [ 24 , 34 ] , we can model the growth of spines by increasing the surface - area of the shape ( also see the Methods part of this paper ) . Thus , we ﬁnd that ﬁlopodia with more membrane require less force to be extended—in other words , membrane addition will result in further elongation of ﬁlopodia . Although the full force - extension relation shown in ﬁgure 2 is non - trivial , the linear part for large extensions ( i . e . large height L ) can easily be understood from a theory that treats these structures as cylinders . From the bending energy of a cylinder ( with given surface - area ) E = 2 π 2 K b L 2 / A we ﬁnd that the force f ≡ − ∂ L E to extend this cylinder is linear in L . Applying this derivative , we ﬁnd the force for producing ﬁlopodia f ≈ 4 π 2 K b L / A . This approximation turns out to be accurate to within 9 % of the computed force - extension curves shown in ﬁgure 2 ( the error in this approximation decreases as the ﬁlopodium height increases ) . This is markedly diﬀerent 5 f fil . f fil . f fil . f fil . constant 0 . 37 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 5 1 0 . 57 0 . 6 8 0 . 6 2 0 . 7 9 0 . 8 5 N u m b e r o f f il a m e n t s d e n d r i t i c f i l o p o d i a g r o w t h ≈ 0 4 7 10 actin filaments 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 57 0 . 68 membrane [ μm 2 ] ( b ) ( d ) ( c ) ( a ) Figure 2 : Outline of results for ﬁlopodium formation . Panel ( a ) : Cartoon of qualitative eﬀect of increasing force whilst the amount of membrane is kept constant . Panel ( b ) : Eﬀect of growth ( viz . membrane addition ) on ﬁlopodium morphology ( if the force on the membrane is kept constant ) . These shapes experience a vertical force of 35 pN corresponding to approximately 9 polymerizing actin ﬁl - aments . Membrane addition results in substantial elongation of the ﬁlopodium . Panel ( c ) : Eﬀect of cytoskeletal remodelling ( viz . actin polymerization ) on ﬁlopodium morphology if the amount of membrane is kept constant . These shapes have a surface - area of 0 . 68 µ m 2 . Increasing the number of polymerizing actin ﬁlaments leads to a marked change in morphology from a stubby - like morphology to a tubular shape . . Panel ( d ) : Force - extension curves of our models of dendritic ﬁlopodia for various values of the surface - area A . Numbers at curves indicate the surface - area in units of µ m 2 whereby we used a radius of the base of the ﬁlopodia R base = 300 nm . 6 from the force required for pulling a tube from a reservoir ( i . e . a ( quasi - ) inﬁnite bath of membrane ) of surface area . As is discussed in [ 3 ] ( using detailed analytical and numerical calculations ) the force for pulling a tube from such a reservoir converges to a constant for large extensions . If it were the case , then , that dendritic ﬁlopodia were connected to a bath of membrane , we would not expect dendritic ﬁlopodia to have a typical length . On the contrary , in that scenario dendritic ﬁlopodia would grow ad inﬁnitum ( given that the applied force is large enough to overcome an initial barrier ) . We assert that , within the paradigm of a conserved quantity of membrane available to the spine , a ﬁnite force will result in a deﬁnite length of the ﬁlopodia . As can be seen in ﬁgure 2 , the force required for formation of dendritic ﬁlopodia is in the tens of piconewtons . The polymerization of actin is able to exert , on the average , a force of f actin ≈ 3 . 8 pN ( from [ 21 ] , see Supplementary Information ) . We ﬁnd , using the typical values for the length and surface - area ( table 1 , see Supporting Information ) and the aforementioned formula f ≈ 4 π 2 K b L / A , a minimal number of actin ﬁlaments of 5 − 15 . Although we have not been able to ﬁnd publications that mention the number of actin ﬁlaments in dendritic ﬁlopodia , examining EM of the cytoskeletal organization of dendritic ﬁlopodia from [ 19 ] suggests that ﬁlopodia typically have 6 − 10 ﬁlaments . This comparison tentatively veriﬁes the plausibility of our model for ﬁlopodium formation . Our simulations span up to A = 0 . 85 µ m 2 and L ≈ 950 nm . Following [ 6 , 39 ] , these shapes can be regarded as relatively small ﬁlopodia . Now , measuring the width of the corresponding tubular part of the shape , we ﬁnd diameters in the order of 160 − 200 nm . Indeed , [ 12 ] report values for the diameters of ﬁlopodia or thin spines in the range 90 − 210 nm . Thus it is found that the simulations and experimental results have compatible ranges . 3 . 2 The Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Spine Maturation As a consequence of synaptic activity , the spine volume may increase and there is a marked change in the qualitative morphology through formation of a bulbous spine - head [ 5 , 36 ] . We have previously shown that simply adding membrane to dendritic ﬁlopodia results in larger ﬁlopodia , but not formation of a bulbous head . Therefore , an additional process is needed in order to produce mature spines . By which mechanisms does this qualitative change in morphology occur ? In this part of the paper , we will show that the process of spine maturation can , at least in part , be ascribed to the interaction of the spine membrane with an isotropic actin meshwork . As is the case for ﬁlopodia , it is known that the actin cytoskeleton is intimately linked to the size and shape of the spine head [ 14 , 23 ] , and therefore is essential to understanding spine maturation . By modeling the interaction of the cytoskeleton with the spine membrane , we will investigate the mechanical requirements for a volume increase and morphological transition ( that is characteristic of spine maturation ) to occur . We will show ( by making use of the Canham - Helfrich energy ( 1 ) and comparison with experiments ) that branched actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head are plausibly responsible for the transition from dendritic ﬁlopodium to a mushroom - type morphology . Although the models in this paper lack many of the biological details relevant for spine maturation , we ﬁnd that the forces that are required for spine membrane match the forces that are generated by actin polymerization . Then , we show that typical spine - neck widths are accurately predicted by our models . An outline of our model for spine maturation is displayed in ﬁgure 3 . We model the polymerization of actin in the spine - neck as a vertical force and polymerization in the spine - head as a radial force . The discrepancy between these two types of forces stems from the diﬀerence in cytoskeletal organization in spines—the spine - head predominantly contains branched actin whereas oriented or linear actin mainly localizes in the spine - neck [ 14 , 19 ] . This gives rise to an approximately isotropic network of actin in the spine - head , contrary to the actin organization in spine - necks and dendritic ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] . The polymerization of these two manifestations of actin result respectively in a radial force and a directed force . As is the case for our models for dendritic ﬁlopodia , we approximate the total surface - area of the spine as a constant since there is only a ﬁnite pool of membrane available on the dendrite ( for a more 7 Figure 3 : Outline of results for spine maturation . The spine bases have been left out in the renders in this ﬁgure . Panel ( a ) : Cartoon showing qualitative eﬀect of increasing force ( viz . increasing the number of ﬁlaments in the spine - head ) whilst the amount of membrane is kept constant . Increasing the number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head enlarges the spine - head and , at the same time , a thinning neck . Panel ( b ) : Results of our model are combined in a three - dimensional growth - organization matrix , shown here with selected shapes . These shapes show clearly the eﬀects of increasing the number of ﬁlaments in the head N , the total surface - area A and the length of the spine - neck L . Panel ( c ) : The minimum number of actin ﬁlaments required in the cytoskeleton for sustaining the contractile force f head that the spine - head membrane exerts and for counteracting the expansive force f neck of the spine - neck . Band indicates typical values of the total amount of membrane A = 0 . 5 . . . 2 . 0 µ m 2 ( cf . table 1 ) . Dashed lines indicate number of actin ﬁlaments required for counteracting f head + f neck . Empirical data ( black circles ) shows reasonable agreement with our model ( data taken from from [ 8 ] , see SI ) . Panel ( d ) : Ratio of head and neck radii ( left ) and volumes ( right ) for a number of actin ﬁlaments N = 25 , 50 , 100 , 150 , 200 ( lower to upper curves ) . For these plots we used equation ( 2 ) with L neck = 500 nm . Experimental data from [ 33 ] is highlighted in gray . Panel ( e ) : Eﬀects of growth ( membrane addition ) and the number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head on spine morphology . In these models , we kept the total length of the spine - neck ﬁxed . Dotted lines are a visual aid for showing how increasing the number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head results decreases the width of the spine - neck . 8 detailed explanation , see the Methods part of this paper ) . This approximation , combined with the fact that lipid membranes are practically inextensible [ 26 ] , leads to the following assertion : exerting an outward force on the spine - head results in the transportation of membrane from the spine - neck to the spine - head . More simply stated , cytoskeletal growth in the spine - head results in an increase of the size of the spine - head at the expense of a decrease in the neck width . In order to make the above considerations quantitative , we propose a model for the spine membrane that is composed of a cylinder of constant height ( but variable radius ) connected to a sphere . As displayed in ﬁgure 3 , we model N ﬁlaments in the spine - head that each apply an outward radial force f actin = f head / N over a radius R head . The work performed by this force is f head R head . Likewise , the energy required for attaining a neck of length L neck and radius R neck is πK b L neck / R neck ( equation ( 1 ) ) . Balance of forces dictates that the total energy πK b L neck / R neck − f head R head is minimized . 3 In order to insist conservation of membrane , we insert into the balance of forces the equation A ≈ 2 πR neck L neck + A head with A a constant . Taken together , this results in the following implicit equation that we can solve for A head : 8 π 2 √ πK b (cid:18) L neck A − A head (cid:19) 2 − f head / (cid:112) A head = 0 . ( 2 ) Given numerical values of f head , K b , A and L neck , solving equation ( 2 ) for A head returns all other geometrical quantities , e . g . R neck , R head and A neck . We have numerically solved this equation for a range of values for the total surface - area A and number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head N = f head / f actin . The inﬂuences of growth , encoded in the total surface - area of the spine A , and cytoskeletal organization , encoded in the number of actin ﬁlaments N , on spine morphology are combined in ﬁgure 3 ( d ) . Using equation ( 2 ) and solving for the radius of the spine - neck we ﬁnd radii R neck = 60 − 93 nm ( whereby we use estimates for the number of actin ﬁlaments N = 71 and the typical surface - areas A = 0 . 5 − 2 . 00 µ m 2 , cf . table 1 ) . This range agrees quite well with the experimentally observed ranges R neck = 45 − 105 nm by [ 12 ] and R neck = 50 − 100 nm by [ 33 ] . From the similarity of these ranges , we infer that at least a substantial part of the force that is exerted by the actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head is directed towards counteracting the expansive force of the spine - neck . Moreover , given numerical values of the total surface - area of the spine A we can solve for the number of actin ﬁlaments required for sustaining the spine - neck . We have done this for a wide range of surface - areas and reproduced the results in ﬁgure 3 ( b ) . These computations show that a larger spine - head ( with the same total quantity of membrane ) requires more actin ﬁlaments to sustain it . This is in agreement with ﬁndings by [ 8 ] that show that the number of actin ﬁlaments increases substantially with increasing surface - area . In fact , the datapoints published in [ 8 ] match our model for N ( A head ) ( see ﬁgure 3 ( c ) ) . We have further used equation ( 2 ) for computing the ratios or radii R head / R neck and of volumes V head / V neck , shown in ﬁgure 3 ( c ) . We have found that both the numerical values of R head / R neck and the upward trend w . r . t . A head of this metric agree well with data published by [ 33 ] if we use for the number of actin ﬁlaments N ≈ 70 − 150 . Thus , the renders shown in ﬁgure 3 ( d ) appear to be in the physiologically relevant regime . Moreover , this number for the actin ﬁlaments appears to be supported by empirical data that shows N ≈ 50 − 150 ( we estimated this on the basis of data published in [ 8 ] , see Supporting Information ) . 3 . 3 Relationship between Actin - Membrane Anchoring and Septin - Complexes on Spine Morphology We have discussed possible links between the cytoskeleton and spine morphology and how , within our model , pushing the spine membrane at the location of the head eﬀectively pulls the spine membrane 3 We have shown by means of theoretical modeling and numerical simulations that we can neglect the force that is exerted by the contractile force due to the bending energy of the head . This fact is reﬂected in the small number of actin ﬁlaments required to sustain a large , bulbous head , as can be seen in ﬁgure 3 ( b ) . 9 R neck = 45 nm R neck = 105 nm R neck = 105 nm R neck = 45 nm | | neck δ τ τ Figure 4 : Results of simulations that have been performed using the energy functional ( 1 ) ( solid curves ) and theoretical model that treats these shapes as cylinders ( dashed curves ) . The computations have been performed for R neck = 45 . . . 105 nm as indicated in the ﬁgure . Black lines corresponds to R neck = 75 nm . We used K b = 5 × 10 − 19 J for these computations [ 28 ] . Top panel : The line tension τ as a function of the distance L between the line tensions . Inset shows how line tension τ and ‘unduloid amplitude’ δ are deﬁned . Bottom panel : The absolute value of the reduced ‘unduloid amplitude’ , (cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12) ˜ δ (cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12) . Inset panel shows the reduced ‘unduloid amplitude’ where it crosses ˜ δ = 0 . Indicated is ˜ δ neck = 10 % , the approximate amplitude of variations in the width of the spine - neck , corresponding to τ ≈ 6 . 5 − 15 pN . 10 inwards at the location of the spine - neck . Within our paradigm of the conservation of membrane , directly applying a contractile force τ at one or more locations along the spine - neck can achieve the same result . This is possible due to the nature of the spine membrane , which can be regarded as a two - dimensional ﬂuid—that is , contracting the spine - neck eﬀectively channels membrane to the spine - head . Thus , applying a line tension can aid in the transition from an immature to a mature spine with a long , thin neck and bulbous head . Possible candidates for such line tensions are anchoring molecules ( such as the WASP / WAVE network [ 2 , 32 ] ) septin - complexes that form ring - like structures [ 22 ] and spectrin [ 35 ] . Next , we will show that anchoring molecules or ring - like complexes are able to apply suﬃcient contractile force along the spine - neck . A line tension can be included in our models by adding a term τ C to the Canham - Helfrich free energy ( 1 ) , where τ is the line tension and C = 2 πR neck is the circumference of the spine - neck . The line tension can be measured thus τ = − ∂ E / ∂ C , where E is the bending energy of the shape . In ﬁgure 4 it can be seen that the line tensions are typically in the order of piconewtons . As a consequence of one or a number of such line tensions we ﬁnd ‘unduloidal’ spine - necks . Some representative shapes along with the required line tension have been reproduced in ﬁgure 4 . The shapes are characterized by an unduloid amplitude δ which describes the maximum deviation from the base value R neck ( we have chosen to use the relative unduloid amplitude ˜ δ = δ / R neck ) . Although we have not been able to ﬁnd publications that measure the ‘unduloid amplitude’ ˜ δ for spine - necks , we have calculated this is in the order ∼ 10 % or less ( see Supplementary Information for details ) . Using this value of ˜ δ , we ﬁnd that—if line tensions are responsible for the typical spine - morphology—the line tensions need to be placed at distances of L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m , as can be readily veriﬁed by examining ﬁgure 4 . Then , computing the line tension ( using numerical values R neck and K b from table 1 ) corresponding to L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m , we ﬁnd that each of the line tensions experiences a load of τ ≈ 6 . 5 − 15 pN . This , too , can be veriﬁed by examining ﬁgure 4 . We are aware of various candidates for anchoring membrane to the cytoskeleton , such as L - selectin , β 2 integrins and CD45 . The literature reports that these three candidates have rupture forces respec - tively 25 − 45 pN , 60 − 120 pN and 35 − 85 pN [ 29 ] . Even the lowest values of these three ranges is almost double our highest estimate for the required line tension . Therefore , it is safe to conclude that anchoring molecules can withstand the mechanical forces that are required in order to constrain the spine - neck to R neck = 45 − 105 nm . Since spine - necks typically have lengths of 0 . 2 − 2 µ m ( table 1 , see Supporting Information ) , we ﬁnd that the number of line tensions that needs to be placed is 1 − 14 ( whereby we used the aforementioned distance between the line tensions L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m ) . However—as far as we can determine— literature does not mention these concentrations of anchoring molecules across all spine - necks . Al - though ring - like septin - complexes are found consistently along spine - necks [ 7 , 22 , 31 ] , they are only reported to be positioned at the base of the spine and not along the full length of the spine - neck . Our models predict that it is required to place line tensions along the full length of the spine - neck in order to constrain it , and therefore we can refute septin - complexes as being solely responsible for con - straining the long , thin spine - necks . Moreover , the assembly of septins into ring - like structures has an associated time - scale in the order of minutes [ 18 ] . Hence , we ﬁnd that cytoskeletal remodeling—which can performed on the time - scale of fractions of a second [ 21 ] —is much more rapid than positioning these constriction proteins . 4 Conclusions We study the physical mechanisms that determine the morphology of dendritic spines . In particular , we investigate the ability of the actin cytoskeleton to change the size and shape of spines . We ﬁnd that the most striking primary features of spine growth and spine morphology can be straightforwardly understood as a consequence of the trade - oﬀ between the elastic properties of the spine membrane and 11 the forces actively generated by the actin cytoskeleton . Speciﬁcally , we show that the initiation and formation of dendritic ﬁlopodia may be rationalized on the basis of the protrusive forces of the actin cytoskeleton . Using realistic estimates for the number of actin ﬁlaments involved , we ﬁnd that the dimensions of the ﬁlopodia in our models agrees well with the observed dimensions of newly formed protrusions in the developing neuron . We have also studied spine maturation , the process characterized by a morphological transition from a ﬁlopodium or thin spine to the mature mushroom - like spine . Using models based on the coupling between the actin cytoskeleton and the spine membrane , we ﬁnd that the combined dynamics of branched actin and aligned actin inherently results in a mushroom - like morphology . Finally , we have discussed several candidate factors that might aid in the stabilization of the long , thin spine - neck and the bulbous spine - head . Our predictions for various morphological quantities , such as the neck radius R neck and the ratios R head / R neck and V head / V neck , compare well with experimental data [ 12 , 33 ] . Furthermore , the suggested important dual roles of branched and aligned organizations suggest novel experiments analyzing ( possibly , even , altering ) the localization of proteins like Arp2 / 3 and septin to the spine head and neck . Summarizing , our model suggests that actin organization is autonomously capable of controlling the shape changes of dendritic spines , providing the forces and geometry support for both the initial ﬁlopodial stage and the mature mushroom - like shape . 5 Supporting Information 5 . 1 Estimate for the Number of Actin Filaments We counted the number of actin ﬁlaments as 20 on ∼ 20 % of the surface - area resulting in ∼ 100 ﬁlaments for one entire spine - head as published by [ 19 ] . Then , noting that on the average the ﬁlaments are not oriented perpendicular to the membrane – but rather at an angle π / 4 , we ﬁnd the eﬀective number of actin ﬁlaments to be ∼ 100 · cos ( π / 4 ) ≈ 71 . This number falls within the range for the number of polymerizing ﬁlaments N = 50 − 150 we derived from data published in [ 8 ] ( [ 8 ] has published the density of non - stationary actin molecules , which we integrated over the surface area to obtain a measure for the number of polymerizing ﬁlaments ) . 5 . 2 Standard Deviation in Spine - Neck Width We measured the width of the spine - neck of images by [ 33 ] by ﬁtting the intensity of the proﬁle with Gaussian distributions along the axis of the spine - neck . We asserted that the standard deviation of these Gaussians is a measure for the width of the spine - neck . Then , we computed the relative variation in these widths . Using this method , the relative variation in the width of the spine - neck was found to be 13 . 5 % . 5 . 3 Shape Equations Taking the ﬁrst variation of the Canham - Helfrich energy functional ( 1 ) , and insisting that the ﬁrst variation δ E is zero under all possible inﬁnitesimal perturbations results in a diﬀerential equation that describes stationary shapes { r ( s ) , ψ ( s ) } . 4 This diﬀerential equation , that we shall henceforth call the 4 The stationary shapes include shapes corresponding to an energetic minimum , an energetic maximum or a saddle point in the energy functional . A seminal paper by [ 38 ] describes the higher - order variations , from which we can infer the class of stationary point . We will not discuss this technical diﬃculty in this publication , although we have used numerical perturbative methods to determine which shapes correspond to energetic minima . 12 shape equation , is [ 3 , 16 , 20 ] ψ ( 3 ) = − 1 2 ( ψ (cid:48) ) 3 − 2 cos ψ r ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) + 3 sin ψ 2 r ( ψ (cid:48) ) 2 + ¯ σ r sin ψ + 3 ( cos ψ ) 2 − 1 2 r 2 ψ (cid:48) + ¯ σψ (cid:48) − ( cos ψ ) 2 + 1 2 r 3 sin ψ , ( 3 ) where we have dropped the s – dependencies and ¯ σ ≡ σ / K b . Most publications that we have consulted make reference to second - order shape equations [ 16 ] , but – in accordance with [ 3 ] – we ﬁnd the third - order shape equation ( 3 ) to be numerically substantially more stable . The second - order shape equations , e . g . found by taking the ﬁrst integral of ( 3 ) , is used to ﬁnd boundary conditions for ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) . This equation is [ 3 ] ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) cos ψ = − 1 2 ( ψ (cid:48) ) 2 sin ψ − ( cos ψ ) 2 r ψ (cid:48) + ( cos ψ ) 2 + 1 2 r 2 sin ψ + ¯ σ sin ψ − ¯ f r , ( 4 ) where ¯ f ≡ f / K b . Although the point force f does not show up in the shape equation ( 3 ) , it does enter in the determination of the correct boundary conditions through ( 4 ) . We use a shooting - and - matching algorithm ( for more information on this numerical technique , we refer to [ 13 ] ) whereby ψ (cid:48) ( 0 ) , f , σ are used as shooting variables . References [ 1 ] B . Angelov and I . M . Mladenov . On The Geometry of Red Blood Cell . Proceedings of the First International Conference on Geometry , Integrability and Quantization , pages 27 – 46 , 2000 . [ 2 ] G . G . Borisy and T . M . Svitkina . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 12 ( 1 ) : 104 – 112 , feb 2000 . [ 3 ] I . Derenyi , F . Julicher , and J . Prost . Formation and interaction of membrane tubes . Physical review letters , 88 ( 23 ) : 238101 , 2002 . [ 4 ] A . Diz - Munoz , D . A . Fletcher , and O . D . Weiner . Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends in cell biology , 23 ( 2 ) : 47 – 53 , feb 2013 . [ 5 ] F . Engert and T . Bonhoeﬀer . Dendritic spine changes associated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature , 399 ( 6731 ) : 66 – 70 , 1999 . [ 6 ] J . F . Evers , D . Muench , and C . Duch . Developmental relocation of presynaptic terminals along distinct types of dendritic ﬁlopodia . Developmental biology , 297 ( 1 ) : 214 – 27 , sep 2006 . [ 7 ] H . Ewers , T . Tada , J . D . Petersen , B . Racz , M . Sheng , and D . Choquet . A Septin - Dependent Diﬀusion Barrier at Dendritic Spine Necks . PLoS ONE , 9 ( 12 ) : e113916 , 2014 . [ 8 ] N . A . Frost , H . Shroﬀ , H . Kong , E . Betzig , and T . A . Blanpied . Single - molecule discrimination of discrete perisynaptic and distributed sites of actin ﬁlament assembly within dendritic spines . Neuron , 67 ( 1 ) : 86 – 99 , jul 2010 . [ 9 ] N . C . Gauthier , T . A . Masters , and M . P . Sheetz . Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics . Trends in cell biology , 22 ( 10 ) : 527 – 35 , oct 2012 . 13 [ 10 ] K . M . Harris , F . E . Jensen , and B . Tsao . Three - dimensional structure of dendritic spines and synapses in rat hippocampus ( CA1 ) at postnatal day 15 and adult ages : implications for the maturation of synaptic physiology and long - term potentiation . The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 12 ( 7 ) : 2685 – 2705 , 1992 . [ 11 ] K . M . Harris and J . K . Stevens . Dendritic spines of rat cerebellar Purkinje cells : serial electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical characteristics . The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 8 ( 12 ) : 4455 – 4469 , 1988 . [ 12 ] K . M . Harris and J . K . Stevens . Dendritic Spines of CA1 Pyramidal Cells in the Rat Hippocampus : Serial Electron Microscopy with Reference to Their Biophysical Characteristics . Journal of Neuroscience , 9 ( 8 ) : 2982 – 2997 , 1989 . [ 13 ] M . T . Heath . Scientiﬁc Computing : An Introductory Survey . McGraw - Hill , 2002 . [ 14 ] P . Hotulainen and C . C . Hoogenraad . Actin in dendritic spines : Connecting dynamics to function . Journal of Cell Biology , 189 ( 4 ) : 619 – 629 , may 2010 . [ 15 ] F . Julicher and R . Lipowsky . Shape transformations of vesicles with intramembrane domains . Physical Review E , 53 ( 3 ) : 2670 – 2683 , 1996 . [ 16 ] F . Julicher and U . Seifert . Shape equations for axisymmetric vesicles : A clariﬁcation . Physical Review E , 49 ( 5 ) : 4728 – 4731 , 1994 . [ 17 ] H . Kasai , M . Fukuda , S . Watanabe , A . Hayashi - Takagi , and J . Noguchi . Structural dynamics of dendritic spines in memory and cognition . Trends in Neurosciences , 33 ( 3 ) : 121 – 129 , 2010 . [ 18 ] M . Kinoshita , C . M . Field , M . L . Coughlin , A . F . Straight , and T . J . Mitchison . Self - and Actin - Templated Assembly of Mammalian Septins . Developmental Cell , 3 ( 6 ) : 791 – 802 , dec 2002 . [ 19 ] F . Korobova and T . Svitkina . Molecular architecture of synaptic actin cytoskeleton in hippocampal neurons reveals a mechanism of dendritic spine morphogenesis . Molecular biology of the cell , 21 ( 1 ) : 165 – 176 , 2010 . [ 20 ] J . Mathews . Axisymetrical equilibrium shapes of two - phase biological membranes . PhD thesis , 2012 . [ 21 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophysical journal , 84 ( 3 ) : 1591 – 1605 , 2003 . [ 22 ] S . Mostowy and P . Cossart . Septins : the fourth component of the cytoskeleton . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 13 , 2012 . [ 23 ] K . - I . Okamoto , T . Nagai , A . Miyawaki , and Y . Hayashi . Rapid and persistent modulation of actin dynamics regulates postsynaptic reorganization underlying bidirectional plasticity . Nature Neuroscience , 7 ( 10 ) : 1104 – 1112 , sep 2004 . [ 24 ] M . Park , J . M . Salgado , L . Ostroﬀ , T . D . Helton , C . G . Robinson , K . M . Harris , and M . D . Ehlers . Plasticity - Induced Growth of Dendritic Spines by Exocytic Traﬃcking from Recycling Endosomes . Neuron , 52 ( 5 ) : 817 – 830 , 2006 . [ 25 ] D . Raucher and M . P . Sheetz . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buﬀering membrane tension . Biophysical journal , 77 ( 4 ) : 1992 – 2002 , oct 1999 . [ 26 ] W . Rawicz , K . C . Olbrich , T . McIntosh , D . Needham , and E . Evans . Eﬀect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophysical journal , 79 ( 1 ) : 328 – 339 , 2000 . 14 [ 27 ] U . Seifert . Conﬁgurations of ﬂuid membranes and vesicles . Advances in Physics , 46 ( 1 ) : 13 – 137 , 1997 . [ 28 ] S . Semrau , T . Idema , L . Holtzer , T . Schmidt , and C . Storm . Accurate Determination of Elastic Parameters for Multicomponent Membranes . Physical Review Letters , 100 ( 8 ) : 088101 , feb 2008 . [ 29 ] J . Y . Shao and R . M . Hochmuth . Mechanical anchoring strength of L - selectin , beta2 integrins , and CD45 to neutrophil cytoskeleton and membrane . Biophysical journal , 77 ( 1 ) : 587 – 596 , 1999 . [ 30 ] M . Stone and P . Goldbart . Mathematics For Physics . Cambridge University Press , 2012 . [ 31 ] T . Tada , A . Simonetta , M . Batterton , M . Kinoshita , D . Edbauer , and M . Sheng . Role of Septin Cytoskeleton in Spine Morphogenesis and Dendrite Development in Neurons . Current Biology , 17 ( 20 ) : 1752 – 1758 , 2007 . [ 32 ] T . Takenawa and S . Suetsugu . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 8 ( 1 ) : 37 – 48 , jan 2007 . [ 33 ] J . Tonnesen , G . Katona , B . Rózsa , and U . V . Nägerl . Spine neck plasticity regulates compart - mentalization of synapses . Nature neuroscience , 17 ( 5 ) : 678 – 85 , 2014 . [ 34 ] Z . Wang , J . G . Edwards , N . Riley , D . W . Provance , R . Karcher , X . D . Li , I . G . Davison , M . Ikebe , J . a . Mercer , J . a . Kauer , and M . D . Ehlers . Myosin Vb Mobilizes Recycling Endosomes and AMPA Receptors for Postsynaptic Plasticity . Cell , 135 ( 3 ) : 535 – 548 , 2008 . [ 35 ] K . Xu , G . Zhong , and X . Zhuang . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 339 ( 6118 ) : 452 – 6 , jan 2013 . [ 36 ] G . Yang , F . Pan , and W . - B . Gan . Stably maintained dendritic spines are associated with lifelong memories . Nature , 462 ( 7275 ) : 920 – 924 , 2009 . [ 37 ] N . Yasumatsu , M . Matsuzaki , T . Miyazaki , J . Noguchi , and H . Kasai . Principles of long - term dynamics of dendritic spines . The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 28 ( 50 ) : 13592 – 13608 , dec 2008 . [ 38 ] O . Y . Zhong - Can and W . Helfrich . Bending energy of vesicle membranes : General expressions for the ﬁrst , second , and third variation of the shape energy and applications to spheres and cylinders . Physical Review A , 39 ( 10 ) : 5280 – 5288 , may 1989 . [ 39 ] N . E . Ziv and S . J . Smith . Evidence for a Role of Dendritic Filopodia in Synaptogenesis and Spine Formation . Neuron , 17 ( 1 ) : 91 – 102 , jul 1996 . 15