1 ADF and cofilin - 1 collaborate to promote cortical actin flow and the leader bleb - based migration of confined cells Maria F . Ullo and Jeremy S . Logue * Department of Regenerative and Cancer Cell Biology , Albany Medical College , 47 New Scotland Ave , Albany , NY 12208 , USA * Corresponding author loguej @ mail . amc . edu Running head : ADF and cofilin - 1 collaborate to promote cortical actin flow 2 Abstract Melanoma cells have been shown to undergo fast amoeboid ( leader bleb - based ) migration , requiring a single large bleb for migration . In leader blebs , is a rapid flow of cortical actin that drives the cell forward . Using RNAi , we find that co - depleting cofilin - 1 and ADF led to a large increase in cortical actin , suggesting that both proteins regulate cortical actin . Furthermore , severing factors can promote contractility through the regulation of actin architecture . However , RNAi of cofilin - 1 but not ADF led to a significant decrease in cell stiffness . We found cofilin - 1 to be enriched at leader bleb necks , whereas RNAi of cofilin - 1 and ADF reduced bleb sizes and the frequency of motile cells . Strikingly , cells without cofilin - 1 and ADF had blebs with abnormally long necks . Many of these blebs failed to retract and displayed slow actin turnover . Collectively , our data identifies cofilin - 1 and ADF as actin remodeling factors required for fast amoeboid migration . Keywords : cancer , metastasis , cell migration , amoeboid , cytoskeleton , actin , ADF , cofilin - 1 3 Introduction Cell migration requires tight spatiotemporal control of the Filamentous - actin ( F - actin ) cytoskeleton . For mesenchymal migration , actin assembly / disassembly and myosin contraction must occur within specific regions of the cell ( 1 ) . Relative to other , recently described modes of migration , the mechanisms by which mesenchymal cells coordinate these processes are reasonably well understood . Whereas , in amoeboid cells , which migrate using intracellular driven protrusions of the Plasma Membrane ( PM ) or blebs , the mechanisms conferring spatiotemporal control of the F - actin cytoskeleton are not well known . Within tissues , cells encounter a variety of physicochemical environments . We and others discovered that in response to tissue confinement , cancer cells frequently undergo a phenotypic transition to what was termed , fast amoeboid migration ( 2 - 5 ) . A hallmark of amoeboid migration is the presence of blebs , which form as a result of PM - cortical actin separation ( 6 ) . Typically , blebs are rapidly retracted following the reassembly of cortical actin on bleb membranes and the recruitment of myosin ( 6 ) . However , during fast amoeboid migration , cells form a very large and stable bleb . Within these blebs , is a cortical actin network that flows from the bleb tip to the neck , which separates leader blebs from the cell body ( 2 - 5 ) . Together with non - specific friction , flowing cortical actin provides the motive force for cell movement ( 4 ) . Accordingly , we simultaneously termed this mode of migration , Leader Bleb - Based Migration ( LBBM ) ( 2 ) . Because migration plasticity is thought to be a major contributor of metastasis , our aim here is to identify the essential factors required for the rapid cortical actin flow in leader blebs . Previous studies have demonstrated that myosin is enriched at the neck of leader blebs . Indeed , the myosin at this location has been shown to be required for rapid cortical actin flow ( 3 - 5 ) . However , what drives the disassembly of F - actin at the neck to replenish the pool of G - actin at the leader bleb tip is unknown . Thus , we hypothesize that actin disassembly factors within leader blebs play a pivotal role in this process . Similarly , in mesenchymal cells , retrograde actin flow is driven by both myosin contraction and actin disassembly , the latter of which is accelerated by the ADF / cofilin family of severing factors ( 7 ) . Severing depends on ADF / cofilin inducing a structural change within the actin filament , an activity known to be repressed by LIM Kinase ( LIMK ) phosphorylation on Ser 3 ( 8 ) . However , the consequence of actin severing is variable , depending on the availability of barbed end capping proteins . At a sufficiently high level , new barbed ends are capped , promoting actin disassembly from new pointed ends ( 9 ) . Conversely , if left uncapped , increased polymerization from new barbed ends may occur ( 9 ) . Additionally , by competing for F - actin binding ( e . g . , Arp2 / 3 ) , ADF / cofilin can regulate actin architecture ( 10 ) . The effects of ADF / cofilin on cortical actin are even less certain , as the focus of many studies has been on the actin within lamellipodia . Therefore , we set out to determine the role of ADF / cofilin in regulating the cortical actin cytoskeleton in fast amoeboid cells . 4 By combining an in vitro assay for the precise confinement of cells with quantitative imaging approaches , we report that ADF and cofilin - 1 , together , are required for the rapid disassembly of incoming cortical actin at leader bleb necks . Under conditions of confinement , we find that melanoma and lung adenocarcinoma cells depleted of both proteins display dramatic defects in bleb morphology and dynamics . Consequently , cells without ADF and cofilin - 1 cannot undergo LBBM . Thus , we reveal unanticipated roles for ADF and cofilin - 1 in driving confined ( leader bleb - based ) migration . Results ADF and cofilin - 1 are required for leader bleb - based migration Using our previously described approach for cell confinement , which involves placing cells under a slab of PDMS held at a defined height ( ~ 3 µm ) above cover glass , cancer cells will switch to LBBM ( Fig . 1A & Movie S1 ) ( 11 ) . Moreover , within leader blebs , we find a rapid flow of cortical actin , which together with non - specific friction , provides the motive force for cell movement ( Fig . 1B & Movie S2 ) ( 5 ) . As indicated by an enrichment in EGFP tagged Regulatory Light Chain ( EGFP - RLC ) , we observe a concentration of myosin at the leader bleb neck that separates the leader bleb from the cell body ( Fig . 1C & Movie S2 ) ( 3 - 5 ) . In concert with myosin , we wondered if the cortical actin flow in leader blebs requires the action of specific actin disassembly factors . In addition to being frequently up - regulated in cancer , the ADF / cofilin family of actin severing factors are known to be essential for actin turnover in mesenchymal cells ( 7 , 12 ) . Therefore , we set out to determine if ADF and / or cofilin - 1 are important for LBBM . Using melanoma A375 cells , a widely used cell line for the study of amoeboid migration , we depleted cells of ADF and cofilin - 1 alone and together by RNAi ( Fig . 1D & S1A ) . By manually tracking the movement of cells over time , we found that cells depleted of cofilin - 1 were significantly less motile ( Fig . 1E - H ) . Additionally , the adhesive transmigration of cells through small pores was hindered after depleting cofilin - 1 ( Fig . S1B ) . Depleting cells of ADF led to a slight reduction in the number of highly motile cells ( Fig . 1E - H ) . Strikingly , depleting cells of both ADF and cofilin - 1 appeared to have an additive effect on reducing LBBM , whereas the adhesive transmigration of cells through small pores did not display this additive behavior and was not affected by ADF depletion ( Fig . 1E - H & S1B ) . These results suggest that these proteins play non - overlapping roles during LBBM ( Fig . 1E - H ) . In agreement with this concept , transfection of EGFP - cofilin - 1 into cells depleted of both proteins was insufficient to restore LBBM ( Fig . 1E - H & S1B ) . Together , ADF and cofilin - 1 are required to retract blebs Subsequently , we wanted to know what is responsible for the decrease in LBBM upon depleting ADF and / or cofilin - 1 . Initially , we analyzed the area of the largest bleb ( i . e . , leader bleb ) , relative to the cell body , in cells depleted of cofilin - 1 . This analysis revealed that depleting cells 5 of cofilin - 1 reduced the area of the largest bleb to ~ 30 % of control ( non - targeting ; Fig . 2A - B & Movies S3 - 5 ) . The area of all blebs was similarly reduced ( Fig . 2C ) . Strikingly , in cells depleted of both ADF and cofilin - 1 , ~ 30 % of cells displayed blebs with elongated necks ( Fig . 2A , D & Movie S6 ) . Detailed analyses of these cells revealed that ~ 60 % display blebs that never retract into the cell body ( Fig . 2E ) . Moreover , we found this effect to not be specific to melanoma A375 cells , as depleting lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells of both ADF and cofilin - 1 similarly resulted in the elongation of bleb necks ( Fig . 2F - G ) . In melanoma A375 cells , depleting both ADF and cofilin - 1 had an additive effect on reducing the rate of bleb retraction , which points to these proteins having non - overlapping functions specifically at bleb necks ( Fig . 2H ) . In support of this role , we determined the location of EGFP - cofilin - 1 in confined cells . Our initial efforts were unsuccessful because of a high degree of soluble ( i . e . , unbound to F - actin ) protein , but in cells depleted of endogenous ADF and cofilin - 1 we could detect an enrichment of EGFP - cofilin - 1 at leader bleb necks ( Fig . 2I ; arrow ) . ADF and cofilin - 1 rapidly disassemble cortical actin Thus far , our results suggest that ADF and cofilin - 1 are important for the rapid turnover of cortical actin at bleb necks . In agreement with this concept , a large concentration of F - actin is found at the necks of blebs in cells depleted of ADF and cofilin - 1 ( Fig . 3A ) . In order to more directly test the role of ADF and cofilin - 1 in regulating cortical actin , we turned to freshly trypsinized ( spherical ) cells . In spherical cells , actin is predominantly cortical and endogenous cofilin - 1 is diffuse throughout the cytoplasm with some enrichment at the cell periphery ( Fig . 3B ) . By combining the specificity of phalloidin for F - actin with flow cytometry , we then determined how the level of cortical actin is affected by ADF and / or cofilin - 1 depletion . In cells depleted of cofilin - 1 , F - actin levels were increased by ~ 10 % , whereas depletion of ADF did not lead to a significant change in the level of F - actin ( Fig . 3C ) . Interestingly , depleting ADF with cofilin - 1 had the largest effect , increasing F - actin levels by ~ 30 % ( Fig . 3C ) . Serine 3 of cofilin - 1 is phosphorylated by LIM Kinase ( LIMK ) , inhibiting its severing activity ( 8 ) . In cells depleted of endogenous ADF and cofilin - 1 , transfection of EGFP - cofilin - 1 reduced the level of F - actin to levels similar to control ( non - target ; Fig . 3D ) . Similarly , F - actin was restored to near control levels by transfection of EGFP - cofilin - 1 ( S3A ; constitutively active ) , whereas transfection of EGFP - cofilin - 1 ( S3E ; constitutively inactive ) led to an increased level of F - actin ( Fig . 3D ) . Additionally , in comparison to EGFP alone , increasing levels of EGFP - cofilin - 1 correlated with reductions in F - actin ( Fig . 3E ) . Thus , cortical actin levels are regulated by ADF and cofilin - 1 severing . Many studies have shown that cofilin - 1 severing can result in distinct outcomes . In lamellipodia , cofilin - 1 severing promotes actin polymerization at new barbed ends , whereas in the lamella , actin is de - polymerized at new pointed ends ( 7 ) . The prevalence of each outcome has been proposed to depend on the concentration of capping proteins ( 9 ) . Therefore , we determined the relative level of barbed ends within the cortical actin network of freshly trypsinized ( spherical ) cells . The treatment of cells with cytochalasin B ( which blocks G - actin 6 from binding the barbed end ) confirmed the specificity of the approach ( Fig . S2A ) . In cells depleted of cofilin - 1 , we observed a more than ~ 50 % increase the level of cortical barbed ends , whereas depleting ADF marginally increased the level of cortical barbed ends ( Fig . 3G ) . Depleting cells of both proteins appeared to have an additive effect , increasing the level of cortical barbed ends by ~ 100 % ( Fig . 3G ) . However , in cells depleted of ADF and cofilin - 1 , transfection of EGFP - cofilin - 1 was sufficient to restore cortical barbed ends to a level similar to control ( Fig . 3H ) . Collectively , these results suggest that ADF and cofilin - 1 regulate cortical actin levels by promoting the de - polymerization of actin at newly formed pointed ends . Rapid cortical actin flow requires ADF and cofilin - 1 severing at leader bleb necks Lasting changes in the F / G - actin ratio , such as occurs during RNAi of ADF and / or cofilin - 1 , can have a range of effects on cellular physiology . Therefore , using a previously described SuperNova - cofilin - 1 construct , we performed Chromophore Assisted Light Inactivation ( CALI ) for establishing the direct effects of cofilin - 1 depletion ( 13 , 14 ) . In cells depleted of ADF and cofilin - 1 , SuperNova - cofilin - 1 is predominantly observed at leader bleb necks ( Fig . 4A ) . After 1 min of intense red light irradiation , we found that ~ 50 % of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 is destroyed , as indicated by a reduction in red fluorescence ( Fig . 4A ) . Using LifeAct - mEmerald for monitoring actin dynamics , we observed an accumulation of actin and the elongation of leader bleb necks within minutes of inactivating cofilin - 1 ( Fig . 4B & Movie S7 ) . Moreover , after inactivating SuperNova - cofilin - 1 , cortical actin flow rates in leader blebs were reduced by ~ 50 % , whereas irradiation of SuperNova alone did not change actin flow rates ( Fig . 4C - D & S3A ) . Thus , as demonstrated by CALI , cofilin - 1 directly regulates the cortical actin in leader blebs . We then determined rates of actin turnover at leader bleb necks . For this , we used a version of LifeAct tagged with the photoactivable ( green / red ) fluorescent protein , mEos , for performing Fluorescence Loss After Photoactivation ( FLAP ) assays . Using a 405 nm laser , a pool of mEos - LifeAct was photoactivated at leader bleb necks . Subsequently , fluorescence decay at leader bleb necks was measured and used for determining rates of actin turnover ( Fig 4E ) . To demonstrate proof of concept , curves were fit with a single phase decay , yielding an R - squared value of 0 . 8348 ( Fig . 4F ) . In contrast , a rapid decline in red fluorescence was not observed in paraformaldehyde treated cells ( Fig . S3B ) . In control ( non - target ) cells , we found the actin at leader bleb necks to be rapidly turned over ( t 1 / 2 ; Fig . 4G ) . While the rate of actin turnover in cells depleted of cofilin - 1 or ADF alone was similar to control ( non - target ) , depleting both ADF and cofilin - 1 led to a significant decrease in the actin turnover rate ( t 1 / 2 ; Fig . 4G ) . These data suggest that ADF and cofilin - 1 , together , are critical for the rapid turnover of cortical actin at leader bleb necks . Cofilin - 1 supports both actin turnover and myosin contractility at leader bleb necks Because the cortical actin flow in leader blebs is driven by myosin , we wondered if ADF and / or cofilin - 1 are important for cortical contractility . To address this possibility , we 7 determined the compressibility of cells using a previously described gel sandwich approach ( 3 ) . Briefly , freshly trypsinized ( spherical ) cells are placed between two polyacrylamide gels of known stiffness ( 1 kPa ) . Subsequently , the ratio of the cell height ( h ) to the diameter ( d ) is used to determine compressibility ( Fig . 5A ) . After depleting cofilin - 1 , we found cells to be significantly more compressible , whereas depleting ADF had no effect ( Fig . 5A ) . Moreover , in cofilin - 1 depleted cells , the depletion of ADF did not have any additional effect on cell compressibility ( Fig . 5A ) . Therefore , cofilin - 1 may be particularly important for contractility . In support of this idea , cofilin - 1 has been shown to modulate contractility through a variety of mechanisms , which involve changes in both actin turnover and network architecture ( 10 , 15 , 16 ) . As determined by immunofluorescence imaging of phosphorylated Regulatory Light Chain ( pRLC ) , we could confirm that signaling to myosin was not significantly affected by depleting ADF and / or cofilin - 1 ( Fig . 5B - C ) . In confined cells , depleting ADF and cofilin - 1 leads to the elongation of leader bleb necks , which are decorated with myosin ( RLC - EGFP ; Fig . 5D ) . We then used CALI to determine if the accumulation of myosin at leader blebs necks is directly caused by the removal of these proteins . Indeed , within minutes of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 inactivation , we observed myosin accumulating at leader bleb necks ( RLC - EGFP ; Fig . 5E & Movie S8 ) . Additionally , the flow of myosin towards leader bleb necks was significantly impeded after cofilin - 1 inactivation , as determined by tracking individual myosin minifilaments ( Fig . 5F ) . While ADF may be particularly important for actin turnover , these results point to cofilin - 1 as having important roles in both actin turnover and myosin contractility at leader bleb necks . Discussion Here , we identify ADF and cofilin - 1 as key mediators of the rapid ( cortical ) actin flow in leader blebs . This is significant as the rapid flow of cortical actin in leader blebs is essential for confined migration ( 3 - 5 ) . We report that melanoma cells depleted of cofilin - 1 poorly undergo LBBM , whereas removing ADF did not have a significant effect . Because ADF and cofilin - 1 are thought to have redundant or overlapping roles , we were surprised to then find that depleting cofilin - 1 together with ADF led to a near complete inhibition of LBBM . Therefore , we set out to determine the basis for this effect in cancer cells . Initially , we used high spatial and temporal resolution imaging for close inspection of RNAi cells . Cells lacking cofilin - 1 alone had much smaller blebs . This result is in line with previous work showing that cofilin - 1 supports myosin contractility through optimizing actin filament lengths and de - branching ( 10 , 15 , 16 ) . Without both cofilin - 1 and ADF , many cells had blebs with elongated necks that would not retract . A similar bleb defect has also been reported in HeLa cells ( 17 ) . This led us to wonder if ADF and / or cofilin - 1 may be important for actin turnover at bleb necks . In agreement with this concept , in cells lacking endogenous cofilin - 1 and ADF , EGFP - cofilin - 1 was enriched at bleb necks . 8 In confined cells , we observed a dramatic accumulation of actin at bleb necks . In order to better understand how ADF and cofilin - 1 regulate the overall level of cortical actin , we utilized spherical cells which predominantly have cortical actin . Using flow cytometry , we found that depleting cells of cofilin - 1 could significantly increase the overall level of actin . Although ADF on its own had no effect , depleting cofilin - 1 with ADF increased the overall level of actin even further , which might suggest that ADF augments the severing activity of cofilin - 1 . Similarly , the level of cortical barbed ends was significantly increased in the absence of cofilin - 1 , whereas removing ADF marginally increased the level of cortical barbed ends . Depleting both cofilin - 1 and ADF appeared to have an additive effect , leading to the largest increase in the level of uncapped ( polymerization competent ) barbed ends . This result suggests that cofilin - 1 severing , in collaboration with ADF , leads to the rapid disassembly of cortical actin and not polymerization at new barbed ends . Because changes in the cellular F / G - actin ratio can trigger specific transcriptional programs , such as through the activation of the transcription factor , MRTF - A , we wanted to determine if the effects we observed on LBBM are a direct result of down regulating actin severing ( 18 ) . For this , we utilized CALI for the rapid inactivation of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 . In cells depleted of ADF and cofilin - 1 , SuperNova - coflin - 1 was sufficient to restore normal bleb morphology and dynamics . However , within minutes of cofilin - 1 inactivation , actin began to accumulate at elongated bleb necks . By kymograph analysis , we also observed a significant decrease in the cortical actin flow rate . Using a photoactivatable LifeAct construct , we then directly measured the rate of actin turnover ( i . e . , fluorescence decay ) at bleb necks . While depleting ADF or cofilin - 1 alone did not have a significant effect on actin turnover rates , depleting both proteins led to a large increase in the rate of actin turnover at bleb necks . Thus , in cells lacking ADF and cofilin - 1 , defects in bleb morphology and dynamics correlate with a reduction in actin turnover at the neck . Cofilin - 1 has been previously implicated in regulating actomyosin contractility . Therefore , using spherical cells , we determined the overall effect of ADF and cofilin - 1 on cortical contractility . As indicated by increased compressibility , cells were found to be less stiff after depleting cofilin - 1 . In contrast , removing ADF had little effect on cell stiffness . Moreover , depleting both ADF and cofilin - 1 was similar to removing cofilin - 1 alone . Therefore , cofilin - 1 may be particularly important to support actomyosin contractility . In line with this notion , cofilin - 1 has been shown to support myosin contractility through optimizing actin filament lengths and de - branching ( 10 , 15 , 16 ) . As indicated by the lack of any change in pRLC levels or localization , removing these proteins does not appear to effect signaling to myosin . The role of cofilin - 1 in supporting myosin contractility is further supported by CALI . More specifically , we demonstrate that inactivating cofilin - 1 decreases the rate at which myosin minifilaments flow towards the bleb neck . Thus , our data are consistent with a model whereby ADF and cofilin - 1 play key roles during LBBM . More specifically , we assert that ADF and cofilin - 1 , together , optimize actin 9 disassembly and myosin contractility at bleb necks ( Fig . 6 , top ) . Whereas , in the absence of these proteins , incoming cortical actin fails to disassemble and accumulates with myosin at the elongated necks of persistent blebs ( Fig . 6 , below ) . Collectively , this study further points to rapid ( cortical ) actin flows as being essential for confined ( leader bleb - based ) migration . This is significant as many cancer cells have been shown to undergo LBBM ( 2 , 3 ) . This work also reveals an unanticipated role for ADF . In melanoma cells , ADF appears to augment the activity of cofilin - 1 at bleb necks . Largely , ADF and cofilin - 1 are thought to have redundant or overlapping roles . However , ADF has been shown to have significant monomer sequestering activity ( 19 ) . We speculate that , in the absence of both proteins , dampened actin severing coupled with uncontrolled filament elongation contributes to the severe phenotypes we observe . Thus , the dissemination of melanoma tumors is likely to be blocked by the simultaneous inhibition of ADF and cofilin - 1 . Supplemental Information Supplemental information includes 3 figures and 8 movies and can be found with this article online . Methods Cell culture . A375 - M2 ( CRL - 3223 ) and A549 ( CCL - 185 ) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ; Manassas , VA ) . Cells were cultured in high - glucose DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS ( cat no . 12106C ; Sigma Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , GlutaMAX ( Thermo Fisher , Carlsbad , CA ) , antibiotic - antimycotic ( Thermo Fisher ) , and 20 mM HEPES at pH 7 . 4 for up to 30 passages . Confinement . This protocol has been described in detail elsewhere ( 11 ) . Briefly , PDMS ( cat no . 24236 - 10 ; Dow Corning 184 SYLGARD ) was purchased from Krayden ( Westminster , CO ) . 2 mL was cured overnight at 37 °C in each well of a 6 - well glass bottom plate ( cat no . P06 - 1 . 5H - N ; Cellvis , Mountain View , CA ) . Using a biopsy punch ( cat no . 504535 ; World Precision Instruments , Sarasota , FL ) , an 8 mm hole was cut and 3 mL of serum free media containing 1 % BSA was added to each well and incubated overnight at 37 °C . After removing the serum free media containing 1 % BSA , 300 µL of complete media containing trypsinized cells ( 250 , 000 to 1 million ) and 2 µL of 3 . 11 µm beads ( cat no . PS05002 ; Bangs Laboratories , Fishers , IN ) were then pipetted into the round opening . The vacuum created by briefly lifting one side of the hole with a 1 mL pipette tip was used to move cells and beads underneath the PDMS . Finally , 3 mL of complete media was added to each well and cells were recovered for ~ 60 min before imaging . Plasmids . SuperNova - cofilin - 1 was a gift from Dr . Kazuyo Sakai ( Osaka University , Osaka , Japan ) . EGFP - cofilin - 1 WT ( no . 50859 ; a gift from Dr . James Bamburg ) , S3A ( no . 50854 ; a gift from Dr . James Bamburg ) , S3E ( no . 50855 ; a gift from Dr . James Bamburg ) , and mEos3 . 2 - 10 LifeAct ( no . 54696 ; a gift from Michael Davidson ) were obtained from Addgene ( Watertown , MA ) . 1 µg of plasmid was used to transfect 400 , 000 cells in each well of a 6 - well plate using Lipofectamine 2000 ( 5 µL ; Thermo Fisher ) in OptiMEM ( 400 µL ; Thermo Fisher ) . After 20 min at room temperature , plasmid in Lipofectamine 2000 / OptiMEM was then incubated with cells in complete media ( 2 mL ) overnight . Pharmacological treatments . Latrunculin - A ( cat no . 3973 ) and cytochalasin B ( cat no . 5474 ) were purchased from Tocris Bioscience ( Bristol , UK ) . DMSO ( Sigma Aldrich ) was used to make 5 mM and 2 mM stock solutions of Latrunculin - A and cytochalasin B , respectively . To disassemble actin , cells resuspended in flow buffer were treated with 5 µM Latrunculin A for 10 min at room temperature before flow cytometry . For barbed end assays , cytochalasin B was pre - diluted in complete media before it was incubated with cells for 1 hr at 37 °C . LNAs . Non - targeting ( cat no . 4390844 ) , cofilin - 1 ( cat no . 4392420 ; s2936 ) , and ADF ( cat no . 4392422 ; s21737 ) Locked Nucleic Acids ( LNAs ) were purchased from Thermo Fisher . All LNA transfections were performed using RNAiMAX ( 5 µL ; Thermo Fisher ) and OptiMEM ( 400 µL ; Thermo Fisher ) . 100 , 000 cells were trypsinized and seeded in 6 - well plates in complete media . After cells adhered ( ~ 1 hr ) , LNAs in RNAiMAX / OptiMEM were added to cells in complete media ( 2 mL ) at a final concentration of 50 nM . Cells were incubated with LNAs for two days . Western blotting . Whole - cell lysates were prepared by scraping cells into ice cold RIPA buffer ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 % SDS , 0 . 5 % deoxycholate , and 1 % Triton X - 100 ) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( Roche , Switzerland ) . Before loading onto 4 – 12 % NuPAGE Bis - Tris gradient gels ( Thermo Fisher ) , DNA was sheared by sonication and samples were boiled for 10 min in loading buffer . Following SDS - PAGE , proteins in gels were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and subsequently immobilized by air drying overnight . After blocking in Tris - Buffered Saline containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( TBS - T ) and 1 % BSA , primary antibodies against ADF ( cat no . MA5 - 25485 ; Thermo Fisher and cat no . D8818 ; Sigma Aldrich ) , and cofilin - 1 ( cat no . MA5 - 17275 ; Thermo Fisher ) were incubated with membranes overnight at 4 °C . Bands were then resolved with IRDye conjugated secondary antibodies on an Odyssey scanner from LI - COR Biosciences , Lincoln , NE . GAPDH ( cat no . 97166 ; Cell Signaling Technology , Danvers , MA ) was used to confirm equal loading . Transmigration . Transmigration assays were performed using polycarbonate filters with 8 or 12 µm pores ( Corning ; Corning , NY ) . Prior to the assays , cells were serum starved for 24 hr and polycarbonate filters were fibronectin ( 10 µg / mL ; Millipore , Burlington , MA ) coated for 1 hr followed by air drying . 100 , 000 cells in serum free media were seeded in the top chamber while the bottom chamber contained media with 20 % FBS to attract cells . After 24 hr , cells from the bottom of the filter were trypsinized and counted using an automated cell counter ( TC20 ; Bio - 11 Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Transmigration was then calculated as the ratio of cells on the bottom of the filter vs . the total . Flow cytometry . Roughly 1 x 10 6 trypsinized cells in flow buffer ( HBS with 1 % BSA ) were fixed using 4 % paraformaldehyde ( cat no . 15710 ; Electron Microscopy Sciences , Hatfield , PA ) for 20 min at room temperature . After washing , cell pellets were resuspended in flow buffer and incubated with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated phalloidin ( cat no . A22287 ; Thermo Fisher ) , and DAPI ( Sigma Aldrich ) for 30 min at room temperature . Data were acquired on a FACSCalibur ( BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) flow cytometer . Flow cytometric analysis was performed using FlowJo ( Ashland , OR ) software . Barbed end assay . The protocol for the barbed end assay was used with minor modifications ( 20 , 21 ) . Prior to barbed end assays , cells were trypsinized and plated on poly - L - lysine coated 6 - well glass - bottom plates ( Cellvis ) . To allow for a minimal level of cell attachment , cells were incubated for 10 min in a tissue culture incubator . Cells were then gently permeabilized for 1 min with saponin buffer ( 138 mM KCl , 4 mM MgCl 2 , 3 mM EGTA , 0 . 1 % saponin , 1 mM ATP , 3 µM phalloidin , and 1 % BSA ) followed by one wash with saponin - free buffer . Permeabilized cells were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 568 - conjugated G - actin from rabbit muscle ( cat no . A12374 ; Thermo Fisher ) for 3 min in a tissue culture incubator and washed with saponin - free buffer . Treated cells were then fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in Hepes - buffered saline ( HBS ) , washed with HBS alone , and immediately imaged . Immunofluorescence . After washing with Hepes - buffered saline ( HBS ) , cells in 6 - well glass - bottom plates ( Cellvis ) were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) in HBS for 20 min at room temperature . Blocking , permeabilization , antibody incubation , and washing were done in HBS with 1 % BSA , 1 % fish gelatin , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 5 mM EDTA . A 1 : 250 dilution of ADF ( cat no . MA5 - 25485 ; Thermo Fisher ) , cofilin - 1 ( cat no . MA5 - 17275 ; Thermo Fisher ) , pRLC ( cat no . PA5 - 17727 or MA5 - 15163 ; Thermo Fisher ) , or RLC ( cat no . PA5 - 17624 ; Thermo Fisher ) antibody was incubated with cells overnight at 4 °C . After extensive washing , a 1 : 400 dilution of Alexa Fluor 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( cat no . A - 21206 ; Thermo Fisher ) was then incubated with cells for 2 hr at room temperature . Cells were then incubated with a 1 : 250 dilution of Alexa Fluor 568 - conjugated phalloidin ( cat no . A12380 ; Thermo Fisher ) and a 1 : 1000 dilution of DAPI ( cat no . D1306 ; Thermo Fisher ) . Cells were again extensively washed and then imaged in HBS . Cell stiffness assay . The protocol for the gel sandwich assay was used with minor modifications ( 3 ) . 6 - well glass bottom plates ( Cellvis ) and 18 mm coverslips were activated using 3 - aminopropyltrimethoxysilane ( Sigma Aldrich ) for 5 min and then for 30 min with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) in PBS . 1 kPa polyacrylamide gels were made using 2 µL of blue fluorescent beads ( 200 nm ; Thermo Fisher ) , 18 . 8 µL of 40 % acrylamide 12 solution ( cat no . 161 - 0140 ; Bio - Rad ) , and 12 . 5 µL of bis - acrylamide ( cat no . 161 - 0142 ; Bio - Rad ) in 250 µL of PBS . Finally , 2 . 5 µL of Ammonium Persulfate ( APS ; 10 % in water ) and 0 . 5 µL of Tetramethylethylenediamine ( TMED ) was added before spreading 9 µL drops onto treated glass under coverslips . After polymerizing for 40 min , the coverslip was lifted in PBS , extensively rinsed and incubated overnight in PBS . Before each experiment , the gel attached to the coverslip was placed on a 14 mm diameter , 2 cm high PDMS column for applying a slight pressure to the coverslip with its own weight . Then , both gels were incubated for 30 min in media before plates were seeded . After the bottom gels in plates was placed on the microscope stage , the PDMS column with the top gel was placed on top of the cells seeded on the bottom gels , confining cells between the two gels . After 1 hr of adaptation , the height of cells was determined with beads by measuring the distance between gels , whereas the cell diameter was measured using a far - red plasma membrane dye ( cat no . C10046 ; Thermo Fisher ) . Stiffness was defined as the height ( h ) divided by the diameter ( d ) . Microscopy . Live high - resolution imaging was performed using a General Electric ( Boston , MA ) DeltaVision Elite imaging system mounted on an Olympus ( Japan ) IX71 stand with a computerized stage , environment chamber ( heat , CO 2 , and humidifier ) , ultrafast solid - state illumination with excitation / emission filter sets for DAPI , CFP , GFP , YFP , and Cy5 , critical illumination , Olympus PlanApo N 60X / 1 . 42 NA DIC ( oil ) objective , Photometrics ( Tucson , AZ ) CoolSNAP HQ2 camera , proprietary constrained iterative deconvolution , and vibration isolation table . Chromophore Assisted Light Inactivation ( CALI ) . Live confined cells co - transfected with SuperNova - cofilin - 1 and either mEmerald - LifeAct or EGFP - RLC were imaged every 12 sec for 5 min before CALI . Cells were then subjected to 1 min of high intensity red light irradiation ( DeltaVision Elite ) . Images were subsequently acquired every 12 sec for 1 hr post - irradiation . Actomyosin flow rates . Actin and myosin minifilament flow rates were calculated from images taken every 12 sec of mEmerald - LifeAct and EGFP - RLC , respectively . Kymographs of each were generated in Fiji ( https : / / imagej . net / Fiji ) and spanned the length of leader blebs . Fluorescence Loss After Photobleaching ( FLAP ) . Cells transiently transfected with the photoactivatable construct , mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct , were imaged using a Zeiss ( Germany ) laser scanning confocal microscope ( LSM880 ) with fast Airy Scan . Regions at bleb necks were photo - converted using the 405 nm laser at 20 % power ( 3 iterations ) . Regions were sampled every 15 ms for 10 and 150 cycles before and after photo - conversion , respectively . Fluorescence measurements were acquired using ZEN software ( Zeiss ) and decay was calculated as F / F 0 . Non - linear one - phase decay curves were fit to data using GraphPad Prism . 13 Cell migration . To perform cell speed and plot of origin analyses , we used an Excel ( Microsoft , Redmond , WA ) plugin , DiPer , developed by Gorelik and colleagues and the Fiji plugin , MTrackJ , developed by Erik Meijering for manual tracking ( 22 , 23 ) . For minimizing positional error , cells were tracked every other frame . Brightfield imaging was used to confirm that beads were not obstructing the path of a cell . Cells that traveled a distance equivalent to at least one cell length over the course of the 5 hr time - lapse were classified as highly motile . Bleb morphology and dynamics . For leader bleb and total bleb areas , freshly confined cells were traced from high - resolution images with the free - hand circle tool in Fiji ( https : / / imagej . net / Fiji ) . From every other frame , the percentage of cell area for leader blebs and percentage of cell area for total blebs were calculated in Excel ( Microsoft ) . Frame - by - frame measurements were then used to generate an average for each cell . Bleb retraction rates were determined by dividing the bleb length by the amount of time taken to completely retract the bleb into the cell body . For each cell , retraction rates were calculated from 2 - 3 blebs . Statistics . All box plots are Tukey in which “ + ” and line denote the mean and median , respectively . Sample sizes were determined empirically and based on saturation . As noted in each figure legend , statistical significance was determined by either a two - tailed Student’s t - test or multiple - comparison test post - hoc . Normality was determined by a D’Agostino & Pearson test in GraphPad Prism . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 Illustration . The model for ADF and cofilin - 1 function was drawn in BioRender ( Toronto , ON ) . Data availability . The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author , J . S . L . , upon reasonable request . Acknowledgements We thank members of the Logue Lab for insightful discussions and especially , Dr . Sandrine B . Lavenus , for help with cell stiffness measurements . We would also like to thank the administrative staff within the Department of Regenerative and Cancer Cell Biology at the Albany Medical College . This work was supported by a Young Investigator Award from the Melanoma Research Alliance ( MRA ; award no . 688232 ) . Author Contributions J . S . L . conceived and designed the study . M . F . U . performed all laboratory research . M . F . U and J . S . L . wrote the manuscript . Competing Financial Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . 14 References 1 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 2 . Logue , J . S . , Cartagena - Rivera , A . X . , Baird , M . A . , Davidson , M . W . , Chadwick , R . S . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2015 ) Erk regulation of actin capping and bundling by Eps8 promotes cortex tension and leader bleb - based migration . Elife 4 3 . Liu , Y . J . , Le Berre , M . , Lautenschlaeger , F . , Maiuri , P . , Callan - Jones , A . , Heuze , M . , Takaki , T . , Voituriez , R . , and Piel , M . ( 2015 ) Confinement and low adhesion induce fast amoeboid migration of slow mesenchymal cells . Cell 160 , 659 - 672 4 . Ruprecht , V . , Wieser , S . , Callan - Jones , A . , Smutny , M . , Morita , H . , Sako , K . , Barone , V . , Ritsch - Marte , M . , Sixt , M . , Voituriez , R . , and Heisenberg , C . P . ( 2015 ) Cortical contractility triggers a stochastic switch to fast amoeboid cell motility . Cell 160 , 673 - 685 5 . Bergert , M . , Erzberger , A . , Desai , R . A . , Aspalter , I . M . , Oates , A . C . , Charras , G . , Salbreux , G . , and Paluch , E . K . ( 2015 ) Force transmission during adhesion - independent migration . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 524 - 529 6 . Charras , G . T . , Coughlin , M . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Mahadevan , L . ( 2008 ) Life and times of a cellular bleb . Biophys J 94 , 1836 - 1853 7 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Magalhaes , M . A . , Eddy , R . J . , Hodgson , L . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2013 ) Functions of cofilin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 14 , 405 8 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 - 812 9 . Wioland , H . , Guichard , B . , Senju , Y . , Myram , S . , Lappalainen , P . , Jégou , A . , and Romet - Lemonne , G . ( 2017 ) ADF / Cofilin accelerates actin dynamics by severing filaments and promoting their depolymerization at both ends . Current Biology 27 , 1956 - 1967 . e1957 10 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) Cofilin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin filaments . Current Biology 19 , 537 - 545 11 . Logue , J . , Chadwick , R . , and Waterman , C . ( 2018 ) A simple method for precisely controlling the confinement of cells in culture . 12 . Bracalente , C . , Rinflerch , A . R . , Ibanez , I . L . , Garcia , F . M . , Volonteri , V . , Galimberti , G . N . , Klamt , F . , and Duran , H . ( 2018 ) Cofilin - 1 levels and intracellular localization are associated with melanoma prognosis in a cohort of patients . Oncotarget 9 , 24097 - 24108 13 . Vitriol , E . A . , Wise , A . L . , Berginski , M . E . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2013 ) Instantaneous inactivation of cofilin reveals its function of F - actin disassembly in lamellipodia . Mol Biol Cell 24 , 2238 - 2247 14 . Takemoto , K . , Matsuda , T . , Sakai , N . , Fu , D . , Noda , M . , Uchiyama , S . , Kotera , I . , Arai , Y . , Horiuchi , M . , Fukui , K . , Ayabe , T . , Inagaki , F . , Suzuki , H . , and Nagai , T . ( 2013 ) SuperNova , a monomeric photosensitizing fluorescent protein for chromophore - assisted light inactivation . Sci Rep 3 , 2629 15 . Chugh , P . , Clark , A . G . , Smith , M . B . , Cassani , D . A . , Dierkes , K . , Ragab , A . , Roux , P . P . , Charras , G . , Salbreux , G . , and Paluch , E . K . ( 2017 ) Actin cortex architecture regulates cell surface tension . Nature cell biology 19 , 689 15 16 . Ennomani , H . , Letort , G . , Guérin , C . , Martiel , J . - L . , Cao , W . , Nédélec , F . , Enrique , M . , Théry , M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2016 ) Architecture and connectivity govern actin network contractility . Current Biology 26 , 616 - 626 17 . Shaw , A . E . , DeLuca , J . G . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2012 ) ADF / cofilin regulates actomyosin assembly through competitive inhibition of myosin II binding to F - actin . Developmental cell 22 , 530 - 543 18 . Olson , E . N . , and Nordheim , A . ( 2010 ) Linking actin dynamics and gene transcription to drive cellular motile functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 353 - 365 19 . Chen , H . , Bernstein , B . W . , Sneider , J . M . , Boyle , J . A . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2004 ) In vitro activity differences between proteins of the ADF / cofilin family define two distinct subgroups . Biochemistry - Us 43 , 7127 - 7142 20 . Vitriol , E . A . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Shen , F . , Jacobson , K . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) Enhanced EGFP - chromophore - assisted laser inactivation using deficient cells rescued with functional EGFP - fusion proteins . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 , 6702 - 6707 21 . Symons , M . H . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) Control of actin polymerization in live and permeabilized fibroblasts . The Journal of cell biology 114 , 503 - 513 22 . Gorelik , R . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2014 ) Quantitative and unbiased analysis of directional persistence in cell migration . Nat Protoc 9 , 1931 - 1943 23 . Meijering , E . , Dzyubachyk , O . , and Smal , I . ( 2012 ) Methods for cell and particle tracking . Methods Enzymol 504 , 183 - 200 16 Figures Figure 1 . ADF and cofilin - 1 are required for leader bleb - based migration . A . Ventral Z - section of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell , which has been confined down to 3 µm , with mEmerald - LifeAct . B . Kymograph from ( A ; dashed line ) , showing cortical actin flow . C . Ventral Z - section of a melanoma A375 - M2 cells , which has been confined down to 3 µm , with EGFP - 17 RLC . D . Western blot confirming CFL1 , ADF , and ADF + CFL1 RNAi in melanoma A375 - M2 cells . E . Individual cell migration tracks ( plot of origin ) for non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi cells , as well as , CFL1 + ADF RNAi cells rescued by transfection with EGFP - cofilin - 1 plasmid . In each , cells were tracked over a period of 5 hr . Relative y ( µm ) and relative x ( µm ) are shown in each . F . Percentage of highly motile cells from ( E ) . Cells that traveled a distance equivalent to at least one cell length over the course of the 5 hr time - lapse were classified as highly motile . G . Average speed ( µm / min ) from cells in ( E ; mean + / - SEM ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnett’s post - hoc test . H . Instantaneous top speed ( µm / min ) for highly motile cells in ( E ; mean + / - SEM ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnett’s post - hoc test . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 18 Figure 2 . Together , ADF and cofilin - 1 are required to retract blebs . A . Montage of non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi with EGFP alone ( volume marker ) in melanoma 19 A375 - M2 cells . B - C . Quantitation of area for leader ( A ) and all blebs ( B ) after non - targeting and CFL1 RNAi . Statistical significance was determined using an unpaired Student’s t - test . D . Percent of non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi cells with elongated bleb necks . E . Percent of ADF + CFL1 RNAi cells from ( D ) with elongated bleb necks that retract vs . un - retracted . F - G . Lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells after non - targeting and CFL1 + ADF RNAi stained with a far - red fluorescent membrane dye ( F ) . Percent of non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi cells with elongated bleb necks ( G ) . H . Bleb retraction rates for non - targeting ( 45 blebs ; 26 cells ) , CFL1 ( 40 blebs ; 20 cells ) , ADF ( 48 blebs ; 30 cells ) , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi ( 38 blebs ; 23 cells ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . I . EGFP - cofilin - 1 localization in an A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm . Arrow points to an enrichment of cofilin - 1 at the leader bleb neck . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 20 Figure 3 . ADF and cofilin - 1 rapidly disassemble cortical actin . A . mEmerald - LifeAct and far - red fluorescent membrane dye in cells after non - targeting and CFL1 + ADF RNAi . B . Cells freshly plated on poly - L - lysine coated cover - glass stained for endogenous cofilin - 1 and F - actin ( phalloidin ) . C . F - actin levels ( normalized to non - target ; mean + / - SEM ) after CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi in trypsinized ( spherical ) cells , as determined by flow cytometry . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . D . F - actin levels ( normalized to non - target ; mean + / - SEM ) after CFL1 + ADF RNAi , as well as , after CFL1 + ADF RNAi with EGFP - cofilin - 1 WT , S3A , or S3E , as determined by flow cytometry . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . E . F - actin level ( normalized to EGFP alone ; mean + / - SEM ) as a function of increasing EGFP - cofilin - 1 in cells depleted of endogenous cofilin - 1 and ADF by RNAi , as determined by flow cytometry . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . F . 21 Top , barbed end assay workflow . Bottom , representative image of a freshly plated ( spherical ) cell subjected to the barbed end assay . G . As shown in ( F ; bottom ) , the level of cortical barbed ends was measured in cells after non - targeting ( 71 cells ) , CFL1 ( 53 cells ) , ADF ( 47 cells ) , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi ( 83 cells ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . H . As shown in ( F ; bottom ) , the level of cortical barbed ends was measured in cells with non - targeting and EGFP ( 42 cells ) , as well as , after CFL1 + ADF RNAi with EGFP ( 32 cells ) or EGFP - cofilin - 1 ( 27 cells ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 22 Figure 4 . Rapid cortical actin flow requires ADF and cofilin - 1 severing at leader bleb necks . A . Left , SuperNova - cofilin - 1 localization in cells depleted of endogenous cofilin - 1 and ADF by RNAi before and after 1 min of red light irradiation . Right , quantitative analysis of CALI , as determined by the fold change in SuperNova emission . B . Montage of mEmerald - LifeAct before and after cofilin - 1 inactivation in a cell depleted of endogenous cofilin - 1 and ADF by RNAi . C . Kymographs of cortical actin ( mEmerald - LifeAct ) flow from the leader bleb tip before and after cofilin - 1 inactivation . D . Quantitative evaluation of cortical actin flow rates before and after cofilin - 1 inactivation . Statistical significance was determined by a paired Student’s t - test . E . Left , representative image of a freshly plated ( spherical ) cells with mEos3 . 2 - 23 LifeAct . Right , montage of mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct within the shown ROI before and after photoactivation . F . Average decay curve for mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct at bleb necks ( normalized to the initial fluorescence level ; F / F 0 ) . The curve was fit using a non - linear single phase decay function . G . T 1 / 2 for mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct after photoactivation at bleb necks for non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 24 Figure 5 . Cofilin - 1 supports both actin turnover and myosin contractility at leader bleb necks . A . A previously described gel sandwich assay was used to measure the stiffness ( h / d ) of spherical cells after non - targeting ( 91 cells ) , CFL1 ( 30 cells ) , ADF ( 25 cells ) , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi ( 42 cells ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . B . Immunofluorescence imaging of endogenous pRLC ( S18 ) , total RLC , and F - actin ( phalloidin ) in freshly plated ( spherical ) cells after non - targeting , CFL1 , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi . C . Ratio of cortical pRLC ( S18 ) to total RLC fluorescence intensity after non - targeting ( 114 cells ) , CFL1 ( 107 cells ) , ADF ( 124 cells ) , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi ( 91 cells ) . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . D . Localization of EGFP - RLC in a cell confined down to 3 µm after CFL1 + ADF RNAi . E . EGFP - RLC dynamics in a cell depleted of cofilin - 1 and ADF before and after CALI of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 . Arrow points to myosin accumulating at an elongating leader bleb neck after cofilin - 1 inactivation . F . Myosin minifilament flow rate before and after cofilin - 1 inactivation . Statistical significance was determined using a paired Student’s t - test . All data are representative of at least 25 three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 26 Figure 6 . Model of ADF and cofilin - 1 function within leader blebs . Top , in the presence of both ADF and cofilin - 1 , cells display large blebs with rapid cortical actin flow . Below , in the absence of cofilin - 1 or ADF , cells form smaller blebs with slower cortical actin flow . Bottom , without both ADF and cofilin - 1 , blebs display several defects , including a failure to retract and an accumulation of actomyosin at elongated necks . 27 Supplemental Figures Supplemental figure 1 . A . Quantitative evaluation of cofilin - 1 ( left ) and ADF ( right ) RNAi as measured by Western blotting of total cell lysates . B . Transmigration of melanoma A375 - M2 cells through 8 ( left ) or 12 µm ( right ) pores after non - targeting , CFL1 , ADF , and CFL1 + ADF RNAi . Statistical significance was determined by one - way ANOVA and a Dunnet’s post - hoc test . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 28 Supplemental figure 2 . A . Cortical barbed end levels in melanoma A375 - M2 cells after vehicle ( DMSO ; 53 cells ) or cytochalasin B ( 2 µM ; 24 cells ) treatment . Statistical significance was determined using an unpaired Student’s t - test . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . * - p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * - p ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * - p ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * * - p ≤ 0 . 0001 29 Supplemental figure 3 . A . C ortical actin ( mEmerald - LifeAct ) flow rates before and after the inactivation ( i . e . , red light irradiation ) of SuperNova alone . B . Left , sample ROI from a Paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) treated melanoma A375 - M2 cell with mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct . Right , average mEos3 . 2 - LifeAct decay ( 3 cells ; mean + / - SEM ) after photoactivation . All data are representative of at least three independent experiments . 30 Supplemental Movies Supplemental movie 1 . Time - lapse imaging of melanoma A375 - M2 cells confined down to 3 µm with far red plasma membrane dye . Supplemental movie 2 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with mScarlet - LifeAct and EGFP - RLC . Supplemental movie 3 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with the volume marker , mScarlet , after control ( non - targeting ) RNAi . Supplemental movie 4 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with the volume marker , EGFP , after RNAi of ADF alone . Supplemental movie 5 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with the volume marker , mScarlet , after RNAi of CFL1 alone . Supplemental movie 6 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with the volume marker , EGFP , after RNAi of CFL1 + ADF . Supplemental movie 7 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with mEmerald - LifeAct after CALI of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 . The cell was depleted of endogenous ADF and cofilin - 1 by RNAi . Supplemental movie 8 . Time - lapse imaging of a melanoma A375 - M2 cell confined down to 3 µm with EGFP - RLC after CALI of SuperNova - cofilin - 1 . The cell was depleted of endogenous ADF and cofilin - 1 by RNAi .