Users ʼ Ongoing Work on Managing Computational Artifacts Abstract In a computing environment where computational artifacts come and go at rapid pace , products become easily outdated , resulting in lack of support . Consequently , users are constantly challenged to think about the trade - offs between maintaining and appropriating the current product and adopting an alternative product . This challenges us to think beyond designing individual products to be useful , usable , aesthetic , or learnable and consider what is necessary for sustainable and long - term use . In order to further understand users and find potential solutions to the design challenge , I explore how users perceive their everyday computational resources becoming outdated and in reaction how they deal with the problem during maintenance , appropriation , and adoption of computational resources on an ongoing fashion . Keywords maintenance , design , discontinuation , abandonware , adoption , computational resources , appropriation ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . Introduction The computing environment of today constantly evolves and improves , producing computational artifacts that emerge at rapid pace . At the same time , the older Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2009 , April 4 – April 9 , 2009 , Boston , MA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 247 - 4 / 0 9 / 04 . Jina Huh School of Information University of Michigan Jina . huh @ gmail . com CHI 2009 ~ Doctoral Consortium April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3149 artifacts disappear or get reappropriated . This has consequences because the computational resources altogether form a complex and intricate network of computing environment ( e . g . , internet , phones , and laptops work together ) , allowing changes in a computational artifact to influence each other in great degree . For example , advancing Internet technology requires more and more sophisticated types of browsers and consequently limits users from using outdated mobile platforms that cannot incorporate the change . And when new mobile platforms get released , a variety of applications including Internet browsers support the current most popular platform , thus again old platforms eventually slowly lose compatibility from the surrounding computing environment . Here we are challenged with a so - called post - usability problem [ 4 ] , which points to thinking about designing beyond useful , usable , or aesthetic devices . One of the challenges is to move out of the isolated view of designing an individual machine and gain perspectives on the complex network of computational resources . The networked computational resources constantly challenge users to negotiate whether to appropriate and maintain current device , or to seek for alternative devices that conform to the changing environment . As a result , through my dissertation I focus on understanding users’ ongoing work of appropriation , maintenance , and trading - offs in switching to a new device . This will reveal how users deal with one of the challenges that emerge in this complex networked computing world today . Specifically , the dissertation aims to answer the following questions :  How do users perceive their everyday computational artifacts becoming outdated ? And how do users deal with the problem of becoming outdated ?  What are the barriers that users face when appropriating and maintaining the current device , or when adopting an alternative device ? And how do they try to overcome the barriers ?  How do users go through the trade - off process of choosing between maintaining the current device and adopting an alternative device ?  Based on the finding , what are potentially important design considerations in today’s complex and volatile computing world ? Previous studies have looked at appropriation and adoption from a variety of perspectives . The field of Information Systems has looked at the adoption of technology in workplaces and home settings [ 8 ] based on TAM model [ 5 ] , which examines the factors resulting in the perceived usefulness that influences users’ decisions on adoption . HCI and CSCW examined appropriation and adoption both at the level of an artifact and social aspects . Examples include tailoring features of artifacts [ 1 , 7 ] , how lead users help others adopt technology as well as customization [ 2 ] , and the role of mediators in the adoption process [ 6 ] . However , we still lack our understandings towards users’ constant negotiation between appropriation and adoption in today’s complex and networked computing world . Through my dissertation I contribute to the conversations on appropriation , maintenance , and adoption the in - depth examination of : the process of users’ perception on becoming outdated ; users’ ongoing work on weighing trade - offs between current CHI 2009 ~ Doctoral Consortium April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3150 and alternative devices ; and users’ work of overcoming barriers in adoption and appropriation . The dissertation tackles the problem through the lens that the so - called “good design” in today’s computing world no longer depends on the evaluation of an individual machine . Accordingly , the dissertation contributes largely to the discussions exploring potential solutions and future directions in designing for sustainable and long - term use that is suit for complex and volatile computing world . Next , my current study is introduced , followed by the rest of the research plan and expected contribution . Current study This research topic began with examining users of a discontinued DOS based palmtop computer called HP200LX ( LX ) ( see figure 1 ) , which prolonged its life for nearly ten years by the users . The purpose of the study was to understand users’ process of appropriation , adaptation , and maintenance while constantly finding alternative devices that can give them better support . The analysis was based on an email archive of the user group containing approximately 90 , 000 messages , of which 30 , 000 was read and coded with standard qualitative practice . The findings of this study [ 3 ] discuss in detail the work that users do while using the LX ( details have been omitted due to page limit ) in dealing with an aging physical platform ( See figure 2 ) , maintaining and creating functionality in rapidly changing environment , and finally understanding alternative platforms , their capabilities , and the tradeoffs . However , several caveats still remain in extending these findings to everyday settings of all users . The LX users are technical enough to work with a discontinued DOS machine . Accordingly , the next plan is studying users who are closer to “the general population” and who use current computational artifacts that require less technical knowledge . Also , it is important to uncover further variety of barriers during the appropriation and adoption process in today’s computing . The following describes the next research plan that addresses these issues in further detail . Research plan and expected contribution Cell phones and Internet are some of the most popular computational resources used by many users today . Studying the use of cell phones and Internet browsers helps examine more general users and introduces a variety of barriers that users face during appropriation and adoption , which is what users are challenged with in today’s computing world . More importantly , the two studies give interesting contrast in terms of the kinds of barriers users face and how much freedom users have in adoption and reverting adoption . Thus these studies together help enrich the analysis on users’ trade - off experiences between appropriation and adoption in different contexts . Next , each study is described in brief detail , followed by expected contributions for all three studies . Users of Internet browsers A new Internet browser , Google Chrome , was introduced in September 2008 . It is supposed to be over fifty times faster than IE , and there is no monetary cost for adopting it . However , other barriers such as technical compatibility of vast kinds of content over WWW become challenges for users ( e . g . , most Korean online TV only works on IE under Windows XP ; dealing with online documents ) . Still , users can easily Figure 1 : Picture of a HP200LX . It is size of a shirt pocket . Figure 2 : Custom cable created by a user for connecting to cell phones . ( Courtesy of user EI ) CHI 2009 ~ Doctoral Consortium April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3151 revert back to using old browsers after trying out . The purpose of this study is understanding how users perceive the kinds of barriers they imagine to experience in adopting Google Chrome despite the benefits and minimal cost in doing so , how they foresee themselves dealing with those barriers , and how they go through the trade - off process of trying out a new browser and reverting back to the old browser . Users of cell phones iPhone has rapidly become one of the most wanted cell phones in the US . iPhone has advanced features than most traditional phones that brought public sensation . However , switching to a new cell phone requires many barriers to overcome – high cost , contract with the providers , what friends and family chose as their providers , etc . The purpose of this study is , similar to the Chrome study , examining users’ negotiation process among these variety of barriers and benefits , but in the case of costly adoption . Method For both studies , 30 semi - structured phone / face - to - face interviews will be conducted with users who have thought about using or currently use iPhones or Google Chrome . Recruiting will take place through flyers and emails at the University . The interview questions will pertain to the purpose of each study identified briefly in the previous sections . Expected contribution Each of the three studies gives distinctive contribution to the understanding of users’ management of computational artifacts . The LX study gives insight into technical and social aspects of technically advanced users who manage a discontinued product . The cell phone study provides a variety of barriers and benefits that users juggle with during the trade - off process in the case of costly adoption . The Internet browser study brings insight into yet another kind of trade - off process where adoption is relatively low cost , giving users freedom to revert back to the old ones . Largely , the overall goal is using the findings to shed light on issues beyond designing individual machines and give directions in designing for complex and networked computing world , in which computational artifacts emerge and disappear at rapid pace . Acknowledgements I thank my advisor Mark Ackerman for his intellectual support and Rick Wash for feedback . References [ 1 ] Dourish , P . The Appropriation of Interactive Technologies . CSCWJ , 12 , ( 2003 ) , 465 - 490 . [ 2 ] Gantt , M . and Nardi , B . A . , Gardeners and Gurus . CHI ( 1992 ) , 107 - 117 . [ 3 ] Huh , J . and Ackerman , M . , Negotiated Appropriation Work . Submitted to CHI ( 2009 ) . [ 4 ] Huh , J . , Ackerman , M . , Erickson , T . , Harrison , S . and Sengers , P . , Beyond usability . CHI ( 2007 ) . [ 5 ] Mathieson , K . Predicting User Intentions . ISR , 2 , 3 ( 1991 ) , 173 - 191 . [ 6 ] Okamura , K . , Orlikowski , W . J . , Fujimoto , M . and Yates , J . , Helping CSCW Applications Succeed . CSCW ( 1994 ) , 55 - 65 . [ 7 ] Salovaara , A . , Appropriation of a MMS - Based Comic Creator . CHI ( 2007 ) , 1117 - 1126 . [ 8 ] Venkatesh , V . and Brown , S . A . Longitudinal Investigation of Personal Computers in Homes . MISQ , 25 , No . 1 ( 2001 ) , 71 - 102 . CHI 2009 ~ Doctoral Consortium April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3152