UC San Diego UC San Diego Previously Published Works Title Myotubes differentiate optimally on substrates with tissue - like stiffness : pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 9mj4d059 Journal JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY , 166 ( 6 ) ISSN 0021 - 9525 Authors Engler , AJ Griffin , MA Sen , S et al . Publication Date 2004 - 09 - 13 DOI 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200405004 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2004 / 09 / 877 / 11 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 166 , Number 6 , September 13 , 2004 877 – 887 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200405004 JCB Article 877 Myotubes differentiate optimally on substrates with tissue - like stiffness : pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments Adam J . Engler , 1 Maureen A . Grifﬁn , 1 Shamik Sen , 1 Carsten G . Bönnemann , 2 H . Lee Sweeney , 2 , 3 and Dennis E . Discher 1 , 2 , 3 1 School of Engineering and Applied Science , 2 Pennsylvania Muscle Institute , and 3 Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 ontractile myocytes provide a test of the hypothesis that cells sense their mechanical as well as molecular microenvironment , altering expression , organization , and / or morphology accordingly . Here , myoblasts were cultured on collagen strips attached to glass or polymer gels of varied elasticity . Subsequent fusion into myotubes occurs independent of substrate ﬂexibility . However , myo - sin / actin striations emerge later only on gels with stiffness typical of normal muscle ( passive Young’s modulus , E (cid:1) 12 kPa ) . On glass and much softer or stiffer gels , including gels C emulating stiff dystrophic muscle , cells do not striate . In addition , myotubes grown on top of a compliant bottom layer of glass - attached myotubes ( but not softer ﬁbroblasts ) will striate , whereas the bottom cells will only assemble stress ﬁbers and vinculin - rich adhesions . Unlike sarcomere formation , adhesion strength increases monotonically versus substrate stiffness with strongest adhesion on glass . These ﬁndings have major implications for in vivo introduction of stem cells into diseased or damaged striated muscle of altered mechanical composition . Introduction Injection of mesenchymal stem cells into an ever - stiffening fibrotic infarct zone in the heart leads to cellular expression of myocyte markers , but differentiation clearly stops short of myofibril assembly ( Shake et al . , 2002 ) . The reason is un - clear , but physical aspects of the microenvironment , espe - cially mechanical compliance of matrix ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) and perhaps adjacent cells , are becoming increasingly linked to gene expression and protein organization . Sufficient substrate stiffness appears particularly important to anchor - age - dependent cells , which often rely on a finite resistance to cell - generated forces in order to induce outside - in mechanical signals . Such signals feed back into cell tension ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) , cell adhesion ( Choquest et al . , 1997 ; Beningo et al . , 2001 ) , posttranslational modification ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Beningo et al . , 2001 ) , protein expression ( Cukierman et al . , 2001 ) , cytoskeletal organization ( Cukierman et al . , 2001 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) , and even cell viability ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) . It seems fair to hypothesize that substrate stiffness imparts new meaning to “anchorage dependence . ” With contractile cells such as muscle cells , one might hypothesize that coupling to a soft or stiff matrix is extremely important to cell function . Myotubes ultimately transmit actomyosin contractions through their attachments to matrix . If a matrix or substrate is fully rigid , as in conventional cul - tures on polystyrene or coverslips , contractile efforts will clearly be isometric . If a matrix is more compliant , such as with a collagen gel , myocytes will be able to contract , but in a manner that depends on the effective stiffness of the un - derlying substrate ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Analogous to the wrinkling of films by cells ( Harris et al . , 1980 ; Oliver et al . , 1995 ) , cells generate traction forces on collagen - coated poly - acrylamide ( PA ) gel substrates . Cells also spread in area to a greater extent on stiff , yet compliant substrates compared with softer substrates ( Lo et al . , 2000 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) . A number of muscle and related pathologies involve changes in matrix properties . Beyond myocardial infarc - tions mentioned above , atherosclerosis generally involves smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) in a matrix that is certainly The online version of this article contains supplemental material . Address correspondence to Dennis E . Discher , Cell and Molecular Biol - ogy Graduate Group , University of Pennsylvania , 112 Towne Building , 220 S . 33rd St . , Philadelphia , PA 19104 . Tel . : ( 215 ) 898 - 4809 . Fax : ( 215 ) 573 - 6334 . email : discher @ seas . upenn . edu Key words : myoﬁbrillogenesis ; patterning ; adhesion ; differentiation ; muscular dystrophy Abbreviations used in this paper : AFM , atomic force microscopy ; EDL , extensor digitorum longus ; IPN , interpenetrating polymer network ; PA , polyacrylamide ; SMC , smooth muscle cell . 878 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 166 , Number 6 , 2004 altered and perhaps softened ( Campbell and Chamley - Camp - bell , 1981 ; Glukhova and Koteliansky , 1995 ; Stenmark and Mecham , 1997 ) . Muscular dystrophies are also associated with changes in matrix : the diaphragm of the dystrophin - defi - cient mdx mouse is more fibrotic and thus much stiffer than a normal mouse diaphragm ( Stedman et al . , 1991 ) . In the same studies , muscle precursor satellite cells were found to be as abundant in dystrophic tissue as in normal tissue , but mdx did not seem successful in regenerating differentiated muscle . The work here attempts to elucidate a role for matrix or tissue stiffness in striated muscle differentiation . Although the conventional in vivo matrix for myotubes is an (cid:1) 1 - (cid:1) m - thick ( or less ) basement membrane of laminin and collagen , tissue compliance convolves compliance of this matrix with cellular compliance . Our ex vivo studies here of normal ver - sus pathological tissue stiffness first set the substrate stiff - ness scale for subsequent in vitro studies . To controllably culture skeletal muscle on suitably compliant substrates , the strong tendency of fusing myocytes to branch and overlay each other must be limited . Micropatterned , compliant substrates solve this problem and allow for isolation of mechanisms underlying cell – matrix adhesion , extending to its role in differentiation . The process typically begins with myoblast anchorage to the substrate , cell spreading , with - drawal from cell cycle , and cell fusion into nascent myo - tubes . Increasing expression and assembly of cytoskeleton and adhesions ultimately concludes with characteristic stri - ations along the contractile myotube . This last step proves to be especially sensitive to substrate compliance . The re - sults thus reveal an optimal , tissue - like matrix that is stiff , yet compliant enough to balance cell adhesion , contractil - ity , and ultimately differentiation . Micropatterned , compli - ant substrates solve this problem ( Fig . 1 ) and allow for iso - lation of mechanisms underlying cell – matrix adhesion , extending to its role in differentiation . Results Skeletal muscle stiffness ex vivo : normal and dystophic Skeletal muscle is obviously a “soft tissue” rather than hard as bone . To quantitate the transverse , passive elasticity of a representative muscle , extensor digitorum longus ( EDL ) muscles were excised from both normal ( C57 ) mice and dys - trophin - deficient ( mdx ) mice and probed locally along their lengths by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ; Fig . 2 ) . The transverse direction is , of course , the direction relevant to lateral adhesion between cells and matrix . Hertz cone model fits of the indenting force yields a transverse Young’s modu - lus , E ( Domke and Radmacher , 1998 ; Rotsch et al . , 1999 ) . Data was averaged over multiple locations within each sam - ple ( n (cid:2) 3 ) from normal mice of different ages , where the predominant modulus was E Muscle (cid:2) 12 (cid:3) 4 kPa ( Table I ; 85 % of data ) . The result is in agreement with the AFM - determined elasticity of C2C12 cells ( up to 1 wk ) : E C2C12 (cid:2) 12 – 15 kPa ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) . From mdx mice , EDL appeared significantly stiffer with a predominant modulus E mdx (cid:2) 18 (cid:3) 6 kPa ( 55 % of data ) . As with the C57 control mice , the average muscle elasticity was Figure 1 . Micropatterned collagen on PA gels . ( A ) Cross - linked PA was first bound to an aminosilanized glass slide or coverslip . Sulfo - SANPAH ( x ) , a hetero - bifunctional cross - linker , was then ap - plied to the free surface and attached to the gel by exposure to 365 nm light . ( B and B (cid:4) ) A micropatterned glass stamp with 20 - (cid:1) m - wide channels was dipped in collagen - I to fill its channels . The “loaded” microstamp was overlaid on the PA gel bearing exposed succinimidyl ester groups and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 12 h at 37 (cid:5) C . ( C ) This gave a striped pattern of cross - linked collagen as visualized by immunofluorescence ( C (cid:4) ) . Addition of C2C12 myoblasts showed strong alignment on the patterns after two d ( D ) on both soft ( 1 kPa ) and stiff ( 8 kPa ) PA gels . Bars , 100 (cid:1) m . Table I . Passive elasticity of EDL muscle ( mean (cid:3) SD ) dissected from normal ( C57 ) and dystrophic ( mdx ) mice , and probed by AFM indentation ( Fig . 2 ) Mouse Mean muscle stiffness , E ( kPa ) C57 12 (cid:3) 4 mdx 18 (cid:3) 6 Figure 2 . Passive stiffness of normal and dystrophic muscle tissue . EDL muscle was dissected from normal ( C57 ) and dystrophic ( mdx ) mice and probed in buffer by AFM . The inset schematic depicts the AFM probe indenting a thick tissue section on a glass support . Indentations of 1 – 2 (cid:1) m were randomly made on (cid:1) 100 - (cid:1) m - thick samples at 10 or more locations per left and right EDL samples ( n (cid:2) 387 ) . Force versus indentation curves were fit with a Hertz cone model ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) in order to determine the passive elasticity as a Young’s modulus , E . Table I lists the predominant stiffness for both normal C57 muscle and mdx - derived muscle . Differentiation optimum in substrate compliance | Engler et al . 879 statistically similar for all mdx mice regardless of age ( P (cid:2) 0 . 42 ) . However , the micro - scale measurements of transverse elasticity for mdx muscle also proved more broadly distrib - uted than in normal muscle : mdx probing gave a significant number of indentations with E mdx (cid:6) 35 kPa ( (cid:1) 40 % ) and also a few with E mdx (cid:7) 5 kPa ( (cid:1) 5 % ) . Myoblasts in vitro sense substrate stiffness Spreading , elongation , and cooperative alignment of myo - blasts depend on substrate stiffness . C2C12 skeletal myoblasts were plated at low densities on homogeneous collagen I – coated glass as well as PA gels of varied elastic modulus E . Fig . 3 ( A – C ) show that myoblasts spread and elongate more on increasingly stiff substrates after just 4 h . By 24 h , cells are spindle - shaped regardless of elastic modulus ( Fig . 3 C ) , although mean cell area still tends to increase with substrate stiffness E ( Fig . 3 B ) . The stiffest gels and glass give statistically similar results for cell area ( P (cid:2) 0 . 4 ) . Interestingly , this asymptotic behavior oc - curs at an elastic modulus below E Muscle . The strong dependence of cell spreading at low elastic modulus , E (cid:7) E Muscle , and the asymptotic behavior of cells spreading on stiff gels and glass substrates fits a simple hy - perbola ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) that suggests a specific and sat - urable mechanosensitive response : ( 1 ) where E 1 / 2 - spread is a half - max modulus for ECM analogous to dissociation constants for biochemical interactions . Best - fit parameters of E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:1) 2 . 5 – 5 kPa are listed in Table II . Stiff or rigid substrates , defined by E (cid:6) E 1 / 2 - spread ( e . g . , glass ) , foster cell spreading and include the tissue - like stiffness , E Muscle . Soft substrates with E (cid:7) E 1 / 2 - spread ( e . g . , 1 kPa gel ) elicit very little cellular response . A decrease in E 1 / 2 - spread with Area aE E 1 / 2 - spread E + ( ) ⁄ = time indicates that spreading ( Fig . 3 B ) becomes less depen - dent on substrate elasticity , which is consistent with the cell elongation results ( Fig . 3 C ) . As shown below , subsequent fusion of spindle - shaped myoblasts into nascent myotubes occurs on all substrates regardless of elastic modulus . For the spindle - shaped myoblasts , Fig . 3 D demonstrates “mechanosensitive” coalignment of adjacent cells . Effects of cell tractions transmitted through gels to neighboring cells were quantified here by an orientational correlation function ( OCF ; Eq . 2 ) . Over distances of 5 – 10 cell widths , cells pre - fer to align ( OCF (cid:1) 1 ) . Beyond such distances , the corre - lation of the cell – cell angle decreases toward a random orientation ( OCF (cid:1) 0 . 5 ) with no significant evidence of an - ticorrelated interactions ( OCF (cid:1) 0 ) . Both soft ( 1 kPa ) and stiff ( 8 kPa ) gels show statistically overlapping trends , with soft gels suggesting slightly longer - range order . The mecha - nism of coalignment is understood , from theory ( Bischofs and Schwartz , 2003 ) , to involve a propagation of cell - induced substrate contractions ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2001 ; Tan et al . , 2003 ) . Coalignment thus occurs here to a varying degree on all substrates and appears to be a first step toward fusion . Nascent myotubes on any substrate Variability in cell – cell orientation necessitates micropat - terned substrates that foster linear fusion and , for later stud - Figure 3 . Initial myoblast responses to collagen - coated PA gels . Myoblasts were plated ( 5 (cid:8) 10 3 cells / cm 2 ) on unpatterned gels to observe initial responses to elas - ticity . ( A ) Images of initial cell spreading and elongation on gels . Bars , 20 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Spread cell area increases as a function of the substrate elastic modulus as well as time . A hyperbolic fit ( Eq . 1 ) captures the trends at each time point . ( C ) Cells at 4 h spontaneously elongate ( minor axis (cid:7) major axis ) only on stiff gels and glass , but by 24 h the elongated morphology predominates on all substrates . ( D ) An orientational correlation function ( OCF , Eq . 2 ) evaluated between any two cells on unpatterned PA gels decays exponen - tially over (cid:1) 5 – 10 cell widths after 24 h For a fully aligned culture , OCF (cid:2) 1 ; for a random orientation OCF (cid:2) 0 . 5 ( indi - cated by a dashed line ) ; and for anti - correlated interactions OCF (cid:2) 0 . The fit , OCF (cid:2) B e (cid:9) Ax (cid:10) ( 1 (cid:9) B ) , gives a decay constant A and the long range orientation B ( B (cid:2) 0 . 5 is random ) . Cells in close proximity thus prefer to align with their nearest neighbors , facilitating formation of myotubes . Error bars are SEM . Table II . Hyperbolic fit of myoblast area versus substrate elasticity ( E in Eq . 1 ) Hyperbolic fit 4 h 24 h a ( (cid:1) m 2 ) 2 , 000 2 , 100 E 1 / 2 - spread ( kPa ) 5 . 1 2 . 4 880 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 166 , Number 6 , 2004 ies of adhesion , inhibit branching . This is achieved by adhe - sively confining cells . After 2 d on collagen - micropatterned PA gels , C2C12 skeletal myoblasts recognize and align on the collagen pattern , and begin to fuse into myotubes . This occurs regardless of elastic modulus ( Fig . 1 D ; Fig . 4 A , top ) . Primary mouse myoblasts ( C57 strain ) exhibit similar pattern recognition and also clearly show membrane fusion . Up to 2 – 4 wk in culture ( Fig . 4 A , bottom ) , fully fused C2C12 or C57 myotubes remain nonmotile and nonprolif - erative , tending to maintain the original patterns . Adhesion proves adequate because , over 4 wk of the culture , overall patterning density calculated as myotube length divided by the total pattern size always remained high ( (cid:6) 70 % ) and de - creased little ( (cid:7) 10 – 15 % ) even with perturbations during needed media changes . Striated myotubes on tissue - like stiffness Fusion into nascent myotubes is a first , common path in dif - ferentiation of skeletal muscle , and to assess the progression of myotube differentiation , C2C12 cells grown for 2 and 4 wk on substrates of varying stiffness were stained for myosin ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) as well as F - actin ( not depicted ) . The multi - nucleated myotubes on both very soft gels ( (cid:7) 5 kPa ) and very stiff gels or glass show only diffuse actin and myo - sin staining after 2 wk in culture ( n (cid:2) 35 cells imaged ) . However , cells on intermediate stiffness ( 8 kPa and 11 kPa (cid:1) E Muscle ) show actin and myosin colocalized as striations in up to 25 % of the cell populations at 2 wk ( Fig . 5 ; n (cid:2) 27 ) . After 4 wk in culture , striated myotubes double in percent - age on intermediate stiffness gels . On gels with elastic mod - uli of 6 . 5 and 17 kPa , myotubes consistently show a signifi - Figure 4 . Myotube striation is substrate stiffness dependent , whereas myocyte patterning is not . ( A ) By 2 d in culture , myoblasts align on the collagen patterns and begin to fuse into nascent myotubes . This occurs regardless of substrate elastic modulus and is sustainable in culture for weeks . Unbranched , isolated myotubes are consistently (cid:6) 90 % of cells throughout the lifetime of all micropatterned cultures . Mouse primary cells ( C57 derived ) exhibit a similar behavior . ( B and C ) Several weeks after plating myoblasts on collagen - coated PA gels of varied stiffness or rigid glass , cells were stained for myosin ( green ) , actin ( not depicted ) , and the nucleus ( blue ) in order to assess cytoskeletal expression and organization . All substrates supported fusion into multi - nucleated myotubes , but after 2 or 4 wk only myotubes on gels of intermediate stiffness showed significant myosin striation . ( D ) On rigid glass , nascent myotubes showed robust arrays of stress fibers ( F - actin is red ) and tight substrate adhesion from vinculin by 1 wk and , as extrapolated from the PA gel results , myotubes showed no tendency to striate , even by 4 wk . Note the precision of the end - patterning on glass ( see Materials and methods ) . Bars : ( A ) 100 (cid:1) m ; ( B – D ) 20 (cid:1) m . Differentiation optimum in substrate compliance | Engler et al . 881 cant but lower percentage of striated cells . In contrast , very soft or very stiff gels ( i . e . , 1 and 23 kPa ) show no more than a small subpopulation of striated myotubes ( (cid:1) 5 % ) with poor striations and predominantly diffuse premyofibril myo - sin . Gaussian fits of the differentiation results clearly identify an optimal modulus of E * (cid:1) 12 kPa that maximizes myosin striations in muscle . E * is both well - defined and nearly constant from 2 to 4 wk . The optimum curves are also relatively narrow with a SD of 2 – 3 kPa . This implies of course that a majority of stri - ated cells ( 63 % for the Gaussian fits ) are found on substrates with stiffness within just 25 % of E * . The fact that E * (cid:2) E Muscle is discussed below . Cells grown on patterned glass substrates were stained after 1 and 4 wk for myosin and F - actin ( Fig . 4 D ) , showing little to no striation ( Fig . 5 , circles ) . Stress fibers and vinculin - enriched focal adhesions are instead very prominent in these cells by 1 wk on glass . This is consistent with stress fiber as - sembly in cells on very stiff gels and in cell types ranging from fibroblasts ( Beningo et al . , 2001 ) to SMCs ( Gaudet et al . , 2003 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Stress fiber disassembly was seen later , but even by 4 wk on glass striations still did not appear . Cell - on - cell differentiation The initial apparent elasticity of C2C12 myotubes has been reported to be E C2C12 (cid:2) 12 – 15 kPa ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) , which closely corresponds to the optimal gel stiffness E * for striation . It also closely corresponds to normal skeletal muscle tissue stiffness , E Muscle . An initial layer of myoblasts was therefore plated on patterned glass surfaces to mimic E Muscle with an underlayer of C2C12 cells . After 1 – 2 d , a sec - ond plating of myoblasts was made in order to generate a cell - on - cell arrangement of myotubes ( Fig . 6 A ) . The initial , bottom cell ( in red ) has well - defined ends and appears locked by stress fibers and vinculin - enriched focal adhesions onto the interpenetrating polymer network ( IPN ) pattern ( per Fig . 4 D ) . The second , top cell layer ( with green vertical stripes ) spreads over the exposed apical surface of the bot - tom , patterned cells . With time the top myotube striates , whereas the bottom myotube does not ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . Compared with cells of comparable age growing on gels of similar stiffness to that of the bottom layer of undifferenti - ated cells ( i . e . , gels (cid:1) E Muscle ) , the top cells in these patterned Figure 5 . Optimum substrate modulus for myotube differentiation . Myoblasts that have fused to myotubes on collagen - coated PA substrates exhibit a striation tendency that is strongly dependent on the substrate’s elastic modulus . The percentage of total cells ( n (cid:6) 15 for each sample ) exhibiting actin - myosin striation on the collagen - coated PA gels showed an optimum gel modulus of E * (cid:2) 12 kPa based on simple Gaussian fits with common means and SDs ( (cid:1) 2 . 5 – 3 kPa ) for 2 and 4 wk . Circles represent differentiation of cells grown on IPN - patterned glass . Error bars are (cid:3) SEM . Figure 6 . Myotube underlayers provide optimal stiffness for myotube striation . Myoblasts were plated in two sequential layers on patterned glass . ( A ) An initial , bottom layer of cells was added and is schematically represented as nascent myotubes with square ends “pinned” by stress fibers . Subsequent addition of cells generates an top myotube that progres - sively differentiates . Within 1 wk after plating ( B ) and even more prominent at 4 wk ( C ) , the top layer of cells striate both F - actin and myosin although clear striation of F - actin seems slower . Merged images of the top myotube at 4 wk demonstrate actin - myosin colocalization . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Striated myotubes in the top layer , after 1 and 4 wk , respec - tively constituted 68 % ( n (cid:2) 34 ) and 85 % of the total myotube population ( repeated in duplicate ) . Immunostaining of vinculin in cells on top of cells shows diffuse labeling and no profound focal adhesions ( not depicted ) . 882 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 166 , Number 6 , 2004 cell - on - cell arrangements exhibited an approximate twofold higher percentage of myosin striation . After 4 wk , the per - centage of myosin - striated myotubes in the top layer ap - proached 100 % ( Fig . 6 D ) . In contrast , cells in the bottom layer showed little indication of striation , despite their inti - mate contact with a soft and stably differentiated cell above . Fibroblasts ( FC7 ) are much softer than C2C12 cells with an AFM - determined elasticity of E Fibroblast (cid:2) 2 – 5 kPa ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Bushell et al . , 1999 ; Rotsch and Radmacher , 2000 ; Mahaffy et al . , 2004 ) . FC7’s were also used to create a first , patterned underlayer of cells ( Fig . 7 A ) . Consistent with the softness of fibroblasts , myotubes grown on FC7’s appear unable to striate myosin ( Fig . 7 B ) . Adhesion increases with substrate stiffness Cell adhesion after 4 wk in culture was studied on various substrates . Isolated myotubes were controllably peeled by a method of micropipette aspiration ( Fig . 8 , A and B ) that is well - suited to elucidating adhesion along the length of sin - gle cells ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . As individual myotubes are peeled , molecular adhesions break and limit the rate of peel - ing along the length of the myotubes ( Gallant et al . , 2002 ; Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Although cell peeling velocity , v peel , fluctuates with the imposed peeling tension , T , it is possible to separate out the effects of focal adhesion clusters for which v peel (cid:1) 0 ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Thresholding v peel measurements to include Figure 7 . Fibroblast underlayers are too soft for myotube striation . ( A ) Fibroblasts were plated first on micropatterned glass with subse - quent addition of myoblasts . The latter generates an top myotube ( B ) , where differentiation is limited to fusion after 1 – 2 wk as there is no indication of striation . Myosin expression is nonetheless more prominent in the nascent myotubes than in the bottom fibroblasts that appear to contain similar amounts of F - actin . Figure 8 . Substrate compliance influences myotube adhesion . Myotubes were mechanically peeled from their matrix after 4 wk in culture . ( A ) By applying a tension to a single myotube , the receptor - ligand bonds mediating adhesion were forcibly disrupted , and the myotube was peeled from the surface . ( B ) Cell peeling was accom - plished by aspirating myotubes into micropipettes . The wall shear stress imposed by the flowing fluid along the length of the myotube pulled the cell into the micropipette . ( C ) Mean peeling velocity is plotted as a function of the imposed tension , as calculated across the width of a cell and for aspiration of at least three cells at each substrate modulus ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Although each myotube peels at a different rate due to adhesive differences , a common resting tension could be extrapolated by simple log fits for results at each substrate stiffness . ( D ) Comparing the zero - velocity tension for myotubes cultured for 4 wk on various substrates to their state of differentiation , i . e . , striation per Fig . 4 , demonstrates a disconnect . Adhesive strength simply increases with substrate modulus , but striation is minimal on very stiff and rigid substrates , showing instead an optimum at intermediate cell - like compliances . All error bars are SEM . Differentiation optimum in substrate compliance | Engler et al . 883 only those points where cells are most rapidly detaching from the surface gives relatively smooth peeling curves ( Fig . 8 C ) . Clearly , sufficient tension on the cell , regardless of the substrate , will increase the disruption rate of receptor - matrix bonds . Fig . 8 C shows , nonetheless , that v peel versus T curves are increasingly shifted to the right as substrate stiffness increases . Cell peeling curves from each stiffness are consistently of a mathematical form ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) v peel (cid:2) a log T (cid:10) b . Evaluating each curve fit at v peel (cid:2) 0 gives a zero - velocity tension T o (cid:2) exp ( - b / a ) that is the minimum tension required to detach a cell from its substrate . T o also represents the maximum contractile prestress sustainable by the cells on a given substrate . Fig . 8 D shows that T o increases monotoni - cally as a function of substrate E , mirroring the rightward shifts to tighter adhesion with increasing substrate stiffness . Discussion Muscle differentiation in cell culture has been described for many years . However , the results here may motivate a care - ful reexamination of what matrix or microenvironment compliance has been used in the past and / or whether differ - entiated myotubes were growing on top of less differentiated myotubes in a more three - dimensional arrangement ( Figs . 6 and 7 ) . Recent efforts with muscle tissue constructs for im - plantation probably fit the latter description ( Borschel et al . , 2004 ) . Micropatterning used here keeps cells well separated and well defined , leading to this first set of observations of how cell differentiation , specifically myofibrillogenesis , pro - ceeds only within a small range of microenvironmental stiff - ness ( Fig . 5 ) . The results also appear the first to show that membrane adhesion strength increases exponentially with substrate stiffness ( Fig . 8 D ) . Tissue , matrix , and cell stiffness Muscle tissue is compliant as well as contractile , and many types of muscle passively resist extension with effective or av - erage moduli of E (cid:1) 5 – 15 kPa at strains up to 10 – 30 % ( Fung , 1993 ) . The transverse elasticity E Muscle (cid:2) 12 kPa here of C57 EDL muscle from AFM indentation fits within the published range of similar measurements on cultured myo - tubes , E C2C12 ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) . Elson and cowork - ers ( Pasternak et al . , 1995 ) used a glass microprobe ( R p (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) m ) to “poke” myotubes grown from C57 - derived satellite cells and reported an average indentation force f (cid:2) 12 . 3 (cid:3) 0 . 04 nN per (cid:11) (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) m ; assuming a Hertz indentation model for an incompressible solid , this early method of myo - tube poking yields E poke (cid:1) f / ( (cid:11) 3 / 2 R p1 / 2 ) (cid:2) 12 . 3 kPa . Al - though this is exactly as reported here for E Muscle , the same method for partially differentiated ( fused but not striated ) mdx - isolated satellite cells gave E poke - mdx (cid:1) 3 . 4 kPa . This is significantly softer than the E mdx found here by AFM , and does not represent the large heterogeneity found in vivo . The difference may reflect compensatory mechanisms in vivo such as an (cid:1) 10 - fold overexpression of filamin C at the sarcolemma in fully differentiated dystrophic muscle com - pared with normal sarcolemma ( Thompson et al . , 2000 ) . The passive elasticity of adherent muscle cells appears set by their contractility ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) because inhibition of myosin activity ( with BDM ) can soften myotubes up to 10 - fold in 30 min ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) . Basal contrac - tility differences might also explain the difference between mdx tissue and cell culture . Consistent with an important role for myosin , soft fibroblasts with E fibroblast (cid:7) 5 kPa , show much less myosin compared with myotubes ( Fig . 7 B ) . Iso - lated adherent myotubes grown on top of fibroblasts seem to sense this softness and thus lack striations . The important finding that E Muscle , E C2C12 , and E poke are all close to the optimum E * for normal myotube differentiation ( i . e . , myofibrillogenesis ) on compliant substrates reinforces the conclusion that substrate stiffness is a common critical factor in differentiation to striated muscle . Moreover , our finding that E mdx from excised EDL muscle is significantly greater than E Muscle is consistent with past findings on dia - phragm ( Stedman et al . , 1991 ) that suggested fibrotic stiffen - ing mechanisms . An increased stiffness is further suggestive of a pathological impact of microenvironmental elasticity ( be it a synthetic or natural ECM ) on muscle differentiation . Well before striation , even myoblast spreading is found to be responsive to substrate compliance , with a characteristic for greatest responsiveness of E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:2) 2 – 5 kPa . This is generally less than E Muscle and is suggestive of a genuine myo - blast - myotube distinction in substrate sensitivity . Like myo - blasts , SMCs have been found to exhibit similar stiffness - dependent spreading , E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:2) 8 – 10 kPa ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) , near the elasticity of the SMC - rich arterial media , E media (cid:2) 5 – 8 kPa ( Engler et al . , 2004b ) . Stem cells exhibit similar sensitivity to substrate elasticity in spreading and morphology ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200405004 / DC1 ) . Paxillin phosphorylation , for example , occurs in fibroblasts plated on stiff substrates for which spreading has been shown to be myosin dependent ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . Recent work with gadolinium , a calcium channel inhibitor , has suggested that calcium entry through the plasma membrane strongly influences cell trac - tions , making calcium a key second messenger in substrate sensing ( Munevar et al . , 2004 ) . The results collectively sug - gest that , by whatever molecular mechanism , the more an at - tached cell pulls on its substrate without being able to deform the substrate , the more the cell and its molecules deform rather than the substrate . Myofibrillogenesis , membrane adhesion , and mechanosensing Myofibrillogenesis is a protracted process that begins at the membrane . In a nascent myotube , (cid:12) - actinin rich “Z - bodies” assemble with F - actin and nonmuscle myosin II in cross - linked premyofibrils ( McKeena et al . , 1986 ; Sanger et al . , 2002 ) . Premyofibrils occur along the sides and at the ends of the myotube , spanning vinculin - rich adhesive contacts with the substrate ( Terai et al . , 1989 ) . Recruitment of muscle myosin II filaments and titin converts the premyofibrils into “nascent” myofibrils that lose nonmuscle myosin II and gen - erate contractile tension , prestress , or force , f . With suffi - cient tension , mature myofibrils assemble from nascent myofibrils as the small Z - bodies laterally fuse and align into Z - bands . Inhibitors of muscle myosin II , including BDM ( and BTS , a skeletal muscle myosin inhibitor ) , clearly block late stage myofibril bundling and so f clearly stimulates myo - 884 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 166 , Number 6 , 2004 fibrillogenesis ( Ramachandran et al . , 2003 ) . Although it is not difficult to understand that a nonlinear sensitivity of myofi - brillogenesis to f implies a nonlinear sensitivity to substrate elasticity , what molecules or complexes are especially sensi - tive to force or substrate displacements are presently unclear . One candidate mechanoreceptor is N - RAP , which ap - pears at the appropriate place and time for myofibrillogene - sis to be sensitive to substrate elasticity . N - RAP is a multido - main , nebulin - related , actin - binding protein with a LIM domain critical for myofibrillogenesis ( Carroll et al . , 2001 ) . N - RAP also binds (cid:12) - actinin and filamin ( Lu et al . , 2003 ) and is thought to form a membrane - bound scaffold for nu - cleating actin filament growth ( Carroll et al . , 2004 ) . Due to N - RAP’s large size ( (cid:6) 100 kD ) , it is believed to orient paral - lel to the membrane in order to mediate force transmission ( Mohiddin et al . , 2003 ) . Force , f , might drive important conformational changes as part of N - RAP’s scaffolding func - tion and cause the N - RAP LIM domain to act as a transcrip - tional regulator of cellular differentiation ( Sadler et al . , 1992 ) . Another LIM domain protein , skeletal muscle LIM protein 1 ( or SLIM1 ) , is known to induce myoblast elonga - tion by a (cid:12) 5 (cid:13) 1 integrin - dependent mechanism ( McGrath et al . , 2003 ) . The dependence shown here of myoblast elonga - tion on substrate stiffness at initial times ( Fig . 3 ) might thus reflect similar LIM domain - dependent mechanisms as the later striation in myotubes . N - RAP and LIM domain pro - teins are , however , only illustrative of the types of proteins or complexes that might facilitate myofibrillogenesis on only those matrices with a suitable tissue - like stiffness suited to fostering force generation ( Fig . 9 ) . However , an important question still remains : what might antagonize myofibrillogenesis on rigid substrates ( e . g . , glass ) and thus push the system beyond its optimum of Fig . 5 while , at the same time , not disrupt focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 D ) ? Mul - tiple mechanisms and / or factors probably contribute to this phenomenon . N - RAP might become phosphorylated , dissoci - ating it from actin ( Chew et al . , 2002 ) and thus limiting pre - myofibril nucleation . High stresses generated on the stiffest substrates by myosin II would also tend to forcibly dissociate key interactions such as those between N - RAP and its binding partners ; these interactions would otherwise be critical to ex - tending N - RAP as a conformationally active mechanorecep - tor . Such a pathway might be stimulated by phorbol esters , which have long been known to cause sarcomere disassembly without loss of vinculin - and talin - rich focal adhesions ( Lin et al . , 1989 ) . Integrin ligation activates PKC in muscle cells as do phorbol esters , with FAK activation downstream of these contributing to cell spreading and survival ( Disatnik and Rando , 1999 ) . FAK regulation could also occur by calcium - dependent mechanisms ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) or stretch - activation ( Nakamura et al . , 2001 ; Munevar et al . , 2004 ) that should also be sensitive to substrate stiffness ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) . Strong and stable focal adhesions that are found for many cell types only on the most rigid matrices ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) and also found here ( Fig . 4 D ) might activate the PKC pathway ( s ) far more strongly than is conducive for myofibrillogenesis ( Fig . 9 , rigid matrix ) . In the absence of stiff ECM resistance , however , assembly and phosphorylation of adhesion proteins are inhibited ( Pel - ham and Wang , 1997 ) , and thus F - actin assembly is reduced ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Thus , on extremely soft substrates ( 1 – 5 kPa ) , it can only be observed from the studies here that cell attachment is extremely weak ( Fig . 8 ) and , of course , striation is absent . Poor adhesion , generating only a small adhesion force , is consistent with reports of reduced mechanical load - ing inducing decreased myogenic expression ( Torgan et al . , 2000 ) and with other cell types grown on soft gels ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Beningo et al . , 2001 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) that prefer moderately stiff mechanical environments in vivo . Given the mechanosensitive down - regulation of focal and cy - toskeletal proteins observed on soft gels , we speculate that nu - cleation of premyobrils requires more mature and suitably stable adhesion structures and cytoskeletal filaments that are signaled by normal muscle stiffness ( Fig . 9 , soft matrix ) . A first illustrative estimate of the force needed for myofi - brillogenesis might be made from the minimum tension , T o , needed to peel myotubes off of the gels of tissue - like stiffness ( Fig . 8 ) . The maturation force per premyofibril , f * , when suitably calculated across the cell width w should not exceed T o otherwise the cell will self - peel . If N is the average number of premyofibrils across w , then f * (cid:7) T o (cid:8) w / N . Using the fo - cal adhesion staining in Fig . 4 D to estimate N (cid:2) 10 , w (cid:2) 20 (cid:1) m , and from Fig . 8 D T o (cid:2) 1 – 2 nN / (cid:1) m , the optimal force for differentiation on an E * substrate is f * (cid:14) 1 nN . This is much less than past estimates of cell forces on glass ( (cid:1) 5 – 10 nN ) , and suggests a need for lability in premyobril formation and myogenic progression ( Fig . 9 ) . Conclusion Muscle has well - recognized active and passive components , and so it is not surprising that striation requires more than cell anchorage . The studies here show that differentiation in culture depends intimately on optimal outside - in signaling of matrix elasticity . Most surprising , however , is the narrowness of the optimum substrate compliance , which has important implica - tions for muscle disease and stiffened as well as softened tissue . This is particularly relevant to attempts to introduce stem cells into dystrophic skeletal muscle or infarcted regions of myocar - Figure 9 . Differentiation is controlled by substrate compliance and adhesive tension . Myofibrillogenesis begins with membrane - nucleated premyofibrils and generates mature myofibrils in a contractile force - dependent manner . On substrates of tissue - like stiffness , the adhesion is moderate ( based on peeling tension ) , which allows premyofibrils to couple optimally to contractile forces , f * , fostering striation and myofibril maturation . On rigid or soft substrates , differentiation is delayed , if not stopped . Cells on rigid substrates ( e . g . , glass ) produce large isometric forces from well - formed stress fibers and numerous vinculin - enriched focal adhesions , all of which limit actin reorganization into striations . Cell adhesion and contractile forces on soft substrates are extremely weak leading to poorly spread cells that lack striations or even stress fibers . Differentiation optimum in substrate compliance | Engler et al . 885 dium ( Mueller et al . , 2002 ; De Bari et al . , 2003 ; Kobinger et al . , 2003 ) . Our results suggest that as both dystrophic and in - farct processes induce tissue stiffening , implanted stem cells are unlikely to fully differentiate into contractile muscle . Indeed , stem cells injected into fibrotic , dystrophic skeletal muscle have been shown to differentiate into connective tissue rather than muscle ( Huard et al . , 2003 ) , which could be a function of me - chanical signaling as well as well - accepted cytokine signaling to the cells . On the other hand , injection of stem cells into an ever - stiffening infarct zone of the heart resulted in the cells be - ginning to express myocyte markers , but stopping differentia - tion short of myofibrillogenesis , highly analogous to our cells on a stiff matrix ( Shake et al . , 2002 ) . Instruction of stem cells for tissue repair will undoubtedly require an understanding of the signaling pathways involved . Our results suggest that it may also require modification of tissue compliance if tissue repair is ultimately going to be successful . Materials and methods AFM on skeletal muscle tissue samples Left and right whole EDL muscles were excised from C57 normal ( 3 , 13 , and 21 mo old ) and mdx dystrophic mice ( 3 , 9 , and 15 mo old ) . Muscle was carefully divided into thinner bundles with a razor and wet mounted onto coverglass . Tissue section thickness was confirmed by light microscopy to be (cid:1) 100 (cid:1) m , and samples were kept in DME plus antibiotics . Samples were probed within 8 h of dissection to minimize rigor . Samples were placed on an Asylum 1 - D AFM ( Asylum Research ) and indented perpendicular to the myotube axis by a pyramid - tipped probe ( Veeco ) with a thermally deter - mined spring constant , k sp (cid:1) 60 pN / nm . Force - indentation profiles were ob - tained at (cid:6) 10 locations of each muscle section , and each profile was fit up to a 2 - (cid:1) m tip deflection with a Hertz cone model ( Domke and Radmacher , 1998 ; Rotsch et al . , 1999 ) to determine the elastic modulus . Histograms of all elastic moduli were plotted , and peak moduli were reported . Cell culture C2C12 cells ( (cid:7) 10 passage ; American Type Culture Collection ) were main - tained in polystyrene flasks in a 37 (cid:5) C , 5 % CO 2 incubator , and cultured in growth media : DME , supplemented with 20 % of FBS , 0 . 5 % chicken em - bryo extract , plus antibiotics . 1 – 2 d after plating on various substrates de - tailed below , cell media was switched to differentiation media , containing DME with 10 % horse serum , 1 % rat brain extract ( Portier et al . , 1999 ) , and antibiotics . FC7 primary human dermal fibroblasts were derived from a normal 21 - yr - old female donor ( anonymous ) and used between passage numbers 6 and 10 . FC7 human fibroblasts were cultured in identical me - dia conditions to C2C12 cells . Mesenchymal stem cells used in the supple - mental information section were obtained from Osiris Therapeutics and cultured in low glucose DME with 10 % FBS . Cell multilayers were created by plating an initial layer of cells on pat - terned glass substrates detailed below . A subsequent layer of C2C12 cells was plated on top of the initial layer 1 – 2 d after the initial plating and the media was switched to differentiation media 1 – 2 d later . The bottom cell layer consisted of either C2C12 cells or FC7 fibroblasts cultured in identi - cal conditions to C2C12 cells . Cell culture products were purchased from Invitrogen Life Technolo - gies , whereas all other products were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich un - less noted . Statistical image analyses were preformed with Scion Image and displayed as cell averages ( (cid:3) SD ) with paired t tests to determine sig - nificance . Live cell experiments were preformed for no more than 1 h at RT , with frequent media renewal . Gel substrates Cells were plated on PA gel substrates of variable stiffness and observed for up to 4 wk . PA gels were prepared on glass slides as previously established by Pelham and Wang ( 1997 ) and illustrated in Fig . 1 A . In brief , N , N (cid:4) meth - ylene - bis - acrylamide ( ranging from 0 . 03 % to 0 . 3 % ) was added to solutions of 5 or 10 % acrylamide ( C 3 H 5 NO ) in distilled water and cross - linked by the addition of 10 % ammonium persulfate ( 1 / 200 vol ) and N , N , N (cid:4) , N (cid:4) - tet - ramethylethylenediamine ( 1 / 2 , 000 vol ) . 25 (cid:1) l of the polymerizing solution was placed on an aminosilanized glass slide or coverslip , which co - valently bound the gel samples to a rigid support ; coverslips coated with dichlorodimethylsilane were placed on top to ensure a smooth gel surface and easy detachment for the final PA gel bound the aminosilinated cover - slip . When polymerized , PA gels were (cid:1) 70 (cid:1) m thick as confirmed by mi - croscopy . Their elastic modulus was set by the acrylamide and bis - acryl - amide concentrations ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Due to the antiadhesive properties of PA gel , chemical cross - linking of rat - tail collagen I ( BD Biosciences ) to the gel surface was done with heterobifunctional sulfosuccinimidyl - 6 - ( 4 (cid:4) - azido - 2 (cid:4) - nitrophenylamino ) hex - anoate ( sulfo - SANPAH ; Pierce Chemical Co . ) . The phenylazide group of sulfo - SANPAH , upon photoactivation at 365 nm , covalently attaches to the gel , leaving the succinimidyl ester to react with lysine (cid:15) - NH 2 of collagen . Cell patterning on gels To create isolated myotube strips , strips of collagen on PA gels were made with a micropatterned glass stamp ( Fig . 1 B ) . A mask with 100 - (cid:1) m - wide reflective lines spaced 20 (cid:1) m apart was designed and applied to a photo - resist - coated glass slide . The photoresist ( Shipley ) was excited by 365 nm light , binding it to the glass , and then baked to ensure attachment . When placed in an HF glass - etch for 10 min , glass in the 20 - (cid:1) m spaces without photoresist was removed , whereas photoresist - protected glass was not etched , thus giving 20 - (cid:1) m - wide grooves spaced 100 (cid:1) m apart along the length of the glass ( Fig . 1 B (cid:4) ) . Residual photoresist was then removed by acetone . Collagen solution ( 1 mg / ml ) was drawn into the grooves in this glass “stamp” , and the stamp was inverted onto the PA gel in the presence of the sulfo - SANPAH cross - linker . The sample was kept at pH 8 . 5 in a 37 (cid:5) C incubator overnight to allow the collagen to react with the gel . Due to the confinement of collagen , collagen bound solely to PA in the grooved areas of the stamp ( Fig . 1 , B , C , and C (cid:4) ) , thus promoting cell at - tachment only within these 20 - (cid:1) m strips ( Fig . 1 , C (cid:4) and D ) . Mechanics of gels The elastic modulus of various gels was determined by AFM as well as macroscopic methods ( Dimitriadis et al . , 2002 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ) . AFM measurements were averaged over several trials and multiple locations per gel ; collagen attachment had no detectable effect . Glass micropatterns Cells were also grown on glass , patterned by an IPN to produce isolated myotubes on glass ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . In brief , clean glass was patterned with photoresist and the exposed glass was bonded to allyltrichlorosilane . The photoresist was then stripped by acetone and the allyltrichlorosilane - covered glass was bound to the IPN . The remaining clean glass was bonded to 3 - aminopropyltriethoxysilane and a layer of collagen . The final pattern was a series of adhesive collagen - adsorbed glass strips , 20 - (cid:1) m wide and 200 – 1 , 000 - (cid:1) m long , surrounded by the antiadhesive IPN . Myoblast spreading and alignment Myoblasts were first observed on unpatterned PA gel of various stiffnesses for initial spreading and alignment tendencies ( as a ratio of the cell’s major axis to its minor axis equals “elongation ratio” ) after 4 and 24 h in culture . An orientational correlation function ( OCF , Eq . 2 ) between the reference and incident cell ( Bates and Frenkel , 2000 ) , was used to assess the sponta - neous alignment of unpatterned cells . ( 2 ) Immunofluorescence Patterned cells after 1 , 2 , and / or 4 wk were labeled with rhodamine - phal - loidin , Hoechst 33342 nuclear stain ( Molecular Probes ) , and immunofluo - rescent antibodies to myosin ( Zymed Laboratories ) or vinculin . Cells were fixed with formaldehyde and blocked in 5 % BSA for 1 h at 37 (cid:5) C . Patterned cells were permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Fisher Scientific ) and in - cubated at 4 (cid:5) C for 8 – 10 h in antimyosin ( Zymed Laboratories ) or vinculin , diluted 1 : 100 in PBS . Cells were permeabilized again and incubated in 1 : 100 FITC - conjugated anti – mouse IgG , and 60 (cid:1) g / ml TRITC - phalloidin at 37 (cid:5) C . Finally , cells were incubated in 1 : 100 Hoechst 33342 ( Molecular Probes ) at RT for 10 min . The samples were mounted onto coverslips with Gel / Mount ( Biomedia ) and viewed under epifluorescence at 60 (cid:8) ( 1 . 4 NA oil objective ) or total internal reflectance fluorescence microscopy . Images were obtained using a liquid nitrogen cooled CCD camera ( Photometrics ) . Micropipette aspiration Isolated myotubes were controllably peeled from gel and IPN - coated glass substrates to determine the dependence of minimal peeling tension on OCF 1 / 2 cos 2 θ ( ) 1 + [ ] = 886 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 166 , Number 6 , 2004 substrate stiffness . In brief , a fluid shear stress with Poiseuille pipe flow was created in a 75 - (cid:1) m aspirating pipette by a syringe pump with known flow rates ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . When positioned over a detached cell end , the local shear force induced cell peeling at the leading edge of a patterned myotube , aspirating the cell into the pipette . Peeling tension was calcu - lated from the shear stress integrated along the length of the cell in the pi - pette , given corrections for pipette entrance and gel displacement effects . The resultant peeling velocities from these experiments were very hetero - geneous due to randomly distributed focal adhesion within numerous cells tested ; thus velocity - tension plots were only made using binned averages of active peeling ( and not focal adhesion ) , defined as a velocity at least 50 % of the previous point . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that mesenchymal stem cells exhibit myoblast morphology on muscle - like stiffness . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200405004 / DC1 . The authors would like to thank Professors Jean and Joe Sanger and Profes - sor Yu Li Wang for very insightful discussions on premyobril formation , Dr . Huisheng Feng and Masataka Kawana for technical assistance and helpful discussions of methods , and the SEAS Microfabrication Center . Support for this work was provided by grants from the National Insti - tutes of Health ( to H . L . Sweeney and D . Discher ) , NSF - PECASE ( to D . Di - scher ) , and the MDA ( to D . Discher ) . Submitted : 3 May 2004 Accepted : 3 August 2004 References Bates , M . A . , and D . Frenkel . 2000 . Phase behavior of two - dimensional hard rod fluids . J . Chem . Phys . 112 : 10034 – 10041 . Beningo , K . A . , M . Dembo , I . Kaverina , J . V . Small , and Y . L . Wang . 2001 . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 881 – 888 . Bischofs , I . B . , and U . Schwartz . 2003 . Cell organization in soft media due to active mechanosensing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 9274 – 9279 . Borschel , G . H . , R . G . Dennis , and W . M . Kuzon Jr . 2004 . Contractile skeletal mus - cle tissue - engineered on an acellular scaffold . Plast . Reconstr . Surg . 113 : 595 – 602 , discussion 603 - 604 . Bushell , G . R . , C . Cahill , F . M . Clarke , C . T . Gibson , S . Myhra , and G . S . Watson . 1999 . Imaging and force - distance analysis of human fibroblasts in vitro by atomic force microscopy . Cytometry . 36 : 254 – 264 . Campbell , G . R . , and J . H . Chamley - Campbell . 1981 . Smooth muscle phenotypic modulation : role in atherogenesis . Med . Hypotheses . 7 : 729 – 735 . Carroll , S . L . , A . H . Herrera , and R . Horowits . 2001 . Targeting and functional role of N - RAP , a nebulin - related LIM protein , during myofibril assembly in cul - tured chick cardiomyocytes . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 4229 – 4238 . Carroll , S . L . , S . Lu , A . H . Herrera , and R . Horowits . 2004 . N - RAP scaffolds I - Z - I assembly during myofibrillogenesis in cultured chick cardiomyocytes . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 105 – 114 . Chew , C . S . , X . Chen , J . A . Parente , S . Tarrer , C . Okamoto , and H . Y . Qin . 2002 . Lasp - 1 binds to non - muscle F - actin in vitro and is localized within multiple sites of dynamic actin assembly in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 4787 – 4799 . Choquest , D . , D . Felsenfeld , and M . Sheetz . 1997 . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell . 88 : 39 – 48 . Collinsworth , A . M . , S . Zhang , W . E . Kraus , and G . A . Truskey . 2002 . Apparent elastic modulus and hysteresis of skeletal muscle cells throughout differentia - tion . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 : C1219 – C1227 . Cukierman , E . , R . Pankov , D . R . Stevens , and K . M . Yamada . 2001 . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science . 294 : 1708 – 1712 . De Bari , C . , F . Dell’Accio , F . Vandenabeele , J . R . Vermeesch , J . M . Raymackers , and F . P . Luyten . 2003 . Skeletal muscle repair by adult human mesenchymal stem cells from synovial membrane . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 909 – 918 . Dimitriadis , E . K . , F . Horkay , J . Maresca , B . Kachar , and R . S . Chadwick . 2002 . Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 82 : 2798 – 2810 . Disatnik , M . H . , and T . A . Rando . 1999 . Integrin - mediated muscle cell spreading . The role of protein kinase c in outside - in and inside - out signaling and evi - dence of integrin cross - talk . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 32486 – 32492 . Domke , J . , and M . Radmacher . 1998 . Measuring the elastic properties of thin polymer films with the atomic force microscope . Langmuir . 14 : 3320 – 3325 . Engler , A . J . , L . Bacakova , C . Newman , A . Hategan , M . Griffin , and D . Discher . 2004a . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys . J . 86 : 617 – 628 . Engler , A . J . , L . Richert , J . Wong , C . Picart , and D . Discher . 2004b . Surface probe measurements of the elasticity of sectioned tissue , thin gels and polyelectro - lyte multilayer films : correlations between substrate stiffness and cell adhe - sion . Surf . Sci . In press . Fung , Y . - C . 1993 . Biomechanics : mechanical properties of living tissues . Springer - Verlag New York Inc . , New York . 568 pp . Gallant , N . D . , J . R . Capadona , A . B . Frazier , D . M . Collard , and A . J . Garcia . 2002 . Micropatterned surfaces to engineer focal adhesions for analysis of cell adhe - sion strengthening . Langmuir . 18 : 5579 – 5584 . Gaudet , C . , W . A . Marganski , S . Kim , C . T . Brown , V . Gunderia , M . Dembo , and J . Y . Wong . 2003 . Influence of type I collagen surface density on fibroblast spreading , motility , and contractility . Biophys . J . 85 : 3329 – 3335 . Glukhova , M . A . , and V . E . Koteliansky . 1995 . Integrins , cytoskeletal and extracel - lular matrix proteins in developing smooth muscle cells of human aorta . In The Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell . Molecular and Biological Responses to the Extracellular Matrix . S . M . Schwartz and R . P . Mecham , editors . Aca - demic Press , New York . 37 – 79 . Griffin , M . , A . J . Engler , T . Barber , K . Healy , H . L . Sweeney , and D . Discher . 2004 . Patterning , prestress and peeling dynamics of myocytes . Biophys . J . 86 : 1209 – 1222 . Harris , A . K . , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . 1980 . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrin - kle in the study of cell locomotion . Science . 208 : 177 – 179 . Huard , J . , B . Cao , and Z . Qu - Petersen . 2003 . Muscle - derived stem cells : po - tential for muscle regeneration . Birth Defects Res Part C Embryo Today . 69 : 230 – 237 . Kobinger , G . P . , J . P . Louboutin , E . R . Barton , H . L . Sweeney , and J . M . Wilson . 2003 . Correction of the dystrophic phenotype by in vivo targeting of muscle progenitor cells . Hum . Gene Ther . 14 : 1441 – 1449 . Lin , Z . X . , J . Eshleman , C . Grund , D . A . Fischman , T . Masaki , W . W . Franke , and H . Holtzer . 1989 . Differential response of myofibrillar and cytoskeletal proteins in cells treated with phorbol myristate acetate . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1079 – 1091 . Lo , C . M . , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , and Y . L . Wang . 2000 . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 : 144 – 152 . Lu , S . , S . L . Carroll , A . H . Herrera , B . Ozanne , and R . Horowits . 2003 . New N - RAP - binding partners alpha - actinin , filamin and Krp1 detected by yeast two - hybrid screening : implications for myofibril assembly . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 2169 – 2178 . Mahaffy , R . E . , S . Park , E . Gerde , J . Kas , and C . K . Shih . 2004 . Quantitative analy - sis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of fibroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 86 : 1777 – 1793 . McGrath , M . J . , C . A . Mitchell , I . D . Coghill , P . A . Robinson , and S . Brown . 2003 . Skeletal muscle LIM protein 1 ( SLIM1 / FHL1 ) induces alpha 5 beta 1 - inte - grin - dependent myocyte elongation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 285 : C1513 – C1526 . McKeena , N . M . , C . S . Johnson , and Y . - L . Wang . 1986 . Formation and alignment of Z lines in living chick myotubes microinjected with rhodamine - labeled (cid:12) - actinin . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2163 – 2171 . Mohiddin , S . A . , S . Lu , J . P . Cardoso , S . L . Carroll , S . Jha , R . Horowits , and L . Fa - nanapazir . 2003 . Genomic organization , alternative splicing , and expression of human and mouse N - RAP , a nebulin - related LIM protein of striated muscle . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 55 : 200 – 212 . Mueller , G . M . , T . O’Day , J . F . Watchko , and M . Ontell . 2002 . Effect of injecting primary myoblasts versus putative muscle - derived stem cells on mass and force generation in mdx mice . Hum . Gene Ther . 13 : 1081 – 1090 . Munevar , S . , Y . L . Wang , and M . Dembo . 2004 . Regulation of mechanical interac - tions between fibroblasts and the substratum by stretch - activated Ca 2 (cid:10) en - try . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 85 – 92 . Nakamura , T . Y . , Y . Iwata , M . Sampaolesi , H . Hanada , N . Saito , M . Artman , W . A . Coetzee , and M . Shigekawa . 2001 . Stretch - activated cation channels in skel - etal muscle myotubes from sarcoglycan - deficient hamsters . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 281 : C690 – C699 . Oliver , T . , M . Dembo , and K . Jacobson . 1995 . Traction forces in locomoting cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 31 : 225 – 240 . Pasternak , C . , S . Wong , and E . L . Elson . 1995 . Mechanical function of dystrophin in muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 355 – 361 . Pelham , R . J . , and Y . - L . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are reg - ulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . Portier , G . , A . Benders , A . Oosterhof , J . Veerkamp , and T . Kuppevelt . 1999 . Dif - ferentiation markers of mouse C2C12 and rat L6 myogenic cell lines and the effect of differentiation medium . In Vitro Cell . Dev . Biol . Anim . 35 : 219 – 227 . Ramachandran , I . , M . Terry , and M . B . Ferrari . 2003 . Skeletal muscle myosin cross - Differentiation optimum in substrate compliance | Engler et al . 887 bridge cycling is necessary for myofibrillogenesis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 55 : 61 – 72 . Rotsch , C . , K . Jacobson , and M . Radmacher . 1999 . Dimensional and mechanical dynamics of active and stable edges in motile fibroblasts investigated by us - ing atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 921 – 926 . Rotsch , C . , and M . Radmacher . 2000 . Drug - induced changes of cytoskeletal struc - ture and mechanics in fibroblasts : an atomic force microscopy study . Bio - phys . J . 78 : 520 – 535 . Sadler , I . , A . W . Crawford , J . W . Michelsen , and M . C . Beckerle . 1992 . Zyxin and cCRP : two interactive LIM domain proteins associated with the cytoskele - ton . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1573 – 1587 . Sanger , J . W . , P . Chowrashi , N . C . Shaner , S . Spalthoff , J . Wang , N . L . Freeman , and J . M . Sanger . 2002 . Myofibrillogenesis in skeletal muscle cells . Clin . Or - thop . 403 : S153 – S162 . Shake , J . G . , P . J . Gruber , W . A . Baumgartner , G . Senechal , J . Meyers , J . M . Red - mond , M . F . Pittenger , and B . J . Martin . 2002 . Mesenchymal stem cell im - plantation in a swine myocardial infarct model : engraftment and functional effects . Ann . Thorac . Surg . 73 : 1919 – 1925 , discussion 1926 . Stedman , H . H . , H . L . Sweeney , J . B . Shrager , H . C . Maguire , R . A . Panettieri , B . Petrof , M . Narusawa , J . M . Leferovich , J . T . Sladky , and A . M . Kelly . 1991 . The mdx mouse diaphragm reproduces the degenerative changes of Duch - enne muscular dystrophy . Nature . 352 : 536 – 539 . Stenmark , K . R . , and R . P . Mecham . 1997 . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pulmonary vascular remodeling . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 59 : 89 – 144 . Tan , J . L . , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadriraju , and C . S . Chen . 2003 . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 1484 – 1489 . Terai , M . , M . Komiyama , and Y . Shimada . 1989 . Myofibril assembly is linked with vinculin , alpha - actinin , and cell - substrate contacts in embryonic car - diac myocytes in vitro . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 12 : 185 – 194 . Thompson , T . G . , Y . M . Chan , A . A . Hack , M . Brosius , M . Rajala , H . G . Lidov , E . M . McNally , S . Watkins , and L . M . Kunkel . 2000 . Filamin 2 ( FLN2 ) : A muscle - specific sarcoglycan interacting protein . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 115 – 126 . Torgan , C . E . , S . S . Burge , A . M . Collinsworth , G . A . Truskey , and W . E . Kraus . 2000 . Differentiation of mammalian skeletal muscle cells cultured on microcarrier beads in a rotating cell culture system . Med . Biol . Eng . Comput . 38 : 583 – 590 . Wang , H . B . , M . Dembo , and Y . L . Wang . 2000 . Substrate flexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 : C1345 – C1350 . Wang , N . , K . Naruse , D . Stamenovic , J . J . Fredberg , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , T . Polte , R . Mannix , and D . E . Ingber . 2001 . Mechanical be - havior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 7765 – 7770 . Wang , N . , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , J . Chen , S . M . Mijailovich , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fred - berg , and D . Stamenovic . 2002 . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 : C606 – C616 . Wu , H . W . , T . Kuhn , and V . T . Moy . 1998 . Mechanical properties of L929 cells measured by atomic force microscopy : effects of anticytoskeletal drugs and membrane crosslinking . Scanning . 20 : 389 – 397 .