. 1 easyFRAP : an interactive , easy - to - use tool for qualitative and quantitative analysis of FRAP data Maria Anna Rapsomaniki 1 , * , Panagiotis Kotsantis 1 , Ioanna - Eleni Symeonidou 1 , Nickolaos - Nikiforos Giakoumakis 1 , Stavros Taraviras 2 and Zoi Lygerou 1 , * 1 Laboratory of Biology and 2 Laboratory of Physiology , School of Medicine , University of Patras , 26505 , Rio , Patras , Greece ABSTRACT Summary : We present easyFRAP , a versatile tool that assists quantitative and qualitative analysis of FRAP data . The user can handle simultaneously large datasets of raw data , visualize fluores - cence recovery curves , exclude low quality data , perform data nor - malization , extract quantitative parameters , perform batch analysis and save the resulting data and figures for further use . Our tool is implemented as a single - screen Graphical User Interface and is highly interactive , as it permits parameterization and visual data quality assessment at various points during the analysis . Availability : easyFRAP is free software , available under the Gen - eral Public License ( GPL ) . Executable and source files , supplemen - tary material and sample datasets can be downloaded at : ccl . med . upatras . gr / easyfrap . html Contact : lygerou @ med . upatras . gr , rapsoman @ upatras . gr 1 INTRODUCTION Functional live cell imaging techniques such as Fluorescence Re - covery after Photobleaching ( FRAP ) exploit the properties of fluo - rescent proteins coupled with modern microscopy systems and are increasingly used to visualize , track and quantify molecules in living cells . Like all photobleaching methods , FRAP involves the irreversible bleaching of emitted light from molecules tagged with a fluorescent protein . During a typical FRAP experiment , a defined Region of Interest ( ROI ) is bleached by a short laser pulse and the fluorescence recovery in the ROI is then monitored by time - lapse microscopy . Analysis of FRAP data provides information on the kinetic behavior of the studied molecules , such as diffusion and macromolecular interactions ( Sprague , 2005 ) . A typical FRAP dataset consists of a number of noisy images acquired before , during and after photobleaching . These raw exper - imental data must be carefully processed to permit biologically significant conclusions to be drawn . FRAP data analysis consists of multiple steps . Following quantification of fluorescence intensi - ty in the various ROIs , intensity values are processed to remove noise , systematic bias and artifacts ( referred to as normalization ) , raw and normalized single - cell curves are visually inspected for * To whom correspondence should be addressed . quality assessment and mean values from multiple cel ls are plotted for qualitative analysis . Curve fitting and parameter extraction permits quantitative analysis ( Reits , 2001 ) . This process is usually performed manually using common spreadsheet software packages and is time - consuming and prone to errors . The need for automated analysis has led to the development of new software , such as FrapCalc ( http : / / cmci . embl . de / downloads / frap _ analysis ) , Virtu - alFRAP ( Cowan , 2009 ) and FRAPAnalyser ( http : / / actinsim . uni . lu / eng / Downloads / FRAPAnalyser ) . However , as functional live cell imaging becomes wide - spread in biology laboratories , there is a lack of fast , interactive and easy - to - use tools that do not require access to commercially licensed software and are not computationally intensive . 2 PROGRAM OVERVIEW In this note we present easyFRAP , a stand - alone application that facilitates qualitative and quantitative analysis of FRAP data . EasyFRAP allows the user to handle large datasets of raw data under various experimental conditions and thus facilitates differen - tial analysis and comparison . The main functions of easyFRAP include data visualization , normalization of the raw recovery curves and curve fitting and are accessible through a single screen GUI ( Fig . 1 . A ) . The user can easily exclude low quality data , ex - tract quantitative information and save the resulting data and fig - ures for further analysis . The FRAP analysis workflow is orga - nized as follows ( for a full description including quick start guide , manual and definitions see Supplementary Material ) : ( 1 ) The user selects a dataset for uploading . Input data must contain intensity measurements from the bleached area ( ROI1 ) , the total fluorescence area ( ROI2 ) and a back - ground area ( ROI3 ) and the corresponding time - points . EasyFRAP works with . csv , . txt and . xls file formats . ( 2 ) Raw intensities in ROI1 , ROI2 and ROI3 are plotted for visual examination and data quality assessment . ( 3 ) Using the list box , a number of low quality samples can be excluded ( and restored ) from the analysis . ( 4 ) The user is asked to insert the necessary parameters ( num - ber of prebleach , bleach and postbleach images ) . © The Author ( 2012 ) . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For Permissions , please email : journals . permissions @ oup . com Associate Editor : Prof . Martin Bishop Bioinformatics Advance Access published April 27 , 2012 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2015 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 2 Fig . 1 . ( A ) easyFRAP’s main Graphical User Interface . ( B ) Exported figures for Cdt1GFP ( left ) and GFPnls ( right ) data . Optionally , a number of initial pre - bleach values can be de - leted ( and restored ) , as they exhibit loss of fluorescence due to non intentional bleaching . The bleaching depth and the gap ratio values are then computed ( see Supplementary material ) . ( 5 ) The normalized recovery curves are computed and visual - ized , according to the commonly used formulas of double ( Phair , 2003 ) or full scale normalization ( Ellenberg , 1997 ) . ( 6 ) The user can select a sample of interest and perform curve fitting using a single or double term exponential equation . The t half ( half maximal recovery time ) and mobile fraction va l ues ( individual and mean values ) are computed . The da - ta , fitted curve and the residuals are visualized in order to evaluate the fit and goodness - of - fit statistics ( R - square ) are also provided ( see Supplementary material ) . The top menu allows the user to save all resulting data ( raw curves , normalized curves and curve fitting results ) in separate files at any point in the analysis for further use . It also includes an extra fea - ture for FRAP batch analysis ( multiple experiment analysis ) . These features are incorporated in a simple and intuitive GUI , allowing the user to analyze a complete dataset in just a matter of minutes . 3 TEST CASE EasyFRAP was tested using data from FRAP experiments on Cdt1GFP and on a nuclear localized construct of GFP ( GFPnls ) , on a Leica SP5 confocal microscope ( Fig . 1 . B ) . The t half and the mo - bile fraction values are computed for Cdt1GFP and GFPnls data ( Table 1 ) . Based on the calculated t half values we conclude that Cdt1GFP exhibits significantly slower mobility than GFPnls , but highly dynamic behavior , consistent with prior analyses ( Xouri , 2007a ) ( Xouri , 2007b ) ( Roukos , 2011 ) . Table 1 . Mean t half and mean mobile fraction for Cdt1GFP and GFP nls . t half ( s ) mobile fraction Cdt1GFP 0 . 55 ± 0 . 09 0 . 98 ± 0 . 02 GFPnls 0 . 27 ± 0 . 08 0 . 99 ± 0 . 01 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank the Advanced Light Microscopy Facility of the Universi - ty of Patras and John Lygeros , ETH Zurich for computing re - sources and software access . Funding : This work was supported by a grant from the Association for International Cancer Research . REFERENCES Cowan , A . E . et al . ( 2009 ) Using the Virtual Cell Simulation Environment for Extract - ing Quantitative Parameters from Live Cell Fluorescence Imaging Data . Microsc Microanal , 15 , 1522 - 1523 . Ellenberg , J . et al . ( 1997 ) Nuclear Membrane Dynamics and Reassembly in Living Cells : Targeting of an Inner Nuclear Membrane Protein in Interphase and Mitosis . J Cell Biol , 138 ( 6 ) : 1193 - 1206 . . Phair , R . D . et al . ( 2004 ) Measurement of Dynamic Protein Binding to Chromatin In Vivo , Using Photobleaching Microscopy . Method Enzymol , 375 : 393 - 414 . Reits , E . A . J . and Neefjes , J . J . ( 2001 ) From Fixed to FRAP : Measuring Protein Mobili - ty and Activity in Living Cells . Nat Cell Biol , 3 ( 6 ) : 145 – 145 . Roukos , V . et al . ( 2011 ) Dynamic recruitment of licensing factor Cdt1 to sites of DNA damage . J Cell Sci , 124 ( 3 ) : 422 - 434 . Sprague , B . L . and McNally , J . G . ( 2005 ) FRAP analysis of binding : proper and fitting . Trends Cell Biol , 15 ( 2 ) : 84 - 91 Xouri , G . et al . ( 2007a ) Cdt1 interactions in the licensing process : a model for dynam - ic spatiotemporal control of licensing . Cell Cycle , 6 ( 13 ) : 1549 - 1552 . Xouri , G . et al . ( 2007b ) Cdt1 associates dynamically with chromatin throughout G1 and recruits Geminin onto chromatin . EMBO J , 26 ( 5 ) : 1303 - 1314 . by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2015 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m