PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by : [ Stanford University ] On : 30 October 2009 Access details : Access Details : [ subscription number 906871167 ] Publisher Psychology Press Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . informaworld . com / smpp / title ~ content = t716100704 On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task P . C . Wason a a Medical Research Council Industrial Psychology Research Group , University College , London Online Publication Date : 01 July 1960 To cite this Article Wason , P . C . ( 1960 ) ' On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task ' , The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 12 : 3 , 129 — 140 To link to this Article : DOI : 10 . 1080 / 17470216008416717 URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17470216008416717 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . informaworld . com / terms - and - conditions - of - access . pdf This article may be used for research , teaching and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , re - distribution , re - selling , loan or sub - licensing , systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . Y JOURNAL OF FAILURE TO ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES IN A CONCEPTUAL TASK BY P . C . WASON Froin the Medical Research Council Indmtrial Psychology Research Group , University College , London This investigation examines the extent to which intelligent young adults seek ( i ) confirming evidence alone ( enumerative induction ) or ( ii ) confirming and disconfirniiiig evidence ( eliminative induction ) , in order to draw conclusions in a simple conceptual task . The experiment is designed so that use of confirming evidence alone will almost certainly lead to erroneous conclusions because ( i ) the correct concept is entailed by many more obvious ones , and ( ii ) the universe of possible instances ( numbers ) is infinite . Six out of 29 subjects reached the correct conclusion without previous incorrect ones , 13 reached one incorrect conclusion , nine reached two or more incorrect conclusions , and one reached no conclusion . The results showed that those subjects , who reached two or more incorrect conclusions , were unable , or unwilling to test their hypotheses . The implications are discussed in relation to scientific thinking . INTKODUCTION Inferences from confirming evidence ( Bacon’s “induction by simple enumeration” ) can obviously lead to wrong conclusions because different hypotheses may be com - patible with the same data . In their crudest form such inferences are apparent in the selection of facts to justify prejudices . In research merely confirming evidence is clearly of limited value . For example , suppose that it is suggested that a deficit ( x ) of a particular substance in the blood is uniquely related to a distinctive symptom ( y ) . ( In logical terms , x is a “necessary - and - sufficient” condition for y . ) And suppose that this hypothesis had been supported by confirming evidence alone , i . e . whenever the deficit had been induced , the symptom had appeared ( ignoring statistical issues for the sake of simplification ) . It might then be assumed that the hypothesis was tenable . But the evidence only allows the inference that x is a sufficient con - dition fory , that the deficit always leads to the symptom . To establish the postulated relation , there must also be no disconfirming evidence - - no case of the symptom without the deficit . For if such a case were obtained , the deficit would not be a necessary condition for the symptom , and the symptom would not be a sufficient condition for the deficit . The hypothesis that either was a necessary - and - sufficient condition for the other could be eliminated . The symptom would not be a reliable sign . Its absence would rule out the possibility of the deficit , but its presence would be ambiguous . In general , scientific inferences are based on the principle of eliminating hypo - theses , while provisionally accepting only those which remain . Methodologically , such eliminative induction implies adequate controls so that both positive and negative experimental results give information about the possible determinants of a phenomenon . 129 Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 = 3o QUARTERLY JOURNAL O F E X P E R I M E N T A L PSYCHOLOGY This investigation seeks to determine the extent to which intelligent young adults make rational inferences about abstract material which does not obviously suggest a conventional scientific approach . A concept attainment task would seem to be most suitable for this purpose , and one such typical task will now be considered in detail . Rruner , Goodnow and Austin ( 1956 ) report some ingenious experiments of this kind . The material of one experiment consisted of an array of 81 instances made up from all the combinations of four attributes , each exhibiting one of three values , i . e . shape ( cross , square , circle ) , d o u r ( green , red , black ) , number of figures ( one , two , three ) and number of borders ( one , ~ W Q , three ) . The subject’s task was to attain a concept , defined in terms of the values of these attributes , by choosing successive instances in order to find out whether they exemplified the concept . The authors describe a number of possible strategies which can be used . One of these , “successive scanning , ” is equivalent to induction by simple enumeration in ‘chat it involves testing successive hypotheses by using information derived from positive instances alone . For example , if “green squares” is the subject’s hypothesis , instances exhibiting these features are selected . If these turn out to be positive , “green squares” is considered to be necessary - and - sufficient for the concept . Rut if any of these instames are negative , a different hypothesis is similarly tried out , and accepted so long as it leads to positive instances . However , Wruner et al . , are not concerned with the fact that successive scanning can lead to merely sufficient , as opposed to necessary - and - sufficient , concepts . For example , if the correct concept is “red figures” ( of which there are 27 positive instances ) , it is possible to attain the incorrect concept , “red circles” ( of which there are g positive instances ) , by consistent use of confirming evidence , since all positive instances of this latter concept are also positive instances of the correct one . The incorrect concept , in this case , entails the correct one but is not entailed by it , i . e . “red circles” is a sufficient , but not a necessary - and - sufficient , condition for “red figures . ” Thus it is logically possible to arrive at incorrect concepts by successive scanning because only confirming evidence is utilized . Such a result , however , may not occur often because other instances , which might act as reminders of alternative possibilities , are displayed in front of the subject . In the above example , the subject’s attention might be directed to the possibility of “circles” being necessary , owing to the presence of instances exhibiting red squares and crosses . The present investigation is designed to compel the subject to encounter plausible sufficient conditions of the concept which must ultimately be eliminated in order to attain the necessary - and - sufficient conditions . The logical mechanism underlying efficient performance in the task rests upon what Von Wright ( 1951 ) terms “the fundamental , though trivial , fact that no confirming instance of a law is a verifying instance , but that any disconfirming instance is a falsifying instance . ” In the experiment the concept to be attained is “three numbers in increasing order of magnitude . ” Subjects were told that the three numbers 2 , 4 , 6 , conformed to a simple relational rule and that their task was to discover it by making up successive sets of three numbers , using information given after each set to the effect that the numbers con - formed , or did not conform , to the rule . It . will be seen that this task , as a whole , differs from previous studies of concept attainment . In the first place , the attributes are rules referring to relations between numbers , e . g . “consecutive even numbers . ” In this respect , the possible concepts are more like those found in the Goldstein - § cheerer ( 1941 ) test of abstractive ability , than those which can be attained in Bruner’s experiment , in which attributes cannot Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 FAILURE TO ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES 131 be combined into classes designated by names but have to be enumerated , e . g . “three red circles . ” Secondly , the possible instances ( triads of numbers ) are , in principle , infinite . In previous studies a finite universe of instances has been used . Such a universe , however , places great constraint on the scope of inductive thinking because the number of instances which exemplify any sufficient concept will always be less than the number which exemplify any necessary - and - sufficient one . Hence the number of instances of a given kind which can be tested is limited . But in the present task an endless series of instances , exemplifying a sufficient rule can be generated without forcing the subject to encounter an instance which would not exemplify it . Thirdly , the instances are not presented as stimuli , but have to be generated by the subject . In this may he is completely free to decide on the kind and amount of evidence which he considers adequate . If , on the other hand , all the possible instances are displayed simultaneously , the subject will know that all available evidence for the solution of the problem is already present . The subject keeps a record of successive instances , the reasons why he generated them and their outcome . The introduction of memory into concept attainment studies is an interesting , but essentially gratuitous variable which may distort inductive reasoning by placing an additional burden on the subject . FIGURE I Finally , no memory of previous instances is involved . Record sheet PROCEDURE The subjects , z . 9 psychology undergraduates ( 17 men and 12 women ) , were examined individually and instructed as follows : “You will be given three numbers which conform to a simple rule that I have in mind . This rule is concerned with a relation between any three numbers and not with their absolute magnitude , i . e . it is not a rule like all numbers above ( or below ) 50 , etc . Your aim is to discover this rule by writing down sets of three numbers , together with reasons for your choice of them . After you have written down each set , I shall tell you whether your numbers conform to the rule or not , and you can make a note of this outcome on the record sheet provided . There is no time limit but you should try to discover this rule by citing the minimum sets of numbers . Remember that your aim is not simply to find numbers which conform to the rule , but to discover the rule itself . When you feel highly confident that you have discovered it , and not befove , you are to write it down and tell me what it is . Have you any questions ? ” Subjects then wrote down their first set of numbers , under the numbers 2 , 4 , 6 , on the record sheet ( see Fig . I ) , together with the reasons why they had chosen them . The Experimenter then said “those numbers do conform to rule , ” or “those numbers do not Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 132 Q U A R T E R L Y J O U R N A L O F E X P E R I M E N T A L PSYCHOLOGY conform to the rule , ” according to whether they were in increasing order of magnitude . The second set of numbers was then written down by the subject , the Experimenter giving the appropriate information as before . This procedure continued until the subject wrote down a rule . If it was incorrect , the subject was told so and instructed to carry on as before . The experiment continued until the correct rule was announced , or the time for the session exceeded 45 minutes , or the subject expressed a wish to give up . The time was recorded and the implications of the results discussed . Finally , subjects were warned not to talk about the experiment . Quantitative If the rule was the correct one , the experiment was concluded . RESULTS Results will be classified as follows : ( a ) frequency of correct and incorrect rules , ( b ) extent of enumerative and eliminative thinking , ( c ) frequency of negative instances , ( d ) immediate response to incorrect rules , and ( e ) types of incorrect rule . ( a ) Frequency of covvect avzd iacorrect rules . Table P shows the frequency of suc - cessive announcements of rules . The first announcement can either be correct TABLE I FREQUENCY OF ANNOUNCEMENTS ( n = 29 ) Fivst Second Thivd Announce - Announce - Announce - nzent ~ ment I ment I Fouvth I Fifth An ; Z % yce - j Announce - ment ( defined as the “immediate correct announcement” ) or incorrect . ( In nearly all cases incorrect rules were sufficient ones , e . g . “increasing intervals of two . ” ) How - ever , a third category , “none , ” is included for those subjects ( one in this case ) who made no announcement of a rule of any kind throughout the experiment . Those cases which fall into the “incorrect” category at the first announcement are redis - tributed within the second announcement categories , according to whether the second rule announced is correct or incorrect . But once again , the category “none” is included to cover those subjects who made no subsequent announcement of a rule of any kind after their first incorrect one . Similarly , those cases which fall into the second incorrect announcement category are redistributed within the third announce - ment categories on the same basis . Thus , the table provides a running record of the behaviour of the subjects . In the sample there were II undergraduates in their first year , 12 in their second year and six in their third year . Of the six subjects who made the immediate Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 FAILURE TO ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES I33 correct announcement , four were in their second year and two in their third year . There were no sex differences and no differences between Arts and Science background . An index of the kind of thinking used was constructed by considering the nature of the instances in relation to the reasons given by the subject for choosing them . Each “reason for choice” was classified as either compatible , or incompatible , with all subsequent instances ( in - cluding that instance for which each was specifically given ) - The total number of instances , compatible and incompatible with reasons , was computed for each subject , ( i ) up to the first rule announced , and independently ( ii ) from the first rule to the second one ( if any ) . It was assumed that thinking was enumerative if there were a high proportion of compatible instances , and eliminative if there were a high pro - portion of incompatible ones . The ratio of the number of incompatible , to compatible instances provided an eliminative / enurnerative index for each subject . The mean ratio was 1’79 ( n = 6 ) for those who made the immediate correct announcement , and 0 . 24 ( n = 22 ) for those who made a first incorrect announcement . As predicted on the basis of the logical considerations given in the Introduction , a significant difference was obtained between these two nieans ( 9 = 0 * 0002 , one tail test ) . The statistic used was Whit - field’s ( 1947 ) extension of Kendall’s S ( 1948 ) to a dichotomous variable . The mean number of instances generated before making the immediate correct announcement was 8 . 0 ( range 5 to g ) , and the mean number before making a first incorrect announcement was 3 - 68 ( range I to 7 ) . This difference is , of course , highly significant . Thus , subjects who arrived at merely sufficient rules did so on the basis of relatively few confirming instances , while those who attained the necessary - and - sufficient rule tended to eliminate sufficient ones . For those subjects whose second announcement was ( i ) correct , and ( ii ) incorrect , the mean ratios were 0 . 50 and 0 . 19 respectively . The difference between them was just short of statistical significance ( p = 0 . 08 , one tail test ) . It should be noted that in 18 out of the 22 cases of a first incorrect rule , the reason given for the subject’s first instance was subsequently announced as at least a part of their first rule . Figure 2 shows Vincent curves ( Hilgard , 1938 ) of the mean number of incompatible instances ( per fifths of the total number of instances for each subject ) for ( i ) the immediate correct announcement , ( ii ) the first incorrect announcement , and ( iii ) the first incorrect announcement , omitting I j subjects without any incompatible instances . ( Vincent curves represent the performance of subjects , equated in terms of their progress towards a criterion which is not defined by a fixed number of trials . The total number of trials taken by each subject to reach this criterion is divided into equal fractions , e . g . fifths , tenths , etc . , and the progress made within each successive fraction is recorded . ) The ratio of the number of negative instances of the correct rule to the total number of instances generated was computed for each subject , ( i ) up to the first rule announced , and ( ii ) from the first rule to the second one ( if any ) . The mean ratio was 0 . 21 ( n = 6 ) for those who made the immediate correct announcement and 0 . 04 ( n = 22 ) for those who made a first incorrect announcement . AS predicted , a significant difference was obtained between these two means ( p = o * oooz , one tail test ) . For those subjects whose second announcement was ( i ) correct , and ( ii ) incorrect , the mean ratios were 0 . 38 and 0 . 09 respectively , and the difference between them was significant ( p = 0 . 003 , one tail test ) . A highly significant correlation was obtained between the eliminative / enumerative index and the negative instance index , the value of tau being - + - 0 . 72 ( 9 < 0 . 00003 , ( b ) Extent of enumerative and eliminative thinking . ( c ) Frequency of negative instances . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 I34 QUARTERLY J Q U R N A L O F E X P E R I M E N T A L PSYCHOLOGY one tail test ) It should be noted that a negative instance of the correct rule does not suffice to eliminate a sufficient rule . For example , a negative instance such as 6 , 4 , 2 is compatible with the sufficient rule , “intervals of two in increasing magnitude . ” A sufficient rule can only be eliminated by a positive instance which is incompatible with it . The instance which is generated immediately after an incorrect announcement can either be compatible or incompat - ible with the rule announced , and it can be either a positive or a negative instance of ( a ) Immediate response to incorrect rules . the correct rule . 0 . 90 0 . 80 0 . 70 Table HI shows the frequency of cases in these four categories . FIGURE z = First rule correct ( n = 6 ) F = First rule incorrect = First rule incorrect omitting 15 subjects without any incompatible instances ( n = 22 ) b = 7 ) Successive fifths of eotal instances for each subject Vincent curves of the mean number of instances incompatible with reasons up to the first rule . Qn a purely logical criterion it would be expected that , when subjects knew that their rule was incorrect ( by being told so ) , they ~ d d depart from it and try a new one . But it will be seen from the table that in more than half the cases the rule is main - tained , even though some other attribute , e . g . order , may be tested . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 FAILURE TO ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES I35 Four different kinds of incorrect rule were announced most frequently : ( i ) numbers increasing in intervals of 2 , i . e . a ( a + d ) , ( a + zd ) where d = z ; ( ii ) increasing multiples of the first number , i . e . a ( a + d ) , ( a + zd ) where a = d ; ( iii ) consecutive even numbers , i . e . za , ( za + d ) , ( za - + zd ) where d = 2 ; and ( iv ) arithmetic progression , i . e . a , ( a f d ) , ( a + zd ) . In addition , five rules were announced only once : ( i ) “the first number added to the second number gives the third” ; ( ii ) “numbers which add up to twelve” ; ( iii ) “ascend - ing progression formed by adding or multiplying by a constant” ; ( iv ) “arithmetic or ( e ) Types of ivtcorrect rule . TABLE I1 FREQUENCY OF TYPES OF INSTANCE IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING INCORRECT RULES Conzfiatible with incovvect rule Positive instances . . . . Negative instances . . Total . . . . * . . . I1 5 16 13 I5 2 geometric progression” ; and ( v ) “the second number is the first number plus one and the third is the first number plus four . ” All these rules , except the last one , are consistent with the initially given instance . Table IT1 shows the frequency of incorrect rules at successive announcements . The five rules announced only once by five different subjects are classified together under “others . ” It will be noticed that “increasing intervals of two” is by far the most frequent at the first The frequency of correct rules is included for comparison . TABLE I11 FREQUENCY OF INCORRECT RULES AT SUCCESSIVE ANNOUNCEMENTS Rules Successive Announcements 1st 1 2nd 1 3rd 1 4th I 5th - - - _ _ _ _ - Increasing intervals of two . . . . * . 0 0 0 Multiples of first number . . . . . . Consecutive even numbers . . . . . . 0 Arithmetic progression . . . . . . . . Others . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I 0 0 0 0 0 2 I 0 0 0 Correct rule . . . . . . . . . . announcement but that there is only one case of it as a second announcement . On the other hand , there were twice as many cases of the more general rule , “arithmetic progression , ” at the second announcement than there were at the first . And this is obviously because the rules are not logically independent . “Consecutive even numbers” entails “increasing intervals of two , ” which in turn entails “arithmetic progression . ” Similarly , “multiples of the first number” entails “arithmetic pro - gression” and , of course , all these rules entail the correct one , “increasing magnitude . ” Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 136 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY Qualitative Six protocols are given below , the first three from subjects who made the immedi - ate correct announcement , and the second three from those who made incorrect announcements . The most interesting qualitative Eeature of the results is that the successive announcements of three subjects consisted in the repetition of a single rule in different terms from those used on their previous announcements . In addition , three subjects reformulated their rules immediately after being told that they were incorrect , i . e . before generating any further instances . ( This latter type of repetition was not counted as a new announcement in the quantitative results . ) In protocol No . 4 it will be seen that the second rule reads , “the middle number is the arithmetic mean of the other two , ” and the third reads , “the difference between two numbers next to each other is the same . ” These rules do not mean exactly the same thing . The first can be fulfilled by instances such as 5 7 g and 9 7 5 , the second by 5 7 g , g 7 5 and j 7 j . Rut , in any case , their connotations are wider than the instances given for them warrant . But the fourth rule , “adding a number , always the same one to form the next number , ” which follows the negative instance , 12 8 4 , is restricted in scope so that it could not be fulfilled by some instances which could fulfil the two previous rules . Its connotation is now exactly that of arithmetic progression . It is not clear whether this subject , ( i ) appreciated the fine difference between the second and third rules , in spite of the fact that their instances conformed to arithmetic progression , or ( ii ) thought that there were no differences between the rules , but assumed that their expression was relevant , or ( iii ) thought that the rules were completely different , failing to realize that arithmetic progression was their common factor . The followiiig is a short extract from protocol No . j . The rule is that the central figure is the mean of the two external ones . 6 10 14 : the difference between the first two numbers , added to the second number gives the third ; 7 I I 15 : to test this theory ; 2 25 48 : to test this theory . The rule is that the difference between the first two figures added to the second figure gives the third . Thus , in this case it appears from the words , “to test this theory , ” as if the subject was announcing what she took to be a new rule , rather than merely reformulating the previous one . The third example is found with the rule of successive multiples . The rule is to start with a basic number , then double it and thirdly to multiply it by 14 28 42 ; 7 14 21 : the first number being a half of the second and a third of the third ; The rule is that the second number is double the first and two - thirds of the third . It seems likely that in these cases the subjects cannot change their concepts ( as judged by their instances ) but change their description of them . Changing the description of a rule makes them think they have changed the rule itself : a verbal adjustment is made to satisfy the demand for a different hypothesis . These observa - tions seem to be related to the findings of Hull ( 1920 ) and Smoke ( 1932 ) that a concept can be accurately employed before it can be correctly verbalized . Both results testify to the fact that insight into the mental processes involved in thinking is often defective . The failure of a spell or curse can always be ascribed to some inexactitude in its utterance , rather than to its intrinsic deficiency : it would have worked , if only it had been pronounced correctly . The immediate repetition of the second rule in protocol No . 6 is particularly striking in this context . three . 8 16 24 : same reason ; g 18 27 ; 50 IOO 150 . The present phenomenon is also reminiscent of magical thinking . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 F . 4ILURE T O ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES I37 The rule is that the three numbers must be in an ascending series and separated by regular step intervals . The rule is that the first number can be arbitrarily chosen ; the second number must be greater than the first and can be arbitrarily chosen ; the third number is larger than the second by the same amount as the second is larger than the first . EXAMPLES OF THE : PROTOCOLS The words which follow an instance are its “reason for choice . ” Negative instances are printed in italics . A . Immediate covvect announcenzent No . I . 12 24 36 : unit figures are even and increase in two’s ; 8 10 12 : even numbers increasing in two’s ; 2 6 10 : even numbers increasing in four’s ; 6 4 2 : even numbers decreasing in two’s ; 2 6 8 : even numbers ascending ; 8 j4 98 : even numbers ascending ; I 17 23 : ascending numbers ; I 18 23 : ascending numbers ; I 2 3 : ascending numbers . No . 2 . 3 6 9 : three goes into the second figure twice and into the third figure three times ; z 4 8 : perhaps the figures have to have an L . C . D . ; z 4 10 : same reason ; 2 j 10 : the second number does not have to be divided by the first one ; ro 6 4 : the highest number must go last ; 4 6 10 : the first number must be the lowest ; 2 3 j : it is only the order that counts ; 4 j 6 : same reason ; I 7 13 : same reason . No . 3 . 8 10 12 : continuous series of even numbers ; 14 16 18 : continuous series of even num - bers ; 20 22 24 : continuous series of even numbers ; 3 j 7 : continuous series of odd numbers ; I z 3 : continuous series b u t with smaller intervals ; 3 z r : reverse ; 2 4 8 : doubling series ; 2 2 4 : two numbers the same ; 6 4 2 : reverse of original numbers ; I g IIZ : simple ascending numbers . Fenzale , aged 25 , 3vd year uiadevgraduate The rule is ascending numbers ( 9 minutes ) . Female , aged 21 , m d y e w undevgvaduate The rule is that the figures must be in iiumerical order ( 16 minutes ) . Mule , aged 25 , zvzd yeav undevgvaduate The rule is any ascending series of different numbers . ( 10 minutes ) . B . Incovvect announcements No . 4 . same reason ; I 3 j : two added to preceding number . number . Female , aged rg , rst yenv uvzdeigvaduate 8 10 12 : two added each time ; 14 16 18 : even numbers in order of magnitude ; 20 22 24 : The rule is that by starting with any number two is added each time to form the next 2 6 10 : middle number is the arithmetic mean of the other two ; I 50 99 : same reason . The rule is that the middle number is the arithmetic mean of the other two . 3 10 17 : same number , seven , added each time ; o 3 6 : three added each time . The rule is that the difference between two numbers next to each other is the same . rz 8 4 : the same number is subtracted each time to form the next number . The rule is adding a number , always the same one to form the next number . I 4 9 : any three numbers in order of magnitude . The rule is any three numbers in order of magnitude . Female , aged 19 , rst y e w undevgvaduate ( 17 minutes . ) No . j . I 3 5 : add two to each number to give the following one ; 16 18 20 ; to test the theory that it is simply a progression of two . These are chosen so that they are more complex and not merely simple numbers ; 99 IOI 103 : to test the progression of two theory , using odd numbers . As these numbers can hardly have any other connection , unless it is very remote , the rule is a progression of adding two , in other words either all even or all odd numbers . I j 9 : the average of the two numbers on the outside is the number between them . The rule is that the central figure is the mean of the two external ones . 6 10 14 : the difference between the first two numbers , added to the second number gives the third ; 7 I I I j ; to test this theory ; z z j 48 : to test this theory . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 138 QUARTERLY JOURNAL O F EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY The rule is that the difference between the first two figures added to the second figure gives the third . 7 9 11 , 11 I2 13 , I2 9 8 , 77 7 . 5 71 . Subject gives up . ( 45 minutes . ) No . 6 . 8 IQ 12 : step interval of two ; 7 9 11 : with numbers not divisible by two ; I 3 5 : to see if rule may apply to numbers starting at two and upwards ; 3 5 r : the numbers do not necessarily have to be in ascending or descending order ; 5 3 r ‘ could be in descending order . The rule is that the three numbers must be in ascending order separated by intervals I I 13 15 : must have one number below ten in the series ; I 6 I I : ascending series with regular step interval . The rule is that the three numbers must be in an ascending series and separated by regular step intervals . The rule is that the first number can be arbitrarily chosen ; the second number must be greater than the first and can be arbitrarily chosen ; the third number is larger than the second by the same amount as the second is larger than the first . Male , aged 23 , 2nd yew uadevgvaduate Qf two . I 3 13 : any three numbers in ascending order . The rule is that the three numbers need have no relationship with each other , except ( 38 minutes . ) that the second is larger than the first , and the third larger than the second . DISCUSSIQN Only six of the 29 subjects gave the correct rule at their first announcement . These subjects tended both to eliminate more possibilities , and to generate more negative instances than did those who announced a first incorrect rule . Significant differences were obtained between these two groups on both criteria at the o . 000 ~ level of confidence . On the other hand , the 13 subjects , who announced only one incorrect rule , presumably did so on the basis of simple enumeration , i . e . they assumed that confirm - ing evidence alone justified their conclusions . But there are two other possible explanations of their behaviour . Firstly , these subjects may have announced a rule in the hope that doing so would remove them from the experimental situation . This seems unlikely , however , because they all appeared highly motivated , and they expressed considerable surprise when told that their rule was not the one which the experimenter had in mind . Secondly , they may have assumed that there could be only one rule to which the initially given instance could conform . Familiarity with the “number series” type of problem in which there is supposed to be only one correct continuation , might have induced a set for the one “right” answer . It could also be argued that the correct rule ( increasing magnitude ) was so trivial that students would have been reluctant to entertain it . However , the point is not that most subjects failed to give the correct rule at their first announcement , but that they adopted a strategy which tended to preclude its attainment . But after they had announced one incorrect rule , 10 of these 13 subjects ( three made no further announcement ) gave the correct rule at their next announcement . And the results suggest that they did this by eliminating more possibilities , and generating more negative instances than those subjects who announced a second in - correct rule . The difference between these two groups was just short of significance ( 9 = 0 . 08 ) on the eliminative / enumerative index , and was significant at the 0 . 003 level on the negative instance index . Thus , it is possible that , at the beginning of the experiment , the reinforcement of these subjects’ rules by their confirming instances blocked the notion that there might be any alternative . But after this set Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 FAILURE TO ELIMINATE HYPOTHESES I39 had been broken by an incorrect announcement , they were able to eliminate any remaining alternative which occurred to them . These possibilities can hardly apply to those nine subjects who announced two or more incorrect rules . For after their first announcement they had evidence to show that stating rules would not remove them from the situation , and that there could be more than one possible rule . Hence , it appears as if from then on they were reasoning by simple enumeration , and announcing sufficient rules , either from an inability to do otherwise , or from a preference for what Bruner has called a “direct test . ” In other words , they might not have known hou - to attempt to falsify a rule by themselves ; or they might have known how to do it , but still found it simpler , more certain or more reassuring to get a straight answer from the experimenter about the correctness of their rules . This second possibility , however , seems rather remote because the method of elimination is not difficult to apply . The attempted falsification of a rule in no way depends on discovering a suitable alternative to substitute for it . All that the subject had to do is to generate an instance which is similar to previous positive ones , but does not conform to the tested rule . If the outcome is positive , the rule can be decisively eliminated . Thus , the subject has to reason that a rule will be false , if it does not cover a positive instance of the correct rule . He must , at some stage , relinquish a rule which may have been confirmed , and adopt that eliminative strategy which Bruner calls “conservative focussing” and which Mill called the method of difference . The announcement of a sufficient rule is , in fact , the frequent result of enumerative thinking . In the present investigation , in contrast to Bruner’s experiment , the use of confirming evidence alone will compel the announcement of a rule , as the only way of finding out whether or not it is the correct one . Here there are no ready - made instances displayed which might be used to correct a sufficient rule . On the contrary , instances exemplifying such a rule can never be exhausted . Thus , the experiment demonstrates the dangers of induction by simple enumeration as a means of dis - covering truth . In real life there is no authority to pronounce judgement on infer - ences : the inferences can only be checked against the evidence . The results show that very few intelligent young adults spontaneously test their beliefs in a situation which does not appear to be of a “scientific” nature . The task simulates a miniature scientific problem , in which the variables are unknown , and in which evidence has to be systematically adduced to refute or support hypotheses . Generating an instance corresponds to doing an experiment , knowledge that the instance conforms , or does not conform , corresponds to its result , and an incorrect announcement corresponds to an inference from uncontrolled data . The kind of attitude which this task demands is that implicit in the formal analysis of scientific procedure proposed by Popper ( 1959 ) . It consists in a willingness to attempt to falsify hypotheses , and thus to test those intuitive ideas which so often carry the feeling of certitude . The methodological analogue of this attitude consists in the use of increasingly stringent controls . Obviously scientific method can be taught and cultivated . But the readiness ( as opposed to the capacity ) to think and argue rationally in an unsystematiaed area of knowledge is presumably related to other factors besides intelligence , in so far as it implies a disposition to refute , rather than vindicate assertions , and to tolerate the disenchantment of negative instances . And certainly these qualities are no less important for thinking in general than the more obvious cognitive functions associated with purely deductive reasoning . Frequent arguments with him about the logical issues involved in this research have greatly helped to clarify my ideas , and his constructive criticism of the manuscript has been invaluable , I should also like I am primarily indebted to Dr . A . K . Jonckheere . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009 I40 QUARTERLY J O U R N A L O F EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY to thank Professor G . C . Drew , Dr . R . P . Kelvin and Mr . R . D . Shepherd for valuable comments . Finally , I am indebted to my subjects for the great interest and enthusiasm which they expressed in the experiment . REFERENCES BRUNER , J . S . , GOOI ~ NOW , J . I , , and AUSTIN , 6 . A . ( 1956 ) A Study of Thinking . GOLDSTEIN , K . , and SCHEERER , M . ( 1941 ) . HILGARD , E . R . ( 1938 ) . HULL , C . L . ( 1920 ) . KENDALL , 3 % . 6 . ( 1948 ) . Rank Correlation Methods . London . POPPER , K . R . ( 1959 ) . The Logzc ofScienti $ c Discovevy . London . SNIQKE , K . L . ( 1932 ) . TON WRIGHT , 6 . H . ( 1951 ) . WHITFIELD , J . W . ( 1947 ) . London . Abstract and concrete behaviour ; an experi - A summary and evaluation of alternative procedures for the Psychol . Monogr . , mental study with special tests . construction of Vincent curves . 28 , No . 123 . Psychol . Monogv . , 53 , No . 239 . Psychol . Bull . , 35 , 282 - 97 . Quantitative aspects of the evolution of concepts . An objective study of concept formation . Psychol . Monogr . , 42 , London . No . 191 . ranked , the other dichotomous . A Tveatase on Probability and Induction . Rank correlation between two variables , one of which is Biometvika , 34 , 292 . Dow nloaded By : [ Stanford University ] At : 18 : 18 30 October 2009