1 Fungal small RNAs ride in extracellular vesicles to enter plant cells through clathrin - mediated endocytosis Baoye He 1 , Huan Wang 1 , Guosheng Liu 2 , Angela Chen 1 , Alejandra Calvo 1 , Qiang Cai 2 , Hailing Jin 1 * 1 Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology , Center for Plant Cell Biology , Institute for Integrative Genome Biology , University of California , Riverside , CA , USA . 2 State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice , College of Life Science , Wuhan University , Wuhan , China . * Correspondence : hailingj @ ucr . edu 2 Abstract Small RNAs ( sRNAs ) of the fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea can enter plant cells and hijack host Argonaute protein 1 ( AGO1 ) to silence host immunity genes . However , the mechanism by which these fungal sRNAs are secreted and enter host cells remains unclear . Here , we demonstrate that B . cinerea utilizes extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) to secrete Bc - sRNAs , which are then internalized by plant cells through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . The B . cinerea tetraspanin protein , Punchless 1 ( BcPLS1 ) , serves as an EV biomarker and plays an essential role in fungal pathogenicity . We observe numerous Arabidopsis clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) around B . cinerea infection sites and the colocalization of B . cinerea EV marker BcPLS1 and Arabidopsis CLATHRIN LIGHT CHAIN 1 , one of the core components of CCV . Meanwhile , BcPLS1 and the B . cinerea - secreted sRNAs are detected in purified CCVs after infection . Arabidopsis knockout mutants and inducible dominant - negative mutants of key components of CME pathway exhibit increased resistance to B . cinerea infection . Furthermore , Bc - sRNA loading into Arabidopsis AGO1 and host target gene suppression are attenuated in those CME mutants . Together , our results demonstrate that fungi secrete sRNAs via EVs , which then enter host plant cells mainly through CME . 3 Introduction Communication between hosts and microbes / parasites involves the exchange of bioactive molecules , such as proteins and metabolites between hosts and pathogens . Recent studies show that RNA molecules , particularly regulatory small RNAs ( sRNAs ) , also travel between hosts and interacting organisms to induce gene silencing in trans , a mechanism termed “cross - kingdom RNA interference” ( RNAi ) 1 - 14 . Since the initial discovery of cross - kingdom RNA trafficking 3 , this regulatory mechanism has subsequently been observed between plants and many fungal pathogens 11 , 12 , 15 , 16 , an oomycete pathogen 13 , and the parasitic plant Cuscuta campestris 14 . Interestingly , cross - kingdom sRNA trafficking has been found to be important even for symbiosis , specifically in mycorrhizal interactions 10 and between prokaryotic Rhizobia and host soybean roots 8 . This mechanism is not limited to plant - microbe / parasite interactions and has also been observed in animal - pathogen / parasite systems 4 - 6 . In many of these interactions , the transferred microbial sRNAs can utilize host AGO proteins to silence host immune response genes 3 , 8 , 11 - 13 . Given the importance of these sRNA effectors in pathogen virulence , anti - fungal strategies that target and silence genes in the RNAi machinery , such as the Dicer - like ( DCL ) proteins that generate sRNAs , have been shown to be effective for plant protection 15 , 17 - 21 . Further protection could likely be achieved by inhibiting the transport processes that enable cross - kingdom trafficking of these sRNAs . However , how these transferred sRNAs are delivered and internalized by plant cells is still a mystery . Extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) are used across the kingdoms of life to package and deliver functional molecules into recipient cells or organisms 2 , 6 , 22 - 24 . These EVs can provide protection to their cargos from degradation by extracellular enzymes , which is especially important for RNA trafficking . Indeed , EVs have been utilized by plants to deliver plant small RNAs to fungal pathogens during cross - kingdom RNAi 2 . Furthermore , many fungal species have been shown to secrete EVs , including yeast and filamentous fungi 25 - 28 . Although , only recently have EVs from plant pathogenic fungi such as the maize smut pathogen Ustilago maydis 29 , the wheat pathogen Zymoseptoria tritici 30 , and the cotton pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f . sp . vasinfectum 31 been characterized . Still , it remains unclear whether plant fungal pathogens secrete EVs to deliver sRNAs into interacting plant cells . 4 Endocytosis is the primary route for eukaryotic cells to internalize plasma membrane proteins , lipids , and extracellular materials into the cytoplasm 32 , 33 . In plants , endocytosis is involved in many critical biological processes , including growth , development , signal transduction , nutrient uptake , and plant - microbe interactions 34 - 37 . In the past decades , substantial progress has been made in characterizing the function of endocytosis in plant immune responses . For instance , several plasma - membrane localized receptor proteins involved in the plant defense response are internalized through the endocytosis pathway 34 , 37 - 39 . Analogous to animal and yeast cells , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the main route to internalize extracellular and plasma membrane materials in plants 40 . Clathrin is a triskelion - shaped complex composed of three clathrin heavy chains ( CHCs ) and three clathrin light chains ( CLCs ) 32 . By interacting with the plasma membrane , cargo proteins , adaptor protein 2 complex ( composed of α , β2 , μ2 , and σ2 subunits ) and other accessory protein factors , clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) can be formed 32 , 41 . The CCPs will then bud off from the plasma membrane to form clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) to deliver cargos into cells 32 . CME also contributes to the internalization of protein effectors from the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae and the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora infestans into plant cells 42 , 43 . In addition to CME , other sterol - sensitive clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) pathways exist in plants . The most well - studied proteins in the CIE pathway are membrane microdomain - associated flotillin1 and remorins 44 , 45 . Whether CME and / or CIE pathways play a role in the internalization of fungal sRNA effectors and EVs is unknown . Here , we find that B . cinerea secretes EVs to deliver fungal sRNAs , and the B . cinerea tetraspanin protein BcPLS1 is essential for B . cinerea pathogenicity and EV - mediated Bc - sRNA secretion . Furthermore , utilizing genetics , biochemistry , and cell biology approaches , we demonstrate that CME is the major pathway for the uptake of fungal EVs and their sRNA cargo . Results B . cinerea can secrete BcPLS1 - positive EVs during infection B . cinerea EVs were first isolated from the supernatants of wild - type strain B05 . 10 liquid culture using the traditional differential ultracentrifugation ( DUC ) method 25 . Nanoparticle tracking analysis ( NTA ) was used to determine the size distribution of isolated EVs , and a peak at 113 nm 5 was observed for B . cinerea EVs ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) . The isolated EVs were further examined by transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) , which confirmed the typical cup - shaped form of EVs ( Supplementary Fig . 1b ) . To further purify EVs obtained from B . cinerea liquid culture , the isolated EVs were subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation as per the minimal information guidelines for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018 ( MISEV2018 ) 46 . Analysis using NTA indicated that EVs were predominantly concentrated in sucrose fractions four and five with peak diameters of 93 nm and 94 nm , respectively ( Fig . 1a ) . EVs were observed in both fractions and exhibited typical cup - shaped structures as confirmed by negative staining and TEM analysis ( Fig . 1b ) . The morphology and size distribution of the isolated B . cinerea EVs were comparable to EVs from other species , including plants and plant pathogenic fungi 29 - 31 , 47 , suggesting that B . cinerea has the ability to secrete EVs into the external environment . Some tetraspanin proteins , such as CD63 in mammalian cells and tetraspanin 8 ( TET8 ) in plant cells , are known to be markers for EVs 2 , 48 . In B . cinerea , two tetraspanin coding genes , Punchless 1 ( BcPLS1 ) and Tetraspanin 3 ( BcTSP3 ) , have been discovered 49 . Although these two proteins display limited amino acid sequence similarity , they share conserved structural hallmarks , including four transmembrane domains ( TM1to TM4 ) , a small extracellular loop ( ECL1 ) , an intracellular loop ( ICL ) , and a large extracellular loop ( ECL2 ) ( Supplementary Fig . 2a , b ) . To determine whether these tetraspanin proteins are in B . cinerea EVs , both BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 proteins were tagged with a fluorescent protein YFP and inserted into the B . cinerea genome by homologous recombination . The EVs were isolated and separated using sucrose gradients from the liquid culture of both transgenic strains . As shown in Fig . 1c , BcPLS1 was found in the EV fractions three to five at the density of 1 . 11 – 1 . 19 g ml – 1 and mainly concentrated at fraction four . However , BcTSP3 was hardly detected in isolated EV fractions , although it can be expressed in B . cinerea cells ( Fig . 1c and Supplementary Fig . 2c ) . Meanwhile , BcPLS1 - YFP - positive EV signals can be observed under confocal microscopy ( Fig . 1d ) . Both transformed strains were then used to challenge wild - type Arabidopsis plants and samples were examined by confocal microscopy ten hours post - inoculation . As shown in Fig . 1e , BcPLS1 - YFP - labeled vesicles were clearly observed around infection sites . However , it was difficult to detect secreted vesicle signals from BcTSP3 - YFP - infected plants . EVs were then isolated from BcPLS1 - YFP or BcTSP3 - YFP infected plants and separated using sucrose gradients . 6 Both BcPLS1 - YFP and Arabidopsis exosome marker TET8 were concentrated in the same fractions ( Fig . 1f ) . To further confirm that B . cinerea secretes EVs during infection , BcPLS1 - YFP or BcTSP3 - YFP strains were used to inoculate Arabidopsis TET8 - CFP transgenic plants . EVs were isolated from infected plants using sucrose gradients , and fraction four was examined under confocal microscopy . The EVs from BcPLS1 - YFP - infected TET8 - CFP plants exhibited two distinct fluorescent protein - labeled signals ( Fig . 1g ) . These results demonstrate that during infection , B . cinerea can secrete BcPLS1 - positive EVs . B . cinerea secretes small RNA effectors through EVs Our previous work demonstrated that B . cinerea could transfer sRNA effectors into host plant cells to suppress host immunity and achieve infection 3 . To study whether B . cinerea uses EVs to transport these sRNA effectors , we examined fungal sRNAs using sRNA stem - loop reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) analysis in EVs isolated from B . cinerea liquid culture 50 . Three previously discovered sRNA effectors , Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 , were detected in B . cinerea EVs isolated by sucrose gradient fractionation . These sRNAs were concentrated primarily in fractions four and five , which also contained high levels of BcPLS1 ( Fig . 2a ) . Additionally , EVs from fraction four were used for a Micrococcal Nuclease ( MNase ) protection assay . As shown in Fig . 2b , the sRNA effectors can still be detected after MNase treatment unless vesicles were ruptured with Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 2b and Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . This result indicates that B . cinerea sRNAs are localized within and protected by EVs . To assess the role of tetraspanin proteins in B . cinerea small RNA delivery , deletion mutants of BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 were generated by targeted gene replacement in wild - type B . cinerea strain B05 ( Supplementary Fig . 4a ) . Two independent mutant strains of each gene Δbcpls1 and Δbctsp3 were complemented by expressing BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 , respectively ( Supplementary Fig . 4a ) . On minimal medium ( MM ) , but not potato dextrose agar , the growth rate of the Δbcpls1 strain was reduced compared to the wild - type and Δbctsp3 strains . ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . The spores of both mutants were collected and used to inoculate wild - type Arabidopsis plants to assess their virulence . The Δbcpls1 mutant strain showed a significant reduction in virulence with the lesion size being reduced by 84 % compared with the wild - type strain . ( Fig . 2c ) . However , Δ bctsp3 resulted in lesions similar to the wild - type strain ( Fig . 2c ) . To further understand the functions of BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 in EV - mediated sRNA secretion from B . cinerea , EVs were isolated from 7 the culture supernatants of both the Δ bcpls1 and Δ bctsp3 strains and Bc - sRNA amounts were examined by real - time PCR and sRNA stem - loop RT - PCR . Compared with the wild - type strain , significantly lower levels of Bc - sRNAs were detected in Δ bcpls1 EVs , while similar amounts of Bc - sRNAs were detected in Δ bctsp3 EVs ( Fig . 2d and Supplementary Fig . 6a ) . Further , we found the EV amount released by Δ bcpls1 was significantly reduced compared with wild - type and Δ bctsp3 strains ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) . This result indicates that BcPLS1 is important for EV - mediated sRNA secretion in B . cinerea . To further confirm the function of BcPLS1 in B . cinerea virulence and EV secretion , we premixed Δbcpls1 spores with EVs isolated from wild - type B . cinerea and used the mixture to infect Arabidopsis plants . As shown in Fig . 2e , EVs from wild - type B . cinerea can partially restore the virulence of Δbcpls1 . The lesion size increased from 12 % of the wild - type strain to 73 % of the wild - type strain . This result demonstrates that the cargoes in B . cinerea EVs are important for fungal virulence . To determine whether sRNAs in the EVs contribute to the fungal virulence , we premixed spores from a B . cinerea mutant dcl1dcl2 strain with EVs isolated from wild - type B . cinerea culture supernatants and then inoculated Arabidopsis plants . The dcl1dcl2 mutant cannot generate sRNA effectors , such as Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 , and exhibits a very weak virulence phenotype 3 . However , when premixed with EVs from wild - type B . cinerea , which contain sRNA effectors , B . cinerea dcl1dcl2 mutant pathogenicity was dramatically recovered . The lesion size increased from 24 % of the wild - type strain to 61 % of the wild - type strain ( Fig . 2f ) . We then further used EVs isolated from the dcl1dcl2 mutant to complement the phenotype of Δbcpls1 . Results showed that B . cinerea dcl1dcl2 mutant EVs could only restore the virulence of Δbcpls1 from 18 % of the wild - type strain to 32 % of the wild - type strain ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . This modest increase may be attributed to the other cargoes in the dcl1dcl2 EVs , because fungal EVs have been found to serve as a mode of transport for various virulence - related proteins and toxic metabolites 51 . These results indicate that fungal DCL1 / DCL2 - generated sRNA effectors encapsulated in B . cinerea EVs play an important role in fungal virulence . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is involved in plant immunity against B . cinerea 8 In the mammalian system , multiple endocytic pathways are used to internalize EVs and their cargoes from various origins 52 . To determine whether endocytosis pathways are also involved in the uptake of B . cinerea EVs and their sRNA cargoes , we first treated wild - type Arabidopsis leaves with plant CME - specific inhibitor ES9 - 17 or CIE - specific inhibitor MβCD 53 , 54 . Vesicle internalization was strongly suppressed by ES9 - 17 but not by MβCD ( Supplementary Fig . 8a , c ) , suggesting that CME is likely the major pathway for EV uptake . However , we found that ES9 - 17 can also suppress the growth of B . cinerea ( Supplementary Fig . 8b ) . So , the chemical treatment may cause a broad impact on both plants and fungi . Therefore , we chose genetic methods to ascertain the involvement of the CME pathway in the plant immune response to B . cinerea infection . We performed B . cinerea infection on two Arabidopsis CME pathway mutants , chc2 and ap2σ , which carry mutations in CLATHRIN HEAVY CHAIN 2 and ADAPTOR 2 SIGMA SUBUNIT , respectively . Compared with wild - type plants , both chc2 - 1 and ap2σ mutants displayed reduced disease susceptibility to B . cinerea ( Fig . 3a ) . The relative lesion size on chc2 - 1 and ap2σ mutants was significantly reduced by 60 % and 73 % compared with wild - type plants , respectively ( Fig . 3a ) . Furthermore , we took advantage of inducible lines that expressed the C - terminal part of clathrin heavy chain ( INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 ) or the clathrin coat disassembly factor Auxilin2 ( AX2 ) ( XVE > > AX2 ) . Overexpression of both lines blocked CME in Arabidopsis 39 , 55 . After induction , both INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 and XVE > > AX2 lines showed significantly higher resistance to B . cinerea infection ( Fig . 3b , c ) . The relative lesion size on INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 and XVE > > AX2 was reduced by 45 % and 59 % compared with control plants . These results confirm that CME contributes to plant susceptibility to B . cinerea infection . Next , we tested the possible function of the CIE pathway in plant immunity against B . cinerea infection . We examined the response of CIE - pathway mutants flot1 / 2 , remorin 1 . 2 , and remorin 1 . 3 after infection of wild - type B . cinerea . Because there is a close homolog of FLOT1 in Arabidopsis named FLOT2 , we generated flot1 / 2 double mutants by knocking out FLOT2 in the flot1 mutant background using the Crispr - Cas9 system ( Supplementary Fig . 9 ) . Two independent lines were inoculated by B . cinerea , both of them showed a slightly more susceptible phenotype compared with wild - type ( Fig . 3d ) . The homozygous knockout mutants of rem1 . 2 and rem1 . 3 T - DNA insertion lines were available and used for pathogen assays . No noticeable difference was observed between rem1 . 2 or rem1 . 3 and wild - type plants when challenged by B . 9 cinerea spores ( Fig . 3e ) . These results indicate that CME plays a more important role than CIE in plant susceptibility and the internalization of B . cinerea sRNAs into plant cells . Bc - sRNA loading into host AGO1 and subsequent host target gene suppression is attenuated in CME mutants B . cinerea sRNAs can hijack the host plant RNAi machinery and silence plant immunity - related genes by binding to Arabidopsis Argonaute protein AGO1 3 . If CME is a critical factor in the internalization of EVs and Bc - sRNAs into plant cells , the deficiency of CME is likely to impact the level of sRNAs incorporated into the AGO1 protein . To determine whether CME is crucial for the uptake of B . cinerea sRNAs , we immunoprecipitated AGO1 from B . cinerea - infected wild - type Arabidopsis and CME mutants , including chc2 - 1 and ap2σ . As shown in Fig . 4a , the fungal sRNA effectors , Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 , were all detected in the AGO1 - associated fraction precipitated from infected wild - type plants . However , the amount of B . cinerea sRNAs loaded into AGO1 was significantly reduced by around 60 % and 80 % in chc2 - 1 and ap2σ , respectively , as compared with wild - type plants . This observation was further supported by similar results obtained from INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 and XVE > > AX2 lines ( Fig . 4b , c ) . We also assessed whether CIE contributes to Bc - sRNA uptake by challenging flot1 / 2 , rem1 . 2 , and rem1 . 3 mutants with wild - type B . cinerea . Unlike CME mutants , the amount of AGO1 - associated Bc - sRNAs in flot1 / 2 , rem1 . 2 , and rem1 . 3 mutants was similar to wild - type plants ( Fig . 4d , e ) . As the total amount of AGO1 protein was not decreased in any of the CME and CIE mutants ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ) , the decrease of Bc - sRNAs associated with AGO1 in CME mutants can be attributed to a reduction in the Bc - sRNA internalization of plant cells , rather than a decrease in the amount of AGO1 protein . Thus , CME is a key pathway for Bc - sRNA trafficking into host plant cells . B . cinerea sRNA effectors have a suppressive effect on predicted host target genes during infection 3 , 56 . If CME is truly essential for cross - kingdom trafficking of Bc - sRNAs , we expect to observe attenuated suppression of host target genes in CME mutants . Thus , we quantified the transcript levels of Bc - siR3 . 1 target gene At - PRXIIF , Bc - siR3 . 2 target genes At - MPK1 and At - MPK2 , and Bc - siR5 target gene At - WAK , at 0 and 24 hours post - infection . As expected , the expression of these genes was suppressed in wild - type plants after 24 hours of infection . However , this suppressive effect was attenuated in the chc2 - 1 , ap2σ , induced INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 and 10 XVE > > AX2 mutants shown by no reduction in target gene transcript levels 24 hours after infection ( Fig . 4f and Supplementary Fig . 11a , b ) . We performed a similar experiment to explore the role of the CIE pathway in target gene suppression using the flot1 / 2 , rem1 . 2 , and rem1 . 3 mutants . Unlike CME mutants , all target genes were still significantly suppressed in the CIE mutants ( Supplementary Fig . 12a , b ) . These results again demonstrate that CME is the major pathway for Bc - sRNA uptake . B . cinerea induces accumulation of clathrin - coated vesicles around infection sites To further validate the role of CME in the internalization of B . cinerea sRNA effectors into host plant cells , Arabidopsis CLATHRIN LIGHT CHAIN 1 ( CLC1 ) - GFP and CLATHRIN HEAVY CHAIN 2 ( CHC2 ) - YFP transgenic plants were challenged by B . cinerea . After eight hours of inoculation , the infected plants were stained with the endocytic tracer FM4 - 64 and subjected to confocal microscopy to examine the role of endocytosis in plant response 36 . Numerous distinct fluorescently labeled endocytic vesicles were observed around B . cinerea infection sites , indicating the activation of endocytosis during B . cinerea infection ( Fig . 5a , b ) . Meanwhile , we detected co - localization between CLC1 - GFP or CHC2 - YFP with the FM4 - 64 signal on vesicles at the infection sites , with co - localization rates of 52 % and 60 % , respectively ( Fig . 5a , b ) . These results suggest that B . cinerea infection induces the accumulation of CCVs around infection sites . In addition to clathrin , AP2 adaptor complexes are important components for CME in plant cells 57 . AP2A1 - GFP plants were also treated with wild - type B . cinerea spores . Similar to CHC2 - YFP and CLC1 - GFP plants , clear colocalization ( 46 % ) was observed on the endocytic vesicles at the infection sites between AP2A1 - GFP with FM4 - 64 ( Fig . 5c ) . We also generated the YFP - tagged FLOT1 transgenic line and monitored the endocytosis through FM4 - 64 staining following inoculation with B . cinerea . As shown in Fig . 5d , endocytotic FM4 - 64 signals can also be observed , but the percentage of colocalization ( 10 % ) between YFP - FLOT and FM4 - 64 was limited . These results further confirm that CME is more involved than CIE in B . cinerea infection of Arabidopsis . B . cinerea EVs and sRNAs are associated with clathrin - coated vesicles Unlike in animal cells , plant CCVs are not disassembled immediately after scission from the plasma membrane , which allows isolation of CCVs by immunocapture 58 . We isolated plant CCVs from CLC1 - GFP transgenic plants after infection with B . cinerea using a two - step procedure comprising differential centrifugation , followed by immunoaffinity purification with antibodies 11 against GFP . GFP signal was clearly detected on the surface of GFP - TRAP agarose beads after incubation with isolated CCVs ( Fig . 6a ) . To examine whether the immunoprecipitated CCVs were intact , the GFP - TRAP beads after pull - down were subjected to scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) analysis . Fig . 6b shows that most of the immuno - captured CCVs were intact with typical cage structures on the surface of GFP - TRAP agarose beads . We further inoculated CLC1 - GFP plants with the BcPLS1 - mCherry B . cinerea strain . After ten hours of inoculation , colocalization of CLC1 - GFP and BcPLS1 - mCherry signals can be observed around the infection sites ( Fig . 6c ) . Further , BcPLS1 - mCherry can be detected in the CCV fractions isolated from infected plants ( Fig . 6d ) . All three of the Bc - sRNA effectors that we examined previously were also present in the immunopurified CCVs ( Fig . 6e ) . These results provide conclusive evidence that B . cinerea EVs are responsible for transporting Bc - sRNAs and enabling their internalization through plant CME . Discussion Cross - kingdom RNAi is emerging as a critical regulatory mechanism across interaction systems . While recent studies show that plant and animal hosts utilize extracellular vesicles to protect and transport sRNAs to their fungal pathogens 2 , 5 , how fungi transported sRNAs to their hosts was still unknown . Here , we demonstrate that , just like their plant hosts , B . cinerea utilizes EVs to protect and transport sRNAs to plants , providing the first example of fungi utilizing EVs for cross - kingdom RNA transport . Furthermore , we show that plant cells internalize fungal EVs through clathrin - mediated endocytosis . CME is one of the major pathways for plant uptake of environmental molecules , with extensive studies demonstrating its vital role in different biological processes 36 , 59 , including plant defense responses 37 , 39 , 60 - 62 . While the plant CME pathway has recently been implicated in the uptake of protein effectors from fungal and oomycete pathogens 42 , 43 , we demonstrate here that it is also critical for the plant uptake of fungal sRNA effectors and fungal EVs . Although in mammals , intraorganismal EV internalization into recipient cells could occur through CME 63 , the mechanisms of internalization of foreign EVs from one organism to another in a different kingdom had never been reported until this study . We found that numerous CCVs accumulated around infection sites , indicating the activation of CME during B . cinerea infection . Additionally , the B . cinerea EV marker protein BcPLS1 is colocalized with plant CME component protein CLC1 12 during fungal infection and can be detected in the immunopurified plant CCVs . These findings strongly support the EV internalization by plant CME pathway . Furthermore , the EV - delivered sRNAs were also detected in the immunopurified CCVs , providing further evidence for the role of plant CME in the uptake of fungal EV - delivered sRNAs . These new insights into the mechanistic basis for cross - kingdom RNA communication between fungi and plants can help in the development of translational applications . For example , in B . cinerea and many other pathogens , such as Fusarium graminearum , Penicillium italicum , Colletotrichum gloeosporioides , and Valsa mali , sRNA effectors are generated by DCL proteins and used to promote virulence , and mutation in the DCL genes attenuates the virulence of these pathogens 3 , 64 - 67 . Consequently , targeting and silencing DCL and other components of the RNAi machinery , even transiently , has been proven to provide powerful protection against these pathogens by hampering their ability to synthesize sRNA effectors 15 , 17 - 21 . For example , using spray - induced gene silencing ( SIGS ) to suppress the expression of both DCL1 and DCL2 genes , plants can be effectively protected from infection by various pathogens , including fungal pathogens B . cinerea 15 , 17 - 19 , F . graminearum 20 , and oomycete pathogen Plasmopara viticola 21 . Recent application of modern nanotechnology in SIGS 19 , 68 - 70 , especially the utilization of artificial nanovesicles that mimic EVs for RNA protection 18 , 68 , largely improves the efficacy of SIGS for crop protection . Here , by elucidating how sRNA effectors are transported from fungal pathogens into plants , we provide additional mechanistic targets for disease control . Specifically , we demonstrate that the EV - associated B . cinerea tetraspanin protein , BcPLS1 , is an important protein for fungal EV secretion and virulence . Previous studies on PLS1 in both the B . cinerea T4 strain and Magnaporthe grisea showed that Δ pls1 mutants exhibit weak virulence 71 , 72 , and the M . grisea PLS1 protein was found to be mainly expressed during infection and localized to appressorial membranes 72 . Consistently , we found the Δ bcpls1 mutant showed weak virulence on plants ( Fig . 2c ) and the BcPLS1 protein can be observed on the appressorial membranes ( Fig . 1e ) . Furthermore , we detected BcPLS1 in the isolated B . cinerea EVs , and found that the delivery of B . cinerea sRNA effectors is compromised in the Δ bcpls1 mutant , suggesting that BcPLS1 - positive EVs are critical for sRNA effector transport . Thus , we have expanded the repetoire of effective genetic targets , such as PLS1 , for anti - fungal strategies such as spray - induced gene silencing . Combining existing effective gene targets with PLS1 and other EV proteins targeting in SIGS will likely 13 provide even more effective crop protection by targeting not only sRNA biogenesis , but also the trafficking mechanism of sRNA effectors from pathogens to plants . Overall , our study helps to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms of EV - mediated sRNA trafficking during “cross - kingdom RNAi” and will further inform efforts in other organisms that also deliver sRNAs into interacting species . Given how widespread the phenomenon of cross - kingdom RNAi is in different branches of life , this will have strong rammifications for anti - pathogen measures in agriculture and human health . 14 Methods Fungal strains and culture conditions Botrytis cinerea strain B05 . 10 was used as a host strain for gene replacement and fluorescent labeling experiments , and as a wild - type ( WT ) control in all experiments . WT , mutants , and transgenic strains were all grown on complete media Potato Dextrose Broth with 1 . 5 % Agar ( PDA ) at room temperature . The minimal medium ( MM ) utilized for measuring growth rate was prepared according to a previous study 73 . The MM was prepared as follows ( per liter of distilled H 2 O ) : sucrose , 30g ; KH 2 PO 4 , 1g ; MgSO 4 •7H 2 O , 0 . 5g ; KCl , 0 . 5g ; FeSO 4 •7H 2 O , 10mg ; NaNO 3 , 2g ; agar , 20g ; trace element solution , 0 . 2ml . The trace element solution contains ( per 95ml of distilled H 2 O ) : citric acid , 5g ; ZnSO 4 •7H 2 O , 5g ; Fe ( NH 4 ) 2 ( SO 4 ) 2 •6H 2 O , 1g ; CuSO 4 •5H 2 O , 0 . 25g ; MnSO 4 •H 2 O , 50mg ; H 3 BO 4 , 50mg ; NaMoO 4 •2H 2 O , 50mg ; EV isolation EV isolation from fungal culture supernatant was performed as previously described 25 . In order to eliminate the possibility of contamination from the culture medium , the medium was initially ultracentrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 1 hour to eliminate any particles . Subsequently , the medium was filtered using a 0 . 22 μm filter prior to its use for B . cinerea culture . 10 6 B . cinerea spores were cultured for 48 hours at room temperature with shaking on the rocker in 100 ml of purified YEPD ( 0 . 3 % yeast extract , 1 % peptone , 2 % glucose , pH 6 . 5 ) medium . The culture supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 3 , 000 g for 15 mins at 4°C . The supernatant was then filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer to further remove cells . The cell - free supernatant was centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 30 mins to remove smaller debris and a second round of centrifugation at 10 , 000 g for 30 mins was performed to ensure the removal of aggregates . The resulting supernatant was filtered through a 0 . 45 μm filter and ultracentrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 1 h to precipitate vesicles . Vesicles were washed once in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS , 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 . 8 mM KH 2 PO 4 ) , and the final pellets were resuspended in PBS . EV isolation from infected plants was performed as previously described 2 , 47 . Apoplastic fluid was extracted from B . cinerea - infected Arabidopsis leaves by vacuum infiltration with infiltration buffer ( 20 mM MES , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 M NaCl , pH 6 . 0 ) and then centrifuged at 900 g for 10 mins . Cellular debris was further removed from the supernatant by centrifugation at 2 , 000 g for 30 15 minutes , filtration through a 0 . 45 μm filter and finally centrifugation at 10 , 000 g for 30 mins . EVs were then collected by ultracentrifugation at 100 , 000 g for 1 hr and washed with infiltration buffer at 100 , 000 g for 1 hour to collect the EVs . Sucrose gradient separation of EVs EVs from B . cinerea liquid culture and B . cinerea - infected Arabidopsis were purified by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation 23 . 10 – 90 % sucrose stocks ( w / v ) , including 10 , 16 , 22 , 28 , 34 , 40 , 46 , 52 , 58 , 64 , 70 and 90 % , were prepared using infiltration buffer ( 20 mM MES , 2 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 1 M NaCl , pH 6 . 0 ) . The discontinuous gradient was prepared by layering 1 ml of each solution in a 15 - ml ultracentrifuge tube . 100 μl EVs were premixed with 1 ml of 10 % sucrose stock and loaded on top of the sucrose gradient . Then , samples were centrifuged in a swinging - bucket rotor for 16 h at 100 , 000 g , 4 °C and six fractions ( 2 ml each ) were collected from top to bottom . Collected fractions were transferred to new ultracentrifuge tubes and each sample was diluted to 12 ml using infiltration buffer , followed by a final centrifugation for 1 h at 100 , 000g , 4 °C to obtain pellets . The pellet was then resuspended in 50 μl infiltration buffer for further analysis . Nanoparticle tracking analysis A NanoSight NS300 fitted with a blue laser ( 405 nm ) with NanoSight NTA software version 3 . 1 ( Malvern Panalytical ) was used to determine the size distribution and concentration of the B . cinerea EVs . EV samples were diluted 50 times using 0 . 22 μm filtered PBS and injected into the flow cell at a flow rate of 50 units . Four 60 second videos were taken for each sample and used to determine the size distribution and concentration of the EVs . Transmission electron microscopy analysis B . cinerea EVs were imaged using negative staining . Briefly , 10 μl of EVs were deposited onto 3 . 0 mm copper Formvar - carbon - coated grids ( EMS ) for 1 min and excess sample was removed from the grids using filter paper . The grids were then stained with 1 % uranyl acetate for 30 s and blotted before a second round of staining with 1 % uranyl acetate 2 min . The samples were air - dried before visualization with a Talos L120 transmission electron microscope , operated at 120 kV . 16 sRNA expression analyses RNA was extracted using the Trizol extraction method for both total RNA and EV samples . sRNA RT - PCR was performed as previously described 2 . The PCR products were detected on a 12 % PAGE gel . Quantitative PCR was performed with the CFX96 real - time PCR detection system ( Bio - Rad ) using SYBR Green mix ( Bio - Rad ) . All primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Data 1 . To determine if sRNAs were localized within vesicles , EVs from sucrose gradient - purified fraction four were treated with 10 U of micrococcal nuclease ( MNase ) ( Thermo Fisher ) with or without Triton - X - 100 . For Triton - X - 100 treatment , vesicles were incubated with 1 % Triton - X - 100 on ice for 30 minutes before nuclease treatments . Nuclease treatment was carried out at 37°C for 15 minutes followed by RNA isolation . Transformation The homologous recombination - based method was used to knock out B . cinerea genes as described previously 3 . The 5 ′ - and 3 ′ - regions of BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 were amplified and inserted into a modified pBluescript KS ( + ) plasmid ( PBS - HPH ) in which a hygromycin resistance cassette containing the hph gene of E . coli under the control of the trpC promoter of A . nidulans had been inserted between HindIII and SalI digestion sites . The full - length fragments containing the 5 ′ - and 3 ′ - regions of each specific gene and the hph cassette were transformed into the protoplasts of wild - type B . cinerea . The transformants were purified by the isolation of a single spore on PDA containing 70 μg ml - 1 hygromycin . The complementary lines were generated by expressing the CDS of BcPLS1 or BcTSP3 in the Δ bcpls1 or Δ bctsp3 mutants , respectively . The CDS of both BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 were cloned separately into the pENTR vector ( Life Technologies ) , then into the destination vector pBCC , which carries Nourseothricin ( NTC ) N - acetyl transferase ( NAT ) conferring nourseothricin resistance . The specific primers 4 - 5 - S and 4 - 3 - A ( Supplementary Data 1 ) were used to amplify dsDNA fragments containing promotor PtrpC , inserted genes , and NAT for B . cinerea transformation The positive transformants were selected on PDA plates with 50 μg / ml Nourseothricin Sulfate ( Goldbio ) . 17 The BcPLS1 - YFP and BcTSP3 - YFP strains were generated by amplifying and inserting the stop codon removed CDS region and 3’ UTR region into the modified PBS - HPH , in which the YFP gene sequence has been inserted between BamHI and HindIII . The BcPLS1 - mCherry was generated by inserting the stop codon removed CDS region and 3’ UTR region into the modified PBS - HPH with the mCherry sequence inserted at the C terminal . The transformation and selection conditions were the same as the homologous recombination - based gene knock - out . All primers used are provided in Supplementary Data 1 . Plant Materials and Growth Conditions Arabidopsis thaliana wild - type and mutant lines used in this study were all Columbia 0 ( Col - 0 ) backgrounds . The chc2 - 1 ( SALK _ 028826 ) 74 , ap2σ ( SALK _ 141555 ) 57 , rem1 . 2 ( SALK _ 117639 ) 75 , rem1 . 3 ( SALK _ 023886C ) 75 T - DNA insertion lines were ordered from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center ( Ohio State University , USA ) . The CLC1 - GFP 76 and AP2A1 - GFP 76 lines were provided by Dr . Eugenia Russinova’s lab . The INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 55 and XVE > > AX2 39 lines were provided by Dr . Jiří Friml . The CHC2 - YFP , TET8 - CFP , and YFP - only transgenic lines were constructed using the Agrobacterium - mediated flower dipping method as described previously 77 . The flot1 / 2 double mutant was generated using Crispr - Ca9 system in the flot1 ( SALK _ 203966C ) mutant background . The designed guide RNA sequences are listed in Supplementary Data 1 . Both wild - type and mutant plants were grown at 22°C under 12 h light per day . Plasmid construction The vector for CHC2 - YFP was constructed as follows : Arabidopsis genomic DNA was used as a template with primers CHC2 - Pentr - F and CHC2 - Pentr - R to amplify the whole sequence of CHC2 . The final PCR product was cloned into pENTR / DTOPO ( Life Technologies ) , and then into the destination vector pEarleyGate 101 by LR reactions ( Life Technologies ) . For the YFP - FLOT1 construct , the full - length CDS of FLOT1 was cloned into the pENTR vector ( Life Technologies ) , then into the destination vector pEARLYGATE 104 for YFP tagging ( Life Technologies ) . For the TET8 - CFP construct , the full - length CDS of TET8 was cloned into the pENTR vector ( Life Technologies ) , then into the destination vector pEARLYGATE 102 for CFP tagging ( Life Technologies ) . For the construct to express YFP , the YFP sequence was amplified from 18 pEARLYGATE 101 and then cloned into pENTR vector and finally into pEARLYGATE 100 ( Life Technologies ) . Primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Data 1 . Chemical Solutions and Treatments ES9 - 17 ( Sigma Aldrich ) was dissolved in DMSO to create a 30 mM stock solution . mβCD ( Sigma Aldrich ) was dissolved in deionized water to create a 200 mM stock solution . 4 - Hydroxytamoxifen ( Sigma Aldrich ) was dissolved in DMSO to make a 2 mM stock solution . Estradiol ( Sigma Aldrich ) was dissolved in DMSO to make a 5 mM stock solution . For the chemical inhibitor treatments , Arabidopsis plant leaves were incubated in liquid 1 / 2 MS with 30 μ M or 10 mM mβCD for 24 hours . DMSO and deionized water were used as controls . To induce the expression of RFP - HUB1 or AX2 , 2 μM 4 - Hydroxytamoxifen or 5 μM estradiol was used to pretreat the plant leaves in liquid 1 / 2 Murashige and Skoog for 24 hours . CCV purification The clathrin - coated vesicle isolation procedure was adapted from previously established protocols 78 , 79 . 50 grams of Arabidopsis leaves were homogenized for 1 min in 2 volumes of resuspension buffer ( 100 mM MES , pH 6 . 4 , 3mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCl2 , 1mM EGTA , protease inhibitors ( Roche ) ) using a Waring Blender . The homogenate was squeezed through eight layers of cheesecloth and three layers of Miracloth ( Sigma ) . Then the homogenate was centrifuged in four increments to obtain a microsomal pellet : 500 g , 5 min ; 5 , 000 g , 10 min ; 20 , 000 g , 30 min ; 100 , 000 g , 60 min . The pellet was then resuspended in 6 ml resuspension buffer . Then the resuspended pellet was loaded on top of the discontinuous sucrose gradients , which were made from three sucrose stocks ( 10 % , 35 % , and 50 % ) in the resuspension buffer . The gradient was composed of 1 ml of 50 % sucrose , 5 ml of 35 % sucrose , and 3 ml of 10 % sucrose in a Beckman 14 × 95 mm Ultra - Clear centrifuge tube . The gradients were centrifuged at 116 , 000 g 50min . Samples were collected from 10 % and 10 / 35 % interface and resuspended in the resuspension buffer to make the sucrose concentration lower than 5 % . The samples were then centrifuged at 200 , 000 g for 50min , and the pellets were collected as crude CCVs . Further immunoisolation of CCVs was performed as follows : GFP - Trap® Agarose ( ChromoTek ) was equilibrated in the resuspension buffer . Plant crude CCVs from CLC1 - GFP and YFP were incubated with the GFP - Trap® Agarose for 2 hr at 4 °C . After , beads were washed three times 19 with resuspension buffer . The RNA from purified CCVs was extracted using TRIzol Reagent ( Invitrogen ) following immunoisolation . Subsequently , the immunoisolated CCVs on GFP - Trap Agarose beads were further analyzed by a scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) . Confocal microscopy Arabidopsis seedlings were imaged on a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . Briefly , leaves were infiltrated with 10 μM FM4 - 64 dye for 30 mins before examination . Samples were imaged using a 40x water immersion dip - in lens mounted on a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . The excitation wavelength was 488 nm for GFP , 514 nm for YFP , and 559 nm for FM4 - 64 . Emission was detected at 500 – 550 nm for GFP and YFP , 570 – 670 nm for FM4 - 64 . The colocalization percentage was processed by means of the ImageJ ( Fiji ) software package . More specifically , the regions of interest ( ROI ) were selected to include vesicles accumulated around B . cinerea infection area . The total area of FM4 - 64 ( red ) and overlapped area ( yellow ) were measured and used for colocalization calculation . The average of three independent values was presented in the figures . The method for intracellular / PM signal intensity ratio quantification was described previously 53 . Non - saturated images were converted in ImageJ ( Fiji ) to 8 - bit and regions of interest ( ROIs ) were selected based on the PM or cytosol localization . Intensity values per ROI of PM and intracellular signals were measured and used for calculation . Pathogen assay B . cinerea was cultured on PDA plates for 10 days at room temperature before spores were collected and diluted into inoculation medium ( 0 . 1 % sabouraud maltose broth buffer , Difco ) for a final concentration of 10 5 spores per mL . Four - week - old plants were then inoculated by applying a single 10 μl droplet of B . cinerea per leaf . Photos were taken 2 days after inoculation and analyzed by ImageJ software to measure the lesion size . For pathogen assay using a mixture of WT or Bc - dcl1 / dcl2 B . cinerea EVs with Δbcpls1 and Bc - dcl1 / dcl2 , 10 6 B . cinerea spores were cultured for 48 hours at room temperature with shaking on the rocker in 100 ml of YEPD ( 0 . 3 % yeast extract , 1 % peptone , 2 % glucose , pH 6 . 5 ) medium . B . cinerea EVs were isolated and purified using sucrose gradients as described above , then EVs from 20 fraction four were resuspended in 100 μl PBS . The spores were collected and diluted into 2 x inoculation medium ( 0 . 2 % sabouraud maltose broth buffer , Difco ) for a final concentration of 2 x10 5 spores per mL . Equal volumes of EVs and spores from mutant strains were mixed . Four - week - old plants were then inoculated by applying a single 10 μl droplet of EVs and spores mixture per leaf . Equal volumes of EVs and 2 x inoculation medium were mixed to inoculate plants as negative control . Photos were taken 2 days after inoculation and analyzed by ImageJ software to measure the lesion size . Real - time RT - PCR Total RNA was extracted from plant tissues using TRIzol and the concentration was measured at 260 nm using a Nanodrop 2000 spectrophotometer ( Nanodrop Technologies , Wilmington , DE ) . Equal amounts of total RNA were treated with DNase I enzyme ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) and converted into first - strand cDNA using SuperScript III ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . The cDNA was then used to check target gene expression by real - time RT - PCR with gene - specific primers . Primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Data 1 . Western blotting Protein samples were resolved in a 12 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) and then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes ( GE Healthcare ) , blocked with 5 % skimmed milk in TBST ( Tris - buffered saline , 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ) and probed with anti - GFP ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Then the signals were detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence method ( GE Healthcare ) . AGO1 immunoprecipitation Arabidopsis AGO1 IP was performed with 5 g fresh leaves collected 24 hr after spray inoculation with B . cinerea . Tissues were collected and ground in liquid nitrogen before resuspension in 5 ml of extraction buffer ( 20 mM Tris – HCl at pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 5mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 5 % NP40 , proteinase inhibitor cocktail ; Sigma ) . The extract was then precleared by incubation with 50 ul of Protein A - agarose beads ( Roche ) at 4°C for 30 min . The precleared extract was incubated with 10 ul of AGO1 - specific antibody for 6 hours . 50 ul of Protein A - agarose beads ( Roche ) was then added to the extract before overnight incubation . Immunoprecipitates were washed three times ( 5 min each ) in wash buffer ( 20 mM Tris – HCl at pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 5mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 5 % Triton x - 100 , proteinase inhibitor cocktail ; Sigma ) . RNA was extracted from the 21 bead - bound AGO1 with TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Proteins were detected by boiling the bead - bound AGO1 in SDS - loading buffer before running in a SDS - PAGE gel . Scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) The structure of CCVs isolated using GFP - Trap Agarose was examined using field emission scanning electron microscopy Nova NanoSEM 450 ( FEI ) at 15kV . The samples were washed three times with PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) and fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde overnight at 4 °C . Samples were dehydrated with gradient alcohol solutions ( 10 % , 30 % , 50 % , 70 % , 80 % , and 90 % ) for 10 min , 100 % ethanol for 20 min , and 100 % acetone for 30 min . Subsequently , samples were dried by CO 2 under critical point . Samples were sputter coated with gold and fixed on the stab using carbon tape before observation and imaging . Statistical analysis The statistical analyses were performed using analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test , and unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - test using GraphPad Prism ( 9 . 0 . 2 ) . The statistical tests and n numbers , including sample sizes or biological replications , are described in the figure legends . Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper , Supplementary Information , and Source Data . Source data are provided with this paper . 22 Acknowledgments We thank Dr . Eugenia Russinova for providing CLC1 - GFP and AP2A1 - GFP seeds , Dr . Jiří Friml for providing the INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 and XVE > > AX2 lines , Shumei Wang for generating the Arabidopsis YFP - only transgenic line and Rachael Hamby for editing the paper . This work was supported by National Institute of Health ( R35GM136379 ) , National Science Foundation ( IOS 2020731 ) , United State Department of Agriculture ( 2021 - 67013 - 34258 ) , United States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture ( 2019 - 70016 - 29067 ) and the CIFAR ‘Fungal Kingdom’ fellowship to H . J . , by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 32272029 ) , Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China ( 2022CFA079 ) to Q . C . . Author contributions H . J . conceived the idea and supervised the project . B . H . and H . J . designed the experiments . B . H . performed most of the experiments and analyzed data . H . W . developed key protocols and performed part of the data analysis . Q . C . validated mutant lines and performed pathogen assay . A . Chen performed the nanoparticle tracking and TEM analysis . A . Calvo generated constructs for B . cinerea transformation . G . L . generated the flot1 / 2 double mutant lines . B . H . , A . Chen , and H . J . wrote the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information is available for this paper . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H . J . 23 Figure legends Fig . 1 B . cinerea secretes BcPLS1 - positive EVs during infection . a , The size distributions of the B . cinerea EVs isolated by sucrose gradients in fractions 4 and 5 were measured using nanoparticle tracking analysis . The data of 4 measurements in one replicate are presented here . Similar data were obtained in three biological replicates . The red area represents the standard error . b , Transmission electron microscopy images of B . cinerea EVs from fractions 4 and 5 . Scale bar , 100nm . c , Western blot analysis of BcPLS1 and BcTSP3 in sucrose gradient fractions purified B . cinerea EVs from liquid culture . d B . cinerea EVs isolated from BcPLS1 - YFP and BcTSP3 - YFP liquid culture were examined by confocal microscopy . Scale bar , 10 μm . e , BcPLS1 - YFP labeled B . cinerea EVs were observed outside the fungal cells at the site of infection on Arabidopsis leaves . Samples were pretreated with 0 . 75M sorbitol for 30min to induce plasmolysis before imaging . Scale bars 10μm . f , BcPLS1 - YFP and BcTSP3 - YFP were examined in sucrose gradient fractionated EVs that were isolated from BcPLS1 - YFP or BcTSP3 - YFP B . cinerea strains infected wild - type Arabidopsis using western blot . Arabidopsis TET8 was used as plant exosome control . g , EVs isolated from BcPLS1 - YFP or BcTSP3 - YFP B . cinerea strains infected Arabidopsis TET8 - CFP plants were purified using sucrose gradients , and the EVs from fraction four were examined using confocal microscopy . Scale bars , 10μm . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Fig . 2 B . cinerea secretes small RNA effectors through EVs . a , B . cinerea sRNAs were examined in B . cinerea EVs isolated by sucrose gradient fractionation . b , B . cinerea sRNAs can be protected from micrococcal nuclease treatment by EVs . F4 , B . cinerea EV samples were collected from fraction 4 after sucrose gradient centrifugation . Bc - siR17 and Bc - siR9 were used as negative controls . c , The Δbcpls1 strain showed strongly reduced virulence , whereas the Δbctsp3 strain showed similar virulence with the wild - type B05 strain . Both Δbcpls1 and Δbctsp3 complementary strains showed similar virulence with the wild - type B05 strain . d , Bc - sRNAs were examined by Real - time PCR in EVs isolated from B05 , Δbcpls1 , Δbctsp3 , Δbcpls1 complementary , and Δbctsp3 complementary strains . The data are presented as mean ± s . d . Similar results were obtained in three biologically independent experiments . e , Wild - type B . cinerea EVs partially complement the virulence of B . cinerea Δbcpls1 mutant . Premixing of wild - type B . cinerea EVs from sucrose gradient fraction 4 with Δbcpls1 mutant spores partially complement 24 the weak virulence of Δbcpls1 on Arabidopsis leaves . f , Wild - type B . cinerea EVs partially complement the virulence of B . cinerea dcl1dcl2 mutant . Premixing of wild - type B . cinerea EVs from sucrose gradient fraction 4 with dcl1dcl2 mutant spores partially complements the weak virulence of dcl1dcl2 on Arabidopsis leaves . Relative lesion size was determined by comparing lesion size to the size of the entire leaf 2 days after infection . The statistical data in c , e and f are presented as mean ± s . d . , n = 10 biological replicates . The statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test . The small open circles represent individual values . The error bars indicate s . d . * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Fig . 3 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is involved in plant susceptibility against B . cinerea a , Arabidopsis chc2 - 1 and ap2σ mutants exhibited enhanced disease resistance to B . cinerea infection . b , c , INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 ( b ) and XVE > > AX2 ( c ) transgenic plants showed enhanced resistance phenotype to B . cinerea infection after induction by 2 μM 4 - Hydroxytamoxifen or 5 μM estradiol , respectively . d , Arabidopsis flot1 / 2 double mutants showed increased susceptibility to B . cinerea infection . e , Arabidopsis rem1 . 2 and rem1 . 3 mutants exhibited similar susceptibility to B . cinerea compared with the wild - type . Relative lesion size was determined by comparing lesion size to the size of the entire leaf 2 days after infection . The data are presented as mean ± s . d . , n = 10 biological replicates . The statistical analysis in b and c was performed using unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - test . The statistical analysis in a , d and e were performed using ANOVA Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test . The small open circles represent individual values . The error bars indicate s . d . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Fig . 4 Bc - sRNA loading into plant AGO1 and target gene suppression was reduced in CME mutants . a , The loading of Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 into AGO1 of wild - type , chc2 - 1 , and ap2σ mutants was examined with AGO1 - IP followed by RT - PCR . b , c , The loading of Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 into AGO1 of induced INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 ( b ) and XVE > > AX2 ( c ) transgenic plants was examined with AGO1 - IP followed by RT - PCR . d , e , The loading of Bc - siR3 . 1 , Bc - siR3 . 2 , and Bc - siR5 into AGO1 of wild - type , flot1 / 2 ( d ) , rem1 . 2 , and rem1 . 3 mutants 25 ( e ) was examined with AGO1 - IP followed by RT - PCR . In a , b , c , d , and e , miR396 served as a positive control . AGO1 was detected by western blot . f , Suppression of host target genes by Bc - sRNAs was attenuated in CME mutants . The expression of Bc - siR3 . 1 target At - PRXIIF , Bc - siR3 . 2 target At - MPK1 and At - MPK2 , and Bc - siR5 target At - WAK in chc2 - 1 and ap2σ mutants compared with those in wild - type infected plants after B . cinerea infection was examined by real - time RT - PCR . The data are presented as mean ± s . d . Similar results were obtained in three biologically independent experiments . The statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test . The small open circles represent individual values . The error bars indicate s . d . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Fig . 5 Clathrin - coated vesicles accumulate around B . cinerea infection sites . a , b , c , Confocal microscopy showed that the CLC1 - GFP ( a ) , CHC2 - YFP ( b ) and AP2A1 - GFP ( c ) signal overlapped with endocytic FM4 - 64 vesicle signals when treated with B . cinerea . Untreated plants served as control . d , Confocal microscopy of B . cinerea infection on Arabidopsis YFP - FLOT1 plants . The scale bars in a , b , c , and d , are 10 μm . The arrows indicate the location of B . cinerea ( Bc . ) . The degree of colocalization between CLC1 - GFP , CHC2 - YFP , AP2A1 - GFP , and YFP - FLOT1 and FM4 - 64 signals was quantified using three independent images . Regions of interest ( ROIs ) that are used for measuring colocalization percentage were marked in the enlarged panel . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Fig . 6 CME mediates the uptake of B . cinerea secreted sRNAs a , CLC1 - GFP labeled CCVs can be pulled down by GFP - Trap Agarose beads . Arabidopsis YFP plant was used as a negative control . Scale bar , 10 μm . b , Intact CCVs can be observed on the surface of GFP - Trap Agarose beads after CCV pull down from CLC1 - GFP plants using the scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) . A schematic figure of CCV is presented . The solid arrows indicate different intact CCVs . Scale bar , 100 nm . c , BcPLS1 - mCherry colocalizes with Arabidopsis CLC1 - GFP during infection . d , BcPLS1 - mCherry signals can be detected in GFP - Trap Agarose beads - isolated CCVs from BcPLS1 - mCherry infected CLC1 - GFP plants using western blot . YFP plant was used as a negative control . e , B . cinerea - secreted sRNAs can be detected in purified plant CCVs by RT - PCR . In d and e , the crude CCVs fraction obtained from B . cinerea - infected CLC - GFP or YFP plants through sucrose gradients was used for immunoprecipitation . Bc - siR17 and Bc - siR9 were negative controls . CLC1 - GFP and YFP protein 26 was detected by western blot using an anti - GFP antibody . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . 27 References 1 Cai , Q . et al . Message in a Bubble : Shuttling Small RNAs and Proteins Between Cells and Interacting Organisms Using Extracellular Vesicles . Annu Rev Plant Biol 72 , 497 - 524 , ( 2021 ) . 2 Cai , Q . et al . Plants send small RNAs in extracellular vesicles to fungal pathogen to silence virulence genes . Science 360 , 1126 - 1129 , ( 2018 ) . 3 Weiberg , A . et al . Fungal small RNAs suppress plant immunity by hijacking host RNA interference pathways . Science 342 , 118 - 123 , ( 2013 ) . 4 Cui , C . et al . A fungal pathogen deploys a small silencing RNA that attenuates mosquito immunity and facilitates infection . Nat Commun 10 , 4298 , ( 2019 ) . 5 Halder , L . D . et al . Candida albicans Induces Cross - Kingdom miRNA Trafficking in Human Monocytes To Promote Fungal Growth . mBio , e0356321 , ( 2022 ) . 6 Buck , A . H . et al . Exosomes secreted by nematode parasites transfer small RNAs to mammalian cells and modulate innate immunity . Nat Commun 5 , 5488 , ( 2014 ) . 7 Gualtieri , C . , Leonetti , P . & Macovei , A . Plant miRNA Cross - Kingdom Transfer Targeting Parasitic and Mutualistic Organisms as a Tool to Advance Modern Agriculture . Front Plant Sci 11 , 930 , ( 2020 ) . 8 Ren , B . , Wang , X . , Duan , J . & Ma , J . Rhizobial tRNA - derived small RNAs are signal molecules regulating plant nodulation . Science 365 , 919 - 922 , ( 2019 ) . 9 Kusch , S . , Singh , M . , Thieron , H . , Spanu , P . D . & Panstruga , R . Site - specific analysis reveals candidate cross - kingdom small RNAs , tRNA and rRNA fragments , and signs of fungal RNA phasing in the barley - powdery mildew interaction . Mol Plant Pathol , ( 2023 ) . 10 Wong - Bajracharya , J . et al . The ectomycorrhizal fungus Pisolithus microcarpus encodes a microRNA involved in cross - kingdom gene silencing during symbiosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119 , ( 2022 ) . 11 Ji , H . M . et al . Fol - milR1 , a pathogenicity factor of Fusarium oxysporum , confers tomato wilt disease resistance by impairing host immune responses . New Phytol 232 , 705 - 718 , ( 2021 ) . 12 Zhang , B . S . , Li , Y . C . , Guo , H . S . & Zhao , J . H . Verticillium dahliae Secretes Small RNA to Target Host MIR157d and Retard Plant Floral Transition During Infection . Front Plant Sci 13 , 847086 , ( 2022 ) . 13 Dunker , F . et al . Oomycete small RNAs bind to the plant RNA - induced silencing complex for virulence . Elife 9 , ( 2020 ) . 14 Shahid , S . et al . MicroRNAs from the parasitic plant Cuscuta campestris target host messenger RNAs . Nature 553 , 82 - 85 , ( 2018 ) . 15 Wang , M . et al . Bidirectional cross - kingdom RNAi and fungal uptake of external RNAs confer plant protection . Nat Plants 2 , 16151 , ( 2016 ) . 16 Wang , B . et al . Puccinia striiformis f . sp . tritici microRNA - like RNA 1 ( Pst - milR1 ) , an important pathogenicity factor of Pst , impairs wheat resistance to Pst by suppressing the wheat pathogenesis - related 2 gene . New Phytol 215 , 338 - 350 , ( 2017 ) . 17 Duanis - Assaf , D . et al . Double - stranded RNA targeting fungal ergosterol biosynthesis pathway controls Botrytis cinerea and postharvest grey mould . Plant Biotechnol J 20 , 226 - 237 , ( 2022 ) . 18 Islam , M . T . et al . Minicell - based fungal RNAi delivery for sustainable crop protection . Microb Biotechnol 14 , 1847 - 1856 , ( 2021 ) . 19 Niño - Sánchez , J . et al . BioClay™ prolongs RNA interference - mediated crop protection against Botrytis cinerea . J Integr Plant Biol 64 , 2187 - 2198 , ( 2022 ) . 20 Werner , B . T . , Gaffar , F . Y . , Schuemann , J . , Biedenkopf , D . & Koch , A . M . RNA - Spray - Mediated Silencing of Fusarium graminearum AGO and DCL Genes Improve Barley Disease Resistance . Front Plant Sci 11 , 476 , ( 2020 ) . 28 21 Haile , Z . M . et al . Double - Stranded RNA Targeting Dicer - Like Genes Compromises the Pathogenicity of Plasmopara viticola on Grapevine . Front Plant Sci 12 , 667539 , ( 2021 ) . 22 Rizzo , J . , Rodrigues , M . L . & Janbon , G . Extracellular Vesicles in Fungi : Past , Present , and Future Perspectives . Front Cell Infect Microbiol 10 , 346 , ( 2020 ) . 23 He , B . et al . RNA - binding proteins contribute to small RNA loading in plant extracellular vesicles . Nat Plants 7 , 342 - 352 , ( 2021 ) . 24 van Niel , G . , D ' Angelo , G . & Raposo , G . Shedding light on the cell biology of extracellular vesicles . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 19 , 213 - 228 , ( 2018 ) . 25 Rodrigues , M . L . et al . Vesicular polysaccharide export in Cryptococcus neoformans is a eukaryotic solution to the problem of fungal trans - cell wall transport . Eukaryot Cell 6 , 48 - 59 , ( 2007 ) . 26 Peres da Silva , R . et al . Extracellular vesicle - mediated export of fungal RNA . Sci Rep 5 , 7763 , ( 2015 ) . 27 Bleackley , M . R . , Dawson , C . S . & Anderson , M . A . Fungal Extracellular Vesicles with a Focus on Proteomic Analysis . Proteomics 19 , e1800232 , ( 2019 ) . 28 Vallejo , M . C . et al . Lipidomic analysis of extracellular vesicles from the pathogenic phase of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis . PLoS One 7 , e39463 , ( 2012 ) . 29 Kwon , S . et al . mRNA Inventory of Extracellular Vesicles from Ustilago maydis . J Fungi ( Basel ) 7 , ( 2021 ) . 30 Hill , E . H . & Solomon , P . S . Extracellular vesicles from the apoplastic fungal wheat pathogen Zymoseptoria tritici . Fungal Biol Biotechnol 7 , 13 , ( 2020 ) . 31 Bleackley , M . R . et al . Extracellular Vesicles From the Cotton Pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f . sp . vasinfectum Induce a Phytotoxic Response in Plants . Front Plant Sci 10 , 1610 , ( 2019 ) . 32 Kaksonen , M . & Roux , A . Mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 19 , 313 - 326 , ( 2018 ) . 33 Murphy , A . S . , Bandyopadhyay , A . , Holstein , S . E . & Peer , W . A . Endocytotic cycling of PM proteins . Annu Rev Plant Biol 56 , 221 - 251 , ( 2005 ) . 34 Robatzek , S . , Chinchilla , D . & Boller , T . Ligand - induced endocytosis of the pattern recognition receptor FLS2 in Arabidopsis . Genes Dev 20 , 537 - 542 , ( 2006 ) . 35 Barberon , M . et al . Monoubiquitin - dependent endocytosis of the iron - regulated transporter 1 ( IRT1 ) transporter controls iron uptake in plants . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 , E450 - 458 , ( 2011 ) . 36 Kitakura , S . et al . Clathrin mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 , 1920 - 1931 , ( 2011 ) . 37 Mbengue , M . et al . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis is required for immunity mediated by pattern recognition receptor kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 11034 - 11039 , ( 2016 ) . 38 Spallek , T . et al . ESCRT - I mediates FLS2 endosomal sorting and plant immunity . PLoS Genet 9 , e1004035 , ( 2013 ) . 39 Ortiz - Morea , F . A . et al . Danger - associated peptide signaling in Arabidopsis requires clathrin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 11028 - 11033 , ( 2016 ) . 40 Paez Valencia , J . , Goodman , K . & Otegui , M . S . Endocytosis and Endosomal Trafficking in Plants . Annu Rev Plant Biol 67 , 309 - 335 , ( 2016 ) . 41 Fan , L . , Li , R . , Pan , J . , Ding , Z . & Lin , J . Endocytosis and its regulation in plants . Trends Plant Sci 20 , 388 - 397 , ( 2015 ) . 42 Wang , H . et al . Uptake of oomycete RXLR effectors into host cells by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Plant Cell , ( 2023 ) . 43 Oliveira - Garcia , E . et al . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis facilitates the internalization of Magnaporthe oryzae effectors into rice cells . Plant Cell , ( 2023 ) . 29 44 Li , R . et al . A membrane microdomain - associated protein , Arabidopsis Flot1 , is involved in a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway and is required for seedling development . Plant Cell 24 , 2105 - 2122 , ( 2012 ) . 45 Raffaele , S . et al . Remorin , a solanaceae protein resident in membrane rafts and plasmodesmata , impairs potato virus X movement . Plant Cell 21 , 1541 - 1555 , ( 2009 ) . 46 Théry , C . et al . Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018 ( MISEV2018 ) : a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles and update of the MISEV2014 guidelines . J Extracell Vesicles 7 , 1535750 , ( 2018 ) . 47 Huang , Y . , Wang , S . , Cai , Q . & Jin , H . Effective methods for isolation and purification of extracellular vesicles from plants . J Integr Plant Biol 63 , 2020 - 2030 , ( 2021 ) . 48 Mathivanan , S . , Ji , H . & Simpson , R . J . Exosomes : extracellular organelles important in intercellular communication . J Proteomics 73 , 1907 - 1920 , ( 2010 ) . 49 Lambou , K . et al . Fungi have three tetraspanin families with distinct functions . BMC Genomics 9 , 63 , ( 2008 ) . 50 Varkonyi - Gasic , E . , Wu , R . , Wood , M . , Walton , E . F . & Hellens , R . P . Protocol : a highly sensitive RT - PCR method for detection and quantification of microRNAs . Plant Methods 3 , 12 , ( 2007 ) . 51 Rutter , B . D . & Innes , R . W . Extracellular vesicles in phytopathogenic fungi . Extracellular Vesicles and Circulating Nucleic Acids 4 , 90 - 106 , ( 2023 ) . 52 Mulcahy , L . A . , Pink , R . C . & Carter , D . R . Routes and mechanisms of extracellular vesicle uptake . J Extracell Vesicles 3 , ( 2014 ) . 53 Dejonghe , W . et al . Disruption of endocytosis through chemical inhibition of clathrin heavy chain function . Nat Chem Biol 15 , 641 - 649 , ( 2019 ) . 54 Li , X . et al . Single - molecule analysis of PIP2 ; 1 dynamics and partitioning reveals multiple modes of Arabidopsis plasma membrane aquaporin regulation . Plant Cell 23 , 3780 - 3797 , ( 2011 ) . 55 Robert , S . et al . ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis . Cell 143 , 111 - 121 , ( 2010 ) . 56 Wang , M . , Weiberg , A . , Dellota , E . , Jr . , Yamane , D . & Jin , H . Botrytis small RNA Bc - siR37 suppresses plant defense genes by cross - kingdom RNAi . RNA Biol 14 , 421 - 428 , ( 2017 ) . 57 Fan , L . et al . Dynamic analysis of Arabidopsis AP2 sigma subunit reveals a key role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and plant development . Development 140 , 3826 - 3837 , ( 2013 ) . 58 Narasimhan , M . et al . Evolutionarily unique mechanistic framework of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in plants . Elife 9 , ( 2020 ) . 59 Dhonukshe , P . et al . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efflux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr Biol 17 , 520 - 527 , ( 2007 ) . 60 Postma , J . et al . Avr4 promotes Cf - 4 receptor - like protein association with the BAK1 / SERK3 receptor - like kinase to initiate receptor endocytosis and plant immunity . New Phytol 210 , 627 - 642 , ( 2016 ) . 61 Bar , M . & Avni , A . EHD2 inhibits ligand - induced endocytosis and signaling of the leucine - rich repeat receptor - like protein LeEix2 . Plant J 59 , 600 - 611 , ( 2009 ) . 62 Sharfman , M . et al . Endosomal signaling of the tomato leucine - rich repeat receptor - like protein LeEix2 . Plant J 68 , 413 - 423 , ( 2011 ) . 63 Tian , T . et al . Exosome uptake through clathrin - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis and mediating miR - 21 delivery . J Biol Chem 289 , 22258 - 22267 , ( 2014 ) . 64 Wang , Q . et al . Dicer - like Proteins Regulate the Growth , Conidiation , and Pathogenicity of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides from Hevea brasiliensis . Front Microbiol 8 , 2621 , ( 2017 ) . 65 Yin , C . , Zhu , H . , Jiang , Y . , Shan , Y . & Gong , L . Silencing Dicer - Like Genes Reduces Virulence and sRNA Generation in Penicillium italicum , the Cause of Citrus Blue Mold . Cells 9 , ( 2020 ) . 30 66 Feng , H . et al . Dicer - Like Genes Are Required for H ( 2 ) O ( 2 ) and KCl Stress Responses , Pathogenicity and Small RNA Generation in Valsa mali . Front Microbiol 8 , 1166 , ( 2017 ) . 67 Werner , B . T . et al . Fusarium graminearum DICER - like - dependent sRNAs are required for the suppression of host immune genes and full virulence . PLoS One 16 , e0252365 , ( 2021 ) . 68 Qiao , L . et al . Artificial nanovesicles for dsRNA delivery in spray - induced gene silencing for crop protection . Plant Biotechnol J 21 , 854 - 865 , ( 2023 ) . 69 Mitter , N . et al . Clay nanosheets for topical delivery of RNAi for sustained protection against plant viruses . Nat Plants 3 , 16207 , ( 2017 ) . 70 Luksiene , Z . , Rasiukeviciute , N . , Zudyte , B . & Uselis , N . Innovative approach to sunlight activated biofungicides for strawberry crop protection : ZnO nanoparticles . J Photochem Photobiol B 203 , 111656 , ( 2020 ) . 71 Gourgues , M . , Brunet - Simon , A . , Lebrun , M . H . & Levis , C . The tetraspanin BcPls1 is required for appressorium - mediated penetration of Botrytis cinerea into host plant leaves . Mol Microbiol 51 , 619 - 629 , ( 2004 ) . 72 Clergeot , P . H . et al . PLS1 , a gene encoding a tetraspanin - like protein , is required for penetration of rice leaf by the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe grisea . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 6963 - 6968 , ( 2001 ) . 73 J . C . Correll , C . J . R . K . , J . F . Leslie . Nitrate Nonutilizing Mutants of Fusarium oxysporum and Their Use in Vegetative Compatibility Tests . Genetics 77 , 1640 - 1646 , ( 1987 ) . 74 Larson , E . R . , Van Zelm , E . , Roux , C . , Marion - Poll , A . & Blatt , M . R . Clathrin Heavy Chain Subunits Coordinate Endo - and Exocytic Traffic and Affect Stomatal Movement . Plant Physiol 175 , 708 - 720 , ( 2017 ) . 75 Huang , D . et al . Salicylic acid - mediated plasmodesmal closure via Remorin - dependent lipid organization . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116 , 21274 - 21284 , ( 2019 ) . 76 Dejonghe , W . et al . Mitochondrial uncouplers inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis largely through cytoplasmic acidification . Nat Commun 7 , 11710 , ( 2016 ) . 77 Zhang , X . , Henriques , R . , Lin , S . S . , Niu , Q . W . & Chua , N . H . Agrobacterium - mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana using the floral dip method . Nat Protoc 1 , 641 - 646 , ( 2006 ) . 78 Reynolds , G . D . , August , B . & Bednarek , S . Y . Preparation of enriched plant clathrin - coated vesicles by differential and density gradient centrifugation . Methods Mol Biol 1209 , 163 - 177 , ( 2014 ) . 79 Harley , S . M . & Beevers , L . Isolation and partial characterization of clathrin - coated vesicles from pea ( Pisum sativum L . ) cotyledons . Protoplasma 150 , 103 - 109 , ( 1989 ) . 31 NANO SIGHT Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 12 - 57 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Size ( nm ) C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 5 . 0 6 . 0 7 . 0 8 . 0 9 . 0 E6 FTLA Concentration / Size graph for Experiment : Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 12 - 57 Bc 4 50 ~ 13 - 13 - 10 Bc 4 50 ~ 13 - 14 - 17 Bc 4 50 ~ 13 - 15 - 30 Bc 4 50 ~ 13 - 16 - 37 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Size ( nm ) C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) 11 2242 93 210 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 5 . 0 6 . 0 7 . 0 8 . 0 E6 Averaged FTLA Concentration / Size for Experiment : Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 12 - 57 Error bars indicate + / - 1 standard error of the mean Included Files Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 13 - 10 Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 14 - 17 Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 15 - 30 Bc 4 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 16 - 37 Details NTA Version : NTA 3 . 1 Build 3 . 1 . 54 Script Used : SOP Standard Measurement 01 - 12 - 57PM 02 ~ Time Captured : 13 : 12 : 57 02 / 12 / 2022 Operator : Angela Pre - treatment : Sample Name : bd 4 Diluent : 500x Remarks : Capture Settings Camera Type : sCMOS Camera Level : 11 Slider Shutter : 890 Slider Gain : 146 FPS 25 . 3 Number of Frames : 1515 Temperature : 22 . 1 - 22 . 2 o C Viscosity : ( Water ) 0 . 948 - 0 . 950 cP Dilution factor : Dilution not recorded Syringe Pump Speed : 50 Analysis Settings Detect Threshold : 5 Blur Size : Auto Max Jump Distance : Auto : 19 . 0 - 29 . 9 pix Results Stats : Merged Data Mean : 88 . 8 nm Mode : 92 . 7 nm SD : 28 . 3 nm D10 : 47 . 1 nm D50 : 90 . 4 nm D90 : 118 . 1 nm Stats : Mean + / - Standard Error Mean : 88 . 9 + / - 2 . 1 nm Mode : 94 . 0 + / - 2 . 7 nm SD : 28 . 0 + / - 1 . 2 nm D10 : 45 . 8 + / - 6 . 0 nm D50 : 90 . 6 + / - 1 . 3 nm D90 : 118 . 2 + / - 2 . 1 nm Concentration ( Upgrade ) : 4 . 14e + 008 + / - 1 . 02e + 007 particles / ml 49 . 1 + / - 1 . 1 particles / frame 52 . 2 + / - 1 . 2 centres / frame C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) E6 Particle size ( nm ) NANO SIGHT Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 52 - 17 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Size ( nm ) C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 E7 FTLA Concentration / Size graph for Experiment : Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 52 - 17 Bc 5 50 ~ 13 - 52 - 29 Bc 5 50 ~ 13 - 53 - 37 Bc 5 50 ~ 13 - 54 - 44 Bc 5 50 ~ 13 - 55 - 52 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Size ( nm ) C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) 45 94 332 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 E7 Averaged FTLA Concentration / Size for Experiment : Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 52 - 17 Error bars indicate + / - 1 standard error of the mean Included Files Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 52 - 29 Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 53 - 37 Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 54 - 44 Bc 5 500x 2022 - 12 - 02 13 - 55 - 52 Details NTA Version : NTA 3 . 1 Build 3 . 1 . 54 Script Used : SOP Standard Measurement 01 - 52 - 17PM 02 ~ Time Captured : 13 : 52 : 17 02 / 12 / 2022 Operator : Angela Pre - treatment : Sample Name : bc 5 Diluent : 500x Remarks : Capture Settings Camera Type : sCMOS Camera Level : 11 Slider Shutter : 890 Slider Gain : 146 FPS 25 . 3 Number of Frames : 1515 Temperature : 22 . 9 - 23 . 0 o C Viscosity : ( Water ) 0 . 931 - 0 . 933 cP Dilution factor : Dilution not recorded Syringe Pump Speed : 50 Analysis Settings Detect Threshold : 5 Blur Size : Auto Max Jump Distance : Auto : 19 . 3 - 25 . 5 pix Results Stats : Merged Data Mean : 87 . 8 nm Mode : 93 . 5 nm SD : 27 . 7 nm D10 : 47 . 1 nm D50 : 89 . 6 nm D90 : 116 . 4 nm Stats : Mean + / - Standard Error Mean : 87 . 8 + / - 2 . 2 nm Mode : 93 . 3 + / - 1 . 5 nm SD : 27 . 4 + / - 0 . 3 nm D10 : 46 . 9 + / - 5 . 4 nm D50 : 89 . 7 + / - 1 . 0 nm D90 : 116 . 3 + / - 3 . 3 nm Concentration ( Upgrade ) : 5 . 62e + 008 + / - 6 . 61e + 006 particles / ml 73 . 4 + / - 1 . 2 particles / frame 75 . 5 + / - 1 . 3 centres / frame C on c en t r a t i on ( pa r t i c l e s / m l ) E7 Particle size ( nm ) Fraction 5 Fraction 4 Fraction 5 Fraction 4 55 55 BcPLS1 - YFP F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 BcTSP3 - YFP ( g ml - 1 ) 1 . 03 1 . 07 1 . 11 1 . 15 1 . 19 1 . 24 ( kDa ) d BcPLS1 - YFP BcTSP3 - YFP a b c BcPLS1 - YFP Bright Field Merge BcTSP3 - YFP Bright Field Merge e 25 55 55 TET8 BcPLS1 - YFP F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 BcTSP3 - YFP ( kDa ) 25 TET8 1 . 03 1 . 06 1 . 10 1 . 15 1 . 18 1 . 20 ( g ml - 1 ) f g Figure 1 AtTET8 - CFP BcPLS1 - YFP Merge Enlarge AtTET8 - CFP BcTSP3 - YFP Merge Enlarge 32 b 05 p l s1 p l s1c o m t s p 3 t s p 3c o m 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 B 05 Δ b c p l s 1 - 1 Δ b c p l s 1 - C o m - 1 Δ b c t s p3 - 2 Δ b c t s p3 - C o m - 1 * * * P < 0 . 0001 P = 0 . 2407 NS P = 0 . 2574 NS P = 0 . 9993 NS B05 Δbcpls1 - 1 Δbcpls1 - Com - 1 Δbctsp3 - 2 Δbctsp3 - Com - 1 F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 ( g ml - 1 ) 1 . 03 1 . 06 1 . 10 1 . 15 1 . 18 1 . 20 70 70 70 70 ( bp ) Bc - siR3 . 1 Bc - siR3 . 2 Bc - siR5 Bc - siR17 Bc - siR9 70 - MNaseTriton - X 70 70 70 70 Bc - siR3 . 1 Bc - siR3 . 2 Bc - siR5 EVs ( F4 ) Total + + + Bc - siR17 - - ( bp ) 70 Bc - siR9 Bc - dcl1dcl2 + EVs Bc - dcl1dcl2 B05 EVs b05 dcl ev dcl ev 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e B c - d c l 1d c l 2 B c - d c l 1d c l 2 + E V s B 05 * * * E V s * * * P < 0 . 0001 P < 0 . 0001 P < 0 . 0001 * * * Δbcpls1 - 1 B05 Δbcpls1 - 1 + EVs EVs Δ b c p l s 1 - 1 + E V s b05 pls1 ev pls1 ev 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 B 05 Δ b c p l s 1 - 1 E V s 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e P = 0 . 0002 P < 0 . 0001 * * * P < 0 . 0001 * * * 1 . 5 * * * a b c B05 Δbcpls1 - 1 Δbcpls1 - Com - 1 Δbctsp3 - Com - 1 Δbctsp3 - 2 B 05 p l s1 p l s1 c o m t s p 3 t s p 3 c o m 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 3 . 1 P < 0 . 0001 P = 0 . 9261 NS P = 0 . 9189 NS P = 0 . 5688 NS 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e s RN A a m oun t * * * Bc - siR3 . 1 B 05 p l s1 p l s1 c o m t s p 3 t s p 3 c o m 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 3 . 2 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e s RN A a m oun t P = 0 . 0072 P = 0 . 6443 NS P = 0 . 9998 NS P = 0 . 6821 NS * * Bc - siR3 . 2 B 05 p l s1 p l s1 c o m t s p 3 t s p 3 c o m 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 5 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e s RN A a m oun t P < 0 . 001 P = 0 . 7218 NS P = 0 . 8296 NS P = 0 . 9916 NS * * * Bc - siR5 d e f Figure 2 33 Figure 3 wt 1 . 2 1 . 3 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 Data 1 rem1 . 2 rem1 . 3 WT 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e NS P = 0 . 9610 WT rem1 . 2 rem1 . 3 NS P = 0 . 9887 2 . 0 wt chc2 ap2 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 * * * chc2 - 1 WT ap2σ WT chc2 - 1 ap2σ 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e * * * P < 0 . 0001 P < 0 . 0001 w t f l o t 1 / 2 1 - 3 f l o t 1 / 2 1 - 12 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 Data 1 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 flot1 / 2 - 1 - 3 WT flot1 / 2 - 1 - 12 f l o t 1 / 2 - 1 - 3 WT f l o t 1 / 2 - 1 - 12 P = 0 . 0156 P = 0 . 0035 * * * INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 I ndu c ed un i ndu c ed c h c hub und i i ndu c 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 Induced uninduced 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e * * * P < 0 . 0001 XVE > > AX2 I ndu c ed un i ndu c ed 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 Induced uninduced 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 R e l a t i v e l e s i on s i z e * * * P < 0 . 0001 a b c d e 34 Figure 4 a 100 70 70 70 70 ( bp ) ( kDa ) ap2σ WT chc2 - 1 Bc - siR 3 . 1 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 miR 396 AGO1 IP α - AGO1 1 1 1 1 1 . 04 1 . 14 0 . 46 0 . 21 0 . 49 0 . 17 0 . 44 0 . 20 100 70 70 70 70 Induced AGO1 IP uninduced 1 1 1 1 Bc - siR 3 . 1 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 miR 396 α - AGO1 ( bp ) ( kDa ) INTAM > > RFP - HUB1 0 . 29 0 . 35 0 . 22 1 . 11 100 70 70 70 70 Induced AGO1 IP uninduced 1 1 1 1 Bc - siR 3 . 1 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 miR 396 α - AGO1 ( bp ) ( kDa ) XVE > > AX2 0 . 30 0 . 32 0 . 33 0 . 91 d 100 70 70 70 70 ( bp ) ( kDa ) WT flot1 / 2 - 1 - 3 Bc - siR 3 . 1 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 miR 396 AGO1 IP α - AGO1 1 1 1 . 04 1 . 10 1 . 34 1 . 07 1 0 . 94 0 . 90 1 0 . 96 0 . 87 flot1 / 2 - 1 - 12 e 100 70 70 70 70 ( bp ) ( kDa ) α - AGO1 Bc - siR 3 . 1 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 miR 396 WT rem1 . 2 1 1 . 01 1 . 02 1 0 . 97 1 . 12 1 1 . 12 0 . 82 1 1 . 01 0 . 99 rem1 . 3 AGO1 IP 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 Data 1 R e l a t i v e m RN A l e v e l 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 * * P = 0 . 0038 * * P = 0 . 0046 At - MPK1 0h 24h W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 Data 2 P < 0 . 001 P = 0 . 0011 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 5 2 . 5 3 . 0 At - MPK2 * * * * * R e l a t i v e m RN A l e v e l 0h 24h W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Data 1 0 1 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 5 At - PRXIIF * * P = 0 . 0044 * * P = 0 . 0051 R e l a t i v e m RN A l e v e l 0h 24h W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 Data 1 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 * * P = 0 . 0036 * * P = 0 . 0044 At - WAK R e l a t i v e m RN A l e v e l 0h 24h W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ W T c h c 2 - 1ap2 σ f b c 35 Figure 5 a Bc . B c . i n f e c t i on C on t r o l FM4 - 64 CHC2 - YFP Merge Merge2 Enlarge 60 . 1 % Bc . B c . i n f e c t i on C on t r o l AP2A1 - GFP FM4 - 64 Merge Merge2 Enlarge 45 . 6 % B c . i n f e c t i on C on t r o l FM4 - 64 CLC1 - GFP Merge Merge2 Enlarge Bc . 52 . 5 % B c . i n f e c t i on C on t r o l FM4 - 64 YFP - FLOT1 Merge Merge2 Enlarge 10 . 5 % Bc . b c d 36 Figure 6 a b c d CLC1 - GFP YFP YFP CLC1 - GFP CLC1 - GFP Bc - PLS1 - mCherry Merge YFP Bc - PLS1 - mCherry Merge Merge2 Merge2 ( kDa ) 55 55 Total CLC1 - GFP Input IP ( CCVs ) CLC1 - GFP BcPLS1 - mCherry 25 55 Total YFP Input IP YFP BcPLS1 - mCherry ( kDa ) CLC1 - GFP IP 70 70 25 70 70 70 ( bp ) ( kDa ) YFP Total Input 55 Bc - siR 3 . 2 Bc - siR 5 Total α - GFP Bc - siR 3 . 1 Input IP ( CCVs ) Bc - siR17 ( kDa ) Bc - siR9 e