This article was published as part of the Nanomedicine themed issue Guest editors Frank Caruso , Taeghwan Hyeon and Vincent Rotello Please take a look at the issue 7 2012 table of contents to access other reviews in this themed issue D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online / Journal Homepage / Table of Contents for this issue www . rsc . org / chemsocrev Registered Charity Number 207890 Featuring an artistic representation of cellular endocytosis ( G . Battaglia , University of Sheffi eld ) . Endocytosis at the nanoscale Battaglia and Canton discuss the latest advancement on endocytosis and its implication for nanomedicine design . G . Battaglia has been working in the last years on several projects aimed to evaluate the diff erent steps of nanoparticle endocytosis and how to develop new strategies for intracellular delivery . As featured in : See Canton and Battaglia Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2718 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Cite this : Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 Endocytosis at the nanoscale w Irene Canton * and Giuseppe Battaglia * Received 11th November 2011 DOI : 10 . 1039 / c2cs15309b Endocytosis is a fundamental process in which eukaryotic cells internalise molecules and macromolecules via deformation of the membrane and generation of membrane - bound carriers . Functional aspects are not only limited to uptake of nutrients , but also play a primary role in evolutionary conserved processes such as the regulation of plasma membrane protein activity ( i . e . signal - transducing receptors , small - molecule transporters and ion channels ) , cell motility and mitosis . The macromolecular nature of the material transported by endocytosis makes this route one of the most important targets for nanomedicine . Indeed , many nanoparticle formulations have been customised to enter cells through endocytosis and deliver the cargo within the cell . In this critical review , we present an overview of the biology of endocytosis and discuss its implications in cell internalisation of nanoparticles . We discuss how nanoparticle size , shape and surface chemistry can control this process eﬀectively . Finally , we discuss diﬀerent drug delivery strategies on how to evade lysosomal degradation to promote eﬀective release of the cargo ( 376 references ) . 1 . Introduction Cellular compartmentalisation is an essential feature to maintain diﬀerent local environments that accommodate speciﬁc metabolic processes . This allows for otherwise incompatible processes to happen simultaneously inside the same cell . 1 Morpho - logical segregation of the compartments is achieved by the total or partial surrounding of ﬂuid - like membranes , known as plasma membrane , formed by dual - nature molecules such as phospholipids , sphigolipids , and glycolipids . These are charac - terised by a structure that always comprises water - soluble ( hydro - philic ) and - insoluble ( hydrophobic ) parts . 2 The two parts interact with the surrounding water counteractively , leading to the The Krebs Institute , The Centre for Membrane Interaction and Dynamics , The Sheﬃeld Cancer Research Centre , and the Department of Biomedical Science , The University of Sheﬃeld , Western Bank , Sheﬃeld , S10 2TN , UK w Part of the nanomedicine themed issue . Irene Canton Dr Irene Canton obtained her MSc in Biochemistry and PhD in Cellular Biology and Genetics from the University of the Basque Country ( Spain ) . After graduating , she joined Profs . MacNeil and Ryan groups as a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Engineering Ma - terials at the University of Shef - ﬁeld . In 2008 , Dr Canton joined the Prof . Battaglia group and she is now a post - doctoral fellow working on the study and characterisation of nanoparticle internalisation in human cells . Giuseppe Battaglia Prof . Giuseppe Battaglia received his ‘‘Laurea’’ in Chemical Engineering from the University of Palermo ( Italy ) in 2001 . He then joined the ICI Strategic Tech - nology Group as research pro - cess engineer before moving to Prof . Anthony Ryan’s group to undertake a PhD in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Sheﬃeld . In 2006 , he was appointed to a lectureship within the Depart - ment of Engineering Materials at the University of Sheﬃeld . In 2009 he relocated to the Department of Biomedical Science where he was appointed to a senior lectureship . In 2011 he was appointed to a personal chair . He is now Professor of Synthetic Biology and leads a 28 - strong group working on the development and characterisation of water - borne nanostructures and their interactions with live cells / tissues . Chem Soc Rev Dynamic Article Links www . rsc . org / csr CRITICAL REVIEW D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2719 self - assembly into a membrane made of a hydrophobic layer stabilised by two hydrophilic layers . The ability to compart - mentalise is due to the phospholipid membrane impermeability to molecules such as ions , proteins and other polar compounds . This allows the formation of conﬁned aqueous volumes with controlled concentrations and compositions , necessary to create the appropriate conditions for housing biochemical processes . Subcellular compartmentalisation is not a static but a dynamic condition , since the phospholipid membrane plays an important role in biological communication ; allowing for traﬃcking of molecules either through passive diﬀusion ( i . e . Fickian diﬀusion of small molecule across the membrane ) or by lodging protein channels that actively control the molecular ﬂow . In multi - compartmented eukaryotic cells , traﬃcking is also controlled by the exchange of small membrane - enclosed sacs known as vesicles . They are formed from ‘‘pinching oﬀ’’ segments of the membrane that comprises the organelle of origin . The resulting vesicles encapsulate some of the material from the organelle and through selective , often protein - controlled interactions , they deliver the contents by fusing membranes with the target organelle . This continuous ﬁssion and fusion ensures the exchange of an isolated but considerable amount of biochemical information . Material is continuously exchanged between the extracellular space and the cell interior ( e . g . cytosol ) via endocytosis ( in ) and exocytosis ( out ) . Although endocytosis and exocytosis processes are strictly connected between each other to maintain cell homeostasis , 3 we will focus the attention of this review on the former process . Endocytosis is a fundamental process that is used by cells to internalise molecules and macromolecules . Its function is not only limited to uptake of nutrients , it plays a primary role in surface receptor regulation ( including antigen presentation ) , cell motility and mitosis , as well as the control of several signalling cascades . 4 , 5 Furthermore , endocytosis is also the primary route exploited by bacteria and viruses to enter cells . 6 – 11 With the advent of nanotechnology and the ability to modulate the design of nanoparticles , unravelling the role of endocytosis in nano - particle internalisation is becoming crucial . This would be key to understand the fate of the nanoparticles once internalised , their toxicological proﬁle and the eﬀect on the biological activity of the cargo transported inside the cells . Herein , we discuss the mechan - isms of endocytosis . How internalised materials are sorted within the cell , and the strategies to escape the endocytic pathway and deliver cargoes intracellularly . 2 . Endocytotic pathways Cellular and molecular biologists are still trying to understand the mechanisms that regulate endocytosis . This is a very diﬃcult task to achieve because of : ( i ) a lack of generally accepted markers / inhibitors to elucidate the pathways , ( ii ) technical limitations such as imaging resolution and toxicity / cell homeostasis perturbation , and ( iii ) cross - talking between the diﬀerent pathways . The traditional classiﬁcation divides uptaken cargoes by size into two categories : phagocytosis ( i . e . cell eating ) and pinocytosis ( i . e . cell drinking ) . While the former is typical of only few specialised cells , the latter is ubiquitous to almost any eukaryotic cell . Pinocytosis is further sub - classiﬁed in several other mechanisms depending on the diﬀerent proteins and lipids involved . In Fig . 1 , the main endocytic mechanisms are depicted together with the intra - cellular fate of internalised materials . All of these mechanisms generally share four fundamental steps : ( i ) speciﬁc binding event at the cell surface ; ( ii ) plasma membrane budding and pinching oﬀ ; ( iii ) tethering of the resulting traﬃcking vesicle and ﬁnally ( iv ) traﬃcking of the vesicle to a speciﬁc subcellular organelle . In this section , we discuss the latest insights into the Fig . 1 Mechanisms of extracellular uptake by endocytosis in a typical eukaryotic cell . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2720 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 mechanistics of endocytosis and the molecular players involved in their regulation . We also discuss brieﬂy how cells regulate membrane deformation across the diﬀerent mechanisms as well as traﬃcking post - endocytosis . 2 . 1 Entry mechanisms 2 . 1 . 1 . Clathrin - mediated . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is by far the most studied of all the diﬀerent endocytosis mechanisms . Originally , this pathway was discovered by Roth and Porter who described numerous ‘‘coated pits’’ visualised using thin - section electron microscopy ( EM ) . 12 CME has been observed to be one of the most important routes of internalisa - tion in eukaryotic cells responsible for nutrient uptake , 13 eﬃcient receptors signalling , 13 as well as its established pivotal role in synaptic vesicle recycling in neurons . 14 – 16 Also , CME is the most common internalisation pathway exploited by viruses . 7 , 9 The very ﬁrst stage of CME involves the sorting of trans - membrane receptors that upon binding to their ligands trigger the formation of ‘coated pits’ on the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane . These pits originate from the assembly of several cytosolic proteins , with clathrin as the main unit . Clathrin has a three - legged structure , known as triskelion , resulting from the assembly of the three clathrin heavy chains , each associated with a clathrin light chain 17 , 18 ( Fig . 2 ) . Clathrin triskelions sponta - neously self - assemble into closed polygonal ‘cages’ in vitro . 19 However , under physiological conditions , clathrin - cage assembly requires other proteins collectively known as the adaptor proteins ( APs ) . 20 , 21 APs coordinate clathrin nucleation at the sites of internalisation in the membrane . 22 This triggers the assembly of clathrin triskelions into a curved polygonal web that ultimately drives the deformation of the anchored membrane . 22 The invagination of the membrane during clathrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) formation is initiated by the interaction of membrane modelling proteins ( such as the F - BAR - m - homology domain - containing FCHo proteins 23 , 24 and the intersectin / Eps15 25 ) with the plasma membrane itself . These proteins work as a membrane deforming template ( see Section 2 . 2 . 1 ) that recruit the core - sorting adaptor AP - 2 . During the early stages of CME , AP - 2 together with other adaptors ( collectively known as CLASPs , clathrin - associated sorting proteins ) become the recognition sites for the many diﬀerent cargoes and sorting signals while the clathrin cages stabilise the deformation points at the membrane . 26 This highly coordinated assembly ends with the formation of a CCV ( Fig . 2 ) . Clathrin assembly is also responsible for the formation of the vesicle neck that , with the intervention of other speciﬁc proteins , is severed leading to the detachment of the CCV from the cell membrane ( see Section 2 . 2 . 2 ) . Once the CCV is detached , the clathrin basket wears oﬀ from the receptor - laden vesicle , leaving the naked vesicle undergoing further intracellular traﬃcking . The entire dynamics of the CME process can be estimated by weighting against the amount of cell membrane occupied Fig . 2 ( a ) The mechanism of clathrin mediated endocytosis and the structure of clathrin cage ( from ref . 18 ) . ( b ) The diﬀerent stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( from ref . 19 ) . ( c ) Gallery of coated pit proﬁles on the inner surface of chicken ﬁbroblasts , illustrating the range of lattice curvature seen normally . Scale bar : 200 nm . 40 ( d ) Electron micrographs of clathrin - coated pits in diﬀerent cell types and with diﬀerent cargoes . ( e ) Electron micrographs of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of a latex bead and Listeria monocytogenes bacteria ( picture adapted from ref . 16 ) . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2721 by the CCPs , approximately 2 % . 27 , 28 The rate of membrane internalisation via CME ranges between 1 – 5 % per minute 29 and the lifetime of a clathrin coated pit ( CCP ) is between 20 s and 2 min . Recent live cell studies have also demonstrated that for eﬀective endocytosis , clathrin assembly , CCP development and CCV formation should be highly synchronised with actin polymerisation . However , how the membrane curvature - modulating proteins are spatiotemporally coordinated is still a subject of study . 30 , 31 Other important questions yet to answer within the process are how CCPs evolve into vesicles ( CCV ) and more importantly , how their size is regulated . For example , during chemical synapses , the largest CCPs are similar in size to CCVs ( 50 nm diameter ) . Each of these CCVs forms from one CCP . 32 In other cell types , such as ﬁbroblasts , CCPs of a similar size to CCVs ( 150 nm diameter ) , as well as larger ( 4 300 nm diameter ) have been observed , with multiple curvature domains or relatively ﬂat regions linked to invaginate sections , 33 implying that CCV can form both from a single smaller section or from a large lattice . These studies suggest that the size of CCV is linked to the size of the cargo , with an upper limit so far reported of about 200 nm diameter 34 ( Fig . 2d ) . Interestingly , larger cargoes such as bacteria , 35 , 36 latex beads 35 , 37 and large double - membrane vesicles 38 have also been reported to interact with CME receptors . Furthermore , CCPs have been observed on the surface of cells beneath beads and bacteria ( Fig . 2e ) . 39 Nevertheless , their relative large size makes it unlikely for internalisation to be entirely due to CME . Yet , there are recent reports in live cells that seem to link the size of the coated vesicle , and hence the design of its clathrin lattice , with the size of the cargo . In particular , Ehrlich and co - workers hypothesised that coated pits have an exploratory character ; randomly appearing at the surface of the membrane and collapsing , unless a molecular event commits the coated pit to completion and budding . In their work , the event that clearly correlated with such commitment was cargo loading . The point of no return appeared to occur just when the membrane curvature began to resist further growth of the clathrin lattice , suggesting that perhaps the cargo itself stabilises CCPs . 34 2 . 1 . 2 . Caveolae - mediated . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis is the most studied clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) mechanism and it is now recognised for many biological functions , including cell signalling , lipid regulation , and vesicular transport . Further , it has been suggested to play a role in a variety of diseases , including cancer , diabetes and virus infection . 41 – 44 Caveolae ( from Latin—little caves ) are 50 – 80 nm large ﬂask - shaped invaginations displayed by the plasma membrane of several types of eukaryotic cells ( Fig . 3 ) . They were ﬁrst observed in the 50s by electron microscopy on endothelial cells . 45 , 46 Caveolae have a striated coat on the surface of the membrane composed primarily of caveolin - 1 ( or caveolin - 3 in muscle cells ) and caveolin - 2 . 41 Generically , caveolins are 21 kDa membrane proteins anchored to the cell membrane by an hydrophobic sequence from the cytosol side . 42 Caveolin - 1 ( and its muscle cell analogous caveolin - 3 ) is responsible for the structural formation of the caveolae . 47 How - ever , the exact function of caveolin - 2 has still to be resolved . It has been reported to act as a scaﬀolding protein within caveolar / lipid raft membranes , forming stable hetero - oligomeric complexes with the other caveolins . 48 Although the structural characteristics of caveolae are widely conserved , there are recent reports of marked disparities on the functional role of individual caveolins . 49 Caveolae have also been proposed to act as membrane tension regulators . 50 , 51 The mechanism of caveolae - mediated endocytosis is still a subject of study , with the link between cargo molecules and caveolae - localised receptors still to be elucidated . Today we know that a number of non - enveloped viruses including the Simian Virus 40 use caveolae - mediated endocytosis to enter cells . 52 , 53 Molecules such as cholera toxin 54 and folic acid 55 , 56 have also been observed to enter cells through caveolae . One of the most studied functions of caveolae has although been its role in transcytosis . Several serum components 57 , 58 and viruses 7 , 59 have been found to use this route to go across polarised endothelium tissues . 2 . 1 . 3 . RhoA - mediated . RhoA belongs to the Ras homolog gene family 60 and its main role is to control actin cytoskeleton dynamics . It regulates actin ﬁlament rearrangement , gene expression , cell - shape determination and cell proliferation 61 , 62 with consequent implication in oncogenesis . 63 RhoA involvement in CLIC endocytosis started with the study of the internalisation of interleukin - 2 receptor . 64 RhoA - mediated endocytosis was sub - sequently ascribed for the control of ricin uptake at the apical side of polarised kidney cells 65 as well as to have a primary role on the entry of Baculovirus in non - phagocytic human cells . 66 Although the speciﬁc requirements have not been rigorously established yet , this mechanism seems responsible for the internalisation of the common g c cytokine receptor 67 , 68 in lymphocytes and mast cells with further immunological functions . 69 Yet it is still unknown whether RhoA is required only for the sorting of the receptor into the endocytic pathway or during the whole endocytic process itself . RhoA is a key player in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics and actin has a very important role in most of the endocytotic mechanisms . 67 , 70 , 71 2 . 1 . 4 . CDC42 - mediated . Cell division cycle 42 ( CDC42 ) is also a member of the Ras superfamily of GTP - binding proteins . CDC42 is involved in a variety of cellular pathways that control growth , diﬀerentiation and apoptosis via regulating actin cyto - skeleton and cellular stress pathways . CDC42 was ﬁrstly identiﬁed observing the central role of the small GTPase on the internali - sation of glycosphingolipids anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) . 72 , 73 This GTPase enzyme controls timing and speciﬁcity of many cellular events by conformational changes driven by nucleotide guanine triphosphate ( GTP ) binding and its hydrolysis to guanine diphosphate ( GDP ) . GPI - APs anchor to the extracellular Fig . 3 ( a ) Thin - section electron microscopy ( EM ) image and ( b ) rapid - freeze deep - etch image of ﬁbroblast caveolae . Arrows point to endoplasmic reticulum near invaginated caveolae . 43 D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2722 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 membrane leaﬂet through lipid chains forming nano - clusters at the surface of living cells . GPI - AP proteins are internalised slowly , with a halftime between minutes to hours . 74 These clusters operate as sorting signals for the selective endocytosis via interaction with the CDC42 protein . Typically , this pathway is associated with the formation of tubular invagination of the plasma membrane . These can be 200 – 600 nm long and 30 – 50 nm wide . 73 These structures are extremely sensitive to traditional ﬁxation methods , explaining their late discovery . 75 , 76 Such membrane arrangement makes possible the internalisation of large volumes of the ﬂuid phase . CDC42 activation is associated with the mobilisation of actin - polymerisation complexes and hence , sensitive to cholesterol levels and to inhibitors of actin polymerisation . Recently , this pathway was also associated with another GTPase that regulates focal adhesion : GRAF1 . 75 , 76 This protein was localised in tubular endocytic membranes involved in the uptake of glycosphingolipids , GPI - linked proteins , cholera toxin B ( CTxB ) subunit , and dextran . 75 , 76 Depletion of GRAF1 was shown to down - regulate ﬂuid - phase uptake in un - stimulated HeLa cells to an extent similar to that produced by blocking CME . 75 , 76 GRAF1 contains distinctive domains to control membrane deformation and vesicle scission . These comprise a BAR domain ( see Section 2 . 2 . 1 ) , a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain ( for recruitment to the plasma membrane via binding to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) and an SRC homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain ( to coordinate post - internalisation vesicles scission via interacting with dynamin , 75 , 76 see Section 2 . 2 . 2 ) . 2 . 1 . 5 . ARF6 - mediated . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) belongs to the ARF family of 6 small GTPases related to the Ras gene and expressed in all eukaryotic cells . 77 While most of the ARFS proteins are very similar , ARF6 is the least - conserved member of this family . It shares only 66 % amino acids with other ARFS . The role of ARF6 in CLIC endocytosis has not been established completely . In the last few years it was singled out in clathrin - and caveolae independent processes . 78 – 80 ARF6 - mediated endocytosis was morphologically associated with tubular rather than vesicular structures . 78 , 81 In vitro experiments studying ARF6 interactions with artiﬁcial phospholipid membranes have recently demonstrated that this protein regulates the membrane curvature . 82 ARF6 was observed to bind to GTP depending on the membrane - curvature . Once bound to GTP , ARF6 generates even higher curvature and eventually , membrane budding via the insertion of its BAR domain within the phospholipid membrane . 82 2 . 1 . 6 . Flotillin - mediated . Flotillins ( also known as Reggies ) were originally discovered in neurons during axon regeneration ( i . e . the name Reg - gie ) . Later on , they were independently recognised as markers of lipid membrane domains ( also rafts ) and renamed ﬂotillins due to their residence in buoyant ( ﬂoating ) detergent insoluble membrane fractions . 83 , 84 Flotillins are palmitoylated and have a hairpin structure when bound to the plasma membrane . 84 This conformation is very similar to caveolin - 1 , suggesting the analogous role in the lipid sorting . Structural similarities to caveolin were also conﬁrmed with its localisation into caveolae - like structures . 83 , 85 – 87 However , recent studies show that ﬂotillins are not responsible for caveolae biogenesis and they associate with caveolae - like structures only once they are formed . 88 Several studies suggest that ﬂotillins characterise a speciﬁc endocytic pathway independent of clathrin and caveolin . 85 – 87 Real time imaging showed that ﬂotillins induce plasma membrane clustering that subsequently internalise . 85 , 86 In one case , electron microscopy analysis demonstrated that ﬂotillin co - localises with cholera toxin B ( CT - B ) at the plasma membrane abd within the endosomal compartments . 86 Similar observations were made for the uptake of GPI - AP bound CD59 85 and cell surface proteoglycans . 89 The role of ﬂotillins as a separate endocytic pathway is yet to be conﬁrmed . Other studies suggest that they act upstream in domain organisation for other clathrin - and caveolin - independent pathways . 76 2 . 1 . 7 . Macropinocytosis . This pathway involves the engulf - ment of a large quantity of external ﬂuid by the formation of waving sheet - like extensions of the plasma membrane that close , thus forming large ( 4 200 nm ) organelles called macro - pinosomes . The micrometre scale of this event made it one of the very ﬁrst endocytotic pathways to be studied . 95 Today we know that macropinocytosis is an actin - regulated endocytic process that , unlike the above discussed endocytosis mechan - isms and phagocytosis , it is not directly driven by the cargo or the receptors associated with it . 96 Although this is a well - studied process , there is still much to understand about the molecules and dynamics involved in the regulation of macro - pinocytosis . As shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) , macropinocytosis is asso - ciated with signiﬁcant plasma membrane ruﬄing across the cell surface . Depending on the cells type and activation path - way , the ruﬄes can be planar folds 90 , 92 ( lamellipodia - like ) , circular cup - shaped extensions 93 , 97 , 98 ( circular ruﬄes ) and in some cases large plasma membrane extrusions 90 , 94 ( blebs ) . These membrane protrusions can be stimulated by the activation of growth factor receptors 91 , 98 as well as a variety of particles including bacteria , apoptotic bodies , necrotic cells and viruses . 90 , 91 , 94 The protrusions are the consequence of cytosolic actin polymerisation initiated by small family Rho guanosine triphosphatases ( GTPases ) working in concert with phosphoino - sitide 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ) . 90 , 91 , 99 – 101 Fig . 4 ( b ) demon - strates this process in live cells by real time imaging of actin—and ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ) —on ﬂuorescently labelled cells . 91 It is worth noting that not all the membrane protrusions lead to the formation of macropinosomes . Most of them retreat back into the plasma membrane while few succeed forming vacuoles ﬁlled with external ﬂuid . At this stage , those vacuoles undergo membrane ﬁssion and consequent formation of the macropinosome . 90 The ﬁssion mechanism and macro - pinosome closure in both lamellipodia - like and circular ruﬄes macropinocytosis are regulated by dynamin . 3 , 102 However , bleb - associated macropinocytosis was found to be dynamin independent . 94 Macropinosomes are larger than other endo - cytic vesicles and lack of cytosolic coat ; they are typically heterogeneous in size ( from 0 . 5 – 10 m m ) and of irregular shape . 90 2 . 1 . 8 . Phagocytosis . Phagocytosis is a type of endocytosis performed only by a few specialised cells . Although it is also involved in nutrient uptake , its major role is the uptake of pathogens , dead cells , and cell debris . Immune cells such as dendritic cells , mast cells , macrophages , monocytes , and neutrophils are all professional phagocytic cells . Typically , phagocytosis is triggered by speciﬁc cell membrane recognition D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2723 of the particle through the recruitment of receptors . This process directs a cup - shaped membrane distortion that gradually surrounds the particle / pathogen . The distortion of the membrane ends with the formation of a phagosome , with shape and size dictated by the up - taken material ( as large as 5 – 10 m m ) . 103 Phagocytosis is speciﬁcally triggered in immune cells by opsoni - sation . Through this process foreign bodies and pathogens are coated by the attachment of classical complement proteins and / or antibodies ( immunoglobins ) . Phagocytic cells then respond accordingly , depending on which proteins opsonise the particles . For example , immunoglobulin G - opsonised particles bind to the immunoglobulin receptor known as the Fc - gamma R ( fragment crystallisable gamma receptors ) . This binding triggers actin rear - rangements , forming membrane extensions around the particle ( Fig . 5a and c ) in the shape of a ‘cup with a zipper - lock’ . 103 – 106 Particles that are opsonised by the classical complement proteins interact with phagocytes via complement receptor type 3 ( CR - 3 ) . This binding produces a depression in the cell membrane surface . The deformation in the membrane is due to a discrete patch - like distribution of polymerised actin ( Fig . 5b ) . 104 – 106 However , the two mechanisms result into morphologically distinct phagocytic cups . In certain cases , such as the engulfment of necrotic cells , the morphology is a combination of the two . 103 Phagocytosis is quite a membrane expensive process ; it requires a considerable contri - bution from the plasma membrane and often it involves other organelles . Recent studies have demonstrated that subcellular compartments , including endosomes , lysosomes and endoplasmic reticulum , are involved in the actual process of phagocytosis . 107 , 108 2 . 2 Endocytic traﬃcking 2 . 2 . 1 . Membrane remodelling . From a mechanical point of view , the initial membrane remodelling on most endocytic pathways can be explained in two steps : the membrane invagination and the pinching oﬀ of the resulting vesicle . Both are energetically expensive and need to overcome the resistance of the cell membrane in order to proceed . 110 In general , endocytosis - induced membrane remodelling begins with the formation of functional nanoscopic domains on the membrane surface . These domains often promote local membrane deformation , generating regions with diﬀerent curvatures . It has now been observed that a superfamily of proteins that contains Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domains have the ability to sense these curvature changes . 111 – 114 BAR domains have been established as precursors in many of the above mechanisms , facilitating interactions between the cell membrane and other cytosolic proteins . 111 – 114 BAR monomers dimerise forming a crescent like structure ( Fig . 6a ) with speciﬁc positive charges on their concave surface that bind to the negatively charged membrane via electrostatic interactions . These dimers are able to both sense and induce the membrane curvature . 115 The ﬁrst BAR domain described was the N - BAR domain , containing a N - terminal amphipathic region of Fig . 4 ( a ) Macropinocytosis mechanisms : the plasma membrane protrusions can be planar lamellipodia , circular ruﬄes or blebs , depending on the cell type and the nature of ligand . The protrusions fold back on the plasma membrane , forming a cave - like invagination and undergoing membrane ﬁssion , to form macropinosomes . Figure from ref . 90 . ( b ) Fluorescently tagged actin ( Green ) and phosphoinositide - 3 - phosphate ( PI ( 3 ) P ) ( red ) enable the direct visualisation of macropinosome formation . Scale bar 10 m m . Figure from ref . 91 . ( c ) Epidermal growth factor induces lamellipodial ruﬄing in A431 cells . Image reproduced with permission from ref . 92 . ( d ) Macrophages stimulated with macrophage colony - stimulating factor show circular ruﬄing predominantly localised to the dorsal cell surface . Image reproduced with permission from ref 93 . ( e ) Addition of vaccinia virus mature virions ( western reserve strain ) induces systemic blebbing in HeLa cells . The blebs uniformly cover the surface of the infected cell . Image from ref . 94 . ( c – e ) Scale bar 10 m m . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2724 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 homology between brain - enriched amphiphysin relatives ( BIN1 , Amphiphysin and RVS167 ) . 116 , 117 At present , several other proteins have been discovered that contain BAR domains within their structure , making the BAR domain proteins a superfamily . Depending on the domain , location or proximity to other domains , this superfamily is further divided into several sub - groups . They include : proteins that contain only the BAR domain ( classical BAR ) , proteins with N - terminal amphipathic helix preceding the BAR domain ( N - BAR ) , proteins where the BAR domain is fused with phosphoinositide binding either a pleckstrin homology domain ( BAR - PH ) or phox homology domain ( PX - BAR ) , FER and CIP4 proteins attributed to a possible actin interaction domain that contain BAR domains ( F - BAR ) , and the inverse BAR ( I - BAR ) . As shown in Fig . 6 ( b ) , these subgroups diﬀer from each other in terms of the membrane curvature they require to dimerise and hence , in terms of the degree of membrane curvature that they can sense . 2 . 2 . 2 . Vesicle severing . Once the membrane is deformed to the point that a vesicle is budded , the subsequent step is to detach the vesicle from the plasma membrane . For most of the entry mechanisms , a common protein from the GTPase family regulates this process , dynamin . This protein assembles into a helical polymer around the constricted phospholipid neck formed by the invagination of the membrane . This irreversibly severs the endocytotic vesicle from the plasma membrane . 102 , 118 Dynamin consists of ﬁve distinct domains : the GTP hydrolysis domain ( GTPase ) , a middle domain ( Middle ) , a pleckstrin homology domain ( PH ) , a GTPase eﬀector domain ( GED ) and a highly basic C - terminal proline - rich domain ( PRD ) . Under physiological conditions , dynamin assembly balances between monomer and tetramer . 119 The tetramer can further assemble in the presence of GDP and lipid tubules into ring complexes and spirals without any underlying support . 120 – 122 Experiments with dynamin and anionic liposomes showed the formation of helical tubes with an external diameter of 50 nm , an internal diameter of 20 nm and a pitch of 13 nm . 123 Upon addition of GTP , the helix was observed to shrink to an external diameter of 40 nm , an internal diameter of 10 nm and a pitch of 10 nm . 123 This indicates that GTP binding would induce con - formational changes that ‘‘pinch oﬀ’’ the membrane known as ‘‘pinchase’’ hypothesis . Nevertheless , in vitro experiments using phospholipid membranes already with a tubular shape 124 , 125 have shown that the membrane severing could follow another diﬀerent mechanism . Upon addition of GTP or GDP , the dynamin helix expanded their pitch nearly two - fold without any variation of the tube diameter . This has led to the ‘‘popsase’’ hypothesis , where dynamin elongates the membrane neck upon GTP binding forcing the vesicle to ‘‘pop oﬀ’’ . More recent experiments 103 on real time imaging of dynamin - coated lipid tubules demonstrated that the addition of GTP ( but not GDP ) makes the tubules twisting up generating supercoils . The twisting tension is then released by tubule breakage and consequent vesicle ﬁssion . This would enforce that dynamin has a mechanic - chemical function in vesicle scission , but also suggests that either constriction of the tube or pitch expansion is not suﬃcient for ﬁssion . 103 All these experiments also revealed that the phospholipid composition of the membrane is crucial to regulate dynamin – phospholipid interactions . Indeed many studies have indeed demonstrated that Fig . 5 ( a ) Model for FcR - mediated signalling during phagocytosis . Figure adapted from ref . 106 . ( b ) Model of the signal transduction pathways that control CR3 ( complement receptor type 3 ) - mediated phagocytosis . Figure adapted from ref . 106 . ( c ) Time - lapse sequences of living mouse macrophage transfected with pEGFP - actin , showing actin dynamics during phagocytosis of IgG - opsonised erythrocytes ( red blood cells ) , ﬁgure adapted from ref . 109 . Fig . 6 ( a ) Lateral and top views of the crystal structure of the Drosophila amphiphysin BAR domain . The ribbon representation shows the antiparallel ( here in purple and green ) monomers with the principal side chains that make up the positive patches on the convex surface . The surface representation shows the distribution of the electrostatic potential ( red , (cid:2) 10 kTe (cid:2) 1 , blue , + 10 kTe (cid:2) 1 ) . Picture adapted from ref . 115 . ( b ) Pairs of BAR monomers ( one in yellow and the other in blue ) dimerise folding with diﬀerent degrees of curvature . Note that PH and PX domains are in grey . Picture from ref . 113 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2725 phosphoinositides and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate inter - act with dynamin PH domains , triggering GTPase activity . 126 – 128 In vitro studies using artiﬁcial phospholipid membranes also showed that given the right mixture of phospholipids , phase separation drives spontaneous ﬁssion 129 – 132 as well as tubul - ation . 133 , 134 Regardless the mechanism of dynamin – membrane interaction , both GTP driven protein conformational changes as well as the right membrane composition are critical to drive the vesicle severing . Dynamin is involved in most endocytic pathways . 67 However , inhibition studies have demonstrated that both CDC42 135 and ARF6 136 mediated endocytosis can occur without dynamin . Both ARF6 and CDC42 are linked to tubular - like deformations in the membrane , whereas vesicular - like deformations are often dynamin dependant . It might be that the vesicular morphologies require dynamin to a diﬀerent extent than the tubular morphologies . 2 . 2 . 3 . Endocytic compartments . Following the complete detachment from the plasma membrane , the resulting vesicle , referred to as pinosome for macropinocytosis , phagosome for phagocytosis , and traﬃcking vesicle ( TV ) for the other mechan - isms , delivers its cargo to other subcellular compartments 137 , 138 ( see Fig . 7 ) . The endocytic pathway is a spatiotemporal succes - sion of diﬀerent compartments , which continuously interchange their content while undergoing structural transformation and functional makeover . Such a dynamic nature makes its inter - pretation extremely diﬃcult . Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain how the material is transported from one endocytic compartment to another . 139 – 142 For many years it was thought that the internalised material is transported from one compartment to another via a maturation process ; with the ﬁrst step being the early endosome ( EE ) , gradually maturing into a late endosome ( LE ) and eventually a lysosome . 143 However , such model is no longer able to explain how most of the endocytic compartments are recyclable and unique in nature . Experiments in cell - free conditions showed that endosomes and lysosomes could communicate via the exchange of small vesicles . 144 Other experiments have shown a continuous cycle of temporary fusion between endosomes and lysosomes ( kiss - and - run theory ) . 140 , 145 Researchers have also shown the complete fusion between endosome and lysosomes , leading to a hybrid compartment from which a lysosome buds out ( fusion – ﬁssion model ) . 146 , 147 Live cell correlated light electron microscopy has demonstrated a more complex and dynamic mechanism , where the combination of coupling and direct fusion events lead to the mixing of endosomes and lysosomes content . 148 Even more complex is the actual distinction between EEs and LEs , where the molecular composition does not necessarily match the organelle morphology . 149 Very likely , the real scenario involves the combination of all these above mechanisms in a succession and synergy yet to be discovered . As discussed above , each entry mechanism is related to a speciﬁc cellular function . For example , material that is inter - nalised by phagocytosis involves large volumes of membrane and requires prompt and eﬀective processing . The resulting phagosomes by - pass the EEs and are directly fused with lysosomes to accelerate the degradative process . 107 , 108 All the other entry mechanisms regulate cargo degradation as well as receptor recycling . The internalised material is therefore trans - ported to coordinating stations , where it is sorted depending on whether it needs degradation or recycling back to the plasma membrane . In caveolae - mediated endocytosis , the resulting traﬃcking vesicle fuses with a compartment known as caveosome ( Fig . 1 ) . 150 , 151 This caveolin - 1 rich organelle , in contrast with all other types of endocytic compartments , has a lumen with a neutral pH and lacks of the usual endosomal markers . 150 , 151 There , the material is further sorted to the EE or to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . 152 Such a non - acidic intermediate step suggests also the association of caveolae - mediated endocytosis , with endothelial cell transcytosis ( see the following section ) . Similarly , in ARF6 , ﬂotillin and CDC42 endocytosis the vesicles are ﬁrst delivered to a GPI - AP enriched early endosomal compartment ( GEEC ) where GPI - APs are quickly recycled back to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 ) . 153 As for the other entry mechanisms , the vesicles are delivered within 1 to 5 min into the early endosomes ( EE ) . These are pleomorphic compartments that comprise cisternae regions with slender tubules ( ca . 60 – 80 nm diameter ) and large vesicles ( ca . 300 – 400 nm diameter ) . The latter ones are multivesicular in nature with membrane invaginations either free in the lumen or detaching from the limiting membrane . The EEs are responsible of : ( i ) ensuring that housekeeping receptors are recycled back to the plasma membrane ( directly or indirectly via recycling endosome ) ; ( ii ) sorting material toward the TGN ; and ( iii ) shuttling receptors and internalised materials that require downregulation / degradation to the LE . EEs are rich in GTPase Rab5 , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and phosphatidyl - inositol - 3 - phosphate , indispensable for its physiological function . 154 – 156 The EE structure is directly correlated to its function . The tubules regulate communication with the TGN and the recycling endosome , as well as the entry of the traﬃcking vesicles . However , the multivesicular parts lead to the formation of multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) . Endosomal membrane arrange - ments are regulated by the ‘‘endosomal - sorting complex Fig . 7 Schematics of the diﬀerent endocytic compartments from traﬃcking vesicle to early endosome , to multivesicular bodies , to late endosome to lysosome . The time 141 that the endocytosed material takes from its entry to each organelle is plotted alongside the organelle internal pH , protease and several ions concentration . 137 D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2726 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 required for transport’’ ( ESCRT ) . This complex drives membrane ﬁssion from the cytosol stabilising the resulting vesicle bud necks . 157 – 159 The EE membrane starts to bud oﬀ towards the inner side forming intraluminal vesicles ( ILVs ) with factors and proteins that need to be degraded in lysosomes . 160 – 162 These are believed to evolve into globular MVB . 139 , 142 , 163 , 164 There are two theories regarding the formation of MVBs . One of them considers MVBs as independent carrier organelles , often naming them ‘endosomal carrier vesicles’ . 161 These are believed to be shuttled via microtubules to LE delivering their cargo by fusion . 139 , 142 , 164 The other theory considers MVBs as intermedi - ate organelles that mature into the LE . 140 , 141 Regardless of the mechanism , MVBs rapidly acidify their lumen to about pH 5 . 5 and reach the LE after 10 – 15 min from the entry . LEs are more acidic than early endosomes ( pH 5 . 5 – 5 . 0 ) and they receive newly synthesised endo - lysosomal proteins from the TGN en route to lysosomes . LEs are characterised by low levels of endocytosed recycling proteins and high levels of endocytosed proteins desig - nated for degradation . LEs have also a pleomorphic architecture that comprises tubular and multivesicular areas rich in ILVs . Each of these regions has a diﬀerent protein and lipid composi - tions to further sort the internalised material . 165 , 166 Finally , after about 30 min from its entry , the internalised material reaches the terminal station of the endocytic pathway : the lysosome . These organelles were discovered by Christian de Duve for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1974 and very quickly were pointed out as one the primary catabolic compartments of eukaryotic cells . 167 Lysosomes make up about 5 % of the intracellular volume and have diﬀerent size and morphology , with multi - lamellar and / or spiral membranous structures refereed as membrane whorls . The luminal pH of lysosomes is maintained around 5 – 4 . 5 by proton - pumping vacuolar ATPases . 137 , 138 Soluble lysosomal hydrolases ( also acid hydrolases ) and integral lysosomal membrane proteins ( LMPs ) are the main regulators of lysosome function . Around 50 lysosomal hydrolases have been identiﬁed , each of them specia - lised in a speciﬁc substrate . Their combined action is responsible for the lysosome catabolic capacity . 141 Also , about 25 LMPs have been identiﬁed in mammalian lysosomes , each of them with diﬀerent functions such as acidiﬁcation , protein import / export and membrane fusion . 168 Alongside its role in the endocytic pathway , lysosomes have a major function in the degradation of intracellular materials ( e . g . autophagy ) , degradation of the extracellular matrix and initiation of apoptosis . 169 , 170 2 . 2 . 4 . Transcytosis . This endocytosis related process represents the transport of macromolecular cargo from one side of a cell to the other within membrane - bounded vesicles ( see Fig . 1 ) . This process is crucial for multicellular organisms to control the transport of material between two diﬀerent tissues , whilst preserving separated physiological compositions . The term transcytosis was originally ascribed to the membrane - bound transport of macromolecules across capillary endo - thelial cells . 171 However , transcytosis is also used by epithelial cells to regulate the transcellular transport in organs such as intestine , liver , kidneys , testis , mammary glands , lungs and thyroid . 57 The two mechanisms share the common aim to transport the cargo from one side to other side of the cell avoiding lysosomes and degradation . While in endothelial cells , entry is caveolae - mediated , epithelial cells exploit mainly the clathrin - mediated entry . Furthermore , many evidences suggest that in endothelial cell transcytosis the vesicles avoid any endosomal compartment ( with the possible exception of caveo - somes ) ; while epithelial transcytosis makes use of a specialised sorting endosomal compartment conveniently located next to the entry and exit sites . 57 3 . Endocytosis of nanoparticles On the basis of their constitutive bonds , nanoparticles can be classiﬁed into two categories : those formed via strong inter - actions , such as ionic , metallic and covalent bonds ( e . g . quantum dots , gold nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes ) and those formed exploiting weak interactions : such as hydrogen bonds , hydrophobic eﬀect , columbic forces and their combination ( e . g . micelles and vesicles ) . Both ‘‘hard’’ and ‘‘soft’’ nano - particles have an intrinsic large surface area , thus interfacial forces dominate most of their interaction with their surrounding . These forces include : van der Waals , electrostatic , depletion , hydration and hydrophobic forces . 177 , 178 Hard nanoparticles have a deﬁned solid – liquid interface with deﬁned interfacial forces ; soft nanoparticles , on the contrary , are characterised by a liquid – liquid interface where interfacial deformations are more dynamic . 179 This diﬀerence is critical to understand nano - particle / biological interactions , and more importantly , how the nanoparticle interface exchanges materials with the surrounding . For example , soft nanoparticles are more fragile but have surface energies with order of magnitudes similar to biological systems . Hence , they are more easily integrated . On the other hand , hard nanoparticles have much higher surface tension , to a point that can induce surface catalytic events that could lead to adverse outcomes . 180 These interactions that dominate the ‘‘nano – bio interface’’ are quite complex and their discussion is outside the remits of the present review ; we direct the readers to a more speciﬁc and comprehensive published work . 180 , 181 Herein , we focus on the parameters that control nanoparticle endocytosis and how nanomaterials can be engineered to exploit endocytosis gaining cell entry . 3 . 1 Parameters aﬀecting nanoparticle endocytosis 3 . 1 . 1 . Size . As shown in Fig . 1 ( and detailed in Section 2 ) , while some entry mechanisms are very speciﬁc when it comes to the cargo size others are less so . For example , phagocytosis has been traditionally associated with the uptake of large particles ( 4 1 m m ) . However , there are several new reports that show the phagocytosis of nanometre - sized particles such as viruses , 182 , 183 gold , 184 , 185 silver , 186 and polymer nanoparticles 187 as well as quantum dots . 188 Most of these studies have also shown that changes on the nanoparticle size do not aﬀect their phagocytosis . Nevertheless , it is worth noticing that this endocytic mechanism is strongly linked to protein opsonisation ( see Section 2 . 18 ) , which in turn promotes aggregation . This very much hinders analysing size related phagocytosis data . Similarly , macropino - cytosis can be exploited for the uptake of large particles 103 ( up to 1 m m ) . However , this is a cargo unspeciﬁc uptake mechanism . Cargoes uptaken by macropinocytosis may be diﬀerent types of materials , independently of their size and often in conjunction with other entry mechanisms . 189 – 192 As shown in Fig . 2 ( d ) , D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2727 mammalian cells can use the clathrin - mediated entry to inter - nalise particles with size ranging from 10 nm to about 300 nm . On the other hand , caveolae have diameters around 50 – 80 nm with a neck around 20 – 40 nm . 41 – 44 Even though this would suggest a tight limit of cargo size for CME , Wang and collaborators have observed that this route can facilitate the entry of nanoparticles up to 100 nm in diameter . 193 As for the other CLIC entry routes , the data so far seem to suggest that their mechanistics would hinder the uptake of particles larger than 100 nm . 194 Recently , a ﬂotillin - mediated endocytosis mechanism has been proposed for the entry of diﬀerent size disulﬁde - based poly ( amido amine ) / DNA polyplexes . 195 It is important to reiterate that most of the entry mechanisms operate simultaneously , making it very diﬃcult to identify a speciﬁc one . The experimental use of inhibitors for speciﬁc pathways often complicates it further . Inhibitors can promote toxicity , artefacts and they need adequate controls that are often overlooked . 196 Nanoparticles can induce deformation and even complete invagination of the membrane as a consequence of generic physical interactions . Pioneering theoretical studies by Lipowsky and colleagues have demonstrated that when phospholipid membranes wrap around particles , 197 , 198 the attractive inter - action between the curved surface of the nanoparticle and the cell membrane produces the necessary deformation to engulf the nanoparticle . This process depends both on the adhesion forces between the membrane and the nanoparticles and on the membrane rigidity . The two parameters together set a speciﬁc critical radius that nanoparticles need in order to achieve full wrapping and internalisation ( see Fig . 8a ) . Computer simulation using dissipative particle dynamics conﬁrmed these ﬁndings , showing also that the full wrapping does not necessary lead to ﬁssion . Only when a heterogeneous domain ( i . e . a lipid raft ) is included in the membrane , the wrapped particle detaches from the larger membrane . 199 These theoretical considerations have also been demonstrated experimentally where both gold 200 and silica nanoparticles 174 have been observed to be engulfed and internalised by phospholipid vesicles . In Fig . 8 ( c ) , a cryogenic electron micrograph shows a 100 nm diameter silica nano - particle wrapped inside lipid vesicles formed by 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) . 174 More recently , similar interactions between nanoparticles and membranes have also been reported for live non - endocytic red blood cells ( Fig . 8c ) . 175 These cells are unable to internalise materials via endocytosis . However , the ultrastructure analysis shown in Fig . 8 ( c ) clearly demonstrates uptake of a silica nanoparticle . The nanoparticle internalisation , in this case , is basically controlled by membrane deformation . 175 Theoretical considerations based on membrane deformation have also been implemented in speciﬁc receptor mediated interactions , with the aim to model more closely the natural endocytic process . 173 , 201 – 205 All the models converge on the same conclusion : the particles ought to have a minimum radius between 20 and 30 nm to achieve eﬀective cellular uptake . 173 , 201 – 205 This critical size is aﬀected by several factors . As shown in Fig . 8 ( a ) , the higher the binding energy between the membrane and the nanoparticle , the smaller the minimum radius . 202 – 204 Similarly as shown by the phase diagram in Fig . 8 ( b ) , the size as well as the maximum number of up - taken particles depends on the ligand density expressed on the nanoparticle . 173 Using also a theoretical approach , we have recently shown that interactions between nanoparticles bound on the cell membrane have a drastic eﬀect on the uptake process . We calculated that attractive interactions lead to a clustering that eﬀectively lowers the free energy threshold for wrapping and therefore shifts the lower cut - oﬀ radius . 204 A similar theoretical approach proposed by Decuzzi and Ferrari 206 has shown that the contribution of the nonspeciﬁc interactions ( such as the van der Waals , steric , and electrostatic forces ) is as important as the contribution of the speciﬁc receptor – ligand interactions . When these are repulsive , the minimum radius for endocytosis increases , therefore hindering endocytosis . 206 Alongside these theoretical models , several experimental reports have shown that the nanoparticle size aﬀects their endocytosis in terms of eﬃciency , i . e . how many nanoparticles are found inside the cell at a given time point . Aoyama and co - workers demonstrated that calix [ 4 ] - resorcarene - based macro - cyclic glycocluster amphiphiles complexed to DNA transfected cells as a function of their size ; with 25 nm radius particles entering cells more eﬀectively than 50 nm and even more than 100 nm . 207 Also this group , using the same chemistry to coat quantum dots showed that 25 nm particles entered more eﬀectively than the 7 . 5 nm ones and even more than the 2 . 5 nm ones ; suggesting an optimal radius at around 25 nm . 207 A more recent study has conﬁrmed the same trend ; this time using gold nanoparticles with a radius of 4 , 12 , and 17 nm tethered on a atomic force microscope cantilever and placed in contact with live cells . They reported that both cellular uptake and unbinding forces increase with the size . 208 Chan and co - workers uniﬁed the two ranges by studying the internalisation of pristine 209 and protein - coated gold nanoparticles 210 with size ranging from few to hundreds of nanometres . They reported 20 – 25 nm to be the optimal radius for uptake ( see Fig . 8e ) . 176 , 209 Theoretical and experimental studies agree on the optimal size for uptake ( 20 – 30 nm of radius ) . Also , most theoretical models suggest a threshold radius below which there cannot be cellular uptake . Most of these models are exclusively based on membrane deformation , without including the eﬀect of the cytoskeleton . Sun and collaborators have shown that if this is included ( in the shape of linear elastic isotropic half - space ) , smaller particles can be internalised . 211 Clearly , if cells are used the scenario is more complex ; involving also non - size dependent entry routes ( e . g . macropinocytosis ) as well as the natural reprocessing of the cell membrane . It is also very important to evaluate how the data are collected experimentally . For example , Shapero et al . have demonstrated that silica nanoparticles enter cells as a function of size using ﬂow cytometry to measure ﬂuorescence intensity per cell . 212 They normalised the data to the starting ﬂuorescence intensity in cells immediately prior to particle removal ( export time 0 h ) noticing that the size eﬀect was not detectable using non - normalised data . 212 We have also reported that the size of poly ( 2 - methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine ) ( PMPC ) and poly ( ethylene oxide ) PEO polymersomes have a big eﬀect on cellular internalisation . 213 , 214 We have studied cell internalisation kinetics using primary human dermal ﬁbroblast ( HDF ) cells by both ﬂow cytometry ( using ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) analysis ) and also UV / visible spectroscopy of cell lysates . FACS measurements allowed the uptake kinetics to be estimated in terms of cell population , or the time required for a given cell D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2728 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 population to be 100 % positive for polymersome uptake , t 100 . Spectroscopic studies on cell lysates after incubation with polymersomes allowed quantiﬁcation of the percentage ( over the initial concentration ) internalised polymersomes per cell at diﬀerent times [ P ] ( t ) . While the t 100 is controlled by the strength of the binding between nanoparticles and cells , [ P ] ( t 100 ) allows an estimation of how eﬃcient is the uptake once the particle is bound to the cell . We deﬁne the ratio of [ P % ] ( t 100 ) / t 100 as endocytosis eﬃciency . This parameter can be compared across diﬀerent nanoparticle formulations . 237 It is worth pointing out that the most eﬀective nanoscopic vector to exploit endocytosis ( the virus ) does not come in one size . Viruses diameters range from about 30 nm for parvoviruses to 400 nm for poxviruses , with the majority of the viruses having diameter between 60 and 150 nm . 7 , 9 , 11 Whilst perfectly within the nanotechnology remits , this range is slightly higher than the optimal diameter proposed by both experiments and theoretical models discussed above . This suggests that size alone is not enough to guarantee endocytosis and several other parameters play an important role . 3 . 1 . 2 . Shape . Together with size , shape is one of the primary parameters that any nanotechnologist includes in nanoparticle design . When it comes to cellular interactions , the shape eﬀect is as important as the nanoparticle size . Champion and Mitragotri have demonstrated this very elegantly incubating macrophages ( professional phagocytic cells ) with polystyrene micro - particles with diﬀerent shapes . 217 Although the micrometre scale of the particles is rather outside the remit of this review , the results are quite interesting and are easily extrapolated to the nanoscale . They observed that when the particle has too large surface area , the macrophages fail to internalise the particle and simply spreads around it . 217 More importantly , this phenomenon occurs independently of the particle size and whether it is opsonised or not , emphasising even more the shape eﬀect . 217 Chan and co - workers observed that cylindrical gold nanoparticles were internalised by HeLa cells less eﬃciently than the spherical ones . Uptake was indepen - dent of whether the particles were functionalised or not with the CME targeting ligand transferrin ( Fig . 9 ( a ) ) . 209 , 210 More impor - tantly , the rates of uptake were considerably lower with an increasing aspect ratio . 209 , 210 Qiu et al . also studied the aspect ratio eﬀects on cellular internalisation of gold nanorods . 218 However , they concluded that surface chemistry ( rather than surface area ) had a dominant role over shape . Jin and co - workers performed similar experiments using single wall carbon nano - tubes . They showed that the cellular uptake trend was bell - shaped as a function of the tube length , with 320 nm being the optimal length , this corresponded with an eﬀective capture Fig . 8 ( a ) Schematics of the interaction between a nanoparticle and a ﬂuid phospholipid membrane when there is an attractive adhesion force ( W ) between them . The formula of minimum radius required to achieve the full wrapping is adapted from ref . 172 where R min is the nanoparticle minimum radius , k is the membrane bending modulus , A is the membrane surface area , e is the binding energy ( e . g . chemical energy per ligand – receptor pair ) , k B is the Boltzmann constant , and T is the temperature . ( b ) A two - dimensional phase diagram on the nanoparticle radius ligand density plane characterizes the interrelated eﬀects of particle size and ligand density on the cellular uptake adapted from ref . 173 . ( c ) Cryo - electron micrograph of silica nanoparticles entrapped within DOPC vesicles ( scale bare = 50 nm ) . Picture adapted from ref . 174 . ( d ) Cellular uptake process of silica nanoparticles ( left to right ) examined by transmission electron microscopy of red blood cells . Picture adapted from ref . 175 . ( e ) Confocal micrograph of human breast cancer SK - BR - 3 cells after incubation with her conjugated gold nanoparticle ( 2 nm on the left ; 40 nm in the middle , 70 nm on the right side ) . The 40 nm resulted to be the optimum size for uptake . 176 D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2729 radius of 26 . 4 nm . 219 However , many studies on carbon nano - tube uptake have demonstrated that they can enter cells via non - endocytic pathways . 215 , 220 , 221 As shown in Fig . 9 ( b ) , the shape and intrinsic hydrophobic nature of carbon nanotubes enables the ‘‘needle - eﬀect’’ , i . e . entering the cell via physical penetration of the membrane . 244 , 248 This behaviour could likely be dependent on the tube length , explaining the data from Jin et al . 219 It is worth noticing that the shape of carbon nanotubes is critical for the outcome of their toxicological interactions with live cells . Several reports have shown toxic eﬀects when the nanotube length is over the micrometre scale . Typical eﬀects described include inﬂammation and the formation of lesions known as granulomas , characteristic of asbestos - like pathogenic behaviour . 222 , 223 Hutter and collaborators showed the uptake of gold nanometre spheres , rods and urchins ( i . e . spiky nanoparticles ) by two types of CNS - associated cells : one phagocytic , microglia cells and one non - phagocytic , neurons . 224 The authors observed that spiky nanoparticles are preferentially taken up by microglia , while only rods are internalised by neurons . This suggests that cells display selectivity toward certain particle shapes by favouring phago - cytosis or not . 224 DeSimone and co - workers produced micro - and nano - particles using lithographic fabrication with extremely high precision in the design of complex geometries , including replicas of viruses . 225 In particular , they developed a method 226 , 227 called PRINT ( Particle Replication In Non - wetting Templates ) to form cross - linked poly ( ethylene glycol ) hydrogels with diﬀerent shapes and studied how the morphology aﬀected cell internali - sation ( Fig . 9c ) . 216 The authors observed that both the size as well as the aspect ratio of cylindrical particles had a considerable eﬀect on the cellular uptake . The graph in Fig . 9 ( c ) summarises the ﬁnding showing that cylinders with a diameter of 150 nm and a height of 450 nm ( aspect ratio of 3 ) are internalised more eﬀectively than similar size cylinders with smaller aspect ratio . 216 These results seem somehow in contradiction with those reported by the Chan group . 239 , 240 Several factors have to be considered : ﬁrstly , gold nanoparticles are considerably much stiﬀer than hydrogels ( this aspect is to be discussed in Section 3 . 1 . 5 ) . The hydrogels are one order of magnitude larger than gold nano - particles and , as shown by Jin et al . , 219 the cylinder length ( or height ) aﬀects cellular internalisation in a bell - shaped behaviour with a peak around 350 nm , very close to that optimal size observed by DeSimone . This eﬀect is in strong agreement with the theoretical study on cylindrical nanoparticle endocytosis reported by Decuzzi and Ferrari . 228 They calculated that only nanoparticles with intermediate aspect ratios achieved full endocytosis . Particles with smaller aspect ratios were not wrapped around the membrane . For the larger aspect ratios , the particle was wrapped but only partially , leading to what they called a ‘‘frustrated endocytosis’’ . 228 Another critical point to consider is that the hydrogel particle study compared cylinders with diﬀerent sizes and aspect ratios , but failed to include spherical analogous . This is important considering the above - mentioned work from the Chan group , on how cylinders were internalised less eﬃciently than the two analogous spheres . 209 This strongly suggests that the curvature of the particle has also a critical eﬀect on cellular endocytosis . Fig . 9 ( a ) The cellular uptake of uncoated and transferrin - coated gold spherical nanospheres and nanorods . Adapted from ref . 210 . ( b ) Electron micrograph showing multi - walled carbon nanotube ( arrow ) crossing the cell membrane of a HeLa cell . Adapted from ref . 215 . ( c ) Internalisation proﬁle of cationic , cross - linked poly ( ethylene glycol ) hydrogel particles with HeLa cells over a 4 h incubation period . The corresponding particle morphology is shown by their respective scanning electron micrograph . Adapted from ref . 216 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2730 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Learning that particle shape has a strong eﬀect on endo - cytosis has inspired research groups to improve nanoparticle design in order to evade the immune system , in other words , using shape to limit endocytosis . The Mitragotri group showed this using elliptical microparticles 229 , 230 while Discher and co - workers used block copolymer cylindrical micelles . These were reported to have extremely long blood circulation times with consequent enhanced therapeutic eﬀects . 231 – 234 In fact , the shape eﬀect has also been proposed to explain the high virulence of two tubular viruses , the Ebola and the Marburg virus . 235 , 236 3 . 1 . 3 . Surface chemistry . Surface chemistry critically aﬀects how nanoparticles interact with each other and their surrounding . 180 Even more , surface chemistry is paramount when it comes to nanoparticle interactions with cells . Simply classifying internalisation of nanoparticles in terms of their surface charge , neutral and anionic nanoparticles are inter - nalised considerably less eﬃciently than cationic ones . 237 – 241 Kannan and colleagues showed this trend synthesising poly ( amidoamine ) ( PAMAM ) 4th generation dendrimers ( i . e . 64 functional groups per dendrimer ) with diﬀerent func - tional end groups , including cationic primary amines , neutral hydroxyl groups and anionic carboxylic groups . 242 They observed that depending on the surface functionalities , the dendrimers enter cells diﬀerently ; with anionic ones entering via a caveolae mediated route while both neutral and cationic dendrimers followed non - clathrin and non - caveolae mediated mechanisms . 242 This is due to the high aﬃnity of cationic species with negatively charged proteoglycans expressed in the surface of most cells . 243 However , it is important to point out that most cationic systems have also been reported to induce mitochondrial damage and apoptosis , 244 – 249 with negative consequences on their biocompatibility and potential clinical use . For example , using cationic poly [ 2 - ( dimethylamino ) ethyl methacrylate ] ( PDMA ) polymersomes , we observed that the cationic nature favoured fast internalisation . In contrast , long term exposure showed a considerable decrease in uptake , which was due to the toxic eﬀect of the cationic polymer on cells . 241 Anionic particles may have less reported toxic eﬀects , but their strong interaction with proteins ( including immune system proteins ) hinders their translation into many biomedical applications . 250 Indeed , the very ﬁrst requisite for an optimal surface chemistry is that the nanoparticle is colloidally stable , i . e . once in biological ﬂuid the nanoparticles stay dispersed . This is a crucial and often overlooked parameter . There are in fact many in vitro studies showing that cellular uptake is strongly aﬀected by how nanoparticles aggregate in cell culture media . 218 , 251 – 254 Nanoparticle – protein interaction is now the subject of several studies , with many groups engaged in understanding the eﬀects . 181 , 218 , 252 – 258 In particular , protein fouling on ﬂat surfaces has been studied for several decades and it is reported to be a major limitation for medical device performance . 259 , 260 Recently , it has been observed that protein adsorption is considerably diﬀerent on nanoparticles compared to ﬂat surfaces . 280 – 284 Such adsorption can alter protein structure , exposing segments normally buried in the native protein conformation ; thus modifying signalling 261 and , in some cases , causing ﬁbrillation . 262 The protein corona can quickly cover the entire nanoparticle surface , even at low plasma concentrations . 255 , 263 Hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions , combined with an increase in entropy caused by the protein unfolding , are the main driving forces for protein adsorption . 250 This can be drastically reduced by coating the surface with a polymer brush that generates steric forces . 178 These forces arise between surfaces decorated with bound poly - meric chains that consider water as theta solvent , i . e . the polymer chains either do not interact strongly with each other , or repel each other in the solution . 178 In such conditions , polymer chains disrupt the water structure depending on their ﬂexibility . When the chains are closed together and are ﬂexible enough , the water molecules bound to the chains are temporarily ‘‘squeezed out’’ , making the brush impermeable for other solutes such as proteins . Accordingly , a brush made of polymer chains that binds to water molecules , generates a relatively thick water layer with a con - siderable exclusion volume that repel any other solute in water . 250 It appears evident that both the brush surface density ( i . e . how closely packed are the chains ) and the polymer molecular weight ( i . e . how thick is the brush ) are critical parameters in modulating steric forces , with high surface density and long chain being more ideal for protein repulsion . 178 Both non - ionic and zwitterionic water - soluble polymers ﬁt these conditions and several examples have been used in research . Mainly , these include poly ( ethylene oxide ) ( PEO ) also known as poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) , 264 , 265 polysaccharides ( such as dextran ) , 266 poly ( N - vinyl pyrrolidone ) ( PVP ) , 267 , 268 poly ( vinyl alcohol ) ( PVA ) , 269 poly ( 2 - methyl - 2 - oxazo - line ) ( PMOXA ) 270 , 271 and poly ( 2 - ethyl - 2 - oxazoline ) ( PEOXA ) , 270 poly ( 2 - methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine ) ( PMPC ) 272 , 273 and poly ( sulfobetaine methacrylate ) ( PSBMA ) . 274 However , when it comes to biomedical applications , the material has also to be tested for immunogenicity ( i . e . immune response ) and thrombo - genesis ( i . e . blood clotting ) . 250 Today , the golden standard in coating for biomedical applications is PEO , with PVP , PMPC and PMOXA being proposed as valid alternatives . 275 PEGylation , i . e . the attachment of PEO chains , has been used for many years as a strategy to prevent protein adsorption into nanoparticles and facilitate long circulation time in biological ﬂuids ( particularly blood ) . 264 , 265 However , as discussed above , the coating has to be dense and with long polymer chains and this is not an easy task to achieve . For hard nanoparticles such as gold , silver and quantum dots , few strategies have been devised with relatively good brush formation . 276 For soft nanoparticles such as vesicles and micelles , PEGylation or the attachment of any other hydrophilic polymer can be achieved by including the PEG into the self - assembling building blocks . This strategy has made the fortune of stealth liposomes 277 , 278 and allowed their development into clinical products . 279 Micelles and vesicles are the result of the self - assembly in water of amphiphiles , or molecules that contain both hydro - philic and hydrophobic moieties . Depending on the ratio between hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts , amphiphiles can pack into more or less curved nanostructures . 280 Attaching a long hydro - philic PEG chain ( 2 – 10 kDa ) to a vesicle - forming phospholipid ( typically 800 Da ) hinders its ability to form vesicles in favour of micelle formation . 280 This has been a limiting factor in the development of stealth liposomes and the typical formulations that now are routinely used in the clinic comprise no more than 10 % of PEG . 309 , 310 Such limitation has been overcome by the synthesis of amphiphilic block copolymers that compensate the large molecular weight of PEG ( or any other hydrophilic polymer ) D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2731 by having an equally large hydrophobic polymer attached to it . 281 , 282 Polymer micelles and vesicles ( also polymersomes ) have almost no exchange with the surrounding solution , as the single blocks are too large to be soluble . 283 , 284 In addition , polymer vesicles and micelles have highly packed polymeric brushes that stabilise them colloidally . 283 , 284 Indeed , PEO functionalised poly - mersomes and micelles have been reported to have very long circulation time in the blood compared to smaller molecular weight analogues . 233 , 285 We have recently studied the eﬀect of a hydrophilic brush on the uptake of polymersomes . We compared polymersomes formed by two diﬀerent non - fouling polymer coat - ings , PMPC and PEO . As expected , we conﬁrmed that PEO polymersomes are very poorly internalised in live cells . 213 , 214 , 241 , 286 , 287 Even though PMPC has been used for several years as a medical device coating with similar performance to PEO , PMPC polymersomes were observed to enter cells three orders of magnitude more eﬀectively than PEO ones . 213 , 214 , 287 – 290 This result has been conﬁrmed by other groups studying the uptake of PMPC functionalised - silver nanoparticles , 291 gold nano - particles , 292 quantum dots , 292 lipid nanoparticles , 293 and polymeric micelles . 273 , 294 We also observed that PMPC cellular uptake is ubiquitous across many cell types including non - dividing cells such as neurons and certain immune cells . 213 , 286 , 288 This would indicate that PMPC has a strong aﬃnity toward a speciﬁc receptor that is expressed by most cells . Current work within our group is under - going for its identiﬁcation . Ultimately , PEO coating , and hence the inhibition of unspeciﬁc cellular internalisation , is critical for the design of targeting nanoparticles . This is normally achieved by decorating the particles with moieties that should bind preferentially to speciﬁc cells . Nevertheless , this is strongly dependent on the identiﬁcation of cellular / tissue speciﬁc markers . Cellular speciﬁ - city combined with endocytosis ensures that once the nanoparticle reaches its target it is readily internalised . For this reason , very often the receptor of choice is associated with endocytosis , including transferrin receptors , 295 , 296 HER - 2 , 297 – 299 albumin receptors , 298 , 300 folate receptors , 301 – 304 LDL receptors 305 and EGF receptors , 306 – 308 among others . 3 . 1 . 4 . Surface topology . Viruses are possibly the best source of inspiration for designing nanoparticles for cellular delivery and they come in diﬀerent shapes and sizes . 311 Most importantly they do not have a homogenous surface both in terms of topology and chemical composition . 7 , 10 , 11 Naked viruses ( i . e . viruses made of only by the proteins capsid ) have highly organised surfaces with speciﬁc arrangements of the diﬀerent components either in the form of long protrusions ( i . e . adenovirus ) or canyon - like ( i . e . rhinovirus ) . 11 Only in the last decade advancements in cryogenic electron microscopy have allowed similar structural studies to be expanded to enveloped viruses ( i . e . viruses where the capsid is encapsulated within a phospholipid membrane ) . We have now a better understanding how cell binding motifs distribute on the surface of highly virulent viruses such as the herpes simplex virus 309 ( Fig . 10a ) , the AIDS retrovirus 310 ( Fig . 10b ) and the human inﬂuenza virus 311 ( Fig . 10c ) . Nanotechnologists have only in the last few years achieved the level of control necessary to engineer diﬀerent nanoparticle topologies . Few studies are on - going on how nanoparticle surface topology aﬀects cell internalisation . Verma et al . have observed that gold nanoparticles coated with diﬀerent self - assembled monolayers of organic ligands enter cells depending on their surface topology . 312 They have showed that nanoparticles with sub - nanometre striations of alternating anionic and hydrophobic groups can enter cells via membrane poration , while nanoparticles with the same chemistry but coated with a random distribution enter cells via an endocytic route . 312 At a diﬀerent scale , we have recently demonstrated the possibility to form polymersomes with diﬀerent surface topologies , exploiting polymer / polymer phase separation . 213 , 214 Depending on the ratio between the diﬀerent polymers , we can engineer polymersomes with surface patterns typical of bimodal or spinodal decomposi - tions ( see Fig . 10d ) . In particular , we have mixed cell inert PEO with cell active PMPC polymers . As shown in Fig . 10 ( d ) , the internalisation eﬃciency of the patchy polymersomes is diﬀerent from the pure formulations . Polymersomes with domains typical of bimodal patchy topology showed considerably higher endo - cytosis eﬃciency compared to the pure formulations across all diameters . In particular , when the domains were made of PMPC ( 25 / 75 molar ratio ) , polymersomes were internalised by 100 % of cells within a very short time , but the amount of polymersome per cell was relatively low . When domains of the cell inert PEO ( 75 / 25 molar ratio ) were made , the patchy polymersomes were inter - nalised slower , but higher numbers of polymersomes per cell were uptaken . 213 , 214 More interestingly , the size eﬀect observed with the 100 % PMPC formulation was no longer relevant , with the patchy formulations showing a slight increase in the uptake of the bigger diameter formulations . 213 , 214 3 . 1 . 5 . Mechanical properties . Recent studies have demon - strated that cells can sense external physical cues including the substrate stiﬀness . Many studies have demonstrated that sub - strate mechanical properties can modulate cell behaviour . 313 Clearly , as discussed in the above section , endocytosis involves several mechanical steps that can induce deformation on the cargo . This was demonstrated by Banquy et al . who studied macrophage uptake of hydrogel nanoparticles of N , N - diethyl acrylamide and 2 - hydroxyethyl methacrylate with diﬀerent elastic modulus . 314 The authors observed that while diﬀerent stiﬀness did not aﬀect the eﬃciency of uptake , it aﬀected the entry pathway . Soft nanoparticles were internalised via macro - pinocytosis , stiﬀ nanoparticles were internalised by a clathrin - dependent mechanism and nanoparticles with an intermediate Young modulus exhibited multiple uptake mechanisms . 314 In a recent work , Yi et al . approached this problem using a theore - tical model . They calculated that stiﬀer particles can achieve full wrapping more easily than softer particles , while softer particles experience smaller energy changes during wrapping . 205 The eﬀect on mechanical properties is still very unclear and it will need further studies to be elucidated in detail . 3 . 2 Endosome escape strategies Endolysosomal release of the cargo has long been considered as an option very much dependant on the application for what the nanoparticle is designed . In this line , bioactive cargoes that are intended to have a pharmacological action inside the cell need a rapid escape from the degradative environment of the endo - lysosomes . These include many drugs and proteins but possibly the most representative case are nucleic acids . In D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2732 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 contrast , certain applications have beneﬁted from endo - lysosomal retention , among them , cell imaging and theragno - stics . For example , several groups have reported the use of quantum dots , 315 chitosan based nanoparticles , 316 silica nano - particles , 316 gold nanoparticles , 317 , 318 that are endocytosed and retained in the lysosomes without detrimental eﬀects to the intended application . Very recently , it has emerged an increasing evidence of cell damage induced by nanoparticle accumulation in the lysosomal compartment . Typical lyso - somal pathologies upon accumulation include phospho - lipidosis 319 and lysosomal overload with morphological changes and autophagy . 320 , 321 As several nanoparticles get closer to biomedical applications , a full understanding of the fate and toxicological consequences of endolysosomal accu - mulation becomes essential . Many toxicological evidences investigated for inorganic nanoparticles such as quantum dots , gold and silver nanoparticles have been attributed to toxic ions leaching from the core . 322 , 323 Also , the typical solid – liquid interface of such a hard nanoparticle favours the generation of reactive oxygen species by the metal core . 322 , 323 This has prompted many researchers to focus on the improvement outermost coating layers to avoid toxicological eﬀects . 324 , 325 Interestingly , a study from Stern and collaborators has demonstrated that quantum dot toxicity was independent of metal - associated mechanisms , and a communal quantum dot - induced autophagy was proposed as the generic cause of the nanoparticle mediated toxicity . 326 All this puts into perspec - tive the possibility that endolysosomal release maybe more a cellular requirement for homeostasis than a nanoparticle design choice . 3 . 2 . 1 . Virus and bacteria endosomal escape strategies in nanotechnology . Natural pathogens commonly use endocytosis as a portal to the cell . However , using this entry , pathogenic organisms also risk degradation by entrapment in the lysosomal pathway . This evolutionary pressure has created great strategies to escape the endolysosomal compartments maintaining more or less cellular machinery for survival and replication . 9 , 327 Non - enveloped viruses use pore formation / membrane disruption mechanisms . Adenoviruses are an example of endosomal membrane disruption . They are endocytosed by a clathrin - mediated process and once in endosomal compartments , pH - induced conformational changes on the viral capsid enable endosomal membrane lysis . 328 Once in the cytosol , the capsid is also capable of targeting the nuclear pore complexes . 328 Since this process is compartmentalised and the lysis is transient , it takes place without cellular damage . Polioviruses are non - enveloped viruses that use a pore forming mechanism to deliver its genome into the host cell cytosol . Upon activation via receptor binding , capsid components insert into the endosomal membrane forming a pore through which the RNA is injected . 329 The empty viral capsid remains in the endosomal compartment and gets degraded . Enveloped viruses , however , in response to a lowering in endosomal pH , promote membrane fusion through fusogenic peptides to enable cytosolic translocation . 330 Intra - cellular bacteria that multiply within host cells have also very sophisticated ways of overcoming lysosomal entrapment . The more severe ones involve degradation of the organelle by secretion of pore - forming toxins that activate with the lowering of pH . 331 These endotoxins can also interfere with endosomal maturation through disruption of ion gradients across the Fig . 10 Surface rendered tomography from cryo - electron micrographs of the ( a ) Herpes Simplex Virus showing its outer surface with a distribution of glycoprotein spikes in yellow ( adapted from ref . 309 ) , ( b ) the AIDS virus showing envelope glycoprotein spikes in gray ( adapted from ref . 310 ) and ( c ) the inﬂuenza virus surface distribution of two kinds of glycoprotein spikes hemagglutinin ( green ) and neuraminidase ( gold ) ( adapted from ref . 311 ) . ( d ) Endocytosis eﬃciency as a function of the polymersome diameter for diﬀerent patchy PMPC / PEO polymersomes formulations . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2733 phagosomal membrane . 332 Nanotechnologists are taking inspiration on such strategies to improve endolysosomal escape and eﬃcient delivery on synthetically created vectors . Although there are some references to bacterial endosomal release mimicking approaches , 333 , 334 viral membrane - disruptive peptides ( viro - porins ) have been more widely used in the development of non - viral gene delivery vehicles as reviewed elsewhere . 335 For example , HGP is a 24 - amino acid peptide derived from HIV gp41 that increases endolysosomal escape and transfection eﬃciency in mammalian cells when incorporated into gene delivery vehicles . 336 Other fusogenic peptides similarly used in nanoparticle mediated gene delivery include inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin HA - 2 N - terminal fusogenic peptide , 337 TAT - fusion peptide from HIV - 1 , 338 and L240 peptide from papilloma - virus L2 minor capsid protein . 339 In addition to naturally occurring pathogen peptides , a variety of synthetic peptides have also been designed to enhance endolysosomal release in syn - thetic viral - like nanoparticles . Typically , these peptides assume a random coil structure at physiological pH . Acidiﬁcation triggers a conformational change in the peptide structure , which enables interaction with the endosomal phospholipid membranes , resulting in pore formation or the induction of membrane fusion and / or lysis . 340 Incorporation of synthetic membrane - disruptive peptides into nanoparticle delivery systems has been reported to enhance intracellular delivery of drugs including oligonucleo - tides , peptides , and plasmid DNA . 341 Worth mentioning is the KALA fusogenic peptide designed for eﬃcient gene delivery . Szoka and colleagues reported this peptide as the ﬁrst ‘‘all - in - one’’ designed peptide , which can bind DNA , destabilise membranes and mediate signiﬁcant gene delivery . 342 Although encouraging results have been obtained with the use of synthetic peptides to enhance cellular delivery of various compounds , still much is unknown about their mechanistic and possible immuno - genicity and toxicity . Hence , other possible approaches are probably easier to translate in vivo , with far more eﬃcient outcomes and less expensive production costs . 3 . 2 . 2 . Fully synthetic polymers and lipids for endolysosomal release . Fully non - viral vehicles , which ensure requirements for both high delivery eﬃciency and safety , are essential . Since viral derived peptides are still immunogenic , researchers have resorted to synthetic polymers and lipids that enhance endo - somal escape . Of interest are the so - called ‘helper lipids’ like phosphatidylethanolamines ( PE ) . These have a peculiar beha - viour when dispersed in water . Unlike most bilayer - forming lipids which assemble into lamellar phases , PE lipids assemble into an inverse hexagonal phase . 343 This ability has been exploited in the production of multi - component lipid nano - particles for DNA delivery and more recently for RNAi . 344 Upon acidiﬁcation ( or photo - destabilisation ) , the lamellar phase collapses and contents are released as the helper - lipids revert to the preferred hexagonal phase . This change of conformation promotes endosomal release upon formation of pores stabilised by the hexagonal phase forming lipids . The high variability on the eﬃciency of transfection mediated by similar mixtures of cationic lipids and helper - lipids is still not very well understood . An example is the work of Caracciolo and co - workers with combinations of DOTAP - DOPC / DNA and DOT AP - DC - Chol - DOPC - DOPE / DNA lipoplexes . 345 One drawback to overcome in these formulations is lipoplex instability in serum proteins 346 , 347 and toxicity . 348 Similarly , membrane - destabilising polymers have been used to enhance endosomal escape . Poly ( propylacrylic acid ) ( PPAA ) is one of the most eﬃcient and most studied membrane - destabilising synthetic polymers . 349 – 351 However , translation to in vivo delivery is still limited by its poor serum stability . 352 3 . 2 . 3 . Proton sponge . Endosomal escape and increased ability of intracellular delivery of nucleic acids have been claimed by many groups using cationic polymers and in particular polyamines such as poly ( ethylene imine ) ( PEI ) . From a macromolecular point of view , linear or branched polycationic molecules are interesting transfection agents . They present a high density of positive charges that allow for eﬃcient binding and condensation of nucleic acids , inducing polyplex formation , which facilitates cellular uptake . 353 Further - more , it has been claimed that once inside the acidic endosomes , the amine groups of these molecules can absorb protons gener - ated by the ATPase . This buﬀering eﬀect is thought to slow down the process of acidiﬁcation , with a consequent increase of the endosomal osmolarity . Such eﬀect is commonly known as the ‘‘proton sponge eﬀect’’ and it postulates that the increase of ions within the endosomes causes osmolysis and consequent release into the cytosol . 354 – 356 In fact , the ‘‘proton sponge eﬀect’’ is based on the same principles as the use of the weak base chloroquine in many non - viral transfection reagents . 356 Whereas there are strong evidences in the literature supporting the polyamine polymer - mediated release of nucleic acids before reaching the lyso - somal compartment , 357 , 358 there are still questions about this system that remain unclear . Particularly , Godbey and collaborators 359 measured endo - lysosomal pH during cell transfection with PEI / DNA complexes . They showed that the normal lysosomal pH value of 5 . 0 was not altered , which questions the proton sponge eﬀect . Additionally , Bieber and collaborators 360 working also with PEI – DNA complexes showed cellular uptake of the complexes into lysosomal compartments and cytosolic delivery . However , they question whether this eﬀect is promoted by the proton sponge eﬀect or simply by a direct binding of the PEI – DNA aggregates to the inner endo - lysosomal membrane surface . 360 Similar controversy was generated from the work of Erbacher and collaborators 361 using chloroquine and other weak bases to enhance luciferase plasmid lactosylated polylysine complexes transfection eﬃciency . They reported no relation between the neutralisation of the acidic compartments of the cells and the eﬃciency of the transfection . Further , luciferase activity in cells transfected with a pSV2LUC / LactpLK complex was not enhanced in the presence of other weak bases , including ammonium chloride and methylamine . This ques - tions the translation of this theory to other weak bases . Whatever the mechanism for intracellular delivery of these agents , the addi - tional high toxicity makes their use in vitro and in vivo rather problematic . 362 , 363 3 . 2 . 4 . Early osmolytic approach . Recently , responsive polymers have been used to form polymersomes to encapsul - ate several active ingredients . These responsive polymersomes can exploit the sensitivity of their forming blocks to external stimuli to release their cargo via assembly / disassembly transitions . Typical examples of release triggering stimuli are temperature , 364 light , 365 D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2734 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 ultrasound and magnetic ﬁeld , 366 redox conditions , 367 enzymatic cleavage 368 but mainly pH . 369 – 372 It is critical to tune such responsive behaviour to the speciﬁc endo - lysosomal conditions . Cerritelli et al . have demonstrated that cytosolic delivery of cargo can be achieved using protease sensitive sulfur bridge polymer - somes . 367 Similarly , Discher and colleagues have shown that the endocytic degradative environment can favour cytosolic delivery using hydrolysable polymersomes . 372 As the polymersomes - forming copolymers degrade , they start to trigger endosomal membrane destabilisation by acting as temporary and local detergents . 372 Such process is very eﬀective and allows also intracellular delivery of small nucleic acids . 373 However , as discussed in Section 2 . 2 . 3 , protease concentration and activity change drastically from early endosomes to lysosomes ; with the latter being the most eﬀective in degradation . Similarly , the internalised cargo reaches late endosomes and lysosomes in less than 30 min . Clearly , destabilising highly degradative organelles ( i . e . late endosomes and lysosomes ) can have severe toxic eﬀects on cells . Hence , it is more sensible to target escape at the early stages of endocytic sorting , where protease levels are low . Therefore , pH is still the most logical trigger to use for the design of an eﬀective escape . Yet one of the major limitations of pH responsive carriers is the reduced pH range where to operate retaining cargo stability in physiological pH and releasing it rapidly upon narrow pH switch . Very low pHs of 5 or lower are only found in the lysosomal compartments of the endocytic pathway , forcing the pH trigger to that particular point in the route may expose sensitive bioactive compounds to harsh con - ditions . For the last few years , our group has focussed on the study of a particular pH sensitive polymer : poly ( 2 - ( diisopropy - lamino ) ethyl methacrylate ( PDPA ) and its use for making pH sensitive polymersomes . 290 , 370 , 374 At physiological pH , PDPA copolymers aggregate to form stable vesicles that can encapsu - late several molecules and macromolecules . 290 , 370 , 374 However , the precise pH switch ( PDPA p K a = 6 . 3 at physiological conditions ) guarantees dissociation and endosomal release of the cargo around a comfortable pH for biological molecule stability avoiding cytotoxicity and cellular stress . 370 , 374 , 375 As polymersomes are taken into early endosomes , the rapid change of pH triggers a quick disassembly of the polymersomes and a consequent increase of particle number inside the endosomal membrane . The osmotic pressure generated is high enough to induce temporary osmolysis of the endosomal membrane , with a release of the polymersome cargo in the cytosol to compensate the pressure . The endosome membrane re - heal back quickly , enabling the natural endolysosomal path without detriment on cellular homeostasis . We have proved this approach to work with many types of cargos including plasmid DNA , small molecules , antibodies , and small nanoparticles . 290 , 370 , 374 4 . Conclusions and perspectives Eﬀective intracellular delivery is of paramount importance for many scientiﬁc as well pharmacological applications . For example in gene therapy , where the therapeutic nucleic acid has to be delivered within the cell cytosol or nucleus in order to achieve the desired eﬀect . Furthermore eﬀective intracellular delivery can open new avenues for research by extending to other bioactive molecules such as drugs and proteins to the ‘‘otherwise unreachable’’ intracellular target as we have recently proposed . 376 Similarly , understanding the mechanistics of nanoparticle endocytosis is crucial for controlling nanoparticle pharmacokinetics and toxicity . Many traditional types of nano - particles ( such as carbon nanotubes , quantum dots and gold nanoparticles ) have generated controversial toxicological studies and there is still a debate to whether they are a viable option for biomedical applications or not . On the other hand , there is still much work to be done to understand the biology of endocytosis . Here , nanotechnology can potentially help to shed light on such a complex cellular process . Although nanotechnology has open the gates to the scale down control and the modiﬁcation of physico - chemical properties of bulk materials , the creation of the ‘‘perfect’’ nano - delivery systems is nowhere near yet . Furthermore , the idea of a universal delivery system suitable for any type of cargo is becoming increasingly unrealistic and the optimisation of a vector seems to be heavily dependent on both the payload to be carried and application . However , targeting endocytic uptake has become a common strategy for eﬃcient intracellular delivery . There are several characteristics shared by successful nano - vehicles destined for internalisation that should be exploited in new improved designs . In particular , size smaller than 100 nm , negative or no surface charge , biocompatibility and biomimetic potential ; but yet allowing functionalisation with targeting ligands for active targeting . Here is where synthetic polymeric nanoparticles are creating much interest . These nature - mimicking but highly tuneable synthetic carriers represent new avenues for engineering novel controlled release mechanisms . References 1 G . Griﬃths , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2007 , 8 , 1018 – 1024 . 2 C . Tanford , Hydrophobic Eﬀect : Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes , John Wiley & Sons Inc , 1st edn , 1973 . 3 G . J . Doherty and H . T . McMahon , Annu . Rev . Biophys . , 2008 , 37 , 65 – 95 . 4 G . J . Doherty and H . T . McMahon , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 2009 , 78 , 857 – 902 . 5 D . Hoeller , S . Volarevic and I . Dikic , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 17 , 107 – 111 . 6 J . Gruenberg and F . G . van der Goot , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2006 , 7 , 495 – 504 . 7 M . Marsh and A . Helenius , Cell , 2006 , 124 , 729 – 740 . 8 O . Steele - Mortimer , L . A . Knodler and B . B . Finlay , Traﬃc , 2000 , 1 , 107 – 118 . 9 J . Mercer , M . Schelhaas and A . Helenius , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 2010 , 79 , 803 – 833 . 10 L . Pelkmans and A . Helenius , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2003 , 15 , 414 – 422 . 11 D . S . Dimitrov , Nat . Rev . Microbiol . , 2004 , 2 , 109 – 122 . 12 T . F . Roth and K . R . Porter , J . Cell Biol . , 1964 , 20 , 313 – 332 . 13 V . Cavalli , M . Corti and J . Gruenberg , FEBS Lett . , 2001 , 498 , 190 – 196 . 14 S . O . Rizzoli and W . J . Betz , Science , 2004 , 303 , 2037 – 2039 . 15 J . R . Morgan , G . J . Augustine and E . M . Lafer , NeuroMol . Med . , 2002 , 2 , 101 – 114 . 16 H . T . McMahon and E . Boucrot , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2011 , 12 , 517 – 533 . 17 J . E . Heuser and J . Keen , J . Cell Biol . , 1988 , 107 , 877 – 886 . 18 C . J . Smith , N . Grigorieﬀ and B . M . Pearse , EMBO J . , 1998 , 17 , 4943 – 4953 . 19 M . G . Ford , I . G . Mills , B . J . Peter , Y . Vallis , G . J . Praefcke , P . R . Evans and H . T . McMahon , Nature , 2002 , 419 , 361 – 366 . 20 S . L . Schmid , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 1997 , 66 , 511 – 548 . 21 F . M . Brodsky , C . Y . Chen , C . Knuehl , M . C . Towler and D . E . Wakeham , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . , 2001 , 17 , 517 – 568 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2735 22 E . M . Schmid , M . G . Ford , A . Burtey , G . J . Praefcke , S . Y . Peak - Chew , I . G . Mills , A . Benmerah and H . T . McMahon , PLoS Biol . , 2006 , 4 , e262 . 23 H . E . Stimpson , C . P . Toret , A . T . Cheng , B . S . Pauly and D . G . Drubin , Mol . Biol . Cell , 2009 , 20 , 4640 – 4651 . 24 W . M . Henne , E . Boucrot , M . Meinecke , E . Evergren , Y . Vallis , R . Mittal and H . T . McMahon , Science , 2010 , 328 , 1281 – 1284 . 25 A . Pechstein , J . Bacetic , A . Vahedi - Faridi , K . Gromova , A . Sundborger , N . Tomlin , G . Krainer , O . Vorontsova , J . G . Schafer , S . G . Owe , M . A . Cousin , W . Saenger , O . Shupliakov and V . Haucke , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2010 , 107 , 4206 – 4211 . 26 L . M . Traub , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2009 , 10 , 583 – 596 . 27 J . L . Goldstein , R . G . Anderson and M . S . Brown , Nature , 1979 , 279 , 679 – 685 . 28 G . Griﬃths , R . Back and M . Marsh , J . Cell Biol . , 1989 , 109 , 2703 – 2720 . 29 M . S . Bretscher , Science , 1984 , 224 , 681 – 686 . 30 C . J . Merriﬁeld , D . Perrais and D . Zenisek , Cell , 2005 , 121 , 593 – 606 . 31 D . Perrais and C . J . Merriﬁeld , Dev . Cell , 2005 , 9 , 581 – 592 . 32 J . E . Heuser and T . S . Reese , J . Cell Biol . , 1973 , 57 , 315 – 344 . 33 Z . Wasylewski , W . Stryjewski , A . Wasniowska , J . Potempa and K . Baran , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1986 , 871 , 177 – 181 . 34 M . Ehrlich , W . Boll , A . Van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert and T . Kirchhausen , Cell , 2004 , 118 , 591 – 605 . 35 E . Moreno - Ruiz , M . Galan - Diez , W . Zhu , E . Fernandez - Ruiz , C . d’Enfert , S . G . Filler , P . Cossart and E . Veiga , Cell . Microbiol . , 2009 , 11 , 1179 – 1189 . 36 E . Veiga and P . Cossart , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 7 , 894 – 900 . 37 J . Aggeler and Z . Werb , J . Cell Biol . , 1982 , 94 , 613 – 623 . 38 P . J . Gokhale , A . M . Giesberts and P . W . Andrews , Cell Growth Diﬀer . , 2000 , 11 , 157 – 162 . 39 J . Aggeler and Z . Werb , J . Cell Biol . , 1982 , 94 , 613 – 623 . 40 J . Heuser , J . Cell Biol . , 1989 , 108 , 401 – 411 . 41 K . G . Rothberg , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . S . Ying , J . R . Glenney and R . G . Anderson , Cell , 1992 , 68 , 673 – 682 . 42 L . Pelkmans and A . Helenius , Traﬃc , 2002 , 3 , 311 – 320 . 43 R . G . Anderson , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 1998 , 67 , 199 – 225 . 44 T . V . Kurzchalia and R . G . Parton , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 1999 , 11 , 424 – 431 . 45 G . E . Palade , J . Histochem . Cytochem . , 1953 , 1 , 188 – 211 . 46 E . Yamada , J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . , 1955 , 1 , 445 – 458 . 47 L . Pelkmans and M . Zerial , Nature , 2005 , 436 , 128 – 133 . 48 K . Das , R . Y . Lewis , P . E . Scherer and M . P . Lisanti , J . Biol . Chem . , 1999 , 274 , 18721 – 18728 . 49 P . Krishnan , P . Gireesh - Babu , K . V . Rajendran and A . Chaudhari , Dis . Aquat . Org . , 2009 , 86 , 263 – 272 . 50 D . Raucher and M . P . Sheetz , Biophys . J . , 1999 , 77 , 1992 – 2002 . 51 P . Sens and M . S . Turner , Phys . Rev . E : Stat . , Nonlinear , Soft Matter Phys . , 2006 , 73 , 031918 . 52 H . A . Anderson , Y . Chen and L . C . Norkin , Mol . Biol . Cell , 1996 , 7 , 1825 – 1834 . 53 E . Stang , J . Kartenbeck and R . G . Parton , Mol . Biol . Cell , 1997 , 8 , 47 – 57 . 54 R . Montesano , J . Roth , A . Robert and L . Orci , Nature , 1982 , 296 , 651 – 653 . 55 K . G . Rothberg , Y . S . Ying , J . F . Kolhouse , B . A . Kamen and R . G . Anderson , J . Cell Biol . , 1990 , 110 , 637 – 649 . 56 R . G . Anderson , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg and S . W . Lacey , Science , 1992 , 255 , 410 – 411 . 57 P . L . Tuma and A . L . Hubbard , Physiol . Rev . , 2003 , 83 , 871 – 932 . 58 P . G . Frank , S . Pavlides and M . P . Lisanti , Cell Tissue Res . , 2009 , 335 , 41 – 47 . 59 S . M . Campbell , S . M . Crowe and J . Mak , J . Clin . Virol . , 2001 , 22 , 217 – 227 . 60 A . J . Ridley , Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 1997 , 25 , 1005 – 1010 . 61 B . Zhang and Y . Zheng , Biochemistry , 1998 , 37 , 5249 – 5257 . 62 R . Li , B . Zhang and Y . Zheng , J . Biol . Chem . , 1997 , 272 , 32830 – 32835 . 63 M . J . Hsu , S . S . Lee , S . T . Lee and W . W . Lin , Br . J . Pharmacol . , 2003 , 139 , 289 – 298 . 64 S . Kumari , S . Mg and S . Mayor , Cell Res . , 20 , 256 – 275 . 65 P . D . Dalton , J . Lleixa Calvet , A . Mourran , D . Klee and M . Moller , Biotechnol . J . , 2006 , 1 , 998 – 1006 . 66 D . Grafahrend , J . L . Calvet , K . Klinkhammer , J . Salber , P . D . Dalton , M . Moller and D . Klee , Biotechnol . Bioeng . , 2008 , 101 , 609 – 621 . 67 H . D . Gresham , J . A . McGarr , P . G . Shackelford and E . J . Brown , J . Clin . Invest . , 1988 , 82 , 1192 – 1201 . 68 K . Sandvig , M . L . Torgersen , H . A . Raa and B . van Deurs , Histochem . Cell Biol . , 2008 , 129 , 267 – 276 . 69 N . Sauvonnet , A . Dujeancourt and A . Dautry - Varsat , J . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 168 , 155 – 163 . 70 P . D . Dalton , K . Klinkhammer , J . Salber , D . Klee and M . Moller , Biomacromolecules , 2006 , 7 , 686 – 690 . 71 A . S . Robertson , E . Smythe and K . R . Ayscough , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . , 2009 , 66 , 2049 – 2065 . 72 F . P . Ryan , J . R . Soc . Med . , 2009 , 102 , 272 – 277 . 73 M . Kirkham , A . Fujita , R . Chadda , S . J . Nixon , T . V . Kurzchalia , D . K . Sharma , R . E . Pagano , J . F . Hancock , S . Mayor and R . G . Parton , J . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 168 , 465 – 476 . 74 S . Mayor and H . Riezman , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2004 , 5 , 110 – 120 . 75 G . J . Doherty and R . Lundmark , Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 2009 , 37 , 1061 – 1065 . 76 R . Lundmark , G . J . Doherty , M . T . Howes , K . Cortese , Y . Vallis , R . G . Parton and H . T . McMahon , Curr . Biol . , 2008 , 18 , 1802 – 1808 . 77 J . G . Donaldson , J . Biol . Chem . , 2003 , 278 , 41573 – 41576 . 78 S . Caplan , N . Naslavsky , L . M . Hartnell , R . Lodge , R . S . Polishchuk , J . G . Donaldson and J . S . Bonifacino , EMBO J . , 2002 , 21 , 2557 – 2567 . 79 E . Walseng , O . Bakke and P . A . Roche , J . Biol . Chem . , 2008 , 283 , 14717 – 14727 . 80 Y . S . Kang , X . Zhao , J . Lovaas , E . Eisenberg and L . E . Greene , J . Cell Sci . , 2009 , 122 , 4062 – 4069 . 81 R . H . Massol , J . E . Larsen and T . Kirchhausen , Exp . Cell Res . , 2005 , 306 , 142 – 149 . 82 R . Lundmark , G . J . Doherty , Y . Vallis , B . J . Peter and H . T . McMahon , Biochem . J . , 2008 , 414 , 189 – 194 . 83 I . C . Morrow and R . G . Parton , Traﬃc , 2005 , 6 , 725 – 740 . 84 C . A . Stuermer , Trends Cell Biol . , 2010 , 20 , 6 – 13 . 85 M . Frick , N . A . Bright , K . Riento , A . Bray , C . Merriﬁed and B . J . Nichols , Curr . Biol . , 2007 , 17 , 1151 – 1156 . 86 O . O . Glebov , N . A . Bright and B . J . Nichols , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2006 , 8 , 46 – 54 . 87 M . H . Blanchet , J . A . Le Good , D . Mesnard , V . Oorschot , S . Baﬂast , G . Minchiotti , J . Klumperman and D . B . Constam , EMBO J . , 2008 , 27 , 2580 – 2591 . 88 M . Kirkham , S . J . Nixon , M . T . Howes , L . Abi - Rached , D . E . Wakeham , M . Hanzal - Bayer , C . Ferguson , M . M . Hill , M . Fernandez - Rojo , D . A . Brown , J . F . Hancock , F . M . Brodsky and R . G . Parton , J . Cell Sci . , 2008 , 121 , 2075 – 2086 . 89 C . K . Payne , S . A . Jones , C . Chen and X . Zhuang , Traﬃc , 2007 , 8 , 389 – 401 . 90 J . Mercer and A . Helenius , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2009 , 11 , 510 – 520 . 91 M . C . Kerr and R . D . Teasdale , Traﬃc , 2009 , 10 , 364 – 371 . 92 M . M . Matin , P . W . Andrews and D . P . Hornby , Anal . Biochem . , 2002 , 304 , 47 – 54 . 93 N . Araki , T . Hatae , T . Yamada and S . Hirohashi , J . Cell Sci . , 2000 , 113 ( Pt 18 ) , 3329 – 3340 . 94 J . Mercer and A . Helenius , Science , 2008 , 320 , 531 – 535 . 95 W . H . Lewis , Johns Hopkins Hosp . , Bull . , 1931 , 49 , 17 – 27 . 96 P . L . McNeil , Tissue Cell , 1984 , 16 , 519 – 533 . 97 J . D . Orth and M . A . McNiven , Cancer Res . , 2006 , 66 , 11094 – 11096 . 98 P . Dowrick , P . Kenworthy , B . McCann and R . Warn , Eur . J . Cell Biol . , 1993 , 61 , 44 – 53 . 99 J . H . Wang , C . Wells and L . Wu , Virology , 2008 , 381 , 143 – 154 . 100 G . Vidricaire and M . J . Tremblay , J . Mol . Biol . , 2007 , 368 , 1267 – 1283 . 101 E . Lee and D . A . Knecht , Traﬃc , 2002 , 3 , 186 – 192 . 102 M . Herzog , D . Gerard , L . Hirth and G . Laustriat , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1977 , 493 , 167 – 177 . 103 J . A . Swanson , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2008 , 9 , 639 – 649 . 104 E . Caron and A . Hall , Science , 1998 , 282 , 1717 – 1721 . 105 L . A . Allen and A . Aderem , Curr . Opin . Immunol . , 1996 , 8 , 36 – 40 . 106 C . Cougoule , A . Wiedemann , J . Lim and E . Caron , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . , 2004 , 15 , 679 – 689 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2736 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 107 E . Gagnon , S . Duclos , C . Rondeau , E . Chevet , P . H . Cameron , O . Steele - Mortimer , J . Paiement , J . J . Bergeron and M . Desjardins , Cell , 2002 , 110 , 119 – 131 . 108 I . Jutras and M . Desjardins , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . , 2005 , 21 , 511 – 527 . 109 N . Araki , T . Hatae , A . Furukawa and J . A . Swanson , J . Cell Sci . , 2003 , 116 , 247 – 257 . 110 S . B . Fonseca , M . P . Pereira and S . O . Kelley , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . , 2009 , 61 , 953 – 964 . 111 A . Frost , V . M . Unger and P . De Camilli , Cell , 2009 , 137 , 191 – 196 . 112 M . Masuda and N . Mochizuki , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . , 2010 , 21 , 391 – 398 . 113 B . Qualmann , D . Koch and M . M . Kessels , EMBO J . , 2011 , 30 , 3501 – 3515 . 114 S . Suetsugu , K . Toyooka and Y . Senju , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . , 2010 , 21 , 340 – 349 . 115 B . J . Peter , H . M . Kent , I . G . Mills , Y . Vallis , P . J . Butler , P . R . Evans and H . T . McMahon , Science , 2004 , 303 , 495 – 499 . 116 C . David , M . Solimena and P . De Camilli , FEBS Lett . , 1994 , 351 , 73 – 79 . 117 D . Sakamuro , K . J . Elliott , R . Wechsler - Reya and G . C . Prendergast , Nat . Genet . , 1996 , 14 , 69 – 77 . 118 M . H . Johnson , Fertil . Steril . , 1972 , 23 , 929 – 939 . 119 E . D . Roberts , J . T . Gallo and J . H . Maner , Am . J . Vet . Res . , 1972 , 33 , 1985 – 1993 . 120 A . M . Silverstein , Nat . Immunol . , 2004 , 5 , 1211 – 1217 . 121 V . I . Sorokovoi , G . I . Klebanov and A . Vladimirov Yu , Mol . Biol . , 1972 , 6 , 567 – 572 . 122 K . Maeda , T . Nakata , Y . Noda , R . Sato - Yoshitake and N . Hirokawa , Mol . Biol . Cell , 1992 , 3 , 1181 – 1194 . 123 A . Pirie , Biochem . J . , 1972 , 128 , 1365 – 1367 . 124 M . H . Stowell , B . Marks , P . Wigge and H . T . McMahon , Nat . Cell Biol . , 1999 , 1 , 27 – 32 . 125 B . Marks , M . H . Stowell , Y . Vallis , I . G . Mills , A . Gibson , C . R . Hopkins and H . T . McMahon , Nature , 2001 , 410 , 231 – 235 . 126 J . Zheng , S . M . Cahill , M . A . Lemmon , D . Fushman , J . Schlessinger and D . Cowburn , J . Mol . Biol . , 1996 , 255 , 14 – 21 . 127 B . Barylko , D . Binns , K . M . Lin , M . A . Atkinson , D . M . Jameson , H . L . Yin and J . P . Albanesi , J . Biol . Chem . , 1998 , 273 , 3791 – 3797 . 128 P . L . Tuma , M . C . Stachniak and C . A . Collins , J . Biol . Chem . , 1993 , 268 , 17240 – 17246 . 129 T . Baumgart , S . T . Hess and W . W . Webb , Nature , 2003 , 425 , 821 – 824 . 130 W . H . Binder , V . Barragan and F . M . Menger , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . , 2003 , 42 , 5802 – 5827 . 131 K . Simons and E . Ikonen , Nature , 1997 , 387 , 569 – 572 . 132 K . Jacobson , O . G . Mouritsen and R . G . W . Anderson , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2007 , 9 , 7 – 14 . 133 A . Roux , D . Cuvelier , P . Nassoy , J . Prost , P . Bassereau and B . Goud , EMBO J . , 2005 , 24 , 1537 – 1545 . 134 J . M . Allain , C . Storm , A . Roux , M . Ben Amar and J . F . Joanny , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2004 , 93 , 158104 . 135 M . Kirkham , A . Fujita , R . Chadda , S . J . Nixon , T . V . Kurzchalia , D . K . Sharma , R . E . Pagano , J . F . Hancock , S . Mayor and R . G . Parton , J . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 168 , 465 – 476 . 136 J . G . Donaldson , N . Porat - Shliom and L . A . Cohen , Cell . Signalling , 2009 , 21 , 1 – 6 . 137 C . C . Scott and J . Gruenberg , BioEssays , 2011 , 33 , 103 – 110 . 138 I . Mellman , R . Fuchs and A . Helenius , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 1986 , 55 , 663 – 700 . 139 J . Gruenberg and H . Stenmark , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2004 , 5 , 317 – 323 . 140 J . P . Luzio , P . R . Pryor and N . A . Bright , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2007 , 8 , 622 – 632 . 141 P . Saftig and J . Klumperman , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2009 , 10 , 623 – 635 . 142 F . G . van der Goot and J . Gruenberg , Trends Cell Biol . , 2006 , 16 , 514 – 521 . 143 B . Alberts , A . Johnson , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts and P . Walter , Molecular Biology of the Cell , Garland Science , New York , 4th edn , 2002 . 144 T . Vida and B . Gerhardt , J . Cell Biol . , 1999 , 146 , 85 – 98 . 145 J . P . Luzio , M . D . Parkinson , S . R . Gray and N . A . Bright , Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 2009 , 37 , 1019 – 1021 . 146 C . Mullins and J . S . Bonifacino , BioEssays , 2001 , 23 , 333 – 343 . 147 P . R . Pryor , B . M . Mullock , N . A . Bright , M . R . Lindsay , S . R . Gray , S . C . Richardson , A . Stewart , D . E . James , R . C . Piper and J . P . Luzio , EMBO Rep . , 2004 , 5 , 590 – 595 . 148 N . A . Bright , M . J . Gratian and J . P . Luzio , Curr . Biol . , 2005 , 15 , 360 – 365 . 149 M . Mari , M . V . Bujny , D . Zeuschner , W . J . Geerts , J . Griﬃth , C . M . Petersen , P . J . Cullen , J . Klumperman and H . J . Geuze , Traﬃc , 2008 , 9 , 380 – 393 . 150 V . Pietiainen , V . Marjomaki , P . Upla , L . Pelkmans , A . Helenius and T . Hyypia , Mol . Biol . Cell , 2004 , 15 , 4911 – 4925 . 151 L . Pelkmans , J . Kartenbeck and A . Helenius , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2001 , 3 , 473 – 483 . 152 L . Pelkmans , T . Burli , M . Zerial and A . Helenius , Cell , 2004 , 118 , 767 – 780 . 153 S . Sabharanjak , P . Sharma , R . Parton and S . Mayor , Dev . Cell , 2002 , 2 , 411 – 423 . 154 V . Marshansky and M . Futai , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2008 , 20 , 415 – 426 . 155 A . K . Haas , E . Fuchs , R . Kopajtich and F . A . Barr , Nat . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 7 , 887 – 893 . 156 V . Rybin , O . Ullrich , M . Rubino , K . Alexandrov , I . Simon , M . C . Seabra , R . Goody and M . Zerial , Nature , 1996 , 383 , 266 – 269 . 157 W . M . Henne , N . J . Buchkovich and S . D . Emr , Dev . Cell , 2011 , 21 , 77 – 91 . 158 J . H . Hurley and P . I . Hanson , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2010 , 11 , 556 – 566 . 159 C . Raiborg and H . Stenmark , Nature , 2009 , 458 , 445 – 452 . 160 K . G . Bache , A . Brech , A . Mehlum and H . Stenmark , J . Cell Biol . , 2003 , 162 , 435 – 442 . 161 C . Raiborg , K . G . Bache , A . Mehlum , E . Stang and H . Stenmark , EMBO J . , 2001 , 20 , 5008 – 5021 . 162 C . Raiborg , J . Wesche , L . Malerod and H . Stenmark , J . Cell Sci . , 2006 , 119 , 2414 – 2424 . 163 E . R . Eden , I . J . White and C . E . Futter , Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 2009 , 37 , 173 – 177 . 164 J . H . Hurley , E . Boura , L . A . Carlson and B . Rozycki , Cell , 2010 , 143 , 875 – 887 . 165 J . Gruenberg , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2003 , 15 , 382 – 388 . 166 M . R . Russell , D . P . Nickerson and G . Odorizzi , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2006 , 18 , 422 – 428 . 167 K . R . Porter and A . B . Novikoﬀ , Science , 1974 , 186 , 516 – 520 . 168 B . Schroder , C . Wrocklage , C . Pan , R . Jager , B . Kosters , H . Schafer , H . P . Elsasser , M . Mann and A . Hasilik , Traﬃc , 2007 , 8 , 1676 – 1686 . 169 G . Marino , F . Madeo and G . Kroemer , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 2011 , 23 , 198 – 206 . 170 S . Conus and H . U . Simon , Biochem . Pharmacol . , 2008 , 76 , 1374 – 1382 . 171 N . Simionescu , in Advances in Inﬂammation Research , ed . S . B . Weissman and G . Paoletti and R . Raven , New York , 1979 , pp . 61 – 70 . 172 A . Chaudhuri , G . Battaglia and R . Golestanian , Phys . Biol . , 2011 , 8 , 046002 . 173 H . Yuan , J . Li , G . Bao and S . Zhang , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2010 , 105 , 138101 . 174 O . Le Bihan , P . Bonnafous , L . Marak , T . Bickel , S . Trepout , S . Mornet , F . De Haas , H . Talbot , J . C . Taveau and O . Lambert , J . Struct . Biol . , 2009 , 168 , 419 – 425 . 175 Y . Zhao , X . Sun , G . Zhang , B . G . Trewyn , Slowing , II and V . S . Lin , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 1366 – 1375 . 176 W . Jiang , B . Y . Kim , J . T . Rutka and W . C . Chan , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2008 , 3 , 145 – 150 . 177 Y . Min , M . Akbulut , K . Kristiansen , Y . Golan and J . Israelachvili , Nat . Mater . , 2008 , 7 , 527 – 538 . 178 D . Leckband and J . Israelachvili , Q . Rev . Biophys . , 2001 , 34 , 105 – 267 . 179 R . R . Dagastine , R . Manica , S . L . Carnie , D . Y . Chan , G . W . Stevens and F . Grieser , Science , 2006 , 313 , 210 – 213 . 180 A . E . Nel , L . Madler , D . Velegol , T . Xia , E . M . Hoek , P . Somasundaran , F . Klaessig , V . Castranova and M . Thompson , Nat . Mater . , 2009 , 8 , 543 – 557 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2737 181 D . F . Moyano and V . M . Rotello , Langmuir , 2011 , 27 , 10376 – 10385 . 182 E . Ghigo , J . Kartenbeck , P . Lien , L . Pelkmans , C . Capo , J . L . Mege and D . Raoult , PLoS Pathog . , 2008 , 4 , e1000087 . 183 C . Clement , V . Tiwari , P . M . Scanlan , T . Valyi - Nagy , B . Y . Yue and D . Shukla , J . Cell Biol . , 2006 , 174 , 1009 – 1021 . 184 A . Franca , P . Aggarwal , E . V . Barsov , S . V . Kozlov , M . A . Dobrovolskaia and A . Gonzalez - Fernandez , Nanomedicine , 2011 , 6 , 1175 – 1188 . 185 Z . Krpetic , F . Porta , E . Caneva , V . Dal Santo and G . Scari , Langmuir , 2010 , 26 , 14799 – 14805 . 186 J . Park , D . H . Lim , H . J . Lim , T . Kwon , J . S . Choi , S . Jeong , I . H . Choi and J . Cheon , Chem . Commun . , 2011 , 47 , 4382 – 4384 . 187 O . Lunov , T . Syrovets , C . Loos , J . Beil , M . Delacher , K . Tron , G . U . Nienhaus , A . Musyanovych , V . Mailander , K . Landfester and T . Simmet , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 1657 – 1669 . 188 H . C . Fischer , T . S . Hauck , A . Gomez - Aristizabal and W . C . Chan , Adv . Mater . , 2010 , 22 , 2520 – 2524 . 189 F . Corsi , C . De Palma , M . Colombo , R . Allevi , M . Nebuloni , S . Ronchi , G . Rizzi , A . Tosoni , E . Trabucchi , E . Clementi and D . Prosperi , Small , 2009 , 5 , 2555 – 2564 . 190 K . T . Thurn , H . Arora , T . Paunesku , A . Wu , E . M . Brown , C . Doty , J . Kremer and G . Woloschak , Nanomed . : Nanotechnol . , Biol . Med . , 2011 , 7 , 123 – 130 . 191 H . Y . Nam , S . M . Kwon , H . Chung , S . Y . Lee , S . H . Kwon , H . Jeon , Y . Kim , J . H . Park , J . Kim , S . Her , Y . K . Oh , I . C . Kwon , K . Kim and S . Y . Jeong , J . Controlled Release , 2009 , 135 , 259 – 267 . 192 J . Rejman , V . Oberle , I . Zuhorn and D . Hoekstra , Biochem . J . , 2004 , 377 , 159 – 169 . 193 Z . Wang , C . Tiruppathi , R . D . Minshall and A . B . Malik , ACS Nano , 2009 , 3 , 4110 – 4116 . 194 S . Mayor and R . E . Pagano , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2007 , 8 , 603 – 612 . 195 D . Vercauteren , M . Piest , L . J . van der Aa , M . Al Soraj , A . T . Jones , J . F . Engbersen , S . C . De Smedt and K . Braeckmans , Biomaterials , 2011 , 32 , 3072 – 3084 . 196 D . Vercauteren , R . E . Vandenbroucke , A . T . Jones , J . Rejman , J . Demeester , S . C . De Smedt , N . N . Sanders and K . Braeckmans , Mol . Ther . , 2010 , 18 , 561 – 569 . 197 R . Lipowsky and H . G . Dobereiner , Europhys . Lett . , 1998 , 43 , 219 – 225 . 198 M . Deserno , Phys . Rev . E : Stat . , Nonlinear , Soft Matter Phys . , 2004 , 69 , 031903 . 199 K . A . Smith , D . Jasnow and A . C . Balazs , J . Chem . Phys . , 2007 , 127 , 084703 . 200 S . K . Banerji and M . A . Hayes , Langmuir , 2007 , 23 , 3305 – 3313 . 201 S . Tzlil , M . Deserno , W . M . Gelbart and A . Ben - Shaul , Biophys . J . , 2004 , 86 , 2037 – 2048 . 202 H . Gao , W . Shi and L . B . Freund , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2005 , 102 , 9469 – 9474 . 203 S . Zhang , J . Li , G . Lykotraﬁtis , G . Bao and S . Suresh , Adv . Mater . , 2009 , 21 , 419 – 424 . 204 A . Chaudhuri , G . Battaglia and R . Golestanian , Phys . Biol . , 2011 , 8 , 046002 . 205 X . Yi , X . Shi and H . Gao , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2011 , 107 , 098101 . 206 P . Decuzzi and M . Ferrari , Biomaterials , 2007 , 28 , 2915 – 2922 . 207 T . Nakai , T . Kanamori , S . Sando and Y . Aoyama , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2003 , 125 , 8465 – 8475 . 208 Y . Shan , S . Ma , L . Nie , X . Shang , X . Hao , Z . Tang and H . Wang , Chem . Commun . , 2011 , 47 , 8091 – 8093 . 209 B . D . Chithrani , A . A . Ghazani and W . C . Chan , Nano Lett . , 2006 , 6 , 662 – 668 . 210 B . D . Chithrani and W . C . Chan , Nano Lett . , 2007 , 7 , 1542 – 1550 . 211 S . X . Sun and D . Wirtz , Biophys . J . , 2006 , 90 , L10 – 12 . 212 K . Shapero , F . Fenaroli , I . Lynch , D . C . Cottell , A . Salvati and K . A . Dawson , Mol . BioSyst . , 2011 , 7 , 371 – 378 . 213 M . Massignani , C . LoPresti , A . Blanazs , J . Madsen , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis and G . Battaglia , Small , 2009 , 5 , 2424 – 2432 . 214 C . LoPresti , M . Massignani , C . Fernyhough , A . Blanazs , A . J . Ryan , J . Madsen , N . J . Warren , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis , S . Chirasatitsin , A . J . Engler and G . Battaglia , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 1775 – 1784 . 215 D . Pantarotto , R . Singh , D . McCarthy , M . Erhardt , J . P . Briand , M . Prato , K . Kostarelos and A . Bianco , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . , 2004 , 43 , 5242 – 5246 . 216 S . E . Gratton , P . A . Ropp , P . D . Pohlhaus , J . C . Luft , V . J . Madden , M . E . Napier and J . M . DeSimone , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2008 , 105 , 11613 – 11618 . 217 J . A . Champion and S . Mitragotri , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2006 , 103 , 4930 – 4934 . 218 Y . Qiu , Y . Liu , L . Wang , L . Xu , R . Bai , Y . Ji , X . Wu , Y . Zhao , Y . Li and C . Chen , Biomaterials , 2010 , 31 , 7606 – 7619 . 219 H . Jin , D . A . Heller , R . Sharma and M . S . Strano , ACS Nano , 2009 , 3 , 149 – 158 . 220 K . Kostarelos , L . Lacerda , G . Pastorin , W . Wu , S . Wieckowski , J . Luangsivilay , S . Godefroy , D . Pantarotto , J . P . Briand , S . Muller , M . Prato and A . Bianco , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2007 , 2 , 108 – 113 . 221 A . E . Porter , M . Gass , K . Muller , J . N . Skepper , P . A . Midgley and M . Welland , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2007 , 2 , 713 – 717 . 222 C . A . Poland , R . Duﬃn , I . Kinloch , A . Maynard , W . A . Wallace , A . Seaton , V . Stone , S . Brown , W . Macnee and K . Donaldson , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2008 , 3 , 423 – 428 . 223 J . P . Ryman - Rasmussen , M . F . Cesta , A . R . Brody , J . K . Shipley - Phillips , J . I . Everitt , E . W . Tewksbury , O . R . Moss , B . A . Wong , D . E . Dodd , M . E . Andersen and J . C . Bonner , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2009 , 4 , 747 – 751 . 224 E . Hutter , S . Boridy , S . Labrecque , M . Lalancette - Hebert , J . Kriz , F . M . Winnik and D . Maysinger , ACS Nano , 2010 , 4 , 2595 – 2606 . 225 B . W . Maynor , I . LaRue , Z . Hu , J . P . Rolland , A . Pandya , Q . Fu , J . Liu , R . J . Spontak , S . S . Sheiko , R . J . Samulski , E . T . Samulski and J . M . DeSimone , Small , 2007 , 3 , 845 – 849 . 226 J . L . Perry , K . P . Herlihy , M . E . Napier and J . M . Desimone , Acc . Chem . Res . , 2011 , 44 , 990 – 998 . 227 J . P . Rolland , B . W . Maynor , L . E . Euliss , A . E . Exner , G . M . Denison and J . M . DeSimone , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2005 , 127 , 10096 – 10100 . 228 P . Decuzzi and M . Ferrari , Biophys . J . , 2008 , 94 , 3790 – 3797 . 229 G . Sharma , D . T . Valenta , Y . Altman , S . Harvey , H . Xie , S . Mitragotri and J . W . Smith , J . Controlled Release , 2010 , 147 , 408 – 412 . 230 J . W . Yoo and S . Mitragotri , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2010 , 107 , 11205 – 11210 . 231 V . V . Shuvaev , M . A . Ilies , E . Simone , S . Zaitsev , Y . Kim , S . Cai , A . Mahmud , T . Dziubla , S . Muro , D . E . Discher and V . R . Muzykantov , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 6991 – 6999 . 232 D . A . Christian , S . Cai , O . B . Garbuzenko , T . Harada , A . L . Zajac , T . Minko and D . E . Discher , Mol . Pharmaceutics , 2009 , 6 , 1343 – 1352 . 233 Y . Geng , P . Dalhaimer , S . Cai , R . Tsai , M . Tewari , T . Minko and D . E . Discher , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2007 , 2 , 249 – 255 . 234 S . Cai , K . Vijayan , D . Cheng , E . M . Lima and D . E . Discher , Pharm . Res . , 2007 , 24 , 2099 – 2109 . 235 O . Dolnik , L . Kolesnikova and S . Becker , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . , 2008 , 65 , 756 – 776 . 236 P . Ascenzi , A . Bocedi , J . Heptonstall , M . R . Capobianchi , A . Di Caro , E . Mastrangelo , M . Bolognesi and G . Ippolito , Mol . Aspects Med . , 2008 , 29 , 151 – 185 . 237 E . C . Cho , J . Xie , P . A . Wurm and Y . Xia , Nano Lett . , 2009 , 9 , 1080 – 1084 . 238 C . R . Miller , B . Bondurant , S . D . McLean , K . A . McGovern and D . F . O’Brien , Biochemistry , 1998 , 37 , 12875 – 12883 . 239 A . Asati , S . Santra , C . Kaittanis and J . M . Perez , ACS Nano , 2010 , 4 , 5321 – 5331 . 240 J . Lin , H . Zhang , Z . Chen and Y . Zheng , ACS Nano , 2010 , 4 , 5421 – 5429 . 241 A . Blanazs , M . Massignani , G . Battaglia , S . P . Armes and A . J . Ryan , Adv . Funct . Mater . , 2009 , 19 , 2906 – 2914 . 242 O . P . Perumal , R . Inapagolla , S . Kannan and R . M . Kannan , Biomaterials , 2008 , 29 , 3469 – 3476 . 243 K . A . Mislick and J . D . Baldeschwieler , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 1996 , 93 , 12349 – 12354 . 244 T . Xia , M . Kovochich , M . Liong , J . I . Zink and A . E . Nel , ACS Nano , 2008 , 2 , 85 – 96 . 245 A . C . Hunter and S . M . Moghimi , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 2010 , 1797 , 1203 – 1209 . 246 P . Symonds , J . C . Murray , A . C . Hunter , G . Debska , A . Szewczyk and S . M . Moghimi , FEBS Lett . , 2005 , 579 , 6191 – 6198 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online 2738 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 247 S . M . Moghimi and H . M . Patel , J . Controlled Release , 2002 , 78 , 55 – 65 . 248 S . M . Moghimi , P . Symonds , J . C . Murray , A . C . Hunter , G . Debska and A . Szewczyk , Mol . Ther . , 2005 , 11 , 990 – 995 . 249 T . Xia , M . Kovochich , J . Brant , M . Hotze , J . Sempf , T . Oberley , C . Sioutas , J . I . Yeh , M . R . Wiesner and A . E . Nel , Nano Lett . , 2006 , 6 , 1794 – 1807 . 250 A . Vonarbourg , C . Passirani , P . Saulnier and J . - P . Benoit , Biomaterials , 2006 , 27 , 4356 – 4373 . 251 A . Albanese and W . C . Chan , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 5478 – 5489 . 252 G . Maiorano , S . Sabella , B . Sorce , V . Brunetti , M . A . Malvindi , R . Cingolani and P . P . Pompa , ACS Nano , 2010 , 4 , 7481 – 7491 . 253 K . Rausch , A . Reuter , K . Fischer and M . Schmidt , Biomacro - molecules , 2010 , 11 , 2836 – 2839 . 254 A . Lesniak , A . Campbell , M . P . Monopoli , I . Lynch , A . Salvati and K . A . Dawson , Biomaterials , 2010 , 31 , 9511 – 9518 . 255 M . P . Monopoli , D . Walczyk , A . Campbell , G . Elia , I . Lynch , F . B . Bombelli and K . A . Dawson , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2011 , 133 , 2525 – 2534 . 256 D . Walczyk , F . B . Bombelli , M . P . Monopoli , I . Lynch and K . A . Dawson , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2010 , 132 , 5761 – 5768 . 257 J . Wang , U . B . Jensen , G . V . Jensen , S . Shipovskov , V . S . Balakrishnan , D . Otzen , J . S . Pedersen , F . Besenbacher and D . S . Sutherland , Nano Lett . , 2011 , 11 , 4985 – 4991 . 258 S . Laera , G . Ceccone , F . Rossi , D . Gilliland , R . Hussain , G . Siligardi and L . Calzolai , Nano Lett . , 2011 , 11 , 4480 – 4484 . 259 J . J . Ramsden , Q . Rev . Biophys . , 1994 , 27 , 41 – 105 . 260 M . Wahlgren and T . Arnebrant , Trends Biotechnol . , 1991 , 9 , 201 – 208 . 261 I . Lynch , K . A . Dawson and S . Linse , Science’s STKE , 2006 , 2006 , 14 . 262 S . Linse , C . Cabaleiro - Lago , W . F . Xue , I . Lynch , S . Lindman , E . Thulin , S . E . Radford and K . A . Dawson , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2007 , 104 , 8691 – 8696 . 263 M . Lundqvist , J . Stigler , T . Cedervall , T . Berggard , M . B . Flanagan , I . Lynch , G . Elia and K . Dawson , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 7503 – 7509 . 264 N . A . Alcantar , E . S . Aydil and J . N . Israelachvili , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , 2000 , 51 , 343 – 351 . 265 J . M . Harris and R . B . Chess , Nat . Rev . Drug Discovery , 2003 , 2 , 214 – 221 . 266 C . Lemarchand , R . Gref and P . Couvreur , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . , 2004 , 58 , 327 – 341 . 267 P . Francois , P . Vaudaux , N . Nurdin , H . J . Mathieu , P . Descouts and D . P . Lew , Biomaterials , 1996 , 17 , 667 – 678 . 268 J . Huang , L . Bu , J . Xie , K . Chen , Z . Cheng , X . Li and X . Chen , ACS Nano , 2010 , 4 , 7151 – 7160 . 269 D . A . Barrett , M . S . Hartshome , M . A . Hussain , P . N . Shaw and M . C . Davies , Anal . Chem . , 2001 , 73 , 5232 – 5239 . 270 S . Zalipsky , C . B . Hansen , J . M . Oaks and T . M . Allen , J . Pharm . Sci . , 1996 , 85 , 133 – 137 . 271 R . Konradi , B . Pidhatika , A . Muhlebach and M . Textor , Langmuir , 2008 , 24 , 613 – 616 . 272 A . L . Lewis , Colloids Surf . , B , 2000 , 18 , 261 . 273 K . Ishihara , K . Fukumoto , Y . Iwasaki and N . Nakabayashi , Biomaterials , 1999 , 20 , 1545 – 1551 . 274 H . Kitano , H . Suzuki , K . Matsuura and K . Ohno , Langmuir , 2010 , 26 , 6767 – 6774 . 275 S . F . Chen , L . Y . Li , C . Zhao and J . Zheng , Polymer , 2010 , 51 , 5283 – 5293 . 276 A . S . Karakoti , S . Das , S . Thevuthasan and S . Seal , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . , 2011 , 50 , 1980 – 1994 . 277 D . Papahadjopoulos , T . M . Allen , A . Gabizon , E . Mayhew , K . Matthay , S . K . Huang , K . Lee , M . C . Woodle , D . D . Lasic , C . Redemann and F . J . Martin , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 1991 , 88 , 11460 – 11464 . 278 D . D . Lasic , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . Engl . , 1994 , 33 , 1685 – 1698 . 279 R . Gaspar and R . Duncan , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . , 2009 , 61 , 1220 – 1231 . 280 J . N . Israelachvili , D . J . Mitchell and B . W . Ninham , J . Chem . Soc . , Faraday Trans . 2 , 1976 , 72 , 1525 – 1568 . 281 T . Smart , H . Lomas , M . Massignani , M . V . Flores - Merino , L . R . Perez and G . Battaglia , Nano Today , 2008 , 3 , 38 – 46 . 282 C . LoPresti , H . Lomas , M . Massignani , T . Smart and G . Battaglia , J . Mater . Chem . , 2009 , 19 , 3576 – 3590 . 283 T . P . Smart , O . O . Mykhaylyk , A . J . Ryan and G . Battaglia , Soft Matter , 2009 , 5 , 3607 – 3610 . 284 Y . Zheng , Y . - Y . Won , F . S . Bates , H . T . Davis , L . E . Scriven and Y . Talmon , J . Phys . Chem . B , 1999 , 103 , 10331 – 10334 . 285 P . J . Photos , L . Bacakova , B . Discher , F . S . Bates and D . E . Discher , J . Controlled Release , 2003 , 90 , 323 – 334 . 286 C . Murdoch , K . J . Reeves , V . Hearnden , H . Colley , M . Massignani , I . Canton , J . Madsen , A . Blanazs , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis , S . MacNeil , N . J . Brown , M . H . Thornhill and G . Battaglia , Nanomedicine , 2010 , 5 , 1025 – 1036 . 287 H . Lomas , M . Massignani , K . A . Abdullah , I . Canton , C . Lo Presti , S . MacNeil , J . Z . Du , A . Blanazs , J . Madsen , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis and G . Battaglia , Faraday Discuss . , 2008 , 139 , 143 – 159 . 288 M . Massignani , T . Sun , A . Blanazs , V . Hearnden , I . Canton , P . Desphande , S . Armes , S . MacNeil , A . Lewis and G . Battaglia , PLoS One , 2010 , 5 , e10459 . 289 V . Hearnden , H . Lomas , S . MacNeil , M . Thornhill , C . Murdoch , A . Lewis , J . Madsen , A . Blanazs , S . Armes and G . Battaglia , Pharm . Res . , 2009 , 26 , 1718 – 1728 . 290 H . Lomas , I . Canton , S . MacNeil , J . Du , S . P . Armes , A . J . Ryan , A . L . Lewis and G . Battaglia , Adv . Mater . , 2007 , 19 , 4238 – 4242 . 291 Y . C . Chung , I . H . Chen and C . J . Chen , Biomaterials , 2008 , 29 , 1807 – 1816 . 292 Y . Goto , R . Matsuno , T . Konno , M . Takai and K . Ishihara , Biomacromolecules , 2008 , 9 , 3252 – 3257 . 293 M . Ukawa , H . Akita , T . Masuda , Y . Hayashi , T . Konno , K . Ishihara and H . Harashima , Biomaterials , 2010 , 31 , 6355 – 6362 . 294 S . Tu , Y . W . Chen , Y . B . Qiu , K . Zhu and X . L . Luo , Macromol . Biosci . , 2011 , 11 , 1416 – 1425 . 295 T . Tanaka , Y . Fujishima and Y . Kaneo , Biol . Pharm . Bull . , 2001 , 24 , 268 – 273 . 296 K . M . H . Iinuma , K . Okinaga , K . Sasaki , T . Sekine , O . Ishida , N . Ogiwara , K . Johkura and Y . Yonemura , Int . J . Cancer , 2002 , 99 , 130 – 137 . 297 D . B . K . J . W . Park , K . Hong , R . Shalaby , Y . Shao , U . B . Nielsen , J . D . Marks , D . Papahadjopoulos and C . C . Benz , J . Controlled Release , 2001 , 74 , 95 – 113 . 298 B . Schmid , D . E . Chung , A . Warnecke , I . Fichtner and F . Kratz , Bioconjugate Chem . , 2007 , 18 , 702 – 716 . 299 D . B . Kirpotin , D . C . Drummond , Y . Shao , M . R . Shalaby , K . Hong , U . B . Nielsen , J . D . Marks , C . C . Benz and J . W . Park , Cancer Res . , 2006 , 66 , 6732 – 6740 . 300 F . Kratz , J . Controlled Release , 2005 , 108 , 171 – 183 . 301 X . Q . Pan , X . Zheng , G . Shi , H . Wang , M . Ratnam and R . J . Lee , Blood , 2002 , 100 , 594 – 602 . 302 X . Han , J . Liu , M . Liu , C . Xie , C . Zhan , B . Gu , Y . Liu , L . Feng and W . Lu , Int . J . Pharm . , 2009 , 372 , 125 – 131 . 303 Z . Zhang , S . Huey Lee and S . S . Feng , Biomaterials , 2007 , 28 , 1889 – 1899 . 304 R . J . Lee and P . S . Low , J . Biol . Chem . , 1994 , 269 , 3198 – 3204 . 305 E . Chnari , J . S . Nikitczuk , J . Wang , K . E . Uhrich and P . V . Moghe , Biomacromolecules , 2006 , 7 , 1796 – 1805 . 306 L . Z . Mi , M . J . Grey , N . Nishida , T . Walz , C . Lu and T . A . Springer , Biochemistry , 2008 , 47 , 10314 – 10323 . 307 H . Lee , M . Hu , R . M . Reilly and C . Allen , Mol . Pharmacol . , 2007 , 4 , 769 – 781 . 308 F . Zeng , H . Lee and C . Allen , Bioconjugate Chem . , 2006 , 17 , 399 – 409 . 309 K . Grunewald , P . Desai , D . C . Winkler , J . B . Heymann , D . M . Belnap , W . Baumeister and A . C . Steven , Science , 2003 , 302 , 1396 – 1398 . 310 P . Zhu , J . Liu , J . Bess , Jr . , E . Chertova , J . D . Lifson , H . Grise , G . A . Ofek , K . A . Taylor and K . H . Roux , Nature , 2006 , 441 , 847 – 852 . 311 A . Harris , G . Cardone , D . C . Winkler , J . B . Heymann , M . Brecher , J . M . White and A . C . Steven , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 2006 , 103 , 19123 – 19127 . 312 A . Verma , O . Uzun , Y . Hu , H . S . Han , N . Watson , S . Chen , D . J . Irvine and F . Stellacci , Nat . Mater . , 2008 , 7 , 588 – 595 . 313 F . Rehfeldt , A . J . Engler , A . Eckhardt , F . Ahmed and D . E . Diseher , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . , 2007 , 59 , 1329 – 1339 . 314 X . Banquy , F . Suarez , A . Argaw , J . - M . Rabanel , P . Grutter , J . - F . o . Bouchard , P . Hildgenab and a . S . Giasson , Soft Matter , 2009 , 5 , 3984 – 3991 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online This journal is c The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012 Chem . Soc . Rev . , 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 2739 315 P . Juzenas , W . Chen , Y . P . Sun , M . A . Coelho , R . Generalov , N . Generalova and I . L . Christensen , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . , 2008 , 60 , 1600 – 1614 . 316 H . Y . Nam , S . M . Kwon , H . Chung , S . Y . Lee , S . H . Kwon , H . Jeon , Y . Kim , J . H . Park , J . Kim , S . Her , Y . K . Oh , I . C . Kwon , K . Kim and S . Y . Jeong , J . Controlled Release , 2009 , 135 , 259 – 267 . 317 C . Brandenberger , C . Muhlfeld , Z . Ali , A . G . Lenz , O . Schmid , W . J . Parak , P . Gehr and B . Rothen - Rutishauser , Small , 2010 , 6 , 1669 – 1678 . 318 D . B . Chithrani , M . Dunne , J . Stewart , C . Allen and D . A . Jaﬀray , Nanomed . : Nanotechnol . , Biol . Med . , 2010 , 6 , 161 – 169 . 319 B . W . Neun and S . T . Stern , Methods Mol . Biol . , 2011 , 697 , 207 – 212 . 320 X . Ma , Y . Wu , S . Jin , Y . Tian , X . Zhang , Y . Zhao , L . Yu and X . J . Liang , ACS Nano , 2011 , 5 , 8629 – 8639 . 321 O . Zabirnyk , M . Yezhelyev and O . Seleverstov , Autophagy , 2007 , 3 , 278 – 281 . 322 A . M . Derfus , W . C . W . Chan and S . N . Bhatia , Nano Lett . , 2003 , 4 , 11 – 18 . 323 C . Kirchner , T . Liedl , S . Kudera , T . Pellegrino , A . M . Javier , H . E . Gaub , S . Stolzle , N . Fertig and W . J . Parak , Nano Lett . , 2004 , 5 , 331 – 338 . 324 A . Romoser , D . Ritter , R . Majitha , K . E . Meissner , M . McShane and C . M . Sayes , PLoS One , 2011 , 6 , e22079 . 325 S . T . Selvan , T . T . Tan and J . Y . Ying , Adv . Mater . , 2005 , 17 , 1620 – 1625 . 326 S . T . Stern , B . S . Zolnik , C . B . McLeland , J . Clogston , J . Zheng and S . E . McNeil , Toxicol . Sci . , 2008 , 106 , 140 – 152 . 327 J . Gruenberg and F . G . van der Goot , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2006 , 7 , 495 – 504 . 328 O . Meier and U . F . Greber , J . Gene Med . , 2004 , 6 ( 1 ) , S152 – S163 . 329 J . M . Bergelson , Trends Microbiol . , 2008 , 16 , 44 – 47 . 330 D . Mudhakir and H . Harashima , AAPS J . , 2009 , 11 , 65 – 77 . 331 R . K . Tweten , Infect . Immun . , 2005 , 73 , 6199 – 6209 . 332 L . M . Shaughnessy , A . D . Hoppe , K . A . Christensen and J . A . Swanson , Cell . Microbiol . , 2006 , 8 , 781 – 792 . 333 D . Akin , J . Sturgis , K . Ragheb , D . Sherman , K . Burkholder , J . P . Robinson , A . K . Bhunia , S . Mohammed and R . Bashir , Nat . Nanotechnol . , 2007 , 2 , 441 – 449 . 334 E . Mastrobattista , G . A . Koning , L . van Bloois , A . C . S . Filipe , W . Jiskoot and G . Storm , J . Biol . Chem . , 2002 , 277 , 27135 – 27143 . 335 P . Joanne , P . Nicolas and C . El Amri , Protein Pept . Lett . , 2009 , 16 , 743 – 750 . 336 E . J . Kwon , S . Liong and S . H . Pun , Mol . Pharmaceutics , 2010 , 7 , 1260 – 1265 . 337 E . Wagner , C . Plank , K . Zatloukal , M . Cotten and M . L . Birnstiel , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 1992 , 89 , 7934 – 7938 . 338 J . S . Wadia , R . V . Stan and S . F . Dowdy , Nat . Med . , 2004 , 10 , 310 – 315 . 339 E . J . Kwon , J . M . Bergen , I . K . Park and S . H . Pun , J . Controlled Release , 2008 , 132 , 230 – 235 . 340 N . K . Subbarao , R . A . Parente , F . C . Szoka , L . Nadasdi and K . Pongracz , Biochemistry , 1987 , 26 , 2964 – 2972 . 341 P . S . Stayton , A . S . Hoﬀman , N . Murthy , C . Lackey , C . Cheung , P . Tan , L . A . Klumb , A . Chilkoti , F . S . Wilbur and O . W . Press , J . Controlled Release , 2000 , 65 , 203 – 220 . 342 T . B . Wyman , F . Nicol , O . Zelphati , P . V . Scaria , C . Plank and F . C . Szoka , Biochemistry , 1997 , 36 , 3008 – 3017 . 343 I . Koltover , T . Salditt , J . O . Radler and C . R . Saﬁnya , Science , 1998 , 281 , 78 – 81 . 344 S . C . Semple , A . Akinc , J . Chen , A . P . Sandhu , B . L . Mui , C . K . Cho , D . W . Sah , D . Stebbing , E . J . Crosley , E . Yaworski , I . M . Hafez , J . R . Dorkin , J . Qin , K . Lam , K . G . Rajeev , K . F . Wong , L . B . Jeﬀs , L . Nechev , M . L . Eisenhardt , M . Jayaraman , M . Kazem , M . A . Maier , M . Srinivasulu , M . J . Weinstein , Q . Chen , R . Alvarez , S . A . Barros , S . De , S . K . Klimuk , T . Borland , V . Kosovrasti , W . L . Cantley , Y . K . Tam , M . Manoharan , M . A . Ciufolini , M . A . Tracy , A . de Fougerolles , I . MacLachlan , P . R . Cullis , T . D . Madden and M . J . Hope , Nat . Biotechnol . , 2010 , 28 , 172 – 176 . 345 G . Caracciolo , R . Caminiti , M . A . Digman , E . Gratton and S . Sanchez , J . Phys . Chem . B , 2009 , 113 , 4995 – 4997 . 346 B . Sternberg , K . Hong , W . Zheng and D . Papahadjopoulos , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1998 , 1375 , 23 – 35 . 347 D . Hirsch - Lerner , M . Zhang , H . Eliyahu , M . E . Ferrari , C . J . Wheeler and Y . Barenholz , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 2005 , 1714 , 71 – 84 . 348 M . C . Filion and N . C . Phillips , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1997 , 1329 , 345 – 356 . 349 T . R . Kyriakides , C . Y . Cheung , N . Murthy , P . Bornstein , P . S . Stayton and A . S . Hoﬀman , J . Controlled Release , 2002 , 78 , 295 – 303 . 350 C . Kusonwiriyawong , P . van de Wetering , J . A . Hubbell , H . P . Merkle and E . Walter , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . , 2003 , 56 , 237 – 246 . 351 R . A . Jones , C . Y . Cheung , F . E . Black , J . K . Zia , P . S . Stayton , A . S . Hoﬀman and M . R . Wilson , Biochem . J . , 2003 , 372 , 65 – 75 . 352 L . K . Lee , C . L . Williams , D . Devore and C . M . Roth , Bioma - cromolecules , 2006 , 7 , 1502 – 1508 . 353 M . Neu , D . Fischer and T . Kissel , J . Gene Med . , 2005 , 7 , 992 – 1009 . 354 M . L . Patil , M . Zhang , O . Taratula , O . B . Garbuzenko , H . He and T . Minko , Biomacromolecules , 2009 , 10 , 258 – 266 . 355 O . Boussif , F . Lezoualc’h , M . A . Zanta , M . D . Mergny , D . Scherman , B . Demeneix and J . P . Behr , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 1995 , 92 , 7297 – 7301 . 356 J . P . Behr , Chimia , 1997 , 51 , 34 – 36 . 357 A . Akinc and R . Langer , Biotechnol . Bioeng . , 2002 , 78 , 503 – 508 . 358 N . D . Sonawane , F . C . Szoka , Jr . and A . S . Verkman , J . Biol . Chem . , 2003 , 278 , 44826 – 44831 . 359 W . T . Godbey , M . A . Barry , P . Saggau , K . K . Wu and A . G . Mikos , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , 2000 , 51 , 321 – 328 . 360 T . Bieber , W . Meissner , S . Kostin , A . Niemann and H . P . Elsasser , J . Controlled Release , 2002 , 82 , 441 – 454 . 361 P . Erbacher , A . C . Roche , M . Monsigny and P . Midoux , Exp . Cell Res . , 1996 , 225 , 186 – 194 . 362 X . Gao , K . S . Kim and D . X . Liu , AAPS J . , 2007 , 9 , E92 – E104 . 363 R . Duncan and L . Izzo , Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . , 2005 , 57 , 2215 – 2237 . 364 S . H . Qin , Y . Geng , D . E . Discher and S . Yang , Adv . Mater . , 2006 , 18 , 2905 – 2909 . 365 G . P . Robbins , M . Jimbo , J . Swift , M . J . Therien , D . A . Hammer and I . J . Dmochowski , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2009 , 131 , 3872 – 3874 . 366 F . Meng , Z . Zhong and J . Feijen , Biomacromolecules , 2009 , 10 , 197 – 209 . 367 S . Cerritelli , D . Velluto and J . A . Hubbell , Biomacromolecules , 2007 , 8 , 1966 – 1972 . 368 F . Ahmed and D . E . Discher , J . Controlled Release , 2004 , 96 , 37 – 53 . 369 W . Chen , F . Meng , R . Cheng and Z . Zhong , J . Controlled Release , 2010 , 142 , 40 – 46 . 370 H . Lomas , M . Massignani , K . A . Abdullah , I . Canton , C . Lo Presti , S . MacNeil , J . Du , A . Blanazs , J . Madsen , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis and G . Battaglia , Faraday Discuss . , 2008 , 139 , 143 – 159 ; discussion 213 – 228 , 419 – 420 . 371 J . Du , Y . Tang , A . L . Lewis and S . P . Armes , J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 2005 , 127 , 17982 – 17983 . 372 F . Ahmed , R . I . Pakunlu , G . Srinivas , A . Brannan , F . Bates , M . L . Klein , T . Minko and D . E . Discher , Mol . Pharmaceutics , 2006 , 3 , 340 – 350 . 373 Y . Kim , M . Tewari , J . D . Pajerowski , S . Cai , S . Sen , J . H . Williams , S . R . Sirsi , G . J . Lutz and D . E . Discher , J . Controlled Release , 2009 , 134 , 132 – 140 . 374 M . Massignani , I . Canton , T . Sun , V . Hearnden , S . Macneil , A . Blanazs , S . P . Armes , A . Lewis and G . Battaglia , PLoS One , 2010 , 5 , e10459 . 375 V . Hearnden , H . Lomas , S . Macneil , M . Thornhill , C . Murdoch , A . Lewis , J . Madsen , A . Blanazs , S . Armes and G . Battaglia , Pharm . Res . , 2009 , 26 , 1718 – 1728 . 376 M . Massignani , I . Canton , N . Patikarnmonthon , N . J . Warren , S . P . Armes , A . L . Lewis and G . Battaglia , Nat . Precedings , 2010 , http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10101 / npre . 2010 . 4427 . 1 . D o w n l o a d e d by P e nn s y l v a n i a S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y on 15 M a y 2012 P ub li s h e d on 05 M a r c h 2012 on h tt p : / / pub s . r s c . o r g | do i : 10 . 1039 / C 2 C S 15309 B View Online