p | 1 Nonverbal Communication Learn how to read and use body language in ways that build better relationships at home and work . What is body language ? While the key to success in both personal and professional relationships lies in your ability to communicate well , it’s not the words that you use but your nonverbal cues or “body language” that speak the loudest . Body language is the use of physical behavior , expressions , and mannerisms to communicate nonverbally , often done instinctively rather than consciously . Whether you’re aware of it or not , when you interact with others , you’re continuously giving and receiving wordless signals . All of your nonverbal behaviors—the gestures you make , your posture , your tone of voice , how much eye contact you make—send strong messages . They can put people at ease , build trust , and draw others towards you , or they can offend , confuse , and undermine what you’re trying to convey . These messages don’t stop when you stop speaking either . Even when you’re silent , you’re still communicating nonverbally . In some instances , what comes out of your mouth and what you communicate through your body language may be two totally different things . If you say one thing , but your body language says something else , your listener will likely feel that you’re being dishonest . If you say “yes” while shaking your head no , for example . When faced with such mixed signals , the listener has to choose whether to believe your verbal or nonverbal message . Since body p | 2 language is a natural , unconscious language that broadcasts your true feelings and intentions , they’ll likely choose the nonverbal message . However , by improving how you understand and use nonverbal communication , you can express what you really mean , connect better with others , and build stronger , more rewarding relationships . Why does nonverbal communication matter ? Your nonverbal communication cues—the way you listen , look , move , and react—tell the person you’re communicating with whether or not you care , if you’re being truthful , and how well you’re listening . When your nonverbal signals match up with the words you’re saying , they increase trust , clarity , and rapport . When they don’t , they can generate tension , mistrust , and confusion . If you want to become a better communicator , it’s important to become more sensitive not only to the body language and nonverbal cues of others , but also to your own . Nonverbal communication can play five roles : Repetition : It repeats and often strengthens the message you’re making verbally . Contradiction : It can contradict the message you’re trying to convey , thus indicating to your listener that you may not be telling the truth . Substitution : It can substitute for a verbal message . For example , your facial expression often conveys a far more vivid message than words ever can . Complementing : It may add to or complement your verbal message . As a boss , if you pat an employee on the back in addition to giving praise , it can increase the impact of your message . Accenting : It may accent or underline a verbal message . Pounding the table , for example , can underline the importance of your message . Source : The Importance of Effective Communication , Edward G . Wertheim , Ph . D . Types of nonverbal communication The many different types of nonverbal communication or body language include : p | 3 Facial expressions . The human face is extremely expressive , able to convey countless emotions without saying a word . And unlike some forms of nonverbal communication , facial expressions are universal . The facial expressions for happiness , sadness , anger , surprise , fear , and disgust are the same across cultures . Body movement and posture . Consider how your perceptions of people are affected by the way they sit , walk , stand , or hold their head . The way you move and carry yourself communicates a wealth of information to the world . This type of nonverbal communication includes your posture , bearing , stance , and the subtle movements you make . Gestures . Gestures are woven into the fabric of our daily lives . You may wave , point , beckon , or use your hands when arguing or speaking animatedly , often expressing yourself with gestures without thinking . However , the meaning of some gestures can be very different across cultures . While the OK sign made with the hand , for example , conveys a positive message in English - speaking countries , it’s consider offensive in countries such as Germany , Russia , and Brazil . So , it’s important to be careful of how you use gestures to avoid misinterpretation . Eye contact . Since the visual sense is dominant for most people , eye contact is an especially important type of nonverbal communication . The way you look at someone can communicate many things , including interest , affection , hostility , or attraction . Eye contact is also important in maintaining the flow of conversation and for gauging the other person’s interest and response . Touch . We communicate a great deal through touch . Think about the very different messages given by a weak handshake , a warm bear hug , a patronizing pat on the head , or a controlling grip on the arm , for example . Space . Have you ever felt uncomfortable during a conversation because the other person was standing too close and invading your space ? We all have a need for physical space , although that need differs depending on the culture , the situation , and the closeness of the relationship . You can use physical space to communicate many different nonverbal messages , including signals of intimacy and affection , aggression or dominance . Voice . It’s not just what you say , it’s how you say it . When you speak , other people “read” your voice in addition to listening to your words . Things they pay attention to include your timing and pace , how loud you speak , your tone and inflection , and sounds that convey understanding , such as “ahh” and “uh - huh . ” Think about how your tone of voice can indicate sarcasm , anger , affection , or confidence . p | 4 Can nonverbal communication be faked ? There are many books and websites that offer advice on how to use body language to your advantage . For example , they may instruct you on how to sit a certain way , steeple your fingers , or shake hands in order to appear confident or assert dominance . But the truth is that such tricks aren’t likely to work ( unless you truly feel confident and in charge ) . That’s because you can’t control all of the signals you’re constantly sending about what you’re really thinking and feeling . And the harder you try , the more unnatural your signals are likely to come across . However , that doesn’t mean that you have no control over your nonverbal cues . For example , if you disagree with or dislike what someone’s saying , you may use negative body language to rebuff the person’s message , such as crossing your arms , avoiding eye contact , or tapping your feet . You don’t have to agree , or even like what’s being said , but to communicate effectively and not put the other person on the defensive , you can make a conscious effort to avoid sending negative signals—by maintaining an open stance and truly attempting to understand what they’re saying , and why . How nonverbal communication can go wrong What you communicate through your body language and nonverbal signals affects how others see you , how well they like and respect you , and whether or not they trust you . Unfortunately , many people send confusing or negative nonverbal signals without even knowing it . When this happens , both connection and trust in relationships are damaged , as the following examples highlight : Jack believes he gets along great with his colleagues at work , but if you were to ask any of them , they would say that Jack is “intimidating” and “very intense . ” Rather than just look at you , he seems to devour you with his eyes . And if he takes your hand , he lunges to get it and then squeezes so hard it hurts . Jack is a caring guy who secretly wishes he had more friends , but his nonverbal awkwardness keeps people at a distance and limits his ability to advance at work . p | 5 Arlene is attractive and has no problem meeting eligible men , but she has a difficult time maintaining a relationship for longer than a few months . Arlene is funny and interesting , but even though she constantly laughs and smiles , she radiates tension . Her shoulders and eyebrows are noticeably raised , her voice is shrill , and her body is stiff . Being around Arlene makes many people feel anxious and uncomfortable . Arlene has a lot going for her that is undercut by the discomfort she evokes in others . Ted thought he had found the perfect match when he met Sharon , but Sharon wasn’t so sure . Ted is good looking , hardworking , and a smooth talker , but seemed to care more about his thoughts than Sharon’s . When Sharon had something to say , Ted was always ready with wild eyes and a rebuttal before she could finish her thought . This made Sharon feel ignored , and soon she started dating other men . Ted loses out at work for the same reason . His inability to listen to others makes him unpopular with many of the people he most admires . These smart , well - intentioned people struggle in their attempt to connect with others . The sad thing is that they are unaware of the nonverbal messages they communicate . If you want to communicate effectively , avoid misunderstandings , and enjoy solid , trusting relationships both socially and professionally , it’s important to understand how to use and interpret body language and improve your nonverbal communication skills . How to improve nonverbal communication Nonverbal communication is a rapidly flowing back - and - forth process that requires your full focus on the moment - to - moment experience . If you’re planning what you’re going to say next , checking your phone , or thinking about something else , you’re almost certain to miss nonverbal cues and not fully understand the subtleties of what’s being communicated . As well as being fully present , you can improve how you communicate nonverbally by learning to manage stress and developing your emotional awareness . Learn to manage stress in the moment Stress compromises your ability to communicate . When you’re stressed out , you’re more likely to misread other people , send confusing or off - putting nonverbal signals , and lapse p | 6 into unhealthy knee - jerk patterns of behavior . And remember : emotions are contagious . If you are upset , it is very likely to make others upset , thus making a bad situation worse . If you’re feeling overwhelmed by stress , take a time out . Take a moment to calm down before you jump back into the conversation . Once you’ve regained your emotional equilibrium , you’ll feel better equipped to deal with the situation in a positive way . The fastest and surest way to calm yourself and manage stress in the moment is to employ your senses—what you see , hear , smell , taste , and touch—or through a soothing movement . By viewing a photo of your child or pet , smelling a favorite scent , listening to a certain piece of music , or squeezing a stress ball , for example , you can quickly relax and re - focus . Since everyone responds differently , you may need to experiment to find the sensory experience that works best for you . Develop your emotional awareness In order to send accurate nonverbal cues , you need to be aware of your emotions and how they influence you . You also need to be able to recognize the emotions of others and the true feelings behind the cues they are sending . This is where emotional awareness comes in . Being emotionally aware enables you to : Accurately read other people , including the emotions they’re feeling and the unspoken messages they’re sending . Create trust in relationships by sending nonverbal signals that match up with your words . Respond in ways that show others that you understand and care . Many of us are disconnected from our emotions—especially strong emotions such as anger , sadness , fear—because we’ve been taught to try to shut off our feelings . But while you can deny or numb your feelings , you can’t eliminate them . They’re still there and they’re still affecting your behavior . By developing your emotional awareness and connecting with even the unpleasant emotions , though , you’ll gain greater control over how you think and act . To start developing your emotional awareness , practice the mindfulness meditation in HelpGuide’s free Emotional Intelligence Toolkit . p | 7 How to read body language Once you’ve developed your abilities to manage stress and recognize emotions , you’ll start to become better at reading the nonverbal signals sent by others . It’s also important to : Pay attention to inconsistencies . Nonverbal communication should reinforce what is being said . Is the person saying one thing , but their body language conveying something else ? For example , are they telling you “yes” while shaking their head no ? Look at nonverbal communication signals as a group . Don’t read too much into a single gesture or nonverbal cue . Consider all of the nonverbal signals you are receiving , from eye contact to tone of voice and body language . Taken together , are their nonverbal cues consistent—or inconsistent—with what their words are saying ? Trust your instincts . Don’t dismiss your gut feelings . If you get the sense that someone isn’t being honest or that something isn’t adding up , you may be picking up on a mismatch between verbal and nonverbal cues . Evaluating nonverbal signals Eye contact – Is the person making eye contact ? If so , is it overly intense or just right ? Facial expression – What is their face showing ? Is it masklike and unexpressive , or emotionally present and filled with interest ? Tone of voice – Does the person’s voice project warmth , confidence , and interest , or is it strained and blocked ? Posture and gesture – Is their body relaxed or stiff and immobile ? Are their shoulders tense and raised , or relaxed ? Touch – Is there any physical contact ? Is it appropriate to the situation ? Does it make you feel uncomfortable ? Intensity – Does the person seem flat , cool , and disinterested , or over - the - top and melodramatic ? Timing and place – Is there an easy flow of information back and forth ? Do nonverbal responses come too quickly or too slowly ? p | 8 Sounds – Do you hear sounds that indicate interest , caring or concern from the person ? Other resources About Nonverbal Communications – Different categories of nonverbal communication , along with a detailed list of signals . ( Adam Blatner , M . D . ) Body Language : Understanding Nonverbal Communication – Particularly as it applies to the workplace . ( MindTools ) Take Control of Your Nonverbal Communication ( video ) – How to notice and use body language . ( Harvard Business Review ) The Importance of Nonverbal Communication ( PDF ) – Piece by Edward G . Wertheim , Ph . D . about the communication process . ( Northeastern University ) Authors : Jeanne Segal , Ph . D . , Melinda Smith , M . A . , Lawrence Robinson , and Greg Boose . Last updated : June 2019 .