Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s12276 - 019 - 0223 - 5 Experimental & Molecular Medicine R E V I E W A R T I C L E O p e n A c c e s s Extracellular vesicle - based therapeutics : natural versus engineered targeting and traf ﬁ cking Daniel E . Murphy 1 , Olivier G . de Jong 1 , 2 , Maarten Brouwer 1 , Matthew J . Wood 2 , Grégory Lavieu 3 , Raymond M . Schiffelers 1 and Pieter Vader 1 , 4 Abstract Extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) are increasingly being recognized as mediators of intercellular signaling via the delivery of effector molecules . Interestingly , certain types of EVs are also capable of inducing therapeutic responses . For these reasons , the therapeutic potential of EVs is a topic of intense research , both in the context of drug delivery and regenerative medicine . However , to fully utilize EVs for therapeutic purposes , an improved understanding of the mechanisms by which they function would be highly advantageous . Here , the current state of knowledge regarding the cellular uptake and traf ﬁ cking of EVs is reviewed , along with a consideration of how these pathways potentially in ﬂ uence the functions of therapeutic EVs . Furthermore , the natural cell - targeting abilities , biodistribution pro ﬁ les , and pharmacokinetics of exogenously administered EVs , along with the components responsible for these features are discussed . An overview of the potential clinical applications and preclinical examples of their successful use is also provided . Finally , examples of EV modi ﬁ cations that have successfully been employed to improve their therapeutic characteristics receive a particular focus . We suggest that , in addition to investigation of EV cell targeting and routes of uptake , future research into the routes of intracellular traf ﬁ cking in recipient cells is required to optimally utilize EVs for therapeutic purposes . Introduction A major limiting factor in the development and appli - cation of biologicals is an appropriate method for the delivery of these molecules to their sites of action . For example , RNA therapeutics possess great potential due to their ability to alter gene expression ; however , the large polar RNA molecule is unable to cross the cell membrane and is subject to rapid digestion by extracellular RNases . Current conventional strategies designed to overcome these barriers involve enveloping therapeutic RNA within synthetic nanoparticles 1 or conjugating RNA to speci ﬁ c ligands designed to promote uptake 2 . More recently , the FDA has approved lipid nanoparticles ( LNPs ) developed by Alnylam for the delivery of siRNAs to treat hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis , representing the ﬁ rst - ever approved drug based on RNA interference . LNPs pro - tect their delicate cargo from degradation and facilitate entry into cells . Despite overcoming these obstacles , LNPs can display ( dose - limiting ) toxicity and LNP - mediated RNA delivery is largely limited to the liver 3 . Thus , inef - fective delivery to other tissues continues to delay the development of effective therapeutic strategies . A solution to this drug delivery problem is urgently needed , and for this reason , the therapeutic potential of extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) has become a topic of intense research . These lipid - bound particles with a diameter of 30 – 1000 nm facilitate intercellular communication fol - lowing their release from donor cells and subsequent © The Author ( s ) 2019 OpenAccess ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4 . 0InternationalLicense , whichpermitsuse , sharing , adaptation , distributionandreproduction inanymediumorformat , aslongasyougiveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor ( s ) andthesource , providealinktotheCreativeCommonslicense , andindicateif changesweremade . Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle ’ sCreativeCommonslicense , unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . Correspondence : Raymond M . Schiffelers ( r . schiffelers @ umcutrecht . nl ) or Pieter Vader ( pvader @ umcutrecht . nl ) 1 Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology , UMC Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands 2 Department of Physiology , Anatomy and Genetics , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK Full list of author information is available at the end of the article . Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1234567890 ( ) : , ; 1234567890 ( ) : , ; 1234567890 ( ) : , ; 1234567890 ( ) : , ; internalization into surrounding or distant recipient cells . This process results in the transfer of their protein , lipid , and RNA cargo , thereby eliciting a response in recipient cells 4 . Due to this ability to function as an endogenous intercellular cargo transfer system , EVs have been studied for use as potential vehicles for drug delivery . In addition to their ability to deliver exogenous therapeutic cargo , certain EVs also possess inherent therapeutic character - istics , most notably in the context of regenerative medicine 5 . In order to understand how EVs can be optimally uti - lized for therapeutic purposes , it is important to under - stand the processes by which they are formed and how they function in health and disease . EVs are classed into two major subtypes based on their biogenesis — exosomes and microvesicles . Exosomes range from 30 – 100 nm in diameter and are derived from endosomal compart - ments 6 . In contrast , microvesicles are formed through a process of budding and pinching off from the cell mem - brane 7 . They are highly heterogeneous in size and vary from 50 – 1000 nm in diameter . Exosomes are formed within multivesicular endosomes ( MVEs ) through a process of inward budding , resulting in the formation of intraluminal vesicles ( ILVs ) . These ILVs are released into the extracellular environment — at which point they are termed exosomes — upon the maturation of the MVE and subsequent fusion with the cell surface . This process depends on numerous pathways , many of which have not yet been fully elucidated ; however , proteins with important roles in this process are the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) protein family 8 . Various members of the ESCRT family are responsible for the organization of proteins on the MVE membrane and the eventual budding off into the MVE lumen , which is assisted by ESCRT - III 9 . ILVs are also generated through a process that does not require the ESCRT complex . An important factor required for ESCRT - independent ILV formation is the tetraspanin CD63 10 . CD63 is a typical EV protein marker , and its importance in EV biogenesis is highlighted by the obser - vation that its knockout results in decreased EV release from human embryonic kidney 293 ( HEK293 ) cells 11 . Another important mediator of ESCRT - independent ILV formation is neutral sphingomyelinase 2 . This enzyme is responsible for the synthesis of the lipid ceramide , which forms microdomains on the MVE membrane , a process that is crucial for ILV generation 12 . The formation of these ceramide - rich lipid microdomains is followed by an inward invagination that may be promoted by the cone - like shape of the ceramide molecule 13 . Other proteins have recently been shown to be involved in exosome formation . Hsp90 , a chaperone protein , appears to exhibit speci ﬁ c MVE - related activity that triggers the deforma - tion of the MVE , fusion of the MVE with the plasma membrane and subsequent release of exosomes 14 . Further studies are needed to elucidate whether microvesicle formation is a completely Hsp90 - independent process . Similarly to exosomes , the secretion of microvesicles is also partially ESCRT dependent and requires the for - mation of lipid microdomains at the plasma membrane . The ESCRT - 1 component tumor susceptibility gene 101 has been reported to interact with arrestin domain - containing protein 1 at the cell surface , which mediates the budding off of microvesicles 15 . In addition , the for - mation of ceramide - rich lipid microdomains is also involved in microvesicle formation 16 . In contrast to exosome formation , in which ESCRT - III is responsible for the scission of ILVs into the MVE lumen , a reorga - nization of the actin - myosin cytoskeletal network medi - ated by ADP - ribosylation factor 6 is the mechanism by which budding microvesicles are released from the plasma membrane 17 . EVs are loaded with a diverse range of proteins , some of which are common to most EV subsets released from most cell types , such as the membrane - bound tetra - spanins CD9 , CD81 , and CD63 18 . Others are detected in EVs derived from only a speci ﬁ c subset of cell types , such as the truncated form of epidermal growth factor receptor known as EGFRvIII , which has been identi ﬁ ed on the surface of glioma - derived EVs 19 . In addition to their protein contents , EVs are also loa - ded with nucleic acids . For example , there are examples of mRNA transcripts loaded within EVs which can be functionally transferred from producer to recipient cells 20 , 21 . Noncoding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) such as microRNAs ( miRNAs ) are also loaded in EVs , some of which are enriched in comparison to their cells of origin 22 . The incorporation of ncRNAs is also in ﬂ uenced by the status of the producing cell . For example , immune activation has been shown to in ﬂ uence the ncRNA transcriptome of dendritic cell - derived EVs 23 . These observations suggest that the ncRNA content of EVs plays a physiological role . Furthermore , various types of DNA , such as mitochon - drial and genomic DNA have also be found within EVs 24 , 25 . The lipid composition of EVs is markedly different from the composition of the cell membrane . EVs can be enri - ched in phosphatidylserine ( PS ) 26 , lipids that positively regulate the curvature of the outer membrane positive such as lysophosphatidylcholine and lipids that negatively regulate the curvature of the inner membrane such as cardiolipin 27 . The lipids contained in EVs may exert a signaling function . For example , eicosanoids present in EVs , such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes , have been implicated in signaling processes 28 . In most cases , the precise mechanisms by which EVs exert their functions remain to be elucidated . However , some EVs transfer active cargo that has been speci ﬁ cally Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 2 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology shown to induce a response in recipient cells . Functional transfer of chemokine receptor 5 ( CCR5 ) by EVs from CCR5 + cells to CCR5 - monocytes provided an important factor required for HIV infection and rendered previously resistant cells sensitive to infection 29 . EGFRvIII was shown to be transferred from EGFRvIII - positive glioma cells to EGFRvIII - negative glioma cells via EVs . Interest - ingly , this transfer lead to the activation of EGFRvIII - mediated oncogenic pathways in the recipient cells 19 . In addition to functional protein transfer , EV - mediated RNA delivery has also been implicated in pathophysiolo - gical processes . For example , the transfer of miRNA - 19 from astrocytes to breast cancer cells via EVs has been shown to inhibit the expression of its target , PTEN . This reduction in PTEN expression is associated with a priming of the tumor microenvironment for metastatic outgrowth in vivo 30 . Furthermore , EV - mediated RNA transfer has also been shown to promote the induction of a metastatic phenotype in vivo . The transfer of EVs containing mRNA transcripts involved in metastasis and migration from highly metastatic MDA - MB - 231 cells to less metastatic T47D cells induced a highly metastatic phenotype in cells that functionally took up MDA - MB - 231 - derived EVs 31 . The fact that EVs have been shown to induce functional effects via the delivery of RNA and protein molecules provides great promise to the EV therapeutic ﬁ eld . To induce their functional in ﬂ uence , these EV - delivered molecules must reach their site of action within the cell in adequate quantities . Strikingly , the mechanisms responsible for EV - mediated delivery of these molecules have not yet been determined . Although some evidence that speci ﬁ c EV types are able to deliver their cargo via direct fusion with the plasma membrane is available 32 – 34 , EVs most likely deliver their cargo through a route similar to viruses via escape of endosomal compartments . It is anticipated that by shedding light on the EV cargo delivery process , the drug delivery ﬁ eld may be able to improve the delivery of therapeutic molecules to their intracellular sites of action . EV therapeutics EVs can possess inherent tissue repair - promoting properties that may be exploited therapeutically . For example , researchers initially thought that the cardio - protective properties of mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) resulted from their differentiation into healthy myo - cardium . However , the effects were later shown to be due to the paracrine effects of MSCs on the surrounding host tissues . Great interest in the therapeutic potential of EVs was generated when it was demonstrated that EVs are an important component of MSC - mediated cardioprotec - tion 5 . Since this discovery , extensive preclinical research has revealed the utility of EVs as a therapeutic agent in liver 35 and cardiac 36 regenerative medicine . EVs possess numerous advantages over cell - based therapies in the context of regenerative medicine . A major advantage is that EVs , depending on their source , may be less immunogenic than their parental cells , likely due to a lower abundance of transmembrane proteins such as MHC complexes on their surface 37 . Unlike live cells , EVs have a long shelf life and may be transported and stored for long periods . Furthermore , EVs do not replicate after injection . Thus , EVs present less risk of tumor generation and the transfer of latent viral pathogens . EVs also possess numerous advantageous features as drug delivery vehicles that may help them to outperform synthetic drug carriers . Notably , EVs seem to possess an intrinsic ability to cross tissue and cellular barriers 38 . In addition , synthetic drug carriers , such as LNPs and polymeric micelles , suffer from high immunogenicity and toxicity 39 . As therapeutic EVs are derived from either autologous or benign biological sources , they are less likely to induce these adverse effects . In fact , MSC - derived EVs have been shown to exert inhibitory effects on immune responses 40 . Furthermore , some EVs may pos - sess inherent targeting characteristics and display tropism for a particular cell or tissue 41 . This feature could be exploited to selectively deliver drugs to their intended targets while avoiding off - target effects . EVs have been successfully utilized as a drug delivery system in preclinical settings . Recently , large quantities of MSC - derived EVs loaded with an anti - KRAS G12D siRNA were produced by electroporation , which were capable of increasing survival in a mouse model of pancreatic can - cer 42 . However , it should be noted that controversy exists regarding the effectiveness of electroporation for siRNA loading into EVs 43 , 44 . EVs have also been successfully used in preclinical regenerative medicine . For instance , MSC - derived EVs were capable of inducing osteochondral regeneration in a rat model of joint damage after an intra - articular injection 45 . Numerous additional examples reveal the successful preclinical use of EVs , some of which are summarized later in this review . However , rather than focusing on these speci ﬁ c examples , a better understanding of their inherent general features , such as EV circulation kinetics , targeting , internalization , and intracellular traf ﬁ cking routes , is needed to fully exploit these features of EVs for therapeutic purposes . In this review , we aim to summarize the current knowledge on these topics . We also aim to summarize methods for altering the characteristics of EVs to improve their therapeutic activity ( Fig . 1 ) . Circulation kinetics and biodistribution of EVs The surface protein components of EVs are in part responsible for the determination of their circulation kinetics and biodistribution pro ﬁ le . This was clearly Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 3 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology demonstrated by the observation that protease treatment of EVs prior to administration via intravenous injection resulted in a delayed clearance of EVs . Protease treatment also signi ﬁ cantly reduced accumulation of EVs in the lungs , but did not alter uptake by macrophages 46 . How - ever , according to other studies , EV surface proteins do indeed affect uptake by macrophages ; for instance , CD47 has been found to inhibit EV uptake by macrophages 47 . The biodistribution of therapeutic EVs is a crucial aspect of their ef ﬁ cacy and safety . In order to success - fully make use of EVs for therapeutic delivery , an improved understanding of the biodistribution pro ﬁ le of exogenously administered EVs is pivotal . Using EVs labeled with a lipophilic dye , it was found that EVs accumulated primarily in the liver , spleen , and gastro - intestinal tract of mice but that the biodistribution could be in ﬂ uenced by route of administration . Interestingly , the cellular origin of EVs also in ﬂ uenced this pro ﬁ le , suggesting that EVs from different cell sources possess different targeting characteristics . EVs from HEK293T cells also accumulated in subcutaneous tumors , a property which could be harnessed by EV - based anti - cancer therapeutics 48 . Another approach for labeling EVs for biodistribution studies is tagging EVs with luciferase . Using this method , it was found that luciferase - labeled EVs accumulated mostly in the lungs , liver , spleen and kidney 49 . Furthermore , Gaussia prin - ceps luciferase - labeled EVs derived from a variety of mouse cell lines were used to demonstrate that intra - venously administered EVs accumulated in the liver and were rapidly cleared from circulation in a partly macrophage - dependent manner 50 . Despite differences in biodistribution being observed between studies which have made use of EVs of different origins and different labeling techniques , a common consensus is that a large proportion of EVs are destined to accumulate in the liver and spleen , which could be exploited for speci ﬁ c therapeutic targeting of these organs . In addition to the effects of the cell source , EVs with different sizes have also been shown to possess differing biodistribution pro ﬁ les . Asymmetric ﬂ ow - ﬁ eld fractiona - tion has been used to isolate three subsets of EVs based on size . These subsets possessed differing molecular com - positions and biophysical properties . Consistent with other observations , the majority of all subsets accumu - lated in the liver . However , the levels of accumulation in the bone and lymph nodes were signi ﬁ cantly higher for large EVs as compared to the smaller subsets 51 . This is an interesting observation , but it remains unclear whether this is a result of EV size per se rather than a result of their differing molecular compositions . None of these studies identi ﬁ ed a signi ﬁ cant distribu - tion of EVs to the brain . However , there is some evidence that this may change during conditions of ischemic stroke . In a mouse model , strong uptake of cardiosphere - derived EVs was observed in the stroke penumbra . This phenomenon could be exploited for therapeutic targeting of tissues that are damaged after stroke 52 . Despite the knowledge provided by these studies , an improved understanding of the factors that affect biodis - tribution would be highly bene ﬁ cial for improving tar - geted EV delivery . Targeting and internalization — natural targeting properties of EVs For an EV to exert its function , it must ﬁ rst bind to its recipient cell , and it is known that different EVs are capable of preferentially binding to speci ﬁ c target cell types . This inherent targeting ability of EVs is a feature that could be used to target EV drug delivery vehicles to their desired sites of action . Some of the features that are known to in ﬂ uence EV targeting are summarized in Table 1 . Fig . 1 Naturally occurring or arti ﬁ cial features of EVs that alter the circulation time and targeting . The addition of polyethylene glycol ( 1 ) increases the circulation time 79 , the presence of CD47 47 ( 2 ) inhibits uptake and clearance from the circulation by macrophages , while PS 58 ( 3 ) is recognized by macrophages , leading to increased clearance . The integrin ( 4 ) , lipid ( 5 ) , and tetraspanin ( 6 ) compositions of EVs in ﬂ uence their natural targeting properties . These targeting properties are altered by the addition of targeting moieties anchored via the phosphatidylserine - binding C1C2 domains of lactadherin 82 ( 7 ) , the expression of lysosome - associated membrane protein 2 fusion proteins 38 ( 8 ) , glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored targeting moieties 81 ( 9 ) , and transferrin - conjugated magnetic particles bound to transferrin receptor expressed on EVs 93 ( 10 ) Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 4 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology As mentioned above , the protein contents of EVs alter targeting behaviors . For example , EVs displaying integrin α 6 in complex with subunits β 1 and β 4 are directed to S100 - A4 - positive ﬁ broblasts and surfactant protein C - positive epithelial cells in the lungs . EVs expressing sub - units β 5 and β 4 are preferentially targeted to Kupffer cells in the liver and CD31 - positive endothelial cells in the brain , respectively 53 . The tetraspanin class of proteins is abundant on the surface of many EV types 18 , and their roles in EV targeting have been investigated . This class of proteins forms a diverse range of complexes with other tetraspanins and integrins , and these complexes have been shown to determine targeting behaviors . For instance , a complex of the tetraspanin Tspan8 with integrin α 4 has been shown to selectively target EVs to cells in the pancreas 54 . In addition , CD63 - positive EVs have been shown to target neuronal and glial cells , while CD63 - negative EVs bound only to the dendrites of neurons 55 . Furthermore , ﬁ bro - nectin present on the EV surface has been implicated in targeting microvascular endothelial cell - derived EVs to oligodendrocyte precursor cells via an interaction with heparin sulfate proteoglycans 56 . The EV lipid composition also in ﬂ uences targeting behavior , the clearest example being the targeting of macrophages via recognition of PS on the EV surface . The importance of PS in this interaction is con ﬁ rmed by the observation that PS - coated beads are targeted and taken up by phagocytic cells via tethering by T - cell immu - noglobulin mucin protein 4 receptor 57 . Furthermore , PS - containing liposomes have been shown to reduce EV uptake by competing with and thereby inhibiting their uptake by macrophages . This recognition of PS by mac - rophages is likely partially mediated by its negative charge , as the uptake of negatively charged phosphatidylglycerol - containing liposomes also inhibited uptake , while neutral phosphatidylcholine - containing liposomes did not 58 . In addition to lipid and protein determinants of EV targeting , glycans on the EV surface also play a role in cell targeting or uptake . Glycans have been shown to direct EV targeting towards CCR8 - positive glioblastoma cells via a triple interaction with the CCR8 ligand CCL18 59 , while glycans on MSC - derived EVs have been shown to direct EVs towards surface - bound sialic acid - binding immu - noglobulins , such as lectin receptors , expressed on the surface of HeLa cells 60 . Targeting and internalization — mechanisms involved in the internalization of EVs It is important to study the ways in which EVs are internalized as this may be crucial for functional out - comes as the route of EV internalization dictates the functional response or ef ﬁ ciency of cargo delivery . There are multiple routes through which EVs can be internalized by recipient cells , including phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and receptor - mediated endocytosis . These routes result in the formation of intracellular vesicles containing the internalized material , which may then be further processed or sorted for degradation 61 . EVs may also fuse directly with the cell membrane ; however , few examples of this process have been reported 32 . Extensive research has been conducted into the routes of EV uptake , some of which is summarized in Table 2 . Numerous uptake routes have been implicated in EV Table 1 An overview of natural EV features that in ﬂ uence targeting EV Characteristic Example Reference (cid:129) Protein composition Integrin pro ﬁ le The display of different integrin complexes directs EVs to either the liver and brain or lungs . 53 Tetraspanin pro ﬁ le EVs containing the tetraspanin Tspan8 in complex with integrin α 4 were shown to be selectively taken up by cells of the pancreas . 54 CD63 + EVs were taken up by neurons and glial cells , while CD63 - EVs bound only to the dendrites of neurons . 55 Fibronectin Fibronectin on MVEC - derived EVs mediates binding to OPCs via HPSGs . 56 (cid:129) Lipid composition PS - coated beads targeted and tethered to phagocytic cells via T - cell immunoglobulin mucin protein 4 receptor . 57 PS - containing liposomes competitively inhibited EV uptake by murine macrophages . 58 (cid:129) Glycan composition Glycans on the EV surface directed EVs to CCR8 - expressing GBM8 cells via a triple interaction with CCL18 . 59 Glycans enriched on MSC - derived EVs were involved in targeting EVs to HeLa cells via SIGLECs . 60 (cid:129) Negative harge Negatively charged PS - and phosphatidylglycerol - containing liposomes reduced EV uptake by murine macrophages , while neutral phosphatidylcholine liposomes did not . 58 Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 5 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology function , and the major route of uptake seems to depend on the cell type being studied . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is a well - understood route of uptake for extracellular material and involves the formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles 62 . CME has been implicated in EV uptake , as its inhibition resulted in reduced uptake in bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stromal cells 63 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis , which involves the formation of caveolin - coated invaginations on the cell membrane 61 , is another route of EV uptake 64 , 65 . It should be noted that this caveolin - dependent endocytosis has also been identi ﬁ ed as a negative regulator of EV uptake 66 . In addition , a major route of EV uptake is macropinocytosis . This involves the uptake of large quantities of extracellular ﬂ uid into a macropinosome in a process that depends on actin polymerization 62 . Numerous examples of EV uptake through this pathway have been reported 63 , 65 , 67 – 69 . Finally , phagocytic cells , such as macrophages , also take up EVs via phagocytosis 58 . The uptake of lipoproteins is often associated with the existence of a speci ﬁ c receptor . For instance , the uptake of LDL is now well characterized , and a receptor has long since been identi ﬁ ed 70 . Currently , researchers have not determined whether such a bona ﬁ de receptor exists for EVs in general , or at least for a particular EV subtype . All the aforementioned proteins are broadly involved in EV targeting and uptake but are neither suf ﬁ cient nor abso - lutely required for EV uptake . The discovery of a putative uptake receptor for a speci ﬁ c type or subtype of EV would tremendously improve the design of engineered EV therapeutics . The routes by which EVs are taken up are diverse and depend on the producer and recipient cell type . To suc - cessfully develop therapeutic EVs , it would be of great interest to determine which routes of uptake result in high Table 2 An overview of research into EV uptake routes Cell types Study method summary Implicated uptake route ( s ) Reference PC12 cell donor to bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stromal cell recipient K + depletion and siRNA - mediated knockdown to inhibit key proteins involved in speci ﬁ c uptake routes . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis 63 U87 glioblastoma cell donor to human umbilical vein endothelial cell , mouse embryonic ﬁ broblast and U87 cell recipients Chemical inhibition of cholesterol synthesis to inhibit lipid raft formation . Lipid raft - dependent endocytosis 66 Mutu - , Mutu I , and Mutu III donors to various epithelial cell line recipients Chemical inhibition of endocytosis , caveolin knockdown and determination of the co - localization of labeled EVs with tagged components of endocytosis . Clathrin - independent endocytosis 64 A431 cell donor to HeLa cell recipient Chemical inhibition of cholesterol synthesis , tyrosine kinases , Na + / H + exchange and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . The siRNA - mediated knockdown of various key proteins involved in speci ﬁ c endocytosis pathways was also employed . Clathrin - independent endocytosis and macropinocytosis 65 HeLa cell donor to MIA PaCa - 2 , A431 , and BxPC - 3 cell recipients Activation of macropinocytosis via stimulation of EGFR , CXCR4 and oncogenic Ras . Macropinocytosis 67 Oli - neu cell donor to primary mouse oligodendrocyte , cortical neuron , astrocyte and microglial recipients Chemical inhibition of macropinocytosis . Macropinocytosis 68 DU145 cell donor to HeLa cell and primary lung ﬁ broblast recipients Chemical inhibitors of endocytosis and siRNA - mediated knockdown of key proteins involved in speci ﬁ c endocytosis pathways . Macropinocytosis and ﬂ uid - phase endocytosis 69 H4 neuroglioma cell donor to H4 neuroglioma and Chinese hamster ovary cell recipients Chemical inhibition of macropinocytosis and clathrin - and caveolin - mediated endocytosis None 95 K562 and MT4 cell donors to Raw264 . 7 and NIH 3T3 cell recipients Chemical inhibition of phagocytosis and siRNA - mediated knockdown of key proteins involved in phagocytosis . Phagocytosis 96 Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 6 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology levels of functional cargo delivery , so that therapeutic EVs could be steered towards this route . Intracellular traf ﬁ cking of EVs Following uptake , extracellular material is kept separate from the cytosol and enters the endosomal system in early endosomes ( EEs ) . Most of the EE contents are destined for degradation in the acidic environment of the lyso - somes , including internalized EVs 71 . However , for EVs to exert their function , their cargo must reach its intracel - lular site of action . The ability of EVs to at least partially avoid this degradative pathway was revealed by the observation that EVs follow a similar route to human immunode ﬁ ciency virus for dissemination after uptake in mature dendritic cells 72 . This observation is of great interest , as it indicates that EVs are capable of bypassing degradative uptake pathways , but this ﬁ nding may be speci ﬁ c to dendritic cells . It should also be noted that protease treatment did not alter this post - uptake traf - ﬁ cking , suggesting that this observation may not be the result of EV - speci ﬁ c features . Despite these concerns , a mechanism for EV escape from degradative pathways after uptake likely exists , as it has been observed in numerous cases that EVs are capable of exerting func - tional effects via the delivery of their cargo . To investigate possible routes of degradative escape , EVs labeled with CD63 - GFP / CD63 - mCherry were pro - duced and followed after internalization by human pri - mary ﬁ broblasts , Huh7 and HEK293 cells . Post - uptake , EVs were seen to be surrounded by larger vesicles which were then traf ﬁ cked towards ER ﬁ laments , where inter - actions with the ER were observed , as demonstrated by microscopy . A potential exchange of content at these interaction sites between the vesicles and the ER was proposed 73 . This hypothesis is strengthened by the fact that Rab5 - and Rab7 - positive endosomal vesicles are known to interact with the ER 74 . The mechanisms underlying this potential process of functional content release , which requires content crossing the exosomal and endosomal membranes , remain unknown . In regards to miRNAs and siRNAs , if EV - mediated delivery to the ER is possible , this could be a pathway for functionally altering gene expression . An analysis of internalized PC12 cell - derived EVs labeled with lipophilic dyes and amino ‐ reactive ﬂ uor - ophores by live - cell ﬂ uorescence microscopy in PC12 cells revealed that EVs were ﬁ rst encapsulated in EEs , which then moved towards the perinuclear space , the location of endosomes as well as lysosomes . Here , it was observed that the labeled protein signal began to separate from the EV membrane signal within 3 h , indicating separation of transmembrane proteins and lipids in the EV membrane . Between 6 and 24 h , the signal of the lipid - labeled EVs was substantially reduced and not present in the perinuclear space , suggesting that the lipids were recycled and transported to other parts of the cell 75 . In contrast , the signal of the transmembrane proteins could still be observed in the perinuclear space , suggesting that much of the protein remained in the lysosomes . This implies that a large amount of membrane - bound EV cargo is degraded in the lysosomes post - uptake . It should be noted that research into the post - uptake routes of EV traf ﬁ cking is hindered by the recent ﬁ nding that commonly used lipophilic dyes used for EV labeling , such as PKH26 , form particles which are hard to distin - guish from labeled EVs and colocalize with them in subcellular compartments 76 . In addition , EVs are often tracked with ﬂ uorescently labeled tetraspanin proteins 77 , which remain associated with membranes even when EV content delivery occurs . It seems evident that assessment of EV content release must involve the use of cytosolic EV markers and the development of new assays to study EV cargo transfer . The evidence suggesting that EVs are able to escape endosomal degradative pathways post - uptake is of great interest , as this feature could be exploited for therapeutic delivery . However , the mechanisms by which EVs are capable of avoiding degradation are currently poorly understood . In order to fully utilize EVs as therapeutics it is necessary to determine the intracellular routes and mechanisms by which their cargo is delivered . Engineering approaches that impact circulation kinetics and biodistribution Altogether , EVs clearly possess many potential advan - tageous features compared to synthetic delivery systems in terms of their intrinsic therapeutic properties and ability to deliver functional cargo . However , unmodi ﬁ ed EVs suffer from rapid clearance and low accumulation in target tissues and cells 48 . Therefore , EVs have been modi ﬁ ed in order to steer their delivery towards their target sites of action . In order to increase circulation time and improve delivery to target tissues , EVs have been coated with polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) functionalised with anti - EGFR nanobodies . PEG is a hydrophilic polymer and is known to increase the circulation time of nanoparticles 78 . It was found that PEGylation increased EV circulation time and reduced nonspeci ﬁ c interactions with cells , while enhan - cing the nanobody - mediated interaction with EGFR - expressing cells 79 . Similarly , the effect of cloaking of the EV surface with streptavidin conjugated to PEG via its linkage to 1 , 2 - bis ( dimethylphosphino ) ethane lipids has also been employed . The streptavidin component facili - tated the conjugation of targeting components , which successfully altered EV biodistribution in mice 80 . It should be noted however , that the addition of PEG to the surface of liposomes is known to hinder their escape from the Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 7 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology endosome after uptake , which may also apply to PEGy - lated EVs 78 . Another approach used to increase circulation time is through the increased expression of CD47 on the EV surface . This protein has been shown to act in opposition to PS , which promotes the initiation of phagocytosis and subsequent removal from the circulation by macro - phages 58 . The CD47 protein has been found on EVs from speci ﬁ c cell types and has been demonstrated to increase circulation time following intraperitoneal injection 47 . This feature could be exploited to prolong the circulation time of therapeutic EVs , and thus increase the window for targeted delivery to speci ﬁ c tissues . Engineering approaches that impact the targeting or internalization of EVs A major challenge hindering the utilization of EVs in a therapeutic context is the dif ﬁ culty in ensuring delivery to their sites of therapeutic action while avoiding accumu - lation at off - target sites . Nonspeci ﬁ c delivery decreases ef ﬁ cacy and may induce off - target effects . The targeting properties of EVs can be in ﬂ uenced by genetic modi ﬁ cation of producer cells . The ﬁ rst example of EVs targeted in such a way involved the fusion of lysosome - associated membrane protein 2 ( Lamp2b ) with the rabies viral glycoprotein peptide . Lamp2b is abundant on the surface of EVs , while the rabies viral glycoprotein peptide binds speci ﬁ cally to the acetylcholine receptor . It was found that this fusion protein conferred EVs with the ability to target neurons , oligodendrocytes and microglia within the brain after systemic injection 38 . EVs with engineered targeting abilities have also been produced by modi ﬁ cation of producer cells to produce recombinant EGFR - speci ﬁ c nanobodies with glycosylpho - sphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchoring peptides . As EVs are enriched in GPI , nanobodies were highly enriched on the EV surface , which provided the EVs with targeting spe - ci ﬁ city for EGFR + cells 81 . While both of these methods successfully targeted EVs to their intended cells of action , the genetic modi ﬁ cation of producer cells may be chal - lenging to utilize for future production of therapeutic EVs , due to their time - consuming production and dif ﬁ culties in applying them to cells derived from a patient ’ s own body ﬂ uids 41 . The application of targeting components post - EV pro - duction is an attractive option , as targeting ligands can be applied in a controllable manner at high densities 41 . There are numerous recent examples of targeting capabilities being conferred by the addition of nanobodies and anti - bodies post - EV production . For example , the high con - centration of PS in EV membranes has been exploited by fusing targeting proteins to the C1C2 domain of lactad - herin , which binds to PS with high af ﬁ nity . An anti - EGFR nanobody fused to C1C2 self - associated onto EV membranes and promoted EV uptake by EGFR + cells in a dose - dependent manner . Nontargeted control nanobody fusion proteins did not alter interactions with cells , and the addition of the fusion protein did not alter EV size or integrity , demonstrating this method ’ s suitability for therapeutic EV targeting 82 . A similar approach was exploited by fusing an anti - Her2 single - chain variable fragment to the C1C2 domain . This fusion protein was able to latch onto the surface of EVs and targeted the delivery of an mRNA encoding a prodrug converting enzyme to Her2 + cells . Remarkably , when administered with the prodrug , these targeted EVs were capable of almost entirely halting the growth of orthotopic Her2 + BT474 xenografts in vivo 83 . In addition to antibodies and nanobodies , EVs have also been functionalized with targeting peptides postproduc - tion . For example , a multifunctional peptide was able to anchor itself to the EV membrane has been used . This peptide also contained a sequence directed to the low density lipoprotein receptor which is expressed on the BBB and glioma cells and an apoptosis - inducing sequence . The peptide contained an ApoA - I mimetic sequence that associated with phospholipids and allowed incorporation onto the EVs via simple incubation . This approach allowed accumulation of systemically injected EVs in the brain and a successful targeting of methotrexate - loaded EVs to glioma cells in mouse mod - els , resulting in an increase in survival in mouse models of glioma 84 . Click - chemistry refers to a group of reactions which involve the conjugation of molecules in a modular fash - ion 85 . One such reaction is bio - orthogonal copper - free azide alkyne cyclo - addition , which was used to couple a cyclo Arg - Gly - Asp - D - Tyr - Lys peptide to the surface of MSC - derived EVs . This peptide binds with high af ﬁ nity to integrin α v β 3 , which is expressed in ischemic reactive cerebral vascular endothelial cells . These engineered EVs targeted the ischemic regions of the brain in a murine artery occlusion model while EVs displaying a control peptide did not . In addition , the targeted EVs were able to reduce the in ﬂ ammatory response via delivery of their loaded curcumin cargo . The approach used in these experiments was robust , rapid , and scalable and could be applied to many other targeting peptides 86 . In addition to the two described here , there are numerous further examples of targeting peptides being linked to the EV surface , which are described in Table 3 . In addition to their use as mediators of cell targeting , peptides have also been used in order to promote the uptake of EVs into cells . For example , Nakase et al . decorated the surface of EVs with an arginine - rich micropinocytosis - inducing peptide via a sulfo - N - ε - mal - eimidocaproyl - oxysulfosuccinimide ester linkage . This modi ﬁ cation substantially increased uptake into CHO - K1 Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 8 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology cells . Interestingly , this increase in uptake was associated with an improved delivery of the loaded ribosome - inactivating cytotoxic saporin protein 77 . The application of this cell - penetrating peptide may be a suitable method for improving the intracellular delivery of therapeutic EV cargo . Furthermore , the same group were also able to promote EV uptake by inducing the clustering and acti - vation of EGFR . Activation of this receptor is known to induce EV uptake via the promotion of macro - pinocytosis 67 . Recipient HeLa cells were engineered to express a modi ﬁ ed form of EGFR which bound with high af ﬁ nity to a stearylated peptide which could be anchored to the EV membrane with high af ﬁ nity . These modi ﬁ ed EVs were capable of inducing receptor clustering and promoting uptake via macropinocytosis and an associated increase in the activity of loaded saporin 87 . In addition to the use of targeting peptides , nanobodies , and antibodies , pseudotyping has also been used to pro - mote EV uptake . Pseudotyping is a well - studied method commonly used in virology to alter the tropism of a viruses via the introduction of foreign protein tropism determinants from another distinct viral species 88 . Meyer et al . utilized this method by expressing vesicular sto - matitis virus glycoprotein in HEK293 cells . This protein was chosen because it is often used to increase the cell tropism and transduction ef ﬁ ciency of therapeutic retro - viral vectors . The vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein was expressed in the membranes of EVs , and its ectodo - main was responsible for inducing a large increase in uptake in several different cell types 89 . Most of the research aiming to alter EV tropism has relied on the addition of proteins or peptides . However , augmented targeting of speci ﬁ c liver cells and an increase in EV uptake has been achieved by modifying the surface of EVs with cationized pullulan . This polysaccharide is known to bind an asialoglycoprotein receptor expressed speci ﬁ cally on hepatocytes . The modi ﬁ cation of the sur - face of MSC - derived EVs with this molecule promoted an increase in uptake in vitro . Furthermore , in a rat model of liver damage , pullulan - modi ﬁ ed EVs were targeted to the liver and signi ﬁ cantly improved clinical parameters of liver function 90 . Another innovative approach to direct EV targeting , which does not rely on proteins or peptides , is through the addition of nucleic acid aptamers which are able to bind target molecules . This approach was recently utilized to direct HEK293T - derived EVs towards prostate cancer cells . In this study , the three - way - join ( 3WJ ) of the bac - teriophage phi29 motor packaging RNA was used as a building block to which cholesterol and a targeting aptamer speci ﬁ c for prostate - speci ﬁ c membrane antigen ( PSMA ) were fused . When cholesterol was bound to the “ arrowhead ” , the 3WJ was loaded inside of the EVs ; however , when cholesterol bound to the “ arrowtail ” , the 3WJ was displayed on the EV surface . This observation was exploited to produce EVs which contained a ther - apeutic anti - survivin siRNA and displayed a PSMA - binding RNA aptamer on their surface . The addition of this aptamer increased uptake in PSMA + cell lines and reduced tumor growth in mouse xenograft models 91 . In addition to RNA aptamers , DNA aptamers have also been used to direct EV targeting . The DNA aptamer AS1411 speci ﬁ c for nucleolin , was used to target the delivery of therapeutic siRNAs to cells positive for this protein expressed on the surface of breast cancer cells . The modi ﬁ cation of EVs with this aptamer promoted the delivery to tumors in vivo , which was associated with an inhibition of tumor growth 92 . Table 3 Examples of engineering EV targeting by the addition of peptides Targeting peptide Linkage method Result Reference RGERPPR — a speci ﬁ c peptide for the neuropilin - 1 receptor expressed speci ﬁ cally on glioma and tumor vascular endothelial cells . Click Chemistry ( cyclo - addition reaction of sulfonyl azide ) . EVs could cross the BBB and target glioma cells to deliver therapeutic payload , resulting in increased survival in a murine model of glioma . 97 M12 — a muscle targeting peptide Using phage display , the CP05 peptide , which binds to the extracellular loop of CD63 with high af ﬁ nity , was identi ﬁ ed . Fusion of targeting peptides to CP05 allowed coating of the EV surface via CP05 - CD63 interaction . Targeted EVs successfully delivered splice - correcting oligomers to muscle in a dystrophin - de ﬁ cient mouse model of muscular dystrophy . 98 RGD — speci ﬁ cally binds to integrin α v β 3 expressed on the surface of angiogenic blood vessels . RGD anchored to EV surface via linkage to PEG - lipid which self - assembles into EV membrane . EVs were targeted to α v β 3 cells in zebra ﬁ sh and promoted angiogenesis . 99 CTP — cardiac targeting peptide Recombinant CTP - Lamp2b expressed in donor cells . 15 % increase in delivery to mouse hearts after intravenous injection . 100 Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 9 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology EVs have also been targeted without the addition of targeting ligands , but instead by the addition of magnetic particles . In this way , the biodistribution of EVs decorated with magnetic particles can be controlled using directed magnetic ﬁ elds . For example , the abundance of transferrin receptor on blood - derived EVs was exploited to coat their surface with transferrin - conjugated superparamagnetic nanoparticles . Post intravenous administration , the bio - distribution of these particles was successfully controlled and targeted towards murine tumors using external magnets 93 . Although many examples of the targeting of EVs to speci ﬁ c cell types or tissues exist , relatively few examples of EVs being targeted towards speci ﬁ c uptake routes or subcellular locations have been reported . EVs have been shown to be directed towards speci ﬁ c uptake routes when decorated with anti - Her2 antibodies . Anti - Her2 directed EVs displayed different co - localization patterns to wild - type EVs and EVs coated with a nonspeci ﬁ c antibody . Wild - type EVs mainly co - localized with a protein known to be taken up via caveolae - mediated endocytosis , while nonspeci ﬁ c antibody - coated EVs co - localized with most strongly with dextran , which is taken up by macro - pinocytosis . When anti - Her2 - targeted EVs were analyzed , they co - localized with markers known to be taken up by macropinocytosis , caveolin - mediated , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis 94 . Altogether , these observations provide evidence that it is possible to tune EV routes of uptake and subsequent subcellular destination . This tuning may substantially increase the ef ﬁ ciency of RNA therapeutic delivery by avoiding degradative uptake routes . Conclusions and perspectives In recent years , the importance of EVs as mediators of intercellular communication has been reported , and it has been demonstrated that EVs possess several features which make them amenable to therapeutic use . For these reasons , the EV ﬁ eld is undergoing a period of rapid growth . This growth has been associated with discoveries which have elucidated some of the targeting abilities , uptake routes , and biodistribution pro ﬁ les of EVs . Despite these recent advances , many aspects of their fundamental biology remain to be elucidated . In order to effectively utilize EVs in a therapeutic context , it would be highly advantageous to ﬁ rst gain an improved under - standing of aspects of their biology . Although there have been many successful attempts to alter the biodistribution and cell - targeting properties of EVs , there has been relatively little work undertaken with the purpose of increasing the delivery of EV cargo to its intracellular site of action . It is possible that a large pro - portion of EVs taken up by a cell are destined for degradation . Therefore , the identi ﬁ cation of features which would allow for improved cargo escape would be highly advantageous . In addition , the routes of EV uptake are highly diverse and vary according to cell and EV types . It is possible that a particular uptake route may result in the delivery of a greater amount functional cargo to the recipient cell than other routes . If EVs were steered towards cellular uptake mechanisms that result in the increased functional delivery of cargo , the ef ﬁ cacy and ef ﬁ ciency of EV - mediated therapeutic strategies would be substantially improved . It is also known that EV preparations contain a range of EV subtypes , which vary in terms of subcellular site of origin , size , and protein markers . At present it is extre - mely challenging to separate these subtypes for functional analysis , and further characterization of the physical and functional properties of subpopulations found in the heterogeneous population of EVs is still ongoing . How - ever , it is possible that the research of certain subtypes for therapeutic purposes could result in the discovery of additional advantageous modi ﬁ cations or strategies for EV - based therapeutics . In conclusion , many aspects of the uptake , biodis - tribution , targeting , and traf ﬁ cking of EVs have been elucidated . A large amount of successful research has also been undertaken into methods by which these features may be altered to produce effective therapeutic EVs . However , in order to translate these ﬁ ndings into clini - cally successful therapeutics , further research into the underlying biology of EV - mediated cargo transfer and processing is required . Acknowledgements The work of D . E . M . and R . M . S . is supported by the European Union ’ s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreement No . 721058 . O . G . d . J . is supported by a Research Grant from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BB / M024393 / 1 ) . P . V . is supported by a VENI Fellowship ( # 13667 ) from The Netherlands Organisation for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( NWO ) . The work of G . L . is supported by Fondation ARC ( PJA20171206453 ) , Cancéropôle Île - de - France ( Emergence 2018 ) and French National Research Agency ( ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 – 02 PSL , ANR - 11 - LABX - 0043 and ANR - 18 - CE15 - 0008 ) . Author details 1 Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology , UMC Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands . 2 Department of Physiology , Anatomy and Genetics , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK . 3 Institut Curie , PSL Research University , INSERM U932 Paris , France . 4 Department of Experimental Cardiology , UMC Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands Con ﬂ ict of interest M . W . is a co - founder and nonexecutive director of Evox Therapeutics . Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 10 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Received : 28 November 2018 Accepted : 12 December 2018 . Published online : 15 March 2019 References 1 . van der Meel , R . et al . Extracellular vesicles as drug delivery systems : lessons from the liposome ﬁ eld . J . Control Release 195 , 72 – 85 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Springer , A . D . & Dowdy , S . F . GalNAc - siRNA conjugates : leading the way for delivery of RNAi therapeutics . Nucleic Acid . Ther . 28 , 109 – 118 ( 2018 ) . 3 . Dowdy , S . F . Overcoming cellular barriers for RNA therapeutics . Nat . Bio - technol . 35 , 222 – 229 ( 2017 ) . 4 . El Andaloussi , S . , Mäger , I . , Breake ﬁ eld , X . O . & Wood , M . J . A . Extracellular vesicles : biology and emerging therapeutic opportunities . Nat . Rev . Drug . Discov . 12 , 347 – 357 ( 2013 ) . 5 . Lai , R . C . et al . Exosome secreted by MSC reduces myocardial ischemia / reperfusion injury . Stem Cell Res . 4 , 214 – 222 ( 2010 ) . 6 . van der Pol , E . , Boing , A . N . , Harrison , P . , Sturk , A . & Nieuwland , R . Classi ﬁ cation , functions , and clinical relevance of extracellular vesicles . Pharmacol . Rev . 64 , 676 – 705 ( 2012 ) . 7 . Van Niel , G . , D ’ Angelo , G . & Raposo , G . Shedding light on the cell biology of extracellular vesicles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 213 – 228 ( 2018 ) . 8 . Hurley , J . H . ESCRT complexes and the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 4 – 11 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Hurley , J . H . & Hanson , P . I . Membrane budding and scission by the ESCRT machinery : It ’ s all in the neck . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 556 – 566 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Colombo , M . et al . Analysis of ESCRT functions in exosome biogenesis , composition and secretion highlights the heterogeneity of extracellular vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 5553 – 5565 ( 2013 ) . 11 . Hurwitz , S . N . , Conlon , M . M . , Rider , M . A . , Brownstein , N . C . & Meckes , D . G . Nanoparticle analysis sheds budding insights into genetic drivers of extra - cellular vesicle biogenesis . J . Extracell . Vesicles 5 , 1 – 20 ( 2016 ) . 12 . Trajkovic , K . et al . Ceramide triggers budding of exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes . Science 319 , 1244 – 1247 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Goñi , F . M . & Alonso , A . Effects of ceramide and other simple sphingolipids on membrane lateral structure . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 , 169 – 177 ( 2009 ) . 14 . Lauwers , E . et al . Hsp90 mediates membrane deformation and exosome release . Mol . Cell 71 , 689 – 702 . e9 ( 2018 ) . 15 . Nabhan , J . F . , Hu , R . , Oh , R . S . , Cohen , S . N . & Lu , Q . Formation and release of arrestin domain - containing protein 1 - mediated microvesicles ( ARMMs ) at plasma membrane by recruitment of TSG101 protein . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 109 , 4146 – 4151 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Menck , K . et al . Neutral sphingomyelinases control extracellular vesicles budding from the plasma membrane . J . Extracell . Vesicles 6 , 1378056 ( 2017 ) . 17 . Muralidharan - Chari , V . et al . ARF6 - regulated shedding of tumor cell - derived plasma membrane microvesicles . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1875 – 1885 ( 2009 ) . 18 . Lötvall , J . et al . Minimal experimental requirements for de ﬁ nition of extra - cellular vesicles and their functions : a position statement from the Interna - tional Society for Extracellular Vesicles . J . Extracell . Vesicles 3 , 26913 ( 2014 ) . 19 . Al - Nedawi , K . et al . Intercellular transfer of the oncogenic receptor EGFRvIII by microvesicles derived from tumour cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 619 – 624 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Valadi , H . et al . Exosome - mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 654 – 659 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Skog , J . et al . Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and protein that promote tumor growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1470 – 1476 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Nolte - ‘ t Hoen , E . N . et al . Deep sequencing of RNA from immune cell - derived vesicles uncovers the selective incorporation of small non - coding RNA biotypes with potential regulatory functions . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , 9272 – 9285 ( 2012 ) . 23 . Driedonks , T . A . P . et al . Immune stimuli shape the small non - coding tran - scriptome of extracellular vesicles released by dendritic cells . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 75 , 3857 – 3875 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Guescini , M . , Genedani , S . , Agnati , L . F . & Institutet , K . Astrocytes and glio - blastoma cells release exosomes carrying mtDNA Astrocytes and Glio - blastoma cells release exosomes carrying mtDNA . J . Neural Transm . ( Vienna ) . 117 , 1 – 4 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Thakur , B . K . et al . Double - stranded DNA in exosomes : a novel biomarker in cancer detection . Cell Res . 24 , 766 – 769 ( 2014 ) . 26 . Llorente , A . et al . Molecular lipidomics of exosomes released by PC - 3 prostate cancer cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1831 , 1302 – 1309 ( 2013 ) . 27 . Haraszti , R . A . et al . High - resolution proteomic and lipidomic analysis of exosomes and microvesicles from different cell sources . J . Extracell . Vesicles 1 , 1 – 14 ( 2016 ) . 28 . Boilard , E . Extracellular vesicles and their content in bioactive lipid mediators : more than a sack of microRNA . J . Lipid Res . 59 , 2037 – 2046 ( 2018 ) . 29 . Mack , M . et al . Transfer of the chemokine receptor CCR5 between cells by membrane - derived microparticles : a mechanism for cellular human immunode ﬁ ciency virus 1 infection . Nat . Med . 6 , 769 – 775 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Zhang , L . et al . Microenvironment - induced PTEN loss by exosomal microRNA primes brain metastasis outgrowth . Nature 527 , 100 – 104 ( 2015 ) . 31 . Zomer , A . et al . In vivo imaging reveals extracellular vesicle - mediated phe - nocopying of metastatic behavior . Cell 161 , 1046 – 1057 ( 2015 ) . 32 . Montecalvo , A . et al . Mechanism of transfer of functional microRNAs between mouse dendritic cells via exosomes . Blood 119 , 756 – 766 ( 2012 ) . 33 . Del Conde , I . , Shrimpton , C . N . , Thiagarajan , P . & Lopez , J . A . Tissue - factor - bearing microvesicles arise from lipid rafts and fuse with activated platelets to initiate coagulation . Blood 106 , 1604 – 1611 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Parolini , I . et al . Microenvironmental pH is a key factor for exosome traf ﬁ c in tumor cells . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 34211 – 34222 ( 2009 ) . 35 . Lou , G . , Chen , Z . , Zheng , M . & Liu , Y . Mesenchymal stem cell - derived exo - somes as a new therapeutic strategy for liver diseases . Exp . Mol . Med . 49 , e346 ( 2017 ) . 36 . Adamiak , M . & Sahoo , S . Exosomes in myocardial repair : advances and challenges in the development of next - generation therapeutics . Mol . Ther . 26 , 1635 – 1643 ( 2018 ) . 37 . Ong , S . - G . & Wu , J . C . Exosomes as potential alternatives to stem cell therapy in mediating cardiac regeneration . Circ . Res . 117 , 7 – 9 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Alvarez - Erviti , L . et al . Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain by systemic injection of targeted exosomes . Nat . Biotechnol . 29 , 341 – 345 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Ha , D . , Yang , N . & Nadithe , V . Exosomes as therapeutic drug carriers and delivery vehicles across biological membranes : current perspectives and future challenges . Acta Pharm . Sin . B 6 , 287 – 296 ( 2016 ) . 40 . Shigemoto - Kuroda , T . et al . MSC - derived extracellular vesicles attenuate immune responses in two autoimmune murine models : type 1 diabetes and uveoretinitis . Stem Cell Rep . 8 , 1214 – 1225 ( 2017 ) . 41 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . , Schiffelers , R . M . , Zarovni , N . & Vago , R . Modulation of tissue tropism and biological activity of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles : new nanotools for cancer treatment . Pharmacol . Res . 111 , 487 – 500 ( 2016 ) . 42 . Mendt , M . et al . Generation and testing of clinical - grade exosomes for pancreatic cancer . JCI Insight 3 , 1 – 22 ( 2018 ) . 43 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . et al . Electroporation - induced siRNA precipitation obscures the ef ﬁ ciency of siRNA loading into extracellular vesicles . J . Control Release 172 , 229 – 238 ( 2013 ) . 44 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . , Vader , P . & Schiffelers , R . M . Tumour - bound RNA - laden exosomes . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 1 , 634 – 636 ( 2017 ) . 45 . Zhang , S . et al . Exosomes derived from human embryonic mesenchymal stem cells promote osteochondral regeneration . Osteoarthr . Cartil . 24 , 2135 – 2140 ( 2016 ) . 46 . Charoenviriyakul , C . , Takahashi , Y . , Morishita , M . , Nishikawa , M . & Takakura , Y . Role of extracellular vesicle surface proteins in the pharmacokinetics of extracellular vesicles . Mol . Pharm . 15 , 1073 – 1080 ( 2018 ) . 47 . Kamerkar , S . et al . Exosomes facilitate therapeutic targeting of oncogenic KRAS in pancreatic cancer . Nature 546 , 498 – 503 ( 2017 ) . 48 . Wiklander , O . P . B . et al . Extracellular vesicle in vivo biodistribution is deter - mined by cell source , route of administration and targeting . J . Extracell . Vesicles 4 , 1 – 13 ( 2015 ) . 49 . Gangadaran , P . et al . A new bioluminescent reporter system to study the biodistribution of systematically injected tumor - derived bioluminescent extracellular vesicles in mice . Oncotarget 8 , 109894 – 109914 ( 2017 ) . 50 . Charoenviriyakul , C . et al . Cell type - speci ﬁ c and common characteristics of exosomes derived from mouse cell lines : yield , physicochemical properties , and pharmacokinetics . Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 96 , 316 – 322 ( 2017 ) . 51 . Zhang , H . et al . Identi ﬁ cation of distinct nanoparticles and subsets of extra - cellular vesicles by asymmetric ﬂ ow ﬁ eld - ﬂ ow fractionation . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 332 – 343 ( 2018 ) . 52 . Lapchak , P . A . , Boitano , P . D . , de Couto , G . & Marbán , E . Intravenous xeno - geneic human cardiosphere - derived cell extracellular vesicles ( exosomes ) improves behavioral function in small - clot embolized rabbits . Exp . Neurol . 307 , 109 – 117 ( 2018 ) . Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 11 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 53 . Hoshino , A . et al . Tumour exosome integrins determine organotropic metastasis . Nature 527 , 329 – 335 ( 2015 ) . 54 . Rana , S . , Yue , S . , Stadel , D . & Zöller , M . Toward tailored exosomes : The exo - somal tetraspanin web contributes to target cell selection . Int . J . Biochem . Cell . Biol . 44 , 1574 – 1584 ( 2012 ) . 55 . Laulagnier , K . et al . Amyloid precursor protein products concentrate in a subset of exosomes speci ﬁ cally endocytosed by neurons . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 75 , 757 – 773 ( 2018 ) . 56 . Osawa , S . , Kurachi , M . , Yamamoto , H . , Yoshimoto , Y . & Ishizaki , Y . Fibronectin on extracellular vesicles from microvascular endothelial cells is involved in the vesicle uptake into oligodendrocyte precursor cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 488 , 232 – 238 ( 2017 ) . 57 . Flannagan , R . S . , Canton , J . , Furuya , W . , Glogauer , M . & Grinstein , S . The phosphatidylserine receptor TIM4 utilizes integrins as coreceptors to effect phagocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 1511 – 1522 ( 2014 ) . 58 . Matsumoto , A . et al . Role of phosphatidylserine - derived negative surface charges in the recognition and uptake of intravenously injected B16BL6 - derived exosomes by macrophages . J . Pharm . Sci . 106 , 168 – 175 ( 2017 ) . 59 . Berenguer , J . et al . Glycosylated extracellular vesicles released by glio - blastoma cells are decorated by CCL18 allowing for cellular uptake via chemokine receptor CCR8 . J . Extracell . Vesicles 7 , 1446660 ( 2018 ) . 60 . Shimoda , A . , Tahara , Y . , Sawada , S . , Sasaki , Y . & Akiyoshi , K . Glycan pro ﬁ ling analysis using evanescent - ﬁ eld ﬂ uorescence - assisted lectin array : Importance of sugar recognition for cellular uptake of exosomes from mesenchymal stem cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 491 , 701 – 707 ( 2017 ) . 61 . Mulcahy , L . A . , Pink , R . C . & Carter , D . R . F . Routes and mechanisms of extracellular vesicle uptake . J . Extracell . Vesicles 3 , 24641 ( 2014 ) . 62 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Tian , T . et al . Exosome uptake through clathrin - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis and mediating miR - 21 delivery . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 22258 – 22267 ( 2014 ) . 64 . Nanbo , A . , Kawanishi , E . , Yoshida , R . & Yoshiyama , H . Exosomes derived from epstein - barr virus - infected cells are internalized via caveola - dependent endocytosis and promote phenotypic modulation in target cells . J . Virol . 87 , 10334 – 10347 ( 2013 ) . 65 . Costa Verdera , H . , Gitz - Francois , J . J . , Schiffelers , R . M . & Vader , P . Cellular uptake of extracellular vesicles is mediated by clathrin - independent endo - cytosis and macropinocytosis . J . Control Release 266 , 100 – 108 ( 2017 ) . 66 . Svensson , K . J . et al . Exosome uptake depends on ERK1 / 2 - heat shock protein 27 signaling and lipid raft - mediated endocytosis negatively regulated by caveolin - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 17713 – 17724 ( 2013 ) . 67 . Nakase , I . , Kobayashi , N . B . , Takatani - Nakase , T . & Yoshida , T . Active macro - pinocytosis induction by stimulation of epidermal growth factor receptor and oncogenic Ras expression potentiates cellular uptake ef ﬁ cacy of exo - somes . Sci . Rep . 5 , 1 – 14 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Fitzner , D . et al . Selective transfer of exosomes from oligodendrocytes to microglia by macropinocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 447 – 458 ( 2011 ) . 69 . Roberts - Dalton , H . D . et al . Fluorescence labelling of extracellular vesicles using a novel thiol - based strategy for quantitative analysis of cellular delivery and intracellular traf ﬁ c . Nanoscale 9 , 13693 – 13706 ( 2017 ) . 70 . Brown , M . S . & Goldstein , J . L . Familial hypercholesterolemia : defective binding of lipoproteins to cultured ﬁ broblasts associated with impaired regulation of 3 - hydroxy - 3 - methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase activity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 71 , 788 – 792 ( 1974 ) . 71 . Yuyama , K . , Sun , H . , Mitsutake , S . & Igarashi , Y . Sphingolipid - modulated exosome secretion promotes clearance of amyloid - β by microglia . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 10977 – 10989 ( 2012 ) . 72 . Izquierdo - Useros , N . et al . Capture and transfer of HIV - 1 particles by mature dendritic cells converges with the exosome - dissemination pathway . Blood 113 , 2732 LP – 2732741 ( 2009 ) . 73 . Heusermann , W . et al . Exosomes surf on ﬁ lopodia to enter cells at endocytic hot spots , traf ﬁ c within endosomes , and are targeted to the ER . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 173 – 184 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Friedman , J . R . , Dibenedetto , J . R . , West , M . , Rowland , A . A . & Voeltz , G . K . Endoplasmic reticulum - endosome contact increases as endosomes traf ﬁ c and mature . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 1030 – 1040 ( 2013 ) . 75 . Tian , T . , Wang , Y . , Wang , H . , Zhu , Z . & Xiao , Z . Visualizing of the cellular uptake and intracellular traf ﬁ cking of exosomes by live - cell microscopy . J . Cell . Bio - chem . 111 , 488 – 496 ( 2010 ) . 76 . Pu ž ar Dominku š , P . et al . PKH26 labeling of extracellular vesicles : character - ization and cellular internalization of contaminating PKH26 nanoparticles . Biochim . Biophys . Acta - Biomembr . 1860 , 1350 – 1361 ( 2018 ) . 77 . Nakase , I . et al . Arginine - rich cell - penetrating peptide - modi ﬁ ed extracellular vesicles for active macropinocytosis induction and ef ﬁ cient intracellular delivery . Sci . Rep . 7 , 1 – 12 ( 2017 ) . 78 . Suk , J . S . , Xu , Q . , Kim , N . , Hanes , J . & Ensign , L . M . PEGylation as a strategy for improving nanoparticle - based drug and gene delivery . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 99 , 28 – 51 ( 2016 ) . 79 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . et al . PEGylated and targeted extracellular vesicles display enhanced cell speci ﬁ city and circulation time . J . Control Release 224 , 77 – 85 ( 2016 ) . 80 . Antes , T . J . et al . Targeting extracellular vesicles to injured tissue using membrane cloaking and surface display . J . Nanobiotechnology 16 , 61 ( 2018 ) . 81 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . et al . Display of GPI - anchored anti - EGFR nanobodies on extracellular vesicles promotes tumour cell targeting . J . Extracell . Vesicles 5 , 31053 ( 2016 ) . 82 . Kooijmans , S . A . A . , Gitz - Francois , J . J . J . M . , Schiffelers , R . M . & Vader , P . Recombinant phosphatidylserine - binding nanobodies for targeting of extracellular vesicles to tumor cells : a plug - and - play approach . Nanoscale 10 , 2413 – 2426 ( 2018 ) . 83 . Wang , J . - H . et al . Anti - HER2 scFv - directed extracellular vesicle - mediated mRNA - based gene delivery inhibits growth of HER2 - positive human breast tumor xenografts by prodrug activation . Mol . Cancer Ther . 17 , 1133 – 1142 ( 2018 ) . 84 . Ye , Z . et al . Methotrexate - loaded extracellular vesicles functionalized with therapeutic and targeted peptides for the treatment of glioblastoma mul - tiforme . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 10 , 12341 – 12350 ( 2018 ) . 85 . Hein , C . D . , Liu , X . - M . & Wang , D . Click chemistry , a powerful tool for phar - maceutical sciences . Pharm . Res . 25 , 2216 – 2230 ( 2008 ) . 86 . Tian , T . et al . Surface functionalized exosomes as targeted drug delivery vehicles for cerebral ischemia therapy . Biomaterials 150 , 137 – 149 ( 2018 ) . 87 . Nakase , I . et al . Receptor clustering and activation by multivalent interaction through recognition peptides presented on exosomes . Chem . Commun . 53 , 317 – 320 ( 2017 ) . 88 . Cronin , J . , Zhang , X . - Y . & Reiser , J . Altering the tropism of lentiviral vectors through pseudotyping . Curr . Gene . Ther . 5 , 387 – 398 ( 2005 ) . 89 . Meyer , C . et al . Pseudotyping exosomes for enhanced protein delivery in mammalian cells . Int . J . Nanomed . 12 , 3153 – 3170 ( 2017 ) . 90 . Tamura , R . , Uemoto , S . & Tabata , Y . Augmented liver targeting of exosomes by surface modi ﬁ cation with cationized pullulan . Acta Biomater . 57 , 274 – 284 ( 2017 ) . 91 . Pi , F . et al . Nanoparticle orientation to control RNA loading and ligand display on extracellular vesicles for cancer regression . Nat . Nanotechnol . 13 , 82 – 89 ( 2018 ) . 92 . Wang , Y . et al . Nucleolin - targeted extracellular vesicles as a versatile platform for biologics delivery to breast cancer . Theranostics 7 , 1360 – 1372 ( 2017 ) . 93 . Qi , H . et al . Blood exosomes endowed with magnetic and targeting prop - erties for cancer therapy . ACS Nano 10 , 3323 – 3333 ( 2016 ) . 94 . Longatti , A . et al . High af ﬁ nity single - chain variable fragments are speci ﬁ c and versatile targeting motifs for extracellular vesicles . Nanoscale 10 , 14230 – 14244 ( 2018 ) . 95 . Delenclos , M . et al . Investigation of endocytic pathways for the internalization of exosome - associated oligomeric alpha - synuclein . Front . Neurosci . 11 , 1 – 10 ( 2017 ) . 96 . Feng , D . et al . Cellular internalization of exosomes occurs through phago - cytosis . Traf ﬁ c 11 , 675 – 687 ( 2010 ) . 97 . Jia , G . et al . NRP - 1 targeted and cargo - loaded exosomes facilitate simulta - neous imaging and therapy of glioma in vitro and in vivo . Biomaterials 178 , 302 – 316 ( 2018 ) . 98 . Gao , X . et al . Anchor peptide captures , targets , and loads exosomes of diverse origins for diagnostics and therapy . Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaat0195 ( 2018 ) . 99 . Wang , J . et al . The use of RGD - engineered exosomes for enhanced targeting ability and synergistic therapy toward angiogenesis . Nanoscale 9 , 15598 – 15605 ( 2017 ) . 100 . Kim , H . et al . Cardiac - speci ﬁ c delivery by cardiac tissue - targeting peptide - expressing exosomes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 499 , 803 – 808 ( 2018 ) . Murphy et al . Experimental & Molecular Medicine ( 2019 ) 51 : 32 Page 12 of 12 Of ﬁ cial journal of the Korean Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology