Introduction Dictyostelium discoideum is a social , eukaryotic amoebae that normally moves through the soil using chemotaxis to folic acid to search for it’s bacterial food source ( Konijn et al . , 1967 ) . When deprived of a food source , cells in a local territory are attracted together to form a multicellular aggregate by chemotaxis to cAMP ( Barkley , 1969 ; Bonner et al . , 1969 ; Konijn et al . , 1967 ) . The mechanisms of chemotactic motility have been extensively investigated , and it is clear that the actin cytoskeleton provides the structural framework against which force is applied , allowing cells to change their shape . In addition , new actin ﬁlament polymerization provides at least part of the force that drives protrusions during cell motility . How this activity is polarized to allow chemotaxis is not understood ; however , it is clear that cell surface receptors for chemotactic factors lead to signals in the ‘front’ of the cell that are translated into localized activation of the cytoskeleton ( Parent et al . , 1998 ) . The organization of these actin ﬁlaments into functional arrays and the dynamics of these arrays is also not well understood . To date , more than twenty actin - binding proteins have been discovered in D . discoideum . Among these are a number of actin ﬁlament cross - linking proteins , including ABP120 ( Condeelis et al . , 1981 ) , a - actinin ( Fechheimer et al . , 1982 ) , ﬁmbrin ( Prassler et al . , 1997 ) , cortexillins I and II ( Faix et al . , 1996 ) , and a 34 kDa protein ( Fechheimer and Taylor , 1984 ) that presumably provide rigidity to the cortex . Why the cell needs so many different actin cross - linking proteins , and what speciﬁc roles each plays in processes that involve rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton such as chemotaxis , cytokinesis , endocytosis and phagocytosis , is unclear . The myosin motors also play a major role in cytoskeletal function . Non - muscle myosin II assembles into miniﬁlaments , and these ﬁlaments are able to apply force to move actin ﬁlaments relative to each other ( Clarke and Spudich , 1974 ; Hynes et al . , 1987 ; Sheetz et al . , 1986 ) . Myosin II miniﬁlament assembly is regulated by the phosphorylation state of the heavy chain tail ( Egelhoff et al . , 1993 ) and the motor activity is stimulated by phosphorylation of the regulatory light chains ( Griffith et al . , 1987 ) . The essential light chain appears necessary for myosin motor function since myosin lacking this protein assembles miniﬁlaments and binds actin , but has no 3761 Cells are frequently required to move in a local environment that physically restricts locomotion , such as during extravasation or metastatic invasion . In order to model these events , we have developed an assay in which vegetative Dictyostelium amoebae undergo chemotaxis under a layer of agarose toward a source of folic acid [ Laevsky , G . and Knecht , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Biotechniques 31 , 1140 - 1149 ] . As the concentration of agarose is increased from 0 . 5 % to 3 % the cells are increasingly inhibited in their ability to move under the agarose . The contribution of myosin II and actin cross - linking proteins to the movement of cells in this restrictive environment has now been examined . Cells lacking myosin II heavy chain ( mhcA – ) are unable to migrate under agarose overlays of greater than 0 . 5 % , and even at this concentration they move only a short distance from the trough . While attempting to move , the cells become stretched and fragmented due to their inability to retract their uropods . At higher agarose concentrations , the mhcA – cells protrude pseudopods under the agarose , but are unable to pull the cell body underneath . Consistent with a role for myosin II in general cortical stability , GFP - myosin dynamically localizes to the lateral and posterior cortex of cells moving under agarose . Cells lacking the essential light chain of myosin II ( mlcE – ) , have no measurable myosin II motor activity , yet were able to move normally under all agarose concentrations . Mutants lacking either ABP - 120 or a - actinin were also able to move under agarose at rates similar to wild - type cells . We hypothesize that myosin stabilizes the actin cortex through its cross - linking activity rather than its motor function and this activity is necessary and sufficient for the maintenance of cortical integrity of cells undergoing movement in a restrictive environment . The actin cross - linkers a - actinin and ABP - 120 do not appear to play as major a role as myosin II in providing this cortical integrity . Movies available online Key words : Chemotaxis , Myosin , Force , Deformation , Under - agarose assay , Folate , Dictyostelium , Actin cross - linking Summary Cross - linking of actin ﬁlaments by myosin II is a major contributor to cortical integrity and cell motility in restrictive environments Gary Laevsky and David A . Knecht * Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of Connecticut , Storrs , CT 06269 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : Knecht @ UCONN . edu ) Accepted 27 May 2003 Journal of Cell Science 116 , 3761 - 3770 ©2003 The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00684 Research Article JCS ePress online publication date 30 July 2003 3762 measurable actin activated ATPase activity ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Xu et al . , 1996 ) . While not generally thought of as an actin cross - linking protein , myosin II miniﬁlaments presumably also have this capability ( Wachsstock et al . , 1994 ; Humphrey et al . , 2002 ) . Mutants lacking myosin II ( mhcA – ) are able to accomplish both random and chemotactic motility ; however , they move slowly and have defects in pseudopod extension ( Peters et al . , 1988 ; Wessels et al . , 1988 ) . Although mhcA – cells are able to aggregate , they are unable to complete the developmental program ( Knecht and Loomis , 1988 ) . The developmental defect of mhcA – cells appears to be due to their inability to move in a restrictive environment ( Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . During early development , cells acquire surface adhesion proteins and so movement occurs while cells are continually making and breaking adhesive contacts with their neighbors as well as the substratum . Unlike movement on a planar substratum , this form of motility is analogous to the movement of metastatic cancer cells away from a primary tumor , or the extravasation of immune cells through capillaries and into a wound site . It requires cells to overcome a barrier of resistance to their movement . Movement in restrictive conditions is also important for Dictyostelium development . Ponte et al . showed that while development of actin - binding protein mutants on agar plates is normal , development on soil plates is defective ( Ponte et al . , 2000 ) . Soil is presumably a more restrictive environment for cell motility than a planar agar surface . Myosin II seems to be essential for this multi - dimensional process of migration , apparently by providing cortical integrity , since the mhcA – cells became stretched and distorted when attempting to move in aggregation streams ( Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . Surprisingly , cells lacking the essential light chain ( mlcE – ) behave normally in this environment indicating that the motor activity of myosin is not required for motility in restrictive conditions ( Xu et al . , 2001 ) . Since the environment of aggregation streams is so complex , we sought to develop a simpler and more versatile means by which cell motility in a restrictive environment could be investigated . An under - agarose folate chemotaxis assay has been developed in which cells are induced to move between a planar substratum ( glass or plastic ) and a layer of deformable agarose of varying stiffness ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . Using this system , we have investigated the movement of cells lacking speciﬁc cytoskeletal proteins . Consistent with our previous results , it appears that the actin binding activity of myosin II , and not the motor activity , is required for movement and cortical stability in this restrictive environment . None of the other actin cross - linkers tested have as major a role in this process as myosin II . Materials and Methods Cell culture and conditions All cell cultures were grown in 100 mm plastic Petri dishes containing 10 ml of HL - 5 medium [ 5 g Bacto (cid:226) protease peptone # 2 ( Difco , Detroit , MI , USA ) , 5 g BBL thiotone E , 10 g glucose , 5 g yeast extract , 0 . 35 g Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 35 g KH 2 PO 4 , 0 . 1 mg / ml ampicillin , 0 . 1 mg / ml dihydrostreptomycin , to 1 l , pH 6 . 7 ] . NC4A2 is an axenic cell line derived from the wild - type NC4 without mutagenesis ( Knecht and Shelden , 1995 ; Morrison and Harwood , 1992 ) . HK321 is a myosin II heavy chain null mutant ( mhcA – ) derived from NC4A2 ( Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . mlcE – is an essential light chain mutant in which the light chain is replaced by the thy1 selectable marker ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Pollenz et al . , 1992 ) . ELC + is a cell line in which the essential light chain gene is integrated back into the genome of mlcE – cells in order to rescue mlcE – function ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Pollenz et al . , 1992 ) . This cell line was used as a control for the mlcE – cells since the thy – parental of both cell lines ( JH10 ) moves poorly in the conditions of the under - agarose assay . a - actinin and ABP - 120 mutants were generated via homologous targeting in an AX2 parental line ( Rivero et al . , 1999 ) . Cell lines containing the actin binding domain ( ABD ) of actin binding protein 120 ( ABP120 ) fused to green ﬂuorescent protein ( ABD - GFP ) ( Pang et al . , 1998 ) were used to localize F - actin . A GFP - myosin expression plasmid ( Moores et al . , 1996 ) was used to determine myosin localization . Under - agarose assay The under - agarose assay was performed as described previously with minor modiﬁcations ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . 14 ml of SeaKem (cid:226) GTG agarose ( BMA , Rockland , ME , USA ) , made with SM medium ( Sussman and Sussman , 1967 ) , was poured into 100 mm plastic Petri dishes . The agarose was allowed to solidify for 1 hour at 22°C . Three 2 mm wide troughs were cut 5 mm apart with a standard razor blade ( 4 cm length ) using a template ( Fig . 1 ) . 100 m l of 0 . 1 mM folic acid ( Research Organics , Cleveland , OH , USA ) was added to the center trough and allowed to form a gradient for 1 hour at room temperature . Cells were harvested , adjusted to 1 · 10 6 cells / ml for individual analysis and 1 · 10 7 cells / ml for population analysis . 100 m l of cell suspension was then added to the peripheral troughs . Analysis of cell movement Images were taken of the cell populations using a Zeiss (cid:226) IM inverted microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) , Paultek Imaging Inc . CCD camera ( Advanced Imaging Concepts , Princeton , NJ , USA ) , Scion Inc . LG3 frame grabber ( MVI , Avon , MA , USA ) and NIH Image software ( developed at the US National Institutes of Health and available on the Internet at http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / ) . Overall distance traveled by cells under - agarose was determined by measuring the average distance the ten front most cells in a ﬁeld of view were from the trough edge , approximately 3 hours after the cells were applied to the trough . The analysis of the movement of mhcA – cells was done near the trough edge as soon as they could be seen to have moved underneath the agarose in order to examine cells prior to stretching and fragmentation . Individual cell speed and direction change was determined using DIAS (cid:226) software ( Solltech , Oakdale , IA , USA ) . Speed was calculated using the displacement of the centroid from frame to frame during 1 - minute intervals . Direction change was measured as the absolute value of the difference in the direction of movement of the centroid from frame to frame , measured in degrees . Cross sectional area measurements were made using NIH Image software . The cross sectional area is measured as the area of the image of a cell seen using phase contrast microscopy . Fluorescence imaging For ﬂuorescence imaging experiments , 0 . 75 ml of agarose was added to a Rose chamber ( Rose et al . , 1958 ) , or 4 ml to a 60 mm glass bottom Petri dish ( Willco Wells , Amsterdam , Netherlands ) so that cells could be imaged through a 0 . 17 mm thick glass coverslip . Two troughs were cut in the Rose chamber with a 10 mm long razor blade , and the amount of cells and folate was decreased proportionally . Confocal imaging of GFP - labeled cells was performed using a Leica TCS SP2 confocal microscope system ( Leica Microsystems , Heidelberg , Germany ) and an MRC 600 ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , USA ) equipped with a 25 mW krypton - argon laser and COMOS software . Journal of Cell Science 116 ( 18 ) 3763 Myosin II maintains cortical integrity Results Motility of cytoskeletal mutants under agarose of varying concentrations A cell is generally able to generate a particular shape and to change shape as desired using internally generated forces . In order to do this , the cell must be able to overcome the environmental forces that resist these processes , such as membrane tension , hydrostatic pressure , ﬂuid shear etc . The shape changes are generally accepted to be driven by the actin cytoskeleton , which together with accessory proteins make up the cell cortex . Therefore , we use the term ‘cortical integrity’ to refer to the structural properties of the cell cortex , i . e . its ability to deal with external or internal mechanical forces . When cells are attached to a planar substratum and moving in ﬂuid , there is little in the way of external forces to resist cell shape changes . However , in the under - agarose chemotaxis assay , cells move between the plastic surface and a sheet of agarose ( Fig . 1 ) . As the cells move out of the trough to move up the folate gradient , they must deform the agarose upward and at the same time become ﬂattened ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . As the stiffness of the agarose increases , cells have more and more difficulty deforming it , until at 3 % agarose , the wild - type cells can no longer move at all . This is likely to occur because at this concentration , the cells no longer have sufficient cortical integrity to deform the agarose sheet upwards . If so , then cells with reduced cortical stiffness should show defects in moving under lower concentrations of agarose compared with wild - type cells . In order to examine this possibility , several mutants that might be expected to have reduced cortical integrity were examined . ABP - 120 and a - actinin are the two major actin cross - linking proteins found in the cortex of Dictyostelium cells ( Condeelis et al . , 1984 ) . Gene disruption mutants have been isolated that lack either of these proteins and these cells have measurable but not dramatic alterations in cytoskeletal function and motility ( Cox et al . , 1992 ; Cox et al . , 1996 ; Noegel et al . , 1989 ) . However , mutants lacking either protein showed normal movement in the under - agarose chemotaxis assay ( Table 1 ) . This result indicates that neither protein is required for under - agarose motility . Cells lacking myosin II ( mhcA – ) are able to move on a liquid covered planar surface at rates about one third of wild - type cells ( Wessels et al . , 1988 ) . However , these mutants are unable to penetrate aggregation streams , which are presumed to be a viscous restrictive environment ( Clow and McNally , 1999 ; Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . In order to examine more directly whether this defect is the result of their inability to move in a restrictive environment , the under - agarose chemotaxis assay was used to examine the motility of the mhcA – cells . In 0 . 5 % agarose , wild - type cells moved relatively freely out of the troughs within 1 hour and continued to do so over the next 9 hours reaching a distance of about 3000 m m from the trough ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . In contrast , few mhcA – moved out of the trough , and those that did never migrated more than 500 m m from the trough ( Fig . 2 ) . Because of this , the movement of individual mhcA – cells was measured near the trough edge soon after exit . The speed of these cells was about two thirds of wild - type cell speed and their movement was directed toward the folate trough ( Table 1 ) . At concentrations of agarose 1 % or above , the mhcA – cells did not move out of the troughs at all ( Figs 2 and 3 ) . In order to conﬁrm that the inhibition of mhcA – movement was due to the stiffness of the agarose and not the adherence of the agarose to the plastic dish , the same experiment was performed except that the agarose layer was either rotated 180° or lifted out and placed in a fresh dish prior to cutting the troughs . The same results were obtained when the agarose was freed from the surface in this way ( data not shown ) indicating that it is the local deformation of the agarose and not the adhesion of the agarose to the surface that inhibits the movement of mhcA – cells . AGAROSE CHEMOATTRACTANT CELL CELLS Fig . 1 . Under - agarose chemotactic assay . Three parallel troughs are cut into the agarose . The center trough is ﬁlled with folate and cells are placed in the peripheral troughs . Cells then migrate towards the folate , deforming the agarose upwards while simultaneously ﬂattening themselves . Arrow indicates direction of cell movement . Table 1 . Computerized motion analysis of the movement of individual cells in the under agarose assay 0 . 5 % Agarose 2 . 5 % Agarose Speed Direction Surface area Speed Direction Surface area ( m m / min ) changes ( m m 2 ) ( m m / min ) changes ( m m 2 ) NC4A2 6 . 4±1 . 3 17 . 5±6 . 6 189±30 . 3 3 . 4±1 . 2 13 . 8±13 384±78 . 5 AX2 7 . 4±1 . 9 16 . 7±5 . 7 269±59 . 9 3 . 5±0 . 7 14 . 4±11 476±114 . 0 MhcA – 4 . 2±1 . 2 * 15 . 7±6 . 7 311±49 . 0 * na na na ELC + 7 . 2±1 . 2 19 . 4±11 . 4 198±26 . 7 4 . 7±1 . 0 13 . 2±10 . 7 364±74 . 8 ELC – 7 . 2±1 . 1 19 . 4±7 . 6 188±17 . 9 3 . 7±0 . 7 11 . 1±12 . 1 317±53 . 0 ABP120 – 5 . 9±0 . 8 17 . 1±6 . 6 270±34 . 7 4 . 0±0 . 6 14 . 6±8 . 4 493±90 . 3 a - actinin – 7 . 0±1 . 2 19 . 6±8 . 1 270±33 . 6 4 . 9±0 . 8 19 . 5±5 . 9 516±132 . 7 Individual cell speed , the number of direction changes and surface area were determined as described in the Materials and Methods section . Transmitted light images were acquired under indicated agarose concentration and quantiﬁed using DIAS ® imaging software . Surface area measurements were determined using NIH software . * Signiﬁcant deviation from parental control values . The data are means±s . d . ( n ‡ 10 ) . Differences between means were checked for signiﬁcance ( P < 0 . 05 ) with a two - way analysis of variance and the Student’s t - test . AX2 is the parent of 120 – and 95 – cell lines . NC4A2 is the parent of the mhcA – cells . The ELC + serves as a control for the ELC – cell line ( see Materials and Methods ) . na , not applicable . 3764 Effects of agarose overlay on mhcA – morphology When moving under 0 . 5 % agarose , the mhcA – cells did not move as far or as fast as the wild - type cells , however , the most unusual aspect of their behavior was the dramatic elongation of the cells as they attempted to move ( Figs 3 , 4 , 5 ) . This behavior is reminiscent of mhcA – cells moving in wild - type aggregation streams using the chimeric aggregation assay ( Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ; Xu et al . , 1996 ) ( see Discussion ) . However , it was difficult in that assay to pinpoint the precise cause of the stretching . In the under - agarose assay , the stretched appearance of cells was found to be due to a failure of retraction of the rear of the cell body . Dictyostelium cells do not normally have a well - deﬁned uropod , but this process generated a structure resembling the uropod of mammalian cells . Time - lapse analysis of cell movement indicated that the rear of the cell would often become stuck to the surface while the cell body continued to move . This uropod would eventually only be connected by a thin bridge of cytoplasm and this bridge sometimes broke as the cell body moved away ( Fig . 4 ) . Even cells that did not fragment ceased moving about 500 m m from the trough edge ( Fig . 2 ) . The posterior of wild - type cells is enriched in F - actin as shown by the bright ﬂuorescence of the GFP - ABD120 probe in this region ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . The posterior of mhcA – cells is also enriched in F - actin and the probe is concentrated in the cytoplasts released from mhcA – cells ( Fig . 5 ) . This loss of cellular actin may account for the eventual cessation of movement by these cells ( Fig . 5 ) . However , it is interesting to note that cells that do not fragment also eventually stop moving about 500 m m from the trough edge . Previously , we showed that increasing the concentration of agarose results in an increased surface area of wild - type cells , indicating that the cell is less able to deform the agarose upward and becomes more compressed and ﬂattened as a result ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . If the cortex of the mhcA – cells were ﬂaccid , one would expect that they would have a greater surface area than wild - type cells at the same agarose concentration . The elongated appearance of the mhcA – cells makes this comparison more complicated , however , the mhcA – cells that were able to move under 0 . 5 % agarose did have a signiﬁcantly greater surface area than wild - type cells ( Table 1 ) . There are two possible reasons why the mhcA – cells might not be able to exit the troughs at high agarose concentrations . The ﬁrst possibility relates to their behavior when moving under 0 . 5 % agarose . The stretching and fragmentation indicates that the cells have trouble releasing and retracting their uropods . While this is seen to some extent when mhcA – cells are moving in liquid media without an agarose overlay ( D . A . K . , unpublished observations ) , it is far more dramatic under agarose . Thus it is possible that at 1 % and higher agarose concentrations , this problem is magniﬁed . In this scenario , the cells would not move beyond the trough edge because once they move the cell body underneath the agarose at the edge , they become trapped because they cannot retract their uropods and move any farther . If this were the case , we would see stretched cells at the very edge of the trough . The other possibility is that the cells are unable to deform the agarose upward and bring the midbody ( the thickest part of the cell ) underneath , indicating a weakness in the ability of the general cell cortex to deform the Journal of Cell Science 116 ( 18 ) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Time ( hours ) D i s t a n ce ( m m ) AX2 ELC + ELC - mhcA - Fig . 2 . Distance traveled by cells under 0 . 5 % agarose . At each time point ( indicated in hours ) the distance that the ten front - most cells in one ﬁeld of view had traveled from the trough edge was determined . AX2 ( wild type ) , ELC – ( essential light chain mutant ) , ELC + ( essential light chain mutant rescued by expression of essential light chain cDNA ) , and mhcA – ( myosin heavy chain null mutants ) . Fig . 3 . Cell morphology under 2 . 5 and 0 . 5 % agarose . Images of cells under agarose were acquired 5 hours after wild - type cells were added to the trough and 2 hours after mhcA – cells were added . The trough edge interferes with the imaging , so the optical ﬁeld was place about 300 m m from the edge of the trough . AX2 ( wild type ) , ELC – ( essential light chain mutant ) , ELC + ( essential light chain mutant rescued by expression of essential light chain cDNA ) , and HK321 ( myosin heavy chain null mutants ) . 3765 Myosin II maintains cortical integrity agarose . In order to distinguish between these possibilities , mhcA – cells were examined at the edge of the trough as they tried to move out under the agarose ( Fig . 6 ) . The cells moved to the edge of the trough , and then frequently extended pseudopods under the agarose sheet , but the cell body was never able to move underneath . However , the cells were able to withdraw the pseudopod and continue moving along the agarose interface . Stretched cells under the agarose at the edge were not observed indicating that uropod retraction was not the cause of the defect . This data indicates that the defect in mhcA – cells is in creating the force necessary to push the stiffer agarose out of the way and move the cell body underneath . Essential light chain mutants move normally under agarose Myosin II from cells lacking the essential light chain of myosin ( mlcE – ) has actin - binding activity , but lacks ATPase motor function ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Xu et al . , 2001 ) . In the chimeric aggregation assay , mlcE – cells moved normally and did not become elongated like mhcA – cells ( Xu et al . , 2001 ) . MlcE – cells were tested in the under - agarose chemotaxis assay to see if the motor function of myosin was necessary for movement in this restrictive environment . Under all agarose concentrations tested , mlcE – cells moved the same distance and at the same speed as the control rescued cells in which the essential light chain was reintroduced into the cells ( Table 1 ) . DIAS analysis of individual cell behavior indicated that the rate of direction change was consistent with cells undergoing positive chemotaxis , as opposed to cells moving randomly ( Table 1 ) ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . The mlcE – mutants maintained a surface area of about 198 m m 2 , similar to that of the control cells ( Fig . 2 , Table 1 ) and became comparably ﬂatter under 2 . 5 % agarose . Morphologically , no obvious difference was seen between the two cell lines when viewed under agarose ( Fig . 3 ) . Localization of F - actin and myosin II during under - agarose chemotaxis In order to determine if the localization of F - actin in mlcE – cells was altered , the GFP - ABD120 probe was introduced into the cells ( Pang et al . , 1998 ) . This probe dynamically associates Fig . 4 . Fragmentation of mhcA – cells moving under agarose . Myosin mutant cells were imaged under 0 . 5 % agarose , within 500 m m of trough edge . The origin of the gradient and direction of cell movement is indicated by the white arrow . The montage shows images of a single cell over time as it becomes stretched and fragmented . The black arrow indicates a cell fragment left behind . Numbers indicate time in seconds . A QuickTime movie showing the fragmentation events can be viewed at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental / . Fig . 5 . GFP - ABD120 localization in mhcA – cells under agarose . Confocal images taken 100 seconds apart of GFP - ABD120 localization in mhcA – cell . The cell is moving in the direction indicated by the arrow . GFP - ABD localizes to F - actin primarily in the rear of the cell . Magniﬁcation is 63 · with a z - section thickness of 0 . 5 m m . A QuickTime movie showing the dynamic localization can be viewed at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental / . 3766 with F - actin ﬁlaments in live cells allowing visualization of the actin cortex . In both wild - type and mlcE – cells moving under agarose , the probe localized to an arc around the posterior and rear edge of the cell and transiently to new protrusions at the leading edge ( Fig . 7A , B ) . No signiﬁcant difference in the localization of this probe was observed in mlcE – cells . Previous work has shown that myosin is distributed throughout the cortex in cells in buffer or media , but when placed under agarose , it rapidly relocalizes to the rear of the cell ( Neujahr et al . , 1997 ; Yumura et al . , 1984 ) . In order to examine the localization of myosin II during under - agarose chemotaxis , wild - type and mlcE – cells , expressing myosin II - GFP were examined . Confocal optical slices about 0 . 5 m m thick were acquired every 5 seconds at a point just above the surface of the coverslip . In both cell types , myosin II is concentrated in an arc at the rear of cells undergoing under - agarose chemotaxis ( Fig . 7C , D ) . In addition to its prevalent localization in the rear , myosin II is also found to transiently localize to small patches of the cortex at the front of the cell . No signiﬁcant differences in myosin - GFP localization were observed between the wild - type and the mlcE – cells during under - agarose motility . In order to visualize the three - dimensional localization of myosin through the volume of the cell , 0 . 2 m m thick z - sections were acquired with the confocal microscope . The cells are about 4 - 5 m m thick under this condition , and actin ( not shown ) and myosin II are present in an arc or ring at the edge of the cell throughout much of this volume ( Fig . 8 ) . There is much less myosin near the dorsal surface of the cell . This conical wall of myosin ( and actin ) sometimes extends all the way around the cell ( Fig . 8 ) , but is frequently just in the rear half of the cortex as in the cells shown in Fig . 7 . The only signiﬁcant difference between wild - type and mlcE – cells was that the later frequently had small round dots of ﬂuorescence in the rear of the cell , which is probably results from a disassembly defect in myosin lacking the essential light chain . We hypothesize that the cortical rim of acto - myosin is the structural element that allows the cell to resist the downward pressure of the agarose and move in this environment . Discussion Movement of cells on a planar surface requires protrusion of the membrane at the leading edge , adhesion of this new protrusion to the surface , and retraction of the cell body . Depending upon where adhesion to the surface is concentrated , adhesions must either be released from the surface or the pull of the cell body must overcome the force of adhesion . It has been proposed that myosin II is the contractile motor that causes tail retraction . However , for many cell types , there is not a distinct ‘retraction’ event . Instead , the cell moves smoothly along with protrusion and retraction apparently occurring simultaneously . Also , it is clear that cells lacking myosin II can move on surfaces , albeit at a slower rate than wild - type cells ( Wessels et al . , 1988 ) . If the cell is moving in a restrictive environment or a three dimensional matrix , the situation becomes even more complex as there is no longer a ‘dorsal’ or ‘ventral’ side of the cell and adhesion can take place anywhere on the Journal of Cell Science 116 ( 18 ) Fig . 6 . mhcA – cells are unable to move the cell body under the edge of a 2 % agarose trough . MhcA – cells were imaged at the edge of the trough . The dotted line indicates trough edge and the numbers indicate the time in seconds . The vertical white arrow points towards the origin of the chemoattractant gradient and the direction of cell movement . The cells can be seen extending pseudopods under the agarose ( arrows ) , but the cell body remains in the trough so the cells cannot move up the gradient . A QuickTime movie showing the transition event can be viewed at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental / . Fig . 7 . Localization of F - actin and myosin II during under - agarose migration . Confocal images taken of cells moving in the direction of the arrow under 2 . 0 % agarose . The images shown are at 30 - 40 second intervals in a focal plane a few microns above the substratum . ( A ) Wild - type cells expressing GFP - myosin II . ( B ) mlcE – cells expressing GFP - Myosin II . ( C ) Wild - type cells expressing GFP - ABD120 to visualize F - actin dynamics . ( D ) mlcE – cells expressing GFP - ABD120 . The localization and dynamics of actin and myosin II are not signiﬁcantly altered in mlcE – cells . QuickTime movies of the ﬂuorescence localization can be viewed at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / supplemental / . 3767 Myosin II maintains cortical integrity surface . We have begun to investigate the issue of how a cell ‘squeezes’ itself through a restrictive environment that provides adhesive surfaces on more than one side . In this situation , the cell is subjected to additional stresses as it must push against resisting structures or resist the pushing of other cells . We use the term cortical integrity to refer to the ability of the actin cortex to apply and resist these external forces . An example of this type of movement would be a neutrophil or macrophage extravasating through a capillary wall , or a metastatic cancer cell invading a tissue layer . Our results indicate that myosin II is a surprisingly important player in the maintenance of cortical integrity , especially when a cell is challenged to move in a restrictive environment . Even more surprising is the ﬁnding that this action of myosin II does not appear to require the normal contractile activity . The most likely interpretation of this result is that ELC - myosin II retains the ability to bind and cross - link actin ﬁlaments and thereby the cortex , in addition to its ability to rearrange those ﬁlaments when called upon to contract . This result is consistent with rheological measurements that show that mixing myosin II with actin ﬁlaments in the presence of ADP can dramatically stiffen the matrix ( Humphrey et al . , 2002 ) . How the cell might regulate this aspect of myosin function is unknown , but a precedent exists in the latch state of smooth muscle myosin where force production is not always directly linked to actin binding ( Sweeney , 1998 ) . We , and others have previously shown that cells lacking myosin II are unable to accomplish morphogenetic movements ( Clow and McNally , 1999 ; Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . In aggregation streams the mhcA – cells were unable to move amidst the mass of adhered cells and became dramatically stretched as they tried to make and break contacts with neighboring cells in this environment ( Shelden and Knecht , 1995 ) . The defect was interpreted as a failure in cortical integrity , allowing cells to be stretched abnormally by externally applied forces . Surprisingly , cells lacking the essential light chains of myosin II behaved normally in this chimeric aggregation assay ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) . In the absence of the essential light chain , myosin is found associated with the actin cortex , so presumably can bind actin , but there is minimal actin - activated ATPase motor activity ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Xu et al . , 1996 ) . This result indicated that the motor activity of myosin II is not required for the maintenance of cortical integrity . We envision at least three distinct force - generating steps in movement under agarose . First is the protrusive force at the leading lamella or pseudopod causing forward movement of the leading edge . Because this part of the cell is relatively thin , and there is a small space between the agarose and the planar surface , the agarose concentrations we are using are probably not especially inhibitory to this protrusion process . The second step is the upward deformation of the agarose necessary to allow the thickest part of the cell ( the nuclear region ) to B . WT in 0 . 5 % and 2 . 5 % C . mhcA - in 0 . 5 % and 2 . 5 % D . mhcA - in 0 . 5 % A . WT in 0 . 5 % and 2 . 5 % Agarose Fig . 8 . Three - dimensional localization of myosin II in cells moving under agarose . z - series through the cells were acquired with a confocal microscope while the cells were moving under agarose . The sections shown are spaced approximately 0 . 2 m m apart . ( A ) Wild - type cells expressing myosin - GFP . ( B ) mlcE – cells expressing myosin - GFP . In both cases , the edge of the cell contains myosin - GFP throughout much of the 4 - 5 m m thickness . This would form a vertical wall of myosin and actin at the edge . The extent of this wall from front to back of the cell varies from cell to cell and over time . In many cells , the wall is primarily in an arc around the posterior of the cell as shown in Fig . 7A , B . Fig . 9 . Model of myosin II function in cortical stability . Cross hatching indicates cross - linking function of myosin II in a cortical acto - myosin complex . Arrows indicate direction of cell movement and downward pressure resultant from resistance to deformation of agarose . ( A , B ) Deformation of agarose and ﬂattening of cell that occurs during wild - type cell migration under agarose . ( C , D ) Lack of cross - linking occurring as a result of loss of myosin heavy chain function . ( C ) The ability of the cell to extend a protrusion under the agarose similar to wild - type cells . In D , although the cell was able to retract its midbody and subsequently migrate ; downward pressure imposed upon the cell by the agarose results in the uropods not being withdrawn . 3768 squeeze underneath . This localized upward deformation as the cell crawls was shown to occur by tracking the movement of ﬂuorescent beads embedded in the agarose ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2001 ) . As the agarose concentration is increased , it becomes more and more difficult for the cells to deform the agarose , and so movement slows down and eventually ceases around 3 % agarose . The third step is the retraction of the rear of the cell . Dictyostelium cells do not have well deﬁned uropods , and therefore it was not obvious that this would be separate from the translocation of the cell body . However , the ﬁnding that cells lacking myosin II have long trailing extensions of cytoplasm when moving under 0 . 5 % agarose indicates that the detachment of the rear of the cell is indeed a separate and important issue in translocation . However , the stretching is not simply a matter of increased surface adhesion . Jay et al . examined the movement of mhcA – cells on surfaces of varying adhesiveness and did not observe the uropods being left behind ( Jay et al . , 1995 ) . Instead the mhcA – cells were unable to move at all on sticky surfaces that the wild - type could still crawl on . The inability of the mhcA – mutant cells to move under concentrations of agarose above 0 . 5 % is likely to be a different problem . In this situation , the cells still make protrusions under the agarose at the trough edge , but the cell body never ﬂattens and continues up the gradient . Thus this is not a problem of rear retraction , since the cells never get the uropod underneath the agarose . A clue to understanding this phenotype , comes from visualization of the dynamic localization of GFP - myosin in these cells . Actin and myosin are not prominent in the ventral or dorsal cortex of cells under agarose , but are enriched in the peripheral cortex , either in the rear portion as an arc , or surrounding the cell ( Figs 7 and 8 ) . This vertical ridge of acto - myosin is likely to be responsible for deforming the agarose upward and allowing the nucleus to ﬁt underneath . In the absence of myosin II , we presume that the cortex does not have the stiffness to deform higher agarose concentrations , and so the nucleus cannot ﬁt underneath and the cells are trapped at the trough edge . The model in Fig . 9 explains the events proposed to occur during protrusion and retraction events . The crosshatching indicates the orthogonal network of actin ﬁlaments that lie beneath the membrane . This network would be held together by actin binding proteins , such as ABP - 120 , a - actinin , cortexillin , talin and myosin II . The wild - type , mlcE – and mhcA – cells are able to extend protrusions under the agarose ( Fig . 9A , C ) . The linkage between the pseudopod and the cell body in wild - type and mlcE – cells is retained and the cell moves as an integral unit under the agarose ( Fig . 9B ) . The mhcA – cell ( Fig . 9D ) is able to retract the nuclear region under 0 . 5 % agarose , but not under 2 . 5 % agarose . At the higher agarose concentrations , the cell apparently cannot produce sufficient force to make further progress . The implication of these results is that the cell cortex acts to integrate the cell as a whole , and myosin II is crucial to integrating the actin cortex . The surprising result is that normal contractile activity is not needed for myosin II to carry out this function . It is possible that some contractile activity below the limit of our assays is present in ELC - myosin , and this is sufficient to allow myosin II to integrate the cortex . It has been determined that Aspergillus nidulans myosin I mutants with less than 1 % of wild - type actin - activated MgATPase activity retain essential in vivo functions ( Liu et al . , 2001 ) . However , we have shown that mlcE – cells cannot undergo contraction of detergent extracted cortices , which would be a direct test of contractile activity of myosin in situ ( Xu et al . , 2001 ) . Another possibility is that because the actin - activated ATPase activity is lost in the mlcE – mutant , this mutant myosin has become a permanent actin cross - linker and this cross - linking activity replaces the normal contractile activity of myosin . This is possible , but it seems unlikely that such a dramatic change in function could allow cells to behave so normally or would allow normal organization of the actin ﬁlament network . We favor a third hypothesis , that as in smooth muscle , non - muscle myosin II is not constitutively applying force to the actin cytoskeleton , but can enter a state in which it is bound to actin like a cross - linker , while not actively engaged in the ATPase cycle . Myosin II may only be called upon to contract when the cell changes shape , as happens in cytokinesis . The mlcE – mutation would allow the myosin II to function in its cross - linking state , but not enter a contractile mode . Our data indirectly indicates that the cortex of mhcA – is less stiff than wild - type cells . Attempts have also been made to directly measure the cortical integrity of cells using biophysical techniques . The results are contradictory and confusing . Pasternak ( Pasternak et al . , 1989 ) showed only a slight decrease ( 32 % ) in the cortical stiffness of mhcA – cells using a ‘cell poker’ that measured the resistance of the cell to inward deformation . Egelhoff ( Egelhoff et al . , 1996 ) , using a vibrating glass rod , measured a 50 % decrease in cortical stiffness in myosin II mutant cells . However , Merkel et al . ( Merkel et al . , 2000 ) used a pipette aspiration system and found a dramatic increase in the resistance of mhcA – cells to outward deformation from a suction pipette , indicating a stiffer cortex in the myosin II mutants . Feneberg et al . ( Feneberg et al . , 2001 ) used a microrheology technique based on colloidal magnetic tweezers to measure the viscoelastic forces within the cytoplasm . They found the apparent viscosity of myosin II null mutants was higher , also implying a stiffer cortex . Some of the discrepancies may be the result of the methodologies used . Live cell imaging of the actin cortex in cells containing the GFP - ABD120 probe shows that any time a cell makes contact with an object ( another cell , a bead or an obstacle ) , there is a rapid accumulation of F - actin in the contact region ( D . A . K . , unpublished observations ) . Thus , application of a pipette or poker may lead to an actin polymerization response that will interfere with the measurements . By using a biological assay , we have directly evaluated the functionality of the cortex in what is to the cells , a relatively normal environment . ABP - 120 and a - actinin are , by mass , the two major actin cross - linking proteins in the cell ( Condeelis et al . , 1981 ; Condeelis and Vahey , 1982 ) . Thus it is surprising that mutants lacking these proteins had no altered phenotype in this assay . This result indicates that not only is myosin II important for cortical integrity , but that so far , it is the single most important protein providing this function . Clearly , cells lacking myosin II have some cortical integrity or they would not be able to move at all . This residual cortical integrity is presumably supplied by the myriad of other actin cross - linkers or the rheological properties of actin ﬁlaments themselves . Our model is not intended to suggest that cells do not require the motor activity of myosin II . Mutants lacking the essential light chain ( and thus motor activity ) are unable to divide in Journal of Cell Science 116 ( 18 ) 3769 Myosin II maintains cortical integrity suspension and have defects in multicellular development ( Chen et al . , 1995 ) . In addition , we have previously shown that myosin II contractile activity is needed for cells to generate shape in suspension or to elongate vertically off a surface ( Shelden and Knecht , 1996 ) and the essential light chain mutants are defective in both functions ( Xu et al . , 2001 ) . Our model , therefore , proposes that myosin plays a major role in maintaining the physical integrity of the actin cortex , and that its function can be separated into contractile and actin - binding activities . Thanks to Francisco Rivero , Rex Chisholm and James Spudich for strains and constructs . Also thanks to Juliet Lee and Catherine Green for careful reading of the manuscript , thoughtful discussions and encouragement . This work was funded by a grant from the NIH to D . A . K . ( GM40599 ) . References Barkley , D . S . ( 1969 ) . Adenosine - 3 ¢ , 5 ¢ - phosphate : identiﬁcation as acrasin in a species of cellular slime mold . Science 165 , 1133 - 1134 . Bonner , J . T . , Barkley , D . S . , Hall , E . M . , Konijn , T . M . , Mason , J . W . , O’Keefe , G . , 3rd and Wolfe , P . B . ( 1969 ) . Acrasin , Acrasinase , and the sensitivity to acrasin in Dictyostelium discoideum . Dev . Biol . 20 , 72 - 87 . Chen , T . L . , Kowalczyk , P . A . , Ho , G . and Chisholm , R . L . ( 1995 ) . Targeted disruption of the Dictyostelium myosin essential light chain gene produces cells defective in cytokinesis and morphogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 3207 - 3218 . Clarke , M . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1974 ) . Biochemical and structural studies of actomyosin - like proteins from non - muscle cells . Isolation and characterization of myosin from amoebae of Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Mol . Biol . 86 , 209 - 222 . Clow , P . A . and McNally , J . G . ( 1999 ) . In vivo observations of myosin II dynamics support a role in rear retraction . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1309 - 1323 . Condeelis , J . and Vahey , M . ( 1982 ) . A calcium - and pH - regulated protein from Dictyostelium discoideum that cross - links actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 466 - 471 . Condeelis , J . , Salisbury , J . and Fujiwara , K . ( 1981 ) . A new protein that gels F actin in the cell cortex of Dictyostelium discoideum . Nature 292 , 161 - 163 . Condeelis , J . , Vahey , M . , Carboni , J . M . , DeMey , J . and Ogihara , S . ( 1984 ) . Properties of the 120 , 000 - and 95 , 000 - dalton actin - binding proteins from Dictyostelium discoideum and their possible functions in assembling the cytoplasmic matrix . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 119s - 126s . Cox , D . , Condeelis , J . , Wessels , D . , Soll , D . , Kern , H . and Knecht , D . A . ( 1992 ) . Targeted disruption of the ABP - 120 gene leads to cells with altered motility . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 943 - 955 . Cox , D . , Wessels , D . , Soll , D . R . , Hartwig , J . and Condeelis , J . ( 1996 ) . Re - expression of ABP - 120 rescues cytoskeletal , motility , and phagocytosis defects of ABP - 120 ( – ) Dictyostelium mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 803 - 823 . Egelhoff , T . T . , Lee , R . J . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain phosphorylation sites regulate myosin ﬁlament assembly and localization in vivo . Cell 75 , 363 - 371 . Egelhoff , T . T . , Naismith , T . V . and Brozovich , F . V . ( 1996 ) . Myosin - based cortical tension in Dictyostelium resolved into heavy and light chain - regulated components . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 17 , 269 - 274 . Faix , J . , Steinmetz , M . , Boves , H . , Kammerer , R . A . , Lottspeich , F . , Mintert , U . , Murphy , J . , Stock , A . , Aebi , U . and Gerisch , G . ( 1996 ) . Cortexillins , major determinants of cell shape and size , are actin - bundling proteins with a parallel coiled - coil tail . Cell 86 , 631 - 642 . Fechheimer , M . , Brier , J . , Rockwell , M . , Luna , E . and Taylor , D . ( 1982 ) . A calcium and pH regulated actin binding protein from D . discoideum . Cell Motility 2 , 287 - 308 . Fechheimer , M . and Taylor , D . L . ( 1984 ) . Isolation and characterization of a 30 , 000 - dalton calcium - sensitive actin cross - linking protein from Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 4514 - 4520 . Feneberg , W . , Westphal , M . and Sackmann , E . ( 2001 ) . Dictyostelium cells’ cytoplasm as an active viscoplastic body . Eur . Biophys . J . 30 , 284 - 294 . Griffith , L . M . , Downs , S . M . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Myosin light chain kinase and myosin light chain phosphatase from Dictyostelium : effects of reversible phosphorylation on myosin structure and function . J . Cell Biol . 104 , 1309 - 1323 . Humphrey , D . , Duggan , C . , Saha , D . , Smith , D . and Kas , J . ( 2002 ) . Active ﬂuidization of polymer networks through molecular motors . Nature 416 , 41341 - 41346 . Hynes , T . R . , Block , S . M . , White , B . T . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Movement of myosin fragments in vitro : domains involved in force production . Cell 48 , 953 - 963 . Jay , P . Y . , Pham , P . A . , Wong , S . A . and Elson , E . L . ( 1995 ) . A mechanical function of myosin II in cell motility . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 387 - 393 . Knecht , D . A . and Loomis , W . F . ( 1988 ) . Developmental consequences of the lack of myosin heavy chain in Dictyostelium discoideum . Dev . Biol . 128 , 178 - 184 . Knecht , D . A . and Shelden , E . ( 1995 ) . Three - dimensional localization of wild - type and myosin II mutant cells during morphogenesis of Dictyostelium . Dev . Biol . 170 , 434 - 444 . Konijn , T . M . , van de Meene , J . G . , Bonner , J . T . and Barkley , D . S . ( 1967 ) . The acrasin activity of adenosine - 3 ¢ , 5 ¢ - cyclic phosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 58 , 1152 - 1154 . Laevsky , G . and Knecht , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Under - agarose folate chemotaxis of Dictyostelium amoebae in permissive and mechanically inhibited conditions . Biotechniques 31 , 1140 - 1149 . Liu , X . , Osherov , N . , Yamashita , R . , Brzeska , H . , Korn , E . D . and May , G . S . ( 2001 ) . Myosin I mutants with only 1 % of wild - type actin - activated MgATPase activity retain essential in vivo function ( s ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 9122 - 9127 . Merkel , R . , Simson , R . , Simson , D . A . , Hohenadl , M . , Boulbitch , A . , Wallraff , E . and Sackmann , E . ( 2000 ) . A micromechanic study of cell polarity and plasma membrane cell body coupling in Dictyostelium . Biophys . J . 79 , 707 - 719 . Moores , S . L . , Sabry , J . H . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Myosin dynamics in live Dictyostelium cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 443 - 446 . Morrison , A . and Harwood , A . ( 1992 ) . A simple method of generating axenic derivatives of Dictyostelium strains . Exp . Cell Res . 199 , 383 - 386 . Neujahr , R . , Heizer , C . and Gerisch , G . ( 1997 ) . Myosin II - independent processes in mitotic cells of Dictyostelium discoideum : Redistribution of the nuclei , rearrangement of the actin system and formation of the cleavage furrow . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 123 - 137 . Noegel , A . A . , Rapp , S . , Lottspeich , F . , Schleicher , M . and Stewart , M . ( 1989 ) . The Dictyostelium gelation factor shares a putative actin binding site with alpha - actinins and dystrophin and also has a rod domain containing six 100 - residue motifs that appear to have a cross - beta conformation . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 607 - 618 . Pang , K . M . , Lee , E . and Knecht , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Use of a fusion protein between GFP and an actin - binding domain to visualize transient ﬁlamentous - actin structures . Curr . Biol . 8 , 405 - 408 . Parent , C . A . , Blacklock , B . J . , Froehlich , W . M . , Murphy , D . B . and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1998 ) . G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic cells . Cell 95 , 81 - 91 . Pasternak , C . , Spudich , J . A . and Elson , E . L . ( 1989 ) . Capping of surface receptors and concomitant cortical tension are generated by conventional myosin . Nature 341 , 549 - 551 . Peters , D . J . , Knecht , D . A . , Loomis , W . F . , de Lozanne , A . , Spudich , J . and van Haastert , P . J . ( 1988 ) . Signal transduction , chemotaxis , and cell aggregation in Dictyostelium discoideum cells without myosin heavy chain . Dev . Biol . 128 , 158 - 163 . Pollenz , R . S . , Chen , T . L . , Trivinos - Lagos , L . and Chisholm , R . L . ( 1992 ) . The Dictyostelium essential light chain is required for myosin function . Cell 69 , 951 - 962 . Ponte , E . , Rivero , F . , Fechheimer , M . , Noegel , A . and Bozzaro , S . ( 2000 ) . Severe developmental defects in Dictyostelium null mutants for actin - binding proteins . Mech . Dev . 91 , 153 - 161 . Prassler , J . , Stocker , S . , Marriott , G . , Heidecker , M . , Kellermann , J . and Gerisch , G . ( 1997 ) . Interaction of a Dictyostelium member of the plastin / ﬁmbrin family with actin ﬁlaments and actin - myosin complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 83 - 95 . Rivero , F . , Furukawa , R . , Fechheimer , M . and Noegel , A . A . ( 1999 ) . Three actin cross - linking proteins , the 34 kDa actin - bundling protein , alpha - actinin and gelation factor ( ABP - 120 ) , have both unique and redundant roles in the growth and development of Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2737 - 2751 . Rose , G . G . , Pomerat , C . M . , Shindler , T . O . and Trunnell , J . B . ( 1958 ) . A cellophane - strip technoque for culturing tissue in multipurpose culture chambers . Biophysic . Biochem . Cytol . 4 , 761 - 764 . Sheetz , M . P . , Block , S . M . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1986 ) . Myosin movement in vitro : a quantitative assay using oriented actin cables from Nitella . Methods Enzymol . 134 , 531 - 544 . 3770 Shelden , E . and Knecht , D . A . ( 1995 ) . Mutants lacking myosin II cannot resist forces generated during multicellular morphogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 1105 - 1115 . Shelden , E . and Knecht , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Dictyostelium cell shape generation requires myosin II . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 35 , 59 - 67 . Sussman , R . and Sussman , M . ( 1967 ) . Cultivation of Dictyostelium discoideum in axenic medium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 29 , 53 - 55 . Sweeney , H . L . ( 1998 ) . Regulation and tuning of smooth muscle myosin . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 158 , S95 - S99 . Wachsstock , D . H . , Schwarz , W . H . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1994 ) . Cross - linker dynamics determine the mechanical properties of actin gels . Biophys . J . 66 , 801 - 809 . Wessels , D . , Soll , D . R . , Knecht , D . , Loomis , W . F . , de Lozanne , A . and Spudich , J . ( 1988 ) . Cell motility and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium amebae lacking myosin heavy chain . Dev . Biol . 128 , 164 - 177 . Xu , X . S . , Kuspa , A . , Fuller , D . , Loomis , W . F . and Knecht , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Cell - cell adhesion prevents mutant cells lacking myosin II from penetrating aggregation streams of Dictyostelium . Dev . Biol . 175 , 218 - 226 . Xu , X . S . , Lee , E . , Chen , T . , Kuczmarski , E . , Chisholm , R . L . and Knecht , D . A . ( 2001 ) . During multicellular migration , myosin II serves a structural role independent of its motor function . Dev . Biol . 232 , 255 - 264 . Yumura , S . , Mori , H . and Fukui , Y . ( 1984 ) . Localization of actin and myosin for the study of ameboid movement in Dictyostelium using improved immunoﬂuorescence . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 894 - 899 . Journal of Cell Science 116 ( 18 )