fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 1 HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY published : 29 May 2017 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 00827 Edited by : Shira Elqayam , De Montfort University , United Kingdom Reviewed by : Linden John Ball , University of Central Lancashire , United Kingdom Ulrich Von Hecker , Cardiff University , United Kingdom * Correspondence : Michael Öllinger michael . oellinger @ parmenides - foundation . org Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cognitive Science , a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology Received : 06 September 2016 Accepted : 05 May 2017 Published : 29 May 2017 Citation : Öllinger M and von Müller A ( 2017 ) Search and Coherence - Building in Intuition and Insight Problem Solving . Front . Psychol . 8 : 827 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 00827 Search and Coherence - Building in Intuition and Insight Problem Solving Michael Öllinger 1 , 2 * and Albrecht von Müller 1 , 3 1 Parmenides Center for the Study of Thinking , Pullach , Germany , 2 Psychological Department , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universität München , Munich , Germany , 3 Philosophical Department , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universität München , Munich , Germany Coherence - building is a key concept for a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of intuition and insight problem solving . There are several accounts that address certain aspects of coherence - building . However , there is still no proper framework deﬁning the general principles of coherence - building . We propose a four - stage model of coherence - building . The ﬁrst stage starts with spreading activation restricted by constraints . This dynamic is a well - deﬁned rule based process . The second stage is characterized by detecting a coherent state . We adopted a ﬂuency account assuming that the ease of information processing indicates the realization of a coherent state . The third stage is designated to evaluate the result of the coherence - building process and assess whether the given problem is solved or not . If the coherent state does not ﬁt the requirements of the task , the process re - enters at stage 1 . These three stages characterize intuition . For insight problem solving a fourth stage is necessary , which restructures the given representation after repeated failure , so that a new search space results . The new search space enables new coherent states . We provide a review of the most important ﬁndings , outline our model , present a large number of examples , deduce potential new paradigms and measures that might help to decipher the underlying cognitive processes . Keywords : insight , intuition , binding , coherence , stage models INTRODUCTION During 1916 Max Wertheimer , the famous Gestaltist , and Einstein had several discussions . Wertheimer was keen to understand Einstein’s outstanding thinking . He realized that Einstein was already puzzled by apparent unanswerable questions at a very early stage , such as : “What would happen if one rode on a ray of light , or what would happen if one ran fast enough ? Would the light stop to move ? ” Einstein felt an incoherence between the novel experimental ﬁndings at this time and the given theoretical assumptions . However , he was not able to put the single pieces together and arrange them in a new coherent picture . It was unclear how such a new picture should look like . According to Wertheimer , Einstein experienced the intuition that the common presuppositions in physics might be wrong . By that time , Einstein had the ingenious insight that the measurement of time is dependent on the applied frame of reference . By using this insight , he relaxed the existing dogmas , and eventually the single pieces became part of a coherent picture . Wertheimer questioned that Einstein attained his great insight by the concatenation of logical operations . “Einstein did not put ready - made axioms , or mathematical formulas together . ” ( p . 183 ) . He emphasized that Einstein’s progress was characterized by structural changes which were Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 1 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 2 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building driven by overcoming the traditional understanding of physical events , time and simultaneity . Wertheimer remarked that Einstein’s thinking was often far ahead of the available mathematical apparatus . Einstein himself reported that his thinking was not bound to words . He used mostly pictures and imagination , as his early thought experiments ( Gedankenexperiment , see above ) demonstrated . “I very rarely think in words at all . A thought comes , and I may try to express it in words afterward ” ( Wertheimer , 1959 ) . Einstein’s thinking showed how literally a new and coherent picture leads to the solution of a diﬃcult problem . Currently , coherence - building plays an important role within cognitive psychology . Coherence is the key concept in a great number of studies on intuition ( e . g . , Dorfman et al . , 1996 ; Shirley and Langan - Fox , 1996 ; Bolte et al . , 2003 ; Bolte and Goschke , 2008 ; Volz et al . , 2008 ; Dehaene , 2009 ; Topolinski and Strack , 2009b ; Zander et al . , 2016 ) and in a few studies on insight problem solving ( Metcalfe and Wiebe , 1987 ; Bowden and Beeman , 1998 ; Kounios et al . , 2006 ) . Intuition can be understood as a widely unconscious process , which provides a hunch for a judgment , which is often accompanied by an aﬀective state or gut feeling ( Gigerenzer and Todd , 2001a ; Kruglanski and Gigerenzer , 2011 ) . A standard task , which demonstrates the dynamic of intuitive judgments , is the word - triads task . Mednick and Mednick ( 1967 ) introduced this task . The original task requires ﬁnding a fourth word which builds meaningful compounds with three given words ( e . g . , SALT , DEEP , FOAM could be associated with the word SEA resulting in three meaningful compounds such as SEA SALT , etc . ) . In a modiﬁed version ( Bolte et al . , 2003 ; Topolinski and Strack , 2009c ) participants were asked to make quick judgments on whether a given triad was coherent or incoherent without searching for associates . Note that incoherent trials had no obvious associate ( e . g . , DREAM , BALL , and BOOK ) . Insight problem solving requires participants to ﬁnd the solution to a given problem . E . g . , the solution of the above presented coherent triads or more diﬃcult problems such as puzzles ( Sternberg and Davidson , 1995 ; Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Bowden et al . , 2005 ; Öllinger and Knoblich , 2009 ; Öllinger et al . , 2014 ) . Insight problems are often characterized by the fact that they are resistant to standard solution approaches . They often require restructuring the given problem or goal representation ( Ohlsson , 1984a , b , 1990 , 2011 ; Fleck and Weisberg , 2013 ) . Insight problem - solving goes usually beyond the information which is actually given ( c . f . Bowers et al . , 1990 , p . 74 ) . Although intuition and insight are often treated as diﬀerent research domains , they obviously share certain features ( see below ) . There are only a few studies addressing both and aiming at an integrated framework ( Bowers et al . , 1990 , 1995 ; Kihlstrom , 1998 ; Topolinski and Reber , 2010 ; Zander et al . , 2016 ) . In this vein , we attempt to provide an integrated view which merges both domains by rule - based coherence - building processes . Bowers et al . ( 1990 ) seminal work on “Intuition in the context of discovery” coherence was supposed to be the key process underlying intuition and insight . Coherence results from a widely unconscious and guided search process , which converges in an integrated representation of the given information , which surpasses the threshold to consciousness . In greater detail , the guiding stage is driven by spreading activation within mnemonic networks ( Collins and Loftus , 1975 ) . Those activation patterns build up to an implicit and unconscious “perception of coherence” ( Bowers et al . , 1990 , p . 74 ) . This tacit perception of coherence guides the thought toward a more “explicit perception in question . ” It is important to note that Bowers et al . ( 1990 ) did not assume that such an implicit coherent representation is equal to the later consciously experienced coherence , but provides a fragmentary representation which could be enriched gradually by accumulating information . Eventually , the integrative stage provides the result of a completed accumulation process . The activation within the network becomes so strong that it crosses the threshold to consciousness . At this stage coherence is , recognized as a hunch , which needs to be validated by an analytic validation process . Although an exact deﬁnition of coherence was not provided , Bowers and colleagues’ experimental design elucidates its alleged characteristics , e . g . , in experiment 3a Bowers and colleagues asked participants to ﬁnd an unknown solution word while a list of up to 15 clue words was presented subsequently . Each clue word was associated with the unknown solution word . An example of the accumulated clues task is for instance : ( 1 ) “Times” , ( 2 ) “Inch” , ( 3 ) “Deal” , ( 4 ) “Peg” , ( 5 ) “Head” , ( 6 ) “Foot” , ( 7 ) “Dance” , ( 8 ) “Table” , ( 9 ) “Person” , ( 10 ) “Town” , ( 11 ) “Math” , ( 12 ) “Four” , ( 13 ) “Block” , ( 14 ) “Table” , ( 15 ) “Box” . The target word is “Square . ” One result was that participants needed up to 10 clue words to ﬁnd the solution . Figure 1 illustrates the idea of associations and spreading activation . Each clue word is associated with the unknown target word ( solution ) . LIMITATIONS OF BOWERS STAGE MODEL Given the importance Bowers and colleagues’ approach , we want to draw attention to a few concerns that we have with the current model . First , the idea of a guided accumulation process is striking , but seems underspeciﬁed and unclear . Spreading activation elicits literally unspeciﬁc neighboring nodes in the network . That means the more clues are provided , the more activity should confuse the search process . The question is what guides the process ? Pure associations would not be able to guide the process , since too many unspeciﬁc associations are activated by , e . g . , 10 very diﬀerent clue words . That is , the potential search space would explode . We propose that the given information activates concepts from long - term memory . Spreading activation provides a bulk of information which either belongs to the solution of the problem or not . We assume that ﬁnding a coherent representation requires constraining the search space . In the easiest case this could be attained by identifying overlapping features or meanings as in the word clue example above . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 2 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 3 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 1 | Spreading activation and coherence . C 1 . . . C n indicate clue words that were associated with the solution word . W 1 . . . W n illustrate activated nodes which are not associated with the solution . Solid lines show associations with the solution word . Doted lines exemplarily show associations between C 1 and other clues . Dashed lines show spreading activation between words . The length of the lines indicates the strength of the association . We conclude that for those problems it is necessary to have a concerted interplay between spreading activation and constraining ( Ohlsson , 1990 ; Thagard and Verbeurgt , 1998 ; Thagard , 2002 ) the activation landscape in a goal - directed manner . More diﬃcult problem representations require constraining the search space by prior knowledge , hypotheses or chunking of information which structures and guides the process of coherence building ( implications see below ) . Our second concern refers to the transition between unconscious and conscious stage is somewhat unclear . We adopt a ﬂuency account ( Topolinski and Strack , 2009a , c ) which relies on the ease of the processing of the given information . We assume that a constrained activation leads to a balance state ( Heider , 1946 ) , which could easily be processed , and results in the realization of a coherent state . Third , the result of the integration process is a hunch or intuition which had to be validated and checked ( Wallas , 1926 ) . We propose a separate process for that and a re - entry loop , if the result is unsatisfactory or erroneous ( Figure 2 ) . Importantly , after repeated failure it might be necessary to restructure the search space to ﬁnd a coherent state in an even larger search space . The new search space allows to integrate new information . We hypothesize that this four - stage model allows to describe coherence - building . We further suggest that at each stage implicit and explicit processes are involved , however , the ratio between them varies to a great extent across stages . Therefore , diﬀerent measures are necessary to pinpoint the underlying cognitive processes at the diﬀerent stages . In the following section , we will elaborate on the four stages by collecting evidence from diﬀerent ﬁelds for each stage . STAGE 1 : SPREADING ACTIVATION AND CONSTRAINING As Figure 1 illustrates a spreading activation account is not suﬃcient to explain the emergence of coherence . Pure spreading activation would result in an unsynchronized activation of unrelated information which distorts the coherence building process ( see W ns in Figure 1 ) . We assume that each word activates associations ( via spreading activations in the semantic network ) . The given clues are constraining ( shaping ) the search space . They are strengthening particular features of the activated concepts , and inhibiting others , at the same time . The interplay between the features of the clues , which also could be interrelated , constrains the search space until the solution word is isolated . Coherence is attained by ﬁnding the intersection of all the associations of the clue words . For the clue experiment that means that the more clues are provided , the narrower becomes the search space until the target word is isolated . The more overlapping associations the clues have , the more likely is the detection of a coherent state . For the word triads task this would explain why “coherent triads” are processed faster than “incoherent triads . ” Incoherent triads share less association which constrain the search space , whereas coherent triads do . Our argumentation is closely related to the work of Holyoak and Thagard ( 1995 ) , Thagard and Verbeurgt ( 1998 ) and Thagard ( 2002 ) . They provided a rule based deﬁnition of coherence . Coherence follows a constraint satisfaction process . Constraint satisfaction is an idea which was successfully applied in connectionistic models , for example to model ambiguous ﬁgure perception ( McClelland et al . , 1986 ; McClelland and Rumelhart , 1989 ) . An illustrative example is for example a model of the Necker cube ( Necker , 1832 ) , where the nodes of one cube representation exited themselves in parallel . That leads to a stable and coherent state . The exited nodes concurrently inhibit the nodes of the alternative cube representation . Thagard and Verbeurgt ( 1998 , see p . 2 – 3 for the detailed list ) stated seven computational principles that deﬁne coherence : ( 1 ) Elements are representations ( e . g . , concepts , images , etc . ) . ( 2 ) Elements can cohere or be incoherent . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 3 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 4 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 2 | A four - stage model of coherence - building . The search starts in a restricted search space ( white rectangle at the top ) . After spreading activation and constraining coherence can be detected or not . A subsequent evaluation stage validates and assesses the result of the coherence detection process . Either a solution is found or a failure occurs . After a failure the search process re - starts at stage 1 or the search space is restructured resulting in a larger search space ( gray rectangle + white rectangle ) . ( 3 ) If two elements cohere there is a positive constraint between them . If they are incoherent there is a negative constraint . ( 4 ) Elements are to be divided into ones that are accepted ( cohere ) and ones that are rejected ( incoherent ) . ( 5 ) A positive constraint between two elements can be satisﬁed either by accepting or rejecting both elements . ( 6 ) A negative constraint between two elements can be satisﬁed by accepting one of the elements and rejecting another . ( 7 ) The coherence problem consists of dividing a set of elements into accepted and rejected sets in a way that satisﬁes the most constraints . That means for the clue task we start with the clues “Times” and “Inch . ” Let us further assume that the concept “Times” activates among others a concept such as “Newspaper , ” and “Inch” a concept such as “unit of measurements , ” which results in a negative constraint between the activated concepts . A “feeling” of incoherence would occur . Providing additional information result in a coherent state until positive constraints between all the concepts are mutually activated . Einstein struggled with incoherent pictures resulting from pieces of information which did not ﬁt together . Re - connecting the given information with the new understanding of the importance of reference frame resolves the incoherence and consequently results in a coherent picture – positive and satisﬁed constraints . However , Einstein’s thinking also shows the limitation of a pure constraint satisfaction account , because the solution is not always available in the initially activated search space . Sometimes it is necessary to overcome the given constraints to ﬁnd novel coherent states ( see stage 4 below ) . Another question related to constraint satisfaction is how coherence could be implemented at a neuronal level . Lakoﬀ and Johnson ( 1980 ) proposed a neural theory of metaphor ( NTM ) ( Lakoﬀ , 2009 , 2014 ) which provides a detailed mechanism for coherence - building that has some relevance for our discussion . The following elements consolidate NTM ( Lakoﬀ , 2009 ) : • Neural groups . Small networks of neurons . Neurons can mutually be part of diﬀerent groups . • Spreading activation and Hebbian learning . Neural groups could inhibit or activate other groups . Important is the assumption that when two groups are simultaneously activated they become connected . This Hebbian learning principle ( Hebb , 2005 ) might also be a key mechanism which is until now widely neglected in the domains of insight and intuition . • Binding . There are three degrees of binding . Permanent ( e . g . , red ball – the red color is bound permanently to the round shape ) , conditional bindings – the binding is still permanent , but could have discrete forms ( e . g . , an object which is changing colors ) . Nonce – binding that happens on the ﬂy . • Fit . A node A ﬁts better to a network N than to a network N’ if A in N showed a higher overall number of neural binding than in N’ ( see p . 24 ) . We postulate that a coherent state is closely related to Gestalt circuits . There are some nodes , e . g . , A , B , C , D , and a Gestalt node G ( Figure 3 ) . If node G is ﬁring , the nodes A , B , C , D are also ﬁring . If a few nodes are activated and a threshold is surpassed , G is elicited . When G is inhibited , at least one of the other nodes is also inhibited . We propose that a Gestalt node could serve as coordinating hub which binds together information . The node G constrains the search space exciting A , B , C , D and inhibiting other nodes like E , F . NTM provides several mechanisms how distant concepts are linked together and how inferences could be drawn . Most important is the assumption that co - activation of remote concepts link those concepts and result in a coherent state . We assume that for the clue example each single word could be seen as Gestalt node . The word co - activates several other words or meanings that are linked to this word . At the beginning ( i . e . , providing the ﬁrst few clues ) the clues excite remote and only partial and weak overlapping nodes . The more clues that are presented , the more likely it becomes that a particular node will be co - activated increasingly until it reaches the threshold to consciousness . The target word could be viewed as a new Gestalt node which binds distinct features of all the other clue words together . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 4 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 5 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 3 | Illustration of a Gestalt node which is tightly connected with the four other nodes . The tight link between Gestalt perception , binding , and consciousness was shown by the detection of synchronized EEG signals ( Singer , 1999 ; Engel and Singer , 2001 ; Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Uhlhaas et al . , 2006 ; Öllinger , 2009 ) . An instructive example is the sudden recognition of an ambiguous ﬁgure , showing a Dalmatian dog sniﬃng at the ground ( Tallon - Baudry and Bertrand , 1999 ) . At the ﬁrst glance the image seems a scrambled pattern of black and white colored patches . After a while the patches re - organize apparently out of nothing to an arrangement of meaningful objects . One explanation for this phenomenon emphasizes the importance of gamma - oscillations when viewers consciously recognize the Dalmatian dog . Tallon - Baudry and Bertrand ( 1999 ) proposed that this pattern stands for a binding process building a coherent picture from scrambled information . STAGE 2 : COHERENCE DETECTION How does a person realize that a coherent state is reached ? There are two intimately related concepts which might address this question . First , Topolinski and Strack ( 2009a , b , c ) , Topolinski et al . ( 2009 ) , Topolinski and Reber ( 2010 ) showed that process ﬂuency is closely related to a coherence state . As mentioned above coherent triads are processed more ﬂuently than incoherent triads . Process ﬂuency could be deﬁned as the ease with which given information is processed by the cognitive system . Process ﬂuency could also be exploited as an indicator showing a transition in a person’s behavior while solving a series of problems . Haider and Frensch ( 1999 ) , Wagner et al . ( 2004 ) , Gaschler et al . ( 2013 ) , Haider et al . ( 2013 ) , Dietrich and Haider ( 2015 ) have been pursuing the idea that during learning of skills there are such transitions . They used for example the number reduction task ( Wagner et al . , 2004 ) . In this task , participants were confronted by strings composed of three diﬀerent digits . E . g . , the string 1 1 4 4 9 4 9 4 . There are two rules that have to be obeyed : ( 1 ) Same rule : two identical digits reduce to the same digit . 1 1 → 1 ( 2 ) Diﬀerent rule : two diﬀerent digits reduce to the third digit 1 4 → 9 The task is to process the string stepwise from left to right . For the example given above 1 1 → 1 . Then the task requires problem solvers to use the result from the ﬁrst reduction and to take the next number from the string : 1 4 → 9 ; etc . The result of number reduction will be 9 for the string above . The strings were composed in a way that they either could be solved by this step - wise or sequential method , or much faster by realizing that there is a hidden rule , where the solution to the problem is already determined after the second attempt , since the sequence of the reduced digits is symmetrical [ see Wagner et al . ( 2004 ) for the details of the task ] . The number reduction task allows the moment of time to be determine when participants utilize the hidden rule . A sudden drop in the solution time is detectable , which could not be explained by step - wise learning process . Haider et al . ( 2013 ) postulated that after a large number of attempts implicit processes extract and detect the underlying regularity of the given sequences . This enters a processing shortcut resulting in a much higher process ﬂuency . Such distinct behavioral changes could be realized consciously by the participants . The realization allows insight to be gained consciously into the symmetric nature of the response strings . Another indicator that helps to realize a coherent state is the change of the aﬀective state . This addresses the famous Aha ! experience . The Aha ! is described by a few dimensions , such as suddenness , positive aﬀect , or the feeling of being right ( Topolinski and Reber , 2010 ; Danek et al . , 2013 ; Danek and Wiley , 2016 ) . It seems conceivable that such changes could easily be detected by the problem solver and could lead to the re - evaluation of the problem - solving process . It is important to note that an Aha ! experience is not a proper predictor for the correctness of the solution ( Koﬀka , 1935 ; Danek and Wiley , 2016 ; Salvi et al . , 2016 ) . STAGE 3 : EVALUATION At this stage the result of the coherence - building process is evaluated . The problem solver validates whether the solution ﬁts the given requirements and meets the desired goal . The solution is either found and coherent or the result is incorrect , which necessitates a restart of the search . Heider ( 1946 ) called a coherent state a state of balance . The given elements ( information ) ﬁt together and there are no contradicting relations between the given elements . Following Heider’s account explains the need for coherence . Incoherence leads to tension within the system and there is a tendency toward a balance state . This might explain , why at the ﬁrst place the cognitive system has a drive toward coherence . Heider’s ﬁeld Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 5 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 6 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building theoretical approach addressed the relations between persons and objects . Heider aimed at providing the determinants of social behavior and social perception . Beyond that , we propose that Heider’s account is generally applicable to situations where mutual relations of interdependent information are given . It provides a rule - based framework explaining the dynamics of coherence - building . Cartwright and Harary ( 1956 , p . 266 ) summarized Heider’s account as follows . Given a P - O - X unit consisting of a person P , another person O , and an impersonal unit X . The relations of each part of the unit are interdependent with each other . If P likes O and O is seen as responsible for X then there would be a tendency that P also would like X . This would be a balance state . If X has a negative relation with P then an imbalanced state results . In the person O the need arises to change the situation toward a balance state , e . g . , by changing the relation between P and O from “like” to “not like . ” A state of balance results Cartwright and Harary ( 1956 ) showed by a general graph theoretical account that Heider’s three elements approach can be extended to more complicated situations . Following this account incoherence lead to the drive to search for a state of balance , and there is a schema that justiﬁes that the deductions within the given information are mutually consistent . This implies the search for new relationships between the existing information driven by logical consistency with the existing information . This search process might to a great extent be unconscious , but will be shaped by the person’s attention , deliberations , prior knowledge , attitudes , and motivations . The theory of balance has some similarities with Thagard and colleagues’ idea of constraint satisfaction ( see above ) . An important question is how the cognitive system resolves existing conﬂicts . Hélie and Sun ( 2010 ) proposed an elegant framework that provides a conﬂict resolution mechanism . Their explicit - implicit interaction theory ( EII theory ) assumes the parallel activation of implicit processes which are mainly associative . In contrast , explicit processes are driven by attention and characterized by more precise and distinct information processing . The explicit processes are predetermined by hard constraints . Processing of a new problem activates simultaneously the two systems . Conﬂict resolution is necessary , when no satisfying result is found . As a consequence , the results from both systems ( implicit – explicit ) will be integrated into one representation . This result is fed in as new input . The program cycles to the conﬂict resolution and integration cycle until the goal state is found . The authors tested their model by a famous study on insight problem solving ( Durso et al . , 1994 ) . Originally , Durso et al . ( 1994 ) introduced a graph theoretical approach . The approach combined the idea of semantic network analysis and the concept of restructuring ( Ohlsson , 1984a , b ) . The goal of the study was to uncover participants’ underlying knowledge structures when solving an insight problem . Durso et al . ( 1994 ) asked participants to solve the following puzzle : “A man walks into a bar and asks for a glass of water . The bartender points a shotgun at the man . The man says , ‘Thank you , ’ and walks out . ” ( Durso et al . , 1994 , p . 95 ) . While solving the problem participants answered ‘yes’ and ‘no’ questions . The questions were intended to reveal the individual problem representation , e . g . , question : “Was the man thirsty ? ” – answer : “No” . Afterward participants were asked to judge the relatedness of concepts of pairs ( e . g . , bartender , surprise ) . From this data semantic graphs were construed . In the next step , the authors compared the semantic graphs of solvers and non - solvers . It was found that solvers represented more likely direct connections between concepts which refer to the solution ( e . g . , surprise and remedy ) . Non - solvers focused more strongly on facts which were explicitly given ( e . g . , bartender and man ) . Solvers represented important aspects of the problem very early . Durso et al . ( 1994 ) concluded that the relatedness between certain concepts determines the likelihood for restructuring ( see below , stage 4 ) . Given this ﬁnding Hélie and Sun ( 2010 ) modeled the hiccups problem with the connectionistic network ( CLARION ) . CLARION’s explicit knowledge system was fed with answers to the yes – no questions . Initially , it mainly represented the given task instruction . The associations between concepts were randomly determined and built the implicit system . The degree of randomness was varied between conditions . The authors found that the higher the randomness score , the more likely is a graph structure which resembles the solvers’ structure actually found by Durso et al . ( 1994 ) . Higher variation rates allowed a better conﬂict resolution that result in the desired solution . Importantly , the authors suggested that higher randomness leads to more frequent remote and distant concept associations . Those associations are often incoherent with the given explicit knowledge representation . The conﬂict between the implicit and explicit representations might result in the generation of new and insightful hypotheses which help to solve the problem . Conﬂict detection plays also an important role in the ﬁeld of intuition research . Kahneman ( 2012 ) showed how misleading ﬁrst intuitions could be . E . g . , in the famous Linda problem a number of statements about a ﬁctive person were given . Linda is 31 years old , outspoken , bright , single . She majored in philosophy . As a student she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination , social justice , and also participated in anti - nuclear demonstrations ( Tversky and Kahneman , 1983 ) . After reading the description participants were asked to choose the statement which seems more probable . ( a ) Linda is a bank teller . ( b ) Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement . Almost all participants opt for statement ( b ) . The answer is wrong . Assuming the probability that Linda is a bank teller is 60 % and the probability that she is active in the feminist movement is 70 % . The product ( conjunction ) of both is 42 % ( 0 . 6 × 0 . 7 = 0 . 42 ) . The product is always smaller than each multiplier . Consequently , option ( a ) is the only correct answer . Tversky and Kahneman ( 1983 ) proposed that participants used an implicit ( intuitive – system 1 ) heuristic which is biased toward option ( b ) , because ( b ) seems more representative than ( a ) . After a deliberate evaluation ( system 2 ) it should become clear that ( a ) is the correct answer . In our discussion that means that a ﬁrst coherent representation of the problem results from prior knowledge constraints or heuristics which restrict the evaluation process . Consequently , a conﬂict is detected between the apparent solution and the actual ( logical ) solution . In our model the participant would also commit an error , since an Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 6 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 7 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building external feedback – whether the solution is correct – would be necessary at the evaluation stage to restart the process . Then the coherence building process could be restructured . We do not agree with Kahneman’s conclusion that intuitive processes are per se problematic . Moreover , there are alternative accounts which demonstrate how the conjunction fallacy could be explained ( e . g . , Tentori et al . , 2013 ) . In contrast to Kahneman , Gigerenzer and Todd ( 2001a , b ) , Kruglanski and Gigerenzer ( 2011 ) , Mega et al . ( 2015 ) assumed that intuitions help solving problems fast and frugal , e . g . , facing the following question : “Which city has the better football team – Karlsruhe or Munich ? ” You do not know Karlsruhe , so you opt for Munich . The recognition heuristic ( Gigerenzer and Todd , 2001a ) helps to solve the problem . The idea is that uncertainty is reduced by relying on the ease of recognition . That means that a processing advantage indicates a potential solution to the problem . In our example , larger cities are more familiar . This corresponds to a higher likelihood of having a successful football team . However , Gigerenzer’s approach has also its limitations . Changing the cities in the above example and using the cities Nuremberg and Hoﬀenheim would result in a wrong solution by the recognition heuristic . Hoﬀenheim is fairly unknown but has the better football team than Nuernberg . In sum , both the deliberate and the intuitive account need an evaluation process which justiﬁes that the found solution is plausible and reliable . Both systems can provide erroneous results . Generally , Kruglanski and Gigerenzer ( 2011 ) criticized ( sensu Keren and Schul , 2009 ; Keren , 2013 ) that the dichotomy between an intuitive and deliberate system might be arbitrary . They proposed a rule - based account which relies in principle on if - then rules , as does our approach . The authors elaborated on this assumption and demonstrated that deliberate and intuitive judgments could be based on the same rules , as they demonstrated for the recognition heuristic ( p . 100 ) . They further assume that rules could be hardwired and explicit rules become implicit after training and expertise . The rule selection process is constrained by the task type . Certain heuristics do ﬁt the task requirements others do not . Again , expertise and prior knowledge play an important role . Thomson et al . ( 2015 ) provided a cognitive model that is based on the ACT - R framework to model intuitive - decision - making . ACT - R is a sophisticated production system . Productions consist of an IF statements ( conditions ) and a THEN part which represents an action . If a condition is matched the production system will execute an action . Productions could be newly learned , modiﬁed , or compiled . They are mostly explicit at the beginning of learning , and become implicit after repeated training . The ACT - R system is divided into an implicit and a declarative memory system ( explicit ) , and has a goal stack which controls the ﬂow of operations like a working memory . Information is stored in chunks . The strength of a chunk is determined by its recency and its frequency of retrieval ( ease of recall ) . The authors assume that implicit memory content is activated by matching the given information . Spreading activation is pre - supposed and implemented by allowing associations between existing chunks . Attentional processes guide activation . The strengths of associations are determined by their co - occurrence in the past . The authors emphasized that intuition is a blend of consciously accessible and consciously inaccessible information . They suggest that retrieval processes are mainly unconscious , whereas declarative knowledge elements and the selection of heuristics and strategies are more deliberate and conscious . Taken together the results of diﬀerent ﬁelds show that intuitive and insightful problem solving could be modeled by rule - based accounts that entail similar properties ( like implicit and explicit systems ) . Problem solving needs both systems to detect conﬂicts which drive the search for new associations . Eventually , the search results in new coherent state . However , there are situations where the building of new associations or the combination of implicit and explicit information is not enough . These situations require a deeper structural change , namely the restructuring of the search space . STAGE 4 : RESTRUCTURING AS COHERENCE BUILDING PROCESS The Gestalt psychologists ( Wertheimer , 1923 , 1959 ; Duncker , 1935 ; Koﬀka , 1935 ; Katona , 1940 ; Köhler , 1947 ) showed a major interest in answering the question under which conditions perceptual information is grouped to meaningful units . They identiﬁed that similarity , symmetry , and the proximity of perceptual elements aﬀect the grouping process . For Köhler ( 1947 ) , Wertheimer ( 1959 ) re - grouping ( restructuring ) of the given information was the major factor for productive or insightful thinking . Figure 4 illustrates the grouping dynamics by the Parallelogram - Square problem ( Wertheimer , 1925 ) . The task requires determining the total sum of the area of the parallelogram plus the area of the square , given “a” and “b” ( Figure 4A ) . A beautiful solution entails that the given lines are restructured so that two rectangular triangles result ( Figure 4B ) . Eventually , the triangles form a rectangle ( new grouping , Figure 4C ) . Now , it is simple to determine the area “a” × “b” . Within the ﬁeld of insight problem solving constraints play a signiﬁcant role ( Isaak and Just , 1995 ; Knoblich et al . , 1999 ) . Ohlsson ( 1992 , 2011 ) argues that a problem activates prior knowledge from long - term memory . The activated knowledge imposes constraints on the representation . It was demonstrated in several studies ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 , 2001 ; Kershaw and Ohlsson , 2004 ; Öllinger et al . , 2006 , 2008 , 2013 , 2014 ; Danek et al . , 2013 , 2014 ; Kershaw et al . , 2013 ) that self - imposed constraints caused the main source of problem diﬃculty . The relaxation of constraints leads to a new problem representation which allows for novel insights . There is a major transition from a state of “not knowing a solution” to a state of “knowing a solution” ( Ohlsson , 2011 ; Danek et al . , 2014 ) . It is important to note , that constraint satisfaction does not need to provide a solution . Figure 5 shows the famous Nine - dot problem . The task is to connect the given nine dots by four connected straight lines , without lifting the pen , or retracing a line . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 7 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 8 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 4 | Wertheimer’s Parallelogram - Square problem . ( A ) Initial state . ( B ) Restructuring of lines . ( C ) Solution . FIGURE 5 | ( A ) The initial problem representation of the Nine - dot problem . ( B ) Perceptual coherence constrains the search space . ( C ) Enhanced search space after the perceptual constraint is relaxed . The Nine - dot problem proves to be extremely diﬃcult . The common explanation claimed that a Gestalt - like perception of the given nine dots prevents drawing lines beyond the perceptual boundaries ( Maier , 1930 ; Kershaw and Ohlsson , 2004 ; Öllinger et al . , 2014 ) . Importantly , and hardly recognized was the fact ( Öllinger et al . , 2014 ) that after problem solvers had relaxed the perceptual constraint an even larger search space resulted – adumbrated in Figure 5C . The scattered dots emphasize that after constraint relaxation ( restructuring ) lines could be drawn to arbitrary positions outside the boundaries of the nine dots . Consequently , it is not trivial to ﬁnd the correct sequence of lines connecting all dots ( Weisberg and Alba , 1981 ) . Öllinger et al . ( 2014 ) showed that the concerted interplay between heuristics – restricting the search space – and constraint relaxation – expanding the search space – is suﬃcient to solve the problem . In sum , restructuring allows problem solvers to search for the solution within a new search space . The larger search space enables the activation of new concepts . The new concepts could be integrated or build interrelationships with already existing concepts of the problem representation . It is necessary that the larger search space is restricted by constraints that guide the coherence - building process . EXAMPLES AND GENERALIZATION In this section , we elaborate on the stage model . Figure 6 shows an introductory example which illustrates the basic principles of coherence - building . First , three arbitrary dots were presented . According to our model , in stage 1 implicit processes spread activation and constrain the search space by prior knowledge . The dots “start” to build interrelationships with each other . At a neural level the dot pattern results in a synchronized spatial activation pattern which organizes the three dots into a uniﬁed Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 8 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 9 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 6 | Process of perceptual organization . ( A ) Three arbitrary dots are given . ( B ) Interactions between dots unfold interrelationships and meaning . ( C ) Higher order meaning of a triangle could emerge . representation ( Koﬀka , 1935 ; Singer , 1999 ; Engel and Singer , 2001 ; Tallon - Baudry , 2003 ; Hebb , 2005 ) . Following Lakoﬀ’s approach ( Figure 3 ) the three dots will be connected via a Gestalt node which concerted the interplay and co - activation ( Hebbs rule : “ﬁre together wire together” ) of the three dots . The Gestalt node coordinates the coherent state . The three dots build a triangle . The concept of a triangle ( another Gestalt node ) is associated with knowledge about triangles ( form , rules , and theorems ) . This would be the result of stage 2 . At a conscious level the recognition of a triangle occurs . At stage 3 the evaluation could focus on the question , whether this ﬁnding is signiﬁcant , reliable , or interesting . However , it is not necessary and pre - determined that a triangle is recognized . Other coherent representations are conceivable and are mostly driven by the given task set , context , prior knowledge , and / or instructions , e . g . , the three dots could also activate the concepts of a number ( three ) or trinity . Others will recognize the dots as representing individual subjects who have certain relationships – two of the dots seem to be linked closer . One seems to be more distant . In principle , a rather large number of coherent states are possible , all of them could be evaluated or further developed . Maybe the last example led the reader into a phase of restructuring which changes the coherence - building process ( stage 4 ) from triangle to social domain . Japanese haikus ( von Müller , 2015 ) illustrate the dynamics of coherence - building in a more sophisticated ﬁeld . Haikus are poems that have a well - deﬁned phrase structure like in the famous haiku : the stillness penetrating the rock a cicada’s cry Basho ( 1644 – 1694 ) Initially , reading Basho’s beautiful haiku word by word might seem confusing . It did not immediately become clear what is meant by the given words and how they are interrelated – a state of imbalance and conﬂicts might occur . After a few iterations through the phrases it is possible that new interrelationships between the concepts were elicited . First there is the image of a state of silence that is turned into a state of noise by a cicada’s cry . The contrast increases and is emphasized . It is alternating between stillness and noise , where both are so intense that even a rock is penetrated . This draws the picture of strong forces which almost hurt . Lastly , it is imaginable to assign diﬀerent directions to the forces caused by noise and stillness . It seems that noise drills into the rock , whereas stillness corrodes the rock . The whole meaning unfolds from the presence of all three parts of the haiku and the constant re - interpretation ( restructuring ) of the diﬀerent parts might result in a vivid image of the scene until a beautiful coherent representation ( image ) results . Haikus might provide a rich source for new empirical research , e . g . , to investigate in more detail how coherence - building is inﬂuenced when the order of the phrases is shuﬄed or words are replaced or substituted ? Would it result in the same coherent image at the end or would it result in a distorted image which becomes meaningless ? Our ﬁnal example is taken from the domain of insight problem solving . It is used to demonstrate how our model promotes a more detailed and elaborated view on problem representations of already well - known standard insight problems . We chose Duncker’s ( 1945 ) tumor problem : “Given a human being with an inoperable stomach tumor , and lasers which destroy organic tissue at suﬃcient intensity , how can one cure the person with these lasers and , at the same time , avoid harming the healthy tissue that surrounds the tumor ? ” Duncker used thinking aloud protocols as one of the ﬁrst to uncover participants thought processes ( Ericsson and Simon , 1993 ) . Figure 7 showed Duncker’s thinking aloud analysis of various solution attempts . The most right - hand path in Figure 7 shows an elegant solution to the problem . The solution requires superimposing rays of weak intensity at the tumor , so that the tumor is destroyed and the surrounding skin is not aﬀected . The tumor problem proved as reluctant to hints and analogical transfer ( Gick and Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) , and was diﬃcult to solve . For quite a long time it was unclear , what caused the diﬃculty of the problem . Grant and Spivey ( 2003 ) provided participants with a sketch of the problem , such as Figure 8 . In a ﬁrst experiment , they recorded the eye - movement patterns . They analyzed the patterns of successful and un - successful problem solvers . They found that successful solvers more likely attended to the surrounding skin , whereas unsuccessful participants ﬁxated on the tumor . Ingeniously , the authors run a second experiment with three conditions . In the animated skin condition , the skin was ﬂickering . In the animated tumor condition , the tumor was ﬂickering . In the third condition a static picture was presented ( control condition ) . As expected the animated skin condition outperformed the two other groups ( solvers : 67 % animated skin ; 33 % animated tumor condition , 37 % static control condition ) . Duncker’s and Grant and Spivey’s ﬁndings suggest an initial representation of the tumor problem as depicted in Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 9 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 10 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 7 | Duncker’s thinking aloud graph . The top node represents the task . Branching from the task three general approaches are illustrated which were further detailed . FIGURE 8 | Grant and Spivey’s tumor problem . Figure 9A . Initially , the given concepts were constrained by the importance of the tumor and did not integrate the remote concept “superposition” which is the key concept of the solution . After evaluation ( stage 3 ) it becomes clear that a solution within this representation is impossible and a state of imbalance is achieved which increases the need to drive toward a state of balance . Restructuring ( stage 4 ) is necessary which expands the search space . For the tumor problem restructuring requires a broad associative search with a high variation rate ( Hélie and Sun , 2010 ) . Importantly , the search process is not blind , but guided by constraints which are stated by the instruction and the goal representation which is strongly tied to the concept of “skin” ( Dietrich and Haider , 2015 ) . New associations are possible and a state of balance between the given concepts could be attained . Consequently , a coherent representation results which entails the solution to the problem . According to Grant and Spivey’s ( 2003 ) ﬁnding skin becomes the driving concept which integrates superposition and leads to new interrelated concepts . Hebbian learning is elicited and leads to a new coherent representation which links the concepts tumor , destruction , laser , and superposition . Currently , we realize a big gap between the empirical data which demonstrates eﬀects according to varying experimental conditions and the underlying knowledge structures . We propose that our four - stage model allows for the pinpointing of knowledge structures . To do so , it is inevitable to validate hypothetical assumptions on potential problem representations by using quantitative measures which reveal the actual knowledge structure . We assume that the four - stage model might help to choose the appropriate means . In the next section we will summarize a few potential measures at the behavioral level . MEASURING COHERENCE BUILDING Since the early work of cognitive psychologist ( Newell and Simon , 1972 ) it has been a main goal to discover signiﬁcant individual representations during the stream of problem solving . This also holds true for measuring coherence . How could the experimenter realize that a coherent state is achieved ? Answering this question is important for the empirical test of our model . We assume that it is helpful to have diﬀerent measures which could be assigned to the diﬀerent stages of our model . We enlisted a few potential measures : ( 1 ) Measuring processing speed . Measuring either the detection of coherence ( stage 2 ) ( Topolinski and Reber , 2010 ) , or signiﬁcant changes of the problem representation ( Wagner et al . , 2004 ) by faster response times or sudden drops of the processing speed . ( 2 ) Implicit measures like lexical decision tasks or implicit association tasks to reveal which key concepts ( Gestalt Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 10 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 11 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building FIGURE 9 | ( A ) Hypothetical initial representation of the tumor problem . ( B ) New coherent representation of the problem . nodes ) are activated during spreading activation by an individual at the beginning of the problem solving process or later on ( stage 1 – stage 4 ) . This is crucial for learning more about the actual representations of the problem and potential changes during the time course . ( 3 ) Semantic diﬀerentials or yes – no questions to assess whether a concept is part of the problem representation or not ( Dayton et al . , 1990 ; Durso et al . , 1994 ) ( stage 1 , 2 ) . This allows to generate knowledge graphs . ( 4 ) A new approach to measure coherence would be to ask participants to draw explicit problem representations like in Figure 9 by themselves after certain time intervals . The graph consists of the explicable basic concepts which are supposed to be important for the problem . The links between the lines reﬂect the association , and the thickness of the lines reﬂects the alleged strength of the concepts . The time series of individual representations reveals changes or mental impasses . Limitation of this approach would be that only explicable concepts will be represented , and the problem - solving process might be changed by this second task . This also holds true for ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) . ( 5 ) Eye - movement data could help to evaluate the importance of the given information for the problem - solving process ( Knoblich et al . , 2005 ) . ( 6 ) In the future , it is conceivable that new brain - imaging techniques will help to monitor coherent states in the brain . Recently Huth et al . ( 2016 ) were able to map natural speech to certain tiles of the cerebral cortex given fMRI data and sophisticated statistical methods . We assume that a detailed understanding of coherence - building is the key to answer the questions when and why a biased or inappropriate representation leads to false intuitions or why problem solvers get stuck in an impasse . We also assume that to pinpoint the processes and knowledge structure it is crucial to decide whether a problem is solved with or without insight . Nowadays , we either rely on the weak and tautological assumptions that insight problems require insight , or we rely on subjective experience like indicating an Aha ! ( Öllinger and Knoblich , 2009 ) . DISCUSSION We demonstrated that intuition and insight share some signiﬁcant features and could be explained within a four - stage model . In both domains constraints play an important role . Constraints drive coherent states ( Thagard , 2002 ) , but also restrict the search space . Prior knowledge imposes rules and activates heuristics and problem solving strategies ( Ohlsson , 2011 ) . Intuition is in our understanding a result of a mainly automatic and implicit process which results from constraining processes and simple heuristics and rules which could lead to the solution or could be misleading . A simple pattern matching mechanism guides the selection of competing rules or heuristics ( Kruglanski and Gigerenzer , 2011 ) . The selected rule determines the processing of the given information and determines the frame for the coherence building process . E . g . , in our three dot example we showed that according to the selected rules , the three dots could cohere in a triangle , number representation , or social interactions . Spreading activation ( Collins and Loftus , 1975 ) and the variation of combinatorial links between remote concepts are key features which help to come up with new coherent states of diﬃcult problems ( Hélie and Sun , 2010 ) . Coherence in this framework could be understood as state of balance ( Heider , 1946 ) , in which the concepts within the constraint representation have a consistent interrelatedness without conﬂicts . Such a state leads to a higher process ﬂuency which causes detectable behavioral changes ( Wagner et al . , 2004 ; Topolinski and Strack , 2009c ) . Gestalt nodes ( Lakoﬀ , 2009 ) stand for the condensed meaning of the linked concepts and bind the given pieces of information together . Additionally , new meanings ( links ) could emerge by the binding processes . At the neural level , it seems plausible that Hebbian learning plays an important role and strengthens the connection between simultaneously activated concepts . Our model extends Bowers et al . ( 1990 ) model in a few aspects . In contrast to Bowers’ model we assume a constraining process at the guiding stage in addition to spreading activation . Importantly , the accumulation of information is not a necessary criterion for a coherent state in our model . The coherence - building in our model is implemented by constraint satisfaction . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 11 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 12 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building The result is a balanced state . If such a state is reached , then the process ﬂuency will increase , and cause behavioral changes ( Wagner et al . , 2004 ) . Those changes foster that the coherent state surpasses the threshold to consciousness . Coherence - building is recursive , widely implicit and consists of conﬂict resolution and the integration of information . The process is aﬀected and guided by attentional processes and deliberate thinking . We also emphasized the existence of a restructuring stage which overcomes already elicited coherent representations by changing the search space . This indicates a qualitative change in the problem - solving process . Still the constraint satisfaction process is active , but now more remote concepts could be integrated in a new representation . As we showed variation plays an important role to build those new associations ( Fedor et al . , 2017 ) . In our understanding restructuring demarcates intuition from insight . Intuition could result from the realization of a coherent representation resulting in a hunch how a problem could be solved and accompanied by aﬀective and cognitive processes . Whereas insight results from a restructured problem representation which allows a new and unusual solution to a problem which suddenly leads to a deep understanding of the given problem . That means intuition evaluates the coherence of the given information , whereas insight evaluates the result of restructuring . OPEN QUESTIONS AND LIMITATIONS An important premise that the four - stage model made is that constraint satisfaction and binding are the basic processes , one at a cognitive , the other a neural level . There are alternative accounts that question the idea of binding by synchrony ( Hayworth , 2012 ) or provide alternative accounts for the combination of information , such as the latching mechanism provided by Amati and Shallice ( 2007 ) , Song et al . ( 2014 ) or binding by convolution introduced by Thagard and Stewart ( 2011 ) . We leave this question open to be answered by future work . We are positive about the fact that our model would also work with an alternative binding process . Another open point is why the system tends to search for a coherent or state of balance ? Related to this point is the question , is it possible that there are problems where imbalance is necessary to solve the problem ? Furthermore , it would be helpful to determine at an individual level , which traits of characteristics of personality increase the probability of ﬁnding coherence . The notion of a rule - based account is also questionable . This refers to the notion of dual systems . Dual system accounts in general diﬀerentiate between a fast , unconscious , unlimited , holistic ( system 1 ) and a slow , deliberate , logical , restricted system ( system 2 ) ( Evans , 2008 ; Kahneman , 2012 ) . Insight and intuition are often assigned to system 1 processes . For many years , there have been discussions , whether such two separate systems , modes or processes are necessary , plausible , well - deﬁned and complete ( Evans , 2008 ; Kruglanski and Gigerenzer , 2011 ; Kahneman , 2012 ; Evans and Stanovich , 2013 ; Mega et al . , 2015 ) . In our line of argumentation , we followed Kruglanski and Gigerenzer ( 2011 ) who proposed a rule - based account in which the rules range between an explicit and implicit level . We think this account is also supported by the modeling accounts we reviewed above ( Hélie and Sun , 2010 ; Thomson et al . , 2015 ) . In contrast , Evans and Stanovich ( 2013 ) disagree with this proposal and argue that there are clear indicators for two systems . Most important would be the fact that only system 2 supports hypothetical thinking and showed heavy working memory load . Again , we are not in a position to resolve this discussion right now , but we think that our model might help to search for uniﬁed processes which vary in the processing stage . In sum , we hope to demonstrate a more general model on insight and intuition which shows that insight and intuition are the two diﬀerent sides of the same coin . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS MÖ provided the review on grouping phenomena in psychology . AvM developed the idea on coherence building and provided the philosophical foundations . REFERENCES Amati , D . , andShallice , T . ( 2007 ) . Ontheemergenceofmodernhumans . Cognition 103 , 358 – 385 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2006 . 04 . 002 Bolte , A . , and Goschke , T . ( 2008 ) . Intuition in the context of object perception : Intuitive gestalt judgments rest on the unconscious activation of semantic representations . Cognition 108 , 608 – 616 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2008 . 05 . 001 Bolte , A . , Goschke , T . , andKuhl , J . ( 2003 ) . Emotionandintuition : eﬀectsofpositive and negative mood on implicit judgments of semantic coherence . Psychol . Sci . 14 , 416 – 421 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 01456 Bowden , E . M . , and Beeman , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Getting the right idea : semantic activation in the right hemisphere may help solve insight problems . Psychol . Sci . 9 , 435 – 440 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 00082 Bowden , E . M . , Jung - Beeman , M . , Fleck , J . , andKounios , J . ( 2005 ) . Newapproaches to demystifying insight . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 , 322 – 328 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2005 . 05 . 012 Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , and Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . “Intuitive antecedents of insight , ” in The Creative Cognition Approach , eds S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , and R . A . Finke ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 27 – 52 . Bowers , K . S . , Regehr , G . , Balthazard , C . , and Parker , K . ( 1990 ) . Intuition in the context of discovery . Cognit . Psychol . 22 , 72 – 110 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 90 ) 90004 - N Cartwright , D . , and Harary , F . ( 1956 ) . Structural balance : a generalization of Heider’s theory . Psychol . Rev . 63 , 277 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0046049 Collins , A . M . , and Loftus , E . F . ( 1975 ) . A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psychol . Rev . 82 , 407 – 428 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 82 . 6 . 407 Danek , A . H . , Fraps , T . , von Müller , A . , Grothe , B . , and Öllinger , M . ( 2013 ) . Aha ! experiences leave a mark : facilitated recall of insight solutions . Psychol . Res . 77 , 659 – 669 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00426 - 012 - 0454 - 8 Danek , A . H . , Fraps , T . , von Müller , A . , Grothe , B . , and Öllinger , M . ( 2014 ) . Working Wonders ? Investigating insight with magic tricks . Cognition 130 , 174 – 185 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 11 . 003 Danek , A . H . , and Wiley , J . ( 2016 ) . What about false insights ? Deconstructing the Aha ! Experience along its multiple dimensions for correct and incorrect solutions separately . Front . Psychol . 7 : 2077 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2016 . 02077 Dayton , T . , Durso , F . T . , and Shepard , J . D . ( 1990 ) . “A measure of the knowledge reorganization underlying in sight , ” in Pathﬁnder Associative Networks Studies Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 12 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 13 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building in Knowledge Organization , ed . R . Sehvaneveldt ( Norwood , NJ : Ablex ) , 267 – 277 . Dehaene , S . ( 2009 ) . Originsofmathematicalintuitions : thecaseofarithmetic . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1156 , 232 – 259 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2009 . 04469 . x Dietrich , A . , and Haider , H . ( 2015 ) . Human creativity , evolutionary algorithms , and predictive representations : the mechanics of thought trials . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 22 , 897 – 915 . doi : 10 . 3758 / s13423 - 015 - 0925 - 1 Dorfman , J . , Shames , V . A . , and Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . “Intuition , incubation , and insight : implicit cognition in problem solving , ” in Implicit Cognition , ed . G . D . M . Underwood ( Oxford : The Oxford University Press ) , 257 – 296 . Duncker , K . ( 1935 ) . The Psychology of Productive Thought . Berlin : Springer . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On Problem - Solving , Vol . 58 . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Durso , F . T . , Rea , C . B . , and Dayton , T . ( 1994 ) . Graph - theoretic conﬁrmation of restructuring during insight . Psychol . Sci . 5 , 94 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 1994 . tb00637 . x Engel , A . K . , and Singer , W . ( 2001 ) . Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory awareness . Trends Cogn . Sci . 5 , 16 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 00 ) 01568 - 0 Ericsson , K . A . , and Simon , H . A . ( 1993 ) . Protocol Analysis : Verbal Reports as Data . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 2008 ) . Dual - Processing Accounts of Reasoning , Judgment , and Social Cognition . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 59 , 255 – 278 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 59 . 103006 . 093629 Evans , J . S . B . T . , and Stanovich , K . E . ( 2013 ) . Dual - process theories of higher cognition advancing the debate . Pers . Psychol . Sci . 8 , 223 – 241 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691612460685 Fedor , A . , Zachar , I . , Szilágyi , A . , Öllinger , M . , de Vladar , H . , and Szathmáry , E . ( 2017 ) . Cognitive architecture with evolutionary dynamics solves insight problem . Front . Psychol . 8 : 427 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 00427 Fleck , J . I . , and Weisberg , R . W . ( 2013 ) . Insight versus analysis : evidence for diversemethodsinproblemsolving . J . Cogn . Psychol . 25 , 436 – 463 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 20445911 . 2013 . 779248 Gaschler , R . , Vaterrodt , B . , Frensch , P . A . , Eichler , A . , and Haider , H . ( 2013 ) . Spontaneous usage of diﬀerent shortcuts based on the commutativity principle . PLoS ONE 8 : e74972 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0074972 Gick , M . L . , andHolyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognit . Psychol . 12 , 306 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 80 ) 90013 - 4 Gick , M . L . , and Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognit . Psychol . 15 , 1 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 83 ) 90002 - 6 Gigerenzer , G . , and Todd , P . M . ( 2001a ) . “Fast and frugal heuristics , ” in Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart , eds G . Gigerenzer and P . M . Todd ( New York , NY : Oxford University Press ) , 3 – 34 . Gigerenzer , G . , and Todd , P . M . ( 2001b ) . Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Grant , E . R . , andSpivey , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Eyemovementsandproblemsolving : guiding attention guides thought . Psychol . Sci . 14 , 462 – 466 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 02454 Haider , H . , Eberhardt , K . , Kunde , A . , and Rose , M . ( 2013 ) . Implicit visual learning and the expression of learning . Conscious . Cogn . 22 , 82 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2012 . 11 . 003 Haider , H . , andFrensch , P . A . ( 1999 ) . Eyemovementduringskillacquisition : more evidencefortheinformation - reductionhypothesis . J . Exp . Psychol . 25 , 172 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 25 . 1 . 172 Hayworth , K . J . ( 2012 ) . Dynamically partitionable autoassociative networks as a solution to the neural binding problem . Front . Comput . Neurosci . 6 : 73 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2012 . 00073 Hebb , D . O . ( 2005 ) . The Organization of Behavior : A Neuropsychological Theory . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Heider , F . ( 1946 ) . Attitudes and cognitive organization . J . Psychol . 21 , 107 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00223980 . 1946 . 9917275 Hélie , S . , and Sun , R . ( 2010 ) . Incubation , insight , and creative problem solving : a uniﬁed theory and a connectionist model . Psychol . Rev . 117 , 994 – 1024 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0019532 Holyoak , K . J . , and Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental Leaps : Analogy in Creative Thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Huth , A . G . , de Heer , W . A . , Griﬃths , T . L . , Theunissen , F . E . , and Gallant , J . L . ( 2016 ) . Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human cerebral cortex . Nature 532 , 453 – 458 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature 17637 Isaak , M . I . , and Just , M . A . ( 1995 ) . “Constraints on thinking in insight and invention , ” in The Nature of Insight , eds R . J . Sternberg and J . E . Davidson ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 281 – 325 . Jung - Beeman , M . , Bowden , E . M . , Haberman , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Arambel - Liu , S . , Greenblatt , R . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Neural activity when people solve verbal problems with insight . PLoS Biol . 2 : 500 – 510 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020097 Kahneman , D . ( 2012 ) . Thinking , Fast and Slow . London : Penguin . Katona , G . ( 1940 ) . Organizing and Memorizing : Studies in the Psychology of Learning and Teaching . New York , NY : Columbia University . Keren , G . ( 2013 ) . A tale of two systems a scientiﬁc advance or a theoretical stone soup ? Commentaryonevans & stanovich ( 2013 ) . Persp . Psychol . Sci . 8 , 257 – 262 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691613483474 Keren , G . , and Schul , Y . ( 2009 ) . Two is not always better than one a critical evaluation of two - system theories . Pers . Psychol . Sci . 4 , 533 – 550 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1745 - 6924 . 2009 . 01164 . x Kershaw , T . C . , Flynn , C . K . , and Gordon , L . T . ( 2013 ) . Multiple paths to transfer andconstraintrelaxationininsightproblemsolving . Think . Reason . 19 , 96 – 136 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2012 . 742852 Kershaw , T . C . , and Ohlsson , S . ( 2004 ) . Multiple causes of diﬃculty in insight : the case of the nine - dot problem . J . Exp . Psychol . 30 , 3 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 30 . 1 . 3 Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Attributions , awareness , and dissociation : in memoriam Kenneth S . Bowers , 1937 - 1996 . Am . J . Clin . Hypn . 40 , 194 – 205 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00029157 . 1998 . 10403426 Knoblich , G . , Ohlsson , S . , Haider , H . , andRhenius , D . ( 1999 ) . Constraintrelaxation and chunk decomposition in insight problem solving . J . Exp . Psychol . 25 , 1534 – 1555 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actpsy . 2008 . 08 . 008 Knoblich , G . , Ohlsson , S . , and Raney , G . E . ( 2001 ) . An eye movement study of insight problem solving . Mem . Cogn . 29 , 1000 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actpsy . 2008 . 08 . 008 Knoblich , G . , Öllinger , M . , and Spivey , M . J . ( 2005 ) . “Tracking the eyes to obtain insight into insight problem solving , ” in Cognitve Processes in Eye Guidance , ed . G . D . M . Underwood ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) , 355 – 375 . Koﬀka , K . ( 1935 ) . Principles of Gestalt Psychology . New York , NY : Harcourt , Brace und World . Köhler , W . ( 1947 ) . Gestalt Psychology . New York , NY : Liveright . Kounios , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Bowden , E . M . , Fleck , J . I . , Subramaniam , K . , Parrish , T . B . , et al . ( 2006 ) . The prepared mind . Psychol . Sci . 17 , 882 – 890 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2006 . 01798 . x Kruglanski , A . W . , and Gigerenzer , G . ( 2011 ) . Intuitive and deliberate judgments are based on common principles . Psychol . Rev . 118 , 97 – 109 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0020762 Lakoﬀ , G . ( 2009 ) . “The neural theory of metaphor , ” in The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought , ed . R . Gibbs ( New York , NY : Cambridge University Press ) . Lakoﬀ , G . ( 2014 ) . Mapping the brain’s metaphor circutry : metaphorical thought in everyday life . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 : 958 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2014 . 00958 Lakoﬀ , G . , and Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors We Live By . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1930 ) . Reasoning in humans . I . On direction . J . Compar . Psychol . 10 , 115 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0073232 McClelland , J . L . , and Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1989 ) . Explorations in Parallel Distributed Processing : A Handbook of Models , Programs , and Exercises . Cambridge , MA : MIT press . McClelland , J . L . , Rumelhart , D . E . , and Hinton , G . E . ( 1986 ) . “The appeal of parallel distributed processing , ” in Parallel Distributed Processing : Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Foundations , Vol . 1 ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 3 – 44 . Mednick , S . A . , and Mednick , M . T . ( 1967 ) . Examiner’s Manual : Remote Associates Test . Boston , MA : Houghton Miﬄin . Mega , L . F . , Gigerenzer , G . , and Volz , K . G . ( 2015 ) . Do intuitive and deliberate judgments rely on two distinct neural systems ? A case study in face processing . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 9 : 456 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2015 . 00456 Metcalfe , J . , and Wiebe , D . ( 1987 ) . Intuition in insight and noninsight problem solving . Mem . Cogn . 15 , 238 – 246 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03197722 Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 13 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827 fpsyg - 08 - 00827 May 24 , 2017 Time : 15 : 59 # 14 Öllinger and von Müller Search and Coherence - Building Necker , L . A . ( 1832 ) . LXI . Observationsonsomeremarkableopticalphaenomenon seen in Switzerland ; and on an optical phaenomenon which occurs on viewing a ﬁgure of a crystal or geometrical solid . Philos . Mag . J . Sci . 1 , 329 – 337 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14786443208647909 Newell , A . , and Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human Problem Solving . Englewood Cliﬀs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Ohlsson , S . ( 1984a ) . Restructuring revisited : I . Summary and critique of the Gestalt theory of problem solving . Scand . J . Psychol . 25 , 65 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9450 . 1984 . tb01001 . x Ohlsson , S . ( 1984b ) . Restructuring revisited : II . An information processing theory of restructuring and insight . Scand . J . Psychol . 25 , 117 – 129 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9450 . 1984 . tb01005 . x Ohlsson , S . ( 1990 ) . “The mechanism of restructuring in geometry , ” in Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , ( Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates ) , 237 – 244 . Ohlsson , S . ( 1992 ) . “Information - processing explanations of insight and related phenomena , ” in Advances in the Psychology of Thinking , eds M . Keane and K . Gilhooly ( London : Harvester - Wheatsheaf ) , 1 – 44 . Ohlsson , S . ( 2011 ) . DeepLearning : HowtheMindOverridesExperience . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511780295 Öllinger , M . ( 2009 ) . “EEG and thinking , ” in Neural Correlates of Thinking , eds E . Kraft , B . Gulyás , and E . Pöppel ( Berlin : Springer ) , 65 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 68044 - 4 _ 5 Öllinger , M . , Jones , G . , Faber , A . H . , and Knoblich , G . ( 2013 ) . Cognitive mechanisms of insight : the role of heuristics and representational change in solving the eight - coin problem . J . Exp . Psychol . 39 , 931 – 940 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0029194 Öllinger , M . , Jones , G . , and Knoblich , G . ( 2006 ) . Heuristics and representational change in two - move matchstick arithmetic tasks . Adv . Cogn . Psychol . 2 , 239 – 253 . doi : 10 . 2478 / v10053 - 008 - 0059 - 3 Öllinger , M . , Jones , G . , and Knoblich , G . ( 2008 ) . Investigating the eﬀect of mental set on insight problem solving . Exp . Psychol . 55 , 269 – 282 . doi : 10 . 1027 / 1618 - 3169 . 55 . 4 . 269 Öllinger , M . , Jones , G . , and Knoblich , G . ( 2014 ) . The dynamics of search , impasse , and representational change provide a coherent explanation of diﬃculty in the nine - dot problem . Psychol . Res . 78 , 266 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00426 - 013 - 0494 - 8 Öllinger , M . , and Knoblich , G . ( 2009 ) . “Psychological research on insight problem solving , ” in Recasting Reality , eds H . Atmanspacher and H . Primas ( Berlin : Springer ) , 275 – 300 . Salvi , C . , Bricolo , E . , Kounios , J . , Bowden , E . , and Beeman , M . ( 2016 ) . Insight solutions are correct more often than analytic solutions . Think . Reas . 22 , 443 – 460 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2016 . 1141798 Shirley , D . A . , and Langan - Fox , J . ( 1996 ) . Intuition : a review of the literature . Psychol . Rep . 79 , 563 – 584 . doi : 10 . 2466 / pr0 . 1996 . 79 . 2 . 563 Singer , W . ( 1999 ) . “Binding by neural synchrony , ” in The MIT Encyclopedia of the CognitiveSciences , edsR . WilsonandF . C . Keil ( Cambridge : MITPress ) , 81 – 84 . Song , S . , Yao , H . , andTreves , A . ( 2014 ) . Amodularlatchingchain . Cogn . Neurodyn . 8 , 37 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11571 - 013 - 9261 - 1 Sternberg , R . J . , and Davidson , J . E . ( 1995 ) . The Nature of Insight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Tallon - Baudry , C . ( 2003 ) . Oscillatory synchrony and human visual cognition . J . Physiol . 97 , 355 – 363 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jphysparis . 2003 . 09 . 009 Tallon - Baudry , C . , and Bertrand , O . ( 1999 ) . Oscillatory gamma activity in humans and its role in object representation . Trends Cogn . Sci . 3 , 151 – 162 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 99 ) 01299 - 1 Tentori , K . , Crupi , V . , andRusso , S . ( 2013 ) . Onthedeterminantsoftheconjunction fallacy : probability versus inductive conﬁrmation . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 142 , 235 – 255 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0028770 Thagard , P . ( 2002 ) . Coherence in Thought and Action . Cambridge , MA : MIT press . Thagard , P . , and Stewart , T . C . ( 2011 ) . The AHA ! experience : creativity through emergent binding in neural networks . Cogn . Sci . 35 , 1 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2010 . 01142 . x Thagard , P . , and Verbeurgt , K . ( 1998 ) . Coherence as constraint satisfaction . Cogn . Sci . 22 , 1 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog2201 _ 1 Thomson , R . , Lebiere , C . , Anderson , J . R . , and Staszewski , J . ( 2015 ) . A general instance - based learning framework for studying intuitive decision - making in a cognitive architecture . J . Appl . Res . Mem . Cogn . 4 , 180 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jarmac . 2014 . 06 . 002 Topolinski , S . , Likowski , K . U . , Weyers , P . , and Strack , F . ( 2009 ) . The face of ﬂuency : semantic coherence automatically elicits a speciﬁc pattern of facial muscle reactions . Cogn . Emot . 23 , 260 – 271 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02699930801994112 Topolinski , S . , and Reber , R . ( 2010 ) . Gaining insight into the “Aha” experience . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 19 , 402 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 096372141 0388803 Topolinski , S . , and Strack , F . ( 2009a ) . Scanning the “fringe” of consciousness : what is felt and what is not felt in intuitions about semantic coherence . Consc . Cogn . 18 , 608 – 618 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2008 . 06 . 002 Topolinski , S . , and Strack , F . ( 2009b ) . The analysis of intuition : processing ﬂuency and aﬀect in judgements of semantic coherence . Cogn . Emot . 23 , 1465 – 1503 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02699930802420745 Topolinski , S . , and Strack , F . ( 2009c ) . The architecture of intuition : ﬂuency and aﬀect determine intuitive judgments of semantic and visual coherence and judgmentsofgrammaticalityinartiﬁcialgrammarlearning . J . Exp . Psychol . 138 , 39 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0014678 Tversky , A . , and Kahneman , D . ( 1983 ) . Extensional versus intuitive reasoning : the conjunction fallacy in probability judgment . Psychol . Rev . 90 , 293 – 315 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 90 . 4 . 293 Uhlhaas , P . J . , Linden , D . E . J . , Singer , W . , Haenschel , C . , Lindner , M . , Maurer , K . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Dysfunctional long - range coordination of neural activity during Gestalt perception in schizophrenia . J . Neurosci . 26 , 8168 – 8175 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2002 - 06 . 2006 Volz , K . G . , Rübsamen , R . , and von Cramon , D . Y . ( 2008 ) . Cortical regions activated by the subjective sense of perceptual coherence of environmental sounds : aproposalforaneuroscienceofintuition . Cogn . Aﬀect . Behav . Neurosci . 8 , 318 – 328 . doi : 10 . 3758 / CABN . 8 . 3 . 318 von Müller , A . ( 2015 ) . Re - Thinking Time at the Interface of Physics and Philosophy : The Forgotten Present , Vol . 4 . Berlin : Springer , 1 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 10446 - 1 Wagner , U . , Gais , S . , Haider , H . , Verleger , R . , and Born , J . ( 2004 ) . Sleep inspires insight . Nature 427 , 352 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature 02223 Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The Art of Thought . New York , NY : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Weisberg , R . W . , and Alba , J . W . ( 1981 ) . An examination of the alleged role of “ﬁxation” in the solution of several “insight” problems . J . Exp . Psychol . 110 , 169 – 192 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 110 . 2 . 169 Wertheimer , M . ( 1923 ) . Untersuchungen zur lehre von der gestalt . II . Psychol . Forsch . 4 , 301 – 350 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00410640 Wertheimer , M . ( 1925 ) . Drei Abhandlungen zur Gestalttheorie . Erlangen : Verlag der Philosophischen Akademie . Wertheimer , M . ( 1959 ) . Productive Thinking . New York , NY : Harper . Zander , T . , Öllinger , M . , and Volz , K . ( 2016 ) . Intuition and insight : two processes that build on each other or fundamentally diﬀer ? Front . Psychol . 7 : 1395 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2016 . 01395 Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2017 Öllinger and von Müller . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 14 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 827