Contents lists available at ScienceDirect International Journal of Pharmaceutics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ijpharm Comparison of exosome - mimicking liposomes with conventional liposomes for intracellular delivery of siRNA Mei Lu a , Xiaoyun Zhao b , Haonan Xing a , Zhe Xun c , Shimeng Zhu a , Lang Lang a , Tianzhi Yang d , Cuifang Cai a , Dongkai Wang a , ⁎ , Pingtian Ding a , ⁎ a School of Pharmacy , Shenyang Pharmaceutical University , Shenyang , China b School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics , Shenyang Pharmaceutical University , Shenyang , China c China Institute of Metabolic Disease Research and Drug Development , China Medical University , Shenyang , China d Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences , School of Pharmacy , Husson University , Bangor , ME , USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Exosomes Liposomes Intracellular delivery Silencing e ﬃ ciency siRNA A B S T R A C T Exosomes have been extensively explored as delivery vehicles due to low immunogenicity , e ﬃ cient cargo de - livery , and possibly intrinsic homing capacity . However , therapeutic application of exosomes is hampered by structural complexity and lack of e ﬃ cient techniques for isolation and drug loading . Liposomes represent one of the most successful therapeutic nanocarriers , but are frequently criticized by short blood circulation and in - e ﬃ cient intracellular drug delivery . In this circumstance , a promising strategy is to facilitate a positive feedback between two ﬁ elds . Herein , exosome - mimicking liposomes were formulated with DOPC / SM / Chol / DOPS / DOPE ( 21 / 17 . 5 / 30 / 14 / 17 . 5 , mol / mol ) , and harnessed for delivery of VEGF siRNA to A549 and HUVEC cells . Compared with Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes , exosome - mimicking liposomes exhibited less than four - fold cytotoxicity but higher storage stability and anti - serum aggregation e ﬀ ect . Exosome - mimicking liposomes ap - peared to enter A549 cells through membrane fusion , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , and macropinocytosis , while enter HUVEC through caveolae - mediated endocytosis , which revealed that the uptake pathway was de - pendent on cell types . Notably , exosome - mimicking liposomes exhibited signi ﬁ cantly higher cellular uptake and silencing e ﬃ ciency than PC - Chol liposomes ( > three - fold ) , suggesting the unique lipid composition did enhance the intracellular delivery e ﬃ ciency of exosome - mimicking liposomes to a signi ﬁ cantly greater extent . However , it still remained far from satisfactory delivery as compared to cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes , which warranted further improvement in future research . This study may encourage further pursuit of more exosome - mimicking delivery vehicles with higher e ﬃ ciency and biocompatibility . 1 . Introduction Exosomes are a submicron group of extracellular membrane - en - closed vesicles that are secreted by nearly all cell types , and encapsulate macromolecular nucleic acids and proteins ( Raposo and Stoorvogel , 2013 ) . The discovery that exosomes are capable of functionally trans - ferring their cargoes between cells locally or at long distance , has cre - ated considerable excitement in the ﬁ eld of drug delivery , where e ﬃ - cient and safe delivery of therapeutics is desired ( Valadi et al . , 2007 ) . During the last decade , exosomes have been widely studied for ther - apeutic delivery ( Antimisiaris et al . , 2017 ; Lu et al . , 2018a ; Perteghella et al . , 2017 ) . To the best of our knowledge , a clinical phase Ⅱ trial ( NCT01854866 ) has been registered by National Institute of Health ( NIH ) to test the safety and e ﬃ cacy of exosomes loaded with chemotherapeutic drugs in the treatment of malignant ascites and pleural e ﬀ usion ( Lener et al . , 2015 ) . It is well - known that the speci ﬁ c composition of exosomes contributes to the e ﬃ cient uptake by recipient cells in vitro and in vivo ( Smyth et al . , 2015 , 2014 ) . Actually , exosomes are characterized by several favorable characteristics for therapeutic delivery , such as lower immunogenicity but higher biocompatibility , greater circulation stability when self - derived exosomes are used , en - dogenous homing capacity that allows them to cross biological mem - branes for targeting speci ﬁ c cells , and superior cytosolic delivery e ﬃ - ciency ( Johnsen et al . , 2014 ; Kooijmans et al . , 2012 ) . However , exosomes displayed complex structures that are di ﬃ cult to characterize pharmaceutically ( Johnsen et al . , 2014 ) . Exosome composition varies with cell type and its physiological state , which may cause problems when considering standardization and reproducibility ( Barile and https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijpharm . 2018 . 08 . 040 Received 30 April 2018 ; Received in revised form 12 August 2018 ; Accepted 19 August 2018 ⁎ Corresponding authors at : School of Pharmacy , Shenyang Pharmaceutical University , No . 103 , Wenhua Road , Shenyang 110016 , China . E - mail addresses : Wangdksy @ 126 . com ( D . Wang ) , dingpingtian @ qq . com ( P . Ding ) . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 Available online 20 August 2018 0378 - 5173 / © 2018 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . T Vassalli , 2017 ) . Besides , the multifaceted roles of exosomes in various physiopathological processes , such as transfer of pathogens or other disease - associated molecules , are far from being thorough under - standing , which may lead to potential side - e ﬀ ects when employing exosomes for therapeutic purpose ( Shao et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , translation of natural exosomes to the clinic is often constrained by the lack of methods for scalable isolation and e ﬃ cient drug loading ( Lu et al . , 2017 ; Stremersch et al . , 2016 ) . In this regard , an alternative strategy to harness exosomes for therapeutic delivery is to develop exosome mimetics . Liposomes are synthetic , enclosed lipid vesicles that closely re - semble exosomes in structure ( bilayered phospholipid structure ) and size ( tuneable diameters ) . During the past three decades , liposomes have been shown to be a valuable drug nanocarrier with > 12 ther - apeutics in routine clinical use , such as Doxil ® and AmBisome ® ( Caracciolo , 2015 ) . Liposomes possess many advantageous features for drug delivery , including well - characterized structure , easy preparation and scalability , e ﬃ cient drug loading , adjustable size and surface charge , facile and controllable surface functionalization , and robust preclinical and clinical evidences of therapeutic relevance ( Johnsen et al . , 2018 ) . However , like most types of nanoparticles , liposomes are easily recognized by the immune system and hardly internalized by target cells ( Caracciolo , 2015 ) . Given the certain advantages and disadvantages of exosomes and liposomes , a positive feedback could be facilitated between the two ﬁ elds , in which superiority from exosome ﬁ eld regarding special lipid compositions bene ﬁ cial for cellular internalization , circulation , or tar - geting accumulation , could be employed to design advanced liposomal delivery vehicles with higher e ﬃ ciency and biocompatibility ( Johnsen et al . , 2018 ) . Following the strategy , a new generation of liposomal nanodelivery platform combining the bene ﬁ ts of endogenous exosomes ( e . g . e ﬃ cient drug delivery , limited immunogenicity , and improved circulatory property ) with the ease of production and drug loading of liposomes would be generated ( Kooijmans et al . , 2012 ) . Interestingly , the assembly of exosome - mimicking liposomes has been shown to be capable of mimicking natural exosomes in speci ﬁ c functionality ( Record et al . , 2014 ) . For example , it has been reported that exosome - mimicking liposomes exhibited high membrane fusion property and stability , which closely resembled natural exosomes ( Haque et al . , 2001 ) . Recently , it was observed that exosome - mimicking liposomes were able to trigger tumor cell death , although they displayed distinct size and lacked speci ﬁ c exosome markers ( Beloribi et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , the lipid composition of natural exosomes could provide a way to generate the optimal lipid composition of liposomes . In this study , we prepared exosome - mimicking liposomes with lipid composi - tion , size , and zeta potential mimicking natural exosomes for delivery of siRNA . Two cells of di ﬀ erent origins , including adenocarcinomic human alveolar basal epithelial A549 cells and endothelial HUVEC cells , were utilized for better evaluation of the delivery property of exosome - mimicking liposomes . In order to investigate the importance of the unique lipid composition of exosome with respect to cellular uptake and endosomal escape , conventional DOTAP and PC - Chol lipo - somes were prepared for comparisons . It is worth to mention that an - giogenesis , driven by vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) which is highly expressed in tumor cells , plays a key role in tumor growth and metastasis ( Yoo et al . , 2007 ) . In recent years , VEGF - targeting siRNA therapy holds tremendous promise to downregulate the expression of VEGF and to suppress blood vessel growth for starving tumors of oxygen and nutrient ( Park et al . , 2010 ) . In this study , VEGF siRNA was chosen as a model drug to assess the intracellular delivery e ﬃ ciency and cytotoxicity of exosome - mimicking liposomes and conventional liposomes . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine ( DOPE ) , and 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - 3 - trimethy - lammonium - propane ( chloride salt ) ( DOTAP ) were purchased from Cordenpharma ( Liestal , Switzerland ) . Cholesterol ( Chol ) was obtained from Nippon Fine Chemical Co . Ltd . ( Tokyo , Japan ) . 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine ( sodium salt ) ( DOPS ) and sphingomyelin ( SM ) ( Egg , Chicken ) were commercially available from Lipoid ( Ludwigshafen , Germany ) . Scramble siRNA ( siNC , sense strand : 5 ′ - UUCUCCGAACGU GUCACGUTT - 3 ′ ) , FAM - labeled negative siRNA ( FAM - siNC , 5 ′ - end of the sense strand ) , and anti - VEGF siRNA ( siVEGF , sense strand : 5 ′ - GGAGUACCCUGAUGAGAU CdTdT - 3 ′ ) were supplied by Genepharma ( Shanghai , China ) . Dulbecco ’ s modi ﬁ ed Eagle ’ s Medium ( DMEM ) was obtained from Corning ( New York , NY , USA ) . Roswell Park Memorial Institute ( RPMI ) 1640 medium was supplied by Hyclone ( Logan , Utah , USA ) . Fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) was purchased from Zhejiang Tianhang Biotechnology Co . , Ltd . ( Hangzhou , China ) . Lipofectamine 2000 ( Lipo 2000 ) , penicillin , streptomycin , and trypsin were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientifc ( Waltham , MA , USA ) . Thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) was purchased from Sigma - Aldrich Co . Ltd . ( St Louis , MO , USA ) . Octadecyl Rhodamine B Chloride ( R18 ) was obtained from Biotium Inc . ( Hayward , CA , USA ) . Hoechst 33 , 342 was provided by Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology ( Shanghai , China ) . Human VEGF enzyme - linked immunosorbent ( ELISA ) kit was supplied by Nanjing Jin Yibai Biological Technology Co . Ltd . ( Nanjing , China ) . PrimeScript ™ RT reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser ( Perfect Real Time ) and SYBR ® Premix Ex Taq ™ Ⅱ ( Tli RNaseH Plus ) were bought from Takara Biomedical Technology Co . , Ltd . ( Dalian , China ) . 2 . 2 . Cell culture Human lung carcinoma A549 cells were kindly provided by the Department of Biology , Shenyang Normal University ( Shenyang , China ) . Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) were kindly gifted by the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , China Medical University ( Shenyang , China ) . A549 cells were grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS , 100 units / mL pe - nicillin G sodium , and 100 μ g / mL streptomycin sulfate . HUVEC cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS , 100 units / mL penicillin G sodium , and 100 μ g / mL streptomycin sulfate . Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidi ﬁ ed atmosphere con - taining 5 % CO 2 . All experiments were performed when cell con ﬂ uence reached 60 % – 80 % . 2 . 3 . Liposome preparation and characterization To mimic the lipid composition of exosomes , exosome - mimicking liposomes ( EXO ) were prepared with DOPC / SM / Chol / DOPS / DOPE at a molar ratio of 21 / 17 . 5 / 30 / 14 / 17 . 5 ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ; Smyth et al . , 2015 , 2014 ; Subra et al . , 2007 ) . DOTAP liposomes were for - mulated with DOTAP , DOPC , and Chol at a molar ratio of 40 / 40 / 20 . PC - Chol liposomes were prepared with DOPC and Chol at a molar ratio of 70 / 30 . All liposomal formulations were prepared by dissolving lipid mixtures with chloroform in a pear - shaped ﬂ ask . A lipid ﬁ lm was formed by evaporating chloroform under vacuum at 28 °C . Subse - quently , the ﬁ lm was hydrated with siRNA ( siNC , FAM - siNC , and si - VEGF , respectively ) solution in sterilized PBS ( pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 01 M ) , pre - treated with DEPC , and shaken at 45 °C for 30 min . The lipid concentration was not measured in various liposomal formulations used in the experiments . To obtain uniformly sized liposomes , the lipid / PBS mixture was extruded 21 × through 100 nm pore sized polycarbonate membranes ( Avestin , Ottawa , Canada ) . Size and zeta potential of exosome - mimicking liposomes and M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 101 conventional liposomes were measured by dispersing liposomal for - mulations in PBS ( pH7 . 4 , 0 . 01 M ) at 25 °C via a Zetasizer nano ZS90 ( Malvern Instruments , Malvern , UK ) . Data for each sample was ana - lyzed by a Dispersion Technology software ( version 7 . 01 , Malvern Instruments ) . All the measurements were performed in triplicate , and the generated data were then averaged . 2 . 4 . Determination of entrapment e ﬃ ciency ( EE ) The siRNA entrapment e ﬃ ciency was determined by an ultra - ﬁ l - tration method as previously described with a slight modi ﬁ cation ( Gao et al . , 2012 ) . Di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations entrapping FAM - siNC were ultracentrifuged by using Amicon ® Ultra - 4 centrifugal ﬁ lter de - vices ( 100 , 000 NMWL , Millipore , Massachusetts ) . After thoroughly ultra - ﬁ ltration at 5000 rpm for 90 min , the ﬂ uorescence intensity of initially FAM - siNC and un - encapsulated FAM - siNC were measured by a spectro ﬂ uorometer ( In ﬁ nite 200Pro , TECAN , Switzerland ) with ex - citation and emission wavelengths of 495 and 525 nm , respectively . The amount of initially added FAM - siNC and un - encapsulated FAM - siNC was quanti ﬁ ed using a calibration curve obtained from standard FAM - siNC solutions . The EE % of siRNA was calculated using the following equation : = − × EE ( % ) ( M M ) / M 100 % i U i where M i and M U represent the mass of initially added siRNA and un - encapsulated siRNA , respectively . 2 . 5 . Stability studies Di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations loaded with siVEGF was in - vestigated for physical stability over a period of one month . These ve - sicles were stored in tightly closed amber colored glass vials at 4 – 8 °C . To be speci ﬁ c , the particle size and zeta potential of these formulations were measured after 0 , 15 , and 30 days ’ storage . To investigate the stability of liposomes in serum , 100 μ L of each siVEGF / liposomes ( siVEGF = 30 nM ) was incubated with 100 μ L FBS in 96 - well plates at 37 °C , as previously described ( Feng et al . , 2014 ) . Aggregation induced by serum was analyzed in terms of turbidity by determining the ab - sorbance values at 630 nm with a microplate reader ( In ﬁ nite M200PRO , TECAN , Switzerland ) at 0 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 10 , 12 h . Relative turbidity was calculated by dividing the turbidity at each time point by the turbidity of time zero . A solution mixture of 100 μ L PBS ( pH7 . 4 , 0 . 01 M ) and 100 μ L FBS was used as negative control . 2 . 6 . MTT cytotoxicity assay The cytotoxicity of various liposomal formulations was determined using A549 cells . The cells were seeded in 96 - well plates at a density of 4000 per well and cultured overnight . Liposomes were loaded with siVEGF ( 30 nM ) at di ﬀ erent molar ratios ( 500 / 1 , 1000 / 1 , 2000 / 1 , and 4000 / 1 ) . Then , the cells were incubated with 100 μ L medium con - taining di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations for 48 h . Next , 20 μ L / well of MTT solution ( 5 mg / mL ) was added and incubated with cells for 4 h . Afterwards , the medium was discarded and replaced with 200 μ L / well of DMSO to dissolve the formazan crystals that was formed in cells . The absorbance of formazan solution was measured at 490 nm using a mi - croplate reader ( In ﬁ nite M200PRO , TECAN , Switzerland ) . The absor - bance of cells without treatment was taken as 100 % cell viability . The cell viability of each formulation was calculated according to the fol - lowing formula : = × Cellviability ( % ) ( OD / OD ) 100 , 490 ( sample ) 490 ( control ) where OD 490 ( sample ) is the absorbance obtained from cells treated with di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations , and OD 490 ( control ) is that obtained from cells without any treatment . 2 . 7 . Measurement of cellular uptake by ﬂ ow cytometry ( FCM ) and ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( FM ) Two types of cells ( A549 and HUVEC ) were seeded into 12 - well plates at a density of 1 × 10 5 cells per well and allowed to attach overnight . The next day , culture medium was discarded and replaced by serum - free medium containing di ﬀ erent FAM - siNC / liposomes ( FAM - siNC = 30 nM ) . After transfection for 4 h , the culture medium was re - moved and the cells were analyzed by two parallel experiments : FCM and FM . For FCM analysis , the cells were detached and washed with pre - cooled PBS solution for three times . FCM assay was performed to determine the cellular uptake of FAM - siNC per 10 , 000 cells by using a ﬂ ow cytometer ( FACScan , BD Biosciences , USA ) , with an excitation wavelength of 488 nm . For FM analysis , cells were visualized under a Leica DMI 3000B inverted ﬂ uorescence microscope ( Leica Microsystems , Heidelberg , Germany ) with an excitation wavelength of 488 nm and a magni ﬁ cation of 100× . Cells without any treatments and exposure to FAM - siNC / Lipo 2000 were used as negative and positive controls , respectively . 2 . 8 . Visualization of cellular distribution by confocal laser scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) A549 and HUVEC cells were seeded into glass - bottom dishes ( d = 35 mm ) at a density of 1 × 10 5 cells per dish and cultured over - night . The culture medium was removed and replaced with serum - free fresh medium containing di ﬀ erent FAM - siNC liposomal formulations . The ﬁ nal concentration of FAM - siNC was 30 nM . After 4 h incubation , the culture medium was removed and the cells were washed thrice with PBS , and then ﬁ xed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature . After that , the cells were individually stained by Hoechst 33 , 342 and Octadecyl Rhodamine B Chloride ( R18 ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Confocal images were recorded using a Nikon C2si confocal scanning module ( Nikon Eclipse Ti , Tokyo , Japan ) , equipped with a motorized TE2000 - E inverted microscope ( 22 μ m slit , Nikon ) and a 100× oil immersion objective lens ( NA 1 . 4 , Nikon ) . Hoechst 33342 , FAM - siRNA , and Octadecyl Rhodamine B Chloride ( R18 ) were excited with 408 nm , 488 nm , and 543 . 5 nm lasers , re - spectively . 2 . 9 . E ﬀ ects of endocytosis inhibitors on cellular uptake To explore the endocytic pathway of liposomal formulations , A549 and HUVEC cells were pre - treated with various endocytosis inhibitors , including chlorpromazine ( 10 μ g / mL ) , indomethacin ( 8 μ g / mL ) , and amiloride ( 5 μ g / mL ) for 1 h . Then , the cells were incubated with dif - ferent FAM - siNC / liposomes ( FAM - siNC = 30 nM ) for 4 h . Chemical in - hibitors were presented throughout the whole transfection process . After transfection , the culture medium was removed and the cells were analyzed by FCM , as described in Section 2 . 7 . Cells without exposure to endocytosis inhibitors were used as control . 2 . 10 . Membrane fusion assay The fusion ability of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations was measured by applying a ﬂ uorogenic de - quenching assay ( Montecalvo et al . , 2012 ; Parolini et al . , 2009 ) . Liposomes were labeled with 1 mM R18 ( 1 h , room temperature ) and then puri ﬁ ed by using a sephadex G - 75 column ( 20 × 1 cm ) equilibrated with PBS ( pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 01 ) . 10 μ g R18 - labeled liposomes were added to 2 mL HEPES - NaCl bu ﬀ er ( pH 7 . 4 ) and pre - equilibrated at 37 °C for 2 min . Afterwards , fusion was initiated by adding unlabeled A549 cells ( 1 × 10 6 ) , and ﬂ uorescence was con - tinuously monitored for 30 min on a spectro ﬂ uorometer ( SpectraMax M3 , Molecular Devices , USA ) at 560 nm excitation and 590 nm emis - sion ( interval 30 s ) . The assay was stopped by adding 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 ( T X100 ) . The ﬂ uorescence increased after the addition of A549 cells M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 102 was expressed as the percentage of maximal ﬂ uorescence de - quenching ( FD % ) , and calculated as follows : = − − × FD ( % ) [ ( F F ) / ( F F ) ] 100 , i max i where F is the ﬂ uorescence intensity at each time point before detergent disruption , F i is the initial ﬂ uorescence of R18 - labeled liposomes , and F max is the maximum ﬂ uorescence of R18 after the addition of Triton X - 100 . To further investigate the fusion activity of exosome - mimicking liposomes with other cell type , HUVEC was adopted and treated with the same methods as described above . 2 . 11 . Determination of VEGF gene silencing by ELISA A549 cells ( 1 × 10 5 ) were seeded into 12 - well plates and incubated overnight . The culture medium was discarded and replaced with serum - free medium containing di ﬀ erent siVEGF - loaded liposomal formula - tions . The ﬁ nal concentration of siVEGF ( or siNC ) was 30 nM . Cells were treated as described previously ( Yang et al . , 2014 ) . To be speci ﬁ c , after incubation for 4 h at 37 °C , the transfection medium was replaced with fresh complete medium , and followed by 6 h incubation to gain the maximum inhibitory e ﬃ cacy on VEGF expression . Afterwards , the culture medium was removed and the cells were incubated with fresh complete medium for another 38 h . Finally , the culture medium was harvested and analyzed by using a human VEGF immunoassay kit ac - cording to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Untreated cells and cells exposure to siVEGF / Lipo 2000 were used as negative and positive controls , respectively . 2 . 12 . Determination of VEGF mRNA level by RT - qPCR For assessment of cellular VEGF mRNA level , A549 cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 ) were seeded into 12 - well plates and allowed to attach overnight . Before transfection , the culture medium was removed and replaced with serum - free medium containing di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations ( siVEGF or siNC = 30 nM ) . After 4 h incubation , the culture medium was replaced with fresh complete medium , and cells were treated with the same procedures described in Section 2 . 11 . Finally , the cells were washed with PBS for three times and total RNA was puri ﬁ ed using trizol ( Takara , Dalian , China ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . cDNA was made by using PrimeScript ™ RT reagent Kit [ with gDNA Eraser ( Perfect Real Time ) kit ] supplied with 1000 ng of total RNA . qPCR was done using SYBR ® Premix Ex Taq ™ Ⅱ ( Tli RNaseH Plus ) kit on a ABI 7500 Real - Time PCR system ( Applied Biosystems , Shanghai , China ) . VEGF expression level was expressed as the fold changes re - lative to the untreated cells and normalized to the expression of a stable housekeeping gene GAPDH . Primer sequences were listed as follows : VEGF ( + ) : 5 ′ - GAGGGCAGAATCATCACGAAGT - 3 ′ , VEGF ( – ) : 5 ′ - GGTG AGGTTTGATCCGCATAA - 3 ′ , GAPDH ( + ) : 5 ′ - GGGTGTGAACCATGAGA AGT - 3 ′ , GAPDH ( – ) : 5 ′ - GACTGTGGTCAT GAGTCCT - 3 ′ . The cycling procedure was as follow : 1 cycle at 95 °C for 30 s followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 34 s . 2 . 13 . Statistical analysis All data were presented as mean ± standard deviation ( SD ) of at least three samples . Statistical analysis was done using Student ’ s t - test or one - way analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) with Graphpad Prism 7 ( Graphpad Software , CA , USA ) . P values < 0 . 05 were considered sta - tistically signi ﬁ cant ( * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 ) . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Generation and characterization of exosome - mimicking liposomes The lipid composition of exosomes has been extensively studied . In general , exosomes shared a common feature with parent cells in lipid type . Although no consensus on the lipid composition of exosomes of di ﬀ erent origins has been reached , there appeared to be a lot of trends conserved across various cell types ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ; Subra et al . , 2007 ; Vlassov et al . , 2012 ) . Compared with donor cells , exosomes showed an enrichment in SM and Chol , implying that exosome mem - brane contain raft - like domains ( de Gassart et al . , 2003 ; Llorente et al . , 2013 ) . Of note , the elevated level of SM at expense of PC represented a lipidic signature of exosomes ( Record et al . , 2014 ) . Besides , exosomes were also shown to be highly enriched in PS as compared to their parent cells ( Matsuo et al . , 2004 ) . In contrast , the level of PE in exosomes remained relatively unchanged when comparing with donor cells ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ; Smyth et al . , 2014 ) . These features revealed an extraordinary sorting of lipids into exosomes during the biogenesis process ( Wubbolts et al . , 2003 ) . In addition to lipid type , there were also conserved trends in the lipid percentage of exosomes secreted by di ﬀ erent cell types ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ; Llorente et al . , 2013 ; Parolini et al . , 2009 ) . By compiling the lipid composition of exosomes reported in the literature , it was found that exosomes comprised typi - cally two - fold increase in the molar percentage of Chol ( 30 % of all li - pids ) as compared to donor cells ( Smyth et al . , 2014 ; Subra et al . , 2007 ; Wubbolts et al . , 2003 ) . Additionally , exosomes contained about 2 . 5 - fold SM ( 25 % of phospholipid ) and two - fold PS ( 20 % of phospholipid ) with respect to parent cells ( Smyth et al . , 2014 ; Subra et al . , 2007 ) . PE ap - peared to remain relatively unchanged in exosomes ( about 25 % ) compared with donor cells ( Laulagnier et al . , 2005 ) . In contrast , PC seemed to decrease from 55 % to approximately 30 % of phospholipid content in exosomes ( Skotland et al . , 2017 ; Smyth et al . , 2014 ) . Building o ﬀ these results , we attempted to formulate exosome - mi - micking liposomes with a lipid composition mimicking that of exo - somes by choosing DOPC , SM , Chol , DOPS , and DOPE at a molar ratio of 21 / 17 . 5 / 30 / 14 / 17 . 5 . DOTAP liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes were prepared as comparisons for assessing the delivery properties of exo - some - mimicking liposomes . DOTAP liposomes were widely used as cationic nanocarriers for their well - known ability to enhance the transfection e ﬃ ciency of genes ( Yin et al . , 2014 ) . PC - Chol liposomes were formulated because they have been extensively studied and had a similar lipid composition to Daunoxomes ® , a commercial anticancer liposome product . Liposomes were prepared by a ﬁ lm hydration procedure . Table 1 showed the particle size and zeta potential of various liposomal for - mulations . The mean diameter of siVEGF / exosome - mimicking lipo - somes was 119 nm , which was comparable to that of exosomes as re - ported in the literature ( Stremersch et al . , 2016 ) . It was worth to mention that the encapsulation of siVEGF did not signi ﬁ cantly alter the mean diameter of liposomes ( Data not shown ) . Similar to siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes , siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes had a size distribution of 116 nm . siVEGF / DOTAP liposomes contained more particles over 120 nm in diameter , which were slightly larger than si - VEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes and siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes ( P < 0 . 05 ) . This might be explained by the formation of large ag - gregates between siVEGF and cationic DOTAP liposomes due to Table 1 Size , zeta potential , and PDI of siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes , siVEGF / DOTAP , and siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . Liposomal formulations Size ( nm ) PDI Zeta potential ( mV ) siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes 118 . 87 ± 1 . 67 0 . 097 ± 0 . 066 − 23 . 77 ± 2 . 12 siVEGF / DOTAP liposomes 129 . 33 ± 3 . 97 0 . 28 ± 0 . 17 34 . 9 ± 4 . 15 siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes 116 . 27 ± 3 . 26 0 . 104 ± 0 . 045 − 3 . 90 ± 0 . 39 M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 103 electrostatic interaction . All liposomes exhibited acceptable poly - dispersity index ( PDI ) values , re ﬂ ecting the homogeneity of size dis - tribution . This was important for ensuring a uniform behavior with regard to the delivery properties of liposomes . Another critical para - meter of liposomes was surface charge . As revealed in Table 1 , siVEGF / DOTAP liposomes had a positive surface charge of 35 mV . On the contrary , siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes and siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes showed negative zeta potentials of - 24 and - 4 mV , respec - tively . The positive charge of DOTAP liposomes may allow for more e ﬃ cient interaction with the negatively - charged cell membrane than exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes , but may also cause high cytotoxicity due to perturbation of cell viability ( Lv et al . , 2006 ) . On the whole , these results suggested the preparation procedure enabled the production of exosome - mimicking liposomes with size and zeta potential comparable to those of exosomes . As shown in Table 2 , the siRNA EE % of DOTAP liposomes was 69 . 6 % , while exosome - mi - micking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes exhibited siRNA EE % of 31 . 5 % and 36 . 9 % , respectively . The apparent discrepancy between the siRNA EE % of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations may suggest that elec - trostatic interaction played an important role in siRNA encapsulation ( Eloy et al . , 2014 ) . Cationic DOTAP liposomes showed a greater siRNA encapsulation , probably due to electrostatic interaction between lipo - somes and negatively - charged siRNA . Exosome - mimicking liposomes exhibited a lower siRNA EE % than PC - Chol liposomes ( P < 0 . 05 ) , which may be attributed to electrostatic repulsion . 3 . 2 . Stability studies The storage stability of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations at 4 – 8 °C over a time course of one month was investigated . As shown in Fig . 1A and B , exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes exhibited no signi ﬁ cant alterations in the mean diameter and zeta potential under the testing condition . Of note , when the storage time was prolonged to 90 days , exosome - mimicking liposomes revealed a slighter ﬂ uctuation in the mean size and no signi ﬁ cant change in the zeta potential com - pared with PC - Chol liposomes . Contrastly , PC - Chol liposomes showed a drastically increase in both the mean size and zeta potential ( data not shown ) . These results suggested exosome - mimicking liposomes may possesse higher long - term stability than PC - Chol liposomes . The better storage stability of exosome - mimicking liposomes might pertain to the elevated rigidity of the SM / Chol bilayer membrane ( de Gassart et al . , 2003 ) . As for DOTAP liposomes , there was no signi ﬁ cant change in zeta potential , but a signi ﬁ cant increase in particle size at 30 days was ob - served ( P < 0 . 05 ) . Therefore , the non - cationic exosome - mimicking li - posomes and PC - Chol liposomes might be more suitable for siVEGF delivery due to their prolonged storage stability . Fig . 1C showed the stability of siVEGF / liposomes in serum . The turbidity of siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes and siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes remained relatively unchanged after being incubated with serum for 12 h . In contrast , siVEGF / Lipo 2000 and siVEGF / DOTAP liposomes showed signi ﬁ cantly higher turbidity than non - cationic counterparts ( P < 0 . 05 ) . Moreover , the turbidity of cationic liposomes increased signi ﬁ cantly as time went by . Altogether , exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes had higher anti - serum aggregation e ﬀ ect than cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes . 3 . 3 . MTT cytotoxicity assay An ideal therapeutic nanocarrier should possess adequate delivery e ﬃ ciency while maintaining low cytotoxicity . Therefore , the cytotoxi - city of various liposomal formulations in A549 cells was evaluated . As presented in Fig . 2 , siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol siVEGF / liposomes showed no apparent cytotoxicity even at high lipid - siRNA molar ratios , while cationic siVEGF / Lipo 2000 and siVEGF / DOTAP exhibited signi ﬁ cant cytotoxicity even at lower lipid - siVEGF molar ratios ( e . g . 500 : 1 ) . The cell viability of non - cationic liposomes was approximately 4 - fold higher than that of cationic liposomes at lipid - siVEGF molar ratio of 4000 : 1 . These results suggested non - ca - tionic exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes were safer than cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes when being used for siRNA delivery . 3 . 4 . Cellular uptake and intracellular distribution of liposomes FAM - labeled siRNA was adopted as a ﬂ uorescent indicator to ana - lyze the cellular uptake and intracellular distribution of various Table 2 SiRNA EE % of exosome - mimicking liposomes , DOTAP , and PC - Chol liposomes . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . Liposomal formulations SiRNA EE % Exosome - mimicking liposomes 31 . 46 ± 1 . 33 DOTAP liposomes 69 . 60 ± 2 . 87 PC - Chol liposomes 36 . 86 ± 2 . 58 Fig . 1 . Stability studies of liposomal formulations . The e ﬀ ect of storage on the particle size ( A ) and zeta potential ( B ) of di ﬀ erent siVEGF / liposomes . Values were measured at day 0 , day 15 , and day 30 . ( C ) The e ﬀ ect of serum on the relative turbidity of siVEGF / liposomes . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . * P < 0 . 05 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 104 liposomal formulations . The cellular uptake of FAM - siNC in two types of cells ( A549 and HUVEC cells ) was quanti ﬁ ed by FCM and visualized by FM after transfection . As shown in Fig . 3 , the cellular uptake of FAM - siRNA by A549 cells ( Fig . 3A and C ) and HUVEC cells ( Fig . 3B and D ) was in the order of FAM - siNC / Lipo 2000 > FAM - siNC / DOTAP > FAM - siNC / exosome - mimicking liposomes > FAM - siNC / PC - Chol > free FAM - siNC . Compared with non - cationic liposomal formulations , cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes displayed signi ﬁ cantly higher cellular internalization with transfection e ﬃ ciency reaching 65 . 1 % and 61 . 0 % in A549 cells , and 84 . 6 % and 70 . 5 % in HUVEC cells , respec - tively ( Fig . 3A and B ) . This may be attributed to the positive surface charge of cationic liposomes that allowed them to interact with the negatively - charged cell membrane , thus facilitating e ﬃ cient cellular internalization of FAM - siNC . Interestingly , the uptake e ﬃ ciency of ca - tionic liposomes appeared to vary with cell types , while the uptake e ﬃ ciency of exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes seemed not to be dependent on cell types . Of note , the uptake e ﬃ ciency of FAM - siNC / exosome - mimicking liposomes by A549 cells ( 22 . 7 % ) and HUVEC cells ( 20 . 8 % ) was apparently higher than that of FAM - siNC / PC - Chol ( about 7 . 4 % in A549 cells and 7 . 6 % in HUVEC cells ) despite of more negatively - charged surface ( Fig . 3A and B ) , implying the unique lipid composition of exosome - mimicking liposomes may contribute to the enhanced cellular internalization of FAM - siNC . Similar results were obtained in the intracellular distribution of li - posomes as visualized by CLSM images ( Fig . 4 ) . Cells treated with FAM - siNC / DOTAP and FAM - siNC / Lipo 2000 exhibited signi ﬁ cantly higher ﬂ uorescence distributing to the cytoplasm of A549 cells ( Fig . 4A ) and HUVEC cells ( Fig . 4B ) than non - cationic liposomes . Interestingly , in both types of cells , evidently higher ﬂ uorescence was observed in the CLSM images of FAM - siNC / exosome - mimicking liposomes when com - pared with those of FAM - siNC / PC - Chol liposomes , which indicated the positive e ﬀ ects of speci ﬁ c helper lipids in exosome - mimicking lipo - somes on the cellular uptake of FAM - siNC could exist . 3 . 5 . E ﬀ ects of endocytosis inhibitors on cellular uptake To unravel the internalization pathways of di ﬀ erent liposomal for - mulations , A549 and HUVEC cells were pretreated with chemical in - hibitors known to interfere with di ﬀ erent cellular uptake pathways . Chlorpromazine blocked clathrin - mediated endocytosis by interfering with the association between clathrin and cell membrane ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) . Indomethacin and amiloride were speci ﬁ c inhibitors of ca - veolae - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis , respectively ( Koivusalo et al . , 2010 ; Yumoto et al . , 2006 ) . As shown in Fig . 5A , the internalization of FAM - siNC / Lipo 2000 and FAM - siNC / DOTAP by A549 cells appeared to be in a similar mode , as both of which were sig - ni ﬁ cantly blocked by the treatment of chlorpromazine and in - domethacin ( P < 0 . 01 ) . In contrast , pretreating A549 cells with amiloride had no e ﬀ ect on the internalization of cationic liposomes , indicating the cellular uptake of these two liposomes was independent of macropinocytosis . The internalization of FAM - siNC / exosome - mi - micking liposomes by A549 cells was not a ﬀ ected by chlorpromazine treatment , but was signi ﬁ cantly inhibited by the treatments of in - domethacin ( P < 0 . 05 ) and amiloride ( P < 0 . 01 ) , suggesting that the endocytic pathway of FAM - siNC / exosome - mimicking liposomes was dependent on both caveolae - mediated endocytosis and macro - pinocytosis . Fig . 5B showed that the uptake of FAM - siNC / Lipo 2000 and FAM - siNC / DOTAP by HUVEC cells was dependent on clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis , but not macropinocytosis , which was similar to that by A549 cells . However , the uptake pathway of exosome - mi - micking liposomes by HUVEC cells appeared to be di ﬀ erent from that by A549 cells . As the former was not dependent on both clathrin - mediated and macropinocytosis , but seemed to be signi ﬁ cantly de - pendent on caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( P < 0 . 01 ) . Due to the limited transfection e ﬃ ciency of FAM - siNC / PC - Chol liposomes in both types of cells , the uptake pathway of these vesicles was not investigated in this study . Together , these results suggested clathrin and caveolae - mediated pathways involved in the uptake of cationic liposomes by both A549 and HUVEC cells , while the endocytic pathway of exosome - mimicking liposomes appeared to vary with cell types . Nevertheless , exosome - mimicking liposomes seemed to enter both types of cells through caveolae - mediated endocytosis . 3 . 6 . Membrane fusion ability of liposomal formulations The fusion ability of exosome - mimicking liposomes was explored by R18 de - quenching assay . Upon fusion of liposomes with cell membrane , the density of self - quenched probe R18 in liposomal membrane de - creased , which resulted in relief of R18 de - quenching and increase in ﬂ uorescence intensity ( Montecalvo et al . , 2012 ) . As shown in Fig . 6A and B , addition of A549 cells to R18 - labeled exosome - mimicking lipo - somes led to a time - dependent increase of ﬂ uorescence immediately , with FD % reaching about 8 . 4 % after incubation for 30 min . This may suggest exosome - mimicking liposomes could slightly fuse with A549 cells even lacked speci ﬁ c exosomal markers . It was interesting that work by Parolini et al . reported that the lipids of exosomes were di - rectly involved in the fusion process while proteins seemed to play a minor role in exosome fusion , as it was observed that the ﬂ uorescence dequenching was only slightly a ﬀ ected by the addition of 0 . 5 % Fig . 2 . Cell viability of A549 cells after being incubated with various siVEGF - loaded liposomes at di ﬀ erent molar ratios for 48h . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 5 ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 105 paraformaldehyde - treated exosomes ( about 20 % reduction ) , but was markedly in ﬂ uenced by ﬁ lipin treatment ( about 50 % reduction ) ( Parolini et al . , 2009 ) . Negligible ﬂ uorescence increase was detected after the addition of A549 cells to R18 - labeled Lipo 2000 , DOTAP , and PC - Chol liposomes , indicating minimal fusion activity of conventional liposomes with cell membranes ( Fig . 6A ) . As a control , no ﬂ uorescence increase was observed in R18 - labeled exosome - mimicking liposomes alone before Triton X100 addition , indicating no spontaneous de - quenching of R18 , and the increase in ﬂ uorescence was attributed to fusion between liposomes and cell membrane ( Fig . 6C ) . Together , the elevated membrane fusion activity of exosome - mimicking liposomes may facilitate intracellular delivery of siRNA due to bypassing the en - docytic pathway . However , Fig . 6D and E showed that negligible increase in ﬂ uor - escence intensity was detected after the addition of HUVEC cells to R18 - labeled exosome - mimicking liposomes with FD % < 3 % after 30 min incubation , which indicated that the fusion activity of exosome - mi - micking liposomes was barely detectable in HUVEC cells . Altogether , these results suggested that exosome - mimicking liposomes fused better with A549 than HUVEC cells . Consequently , one could deduce that the fusion activity of exosome - mimicking liposomes was not only depen - dent on lipid type , but also pertained to cell type . 3 . 7 . Silencing e ﬀ ects of siVEGF - loaded liposomes An important consideration when designing drug delivery systems is to distinguish between the cellular uptake and functional delivery ( re - lease of therapeutic cargoes from endosomes to desired compartment of target cells ) . Therefore , uptake experiments alone may not be su ﬃ cient to fully assess the functional delivery capacity of di ﬀ erent liposomes . Therefore , the VEGF gene silencing e ﬀ ects of di ﬀ erent liposomal for - mulations were studied by using ELISA assay and RT - qPCR . As depicted in Fig . 7A , siVEGF / Lipo 2000 , siVEGF / DOTAP , and siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes showed a signi ﬁ cantly higher VEGF down - regulation e ﬀ ect , comparing with the corresponding formulations loaded with scramble siRNA ( siNC ) ( P < 0 . 05 ) . Furthermore , a higher Fig . 3 . Cellular uptake of FAM - siNC / liposomes in A549 and HUVEC cells . The uptake e ﬃ ciency was quanti ﬁ ed by ﬂ ow cytometry after 4h incubation ( A and B ) , and ﬂ uorescence intensity of FAM - siRNA in A549 ( C ) and HUVEC cells ( D ) was observed by ﬂ uorescence microscopy . ( E ) Non ﬂ uorescent images of A549 and HUVEC cells recorded under natural light as cell density control . Cells without any treatments were taken as a control . The scale bar indicates 100 μ m . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 106 Fig . 4 . Confocal microscope images of intracellular distribution of liposomal formulations loaded with FAM - siNC ( green ) in A549 cells ( A ) and HUVEC cells ( B ) after incubation for 4h . Cell nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( blue ) , and cell membranes were stained with Octadecyl Rhodamine B Chloride R18 ( red ) . The scale bar indicates 10 μ m . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 107 VEGF downregulation e ﬀ ect was found in cells treated with cationic siVEGF / liposomes than non - cationic siVEGF / liposomes ( P < 0 . 01 ) . Meanwhile , we noticed that siVEGF / exosome - mimicking liposomes had a signi ﬁ cantly higher gene silencing e ﬃ cacy than siVEGF / PC - Chol or free siVEGF ( > three - fold ) . Overall , these results displayed a similar trend as those of cellular uptake studies . To further explore whether VEGF knockdown e ﬀ ect was a result of decreased mRNA level , the transcriptional mRNA level was quanti ﬁ ed by RT - qPCR . To the whole , the knockdown e ﬀ ects of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations were in line with those on VEGF protein levels ( Fig . 7B ) . Fig . 4 . ( continued ) M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 108 Treating cells with cationic siVEGF / Lipo 2000 and siVEGF / DOTAP li - posomes contributed to greater knockdown e ﬀ ects than siVEGF / exo - some - mimicking liposomes and siVEGF / PC - Chol liposomes ( P < 0 . 01 ) . No signi ﬁ cant downregulation e ﬀ ect was found in cells treated with siVEGF / PC - Chol , free siVEGF , or siNC / exosome - mimicking liposomes compared with the control group ( P > 0 . 05 ) . Notably , siVEGF / exo - some - mimicking liposomes showed a signi ﬁ cantly higher silencing ef - fect on VEGF transcription than siVEGF / PC - Chol and the corresponding formulations loaded with siNC ( > three - fold ) , the same trend as shown in the cellular uptake and ELISA assay . 4 . Discussion Considering that exosomes and liposomes possess certain ad - vantages and drawbacks ( as mentioned in the introduction section ) , an alternative strategy would be design of “ clean ” , well characterized exosome - mimicking liposomal drug delivery systems to circumvent problems of each ﬁ eld . Meanwhile , such liposomal drug delivery vehicles can bene ﬁ t from favorable lipid composition of exosomes and high pharmaceutical acceptability of liposomes ( Johnsen et al . , 2018 ; Kooijmans et al . , 2012 ) . In this study , exosome - mimicking liposomes were formulated by adopting the lipid composition of exosomes as a starting point . It has been widely reported that the unique lipid com - position of exosomes could contribute to increased cellular inter - nalization compared with conventional liposomes ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ; Parolini et al . , 2009 ; Smyth et al . , 2015 ; Subra et al . , 2007 ) . In accordance with this statement , our results suggested that exosome - mimicking liposomes exhibited signi ﬁ cantly enhanced siRNA cellular uptake ( in A549 and HUVEC cells ) and silencing e ﬃ ciency ( in A549 cells ) compared with conventional PC - Chol liposomes ( Fig . 3 , Fig . 4 , and Fig . 7 ) . Actually , evidences have been provided that exosome lipids were important to facilitate exosome internalization by recipient cells ( Parolini et al . , 2009 ; Smyth et al . , 2014 ) . To this end , exosome - mi - micking liposomes that were characterized by a unique lipid composi - tion similar to exosomes may be more readily internalized by recipient cells . For instance , similar to some enveloped viruses , exosome - Fig . 5 . Cellular uptake of various FAM - siNC / liposomes by A549 cells ( A ) and HUVEC cells ( B ) in the presence of chlorpromazine , indomethacin , or amiloride , as quanti ﬁ ed by FCM . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . * indicates P < 0 . 05 compared to the control , * * indicates P < 0 . 01 compared to the control . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 109 mimicking liposomes contained lipid raft - like domains ( generally en - riched in SM and Chol ) , which may enhance the intracellular delivery e ﬃ ciency of siRNA by fusing with target cells ( Fig . 6A ) ( Montecalvo et al . , 2012 ; Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . In addition , it has been pointed out that Chol - containing liposomes loaded with DNA exhibited en - hanced transfection e ﬃ ciency in both in vitro and in vivo studies ( Hong et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , incorporation of Chol in exosome - mimicking liposomes may help to improve their delivery e ﬃ ciency . PS had a natural conical shape , which was not only advantageous for the as - sembly of curved liposomal membrane ( Max ﬁ eld and McGraw , 2004 ) , but also able to facilitate fusion of exosome - mimicking liposomes with A549 cells ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ) . Besides , it was indicated that in - corporation of Chol to pure liposomes consisting of PS could foster their membrane fusion capacity ( Laulagnier et al . , 2004 ) . PE can serve as a helper lipid to promote the endosomal escape of liposomes ( Yin et al . , 2014 ) . PE may undergo phase transition from lamellar ( L α ) to hex - agonal inverted phase ( H Ⅱ ) in acidic endosomal environment , resulting in fusion of liposomes with endosomal membrane and enhanced cyto - solic release of their payloads ( Brown and London , 1998 ; Wong et al . , 2003 ) . Together , our results suggested inclusion of exosomal lipids in exosome - mimicking liposomes could aid in enhancing the cellular up - take , cytoplasmic release , and silencing e ﬃ ciency of siRNA , although these lipids were not commonly used in liposomal formulations . Still , the surface charge of liposomes remained a primary factor a ﬀ ecting the intracellular delivery e ﬃ ciency of siRNA in this study . Cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP liposomes appeared to be much more readily internalized by A549 and HUVEC cells than exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) . This can likely be explained by the strong electrostatic interaction between cationic li - posomes and negatively - charged cell membrane that boosted cellular uptake of these liposomes ( Sokolova et al . , 2013 ) . Additionally , the positive charge of cationic liposomes was also favorable for en - capsulation of negatively - charged siRNA ( Table 2 ) . Of note , exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol liposomes showed signi ﬁ cant lower encapsulation e ﬃ ciencies than cationic liposomes ( Table 2 ) . As a result , much higher amount of siRNA and lipids will be used in these two li - posomal formulations to reach an identical amount of loaded siRNA in cationic liposomes . Therefore , in this study , cellular uptake and silen - cing experiments are based on normalization of initially added siRNA instead of loaded siRNA to eliminate the discrepancy in siRNA dose and lipid concentration . However , a major limitation of normalizing in - itially added siRNA is bringing about the e ﬀ ect of discrepancy in en - capsulation e ﬃ ciency . To this end , the high uptake e ﬃ ciency of ca - tionic liposomes by both A549 and HUVEC cells ( Fig . 3 ) could merely re ﬂ ect the high encapsulation e ﬃ ciency . Also , the signi ﬁ cantly higher silencing e ﬃ ciency of cationic liposomes than non - cationic liposomes ( Fig . 7 ) might be a direct consequence of the considerably higher en - capsulation e ﬃ ciency . However , there was a possibility that cationic liposomes can escape from endosomes / lysosomes by disrupting the endosomal membrane , for example , through “ proton sponge e ﬀ ect ” ( Luo et al . , 2017 ) , which may also contribute to their higher silencing e ﬃ ciency . In this study , a theoretically not possible loading e ﬃ ciency of siRNA ( > 30 % ) in noncationic exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol Fig . 6 . Membrane fusion assay of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations with A549 and HUVEC cells . ( A ) Spectro ﬂ uorimetric analysis after the addition of unlabeled A549 cells to di ﬀ erent R18 - labeled liposomes . ( B ) Fusion e ﬃ ciency curve of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations after the addition of unlabeled A549 cells . Spectro ﬂ uorimetric analysis of R18 - labeled exosome - mimicking liposomes alone and R18 - labeled exosome - mimicking liposomes with the addition of A549 cells ( C ) or HUVEC cells ( D ) . ( E ) Fusion e ﬃ ciency curve of exosome - mimicking liposomes after the addition of unlabeled HUVEC cells . Results were determined in triplicate . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 110 liposomes was observed even after multiple extrusion steps ( Table 2 ) . It is known that loading of hydrophilic molecules in liposomes is a ﬀ ected by multiple factors , such as membrane composition ( Eloy et al . , 2014 ) . For example , the incorporation of Chol in liposome bilayer was shown to “ tighten ” ﬂ uid bilayer and reduce the leakage of cargoes from lipo - somes ( Eloy et al . , 2014 ; Manojlovic et al . , 2008 ; McIntosh , 1978 ) . Therefore , the high content of Chol in both exosome - mimicking lipo - somes and PC - Chol liposomes ( 30 % ) may greatly contribute to the encapsulation of siRNA . In addition , phase transition from a ﬂ uid lipid bilayer to a solid phase bilayer was reported to reduce drug leakage , as did incorporation of SM into liposomes due to its high phase transition temperature ( Allen and Cullis , 2013 ; Cullis and Hope , 1980 ) . In this regard , the incorporation of high content of SM ( 17 . 5 % ) in exosome - mimicking liposomes might help to improve the encapsulation e ﬃ - ciency . Furthermore , as lipid bilayer has lower permeability to hydro - philic therapeutics than hydrophobic drugs ( Bartoli et al . , 1990 ) , the retention of hydrophilic siRNA in liposomes may be more e ﬃ cient than hydrophobic therapeutics . However , it has to be admitted that a lim - itation of this study is only application of an ultra - ﬁ ltration method based on ﬂ uorescence determination for determination of encapsula - tion e ﬃ ciency . The encapsulation e ﬃ ciency results may be further con ﬁ rmed by more combinative approaches in the future . Nevertheless , it was worth noting that although exosome - mimicking liposomes ex - hibited a signi ﬁ cantly lower encapsulation compared with PC - Chol li - posomes ( P < 0 . 05 ) ( Table 2 ) , the former exhibited a signi ﬁ cant higher cellular uptake and silencing e ﬃ ciency than the latter ( P < 0 . 05 ) ( Fig . 3 and Fig . 7 ) . This may support the conclusion that the speci ﬁ c lipid composition of exosome - mimicking liposomes facilitated their cellular uptake and silencing e ﬃ ciency . Our observation on the physical stability of di ﬀ erent liposomal formulations suggested anionic exosome - mimicking liposomes and neutral PC - Chol liposomes exhibited higher storage and serum stability than cationic DOTAP liposomes . Drawing from liposomal literatures , it has been well - known that SM could bind to Chol through hydrogen bonds , leading to the formation of tight packing and detergent resistant SM / Chol bilayers ( Kooijmans et al . , 2012 ) . Besides , the augmented Chol percentage was able to improve the cohesive properties of lipid membrane , resulting in increased membrane rigidity ( Needham and Nunn , 1990 ) . The excellent rigidity and stability of SM / Chol bilayers could not only confer exosome - mimicking liposomes with higher phy - sical stability ( Fig . 1A and B ) , but also reduce the in vivo insertion of plasma proteins , thus contributing to prolonged circulation time ( Allen et al . , 1991 ) . The poor physical stability of DOTAP liposomes might be attributed to the interaction between negatively - charged siVEGF with cationic moieties on the surface of DOTAP liposomes , which resulted in the formation of large aggregates upon storage ( Noh et al . , 2010 ) . Si - milarly , the instability of cationic liposomes in serum was considered to be a result of electrostatic interactions between cationic liposomes and anionic serum proteins ( Caracciolo , 2015 ) . Therefore , cationic lipo - somes may not be suitable for siVEGF delivery in terms of su ﬃ cient storage stability and blood circulation time . In this regard , it required further decoration procedures to improve the surface feature of cationic liposomes . The cytotoxicity of exosome - mimicking liposomes and PC - Chol li - posomes in A549 cells was limited throughout all molar ratios between lipids and siVEGF . On the contrary , cationic Lipo 2000 and DOTAP li - posomes exhibited signi ﬁ cantly greater cytotoxicity even at lower molar ratios between lipid and siVEGF ( Fig . 2 ) . In fact , cytotoxicity remains a considerable issue for cationic liposomes although they were extensively studied for gene delivery ( Lv et al . , 2006 ) . Cationic lipo - somes may cause cytotoxic e ﬀ ects to cells in multiple ways , such as cell membrane disruption , cell shrinking , reduced number of mitoses , and vacuolization of cytoplasm ( Lappalainen et al . , 1994 ) . Therefore , the surface charge of liposomes seemed to be controversial when both cellular uptake e ﬃ ciency and cytotoxicity were simultaneously taken into account . Altogether , exosome - mimicking liposomes assembled in this study were much safer for siRNA delivery than cationic liposomes . The uptake pathway of liposomes considerably a ﬀ ected their de - livery e ﬃ ciency and intracellular tra ﬃ cking . Generally , the endocytosis pathways of liposomes could be classi ﬁ ed into three mechanisms : cla - thrin - mediated endocytosis , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , and mac - ropinocytosis ( Sieczkarski and Whittaker , 2002 ) . Macromolecules were mainly internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis instead of cla - thrin - independent endocytosis such as caveolae - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis , which were destined to undergo endosomal - ly - sosomal degradative pathway ( Khalil et al . , 2006 ) . However , in order to achieve functional siRNA delivery , liposomes should be able to escape from endosome / lysosomal degradation for translocation to the cytosol of target cells . Recently , it was reported that exosomes were taken up by recipient cells by clathrin - independent endocytosis and macro - pinocytosis ( Verdera et al . , 2017 ) . In addition , exosomes have also been demonstrated to be able to fuse with target cell membrane , either di - rectly with the plasma membrane or with the endosomal membrane after endocytosis ( Montecalvo et al . , 2012 ; Mulcahy et al . , 2014 ) . This was important for intracellular delivery , as direct fusion with the plasma membrane of recipient cells bypassed the endosomal - lysosomal pathway , thus substantially promoting cytoplasmic cargo delivery . Our results showed that exosome - mimicking liposomes could be inter - nalized by A549 cells through caveolae - mediated endocytosis , macro - pinocytosis , and membrane fusion . Such an entry mode was similar to that of exosomes to some extent , which probably accounted for the enhanced cellular uptake and silencing e ﬃ ciency of exosome - mi - micking liposomes . However , the uptake pathway of exosome - mi - micking liposomes seemed to be dependent on cell types . Exosome - Fig . 7 . VEGF silencing e ﬀ ects of various VEGF / liposomes . ( A ) Protein expres - sion level in the culture medium of A549 cells after being treated with various siVEGF / liposomes . ( B ) VEGF mRNA level in A549 cells after being incubated with di ﬀ erent siVEGF / liposomes . Data were represented as mean ± SD ( n = 3 ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 111 mimicking liposomes appeared to be uptaken by HUVEC cells through caveolae - mediated endocytosis . When using HUVEC cells for membrane fusion assay , only barely detectable fusion activity of exosome - mi - micking liposomes was observed . Yet it remained an open question why these vesicles fused better with one cell type while exhibited rather ine ﬃ cient with another . One may conceivable that , due to the vast complexity of fusion process , the fusion activity of such vesicles can be restricted to a particular cell type or even cell status . Taken together , our results suggested the speci ﬁ c lipid composition of exosomes could function as a critical modulator of the physico - chemical properties , circulation behaviors , cellular uptake , and in - tracellular tra ﬃ cking of liposomes . 5 . Conclusion By borrowing a leaf from nature ’ s book , a novel liposomal nano - delivery system with lipid composition , size , and zeta potential mi - micking those of exosomes was designed in this study . The cellular uptake and silencing e ﬃ ciency of exosome - mimicking liposomes were signi ﬁ cantly enhanced as compared to PC - Chol liposomes and free siRNA . In addition , exosome - mimicking liposomes possessed higher storage stability and anti - serum aggregation e ﬀ ect , and more than four - fold safety than cationic liposomes . Interestingly , to certain extent , exosome - mimicking liposomes appeared to be internalized by A549 cells through an entry mode similar to exosomes . Of note , the entry mode of direct fusion with A549 cells circumvented the need for en - dosomal escape , which may contribute to the enhanced delivery e ﬃ - ciency of exosome - mimicking liposomes . However , only barely de - tectable fusion activity of exosome - mimicking liposomes in HUVEC cells was observed , suggesting that the way exosome - mimicking lipo - somes interact with cells seemed to di ﬀ er according to the cell type . Taken together , our results suggested the intracellular delivery e ﬃ - ciency of exosome - mimicking liposomes was actually improved to a greater extent by mimicking the unique lipid composition of exosomes . However , it still remained far from adequate for e ﬃ cient siRNA de - livery when compared with cationic liposomes . Therefore , future re - search still needs to explore how to enhance the delivery properties of exosome - mimicking liposomes ( e . g . introduction of exosomes ’ func - tional proteins ) to achieve more e ﬃ cient intracellular delivery . For example , gap junctional protein Cx43 which was shown to be enriched in exosomes and to facilitate e ﬃ cient cargo transfer from exosomes to target cells , could serve as a potential cytosolic delivery helper ( Lu et al . , 2018b ; Soares et al . , 2015 ) . However , incorporation of membrane proteins in liposomal membrane represents a challenging task , which involves collaboration research from di ﬀ erent disciplines . Acknowledgements The authors are grateful for the ﬁ nancial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China , China ( No . 81373335 , 81872822 ) and Liaoning Province Natural Science Foundation , China [ No . 20170541025 ] . The authors appreciate the Institute of Metabolic Disease Research and Drug Development of China Medical University for their help in providing experimental materials and equipment . Con ﬂ ict of interest The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interests relevant to this work . References Allen , T . M . , Austin , G . A . , Chonn , A . , Lin , L . , Lee , K . C . , 1991 . Uptake of liposomes by cultured mouse bone marrow macrophages : in ﬂ uence of liposome composition and size . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1061 , 56 – 64 . Allen , T . M . , Cullis , P . R . , 2013 . Liposomal drug delivery systems : from concept to clinical applications . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 65 , 36 – 48 . Antimisiaris , S . , Mourtas , S . , Papadia , K . , 2017 . Targeted si - RNA with liposomes and exosomes ( extracellular vesicles ) : How to unlock the potential . Int . J . Pharm . 525 , 293 – 312 . Barile , L . , Vassalli , G . , 2017 . Exosomes : therapy delivery tools and biomarkers of diseases . Pharmacol . Ther . 174 , 63 – 78 . Bartoli , M . H . , Boitard , M . , Fessi , H . , Beriel , H . , Devissaguet , J . P . , Picot , F . , Puisieux , F . , 1990 . In vitro and in vivo antitumoral activity of free , and encapsulated taxol . J . Microencapsul . 7 , 191 – 197 . Beloribi , S . , Ristorcelli , E . , Breuzard , G . , Silvy , F . , Bertrand - Michel , J . , Beraud , E . , Verine , A . , Lombardo , D . , 2012 . Exosomal lipids impact notch signaling and induce death of human pancreatic tumoral SOJ - 6 cells . PLoS One 7 , e47480 . Brown , D . A . , London , E . , 1998 . Structure and origin of ordered lipid domains in biological membranes . J . Membr . Biol . 164 , 103 – 114 . Caracciolo , G . , 2015 . Liposome – protein corona in a physiological environment : chal - lenges and opportunities for targeted delivery of nanomedicines . Nanomed . Nanotechnol . 11 , 543 – 557 . Cullis , P . R . , Hope , M . J . , 1980 . The bilayer stabilizing role of sphingomyelin in the pre - sence of cholesterol : a 31P NMR study . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 597 , 533 – 542 . de Gassart , A . , Geminard , C . , Fevrier , B . , Raposo , G . , Vidal , M . , 2003 . Lipid raft - associated protein sorting in exosomes . Blood 102 , 4336 – 4344 . Eloy , J . O . , Claro , D . S . M . , Petrilli , R . , Barcellos , J . P . , Lee , R . J . , Marchetti , J . M . , 2014 . Liposomes as carriers of hydrophilic small molecule drugs : strategies to enhance encapsulation and delivery . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 123 , 345 – 363 . Feng , Q . , Yu , M . Z . , Wang , J . C . , Hou , W . J . , Gao , L . Y . , Ma , X . F . , Pei , X . W . , Niu , Y . J . , Liu , X . Y . , Qiu , C . , 2014 . Synergistic inhibition of breast cancer by co - delivery of VEGF siRNA and paclitaxel via vapreotide - modi ﬁ ed core – shell nanoparticles . Biomaterials 35 , 5028 – 5038 . Gao , J . , Yu , Y . S . , Zhang , Y . Y . , Song , J . J . , Chen , H . W . , Li , W . , Qian , W . Z . , Deng , L . , Kou , G . , Chen , J . M . , Guo , Y . J . , 2012 . EGFR - speci ﬁ c PEGylated immunoliposomes for active siRNA delivery in hepatocellular carcinoma . Biomaterials 33 , 270 – 282 . Haque , M . E . , Mcintosh , T . J . , Lentz , B . R . , 2001 . In ﬂ uence of lipid composition on physical properties and peg - mediated fusion of curved and uncurved model membrane ve - sicles : “ nature ' s own ” fusogenic lipid bilayer . Biochemistry 40 , 4340 – 4348 . Hong , K . , Zheng , W . , Baker , A . , Papahadjopoulos , D . , 1997 . Stabilization of cationic li - posome - plasmid DNA complexes by polyamines and poly ( ethylene glycol ) - phospho - lipid conjugates for e ﬃ cient in vivo gene delivery . FEBS Lett . 400 , 233 – 237 . Johnsen , K . B . , Gudbergsson , J . M . , Duroux , M . , Moos , T . , Andresen , T . L . , Simonsen , J . B . , 2018 . On the use of liposome controls in studies investigating the clinical potential of extracellular vesicle - based drug delivery systems – a commentary . J . Control . Release 269 , 10 – 14 . Johnsen , K . B . , Gudbergsson , J . M . , Skov , M . N . , Pilgaard , L . , Moos , T . , Duroux , M . , 2014 . A comprehensive overview of exosomes as drug delivery vehicles – endogenous nano - carriers for targeted cancer therapy . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1846 , 75 – 87 . Khalil , I . A . , Kogure , K . , Akita , H . , Harashima , H . , 2006 . Uptake pathways and subsequent intracellular tra ﬃ cking in nonviral gene delivery . Pharmacol . Rev . 58 , 32 – 45 . Koivusalo , M . , Welch , C . , Hayashi , H . , Scott , C . C . , Kim , M . , Alexander , T . , Touret , N . , Hahn , K . M . , Grinstein , S . , 2010 . Amiloride inhibits macropinocytosis by lowering submembranous pH and preventing Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 547 – 563 . Kooijmans , S . A . , Vader , P . , Dommelen , S . M . V . , Solinge , W . W . V . , Schi ﬀ elers , R . M . , 2012 . Exosome mimetics : a novel class of drug delivery systems . Int . J . Nanomed . 7 , 1525 – 1541 . Lappalainen , K . , Jääskeläinen , I . , Syrjänen , K . , Urtti , A . , Syrjänen , S . , 1994 . Comparison of cell proliferation and toxicity assays using two cationic liposomes . Pharm . Res . 11 , 1127 – 1131 . Laulagnier , K . , Motta , C . , Hamdi , S . , Roy , S . , Fauvelle , F . , Pageaux , J . F . , Kobayashi , T . , Salles , J . P . , Perret , B . , Bonnerot , C . , 2004 . Mast cell - and dendritic cell - derived exosomes display a speci ﬁ c lipid composition and an unusual membrane organiza - tion . Biochem . J . 380 , 161 – 171 . Laulagnier , K . , Vincent - Schneider , H . , Hamdi , S . , Subra , C . , Lankar , D . , Record , M . , 2005 . Characterization of exosome subpopulations from RBL - 2H3 cells using ﬂ uorescent lipids . Blood Cell . Mol . Dis . 35 , 116 – 121 . Lener , T . , Gimona , M . , Aigner , L . , Borger , V . , Buzas , E . , Camussi , G . , Chaput , N . , Chatterjee , D . , Court , F . A . , Del Portillo , H . A . , O ' Driscoll , L . , Fais , S . , Falcon - Perez , J . M . , Felderho ﬀ - Mueser , U . , Fraile , L . , Gho , Y . S . , Gorgens , A . , Gupta , R . C . , Hendrix , A . , Hermann , D . M . , Hill , A . F . , Hochberg , F . , Horn , P . A . , de Kleijn , D . , Kordelas , L . , Kramer , B . W . , Kramer - Albers , E . - M . , Laner - Plamberger , S . , Laitinen , S . , Leonardi , T . , Lorenowicz , M . J . , Lim , S . K . , Lotvall , J . , Maguire , C . A . , Marcilla , A . , Nazarenko , I . , Ochiya , T . , Patel , T . , Pedersen , S . , Pocsfalvi , G . , Pluchino , S . , Quesenberry , P . , Reischl , I . G . , Rivera , F . J . , Sanzenbacher , R . , Schallmoser , K . , Slaper - Cortenbach , I . , Strunk , D . , Tonn , T . , Vader , P . , van Balkom , B . W . M . , Wauben , M . , Andaloussi , S . E . , Thery , C . , Rohde , E . , Giebel , B . , 2015 . Applying extracellular vesicles based ther - apeutics in clinical trials – an ISEV position paper . J . Extracellular Vesicles 4 , 30087 . Llorente , A . , Skotland , T . , Sylvänne , T . , Kauhanen , D . , Róg , T . , Or ł owski , A . , Vattulainen , I . , Ekroos , K . , Sandvig , K . , 2013 . Molecular lipidomics of exosomes released by PC - 3 prostate cancer cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1831 , 1302 – 1309 . Lu , M . , Xing , H . , Xun , Z . , Yang , T . , Ding , P . , Cai , C . , Wang , D . , Zhao , X . , 2018a . Exosome - based small RNA delivery : progress and prospects . Asian J . Pharm . Sci . 13 , 1 – 11 . Lu , M . , Xing , H . , Yang , Z . , Sun , Y . , Yang , T . , Zhao , X . , Cai , C . , Wang , D . , Ding , P . , 2017 . Recent advances on extracellular vesicles in therapeutic delivery : challenges , solu - tions , and opportunities . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 119 , 381 – 395 . Lu , M . , Zhao , X . , Xing , H . , Xun , Z . , Yang , T . , Cai , C . , Wang , D . , Ding , P . , 2018b . Liposome - chaperoned cell - free synthesis for the design of proteoliposomes : implications for therapeutic delivery . Acta Biomater . 76 , 1 – 20 . Luo , H . C . , Li , N . , Yan , L . , Mai , K . J . , Sun , K . , Wang , W . , Lao , G . J . , Yang , C . , Zhang , L . M . , Ren , M . , 2017 . Comparison of the cellular transport mechanism of cationic , star - shaped polymers and liposomes in HaCat cells . Int . J . Nanomed . 12 , 1085 – 1096 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 112 Lv , H . T . , Zhang , S . B . , Wang , B . , Cui , S . H . , Yan , J . , 2006 . Toxicity of cationic lipids and cationic polymers in gene delivery . J . Control . Release 114 , 100 – 109 . Manojlovic , V . , Winkler , K . , Bunjes , V . , Neub , A . , Schubert , R . , Bugarski , B . , Leneweit , G . , 2008 . Membrane interactions of ternary phospholipid / cholesterol bilayers and en - capsulation e ﬃ ciencies of a RIP II protein . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 64 , 284 – 296 . Matsuo , H . , Chevallier , J . , Mayran , N . , Le Blanc , I . , Ferguson , C . , Faure , J . , Blanc , N . S . , Matile , S . , Dubochet , J . , Sadoul , R . , Parton , R . G . , Vilbois , F . , Gruenberg , J . , 2004 . Role of LBPA and Alix in multivesicular liposome formation and endosome organi - zation . Science 303 , 531 – 534 . Max ﬁ eld , F . R . , McGraw , T . E . , 2004 . Endocytic recycling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 121 – 132 . McIntosh , T . J . , 1978 . The e ﬀ ect of cholesterol on the structure of phosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 513 , 43 – 58 . Montecalvo , A . , Larregina , A . T . , Shufesky , W . J . , Stolz , D . B . , Sullivan , M . L . , Karlsson , J . M . , Baty , C . J . , Gibson , G . A . , Erdos , G . , Wang , Z . , 2012 . Mechanism of transfer of func - tional microRNAs between mouse dendritic cells via exosomes . Blood 119 , 756 – 766 . Mulcahy , L . A . , Pink , R . C . , Carter , D . R . F . , 2014 . Routes and mechanisms of extracellular vesicle uptake . J . Extracellular Vesicles 3 , 24641 . Needham , D . , Nunn , R . S . , 1990 . Elastic deformation and failure of lipid bilayer mem - branes containing cholesterol . Biophys . J . 58 , 997 – 1009 . Noh , S . M . , Park , D . - E . , Im , S . , Kim , S . , Kim , Y . B . , Oh , Y . - K . , 2010 . The e ﬀ ects of storage conditions on the stability of porcine placenta extract - loaded liposome formulations . J . Pharm . Investig . 40 , 187 – 192 . Park , K . , Lee , M . Y . , Kim , K . S . , Hahn , S . K . , 2010 . Target speci ﬁ c tumor treatment by VEGF siRNA complexed with reducible polyethyleneimine - hyaluronic acid conjugate . Biomaterials 31 , 5258 – 5265 . Parolini , I . , Federici , C . , Raggi , C . , Lugini , L . , Palleschi , S . , De , M . A . , Coscia , C . , Iessi , E . , Logozzi , M . , Molinari , A . , 2009 . Microenvironmental pH Is a key factor for exosome tra ﬃ c in tumor cells . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 34211 – 34222 . Perteghella , S . , Crivelli , B . , Catenacci , L . , Sorrenti , M . , Bruni , G . , Necchi , V . , Vigani , B . , Sorlini , M . , Torre , M . L . , Chlapanidas , T . , 2017 . Stem cell - extracellular vesiclesasdrug delivery systems : new frontiers for silk / curcumin nanoparticles . Int . J . Pharm . 520 , 86 – 97 . Raposo , G . , Stoorvogel , W . , 2013 . Extracellular vesicles : exosomes , microvesicles , and friends . J . Cell Biol . 200 , 373 – 383 . Record , M . , Carayon , K . , Poirot , M . , Silvente - Poirot , S . , 2014 . Exosomes as new vesicular lipid transporters involved in cell - cell communication and various pathophysiologies . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1841 , 108 – 120 . Shao , Y . K . , Shen , Y . W . , Chen , T . , Xu , F . , Chen , X . W . , Zheng , S . , 2016 . The functions and clinical applications of tumor - derived exosomes . Oncotarget 7 , 60736 – 60751 . Sieczkarski , S . B . , Whittaker , G . R . , 2002 . Dissecting virus entry via endocytosis . J . Gen . Virol . 83 , 1535 – 1545 . Simons , K . , Ikonen , E . , 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 . Skotland , T . , Sandvig , K . , Llorente , A . , 2017 . Lipids in exosomes : current knowledge and the way forward . Prog . Lipid Res . 66 , 30 – 41 . Smyth , T . , Kullberg , M . , Malik , N . , Smithjones , P . , Graner , M . W . , Anchordoquy , T . J . , 2015 . Biodistribution and delivery e ﬃ ciency of unmodi ﬁ ed tumor - derived exosomes . J . Control . Release 199 , 145 – 155 . Smyth , T . J . , Redzic , J . S . , Michael , W . B . , Anchordoquy , T . J . , 2014 . Examination of the speci ﬁ city of tumor cell derived exosomes with tumor cells in vitro . Biochim . Biophys . Acta - Biomembr . 1838 , 2954 – 2965 . Soares , A . R . , Martins - Marques , T . , Ribeiro - Rodrigues , T . , Ferreira , J . V . , Catarino , S . , Pinho , M . J . , Zuzarte , M . , Anjo , S . I . , Manadas , B . , Sluijter , J . P . G . , Pereira , P . , Girao , H . , 2015 . Gap junctional protein Cx43 is involved in the communication between extracellular vesicles and mammalian cells . Sci . Rep . 5 , 13243 . Sokolova , V . , Kozlova , D . , Knuschke , T . , Buer , J . , Westendorf , A . M . , Epple , M . , 2013 . Mechanism of the uptake of cationic and anionic calcium phosphate nanoparticles by cells . Acta Biomater . 9 , 7527 – 7535 . Stremersch , S . , Smedt , S . C . D . , Raemdonck , K . , 2016 . Therapeutic and diagnostic appli - cations of extracellular vesicles . J . Control . Release 244 , 167 – 183 . Subra , C . , Laulagnier , K . , Perret , B . , Record , M . , 2007 . Exosome lipidomics unravels lipid sorting at the level of multivesicular bodies . Biochimie 89 , 205 – 212 . Valadi , H . , Ekstrom , K . , Bossios , A . , Sjostrand , M . , Lee , J . J . , Lotvall , J . O . , 2007 . Exosome - mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic ex - change between cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 654 – U672 . Verdera , H . C . , Gitz - Francois , J . J . , Schi ﬀ elers , R . M . , Vader , P . , 2017 . Cellular uptake of extracellular vesicles is mediated by clathrin - independent endocytosis and macro - pinocytosis . J . Control . Release 266 , 100 – 108 . Vlassov , A . V . , Magdaleno , S . , Setterquist , R . , Conrad , R . , 2012 . Exosomes : current knowledge of their composition , biological functions , and diagnostic and therapeutic potentials . Biochim . Biophys . Acta - Gen . Subjects 1820 , 940 – 948 . Wang , L . H . , Rothberg , K . G . , Anderson , R . G . , 1993 . Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 1107 – 1117 . Wong , F . M . P . , Harvie , P . , Zhang , Y . P . , Ramsay , E . C . , Bally , M . B . , 2003 . Phosphatidylethanolamine mediated destabilization of lipid - based pDNA delivery systems . Int . J . Pharm . 255 , 117 – 127 . Wubbolts , R . , Leckie , R . S . , Veenhuizen , P . T . M . , Schwarzmann , G . , Mobius , W . , Hoernschemeyer , J . , Slot , J . W . , Geuze , H . J . , Stoorvogel , W . , 2003 . Proteomic and biochemical analyses of human B cell - derived exosomes – potential implications for their function and multivesicular body formation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 10963 – 10972 . Yang , Z . , Li , J . , Wang , Z . , Dong , D . , Qi , X . , 2014 . Tumor - targeting dual peptides - modi ﬁ ed cationic liposomes for delivery of siRNA and docetaxel to gliomas . Biomaterials 35 , 5226 – 5239 . Yin , H . , Kanasty , R . L . , Eltoukhy , A . A . , Vegas , A . J . , Dorkin , J . R . , Anderson , D . G . , 2014 . Non - viral vectors for gene - based therapy . Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 , 541 – 555 . Yoo , J . Y . , Kim , J . H . , Kwon , Y . G . , Kim , E . C . , Kim , N . K . , Choi , H . J . , Yun , C . O . , 2007 . VEGF - speci ﬁ c short hairpin RNA - expressing oncolytic adenovirus elicits potent inhibition of angiogenesis and tumor growth . Mol . Ther . 15 , 295 – 302 . Yumoto , R . , Nishikawa , H . , Okamoto , M . , Katayama , H . , Nagai , J . , Takano , M . , 2006 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis of FITC - albumin in alveolar type II epithelial cell line RLE - 6TN . Am . J . Physiol . 290 , 946 – 955 . M . Lu et al . International Journal of Pharmaceutics 550 ( 2018 ) 100 – 113 113