Freed : A S ystem for C reating Multiple Views of a Digital Collection during the Design P rocess Philip Mendels , Joep Frens and Kees Overbeeke Designing Quality in Interaction , Department of Industrial Design Eindhoven University of Technology Den Dolech 2 , 5612 AZ , Eindhoven , The Netherlands { p . mendels , j . w . frens , c . j . overbeeke } @ tue . nl + 31 40 247 5924 ABSTRACT In this paper Freed is presented , a system that enables design students to spatially organize their digital collection , define relations between collection content and reflect on it . The system features a force - based layout that allows to explore spatial organizations , and hence to gain new insights . Its main advantage over existing software , is that it empowers the students to create different views of their digital collection . A view is a spatial organization of a selection of the collection content and its relations . It can e . g . be used for a specific design activity or project phase , for organizing work around a specific topic , or for explaining the perspective of a given student or stakeholder . Feedback of design students working with Freed during their design projects , and results from a workshop as measured by a questionnaire , show positive prospects for adoption of the system during the design process . Author Keywords Design process , reflection , digital collection , multiple views , force - based layout ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 4 Information interfaces and presentation : Hypertext / Hypermedia . H . 5 . 2 Information interfaces and presentation : User Interfaces : Interaction styles General Terms Design INTRODUCTION In the Industrial Design Department at the Eindhoven University of Technology , students spend 60 percent of their time working in semester - long design projects , often for real clients . Students collect a lot of diverse digital content . Examples of collection content include plannings , requirement lists , related or inspiring work , ideas , sketches , interaction scenarios , client and expert feedback , prototyping tutorials , CAD models , programming code , photos or videos of prototypes , information from user tests , presentations and reports . As design teachers , we have observed that our students mainly organize and browse this digital content within standard hierarchical file browsers ( e . g . Windows Explorer or Mac OSX Finder ) . These standard file browsers do not do justice to the visual nature of design work , and are not designed to define and see relations other than hierarchical ones , such as associations , comparisons and temporal relations . They also do not integrate well with different software - based activities , such as making a mood board , a map of ideas , a scenario or a presentation . This fragments the collection because the same content that is used in multiple activities is imported in different files or copied to different folders . This fragmentation and the lack of easily visible relations make it difficult for the students to reflect on their work and process , and to communicate these to others . Reflection is important , after and during the design process . Schön describes design as a dynamic explorative process during which the design problem is explored and refined [ 1 ] , in contrast to Simon’s rational problem solving approach in which the design problem is fixed at the start of the design process [ 2 ] . In our department we strongly embrace Schön’s ideas , which fit the competency - based learning system that is used , in which students learn by doing and in which equal weight is given to knowledge , skills and attitudes . We also want students to develop a vision about how our world could be like and to become designers that can transform our world , not that only solve existing problems . Therefore in our department the Reflective Transformative Design Process is developed [ 3 , 4 ] . To fit such a dynamic design process , and to resolve the shortcomings of standard file browsers , we see a need for a collection system that enables students to easily switch between different visual - spatial representations of their work . To avoid fragmentation of the collection this system should integrate various design related activities ( e . g . mapping ideas , presenting ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0267 - 8 / 11 / 05 . . . $ 5 . 00 . CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1481 In what follows we first describe related work . We continue by explaining the current state of Freed . Then we discuss the feedback of design students working with the system during part of their design projects , and results from a workshop with accompanying questionnaire . We conclude with our plans for improving the system and validating it during semester - long student design projects . RELATED WORK In this section we describe related work in three parts : • digital collections during the design process • spatial organization and automated layouts • multiple views We end with a discussion on how Freed combines several aspects of the related work , and how it differs . Digital collections during the design process Many systems that have been developed to support design , focus on how designers can combine their digital and physical artifacts [ 5 , 6 ] . Such systems often add extra , large devices to the designers’ workspace , and the focus is often not on how designers can organize their digital work . In a recent study on professional designers’ knowledge management practices , is found that reuse of prior design knowledge is highly valued during early design activity , but seldom performed . Also , designers indicated that they want to know more about the stories associated with artifacts and want to reflect on past processes . An inquiry into designers’ organization strategies showed that besides the physical note / sketch book , digital folders were clearly the most used organization strategy . These folders were generally described as ‘messy’ [ 7 ] . The Digital Scrapbook is an online tool that is discussed in a recent article on design’s processional character [ 8 ] . The tool is developed in - house in the Interaction Design department of the Royal College or Art . It was developed to enable tutors to gain insight in their students’ design processes , which was difficult because students had troubles with documenting their process . The tool automatically gathers mainly visual content from students’ project blogs , online photo sites , and online video sites , and aggregates this content of different people in a minimalistic grid - based interface . The tool is valued by both staff and students for looking at each other’s work and for drawing inspiration , for the way it represents the dynamic and haphazard nature of the design process , and for the way it reflects the creative nature of the department as a whole . Spatial organization and automated layouts Free spatial organization allows for mapping the many possible relations that can exist between collection content and the complexity of the design process . It also allows for differences between individual design students and between projects . Additionally , it supports free association between collection content . Free association is important for drawing inspiration during the creative process [ 9 ] but also for reflection . A design student might for example find a new direction for the project by comparing or clustering his / her ideas . Prezi is an online software application [ 10 ] that can be used to create interactive maps and animated presentations . We have observed several of our students using it for creating presentations . Its canvas is zoomable , so that major topics can be presented much larger than more detailed topics . To create a presentation , a presentation path has to be generated on the canvas . When playing back this presentation , the application smoothly zooms , pans and rotates across the canvas . The Visual Understanding Environment ( VUE ) is a concept and content mapping software application that like Prezi features a digital canvas and the possibility to create presentation paths [ 11 ] . Presentation slides are however not an integral part of the canvas , but are independent entities that are linked to items ( image nodes and text nodes ) on the canvas . These slides can be edited separately without influencing the content map on the canvas . When the amount of items and relations in a collection grows , it becomes increasingly harder for the user to find a satisfying layout . A solution is to offer a ( semi - ) automated layout . An example of an application that shows the strengths of a semi - automated layout is Vizster , a tool for exploring online social networks [ 12 ] . Vizster represents a network as a node - link diagram and features a force - based layout . This means that the links between nodes behave as springs . The user can directly interact with the nodes , and the layout tries to keep related nodes close to each other and avoids the nodes from overlapping . Product World is a software application specifically geared at industrial designers , that features a semi - automated layout [ 13 ] . It is a tool for creating and exploring a collection visually , based on similarity between the collection content . A designer enters product samples into the collection by positioning them into a two - dimensional area in such a way that their relative positions express their perceived similarities regarding a specific criterion . An example of such a similarity criterion is ‘form’ . When all the samples are entered , the collection can be explored . By ' clicking ' positions between the samples an object is retrieved from the collection that ' fits ' in this position relative to the other samples . Multiple views An overview of research into coordinated and multiple views is given in [ 14 ] . Views can be predefined by the developer , or generated by the user . Often used in exploratory visualization , they allow the user to ‘understand trends , locate anomalies , isolate and reorganize information , compare and make clear any differences or similarities between datasets’ . The user can interact with the data while examining the results in multiple views . A common approach to this is brushing , during which elements are selected in one view , and concurrently the same information is highlighted in other views . CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1482 Less seems to have been written about the use of multiple views in relation to digital collections or personal information management . Compendium is an example of a tool that combines multiple views with design rationale [ 15 ] . Each view is an argument map and can contain multiple nodes such as ideas , questions , arguments , images and documents . The user can create as many maps as s / he wants . A node can have instances in multiple maps , but this is not necessary . A number above each node shows how many maps the node is used in , and by clicking on this number a popup menu is shown through which the user can open ( some of ) these other maps if they are currently closed . Discussion Although we recognize that physical artifacts are part of designers’ collections , and that digitizing physical content is an issue , our current focus is on the organization and use in software . This overview of related work supports our observations that a new system to document the design process is needed . We think that an automated collection system such as the Digital Scrapbook can be useful for aggregating parts of individual digital collections , but that it does not cater for the entire design process in our department , and that is our goal . We discussed several examples relating to spatial organization , semi - automated layouts and multiple views . We see value in combining these aspects , as they can strengthen each other . Relations do not only serve the purpose of association and reflection ( this could also be supported by spatial organization alone ) , but they also play a crucial role in enabling the force - based layout by behaving as springs , and in exploring the collection . The latter is done by showing ( or hiding ) content that is related to specific content . This showing and hiding , in combination with the easy reorganization possibilities of the force - based layout , help to explore spatial organizations and selections and hence to create different views . We see value in the way Compendium integrates multiple views . We consider it however to be more suitable for argument mapping of more rational and structured design processes , requiring users to specify whether a new node is for example a question or argument , while we seek a quicker and more playful way of organization to support dynamic creative design processes . Some of the discussed examples show the integration of additional activities besides making a spatially organized collection . We explained that Product World enables designers to compare content based on a similarity criterion such as form . We imagine that this can also be useful for mapping ideas or concepts to for example requirements . Although we see it as an interesting addition for future work , we currently do not focus on these activities , as it requires the student to set specific distances between content or specify weights for the relations in a force - based layout . This might decrease the spontaneity of the interaction , i . e . it might make building the collection a too cognitive and perhaps too complex process . Prezi and VUE feature the possibility to create presentations . We do integrate this activity , because formal but especially informal presentations ( e . g . showing the project progress to a project coach ) occur often throughout the entire design process . More about this is explained in the next section in which the current state of Freed is explained . FREED : CURRENT STATE OF THE SYSTEM Our system is called Freed , because it gives design students the freedom to position and relate content freely , to quickly spatially reorganize their content , to create multiple linked views , and to integrate different activities ( e . g . presentation ) . Freed is a work - in - progress that is developed during the PhD project of the first author . It is however functional , and is and has been used by students during their design projects . In this section we will describe the main functionality of the system as it is now . It is not possible to explain all functionality of Freed within this paper . For getting a sense of the dynamic qualities of the system , we refer the reader to the video that accompanies this paper . System overview Freed is in its current state a standalone single - user software application created in Java using the Processing libraries [ 16 ] within the Eclipse development environment . The application can run in normal and openGL hardware accelerated mode , the latter being clearly the preferred choice because it operates much smoother . It currently works in Windows and Mac OS X and is used by design students on both operating systems . Figure 1 : The structure of the system CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1483 The application supports text , image and video content . A collection is saved as an xml - file in a collection folder . All imported content is copied to a shared content folder within that collection folder . Multiple collection files can exist within a collection folder ( e . g . saved iterations of the same collection ) , and they can share ( part of ) the shared content . The structure of the system is explained in figure 1 . Graphical interface The interface of Freed consists of two main parts : the canvas and the panels . The canvas ( figure 2a ) is the place where the main action takes place . Here the designer creates a visual - spatial organization of the collection content . The canvas can be zoomed and panned seamlessly , and individual content or selections of content can be easily zoomed to fill the screen . In the main panel ( figure 2b ) several tools can be chosen to interact with the content , as well as several actions that are applied immediately to selected content . From the main panel , several floating panels can be opened and closed , such as a panel for controlling the properties of the collection items , and a panel for controlling the force - based layout . Views and multi - view presentations The designer can switch between views and create new views from the ‘views panel’ , which can be opened from the main panel . Views are not separate files ; they are part of a collection file ( figure 1 ) . View switches are animated : The content that is in both views is gradually moved and transformed to its new position and size . The other content either fades in or out . These animations help seeing the relations and differences between views . They can be also be useful when giving a presentation consisting of multiple views ( i . e . views are used as slides ) . We do not yet provide a thumbnail overview of views ( or slides ) , and grouping of views into presentations is not yet supported , although we think that these can be useful features . In the current implementation of the system there can only be one view open at a time . Enabling multiple views to be open at the same time to support brushing ( see related work ) or copying content between views is planned for future work . Collection items The main collection items are nodes . Graphical nodes ( figure 2d ) can be created by dragging one or more images and / or videos from a file browser onto the canvas . Thumbnails of various sizes are automatically created , and are automatically loaded into or out of memory depending on the current display size of the node . Text nodes ( figure 2c ) are created by clicking anywhere on the canvas with the text tool . The background color and font of a text node can be changed specifically for each view . Graphical nodes can be unified with text nodes so that the text appears as a description below the graphical content ( figure 2e ) . Content that cannot be viewed within freed , such as documents , animations or CAD files , can be included as a clickable attachment to a node . Also hyperlinks to online websites can be attached to a node . Besides being resizable , nodes can be minimized ( figure 2i ) , after which they are presented as little dots . Possibly attached relations and paths stay connected . The dot serves as a visual reminder that there is something to show . Figure 2 . Different elements within Freed . a : canvas , b : main panel , c : text node , d : graphic node , e : combined text - graphic node , f : relation , g : start of a path , h : end of a path , i : minimized node CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1484 Besides nodes , there are three other types of collection items : Relations , paths and styles . A relation ( figure 2f ) is a visual link between two nodes . We call it relation rather than link , because students confused the latter with hyperlinks to websites . A relation can be created by clicking on multiple nodes in succession . The first - clicked node stays selected so that it is easy to quickly relate many nodes to that specific node ( making it the center of a cluster ) . Text can be added to relations , and global visual properties of the relation can be changed ( e . g . arrow type , directionality ) . A Path ( figure 2 g - h ) is a linear sequence of nodes . It can be created by clicking on multiple nodes sequentially with the path tool . A path can be useful for showing a linear process ( e . g . construction process of a prototype ) , a scenario , or for preparing an informal presentation of nodes within the view ( which differs from a multi - view presentation ) . Paths are independent of relations : A path is not a linear group of relations . Paths and relations can overlap ( i . e . the same node can be part of both a relation and a path ) . Multiple paths can also overlap . In the current implementation , paths cannot branch . For branches , new paths or relations have to be used . When playing back a video within Freed , snapshots of the video can be created . These snapshots are image nodes that are automatically related to the video node . Additionally , a path is automatically created that orders the snapshots chronologically . Styles are the only abstract collection items , and are designed to make it easier to control the visual appearance of nodes . They have properties such as ‘node background color’ and ‘font - style’ . A style can only be set as global property of a node . For each view , the designer can choose whether to use the view - specific appearance properties of the node , or whether its appearance is controlled by its global style . To add even more flexibility , styles have view - specific properties too . This can help the designer to for example quickly choose a different color simultaneously for all the nodes with the style ‘comment’ in the current view . Force - based layout The force - based layout avoids nodes from overlapping and keeps linked nodes close to each other , so that it is easy to reposition and resize the nodes . By slightly pulling a node , the user gets feedback about its connectivity , because connected nodes will also start to move . The designer can also explore connectivity by placing the mouse over a node or relation : Connected nodes or relations are then highlighted ( figure 3 ) . The main purpose of the force - based layout is to make it easy to adapt the spatial organization , and hence to create new views . It helps the designer to create a rough initial spatial organization . S / he can then lock one or more nodes to gain full control over their positions and fine - tune the spatial organization . The force - based layout uses two view - specific user - definable distance settings : distance between nodes and distance between clusters . The latter is implemented similarly as in Vizster ( see related work ) : Clusters are not specifically defined by the user , but depend on the amount of relations between nodes . By using a relatively small distance between nodes , and by using a relatively high distance between clusters , clusters of nodes become apparent ( figure 3 ) . Figure 3 : Distance settings can help to keep the visual information relatively dense while still seeing clusters . When the mouse cursor is placed over a node or relation , all connected nodes and relations are highlighted . Figure 4 : Two times the same path but with different path settings . Left : A curved path with a small straighten - force . Right : A straight path with a high ‘space around path’ setting . Force - based paths Paths in Freed differ from paths in related work , because they are force - based . A path can be straight or curved ( figure 4 ) . The straight setting can be used if the student wants to focus on the path and wants to see how the other nodes in the view ( if any ) relate to the path . The curved setting is useful if the student wants to focus on the organization of the nodes in the view , and wants to see how the path flows through this organization . The curviness of the path can be gradually controlled , using its ‘straighten force’ slider in the path properties panel . This straighten - CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1485 force competes with the general force - based layout . The student can also gradually control the distance between the path and the other nodes in the current view , to make it stand out more . The straighten - force of the path and the distance around it are view - specific settings . Force - based timeline Also the timeline function in Freed differs from related work , because it is force - based . This timeline can help design students to organize the nodes within a view chronologically , after which they can for example make a process overview ( figure 5 ) . They can add directional relations that show how different content has inspired each other . A time - align force slider allows the user to gradually mix the linear organization by time with the two - dimensional categorization of the force - based layout . Different timestamps can be used , such as the time the node was created , the time the file was last modified at time of import ( for an image or video node ) , or a user defined time . The latter can be set by dragging the anchor of a node on the timeline . Figure 5 : Small cutout of a process - overview , made with the force - based timeline Showing and hiding content To focus or to reduce visual clutter , nodes can be hidden ( besides minimizing them ) . This can be done directly , or by hiding all the leaf - nodes ( nodes that have no other relations ) related to a specific visible node at once . Hidden content can be shown in two distinct ways : By showing it from the collection panel ( which shows all the content in the collection and has search and filter options ) , or by showing it through related content that is visible in the current view . The latter is much quicker . Above each node that is visible in the current view , a button is displayed with a number that indicates the amount of invisible related nodes ( except if zero ) . When clicking on this button , all these nodes are immediately shown . When placing the mouse cursor over a node that has any hidden related nodes , also another button is shown above it . When clicking this button a special panel is shown at the bottom of the screen from which these hidden related nodes can be shown individually ( figure 6 ) . When placing the mouse cursor over a node that is visible in the current view , all hidden relations to other nodes that are visible in the view are shown as dotted lines . When clicking on such a line , the relation is shown . Figure 6 . The panel for showing hidden related nodes . The hidden relations between the selected node and its hidden related nodes are temporarily shown when this panel is open , and all the items in the view except for the selected node are partly faded out . EVALUATION In this section we discuss two evaluations of Freed . The first is a longitudinal evaluation during which 4 students worked with Freed between March 2010 and June 2010 . This was the first time that Freed was used by students . The second evaluation is a 3 - hour workshop held with 14 students in September 2010 . This evaluation included a questionnaire about the students’ general collection and reflection practices during the design process , their first reactions to Freed during the workshop , and their intended use of Freed . It is not our intention here to present a highly detailed discussion of usability issues . We describe our first experiences with the use of Freed by students . Besides discussing how both evaluations influenced and will influence the design of Freed , we will focus on : -­‐ Freed as a tool for documentation -­‐ Freed as tool for exploration and reflection -­‐ Freed as a tool for additional activities -­‐ General comments and challenges for acceptance Longitudinal evaluation Freed was tested with four industrial design students ( two male , two female ) during the last three months of their semester - long individual final bachelor project . The students were asked to participate directly by the first author , who was the only researcher involved in the evaluation . At the start of the evaluation , the students were provided with the software and an illustrated digital manual . Additionally , the researcher demonstrated some of the main features , such as adding and relating content , using the force - based layout , and using multiple - views . At that point some features were not yet implemented , namely : the timeline , adding attachments and hyperlinks to nodes , changing the color of nodes , and adding video nodes . During the course of the evaluation , the researcher continuously worked on Freed and made several updates available , partly based on student request . Information about each update and how to install it was e - mailed to the CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1486 students . They were not forced to install the updates . The students were not instructed to use the software in a specific way or with a specific frequency . During the evaluation , the researcher contacted the students about every three weeks to ask them if they agreed to have a one - and - a - half our meeting with the researcher , to discuss their work using Freed . These meetings were loosely structured interviews during which the students showed their work using Freed , and the researcher asked questions about how Freed was used , things that were unclear , bugs and missing functionality . He also demonstrated functionality that was unclear , unknown or new . Two students used the system respectively two and three times , which resulted in respectively two and three meetings with the researcher . The other two students ( one male , one female ) used it on a more regular basis , about every two weeks . The researcher had four meetings with each of these two students . Documentation All students created a relatively similar main view in which they organized their design process horizontally in a chronological way . They locked the main nodes of this process ( e . g . ‘concept 1’ or ‘interim presentation’ ) , and let the related content ( e . g . different sketches of concept 1 ) for a large part unlocked so that it was easy to reorganize the view by dragging the main nodes . They made these main nodes bigger to show their importance . They then created relations , mostly associations or causal relations ( e . g . ‘inspired by’ ) , between the content of the different phases . Three students also created additional views that gave a more detailed overview of selections of the process ( i . e . to show all the ideas in one view ) . One student used the path tool to connect the main project phases in a chronological way . He used a curved path and used it for its visual properties ( a clear thick line ) and not for its quick reorganization possibilities ( e . g . by using a straight path ) or its full screen presentation possibilities . Exploration and reflection During the projects , the students did not use Freed for dedicated reflection . They mainly used it to document or communicate their work . They however felt that documentation and preparing informal presentations in Freed helped them to revisit previous work and to gain a better overview of their project process . These activities were therefore seen as part of reflection . They indicated that exploration during these activities was enforced by the playful nature of Freed . Two students used the collection that they had built in Freed at the end of the project , when they had to create their educational portfolio on which they are assessed . They mainly used it to explore all the work that they had done , and to gain a better overview . They felt that Freed helped them to do this , but they did not change their collection during this process ( e . g . add comments / reflections , relations , new views ) . Additional activities Besides documentation , exploration and reflection , Freed was mainly used for communication . The two students who used Freed on a more regular basis used it to explain their progress to their project coach ( about every two weeks ) . They used it mainly as an informal presentation tool ; they did not add coach comments to the collection during these meetings . One of these two students made a new view for most coach meetings . This view then included the entire collection ( it was not a selection ) , but the student used the path tool and the size of the nodes ( making them bigger ) to ‘highlight’ what he wanted to show to his coach . The student mentioned that the advantage of having all content in the view was , that it was easy for the coach to see what they discussed in the previous meeting ( i . e . the student could show the new work in the context of the old work ) . He used the path for its visual properties ( a clear thick line ) and for the possibility of quickly browsing through the nodes of the path in full screen using the arrow keys . The two students that used the system on a more regular basis made screen captures ( still images ) of their main view . One student used these on a large poster at the education exhibition where he had to show the final outcome of his work ( figure 7 ) , the other student used them in her report . Figure 7 : Top : An exhibition stand of a design student with at the back a poster with a process overview made in Freed . Bottom : The left half of the process overview . General comments and challenges for acceptance The students mentioned that they did not find the time to explore all the functionality of the system during their busy projects , but that they would probably have used the system more if they had learned to work with the system from the start of the project in a gradual way . An important relating problem was the lack of explanation or tutorial videos . A quite lengthy manual with lots of images was provided , but CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1487 all students mentioned ( independently and without asking ) that they were missing explanation videos . Finally , two missing features ( different colors for nodes and adding attachments / hyperlinks to nodes ) were experienced as barriers for using the software more often . Nevertheless , all students were enthusiastic about the freedom that the system gave them . They liked the quick way of organizing and reorganizing their work , and although not used extensively , they liked the ability to create multiple views . Changes made to Freed In response to the students’ requests , the researcher added functionality for adding colors , attachments and hyperlinks to nodes and created a website with tutorial videos . These developments were already planned , but were prioritized due to the requests . Additionally , the researcher added styles ( for quickly changing the appearance of multiple nodes ) , support for playback of video , and the timeline functionality . Workshop and questionnaire After the previously described evaluation , a three - hour workshop was held with fourteen industrial design students , followed by a questionnaire returned by thirteen of these participants . All students never used the system before . Seven students ( three female , four male ) were Bachelor students in their final third year . The seven other students ( one female , six male ) were Master students in their final second year . All students had experience with many semester - long design projects , as well as keeping a design and education portfolio During the 3 - hour workshop , the students were provided with the system , explanation videos of the main functionality , and an example collection that they could explore . The students were asked to bring as much digital content as possible from previous projects and their just - started current project , and to spend half of the time working with the former and the other half with the latter . They were explicitly told that they should include everything in one collection and that they were allowed to make previous and current work overlap . Roughly the first 45 minutes were spent exploring the explanation videos and example collection , so about 2 hours and 15 minutes were spent with their own work . The questionnaire was divided in three parts : Questions about the students’ general collection and reflection practices during the design process ( 6 questions ) , questions about the use of Freed during the workshop ( 19 questions ) and questions about the students’ intention to use Freed and required changes or improvements ( 9 questions ) . The majority of the questions was open . Documentation The students’ physical collections mainly exist out of their sketch / note book , loose sketches and physical models or prototypes . They sometimes use their physical work as visual references for inspiration and communication purposes in their workspace ( e . g . on the walls ) , and also print out digital work for this sake . All students indicated that they use the main file browser of their operating system ( e . g . Windows Explorer ) for managing their digital work during the design process . They create folders with the main activities or project phases . Some organize these chronologically by numbering them . One student mentioned that he used a blog in some projects to document his work and to communicate to his team and client . One other student creates a video log . Some other students use weekly to - do and have - done lists to document their work . All students create a portfolio including reflections , as this is required to pass their semester . None of the students mention that they work on this portfolio before the end of the semester . All students indicated that they feel that it is important to keep a well - structured digital collection during the project , but seven students mention that they do not or only partly succeed to , and that it is especially hard during project phases with a lot of time - pressure . In such phases the collection becomes more chaotic and less physical content is digitized . One student specifically mentions that he does not keep a complete digital collection because he does not know which part of his physical work ( e . g . notes , sketches ) will be relevant to have in digital form later ( e . g . for reflecting , reporting or presenting ) . Three students perceive it as a problem that they have no software for creating a collection that will be compatible with the portfolio that they have to create in the end of the semester . Most students make these portfolios using an HTML WYSIWYG editor or Adobe Flash . These are not used to keep a collection during the entire project . Apart from the time pressure and the time it takes to digitize physical work , most students mention the lack of freedom and exploration possibilities , and the lack of a visual overview , as key - problems during their digital collection process . During the workshop , seven students did not plan in advance how to structure their content and were inspired while working with the system . The six others mentioned that it was a combination of planning and being inspired while working . The following answer is an example of the latter : “During the process , I got inspired by the option of multiple views . While I was going through my collection , I realized that in different situations , you need different ‘views’ on your collection . In my case I figured that there are situations where you want to present your specific skills as a designer and there are situations where you want to focus more on your projects . ” ( figure 8 ) Most students , in particular the ones that did not plan ahead , started with dragging many images onto the canvas , and then started ‘playing’ supported by the force - based layout . Two students were somewhat overwhelmed by the large amount of images that they had imported , but this improved when they started scaling , minimizing and hiding content . It is important to note however , that this will be different when introducing the system from the start of a design CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1488 project , because then less content at a time will be imported , and perhaps with clearer goals in the context of an activity within the design process . Figure 8 : One student made a view about skills . Two of the students did not create multiple views . One explains that he was too busy organizing his imported content in his one and only view , the other mentions that she had no inspiration during the workshop for a new view . Five of the students that created multiple views , created at least one view that was a categorization of work , and another view that was a more chronological organization of the same work . Some used the timeline feature for the latter , but most used the path feature . Three students each created multiple views that were different categorizations of the same work , e . g : “The first view is hierarchical to show my activities during a semester , where each activity can have subgroups . This view was an overview to see what kind of media I have created for these activities . The second view was to visualize my activities linked to competencies that I need to work on for my education . “ Exploration and reflection The students indicated that reflection is often postponed until the end of the project , when they have to make their educational portfolio . At this point , it is a lot of work to review all the details of the project . Also deciding what to focus on and creating a coherent story are mentioned as problems at this point . One student mentions that she prints out digital work such as ideas and requirements so that she can try out different physical mappings of these on her desk , and reflect on that . One other student mentions that he explores different overlapping representations of his project work in software , but that this is a lot of work : “The various representations of my output are tedious to produce as most of the time it involves recreating part of a previous representation . The difference between these kind of representations are key to gaining insight , however the representations of the current software I use ( OmniGraffle , Photoshop , Visio ) are too static . ” Besides general insights such as ‘ the workshop made me again aware of the importance of visual documentation’ , or ‘I was inspired to new visual styles for presenting my work in the future’ , two students mentioned that they gained new insights in their work . One concerned a possible direction for a project , and one concerned skills , as was described under ‘documentation’ and shown in figure 8 . The other students mention the limited time of the workshop , and the focus on learning the system , as the reason for not gaining new insights . They expected to gain new insights when using the system over a longer period of time in a more relaxed setting . Additional activities Many students create small ‘collections’ for specific design activities , such as a planning , mood boards , mind maps or brainstorms , mappings of ideas and concepts ( sometimes mapped against requirements ) , reports , presentations , and process overviews . Sometimes these small collections are physical and exist within the workspace , but they are mostly digital . The students indicated that these collections are not well integrated with each other . Besides documenting work based on previous and current activities ( as students would normally do in their standard file browser ) , several other activities were observed during the workshop : Making a visual chronological overview of work ( nine students ) , organizing work based on competencies or skills ( four students ) , making a mindmap of the current project ( two students ) , mapping related work ( benchmark ) of the current project along two dimensions ( one student ) , mapping prototypes along two dimensions ( one student ) , making a stakeholder overview for the current project ( one student ) and making a geographic overview of work ( one student ) . General comments and challenges for acceptance All students except one praised the freedom that the system gave them and the multiple view functionality . This one student had doubts that the system was too free / open for him , because he knows that he needs a lot of structure during his design process . He said that he might not know what to do with it and preferred to have some templates for structuring , or tutorials . Most of the other students answered that they explicitly did not want templates and prefer freedom . Nine of the thirteen students said that they were intending to use the system during their design process ( of which five thought they would use it structurally , perhaps weekly ) , the four others had doubts or conditions : One of these four was the just - described student that desired more structure . Another student thought that the system might require him to digitize too much physical content that he would not really need later . Another student thought that the flexibility and playfulness might make him spend too much time with it . Finally , one student answered that he required the system to drag and drop PDF documents , and to be able to preview these documents within Freed . Drag and drop of files ( other than images and videos which was possible CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1489 already ) , such as documents , Flash , Illustrator and Photoshop files , was also requested by most of the other students . Other much requested features were to have multiple views open at the same time so that it is possible to quickly switch between views without thinking about saving , to see the views as visual tabs , and to switch to a view from within another view : e . g . switching to a view about the final prototype by clicking on a node that shows the final prototype ( like in Compendium , see related work ) . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Although we feel that Freed can also be useful for practicing designers ( especially since our education is modeled to a professional context ) , our current focus is on design students . The evaluations confirmed our observations regarding students’ documentation and reflection practices , and the need for a system such as Freed . The ease of exploration and reorganization and the possibility to create multiple views and integrate different activities , which we consider the key features of our system , were well appreciated . This , combined with the use of Freed by two of the students during the longitudinal evaluation and combined with the students’ answers regarding intended use of Freed , gives us good hopes for acceptance of Freed during the design process . Freed is however a work in progress , and there are instruction and usability aspects that need to be improved ( most notably tutorial improvements and GUI / menu improvements ) and features to be added ( most notably regarding switching views and supporting the drag and drop of additional file types ) . Additionally personal differences between students will keep playing a role . Some students might require a more structured way of documentation and reflection than Freed offers . Also , it differs per student how much content originates in digital form and how much energy is put in digitizing physical content . Besides improving Freed , we need to do a longitudinal study that captures the entire design process . It is important to see how the different activities in the different stages of the design process integrate with the system . We also need to analyze how the more advanced features of the system , such as paths and the timeline are used , and how the system supports reflection . We have currently started this longitudinal study . Ten of the students that participated in the workshop take part in the study . We will examine the use of the system by each student for the whole semester . After that , we will try to adapt Freed for use in a group setting . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank the students that participated in the evaluations . REFERENCES 1 . Schön , D . A . The Reflective Practitioner . Basic Books , 1982 2 . Simon , H . A . The Sciences of the Artificial . MIT Press , Cambridge MA , 1969 . 3 . Hummels , C . and Frens , J . The reflective transformative design process . Ext . abstracts CHI 2009 . ACM press ( 2009 ) , 2655 - 2658 . 4 . Hummels , C . and Frens , J . Designing for the unknown : A design process for the future generation of highly interactive systems and products . In Proc . EPDE 2008 , 204 - 209 . 5 . Keller , I . For Inspiration Only . Doctoral Dissertation . Delft University of Technology , the Netherlands 6 . Martens , J . , Parthesius , F . , Atasoy , B . Design TeamMate : a platform to support design activities of small teams . In Proc . AVI 2010 . ACM ( 2010 ) , 119 - 126 . 7 . Sharmin , M . , Bailey , B . P . , Coats , C . , Hamilton , K . Understanding knowledge management practices for early design activity and its implications for reuse . In Proc . CHI 2009 , ACM press ( 2010 ) 8 . Swan , L . , Tanase , D . , Taylor , A . S . Design ' s processional character . In Proc . DIS 2010 , ACM press ( 2010 ) , 65 - 74 . 9 . Ben Shneiderman . Creating creativity : user interfaces for supporting innovation . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 114 - 138 . 10 . http : / / prezi . com / . Accessed September 2010 . 11 . Kumar A . , Saigal R . Visual understanding environment . In proc . JCDL 2005 . ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 413 . 12 . Heer , J . , Boyd , D . Vizster : Visualizing Online Social Networks , Proc . IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization , IEEE Press ( 2005 ) , 33 - 40 . 13 . Pasman , G . , Stappers , P . J . ProductWorld , an Interactive Environment for Classifying and Retrieving Product Samples . In Proc . 5 th Asian Design Conference 14 . Roberts , J . C . State of the Art : Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization . In Proc . CMV 2007 , 61 - 71 15 . Buckingham Shum , S . J . , Selvin , A . M . , Sierhuis , M . , Conklin , J . , Haley , C . B . , and Nuseibeh , B . Hypermedia Support for Argumentation - Based Rationale : 15 Years on from gIBIS and QOC . In Rationale Management in Software Engineering . Springer - Verlag ( 2006 ) , 111 - 132 . 16 . Reas , C . , Fry , B . Processing : a learning environment for creating interactive Web graphics . In Proc . SIGGRAPH 2003 , ACM press ( 2003 ) CHI 2011 • Session : Digital Content & Collections May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1490