This powerful underlying concept is usually realized in both research and practical efforts within a node - link model : nodes are the holders of content , and links are the means by which the content is given con - text . In this model , links are closely associated with navigation and mechanisms for traversal ; they are a way to move from node to node , to keep readers focused on the current node or document , until they decide to move on to the next . We refer to this style of hypertext as document - centered hypertext . As systems and applications designers have gained more practical experience with hypertext , models of structure have grown more sophisticated , more expres - sive , and in many cases , more flexible than convention - al node - link models . To address the needs of specialized applications , some models diverge entirely from stan - dard notions of links ; for example , Parunak introduces set - based hypertext for applications that involve taxo - nomic reasoning [ 21 ] . The expressiveness of hypertext models has been extended by adding types to nodes , links , and structures [ 5 , 15 , 20 ] . Finally , for the sake of flexibility , in some applications links are left implicit , computed dynamically by using text analysis methods or other heuristics for determining regular interconnec - tions [ 2 , 6 ] . Thus we see systems and applications designers broadening the field , in some cases by theory , but also through practical experience . Spatial hypertext has grown out of just such an intertwining of theory - and experience - based extensions to hypertext concepts . Spatial hypertext has arisen through our experi - ences with applications that explore alternative structures for content and applications in which the domain structure is not well understood at the outset or changes during the course of a task . Many of these applications involve the collection , comprehension , 88 August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM C a t h e r i n e C . M a r s h a l l F r a n k M . S h i p m a n I I I Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change ypertext , 1 in its most general sense , allows content to appear in different contexts . The immediate setting in which readers encounter a specific seg - ment of material then changes from reading to reading or from reader to reader . Authors collect and structure materials to reflect their own under - standing or in anticipation of readers’ possible interests , needs , or ability to comprehend the substrate of interrelated content . 1 We use the term hypertext broadly , to cover both textual and multimedia content . Node A Node A Node D Node E Node C Node B Node A and interpretation of diverse mate - rials ; they are information - intensive activities , like analysis , design or evaluation , and are often collabora - tive efforts . Spatial hypertext is most appropriate when there is no distinction between readers and writers , and more prescriptive design methods might ham - per exploratory structuring . Spatial hypertext has its origins in browser - based approaches in which the emerging hyper - text network is portrayed graphically , in an overview , to promote coherence ( see Thüring et al . in this issue ) ; authors and readers interact with the hypertext using a map of its structure . In early conceptions of browser - based hypertext , boxes or other icons sym - bolized nodes , while lines represented the links among them ; hypertext browsers were oriented toward presenting a graph representation of a net - work . NoteCards [ 9 ] and gIBIS [ 5 ] are examples of hypertext systems that used such a spatial map . But gIBIS differed from NoteCards in one crucial way : in NoteCards , the browser was used mainly as a means of visualizing existing network structure 2 ; in gIBIS , the browser was the primary means of interacting with the emerging network as well as presenting it . Extensions to the node - link model , such as types and complex structures , have found their way into browser - based approaches . By watching people use these extensions , our sense of “what matters” in spatial hypertext evolved . The ability to create and move nodes freely matters ; the abil - ity to express relationships by spatial proximity and visual cues matters . If we remove the explicit links from a browser , it can become a dynamic canvas for interaction . Nodes may appear in different contexts through multiple spatial references to the same underlying content ; authors may use “any unit of text as a new element in an expanding vocabulary of signs” [ 4 ] . Thus , spatial hypertext is not only a means of presenting readers and authors with visualizations of existing structures ; it is also a way to take advantage of human per - ceptual abilities in hypertext navi - gation , and to provide users with a fairly intuitive medium through which they may express new struc - tures and manipulate existing structures . Figure 1 illustrates how hypertextual structures can be realized in a spatial setting by showing the transition from a document - centered hypertext ( Fig - ure 1a ) to a browser - based hypertext ( Figure 1b ) to a spatial hypertext ( Figure 1c ) . Imagine Nodes C and A in Figure 1a are documents displayed as in popular interfaces such as NCSA’s Mosaic ; clicking on the anchor ( or , more precisely , the marker for the anchor ) embedded in Node C causes the document corresponding to Node A to be displayed in the win - dow . Node A may replace Node C in the viewer , as it COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 89 Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change Fig . 1c Figure 1 . Transitions from document - centered hypertext to browser - based hypertext to spatial hypertext : a ) Document - centered hypertext ; b ) Browser - based hypertext ; c ) Spatial hypertext 2 Although NoteCards allowed users to construct links through browser interaction , most users chose other , more document - centered , means of making links . Node C Some intro - ductory text… < ref Node A > < ref Node D > < ref Node E > Continuingexposition… Node A Node B Then there ' s a related topic < ref Node B > Additional facts and figures… Node C Node A Node D Node E Node B is - related - to contains Fig . 1a Fig . 1b does in Mosaic’s default behavior , or it may open a new window , as it would in many multiple window hypertext systems , but in either case , the links are used primarily as a means of traversal . Figure 1b shows the same hypertext portrayed in a spatial browser . Nodes A , B , C , D , and E are repre - sented by visual symbols —boxes , in this case—that refer to the underlying documents . We have added types to Figure 1b ; node types are represented by box colors and link types by line dashing . Arrowheads indicate link directionality . Nodes A , D , and E are all contained by Node C , and Node B is related to Node A . Figure 1b is fairly typical of the style of hypertext network display presented by browser - based hyper - text ( see Figure 2 in Thüring et al . , this issue and Fig - ure 4 in Nanard and Nanard , this issue ) . Figure 1c extends and generalizes the browser - based hypertext in Figure 1b to a simple spatial hypertext . Once again , we refer to content of underlying nodes by visual symbols , applying the color - coded types from Fig - ure 1b . First we see that Node A’s visual symbol is near Node B’s visual symbol , so Node A is very probably related to Node B . From the characteristics of their visual symbols , Nodes A , D , and E are understood to belong to the same set , contained in Node C , whose symbol is at the head of the list ; the set relation - ship is implicitly con - veyed through proximity , alignment , and homo - geneity of type . To illus - trate one final important property of spatial hypertext , we have populated the space with some gray unlabeled nodes that show Node A as part of other relationships elsewhere in the space—its visual symbol is grouped with some others on the right side of the example hypertext , as well as heading up a list on the left . Thus hypertext—encounters with content in different con - texts—is realized through recurrent references that use visual symbols of underlying objects instead of through traversal - oriented links . 3 Figure 1 illustrates several important characteris - tics of spatial hypertext : the separation of symbol and underlying content ; the use of these visual symbols to create hypertextual meaning ; and the ability to leave structure implicit and informal . This final point—the ability to leave structure implicit and informal —is one of the crucial distinctions of spatial hypertext . Of course , in document - based hypertext , structure may be left implicit and reclaimed through analysis of document content , but the structure that is comput - ed is regular ; spatial hypertext allows people to express what DeRose refers to as “extensional struc - ture” [ 6 ] , idiosyncratic and dependent on the situa - tion at hand , perceived through context , not computed from content . Ambiguity may be left unre - solved without compromising the integrity of the structure . 4 For example , in Figure 1c , if we pushed 90 August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Figure 2 . A multi - region space created in an Aquanet application 3 Rosenberg contrasts the choices a reader must make in traversing links to Node A or D or E ( see , for example , Figure 1a ) with spatial simultaneities , in which a reader can at once apprehend “A and D and E” [ 22 ] . Node E out of alignment with Nodes A and D , we could use the misalignment to express our uncertain - ty about whether Node E really belongs to the same set as A and D . The characteristics of spatial hypertext allow structure to emerge very gradually , as people work with the visual characteristics and spatial posi - tions of symbols . Spatial hypertext is thus inherently flexible , decid - edly less formal than other models of hypertext , and readily supports volatility and change . Many of these characteristics are derived from the basic affordances offered by visual and spatial modes of working . People may find it difficult to express how or why content is interconnected , but they are accus - tomed to arranging media—either physical or elec - tronic—in space . Computational tools like text editors , structured graphics editors , outliners , some hypertext systems , and even multiple window displays ( where dif - ferent documents or different portions of the same document can be readily juxtaposed ) all support spa - tialized content . Office workers frequently shuffle papers to make sense of them , and use the physical space around their offices as important adjuncts to their more organized file cabinets [ 13 , 14 ] . Sometimes links are noted physically or graphical - ly in these media—in computational media , lines are drawn from one content item to another , or boxes group multiple items ; in noncomputational environ - ments , people fasten documents together with paper clips , staple them , put rubber bands around sets of videotapes , or otherwise physically connect related things—but often interconnections are left implicit , to be resolved only if use demands it . Looking at Practice Instances of spatial hypertext - like constructs appear in many computational and noncomputational set - tings . How can we learn from practice to design appropriate components for and an interface to a spatial hypertext system ? It is crucial to watch users in action , to look at the results of their work in a variety of envi - ronments , and to talk to them about what they are trying to accomplish . Experiences with the Aquanet hypertext system , which uses a browser - based approach , coupled with a survey of the types of spatial structures people created in three different hypertext systems ( NoteCards , the Virtual Notebook System , and Aquanet ) provided us with a basis for designing a spatial hypertext system and reflecting on direc - tions for spatial hypertext [ 16 ] . In our survey , we found that authors sometimes prefer to express relationships among nodes 5 by using geometric cues like proximity and alignment , and visual cues like graphical similarity . These geo - metric and visual cues correspond to Bertin’s notion of planar and retinal variables [ 3 ] . By combining geo - metric and visual cues , authors may build up surpris - ingly complex hypertext structures . Geometrically - based relationships arise from spa - tial configurations of nodes : nodes may be “close to” or “on top of” each other ( be proximate ) ; nodes may be “under , ” “over , ” “to the left of , ” or “to the right of” one another ( show deliberate alignment in either the x or y dimension ) ; or nodes may be clustered or grouped ( set apart from other elements of a space ) . People readily use these spatial configurations to por - tray relationships . For example , two adjacent or over - lapping nodes might be related in a manner analogous to a simple binary link . Visual characteristics also are used to signify rela - tionships or clarify spatial cues . So nodes of the same color distributed throughout a space might belong to a common set . Or nodes that are similar in appearance might elaborate on the role of a geometrically - per - ceived link . For example , if we know Node Y is an annotation on its neighbor , Node Z , and Node Y is dis - tinctive because it is yellow , we can perceive the same annotative relationship between Node X and its yellow neighbor , Node W . While we have observed that peo - ple develop complex visual codings to represent dif - ferent properties of nodes , these codings are apt to be COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 91 Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change Figure 3 . Finding structure in a portion of Figure 2 DUET ATLAS Sharp Fujitsu 101121101121 1011211582 Pulses direction Japanese - English matrix Interaction SONDUETJAPANS SHARP COMP . TO INTRODUCEPORTABLE 11 art Excerpt from Figure 2 Sets Composites Set of composites 18 art 4 In explicit hypertextual linking , links are either there , or they are not . When links are given weights or may exist independently from nodes , the existence of the link still must be specified unambiguously . undeclared and inaccessi - ble for processing by a spatial hypertext system . Thus from our analysis , we found that the most important and basic visual characteristic to consider is “similar to” ( or , equiva - lently , “different from” ) . Using homogeneity and analogy as guides , people can portray and perceive different kinds of hyper - textual structures . Taken in combination , visual and geometric characteristics also suggest hyper - text composites . Composites are higher - level structures that include other nodes [ 8 ] . By this definition , any group of visual symbols that appears to be deliberately organized—specific symbols occupying specific rela - tive positions—is a composite . More interesting are node layouts that exhibit repeated patterns of visual and geometric characteris - tics , which are referred to as composite types . We found composite types in many of the layouts surveyed . Figure 2 shows a com - plex spatial structure cre - ated in Aquanet as part of a long - term analysis of machine translation sys - tems and technologies . The figure includes graphical objects that are instances of seven differ - ent object types ; each instance refers to underly - ing content . What kinds of structure can readers perceive in this informa - tion space ? First , coupling geometric and visual characteristics , we can see that each corner of the space seems to be inhabited by different distinct pat - terns of graphical objects . It is useful to take a closer look at a small portion of one of these regions to exam - ine other common types of hypertextual structure . Figure 3 shows several structures taken from the lower - right corner of this space . First , we can see that there are overlapping stacks of visually - similar gray - bordered objects ; we can consider these to be sets . At a slightly coarser level of structure , we can see two instances of a composite type , the type that consists of four symbols : a purple rectangle above a cyan rectan - gle next to a green rectangle over a set of gray - bor - dered rectangles . Since the two instances of the 92 August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Figure 4 . An exam - ple application show - ing objects , visual symbols , collections , and navigation Fig . 4a Fig . 4b composite type are aligned so regularly , they appear to be a set as well . Although little structure has been declared beyond node types , there is much hypertex - tual structure to be perceived in this example . Given the results of this analysis , we can begin to anticipate common kinds of spatial structures and ways people would like to manipulate and interact with these structures . These results can then be used as a basis for designing an experimental spatial hypertext system . An Experimental Spatial Hypertext System With Coombs , we have developed an experimental system , VIKI , to explore spatial hypertext as a geo - metric and visual structuring paradigm [ 17 ] . The sys - tem is designed to take advantage of the human perceptual system , spatial and geographic memory , and more generally , spatial intelligence ; its emphasis is on flexibility , informality , and change . For readers , the system provides an opportunity to read in con - text , with awareness of the related , nearby nodes . For writers , the system supports the development of a visual language through informal interaction with a user interface similar to a graphics editor . A hierar - chy of spaces helps keep complexity tractable for both readers and writers ; users traverse through lev - els of spaces , each containing references to a particu - lar set of nodes and subspaces—an organizational strategy similar to that of Storyspace [ 2 ] . The Interpretive Task In designing VIKI , we focused our efforts on sup - porting the interpretive process . Interpretation is that part of writing , collaborating , or thinking in which people collect the materials of interest and make sense of them in the light of their tasks and the backgrounds they bring to it . Of course , groups and individuals are neither monolithic nor consistent in their beliefs ; to support interpretation , we considered varying ways of recording interpretations of a body of materials , using frameworks or structuring schemes that make very different uses of the same content . Interpretive use of spatial hypertext is an impor - tant avenue of research to pursue . Through the increasing availability of online information sources ( including other people , in addition to databases and corpora ) , people have access to vast quantities of materials relevant to their work . Yet there are rela - tively few tools that can be used to gather diverse materials and to explore the various ways these mate - rials may be interpreted . Such tools are needed in many settings . For exam - ple , a successful product development organization will collect business - related material relevant to the positioning and viability of a new product . This busi - ness - related material may include electronic announcements and reviews of related products ; competitors’ home pages from the World - Wide Web ; relevant patent documents retrieved from an infor - mation provider’s extensive database ; internal pro - ject - related materials ( like engineering documents ) created during the course of product development ; electronic mail exchanges held within the organiza - tion ; and , perhaps , information mined from Usenet newsgroup discussions . Once these materials have been gathered , members of the organization must make sense of them—they need to decide which materials are important , extract the salient informa - tion , evaluate its veracity , and organize it for their purposes . It is the understanding that a group devel - ops and shares over time that makes a collection of materials valuable ; the materials themselves are of limited utility without this shared understanding . The difficulty lies in expressing and recording this mutu - ally - defined , ever - evolving interpretive structure . Thus , interpretive structure is not inherent in doc - ument content , but evolves through work . In prac - tice , interpretive structure may arise through filing , in conversation , in juxtapositions of documents on a desktop , in notes and annotations , in markings and marginalia [ 12 ] . All of these methods of expressing interpretations are necessarily partial , since they are not fully articulated ; they readily tolerate ambiguity . Relationships among documents , assessments of their content , and interpretive abstractions can remain tacit through the entire interpretive process . E xternalizing these relationships , assessments , and interpretive abstractions is a crucial part of reflecting on one’s own under - standing of a problem and commu - nicating one’s understanding to others during the course of collabo - rative work . Our experiences demonstrate that such structure is difficult to express , even in hypertext ; tensions arise between the tacit knowledge of the expert practitioner ( the reader / author ) , and the means that hypertext tools provide to express interpretations as partial , emerg - ing forms [ 23 ] . Spatial hypertext promises to be a good medium to ease these tensions . VIKI forms the basis of our experimentation with the use of spatial hypertext in service of interpretive tasks . VIKI’s Spatial Hypertext Model VIKI’s spatial hypertext model is simple , and follows our survey of practice 6 ; it consists of objects , which are node - like holders of content ; visual symbols , which are the references to objects that a user manipulates in an information space 7 ; collections , which are user - COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 93 Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change 5 We use the term node here to mean the node itself or a visual reference to a node’s full content , since both terminology and functionality varied among the systems and applications surveyed . 6 Much of our survey centered around information - intensive tasks . 7 All content and references to content are accessible through this space . defined subspaces ; and composites , which are the groupings of objects that form higher - level structures . Extensible structured types provide users with an abstraction mechanism . We describe each element of the model very briefly to illustrate how spatial hyper - text is realized in our prototype . Figures 4 and 5 refer to an analysis of machine translation software , in which retrieved materials and notes are organized according to the systems they cover . The analysis is shown in progress—some portions of the spatial hypertext are more highly structured than others . Objects . Objects are the content - holding entities of VIKI’s spatial hypertext model . Objects are semi - structured : they may have no internal structure , or they may have an unlimited number of fields that can be added when users wish to highlight or create con - tent that doesn’t fit within the object’s existing inter - nal structure . Each object that is part of the information space is referred to by one or more visu - al symbols . Double - clicking on a visual symbol causes the corresponding object’s full content to appear in a separate window . Visual symbols . Visual symbols are manipulable ref - erences to an object . Visual symbols each have a graphical appearance , determined either by direct manipulation or through the types mechanism described later . Users can manipulate the size , shape , color , line thickness , and font characteristics of indi - vidual visual symbols separately from their content . Indeed , users have much control over what is visible on a visual symbol at a given time . They can use the symbol’s size to limit the amount of content revealed ; they can specify which fields’ contents are shown ; and they can scroll through content to focus attention on a specific segment . In contrast to the tight correspondence between instances of object types and their graphical appear - ance that is common to most browser - based hypertext systems , VIKI’s visual symbols decouple objects and particular references to them in the display space . This decoupling , along with the ability to manipulate the appearance of individual symbols , provides users with an informal way to record different properties of an object according to its spatial context . For exam - ple , Figure 4a contains two references to the same content , a lengthy survey article about machine trans - lation software , “Babelware for the Desktop . ” One ref - erence to the article has a wide , dark border ; the other , a narrow , less conspicuous outline . The author has used this convention , line thickness , to indicate how important the information in the article is . Apparently , the article is a more important source of information about Intergraph’s DP - Translator system than it is about Globalink’s GTS . Collections . Collections contain arbitrary spatial arrangements of objects or other collections , enabling them to form a system - supported hierarchy of spaces . They too are represented by manipulable visual symbols that refer to large , scrollable planes , in which objects may overlap . Figure 4a includes five collections ( each with a blue background ) titled according to the systems investigated . The edges of the collections act as clipping regions—collections appear as portals into subspaces . Users may resize or zoom collections to reveal more or less of their con - tents . In Figure 4a , the collections are sized to reveal the degree to which their contents have been orga - nized ; the collection at the lower left is clearly less well organized than the others . C ollections give users the ability to immerse themselves in local meaning without losing global context . A collection may be moti - vated by the use of a particular visual / spatial structuring scheme ( for example , as exhibited by the regions in Figure 2 ) ; it may group materials that pertain to a specific subtask ( as is the intent of Rooms [ 10 ] ) ; or it may indicate semantic cohesion , as in Figure 4 . Since collections are acyclic , visually - nested hierar - chical structures , the system provides a navigational mechanism that allows people to move between focal collections . Like Boxer [ 7 ] , VIKI uses a spatial metaphor for navigation . Figure 4 shows an example of spatial navigation in VIKI . Figure 4a shows the top level of an information space . Traversing into the collection titled “ATLAS” ( by double - clicking on its border ) causes it to become the focus . Figure 4b shows the result of this traversal . Now more of the contents of “ATLAS” are visible . Other objects have been revealed by the traversal , and we see that “ATLAS” contains another collection , “Using ATLAS , ” which is clipped . Multiple levels of the hierarchy may be traversed in a single step by clicking on any collection’s border . Types . In our spatial hypertext model , types arise through use ; we expect users to work first with the graphical appearance and spatial layout of instances , and build up abstractions from these examples as generalities become apparent ( see the description of prototypes and bottom - up design processes in Nanard and Nanard , this issue ) . A type encapsulates a particular appearance and internal structure , along with how this internal structure is displayed by visual symbols . Because content is often irregular , ad hoc fields may be added to the internal structure of any instance . For example , if one of the machine transla - tion systems used a particular intermediate represen - tation like Esperanto , we might want to add a field and value “Interlingua : Esperanto” to a single object . Composites . Composites are structures that consist of combinations of two or more objects or collections in particular visual / spatial configurations ; they close - ly model the structures we have observed in practice . Composite types are formed through recurrent pat - terns of constituent types ; they may be defined direct - 94 August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM ly or suggested to authors based on the results of recognition algorithms , as illustrated in Figure 5 . We see composites ( especially automatically perceived and maintained composites ) as a viable way of build - ing up relational structures in spatial hypertext . Figure 4b shows an example of four composites that are instances of a composite type , which may be described roughly as , “a green rectangle over a set of purple rectangles . ” Several instances of the purple rec - tangle ( an object type ) use a visual property—border thickness—to represent an attribute of the underlying objects . Working within such a spatial hypertext model , authors can use objects , collections , compos - ites , and the visual symbols that refer to them to gradually build up interpretations of the con - tents of a corpus of collected relevant material , eventually forming types , abstractions , and a sophisticated visual language for performing an analysis of this material . Recognition Instead of providing a mecha - nism for defining specific links between objects , VIKI focuses on the relationships that can be noted visually and spatially . These relationships may either remain implicit , or be recog - nized by structure - finding algorithms that automatically analyze spatial layout and visu - ally salient properties of the constituents of a space [ 24 ] . Because structure is not enforced , but available on demand , expressive flexibility is not hampered by the defini - tion of formal interconnec - tions . 8 This approach addresses common problems associated with creating hypertexts , such as the need to articulate tacit knowledge or commit to structure prematurely [ 25 ] . In short , structure is created easily , perceived by readers and writers , and , if requested , recognized by the system and used as the basis for fur - ther interaction . Figure 6 . A VIKI information space used to organize references to topical World - Wide Web pages and personal notes Figure 5 . Applying composite type recognition to the collection shown in Figure 4b 8 This approach is philosophically similar to Moran et al . ’s notion of freeform interaction [ 19 ] . Automated structure recognition , as we use it in our spatial hypertext prototype , assists authors in three different ways . VIKI may ( 1 ) use undeclared structure as a basis for interaction ( for example , users may select and move the entirety of an undeclared structure ) ; ( 2 ) help people use the object - collection - composite data model ( for example , by locating potential collections and composites ) ; and ( 3 ) pro - vide inter - object abstraction ( for example , by sug - gesting composite types ) on demand . Figure 5 shows an example of how the recognition facilities can help users locate and declare composite types , and more generally , incrementally formalize structure . In Figure 5 , the structure recognition facil - ities have identified and suggested a possible com - posite type , a green rectangle ( a type called “Label” ) over a set of purple rectangles ( a type called “Dia - log” ) . The user has accepted the system’s suggestion , and has declared the new type . Recognition is an accelerator , and enhances the usability of the basic facilities ; it also usefully demon - strates that certain kinds of regular structures do tend to emerge in real use situations and can be made into formal hypertext constructs as needed . Spatial Hypertext in Use We have found that information - intensive applica - tions refer to external materials ; for these applica - tions it is important to see spatial hypertext not as the primary holder of content , but rather as a super - structure for organizing , and more importantly , interpreting large - scale information resources . This perspective takes account of the mutability of any external materials , and the role of structuring para - digms in making large - scale information resources serve communities of practice [ 18 ] . To demonstrate the use of spatial hypertext in this role , we have extended VIKI so that objects may refer ( through automatic processing of user - supplied URLs ) to World - Wide Web pages [ 1 ] ; users can start Web browsers by interacting with VIKI objects . This facility allows people to take advantage of the Web as an information resource , and enables them to inter - pret and situate Web materials in the context of their work ; they are free to mix annotation and source materials , and add as much structure as necessary . Thus VIKI provides an expressive superstructure—a medium for customizing views of the Web . Figure 6 shows an in - progress VIKI information space that refers to Web pages pertaining to research topics of interest to its author . The author has used collections to gather materials on different topics and has used color to indicate the types of Web pages referred to by the visual symbols . For example , red symbols refer to journals , purple to ACM Special Interest Groups , green to conferences . The author has also annotated materials in several of the collec - tions with his own notes and questions , such as his notes about how visual languages use spatial parsing . In this example , we see a mixture of structured and unstructured materials , and a mixture of external ref - erences and personal annotations . This is a potential - ly useful way for communities to cull materials from information resources and record their interpreta - tions of these external materials . Summary Spatial hypertext can provide workgroups with a means of recording their interpretations of the large bodies of information relevant to their day - to - day activities ; this information is quickly becoming avail - able through a variety of networked electronic resources such as the World - Wide Web , online infor - mation services , and various digital library projects . By addressing the needs of applications in which structure is emerging , changing , or difficult to articu - late , spatial hypertext promises to be a useful alterna - tive to traditional node - link models of hypertext . Spatial hypertext uses perceptible characteristics of recurrent visual symbols—references to underlying content—to create structures such as annotative links , sets , and composites . We have observed that these structures arise in practice , through human interaction with computational and noncomputa - tional materials . Spatial hypertext not only provides the means of visualizing complex structures ; it also can provide perceptually - based feedback for navigation and a range of possibilities for expressing emerging rela - tionships . As Kaplan and Moulthrop point out , spatial hypertext need not only reflect an author’s picture of relationships among nodes ; it may also be used to represent a reader’s growing conceptualization of meaning [ 11 ] . Hyperspace may draw upon physical metaphors ( see Dieberger and Bolter in this issue ) ; it may also serve as fertile ground for exploring new kinds of abstract spaces that exhibit characteristics not found in the physical world . We have begun such an exploration of abstract information spaces with an experimental system , VIKI , which uses a simple spatial hypertext model and a familiar user interface , coupled with mecha - nisms to support the gradual emergence of structure , such as types and recognition algorithms . VIKI is designed to support the volatility and change we have observed in information - intensive work . By investigat - ing the use of spatial hypertext in such applications , we can extend hypertext concepts to realms in which prescriptive design methods break down . Acknowledgments . This article is dedicated to the memory of our col - league James H . Coombs , who contributed extensive - ly to the development of the VIKI spatial hypertext system . References1 . Berners - Lee , T . , Cailliau , R . , Luotonen , A . , Nielsen , H . F . , and Secret , A . The World - Wide Web . Commun . ACM 37 , 8 C 96 August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM ( Aug . 1994 ) , 76 – 82 . 2 . Bernstein , M . , Bolter , J . D . , Joyce , M . , and Mylonas , E . Architec - tures for Volatile Hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ` 91 ( Dec . 16 – 18 , San Antonio , Tex . ) . ACM , New York , 1991 , pp . 243 – 260 . 3 . Bertin , J . Semiology of Graphics . University of Wisconsin Press , Madison , 1983 . 4 . Bolter , J . D . Writing Space : The Computer , Hypertext , and the Histo - ry of Writing . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , N . J . , 1991 . 5 . Conklin , J . and Begeman , M . gIBIS : A hypertext tool for exploratory policy discussion . ACM Trans . Office Information Sys - tems 6 , 4 ( Oct . 1988 ) , 303 – 331 . 6 . DeRose , S . J . Expanding the notion of links . In Proceedings of Hypertext‘89 ( Nov . 5 – 8 , Pittsburgh , Penn . ) . ACM , New York , 1989 , pp . 249 – 258 . 7 . diSessa , A . and Abelson , H . Boxer : A reconstructible computa - tional medium . Commun . ACM 29 , 9 ( Sept . 1986 ) , 859 – 868 . 8 . Grønbæk , K . and Trigg , R . H . Design issues for a Dexter - based hypermedia system . Commun . ACM 37 , 2 ( Feb . 1994 ) , 40 – 49 . 9 . Halasz , F . Reflections on NoteCards : Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems . Commun . ACM 31 , 7 ( July 1988 ) , 836 – 852 . 10 . Henderson , D . A . , Jr . and Card , S . K . Rooms : The use of multi - ple virtual workspaces to reduce space contention in a window - based graphical user interface . ACM Trans . Graphics 5 , 3 ( July 1986 ) , 211 – 243 . 11 . Kaplan , N . and Moulthrop , S . Where no mind has gone before : Ontological design for virtual spaces . In Proceedings of the Euro - pean Conference on Hypermedia Technologies ( Sept . 18 – 23 , Edin - burgh , Scotland ) . ACM , New York , 1994 , pp . 206 – 216 . 12 . Levy , D . and Marshall , C . C . Going digital : A look at assump - tions underlying digital libraries . Commun . ACM 38 , 4 ( Apr . 1995 ) , 77 – 84 . 13 . Malone , T . W . How do people organize their desks ? Implica - tions for the design of office information systems . ACM Trans . Off . Info . Syst . 1 , 1 ( Jan . 1983 ) , 99 – 112 . 14 . Mander , R . , Salomon , G . , and Wong , Y . Y . A ‘Pile’ metaphor for supporting organization of information . In Proceedings of CHI ‘92 ( May 3 – 7 , Monterey , Calif . ) . ACM , New York , 1992 , pp . 627 – 634 . 15 . Marshall , C . C . , Halasz , F . G . , Rogers , R . A . , and Janssen , W . C . Jr . Aquanet : A hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place . In Proceedings of Hypertext‘91 ( Dec . 16 – 18 , San Antonio , Tex . ) . ACM , New York , 1991 , pp . 261 – 275 . 16 . Marshall , C . C . and Shipman , F . M . III Searching for the missing link : Discovering implicit structure in spatial hypertext . In Pro - ceedings of Hypertext‘93 ( Nov . 14 – 18 , Seattle , Wash . ) . ACM , New York , 1993 , pp . 217 – 230 . 17 . Marshall , C . C . , Shipman , F . M . III , and Coombs , J . H . VIKI : Spa - tial hypertext supporting emergent structure . In Proceedings of the European Conference on Hypermedia Technologies ( Sept . 18 – 23 , Edinburgh , Scotland ) . ACM , New York , 1994 , pp . 13 – 23 . 18 . Marshall , C . C . , Shipman , F . M . III , and McCall , R . J . Making large - scale information resources serve communities of prac - tice . To appear in Journal of Management Information Systems 11 , 4 ( Spring 1995 ) . 19 . Moran , T . , Chiu , P . , van Melle , W . , and Kurtenbach , G . Implic - it structures for pen - based systems within a freeform interac - tion paradigm . In Proceedings of CHI‘95 ( May 7 – 11 , Denver , Co . ) . ACM , New York , 1995 , pp . 487 – 494 . 20 . Nanard J . and Nanard M . Should anchors be typed too ? An experiment with MacWeb . In Proceedings of Hypertext ` 93 ( Nov . 14 – 18 , Seattle , Wash . ) . ACM , New York , 1993 , pp . 51 – 62 . 21 . Parunak , H . V . Don’t link me in : Set - based hypermedia for tax - onomic reasoning . In Proceedings of Hypertext‘91 ( Dec . 16 – 18 , San Antonio , Tex . ) . ACM , New York , 1991 , pp . 233 – 242 . 22 . Rosenberg , J . Navigating Nowhere / Hypertext Infrawhere . SIGLINK Newsletter 3 , 3 ( Dec . 1994 ) , 16 – 19 . 23 . Shipman , F . M . III and Marshall , C . C . Formality considered harmful : Experiences , emerging themes , and directions . Xerox PARC Tech . Rep . ISTL - CSA - 94 - 08 - 02 , 1994 . 24 . Shipman , F . M . III , Marshall , C . C . , and Moran , T . P . Finding and using implicit structure in human - organized spatial layouts of information . In Proceedings of CHI ‘95 ( May 7 – 11 , Denver , Co . ) . ACM , New York , 1995 , pp . 346 – 353 . 25 . Shum , S . Cognitive dimensions of design rationale . In People and Computers VI D . Diaper and N . V . Hammond , Eds . , Cam - bridge University Press , Cambridge , 1991 . About the Authors : CATHERINE C . MARSHALL is an associate research scientist in the Department of Computer Science at Texas A & M University , and the U . S . Vice Chair of ACM SIGLINK . Current research interests include hypermedia , digital libraries , and computer support for information - intensive intellectual work . email : marshall @ cs . tamu . edu ; http : / / bush . cs . tamu . edu / ~ marshall FRANK M . SHIPMAN III is an assistant research scientist in the Department of Computer Science at Texas A & M University . He has been pursuing research in the areas of hypermedia , computer - sup - ported cooperative work , and intelligent user interfaces since 1987 , focusing on the combining of informal and formal representations in interfaces and methods for supporting incremental formalization . email : shipman @ cs . tamu . edu ; http : / / bush . cs . tamu . edu / ~ shipman Authors’ Present Address : Department of Computer Science , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX , 77843 - 3112 . Permission to make digital / hard copy of all or part of this material without fee is granted provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , the ACM copyright / server notice , the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by per - mission of the Association for Computing Machinery , Inc . ( ACM ) . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . ©ACM 0002 - 0782 / 95 / 0800 $ 3 . 50 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM August 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 8 97 Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change Details , Details , Details ! How to advertise with us See page 115 .