297 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 15 DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 4892 - 0 . ch015 Challenges of Structure and Organization in Medium - Sized Content ABSTRACT Organizational knowledge management resources are a combination of articles , guidelines , and process documents . The content in these resources typically ranges from about a few words to a few hundred words . These pieces of content are called medium - sized content . While most organizations do not pose a limit on how long or short each content piece should be , most content sizes default to this limit due to various reasons . Assigning a metadata and taxonomy to the medium - sized content pieces are challenging because of a limited number of repetition of keywords , the limited size of the content , and the existence of other content without which this content is not conceptually complete . This results in challenges for knowledge managers in organizing and structuring this content as well as making it intelligent enough for search engines and business intelligence tools . This chapter presents an approach to creating metadata for these content pieces by proposing a three structure metadata consisting of a static part , a dynamic part , and a conceptual part that links to other pieces of related information . Madhavi M . Chakrabarty Verizon Wireless , USA 298 Challenges of Structure and Organization in Medium - Sized Content INTRODUCTION Organizational knowledge resources are used by employees to improve their explicit knowledge ( Alavi & Leidner , 2001 ) . These resources help the employees to perform their job responsi - bilities efficiently . Organizations have dedicated individuals and teams that develop these knowl - edge resources . Most of the knowledge resources within an organization are in the form of articles , how - tos , learning assessments , Frequently Asked Questions ( FAQs ) and data sets ( Alavi , Timothy R . Kayworth , & Leidner , 2005 - 6 ) . While the exact guidelines used to create and develop these articles vary from organization to organization , the main goal in creating them is to be able to convey the right message to the right user base at the right time of need ( Grant , 1996 ) . As is the case with most organizational content , the content sizes are neither too lengthy like scholarly articles and book chapters , nor too small like short Message Services ( SMS ) and chat session conversations ( Burbidge , 2003 - 12 - 03 ) , twitter feeds ( Johnson , 2009 ) and ticker notifications . All the content that fits this profile are referred to as medium sized content . In order to create an effective knowledge management system , it is necessary to structure and organize the different pieces of content such that user can find the right information at the right time ( Becerra - Fernandez , Gonzalez , & Sabher - wal , 2004 ) . In most large organizations , content gets created by content authors and stored in a content management system . The content resides in a conceptual structure so that it is easy for the knowledge managers to fetch and display the information in different knowledge management systems that are used in the organization ( McIn - erney & Day , 2007 ) . To make the content smart and easily readable by the different systems , search engines and other meta - analytics tools , the content is marked up and tagged with suitable keywords and metadata . The metadata of the content is a description of the data as well as the rules that will be used to display the data . The knowledge management systems use this metadata to decide if the particular content should be visible to a given user base and the location in the navigation where it resides . Most content management systems have a provision to assign keywords and metadata to a piece of content and it is the responsibility of the content author to make sure that the right metadata is applied to the right pieces of content . As is the case in most organizational knowledge management systems , the content ( like articles , technical documents , how - tos and FAQs ) are created as a medium sized content ( Karner & Droschl , 2002 ) . This is a deliberate decision by most content authors since the article size is just sufficient to hold the user’s attention span and deliver the appropriate information to him or her . From a cognitive point of view , users may deter reading a larger piece of content in their busy work schedule where they may not have a single slot of time available for them to read the entire content in one session . From a user experience point of view , many user experience experts rec - ommend the use of medium sized content as the size is most suitable for display in web - based and mobile devices . The screens on desktops , laptops , smart phones and tablets can effectively be used to display the medium sized articles without having the user to scroll up and down the screen ( Karner & Droschl , 2002 ) . Even if the user chooses to print the articles out , they can be fit in a one or two page format that is cognitively easier for the user to process . In addition to the most common model of knowledge management systems where content authors are responsible for creating content and adhering to guidelines , more and more of the content generated is derived from the users them - selves . Capturing and integrating user generated content is becoming a very prominent aspect of the knowledge in knowledge management sys - tems . Outside the bounds of the organization , the statistics favor the importance of user generated content . As per Wikipedia , the average number of words in a Wikipedia article varies between 300 15 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / challenges - of - structure - and - organization - in - medium - sized - content / 96156 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , Business , Administration , and Management , InfoSci - Business and Management , Advances in Business Strategy and Competitive Advantage , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content ASD - BI : A Knowledge Discovery Process Modeling Based on Adaptive Software Development Agile Methodology Mouhib Alnoukari ( 2012 ) . Business Intelligence and Agile Methodologies for Knowledge - Based Organizations : Cross - Disciplinary Applications ( pp . 183 - 207 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / asd - knowledge - discovery - process - modeling / 58571 ? camid = 4v1a How Business Intelligence Creates Value : An Empirical Investigation Nir Yogev , Adir Even and Lior Fink ( 2013 ) . International Journal of Business Intelligence Research ( pp . 16 - 31 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / how - business - intelligence - creates - value / 83476 ? camid = 4v1a Predictive Analysis for Digital Marketing Using Big Data : Big Data for Predictive Analysis Balamurugan Balusamy , Priya Jha , Tamizh Arasi and Malathi Velu ( 2017 ) . Handbook of Research on Advanced Data Mining Techniques and Applications for Business Intelligence ( pp . 259 - 283 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / predictive - analysis - for - digital - marketing - using - big - data / 178111 ? camid = 4v1a A New Approach to Generate Hospital Data Warehouse Schema Nouha Arfaoui and Jalel Akaichi ( 2016 ) . Applying Business Intelligence to Clinical and Healthcare Organizations ( pp . 84 - 115 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / a - new - approach - to - generate - hospital - data - warehouse - schema / 146064 ? camid = 4v1a