10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 31 . 082901 . 134259 Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 2002 . 31 : 151 – 75 DOI : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 31 . 082901 . 134259 Copyright c (cid:176) 2002 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved PIP 2 AND P ROTEINS : Interactions , Organization , and Information Flow Stuart McLaughlin , 1 Jiyao Wang , 1 Alok Gambhir , 1 and Diana Murray 2 1 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , HSC , SUNY Stony Brook , New York 11794 - 8661 ; email : SMCL @ epo . som . sunysb . edu 2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Weill Medical College of Cornell University , 1300 York Avenue , Box 62 , New York , New York 10021 Key Words phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate , phosphoinositides , signal transduction , second messengers n Abstract We review the physical properties of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphos - phate ( PIP 2 ) that determine both its speciﬁc interactions with protein domains of known structure and its nonspeciﬁc electrostatic sequestration by unstructured do - mains . Several investigators have postulated the existence of distinct pools of PIP 2 within the cell to account for the myriad functions of this lipid . Recent experimental workindicatescertainregionsoftheplasmamembrane—membranerufﬂesandnascentphagosomes—doindeedconcentratePIP 2 . We consider two mechanisms that could account for this phenomenon : local synthesis and electrostatic sequestration . We con - clude by considering the hypothesis that proteins such as MARCKS bind a signiﬁcant fraction of the PIP 2 in a cell , helping to sequester it in lateral membrane domains , then release this lipid in response to local signals such as an increased concentration of Ca CC / calmodulin or activation of protein kinase C . CONTENTS INTRODUCTION : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 152 PHYSICAL / CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF PIP 2 AND ITS CONCENTRATION IN CELLS : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 154 Orientation of the Head Group : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 154 Charge of PIP 2 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 154 Partial Charges on Lipids : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 155 Concentration of PIP 2 in a Typical Mammalian Cell : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 155 DOMAINS / PROTEINS THAT BIND PIP 2 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 155 Domains of Known Structure : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 155 Unstructured Domains : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 159 FUNCTIONS OF PIP 2 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 160 Production of Second Messengers : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 160 Membrane Targeting : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 161 1056 - 8700 / 02 / 0609 - 0151 $ 14 . 00 151 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 152 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . Enzyme Activation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 161 Cytoskeletal Attachment : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 161 Exocytosis , Endocytosis , and Membrane Trafﬁc : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 162 Other Functions : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 162 EVIDENCE FOR THE LATERAL ORGANIZATION OF PIP 2 IN THE PLASMA MEMBRANE : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 162 MECHANISMS THAT COULD CONCENTRATE PIP 2 IN THE PLANE OF THE PLASMA MEMBRANE : SYNTHESIS OR SEQUESTRATION ? : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 163 GAP43 , MARCKS , AND CAP23 : DOES THE GMC GANG HANG OUT IN RAFTS ? : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 167 NEW TECHNOLOGIES : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 168 CODA : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 169 INTRODUCTION Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate , abbreviated as PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or PIP 2 , is the major polyphosphoinositide in mammalian cells . Other recent reviews ( 29 , 30 , 32 , 48a , 53 , 55 , 56 , 70 , 83 , 97a , 100 , 106 ) and a monograph ( 28 ) discuss the functions of phosphoinositides in cells , as well as their production by different kinases and their breakdown by phosphatases and phosphoinositide - speciﬁc phospholipase Cs ( PLCs ) . This review focuses on the biophysics of PIP 2 and how it interacts with proteins in the plasma membrane . Early studies established the role of PIP 2 as the source of two second messen - gers in the cell ( 16 ) , diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) , a topic that we will not consider in detail . Subsequent studies have shown that PIP 2 has a host of functions in cells related to its ability to interact with different proteins . Indeed , Cantley ( 24 ) suggests its role in IP 3 - induced Ca CC release in higher eukaryotes is a relatively late adaptation to its original role as a lipid an - chor . It is now well documented that PIP 2 is important in the attachment of the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane , exocytosis , endocytosis , membrane trafﬁck - ing , and the activation of enzymes . This has led several reviewers to ask how one lipid can play so many different roles and to suggest that there are different pools of PIP 2 in the plasma membrane ( e . g . , 49 , 70 , 97a ) . New tools for visualizing phos - phoinositides in living cells have revealed that PIP 2 and other phosphoinositides are in fact distributed nonuniformly in the plasma membrane . In a perceptive recent review on targeting by membrane lipids , Hurley & Meyer ( 53 ) note that “a picture has emerged of a restless subclass of signaling proteins that spend a signiﬁcant fraction of their time diffusing through the cytosol in search of binding partners . ” Although many of these signaling proteins indeed move only by passive diffusion , the remarkable feature of signal transduction pathways , including those that involve PIP 2 , is that the ﬂow of information from the surface to the interior of the cell resembles an elegantly choreographed ballet rather than a collection of uncoordinated random walks . But what choreographs this diffusional “dance to the music of time” ( 87 ) ? We argue that cells utilize several biophysical 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 153 mechanisms to facilitate this ﬂow of information . We refer to these concepts as “cheap tricks , ” a term coined by the distinguished physiologist Knut Schmidt - Nielsen ( 94 ) to describe how countercurrent exchangers function passively ( i . e . , without a direct input of energy ) in a number of different organ systems . This physiological cheap trick minimizes , for example , the loss of heat from the leg of a wading bird or ﬂipper of a seal , helps the mammalian kidney to concentrate urine , andthusexplainswhyadesertratneednevertakeadrinkofwater . Wediscusscheap tricks that act at the molecular or biophysical rather than at the organ systems level . The three tricks we describe in this review are well known to membrane bio - physicists , but cell biologists or biochemists studying signal transduction may be less familiar with biophysical principles . In this spirit , we refer a reader unfamiliar with the fundamentals of diffusion theory to Berg’s pithy , lucid , and still timely introduction to this topic in Random Walks in Biology ( 14 ) . Berg’s discussion of the diffusional mechanism by which a ligand revisits a surface explains , for example , why only a small fraction of a cell need be covered by receptors to effectively capture a ligand ; subsequent theoretical and experimental studies extend Berg’s discussion [ e . g . , ( 62 , 63 ) and references therein ] . Cheap trick # 1 : Reduction of dimensionality or local concentration effect . Consider , for example , a phosphoinositide - speciﬁc phospholipase C - – ( PLC – ) enzyme ( 91 ) diffusing randomly through the cytoplasm of a cell : When its pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain encounters a PIP 2 in the plasma membrane , itbindstoPIP 2 withsufﬁcientlyhighafﬁnityandspeciﬁcitytoanchortheprotein to the membrane ( 65 ) . This conﬁnes the catalytic site of PLC – to the surface phase , which Guggenheim deﬁnes as a thin ( few nm ) region of the aqueous phase adjacent to the membrane ( 10 ) . In the surface phase , the catalytic site experiences a … 1000 - fold higher concentration of PIP 2 than if it was diffusing throughout the cytoplasm of a cell , which greatly facilitates PLC – ’s ability to hydrolyze PIP 2 when it is activated by an increase in intracellular Ca CC . This reduction of dimensionality—or more appropriately , local concentration effect—is well understood at a biophysical level ( 1 , 15 , 61 , 71 , 74 ) . Membrane anchoring and the local concentration effect are important for all major proteins in the calcium / phosphoinositide second messenger signal transduc - tion pathway . For example , acyl and prenyl chains anchor G proteins to the plasma membrane ; PH and other domains anchor PLCs ; C1 and C2 domains reversibly anchor protein kinase C ( PKC ) ; and a myristate and a cluster of basic residues reversibly anchor MARCKS ( myristoylated alanine - rich C kinase substrate ) . Of course the domains that anchor the protein to the membrane may serve other func - tions : The PH domain of PLC – contributes to its preferential localization at the plasma versus internal membranes ; the C1 and C2 domains on PKC are involved in the activation of the enzyme as well as membrane targeting ( 54 ) . As discussed below , it is now well established that PIP 2 often serves to activate as well as merely anchor proteins to the plasma membranes . In other words , it can act as a second messenger as well as a passive membrane anchor . 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 154 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . PHYSICAL / CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF PIP 2 AND ITS CONCENTRATION IN CELLS Orientation of the Head Group Figure 1 illustrates the chemical structures and space - ﬁlling models of phos - phatidylcholine ( PC ) , cholesterol , and PIP 2 . In PC and other common phospho - lipids , the glycerol backbone is approximately perpendicular to , and the head group parallel to , the plane of the membrane as illustrated here ( 43 ) . The orientation of the head group of PIP 2 with respect to the membrane surface is unknown . We show it as perpendicular to the plane of the membrane , in agreement with studies of the structure of phosphatidylinositol ( 21 , 113 ) . Note that the potentially erect structure and large size of the PIP 2 head group implies that it may protrude further into the aqueous phase than a typical phospholipid . Charge of PIP 2 CholesterolisaneutralmoleculeandPCisazwitterionthatalsohaszeronetcharge , as indicated in Figure 1 . The net charge on PIP 2 , however , depends on a number of factors such as the local pH and its interaction with proteins . NMR experiments show that the pK values for the ﬁrst protonation of the 4 and 5 position phosphates of PIP 2 ( in a PC / PIP 2 99 : 1 vesicle ) are about 6 . 7 and 7 . 7 [ ( 107 ) conﬁrmed by A . McLaughlin & S . McLaughlin ] . Thus at pH 7 . 0 , » 1 proton is bound and the net charge on PIP 2 might be expected to be ¡ 4 ( Figure 1 ) . However , the electrophoretic mobility of a PC / PIP 2 vesicle formed in 100 mM KCl , pH 7 . 0 suggests the net charge on PIP 2 is only ¡ 3 ( 101 , 110 ) ; presumably both a K C and a H C ion are bound to the lipid . It seems likely the K C ion will be displaced when PIP 2 binds Figure 1 ( a ) Chemical structures of the most prevalent phospholipid ( POPC ) , sterol ( cholesterol ) , andpolyphosphoinositide ( PIP 2 ) inmammaliancellmembranes . Thesize of the inositol ring of PIP 2 is approximately doubled for clarity . ( b ) Molecular models of 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - 3 - phosphatidylcholine , POPC ; cholesterol and 1 - stearoyl - 2 - arachidonyl - 3 - phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate , PIP 2 . A typical phospholipid in a bilayer occupies an area of 70 ˚A 2 ( 79 ) ; cholesterol occupies 40 ˚A 2 . 15 Apr 2002 14 : 19 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 155 to a protein , although this must be determined in each case . The proton bound to PIP 2 may also be displaced upon binding to a protein , so the charge on PIP 2 could be ¡ 3 , ¡ 4 , or ¡ 5 . Partial Charges on Lipids The distribution of the partial charges on PC and other common phospholipids has been determined by ab initio quantum mechanical calculations , but similar calculations have not been performed for PIP 2 . The dearth of information about both the orientation of the head group and the distribution of partial charges within the PIP 2 molecule severely limits the types of theoretical calculations that can be performed with this important lipid . Concentration of PIP 2 in a Typical Mammalian Cell We assume the cell is a sphere of radius 10 „ m and that PIP 2 is conﬁned to the plasma membrane . If all the phospholipids in the plasma membrane of this hypo - thetical cell ( e . g . , phosphatidylcholine , phosphatidylethanolamine , PIP 2 ) were dis - solved in the cytoplasm , they would be present at an effective concentration of … 1 mM . If we assume PIP 2 comprises 1 % of the phospholipid in the plasma membrane of our hypothetical cell , as it does in human erythrocytes ( 37 , 46 ) , the effective concentration of PIP 2 in the cell is … 10 „ M . The recent studies using constructs of PH domains linked to green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) provide more direct information about the concentration and location of PIP 2 in a mammalian cell . Fluorescent ( 52 , 98 , 99 , 105 , 108 ) constructs of the PH domain from PLC – are localized on the plasma membrane , whereas the PH domain from pleckstrin is found in the cytoplasm ( 65 ) . In vitro the PH domain from PLC – binds PIP 2 with a K d of 2 „ M , whereas the PH domain from pleckstrin binds PIP 2 with a K d of 30 „ M ( 65 ) . If we assume the K d values are the same in the test tube and the cell , then 2 „ M < [ PIP 2 ] a < 30 „ M , where [ PIP 2 ] a is the effective concentration of PIP 2 that is accessible to the PH domains . This range is consistent with our calculation of a total effective concentration of … 10 „ M but , as discussed below , does not imply that all the PIP 2 in the plasma membrane is free . The relative concentration of the other phosphoinositides in cells is considered elsewhere ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 comprises > 99 % of the doubly phosphorylated phospho - inositides in a mammalian cell according to ( 106 ) . We next consider how the PIP 2 located on the cytoplasmic leaﬂet of the plasma membrane anchors and , in some cases , activates different proteins . DOMAINS / PROTEINS THAT BIND PIP 2 Domains of Known Structure Figure 2 a shows ribbon diagrams of three structurally diverse domains that bind PIP 2 : the PLC – - PH domain ( 36 ) , the CALM N - terminal ENTH domain ( 38 ) , and the radixin FERM domain ( 47 ) . Either IP 3 or the head group 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 156 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . of PIP 2 is shown in each binding pocket with the 1 - phosphate facing down ; the domains are thus presumably in the orientation they have when they bind to PIP 2 in a bilayer ( e . g . , Figure 1 ) . Figure 2 b illustrates how two Lys residues of PLC – - PH form hydrogen bonds with both the 4 - and 5 - phosphates . PH DOMAINS As described in many recent reviews [ ( 65 ) and references therein ] , PH domains comprise about 120 amino acids ; their function is generally to bind to phosphoinositides . The PH domain of PLC – ( PLC – - PH ) , for example , binds to PIP 2 with a K d D 2 „ M , as measured with PC / PIP 2 vesicles using calorimetry ( 66 ) , a BIAcore sensor chip ( 50 ) , or a PLC – - PH - GFP construct and a centrifugation assay ( A . Gambhir & S . McLaughlin , unpublished data ) . Intact PLC – binds with a similar K d ( 26 , 91 ) , an afﬁnity sufﬁciently strong to anchor the protein to the plasma membrane . The mechanism by which PLC – - PH and several other PH domains bind phosphoinositides is revealed by crystal structures of the domains with bound IP 3 ( 36 , 65 , 81 ) . The 4 - and 5 - phosphates form several hydrogen bonds with residues in PLC – - PH , holding the lipid head group in a classical “lock and key” complex . Speciﬁcally , Lys 30 and Lys 57 form bonds with both phosphates simultaneously ( Figure 2 b ) “clamping the 4 - and 5 - phosphates in the binding pocket” ( 36 ) . PLC – - PH increases the surface pressure of a mixed lipid monolayer when it binds PIP 2 , which shows it penetrates the polar head group region ( K . N . J . Burger , personal communication ) . PLC – - PH binds about 10 - fold more strongly to IP 3 than to PIP 2 , which complicates the use of PLC – - PH - GFP constructs to determine the subcellular location of PIP 2 . For example , translocation of PLC – - PH - GFP from membrane to cytosol upon activation of PLC could be due to either a decrease in the level of PIP 2 in the membrane or an increase in the level of IP 3 in the cytosol , an issue that is still unresolved ( 50 , 105 , 108 ) . As discussed elsewhere ( 65 ) , many of the … 250 PH domains bind only weakly , andwithlittlespeciﬁcity , tophosphoinositides : Theydonotbindphosphoinositides with sufﬁcient avidity to provide a stable membrane anchor on their own . How then do they anchor a protein to the membrane if this is indeed their main function ? The PH domain could cooperate with additional membrane - binding sites on the protein or the protein could oligomerize so that more than one PH domain contributes to the binding ; signal transduction proteins almost certainly use both schemes ( 65 ) . Cheap trick # 2 : Two domains are better than one . Many signal transduc - tion molecules use two or more domains / motifs to bind to membranes ; the membrane - binding energies of the individual domains often simply add ( bind - ing constants multiply ) , as discussed elsewhere ( 23 , 31 , 44 , 77 ) . Why do signal transduction molecules use multiple domains with low membrane afﬁnities rather than one domain with a high afﬁnity to anchor themselves to the plasma membrane ? Multiple membrane – anchoring sites offer at least three advantages . First , they may promote lateral organization or sequestration of the molecules : Proteins with ‚ 2 saturated acyl chains , such as GAP43 ( 9 ) , are concentrated in the detergent - insoluble membrane fraction ( DIGs ) and may be directed laterally 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 157 to putative cholesterol - enriched rafts in the unperturbed membrane ( 22 , 60 , 95 ) . Second , they offer greater possibilities for reversible binding : Dynamin may form oligomers where the n PH domains in the oligomer bind to n PIP 2 ( 65 ) . Thus membrane binding can be controlled through oligomerization without changing the level of PIP 2 in the membrane . Third , multiple binding sites pro - videamechanismforsynergy / coincidencedetection : TheC1andC2domainsof PKC require DAG and Ca CC , respectively , to bind to membranes—concomitant membrane binding of the C1 and C2 domains removes the pseudosubstrate re - gion of PKC from its binding site and activates the enzyme ( 54 ) . Synergy / coincidence counting can also occur when PIP 2 - binding motifs act in concert with other membrane - binding domains to anchor and simul - taneously activate proteins . For example , activation of the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family , which is involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton ( 35 , 75 , 82 , 86 ) , occurs when it binds PIP 2 together with the preny - lated , membrane - bound , low - molecular - weight G protein Cdc42 ( 25 ) . Fawcett & Pawson ( 35 ) suggest that “perhaps N - WASP is a ‘coincidence detector’ be - cause when it binds to activated Cdc42 it becomes destabilized and primed such that only a small amount of a coincident signal—in this case PIP 2 —is needed for it to become fully activated . ” The factor ( s ) that increase the level of PIP 2 in the membrane to produce the coincident signal are not well understood . ENTH DOMAINS Proteins in the epsin family share a conserved region , the epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain , that binds PIP 2 . Two recent structural studies provide details of how the ENTH domains of epsin ( 57 ) and the AP180 homolog CALM ( 38 ) may bind to PIP 2 in membranes . The structure of the CALM N - terminal domain , a superhelix of nine major alpha helices , is illustrated in Figure 2 with a bound headgroup of PIP 2 . The PIP 2 - binding site in CALM ( X - ray structure ) is unusual in that it consists of an exposed cluster of lysines that do not form a binding pocket and , curiously , appear to be different from the PIP 2 - binding site in epsin ( NMR structure ) . EpsinandCALMregulateassemblyoftheclathrinlattice , andbindingofPIP 2 to epsin is necessary for endocytosis ( 45 , 70 ) . Several other proteins that are involved in either recruiting receptors to clathrin - coated pits ( e . g . , AP - 2 , ﬂ - arrestin ) or the ﬁnal pinching - off process from the plasma membrane ( e . g . , dynamin ) also bind PIP 2 . Finally , dephosphorylation of PIP 2 by synaptojanin to form PI ( 4 ) P causes disassembly of the clathrin coat . Tsujishita et al . ( 102 ) recently obtained the crystal structure of a synaptojanin and provide an excellent discussion of how the binding pocket could accommodate a phosphoinositide . FERM DOMAINS Members of the ezrin / radixin / moesin or ERM family , which help link actin to the plasma membrane , contain an N - terminal FERM ( 4 . 1 and ERM ) domain that binds to the C - terminal region of the protein . Upon binding to PIP 2 , the FERM domain is released from the C - terminal autoinhibitory domain , 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 158 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . allowing the protein to interact with other proteins , such as CD44 , and link actin ﬁlaments to the plasma membrane ( 47 , 103 ) . Figure 2 a shows the radixin FERM domain bound to IP 3 ( 47 ) . The PIP 2 - binding pocket in the FERM domain is formed from a basic cleft between two subdomains : The cleft is located on a positively charged , relatively ﬂat surface , which should facilitate interaction of the FERM domain with the surface of a negatively charged membrane . The 4 - phosphate of PIP 2 intrudes into the cleft , but the 5 - phosphate does not ; in contrast , both the 4 - and 5 - phosphates are buried in the pocket of the PH domain of PLC – , as shown in Figure 2 b . This probably explains the ability of radixin to bind moderately strongly to PI4P as well as to PIP 2 ( 47 ) . OTHER PIP 2 - BINDING DOMAINS Several other domains of known structure bind PIP 2 : The Tubby domain is a new structure with a basic pocket that binds PIP 2 ( 93 ) ; the PX domains contained in many different proteins ( 75a , 81 , 93a ) generally bind phosphoinositides that contain a phosphate at the 3 position , but one also binds PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . SeveralimportantPIP 2 - bindingproteinshaveclustersofbasic / aromaticresidues of relatively undeﬁned structure that interact with PIP 2 . For example , although phospholipase D ( PLD ) contains a PH domain , the PIP 2 - binding site responsible for activation has been localized to a different region of the protein containing a conserved cluster of basic / aromatic residues ( 96 ) ; the structure of PLD is un - known . Thestructureoftheactin - bindingproteingelsolinwasrecentlydetermined : Tuominen et al . ( 104 ) studied the binding of ﬂuorescently labeled PIP 2 to gelsolin and to peptides corresponding two putative PIP 2 - binding regions that contained clusters of basic / aromatic residues . They found that PIP 2 bound more strongly to the native protein than to either of the two peptides . We obtained similar results with peptides corresponding to the cluster of seven basic residues in N - WASP that apparently binds PIP 2 ( 88 ) : A peptide corresponding to this region binds weakly to PC / PIP 2 vesicles ( J . Wang & S . McLaughlin , unpublished data ) . The weak binding of the basic peptides from gelsolin and N - WASP to PC / PIP 2 vesicles suggests that the structural context of the binding region is important in determining the afﬁnity of a cluster of basic residues for phosphoinositides . Experiments in several laboratories over the past decade with many different hydrophilic ( i . e . , lacking aromatic residues ) peptides containing a small cluster of basic residues ( < 7 Lys or Arg ) have failed , to our knowledge , to identify pep - tides where addition of 1 % PIP 2 signiﬁcantly increases ( > 100 - fold ) the partition coefﬁcient of the peptide onto a vesicle in physiological salt solutions . Included in this list are myristoylated and nonmyristoylated basic peptides corresponding to the basic N - terminal regions of Src ( 23 ) and CAP23 ( J . Wang & S . McLaughlin , unpublished data ) and a peptide corresponding to the basic C - terminal region of Kras4B ( 67 ) . THE ROLE OF STRUCTURE The data accumulated to date with these small hydro - philic basic peptides suggest that a structured domain , one that can form multiple hydrogen bonds with the phosphates of the phosphoinositide ( e . g . , Figure 2 b ) , is 15 Apr 2002 14 : 21 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 159 required to anchor a protein ﬁrmly to a single PIP 2 in the plasma membrane . It seems even more likely that structure is required for speciﬁcity . For example , the biologically important 3 - phosphorylated phosphoinositides bind with high speci - ﬁcity to several structured domains ( e . g . , PH , PX , and FYVE domains ) ( 75a , 81 , 93a ) . In contrast , small unstructured molecules , such as neomycin ( 6 ) or a peptide corresponding to the MARCKS effector domain that contains 13 basic residues ( 110 ) , exhibit no speciﬁcity between PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , although they bind to PIP 2 - containing bilayers with high afﬁnity . If unstructured clusters of basic residues on proteins are located near the membrane - solution interface , however , they could well be involved in seques - tering PIP 2 laterally in the membrane . The process by which a basic motif binds to a membrane [ reviewed in ( 76 ) ] , and the simpler process by which a basic motif located at the interface uses electrostatics to laterally reorganize multivalent lipids such as PIP 2 , involve different combinations of forces . Unstructured Domains THE UNSTRUCTURED BASIC EFFECTOR REGION OF MARCKS BINDS WITH HIGH AFFIN - ITY TO VESICLES CONTAINING PIP 2 The MARCKS protein is a puzzle : It is present at high concentration ( … 10 „ M ) and is the major PKC substrate in many cell types , but its function is unknown ( 2 , 18 ) . The mechanism by which this un - structured protein binds to membranes containing acidic lipids is well understood ( Figure 4 a ) and has been reviewed in detail elsewhere ( 7 , 74 ) . Binding requires both the hydrophobic insertion of the N - terminal myristate ( orange ) into the bi - layer and electrostatic interaction of a conserved cluster of basic residues ( blue “ C ” signs ) , termed the effector domain , with acidic lipids . As illustrated in Figure 4 b , the 25 residue effector domain contains 13 basic ( blue ) and 5 aromatic ( cyan ) residues ; it also contains the 3 serine ( purple ) residues phosphorylated by PKC and binds with nM afﬁnity to calcium / calmodulin ( Ca CC / CaM ) ( 7 , 74 ) . The myris - tate alone cannot anchor the protein to the plasma membrane , so abrogation of the electrostatic interaction with the membrane by binding to Ca CC / CaM or phos - phorylation by PKC translocates MARCKS from membrane to cytosol in many cell types . This myristoyl / electrostatic switch mechanism ( 7 , 74 ) has been demon - strated in both phospholipid vesicles and cells , most directly with GFP - MARCKS ( 80 ) . Although the physiological concentration of monovalent lipids in the plasma membrane provides sufﬁcient electrostatic attraction to anchor the protein , recent work has shown the effector domain binds PIP 2 with high afﬁnity . Physiological concentrations of both the intact protein and a peptide corresponding to the ef - fector domain inhibit PLC - catalyzed hydrolysis of PIP 2 in phospholipid vesicles . The inhibition occurs because the effector domain sequesters PIP 2 away from the catalytic domain of PLC , as shown by direct binding measurements ( 110 ) . Incor - porating 1 % PIP 2 into PC vesicles increases the binding of the effector domain peptide by four orders of magnitude . For comparison , 100 - fold higher concentra - tions of PC / PIP 2 vesicles are required to bind the same fraction of the PH domain of PLC – . 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 160 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . HOW DOES THE UNSTRUCTURED BASIC EFFECTOR DOMAIN OF MARCKS BIND WITH SUCH HIGH AFFINITY TO PIP 2 ON A BILAYER SURFACE ? It uses cheap trick # 2 , binding several ( probably three ) PIP 2 to form an electroneutral complex ( 110 ) as demonstrated most directly by recent electron spin resonance ( ESR ) experi - ments with spin - labeled PIP 2 ( D . Caﬁso , personal communication ) . Small basic hydrophilic peptides with < 7 basic residues presumably do not bind with high afﬁnity to PC / PIP 2 membranes because they cannot form complexes with > 1 PIP 2 . Several lines of evidence support the conclusion that local electrostatic interac - tions drive this high - afﬁnity binding of the MARCKS effector domain : Raising the salt concentration screens the binding ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 bind with the same afﬁnity , indicating it is independent of the chemical nature of the phospho - inositide ; and peptides with 13 Lys or 13 Arg residues bind with the same afﬁnity as the MARCKS effector domain peptide ( 110 ) . FUNCTIONS OF PIP 2 Figure 3 summarizes some of the well - established functions of PIP 2 ; we discuss these only brieﬂy because they have been considered in detail in other reviews ( 29 , 30 , 32 , 53 , 55 , 56 , 70 , 83 , 100 , 106 ) . Production of Second Messengers Receptor - mediated activation of PLC catalyzes hydrolysis of PIP 2 to produce the second messengers DAG and IP 3 ( 16 ) . IP 3 releases Ca CC from intracellular stores ( 17 , 27 ) , whereasDAGremainsinthemembraneandhelpsactivatePKCbybinding to its C1 domain ( 54 ) . More recently it has been recognized that PIP 3 , which can be formed from phosphorylation of PIP 2 by a PI3 kinase , is also an authentic second messenger that functions as a membrane anchor for a number of proteins ( 32 ) . It is easy to understand how the products of PI3 kinases , such as PIP 3 , function as second messengers . Their level in a quiescent cell is low ( 106 ) ; signaling to a Figure 3 Functions of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . See text for discussion . 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 161 PI3 kinase can thus produce a large increase in the level of the 3 - phosphorylated lipid in the membrane , which can be recognized by a binding domain with a high speciﬁcity for that lipid . In contrast to DAG , IP 3 , and PIP 3 , where the level of messenger can increase dramatically , the overall concentration of PIP 2 in the plasma membrane is unlikely to increase signiﬁcantly , making it less clear how PIP 2 itself acts as a second messenger ( 53 ) to activate actin - binding proteins such as the WASP and ERM families , and enzymes such as PLD . Membrane Targeting In some cases it is not necessary for the concentration of PIP 2 to increase for it to function effectively as a membrane anchor . The PH domain of PLC – was the ﬁrst PIP 2 - binding domain to be understood in atomic detail , and the local concentration effect ( cheap trick # 1 ) explains why targeting is important with this enzyme . The enzyme is activated not by translocation to the membrane but by an increase in the intracellular [ Ca CC ] : Membrane anchoring simply facilitates interaction of the catalytic domain of PLC – with its membrane - bound substrate PIP 2 ( 91 ) . TUBBY , in contrast , is apparently anchored to the plasma membrane to prevent it from interacting with its target molecules in the nucleus : Hydrolysis of PIP 2 produces translocation of TUBBY from membrane , allowing it to diffuse to the nucleus ( 24 , 93 ) . In many other cases , PIP 2 acts as a second messenger and activates proteins . Enzyme Activation We consider only one example , a major PIP 2 synthesis pathway in mammalian cells . The PI4P 5 - kinases ( PIP kinases ) produce PIP 2 mainly by phosphorylating PI4P ; they are strongly activated by phosphatidic acid ( PA ) ( 5 , 40 , 49 , 52 ) . PA is produced by PLD , which requires PIP 2 for activation ( 68 ) . Thus the potential exists for a positive feedback loop . Actually , several complicated positive and negative feedback loops involving PIP 2 control the activation of PIP kinases ( 32 , 34 , 89 ) . There is also evidence the enzymes involved in these control mechanisms may be concentrated together in speciﬁc regions of the plasma membrane , such as membrane rufﬂes ( 52 ) . Cytoskeletal Attachment Many actin - binding proteins bind to PIP 2 and are activated by this lipid . We men - tioned that PIP 2 induces conformational changes in N - WASP and the ERM proteins [ more extensive lists are considered elsewhere ( 49 , 97 ) ] . The possibility that a lo - cal increase in the free concentration of PIP 2 acts as a signal for anchoring actin has been discussed widely , and the importance of PIP 2 in cytoskeletal attachment was demonstrated directly by elegant experiments using laser tweezers ( 90 ) . De - creasing the level of PIP 2 produced a dramatic release of the cytoskeleton from the membrane ( 90 ) . 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 162 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . Exocytosis , Endocytosis , and Membrane Trafﬁc This topic has been reviewed recently ( 30 , 70 , 97a ) and there is no lack of candidate PIP 2 - binding molecules that could be involved in exocytosis and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Several investigators have stressed the importance of understanding the lateral organization of PIP 2 in the membrane and the role it might play in these functions . With respect to exocytosis , Martin notes that immunocytochemical studies from his lab using PC12 cells reveal “plasma membrane rafts of PIP 2 that colocalize with secretory granules” ( 70 ) . With respect to endocytosis , “the focal assembly of clathrin lattices implies that there may be PIP 2 rich patches in the plasma membrane” ( 45 ) . The mechanism ( s ) by which these putative PIP 2 - enriched rafts or patches are assembled and maintained is unclear . Other Functions Space limitations prevent us from discussing the many other functions of PIP 2 [ e . g . , regulation of ion channels ( 48a ) , binding of scaffolding proteins ] . How does one simple lipid do all these different jobs ? We consider the possibility there are separate pools of PIP 2 in the plasma membrane . EVIDENCE FOR THE LATERAL ORGANIZATION OF PIP 2 IN THE PLASMA MEMBRANE The older literature contains hints that much of the PIP 2 in the plasma membrane is not free . For example , microvesicles released from erythrocytes after a variety of treatments contain only about half the fraction of polyphosphoinositides ( mainly PIP 2 ) seen in the original erythrocyte membranes ( 46 ) . Other studies suggest dif - ferent metabolic pools of PIP 2 may exist in cells [ see discussion in ( 49 , 108 ) ] . PIP 2 is concentrated in the noncaveolar DIGs fraction of the plasma membrane ( 85 , 111 ) , which suggests an association with putative cholesterol - rich rafts in the unperturbed membrane ( 22 , 60 , 95 ) . Because PIP 2 has a polyunsaturated chain ( Figure 1 ) , it is unlikely it partitions spontaneously into rafts by itself ( 22 , 33 ) . Recently , researchers have developed new tools to study the location of PIP 2 in living cells more directly ( 11 , 98 , 108 ) . Botelho et al . ( 20 ) used ﬂuorescent chimeras of PH domains to show that PIP 2 is concentrated in the nascent phago - somes of macrophages . This elegant , tightly reasoned paper showed the localized accumulation of PLC – - PH - GFP is transient ; the chimera dissociated rapidly once thephagosomespinchedofffromthemembrane . Severalfactorscould , inprinciple , decreasethelevelofPIP 2 , buttheconcomitantappearanceofthehydrolysisproduct DAG ( detected by a ﬂuorescent C1 domain chimera ) indicates that PLC - catalyzed hydrolysis is at least partially responsible for reducing the concentration of PIP 2 in the phagosomes . Are these transient changes in the level of PIP 2 important ? Their observation that neomycin or overexpression of PLC – - PH inhibits phagocy - tosis suggests these transient changes in the level of PIP 2 are required for phagocy - tosis . Botelho et al . ( 20 ) discuss the ( still imperfectly understood ) roles that PIP 2 , 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 163 PLC , PKC , and other enzymes could play in phagocytosis . They also showed that a PIP kinase involved in the synthesis of PIP 2 migrates to the nascent phago - some , then dissociates shortly after completion of phagocytosis . In a subsequent report , they used GFP constructs of PH domains that bind PIP 3 ( e . g . , Akt ) to show PIP 3 also accumulates in and is sharply restricted to the phagosomal cup ( 69 ) . The accumulation is transient : PIP 3 disappears within 2 min of phagosomal sealing , probably because of the action of the phosphatase SHIP1 . Two other groups have used ﬂuorescent constructs of PLC – - PH to show trans - ient increases in the concentration of PIP 2 in a different region of cells , mem - brane rufﬂes . When HeLa cells were stimulated with epidermal growth factor , PLC – - PH - GFP ﬁrst translocated to the rufﬂes then dispersed as the membrane ruf - ﬂes disappeared ( 52 ) . The localization of PLC – - PH - GFP at the rufﬂes coincided with the presence of a PIP kinase ( 52 ) , as was observed with the phagosomes . A PLC – - PH - EGFP chimera has also been shown to be concentrated in the membrane rufﬂes of NIH - 3T3 ﬁbroblasts ( 99 ) . The PH - GFP chimeras , of course , are not perfect indicators of PIP 2 ( 11 ) . Holz et al . ( 51 ) , for example , minimized potential artifacts by using two PIP 2 indicators , ﬂuorescent neomycin ( 6 ) and PLC – - PH - GFP , in their study of exocytosis . Fortu - nately , they produced similar results . Thus the available evidence strongly suggests that PIP 2 is concentrated in nascent phagosomes and membrane rufﬂes , but how ? MECHANISMS THAT COULD CONCENTRATE PIP 2 IN THE PLANE OF THE PLASMA MEMBRANE : SYNTHESIS OR SEQUESTRATION ? We ﬁrst note that the concentration of PIP 2 in a submicroscopic region of the plasma membrane is unlikely to change signiﬁcantly in response to enhanced local synthesis of PIP 2 by a PIP kinase . Put simply , PIP 2 will diffuse away faster than it can be produced . Consider , for example , a lateral domain of diameter 100 nm with a single PIP kinase enzyme at the center producing PIP 2 at a rate of 100 per sec . The Einstein relation ( 14 ) , t D x 2 = 4D , gives the average time t to diffuse a distance x in the two - dimensional surface , where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient . For PIP 2 , D should be … 10 ¡ 8 cm 2 s ¡ 1 ( 48 , 109 ) , so a newly synthesized PIP 2 will diffuse away from the domain in < 1 ms : Synthesis cannot keep up with diffusion over short distances . More speciﬁcally , it is unlikely that local synthesis could produce an accumulation of PIP 2 in the putative cholesterol - enriched rafts if they have dimensions < 100 nm . In contrast , local synthesis can and does produce signiﬁcant gradients of 3 - phosphorylated phosphoinositides in the plasma membrane as a whole , and a number of recent reports demonstrate these gradients are important in chemore - ception [ see references in ( 48 ) ] . Haugh et al . ( 48 ) demonstrated the existence of these gradients in ﬁbroblasts using evanescent wave microscopy and a GFP con - struct of the Akt PH domain ; they also provided a theoretical model that accounts for the gradients . 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 164 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . The accumulation of PIP 2 ( and PIP 3 ) in lateral membrane domains of interme - diate size ( e . g . , nascent phagosomes , rufﬂes ; size 1 – 10 „ m ) by a local synthesis mechanism is certainly possible theoretically , but as discussed critically by Marshall et al . ( 69 ) , it is difﬁcult to reconcile a simple local synthesis model with the experimental observation that PIP 3 is conﬁned sharply to the phagosomal cup . They considered a more complicated synthesis model in which phosphatases were concentrated at the rim of the cup to hydrolyze escaping PIP 3 , but they were unable to obtain experimental support for this model . What other mechanisms might account for the enhanced local concentration of phosphoinositides in rufﬂes and phagosomes ? One alternative possibility is that speciﬁc proteins can act as “buffers , ” binding and passively concentrating PIP 2 ( and PIP 3 ) in these lateral membrane domains . Such proteins would have to satisfy three criteria : be concentrated in the domains , be present at a sufﬁciently high concentration to sequester PIP 2 ( ‚ 10 „ M ) , and have a high afﬁnity for PIP 2 . One protein that satisﬁes these criteria is MARCKS : It is concentrated in the rufﬂes of ﬁbroblasts ( 78 ) and the forming phagosomes of macrophages ( 4 ) possibly because of its interaction with actin . Its concentration is comparable to that of PIP 2 ( 3 , 18 ) , and its basic effector domain binds PIP 2 with high afﬁnity ( 8 , 110 ) . [ As an aside , we notethatthePIP 2 electrostaticallyassociatedwiththeeffectordomainofMARCKS ( e . g . , Figure 4 f ) is accessible to PLC – - PH - GFP . Concentrations of the MARCKS effector domain peptide that bind > 90 % of the PIP 2 in a PC / PIP 2 vesicle , have no signiﬁcant effect on the binding of a PLC – - PH - GFP construct ( A . Gambhir & S . McLaughlin , unpublished observation ) . Cheap trick # 3 : Electrostatic sequestration . A well - understood example of electrostatic sequestration is the binding of charged solutes to membranes be - cause of their nonspeciﬁc electrostatic accumulation in the diffuse double layer adjacent to a charged surface . Helmholtz clearly appreciated the qualitative as - pects of the phenomenon in the nineteenth century ( and the electrostatic double layer is still often approximated as a capacitor with a thickness equal to the De - bye length : 1 = • D 1 nm for a 0 . 1 M solution ) . Gouy and Chapman combined the Poisson and Boltzmann equations to describe the double layer quantitatively in the early twentieth century . Their model , which predicts the electrostatic po - tential falls with distance x from the surface as exp ( ¡ • x ) , describes accurately the electrostatic sequestration of small ions adjacent to phospholipid bilayers ( 72 , 73 ) . For example , the Boltzmann relation predicts , and experiments with membrane - bound pH indicators conﬁrm , that the concentration of a monovalent cation ( i . e . , a H C ion ) in the aqueous phase at the surface is enhanced 10 - fold over its value in the bulk solution if the surface potential is ¡ 60 mV . The effect is much more dramatic for multivalent ions , such as charged basic peptides : Their nonspeciﬁc accumulation can be calculated from the ﬁrst principles of physics using detailed atomic - level models of membranes and peptides in conjunction with the Poisson and Boltzmann relations ( 12 , 13 ) . One calculates the Gibbs surface excess , the integral of the excess concentration of the charged peptide 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 165 over distance from the surface ( 76 ) . This is the number of peptides bound per unit area , which can be compared with experimental data . There is satisfac - tory agreement between theoretical predictions and experimental results , as reviewed elsewhere ( 76 ) . WeconsiderthehypothesisthatMARCKSusescheaptrick # 3 , nonspeciﬁcelec - trostatic sequestration , to accumulate laterally a signiﬁcant fraction of the PIP 2 in a cell . Speciﬁcally , the cluster of basic residues in the MARCKS effector domain produces a signiﬁcantly positive local electrostatic potential , which enhances the local two - dimensional concentration ( i . e . , number per unit area ) of a trivalent lipid such as PIP 2 by the Boltzmann factor ( see cheap trick # 3 ) . Figure 4 illustrates various features of this model . Figures 4 a , b show the orientation of the MARCKS effector domain with respect to the bilayer . Monovalent acidic lipids [ e . g . , phos - phatidylserine ( PS ) ] comprise about 20 % – 40 % of the phospholipids on the cyto - plasmic leaﬂet of a plasma membrane in a mammalian cell . Figure 4 c shows the ¡ 25 mV electrostatic equipotential proﬁle adjacent to a 2 : 1 PC / PS membrane in 100 mM monovalent salt ( 76 , 84 ) . Although the discrete nature of the monovalent ﬁxed charges ( i . e . , PS ) produces a slight undulation in the potential proﬁle , to a good approximation the ¡ 25 mV surface may be regarded as ﬂat and located about 1 nm from the surface , exactly as predicted by much simpler Gouy - Chapman the - ory . Figure 4 d shows how binding of the MARCKS effector domain modiﬁes this potential . Although the positive charges on the peptide are screened by the coun - terions in the aqueous solution and the monovalent acidic lipids in the membrane , they nevertheless produce a positive potential in the neighborhood of the peptide , as illustrated by the C 25 mV equipotential proﬁle shown in blue . It is apparent from Figure 4 d that a cluster of basic residues conﬁned to the membrane - solution interface can act as a basin of attraction for multivalent acidic lipids . To illustrate this more quantitatively , we ask the following questions . What are the average potentials the 3 negative charges on PIP 2 experience when the lipid is far from the peptide and when it is close to the peptide ? These charges , located about 0 . 5 nm from the surface of the bilayer ( Figure 1 and Figure 4 f ) , are within the ¡ 25 mV equipotential surface ( shown in Figure 4 c ) . They experience a potential more negative than ¡ 25 mV when the lipid is far ( i . e . , > 1 nm laterally ) from the peptide . The 3 charges on a PIP 2 located within the blue mesh surrounding the peptide ( Figure 4 d ) experience a potential more positive than C 25 mV . For simplicity , we assume there is a neighborhood around the basic peptide where the potential experienced by PIP 2 is uniformly C 25 mV and that outside this region the PIP 2 experiences a potential of ¡ 25 mV as shown in Figure 4 e . If we also assume ( incorrectly ) that the PIP 2 does not perturb the potential in the neighborhood of the peptide when it is sequestered , the Boltzmann relationship predicts PIP 2 will be concentrated laterally by a factor of exp ( ¡ ze 1ˆ = kT ) , where 1ˆ is the difference in potential ( 50 mV ) , z is the valence on the PIP 2 ( ¡ 3 ) , and kT = e D 25 mV . Thus , the simple electrostatic sequestration model predicts that PIP 2 is con - centrated by a factor of exp ( 6 ) D 400 in this neighborhood of the peptide . As 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 166 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . MARCKS and PIP 2 are present at similar concentrations , and PIP 2 comprises about 1 % of the phospholipids , this order of magnitude calculation predicts a sig - niﬁcant fraction of the PIP 2 in the membrane should be sequestered by MARCKS . Work in progress on a more realistic theoretical treatment takes into account the perturbation of the potential by PIP 2 . Figure 4 f shows preliminary calculations for PIP 2 ( yellow ) sequestered adjacent to a single MARCKS effector domain peptide ( green ) in an otherwise electrically neutral PC membrane , showing local regions of negative potential around the PIP 2 and local regions of positive potential around the basic residues . The simple electrostatic sequestration model illustrated in Figure 4 is consistent with the available experimental data obtained by both biophysicists and cell biolo - gists . Physiological levels of MARCKS ( 10 „ M ) or its effector domain peptide are predicted to sequester a signiﬁcant fraction of the PIP 2 in a phospholipid vesicle , even in the presence of a large excess of monovalent acidic lipids . Biophysical experiments on model membranes over the past few years show that this con - centration of protein or peptide does in fact inhibit PLC - catalyzed hydrolysis and that this inhibition is due to the electrostatic sequestration of PIP 2 by the effector domain ( 8 , 110 ) . Cell biology experiments show colocalization of MARCKS and PIP 2 antibodies in ﬁxed cells ( 64 ) . Cell biology experiments provide other impor - tant indications that MARCKS sequesters a signiﬁcant fraction of the PIP 2 in a cell : Overexpression of MARCKS produces a concomitant increase in the level of PIP 2 in the cell , which is the expected response if the cell maintains a constant concentra - tion of free PIP 2 ( 64 ) . The main caveat here is that the degree to which electrostatic sequestration occurs with MARCKS may depend on the cell type ; the relative con - centration of MARCKS and PIP 2 has not been determined accurately in most cells . One interesting feature of the electrostatic sequestration mechanism sketched in Figure 4 is that MARCKS can bind PIP 2 globally and release it locally . Bind - ing of Ca CC / CaM or phosphorylation by PKC releases the basic effector domain from the membrane ( 7 , 74 , 80 ) . It is easy to demonstrate in phospholipid vesi - cles that translocation of the effector domain from membrane to solution by PKC or Ca CC / CaM releases bound PIP 2 : Speciﬁcally , it reverses the inhibition of the PLC - catalyzed hydrolysis ( 76 , 110 ) . It is much harder to demonstrate that PIP 2 is reversibly sequestered with MARCKS in a living cell : Laux et al . ( 64 ) provided the best evidence to date by showing colocalization of MARCKS and PIP 2 in ﬁxed cells using PIP 2 antibodies , but experiments on living cells with some of the new technologies discussed below are obviously necessary to test critically the reversible sequestration hypothesis . A corollary of the reversible sequestration model , if it can be conﬁrmed in living cells , is that local increases in [ Ca CC ] , which are controlled tightly ( 17 ) , could produce local increases in the free concentration of PIP 2 in the membrane . Speciﬁcally , the increase in local [ Ca CC / CaM ] would produce a local release of PIP 2 sequestered by the MARCKS effector domain . It remains to be determined experimentally whether local synthesis or electro - static sequestration is more important in concentrating PIP 2 in nascent phagosomes and membrane rufﬂes . Some experiments ( 69 ) strongly suggest that local synthesis anddegradationisimportantintheappearance / disappearanceofphosphoinositides 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 167 in phagosomes , e . g . , the “appearance of PIP 3 coincides with the equally localized disappearance of PIP 2 from the base of the cup . ” But these authors also discuss why local synthesis alone does not account for several features of the accumula - tion of the phosphoinositides in phagosomes ( 69 ) . Because both PIP kinases and MARCKS are concentrated in nascent phagosomes and membrane rufﬂes , both mechanisms might be in play . What is the advantage of combining local synthesis and local sequestration ? For a given rate of PIP 2 synthesis in a lateral membrane domain , the analysis of Haugh et al . ( 48 ) shows that a 10 - fold - larger concentration gradient will be obtained if the diffusion coefﬁcient is lowered 10 - fold . If 90 % of the PIP 2 in the lateral domain is bound to MARCKS or other proteins , the effective local diffusion coefﬁcient of PIP 2 will be 10 - fold lower ( e . g . , 59 ) , and 10 - fold more PIP 2 will be accumulated in the lateral domain . The MARCKS effector domain is not unique : Other proteins have basic re - gions with similar sequences , and some are also present at high concentrations . For example , MacMARCKS ( 2 , 18 ) ; adducin ( 58 ) , which may function in rufﬂe formation ( 41 ) ; a Drosophila - scaffolding protein , DAKAP200 ( 92 ) ; and the N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) receptor ( 112 ) all have basic regions similar to the MARCKS effector domain . The net positive charge in these effector regions is 12 , 11 , 10 , and 9 , respectively . Peptides corresponding to these regions bind PIP 2 with signiﬁcant afﬁnity : The binding afﬁnity to a PC / PIP 2 ( 99 : 1 ) vesicle corre - lates with charge on the peptide and decreases 100 - fold as the net charge on the peptide decreases from 13 for MARCKS to 9 for the NMDA peptide ( J . Wang & S . McLaughlin , unpublished data ) . Additional work is needed to determine if these proteins also bind PIP 2 in the cell and , if so , whether this binding is biologically important . The NMDA receptor is particularly interesting because it functions as a Ca CC channel , and Ca CC / CaM binds to the effector region when Ca CC ﬂows through the channel ( 112 ) . GAP43 , MARCKS , AND CAP23 : DOES THE GMC GANG HANG OUT IN RAFTS ? Caroni and colleagues have pointed out striking parallels between MARCKS and two neuronal proteins , GAP43 ( a growth - associated protein ) and CAP23 ( a cytoskeletal - associated protein ) . They coined the term GMC family for these proteins . Although the GMC proteins have no sequence similarity , they share important physical traits ( 39 ) . For example , they lack any ﬁ - helix structure and resemble extended rods , a structure consistent with their highly acidic nature ; their N - termini contain either a myristate or two palmitates ( GAP43 ) that insert into the bilayer ; and they have a conserved basic region that is phosphorylated by PKC and can bind Ca CC / CaM ( CAP23 and MARCKS ) and actin . The proteins share biolog - ical as well as physical properties . Frey et al . ( 39 ) used knockin mice to show that GAP43 can largely rescue the phenotypical abnormalities caused by the absence of CAP23 . CAP23 and GAP43 together can induce spinal axon regeneration , so they may have interesting clinical applications ( 19 ) . Based on their experimental 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 168 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . observations that PIP 2 colocalizes with GMC proteins in micrometer - size domains when cells are ﬁxed in certain ways , Laux et al . ( 64 ) recently proposed a provoca - tive , and potentially important , hypothesis : All GMC proteins are localized in small cholesterol - enriched domains or rafts in unﬁxed cells , all bind PIP 2 , and thus localize PIP 2 to the putative rafts . The two saturated chains on GAP43 should help localize it to cholesterol - enriched rafts , and previous work has shown that it is concentrated in the detergent - resistant or DIGs fraction of the plasma membrane ( 9 ) . Proteins with a single saturated acyl chain ( i . e . , on CAP23 , MARCKS , or a mutant GAP43 with one palmitate ) , however , are not generally present in DIGs , and a single acyl chain is generally considered incapable of targeting a protein to the putative rafts ( 22 ) . The Laux et al . ( 64 ) experiments can be reconciled with the previous DIGs / raft work by noting that they were done under conditions where the GMC proteins were pre - sumably chemically cross - linked into supramolecular assemblies that effectively had multiple saturated acyl chains . Recent work by Dietrich et al . ( 33 ) showed that cross - linking a saturated phospholipid analog indeed increases its partitioning into large cholesterol - enriched domains that are visible in a supported monolayer . The biological signiﬁcance of the results emerges if one postulates actin , rather than chemical , cross - linking of GMC proteins in speciﬁc regions of the cell ( e . g . , MARCKS in the nascent phagosome and membrane rufﬂes ) : The cross - linked GMC proteins might nucleate the formation of cholesterol - enriched rafts in those regions . The recent observation that the diffusion coefﬁcient of a disaturated lipid analog was reduced in the phagosome is consistent with this scenario ( 69 ) . The postulated connection between the GMC proteins and cholesterol - enriched rafts ( 64 ) , in our opinion , is important and needs to be evaluated using new tools on living cells . The suggestion that all the GMC proteins sequester PIP 2 and thus act as pipmodulins ( 64 ) is also interesting . There is good biophysical evidence that MARCKS can sequester PIP 2 in model systems , but the interaction of PIP 2 with the neuronal proteins CAP23 and GAP43 has not been similarly investigated in any detail . In contrast to MARCKS , overexpression of these two proteins does not produce a heightened level of PIP 2 in cells , which implies they may be less important than MARCKS in acting as buffers to control the level of free cellular PIP 2 ( 64 ) . NEW TECHNOLOGIES Many new techniques are available to examine the location of PIP 2 in living cells and model membranes . GFP constructs of domains that bind with high afﬁnity to speciﬁc phosphoinositides are now used widely by cell biologists and should con - tinue to provide important new information . Fluorescent and spin - labeled analogs of PIP 2 have been important tools for model membrane studies , but hydrolysis of these molecules would be a problem in cells ; a nonhydrolyzable ﬂuorescent analog of PIP 2 would be extremely useful for examining more directly the distribution of PIP 2 in living cells . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) microscopy 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 169 with GFP - PH domain constructs has already provided useful information in cells ( 105 ) and has great potential for examining the possible localization of PIP 2 in submicroscopic domains such as rafts . Evanescent wave or total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) [ see references in ( 109 ) ] has already been used to examine gradients of phosphoinositides in cells ( 48 ) . We suspect that single molecule ﬂuorescence measurements on living cells will prove to be increasingly valuable in phosphoinositide research , and the technique has been used to provide evidence for rafts in cell membranes ( 95 ) . Laser tweezer measurements allow the direct determination of the force by which PIP 2 attaches the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane ( 90 ) . With respect to model membrane systems , computational studies ( 76 ) and biophysical measurements on PIP 2 are now in progess in dif - ferent laboratories using laser tweezers ( 42 ) , NMR , ESR , ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy , and other approaches . They should help tease out the physical mech - anisms by which proteins interact with phosphoinositides . Thus we are looking forward to the next several years of phosphoinositide research , as they are sure to be exciting ones . CODA Of course we have not answered the most important question we posed in the Introduction : How does order emerge from diffusional chaos in the many signal transduction systems that exist in a cell ? We hope , however , that the biophysical cheap tricks we have described will help cell biologists to discover how PIP 2 acts as its own second messenger and choreographs the diffusional dance of so many other signal transduction molecules ; in Yeats’ words , to “know the dancer from the dance . ” ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM24971 and National Science Foundation Grant MCB9729538 to S . McLaughlin . Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www . annualreviews . org LITERATURE CITED 1 . Adam G , Delbr¨uck M . 1968 . Reduction of dimensionality in biological diffusion processes . In Structural Chemistry and Molecular Biology , ed . A Rich , N David - son , pp . 198 – 215 . San Francisco : Free - man 2 . AderemA . 1992 . TheMARCKSbrothers : a family of protein kinase C substrates . Cell 71 : 713 – 16 3 . Albert KA , Nairn AC , Greengard P . 1987 . The 87 - kDa protein , a major speciﬁc sub - strate for protein kinase C : puriﬁcation from bovine brain and characterization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 84 : 7046 – 50 4 . Allen LA , Aderem A . 1995 . A role for MARCKS , the ﬁ isozyme of pro - tein kinase C and myosin I in zymosan 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 170 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . phagocytosis by macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 182 : 829 – 40 5 . Anderson RA , Boronenkov IV , Dough - man SD , Kunz J , Loijens JC . 1999 . Phos - phatidylinositolphosphatekinases , amul - tifaceted family of signaling enzymes . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 9907 – 10 6 . Arbuzova A , Martushova K , Hangyas - Mihalyne G , Morris AJ , Ozaki S , et al . 2000 . Fluorescently labeled neomycin as a probe of phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1464 : 35 – 48 7 . Arbuzova A , Murray D , McLaughlin S . 1998 . MARCKS , membranes , andcalmo - dulin : kinetics of their interaction . Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta 1376 : 369 – 79 8 . Arbuzova A , Wang L , Wang J , Hangyas - Mihalyne G , Murray D , et al . 2000 . Mem - brane binding of peptides containing both basicandaromaticresidues . Experimental studies with peptides corresponding to the scaffolding region of caveolin and the ef - fector region of MARCKS . Biochemistry 39 : 10330 – 39 9 . Arni S , Keilbaugh SA , Ostermeyer AG , Brown DA . 1998 . Association of GAP - 43withdetergent - resistantmembranesre - quires two palmitoylated cysteine resi - dues . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 28478 – 85 10 . Aveyard R , Haydon DA . 1973 . An Intro - ductiontothePrinciplesofSurfaceChem - istry . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press 11 . Balla T , Bondeva T , Varnai P . 2000 . How accurately can we image inositol lipids in living cells ? Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 21 : 238 – 41 12 . Ben - Tal N , Honig B , Miller C , McLaugh - lin S . 1997 . Electrostatic binding of pro - teinstomembranes : theoreticalprediction and experimental results with charybdo - toxin and phospholipid vesicles . Biophys . J . 73 : 1717 – 27 13 . Ben - Tal N , Honig B , Peitzsch RM , Denisov G , McLaughlin S . 1996 . Bind - ing of small basic peptides to membranes containing acidic lipids : theoretical mod - els and experimental results . Biophys . J . 71 : 561 – 75 14 . Berg HC . 1983 . Random Walks in Biol - ogy . Princeton : Princeton Univ . Press 15 . Berg HC , Purcell EM . 1977 . Physics of chemoreception . Biophys . J . 20 : 193 – 219 16 . Berridge MJ , Irvine RF . 1984 . Inositol trisphosphate , a novel second messen - ger in cellular signal transduction . Nature 312 : 315 – 21 17 . Berridge MJ , Lipp P , Bootman MD . 2000 . Theversatilityanduniversalityofcalciumsignalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 11 – 21 18 . Blackshear PJ . 1993 . The MARCKS fam - ily of cellular protein kinase C substrates . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 1501 – 4 19 . BomzeHM , BulsaraKR , IskandarBJ , Ca - roniP , SkeneJH . 2001 . Spinalaxonregen - eration evoked by replacing two growth cone proteins in adult neurons . Nat . Neu - rosci . 4 : 38 – 43 20 . Botelho RJ , Teruel M , Dierckman R , An - derson R , Wells A , et al . 2000 . Localized biphasic changes in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate at sites of phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 1353 – 68 21 . Bradshaw JP , Bushby RJ , Giles CC , Saun - ders MR . 1999 . Orientation of the head - group of phosphatidylinositol in a model biomembrane as determined by neutron diffraction . Biochemistry 38 : 8393 – 401 22 . Brown DA , London E . 2000 . Structure and function of sphingolipid - and choles - terol - rich membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17221 – 24 23 . BuserCA , SigalCT , ReshMD , McLaugh - lin S . 1994 . Membrane binding of myris - tylated peptides corresponding to the NH 2 - terminus of Src . Biochemistry 33 : 13093 – 101 24 . CantleyLC . 2001 . Transcription . Translo - cating tubby . Science 292 : 2019 – 21 25 . Chen F , Ma L , Parrini MC , Mao X , Lopez M , et al . 2000 . Cdc42 is required for PIP 2 - induced actin polymerization and early development but not for cell viability . Curr . Biol . 10 : 758 – 65 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 171 26 . Cifuentes ME , Honkanen L , Rebecchi MJ . 1993 . Proteolytic fragments of phos - phoinositide - speciﬁc phospholipase C - – 1 . Catalytic and membrane binding proper - ties . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 11586 – 93 27 . Clapham DE . 1995 . Calcium signaling . Cell 80 : 259 – 68 28 . Cockcroft S , ed . 2000 . Biology of Phos - phoinositides . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . 341 pp . 29 . Cockcroft S , De Matteis MA . 2001 . Inos - itol lipids as spatial regulators of mem - brane trafﬁc . J . Membr . Biol . 180 : 187 – 94 30 . Cremona O , De Camilli P . 2001 . Phos - phoinositides in membrane trafﬁc at the synapse . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 1041 – 52 31 . Crothers DM , Metzger H . 1972 . The in - ﬂuence of polyvalency on the binding properties of antibodies . Immunochem - istry 9 : 341 – 57 32 . Czech MP . 2000 . PIP 2 and PIP 3 : complex roles at the cell surface . Cell 100 : 603 – 66 33 . Dietrich C , Volovyk AN , Levi M , Thomp - son NL , Jacobson K . 2001 . Partitioning of Thy - 1 , GM1 and cross - linked phospho - lipid analogs into lipid rafts reconstituted in supported model membrane monolay - ers . PNAS 98 : 10642 – 47 34 . Donaldson JG , Jackson CL . 2000 . Regu - lators and effectors of the ARF GTPases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 475 – 82 35 . Fawcett J , Pawson T . 2000 . Signal trans - duction . N - WASP regulation—the sting in the tail . Science 290 : 725 – 26 36 . Ferguson KM , Lemmon MA , Schles - singer J , Sigler PB . 1995 . Structure of the high afﬁnity complex of inositol trisphos - phate with a phospholipase C pleckstrin homology domain . Cell 83 : 1037 – 46 37 . Ferrell JE Jr , Huestis WH . 1984 . Phos - phoinositide metabolism and the mor - phology of human erythrocytes . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1992 – 98 38 . Ford MG , Pearse BM , Higgins MK , Val - lis Y , Owen DJ , et al . 2001 . Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lat - tices on membranes . Science 291 : 1051 – 55 39 . Frey D , Laux T , Xu L , Schneider C , Ca - roni P . 2000 . Shared and unique roles of CAP23 and GAP43 in actin regulation , neurite outgrowth , and anatomical plas - ticity . J . Cell Biol . 149 : 1443 – 54 40 . Fruman DA , Meyers RE , Cantley LC . 1998 . Phosphoinositide kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 : 481 – 507 41 . Fukata Y , Oshiro N , Kaibuchi K . 1999 . Activation of moesin and adducin by Rho - kinase downstream of Rho . Biophys . Chem . 82 : 139 – 47 42 . Galneder R , Kahl V , Arbuzova A , Rebec - chi M , Radler JO , McLaughlin S . 2001 . Microelectrophoresis of a bilayer - coated silica bead in an optical trap : applica - tion to enzymology . Biophys . J . 80 : 2298 – 309 43 . GennisRB . 1989 . Biomembranes : Molec - ular Structure and Function . New York : Springer . 533 pp . 44 . GhomashchiF , ZhangX , LiuL , GelbMH . 1995 . Binding of prenylated and poly - basic peptides to membranes : afﬁnities and intervesicle exchange . Biochemistry 34 : 11910 – 18 45 . Gillooly DJ , Stenmark H . 2001 . Cell biol - ogy . A lipid oils the endocytosis machine . Science 291 : 993 – 94 46 . Hagelberg C , Allan D . 1990 . Restricted diffusion of integral membrane pro - teins and polyphosphoinositides leads to their depletion in microvesicles released from human erythrocytes . Biochem . J . 271 : 831 – 34 47 . Hamada K , Shimizu T , Matsui T , Tsukita S , Hakoshima T . 2000 . Structural basis of the membrane - targeting and unmask - ing mechanisms of the radixin FERM do - main . EMBO J . 19 : 4449 – 62 48 . Haugh JM , Codazzi F , Teruel M , Meyer T . 2000 . Spatial sensing in ﬁbroblasts medi - ated by 3 0 phosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 1269 – 80 48a . Hilgemann DW , Feng S , Nasuhoglu C . 2001 . The complex and intriguing lives 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 172 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . of PIP 2 with ion channels and transpor - ters . Science’s STKE . http : / / stke . science mag . org / cgi / content / full / OC sigtrans ; 2001 / 111 / re19 49 . Hinchliffe KA , Ciruela A , Irvine RF . 1998 . PIPkins1 , their substrates and their products : new functions for old enzymes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1436 : 87 – 104 50 . Hirose K , Kadowaki S , Tanabe M , Take - shibaH , IinoM . 1999 . Spatiotemporaldy - namicsofinositol1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphatethat underlies complex Ca 2 C mobilization pat - terns . Science 284 : 1527 – 31 51 . Holz RW , Hlubek MD , Sorensen SD , Fisher SK , Balla T , et al . 2000 . A pleckstrin homology domain speciﬁc forphosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns - 4 , 5 - P 2 ) and fused to green ﬂuore - scent protein identiﬁes plasma membrane PtdIns - 4 , 5 - P 2 as being important in exo - cytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17878 – 85 52 . Honda A , Nogami M , Yokozeki T , Yama - zaki M , Nakamura H , et al . 1999 . Phos - phatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase al - pha is a downstream effector of the small G protein ARF6 in membrane rufﬂe for - mation . Cell 99 : 521 – 32 53 . Hurley JH , Meyer T . 2001 . Subcellular targeting by membrane lipids . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 146 – 52 54 . Hurley JH , Misra S . 2000 . Signaling and subcellular targeting by membrane bind - ing domains . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 49 – 79 55 . Irvine R . 2000 . Nuclear lipid signaling . Science’s STKE : http : / / www . stke . org / cgi / content / full / OC sigtrans ; 2000 / 48 / re1 56 . Irvine RF , Schell MJ . 2001 . Back in the water : the return of the inositol phos - phates . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 327 – 38 57 . Itoh T , Koshiba S , Kigawa T , Kikuchi A , Yokoyama S , Takenawa T . 2001 . Role of the ENTH domain in phosphatidy - linositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate binding and endocytosis . Science 291 : 1047 – 51 58 . Joshi R , Gilligan DM , Otto E , McLaugh - lin T , Bennett V . 1991 . Primary structure and domain organization of human alpha and beta adducin . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 665 – 75 59 . Junge W , McLaughlin S . 1987 . The role of ﬁxed and mobile buffers in the kinetics of proton movement . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 890 : 1 – 5 60 . Kenworthy AK , Petranova N , Edidin M . 2000 . High - resolution FRET microscopy of cholera toxin B - subunit and GPI - anchored proteins in cell plasma mem - branes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 1645 – 55 61 . Kholodenko BN , Hoek JB , Westerhoff HV . 2000 . Why cytoplasmic signalling proteins should be recruited to cell mem - branes . Trends Cell Biol . 10 : 173 – 78 62 . Lagerholm BC , Starr TE , Volovyk ZN , Thompson NL . 2000 . Rebinding of IgE Fabs at haptenated planar membranes : measurement by total internal reﬂection with ﬂuorescence photobleaching recov - ery . Biochemistry 39 : 2042 – 51 63 . Lagerholm BC , Thompson NL . 1998 . Theory for ligand rebinding at cell mem - brane surfaces . Biophys . J . 74 : 1215 – 28 64 . Laux T , Fukami K , Thelen M , Golub T , Frey D , Caroni P . 2000 . GAP43 , MAR - CKS , and CAP23 modulate PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at plasmalemmal rafts , and regulate cell cor - tex actin dynamics through a common mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 149 : 1455 – 72 65 . Lemmon MA , Ferguson KM . 2000 . Signal - dependent membrane targeting by pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains . Bio - chem . J . 350 : 1 – 18 66 . Lemmon MA , Ferguson KM , O’Brien R , Sigler PB , Schlessinger J . 1995 . Speciﬁc and high - afﬁnity binding of inositol phos - phates to an isolated pleckstrin homo - logy domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 10472 – 76 67 . Leventis R , Silvius JR . 1998 . Lipid - bind - ing characteristics of the polybasic car - boxy - terminal sequence of K - ras4B . Bio - chemistry 37 : 7640 – 48 68 . Liscovitch M , Chalifa V , Pertile P , Chen CS , Cantley LC . 1994 . Novel function of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate as 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 173 a cofactor for brain membrane phospholi - pase D . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 21403 – 6 69 . Marshall JG , Booth JW , Stambolic V , Mak T , Balla T , et al . 2001 . Restricted accumulation of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinaseproductsinaplasmalemmalsubdo - mainduringFcgammareceptor - mediated phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 1369 – 80 70 . Martin TF . 2001 . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 regulation of surfacemembranetrafﬁc . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 493 – 99 71 . McCloskey MA , Poo MM . 1986 . Rates of membrane - associated reactions : reduc - tion of dimensionality revisited . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 88 – 96 72 . McLaughlin S . 1977 . Electrostatic po - tentials at membrane - solution interfaces . Curr . Top . Membr . Trans . 9 : 71 – 144 73 . McLaughlin S . 1989 . The electrostatic properties of membranes . Annu . Rev . Bio - phys . Biophys . Chem . 18 : 113 – 36 74 . McLaughlin S , Aderem A . 1995 . The myristoyl - electrostatic switch : a modula - tor of reversible protein - membrane inter - actions . Trends Biochem . Sci . 20 : 272 – 76 75 . Millard TH , Machesky LM . 2001 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family . Trends Biochem . Sci . 26 : 198 – 99 75a . Misra A , Miller GJ , Hurley JH . 2001 . Recognizing phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate . Cell 107 : 559 – 62 76 . Murray D , Arbuzova A , Honig B , McLaughlin S . 2002 . The role of elec - trostatic and nonpolar interactions in the association of peripheral proteins with membranes . Curr . Top . Membr . 52 : 271 – 301 77 . Murray D , Hermida - Matsumoto L , Buser CA , Tsang J , Sigal C , et al . 1998 . Elec - trostatics mediates the membrane associ - ation of Src : theory and experiment . Bio - chemistry 37 : 2145 – 59 78 . Myat MM , Anderson S , Allen LH , Aderem A . 1997 . MARCKS regulates membrane rufﬂing and cell spreading . Curr . Biol . 7 : 611 – 14 79 . Nagle JF , Tristram - Nagle S . 2000 . Struc - ture of lipid bilayers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1469 : 159 – 95 80 . Ohmori S , Sakai N , Shirai Y , Yamamoto H , Miyamoto E , et al . 2000 . Importance of protein kinase C targeting for the phos - phorylation of its substrate , myristoylated alanine - rich C - kinase substrate . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 26449 – 57 81 . Overduin M , Cheever ML , Kutateladze TG . 2001 . Signaling with PIs : its better than binary . Mol . Interv . 1 : 14 – 23 82 . Pantaloni D , Le Clainche C , Carlier MF . 2001 . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 : 1502 – 6 83 . PayrastreB , MissyK , GiuriatoS , BodinS , PlantavidM , GratacapM . 2001 . Phospho - inositides : key players in cell signalling , in time and space . Cell Signal 13 : 377 – 87 84 . Peitzsch RM , Eisenberg M , Sharp KA , McLaughlin S . 1995 . Calculations of the electrostatic potential adjacent to model phospholipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 68 : 729 – 38 85 . Pike LJ , Miller JM . 1998 . Cholesterol depletion delocalizes phosphatidylinosi - tol bisphosphate and inhibits hormone - stimulated phosphatidylinositol turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 22298 – 304 86 . Pollard TD , Blanchoin L , Mullins RD . 2000 . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 76 87 . Powell A . 1995 . A Dance to the Music of Time : First Movement . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press . 726 pp . 88 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Dyche Mullins R , Lim WA . 2000 . Integration of multi - ple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 : 801 – 6 89 . Randazzo PA , Nie Z , Miura K , Hsu VW . 2000 . Molecularaspectsofthecellularac - tivities of ADP - ribosylation factors . Sci . STKE 59 : 1 – 15 90 . Raucher D , Stauffer T , Chen W , Shen K , Guo S , et al . 2000 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate functions as a second 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH 174 MCLAUGHLIN ET AL . messenger that regulates cytoskeleton - plasma membrane adhesion . Cell 100 : 221 – 28 91 . Rebecchi MJ , Pentyala SN . 2000 . Struc - ture , function , and control of phosphoino - sitide - speciﬁc phospholipase C . Physiol . Rev . 80 : 1291 – 335 92 . Rossi EA , Li Z , Feng H , Rubin CS . 1999 . Characterization of the targeting , binding , and phosphorylation site domains of an A kinase anchor protein and a myristoy - lated alanine - rich C kinase substrate - like analog that are encoded by a single gene . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 27201 – 10 93 . Santagata S , Boggon TJ , Baird CL , Gomez CA , Zhao J , Shan WS , et al . 2001 . G - protein signaling through tubby pro - teins . Science 292 : 2041 – 50 93a . Sato TK , Overduin M , Emr SC . 2001 . Lo - cation , location , location : membrane tar - geting directed by PX domains . Science 294 : 1881 – 85 94 . Schmidt - Nielsen K . 1972 . How Animals Work . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press . 114 pp . 95 . Schutz GJ , Kada G , Pastushenko VP , Schindler H . 2000 . Properties of lipid mi - crodomainsinamusclecellmembranevi - sualized by single molecule microscopy . EMBO J . 19 : 892 – 901 96 . Sciorra VA , Rudge SA , Prestwich GD , Frohman MA , Engebrecht J , Morris AJ . 1999 . Identiﬁcation of a phosphoinositide binding motif that mediates activation of mammalian and yeast phospholipase D isoenzymes . EMBO J . 18 : 5911 – 21 97 . Sechi AS , Wehland J . 2000 . The actin cytoskeleton and plasma membrane con - nection : PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 inﬂuences cyto - skeletal protein activity at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 3685 – 95 97a . SimonsonA , WurmserAE , EmrSD , Sten - mark H . 2001 . The role of phosphoinosi - tides in membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 485 – 92 98 . Stauffer TP , Ahn S , Meyer T . 1998 . Receptor - induced transient reduction in plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 concen - tration monitored in living cells . Curr . Biol . 8 : 343 – 46 99 . Tall E , Spector I , Pentyala SN , Bitter I , Rebecchi MJ . 2000 . Dynamics of phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in ac - tin - supported structures . Curr . Biol . 10 : 743 – 46 100 . Toker A . 1998 . The synthesis and cel - lular roles of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 254 – 61 101 . Toner M , Vaio G , McLaughlin A , Mc - Laughlin S . 1988 . Adsorption of cations to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Biochemistry 27 : 7435 – 43 102 . Tsujishita Y , Guo S , Stolz LE , York JD , HurleyJH . 2001 . Speciﬁcitydeterminants in phosphoinositide dephosphorylation : crystal structure of an archetypal inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatase . Cell 105 : 379 – 89 103 . Tsukita S , Yonemura S . 1999 . Cortical actin organization : lessons from ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 34507 – 10 104 . Tuominen EK , Holopainen JM , Chen J , Prestwich GD , Bachiller PR , et al . 1999 . Fluorescent phosphoinositide derivatives reveal speciﬁc binding of gelsolin and otheractinregulatoryproteinstomixedli - pid bilayers . Eur . J . Biochem . 263 : 85 – 92 105 . van der Wal J , Habets R , Varnai P , Balla T , Jalink K . 2001 . Monitoring agonist - inducedphospholipaseCactivationinlivecellsbyﬂuorescenceresonanceenergytransfer . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 15337 – 44 106 . Vanhaesebroeck B , Leevers SJ , Ahmadi K , Timms J , Katso R , et al . 2001 . Synthe - sisandfunctionof3 - phosphorylatedinos - itol lipids . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 535 – 602 107 . van Paridon PA , De Kruijff B , Ouwerkerk R , Wirtz KW . 1986 . Polyphosphoinosi - tides undergo charge neutralization in the physiological pH range : a 31P - NMR stu - dy . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 877 : 216 – 19 108 . Varnai P , Balla T . 1998 . Visualization of phosphoinositides that bind pleckstrin 10 Apr 2002 12 : 54 AR AR157 - 06 . tex AR157 - 06 . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2001 / 05 / 10 ) P1 : IKH PIP 2 AND PROTEINS 175 homologydomains : calcium - andagonist - induced dynamic changes and relation - ship to myo - [ 3H ] inositol - labeled phos - phoinositide pools . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 501 – 10 109 . Wagner ML , Tamm LK . 2001 . Reconsti - tuted syntaxin 1A / SNAP25 interacts with negatively charged lipids as measured by lateraldiffusioninplanarsupportedbilay - ers . Biophys . J . 81 : 266 – 75 110 . Wang J , Arbuzova A , Hangyas - Mihalyne G , McLaughlin S . 2001 . The effector domain of myristoylated alanine - rich C kinase substrate binds strongly to phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 5012 – 19 111 . WaughMG , LawsonD , TanSK , HsuanJJ . 1998 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate synthesis in immunoisolated caveolae - like vesicles and low buoyant density non - caveolar membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 17115 – 21 112 . Zhang S , Ehlers MD , Bernhardt JP , Su CT , Huganir RL . 1998 . Calmodulin me - diates calcium - dependent inactivation of N - methyl - D - aspartate receptors . Neuron 21 : 443 – 53 113 . Zhou C , Garigapati V , Roberts MF . 1997 . Short - chain phosphatidylinositol conformation and its relevance to phos - phatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C . Biochemistry 36 : 15925 – 31 22 Apr 2002 9 : 32 AR AR157 - 06 - COLOR . tex AR157 - 06 - COLOR . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2002 / 01 / 18 ) P1 : GDL Figure 2 ( a ) Ribbon diagrams of three domains showing their interaction with IP 3 or the head group of PIP 2 . Helices , blue ; ﬂ - sheets , green ; loops , cyan ; oxygens on IP 3 , red . ( b ) Detail of the binding pocket of the PH domain of PLC – showing the two hydrogen bonds that K30 and K57 each make with the 4 - and 5 - phosphates . 22 Apr 2002 11 : 55 AR AR157 - 06 - COLOR . tex AR157 - 06 - COLOR . SGM LaTeX2e ( 2002 / 01 / 18 ) P1 : GDL Figure 4 ( a ) Cartoon of MARCKS bound to a bilayer . The myristate ( orange ) inserts hydrophobically into the membrane , and the 13 basic residues ( blue “ C ” signs ) in the effector domain interact with acidic lipids ( 3 red balls indicate PIP 2 ) . Five Phe residues ( cyan ) insert into the bilayer . Phosphorylation of 3 Ser ( purple ) by PKC or binding of Ca CC / calmodulin displaces the effector domain from the bilayer . ( b ) Molecular model of the effector domain of MARCKS bound to a bilayer . Basic residues , blue ; Ser phosphorylated by PKC , purple ; Phe , cyan . ( c ) Electrostatic equipotential proﬁle ( ¡ 25 mV D kT = e proﬁle shown in red ) adjacent to a PC / PS ( 2 : 1 ) bilayer in 100 mM monovalent salt as calculated from the nonlinear Poisson - Boltzmann equation ( 84 ) . ( d ) Electrostatic potential proﬁles produced by the binding of a MARCKS effector domain peptide to a PC / PS 2 : 1 bilayer . The ¡ 25 mV equipotential proﬁle is shown in red , the C 25 mV potential proﬁle in blue . ( e ) Simple model to illustrate electrostatic sequestration of PIP 2 by MARCKS . ( f ) MARCKS effector domain adsorbed to a PC / PIP 2 bilayer showing that it captures electrostatically several PIP 2 ( yellow : two are visible on the front of the peptide ) . The C 25 mV equipotential proﬁle is shown in blue , the ¡ 25 mV equipotential proﬁle in red .