Regulated Tyrosine Phosphorylation at the Tips of Growth Cone Filopodia Da - Yu Wu and Daniel J . Goldberg Department of Pharmacology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior , Columbia University , New York 10032 Abstract . Several types of evidence suggest that pro - tein - tyrosine phosphorylation is important during the growth of neuronal processes , but few specific roles , or subcellular localizations suggestive of such roles , have been defined . We report here a localization of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein at the tips of growth cone filopodia . Immunocytochemistry using a rnAb to phosphorylated tyrosine residues revealed intense staining of the tips of most filopodia of Aplysia axons growing slowly on a polylysine substrate , but of few filopodia of axons growing rapidly on a substrate coated with Aplysia hemolymph , which has growth - promoting material . Cytochalasin D , which causes F - actin to withdraw rapidly from the growth cone , caused the tyrosine - phosphorylated protein to with - draw rapidly from filopodia , suggesting that the pro - tein associates or interacts with actin filaments . Phosphotyrosine has previously been found concen - trated at adherens junctions , where bundles of actin filaments terminate , but video - enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast and confocal interfer - ence reflection microscopy demonstrated that the filo - podial tips were not adherent to the substrate . Acute application of either hemolymph or inhibitors of pro - tein - tyrosine kinases to neurons on polylysine resulted in a rapid loss of intense staining at filopodial tips concomitant with a lengthening of the filopodia ( and their core bundles of actin filaments ) . These results demonstrate that tyrosine - phosphorylated protein can be concentrated at the barbed ends of actin filaments in a context other than an adherens junction , indicate an association between changes in phosphorylation and filament dynamics , and provide evidence for tyro - sine phosphorylation as a signaling mechanism in the filopodium that can respond to environmental cues controlling growth cone dynamics . EVERAL pieces of evidence suggest that protein - tyro - sine phosphorylation is important in the growth of neuronal processes during development , one of the key steps in establishing the circuitry of the nervous system . First , certain protein - tyrosine kinases ( PTKs ) ~ and protein - tyrosine phosphatases are transiently expressed by develop - ing axons , c - src andfyn , related nonreceptor PTKs , are both expressed at much higher levels in various developing nerve tracts of the vertebrate central nervous system than in the adult , and most highly in the growth cone , the specialized ending of a growing neurite ( Maness et al . , 1988 ; Bare et al . , 1993 ) . Another nonreceptor PTK , abl , and three recep - tor protein - tyrosine phosphatases are transiently expressed on subsets of developing axons in the Drosophila central nervous system ( Elkins et al . , 1990 ; Hariharan et al . , 1991 ; Tian et al . , 1991 ) . Second , protein - tyrosine phosphoryla - tion is acutely affected by certain neurite growth - promoting molecules . The surface receptors for NGF and other neu - rotrophins are members of the family oftrk PTKs ( Lamballe et al . , 1991 ; Loeb et al . , 1991 ; Squinto et al . , 1991 ) . Bind - ing of NGF not only causes autophosphorylation of trk , but 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : PTK , protein - tyrosine kinase ; VEC - DIC , video - enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast . tyrosine phosphorylation of numerous other proteins as well ( Maher , 1988 ; Schanen - King et al . , 1991 ; Vetter et al . , 1991 ) . Soluble fragments of neural cell adhesion molecule and L1 ( neurite growth - promoting molecules of the im - munoglobulin superfamily ) , as well as antibodies to the whole proteins , decrease the tyrosine phosphorylation of membrane - bound tubulin in growth cones ( Atashi et al . , 1992 ) . Third , alterations in protein - tyrosine phosphoryla - tion have been found to affect neuritic growth . Expression of the constitutively active v - src gene in PC12 pheochromo - cytoma cells causes neurite outgrowth in the absence of the normally required NGF ( Alem ~ t et al . , 1985 ) . Pharmacolog - ical inhibition of PTKs results in increased neuritic out - growth from cultured chick brain neurons ( Bixby and Jhabvala , 1992 ) and PC12 cells ( Miller et al . , 1993 ) . Em - bryonic mouse cerebellar neurons missing the c - src gene ex - hibit abnormally slow neuritic growth on an L1 substrate in culture ( Ignelzi , M . A . , D . R . Miller , P . Soriano , and P . F . Maness . 1992 . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 18 : 1095a ) . Drosoph - ila embryos missing both the abl PTK and fasciclin I ( a neu - rite growth - promoting molecule of the immunoglobulin superfamily ) show evidence of disrupted pathfinding by cer - tain axons in the central nervous system ( Elkins et al . , 1990 ) . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 11 / 653 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , Number 3 , November 1993 653 - 664 653 Although these studies suggest that protein - tyrosine phos - phorylation is important in neuritic growth , they do not define specific roles . In fact , some of the results are su - perficially contradictory : both increased and decreased FIX activity seem capable of enhancing neuritic growth ( Alem ~ i et al . , 1985 ; Bixby and Jhabvala , 1992 ; Miller et al . , 1993 ) and , whereas L1 and c - src have opposite effects on pro - tein - tyrosine phosphorylation in the growth cone ( Matten et al . , 1990 ; Atashi et al . , 1992 ) , c - src apparently enhances neurite growth promotion by L1 ( Ignelzi , M . A . , D . R . Miller , P . Soriano , and P . E Maness . 1992 . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 18 : 1095a ) . There are as yet not even descriptions of any subcellular localizations of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins suggestive of specific roles in neuritic growth . The growth cone should be a focus of study for clues to the roles of protein - tyrosine phosphorylation in neuritic growth . It is the site at which new neuritic length is added ( Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ) , and interactions of the growth cone with the environment are critical in regulating both the rate and direction of growth ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ; Candy and Bentley , 1986 ; Kapfhammer and Raper , 1987 ; Rivas et al . , 1992 ) . Though variable in form , growth cones typically display a peripheral motile re - gion , whose thin layer of cytoplasm is filled with a dense network of actin filaments , and a more voluminous central region containing membrane - bound organelles and microtu - bules ( Letourneau and Ressler , 1983 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Goldberg and Burmeister , 1989 ) . Often protruding from the margin of the peripheral region are digitate filopo - dia filled with core bundles of actin filaments ( Letourneau and Ressler , 1983 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Filopodia can extend tens of microns from the body of the growth cone , projecting in many directions , so they can survey large areas of the environment ( Candy and Bentley , 1986 ; Hammarback and Letourneau , 1986 ) . Interactions of filopodia with en - vironmental cues , such as other cells , can stimulate ( Caudy and Bentley , 1986 ; Hammarback and Letourneau , 1986 ) or inhibit ( Kapfhammer and Raper , 1987 ; Bandtlow et al . , 1990 ) growth in the direction of the cue , and the loss of filopodia leads to abnormally directed axonal growth ( Bent - ley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ) . Thus , filopodia are per - haps the most important sensors of the growth cone . We report here an interesting localization of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein in Aplysia growth cones in culture : the tips of filopodia . We find that the tyrosine phosphoryla - tion there is rapidly regulated by a substrate - binding en - vironmental cue that modifies filopodial dynamics . This and additional evidence suggest a role for tyrosine phosphoryla - tion in mediating interactions of filopodia with environmen - tal cues . Materials and Methods Culture of Aplysia Neurons JuvenlleAplysia californica weighing 2 - 5 g were obtained from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute mariculture facility ( Miami , FL ) . Neurons for culturing were obtained both by dissociation and by manual extraction of single neurons as previously described ( Goldberg , 1991 ) . Neurons were cultured in protein - free defined medium on glass coverslips that had been exposed to polylysine and then Aplysia hemolymph ( blood ) , or to polyly - sine alone . All experiments were performed at room temperature . V ' uteo Microscopy Neurons were used 16 - 40 h after plating . Video - enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast ( VEC - DIC ) microscopy and video - intensified fluorescence microscopy ( of fixed growth cones ) were done as previously described ( Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ; Burmeister et al . , 1991 ) . Images were recorded by an optical memory disc recorder ( model TQ - 3031F ; Panasonic Communications and Systems Company , Secaucus , NJ ) . Some fluorescence images were recorded by using a 35 - ram camera attached directly to the microscope . Video micrographs were prepared for presentation by 35 - ram photography of the video monitor . Fluorescent Cytoskeletal Labeling and Immunocytochemistry Cells were fixed by perfusing into the culture dish a fixative ( pH 7 . 4 ) con - raining 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde , 400 mM sucrose , and 100 mM cacodylate for 7 - 10 rain . Fixed preparations were rinsed three times with artificial sea - water containing 400 mM sucrose and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . For staining of actin filaments , cells were then incubated at room temperature for 1 h with 0 . 33 / ~ M rhodamine - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Inc . , Eugene , OR ) in artificial seawater . For immunostaining of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein , ceils were first incubated for 30 min in artificial seawater with 10 % normal goat serum ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . They were then incubated for 1 h in monoclonal antiphosphotyrosine ( clone 4GI0 , Upstate Biotechnology , Inc . , Lake Placid , NY ) and used at 1 : 100 di - lution in artificial seawater with sucrose and Triton X - 100 . After three rimes with artificial seawater , cells were incubated with fluorescein - conjngated goat anti - mouse antibody ( Cappel ; Organon Teknika Corp . , Durham , NC ) for 1 h . Two types of control experiments were done to assess the specificity of the staining for phosphotyrosine . In one type , preimmune mouse serum ( Cappel ; Organon Teknika ) was used at 1 : 100 dilution to replace the pri - mary antibody . In the other type , primary antibody was omitted entirely . Statistical Analysis Statistical evaluation of the significance of differences between means was done via Student ' s t test for single comparisons and an analysis of variance followed by Bonferroni ' s modified t test for multiple comparisons . For the analysis of the results of micropipette puffing experiments , the filopodia of each growth cone were divided into two groups based on their proximity to the micropipette . The difference in distances from the micropipette of the nearest and farthest filopodial tips was determined . One third of this difference was added to the distance from the micropipette of the nearest tip to yield the maximum distance of a tip from the micropipette for that filopodium to be included in the " close " group . All filopodia whose tips were farther from the micropipette than this distance were included in the other group . To reduce the contributions of random fluctuations in filopodial lengths , only lengthenlngs of at least 2 # m were scored positively . Filopodial responses from all the growth cones were combined for each con - dition ( puffing of vehicle or vehicle containing gehistein ) and the signlficances of differences in the proportions of lengthening filopodia in the close group and the other group were assessed statistically by the chi - square test . Results ~ rosine - Phosphorylated Protein Is Concentrated at the Tips of Filopodia on a Polylysine Substrate Neurons dissociated from the ganglia of juvenile Aplysia grow neurites slowly when cultured in a protein - flee defined medium on a substrate coated only with polylysine ( Bur - meister et al . , 1991 ) . Often the short neurites are tipped by large growth cones whose peripheral region consists of numerous filopodia extending out of a wide lameUipodium ( Figs . ! and 2 A ) . Observations with VEC - DIC microscopy revealed considerable actin - based motility in this peripheral region , as previously described ( Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ; Forscher et al . , 1987 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Bur - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 654 Figure 1 . Distribution of phosphotyrosine in a growth cone on a polylysine substrate , as determined by immunofluorescence microscopy . ( A ) Almost all of the tips of the filopodia are brightly stained with an mAb to phosphotyrosine ( arrowheads point to several filopodia ) . Much of the bright diffuse fluorescence in the center of the growth cone is nonspecific ( some of which is autofluorescence , which is substan - tial when glutaraldehyde is included in the fixative ) , as can be seen when preimmune mouse serum replaces the antiphosphotyrosine mono - clonal as the primary antibody ( B ) or when primary antibody is omitted ( C ) . All of the images were photographed at the same aperture size and exposure time with a 35 - mm camera attached to the microscope , and processed identically . Bar , 10 / zm . meister et al . , 1991 ) : both filopodia and the veils of mem - brane between them moved in and out ( although net advance was slow ) and there was a steady rearward flow of material in the lamellipodium . There was a striking distribution of tyrosine - phosphor - ylated protein ( the use of the singular is not meant to imply that there is necessarily only one species of protein ) in these growth cones , as revealed by immunotluorescence using a mAb specific for phosphorylated tyrosine residues : although there was diffuse staining speckled with bright spots throughout the lamellipodium and central region of the growth cone , there was intense staining at the tips of most or all of the filopodia of almost all such growth cones ( Fig . 1 A ) . The staining was specific in that use of preimmune pooled mouse serum to replace the primary antibody ( Fig . 1 B ) or omission of the primary antibody ( Fig . 1 C ) did not yield tip staining . The mean percentage of filopodial tips per growth cone that were brightly stained was 79 + 4 % ( SEM ; n = 9 ) . The tips of many filopodia appeared swollen when viewed with VEC - DIC microscopy ( Fig . 2 A ) , but we ob - served many filopodia without detectable tip swelling , and these also displayed intense tip staining . An example of a growth cone with both apparently swollen and nonswollen filopodial tips , all with intense staining , is shown in Fig . 2 B . Thus , we conclude that the intense staining of the filopodial tips largely results from the presence of relatively high concentrations of phosphotyrosine at the tips , though it is enhanced in those filopodia with swollen tips by the locally increased thickness . Bright fluorescent cellular staining with antiphosphotyro - sine antibody has been observed at normal or modified adhe - rens junctions , both cell substrate ( focal contacts ) and cell - cell ( Maher et al . , 1985 ; Tarone et al . , 1985 ; Takata and Singer , 1988 ; Tsukita et al . , 1991 ) , but this was not the case here , Two types of microscopic observation showed that the filopodial tips typically did not make focal contact with the substrate ( and never contacted cells during our observa - tions ) . Observations of growth cones at high resolution and magnification using VEC - DIC microscopy showed that the tips were often highly mobile between transient contacts with the substrate , moving not only back and forth but also up and down above the substrate ( Fig . 3 ) . The separation of Figure 2 . Video micrographs of a growth cone on a polyly - sine substrate . ( A ) VEC - DIC microscopy shows numerous short filopodia projecting from a broad lamellipodium . Many of the tips of the filo - podia appear swollen . ( B ) Video - intensified fluorescence microscopy of the same growth cone stained with anfiphospho - tyrosine antibody shows non - swollen ( arrowheads ) as well as swollen tips to be brightly stained . In this and subse - quent VEC - DIC / fluorescence groups , the magnification of the fluorescence image ( s ) is slightly greater than that of the VEC - DIC image . Bars , 5 / zm . Wu and Goldberg Tyrosine Phosphorylation in Filopodia 655 Figure 3 . Rapid movement of filopodial tips is observable by VEC - DIC microscopy . The growth cone is on a polylysine substrate . One filopodium ( arrowhead ) is seen first swinging from left to right ( A - D ) and then lifting far enough offthe substrate to be out of sharp focus ( E and F ) . The left filopodium bends and lifts off the substrate ( F and G ) . The interval between panels is 5 s . Bar , 5 # m . the tips from the substrate was confirmed by observing living growth cones with interference reflection microscopy using a confocal scanning microscope ( Fig . 4 ) . Though there were areas of focal ( black ) and close ( gray ) contact of the periph - erai region of the growth cone with the substrate , the tips of the filopodia generally exhibited a larger separation from the substrate ( white ) . Therefore , the concentration of phos - photyrosine at the tips was not related to their adherence to the substrate . We examined the possibility that the phosphotyrosine at the tip of the filopodium is actin associated , because a core bundle of actin filaments is the only major cytoskeletal struc - ture in the filopodium ( Letourneau and Ressler , 1983 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) , and actin and certain of its associated Figure 4 . Confocal scanning interference reflection microscopic ob - servation of a growth cone on a polylysine substrate . Closeness of the ventral membrane to the substrate correlates with darkness , such that the darkest areas are closest . No filopodial tips are very dark , and most are white , indicating that they have not formed focal or close contacts . Bar , 5 / ~ m . proteins are substrates for tyrosine phosphorylation ( Kellie et al . , 1991 ; Howard et al . , 1993 ) . Cytochaiasin has been shown to induce a rapid disappearance of the network of ac - tin filaments from the peripheral region of these growth cones by causing the network to recede en masse into the central region ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . Growth cones fixed several minutes after the application of 1 # M cytochalasin D , when the actin network had completely receded , no longer displayed bright staining with an - tiphosphotyrosine antibody at the tips of filopodia ( data not shown ) . We examined the mode of disappearance of the phosphotyrosine by fixing growth cones within 4 rain of the application of cytochaiasin D , when the actin network had receded only partially . In many filopodia , the phosphotyro - sine accumulation was apparently caught in the process of withdrawing from the tip , sometimes having spread or frag - mented ( Fig . 5 ) . These data imply an association or interac - tion between the phosphotyrosine at the tip and actin fila - ments of the filopodium . ~ rosine Phosphorylation Is Reduced in Filopodial Tips on a Growth - promoting Substrate When dissociated Aplysia neurons are cultured in protein - free defined medium on a substrate preexposed not only to polylysine but then also to Aplysia hemolymph ( which is then removed before addition of cells , leaving only substrate - bound material ) , neuritic growth is four to eight times faster than on polylysine alone and growth cones are typically smaller , with longer filopodia ( Burmeister et al . , 1991 ) . On average , only 14 + 5 % ( n = 9 ) of the filopodia per growth cone displayed bright staining of their tips with an - tiphosphotyrosine antibody in this condition ( Fig . 6 A ) ( mean significantly different from mean on polylysine , P < 0 . 00001 ) . This difference in phosphorylation was not simply due to a nonspecific change in the substrate caused by cover - ing the polylysine with protein ( such as a change in surface charge ) . Irradiation with UV fight of the growth - promoting substrate before addition of cells eliminates its ability to The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 656 Figure 5 . Tyrosine - phosphorylated protein rapidly withdraws from the tips of filopodia in response to cytochalasin D . This growth cone is in protein - free medium on a polylysine substrate . Cytochalasin D was added to the medium 4 min before fixation for immunofluo - rescence microscopy with antiphosphotyrosine antibody to cause the peripheral network of actin filaments to withdraw towards the central region of the growth cone . Tyrosine - phosphorylated protein seems to be withdrawing from the tips of several filopodia , spread - ing as it does so ( arrowheads and straight arrows ) . In two filopodia the staining has fragmented , with some / eft at the tips ( arrow - heads ) ; in one of those filopodia , there is additional fragmentation proximally ( curved arrow ) . The distribution of phosphotyrosine in this growth cone before the addition of cytochalasin was presum - ably similar to that depicted in Fig . 2 B , because that pattern was consistent . Bar , 5 / ~ m . affect the growth cone or accelerate neuritic growth ( Bur - meister et al . , 1991 ) . On the irradiated substrate , the pattern of staining with antiphosphotyrosine antibody was indistin - guishable from the pattern on polylysine alone : most filopodial tips were brightly fluorescent ( data not shown ) . The disappearance of phosphotyrosine at the tips of filopo - dia in response to growth - promoting substrate occurs rap - idly . This was seen by adding hemolymph to the culture medium of cells previously plated on a polylysine substrate . This has previously been shown to affect the morphology of the growth cone and accelerate neuritic growth within minutes ; these effects apparently result from binding of ma - terial to the substrate ( Burmeister et al . , 1991 ) . By 10 - 15 min after the addition of hemolymph , a mean of only 16 ± 4 % ( n = 9 ) of the filopodia per growth cone had tips that were brightly stained with antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( Fig . 6 B ) ( mean significantly different from mean on polyly - sine , P < 0 . 00001 ) . Because the tips of most filopodia were found to be brightly stained in the absence of hemolymph ( see above ) , it can be inferred that phosphotyrosine at the tips of many filopodia rapidly decreases when the substrate is altered acutely . These tips remained free of tight attach - ment to the substrate , as they could be seen with VEC - DIC microscopy to lift off the substrate ( Fig . 7 ) . Decrease in Phosphotyrosine At Filopodial Tips Is Associated with Elongation of Filopodia After addition of hemolymph , there was a pronounced change in behavior of the filopodia at the same time that phosphotyrosine at the tips of filopodia was disappearing . As noted above , filopodia of neurons cultured in protein - free defined medium on a polylysine substrate engaged in fre - quent short elongations and retractions , resulting in little net elongation . Analysis of filopodial dynamics revealed that ad - dition of hemolymph increased the fraction of filopodia elon - gating daring a given 10 - s interval ( Table I ) . We infer from this that the addition of hemolymph increased the fraction of time the average filopodium spent elongating . To confirm this , we followed the behavior of four filopodia on one of the growth cones for 110 s before and after the addition of hemo - lymph . We found that , on average , they spent 55 % of the time elongating , 25 % retracting , and 20 % remaining sta - tionary before the addition of hemolymph , and 75 % of the time elongating , 22 . 5 % retracting , and 2 . 5 % remaining sta - tionary after hemolymph . These data on individual filopodia are similar to the population data given in Table I . In addi - tion , we found that hemolymph caused an increase in the Figure 6 . Distribution ofphosphotyro - sine in growth cones exposed to sub - strate - binding material from hemo - lymph . ( A ) Only one filopodium has a brightly stained tip ( arrowhead ) when the substrate has been preexposed to hemolymph as well as polylysine . This neuron had , like the neurons depicted in the previous figures , been cultured the previous day in protein - free defined medium , but exhibited much faster axonal growth because of the al - tered substrate . ( B ) Bright staining is absent from the tips of filopodia 6 min after the acute addition of hemolymph to neurons on a polylysine substrate . Compare the staining of the growth cones in these video micrographs with that of the growth cone in Fig . 2 b . Bar , 5 ~ m . Wu and Goldbcrg Tyrosine Phosphorylation in Filopodia 657 Figure 7 . Lifting of filopodial tips off the substrate after filopodia have been stimulated to grow by acute addition of hemolymph . Arrows point to two filopodia whose ends go out of focus in B because they have lifted off the substrate . The ends return closer to the substrate in C . There is a 10 - s interval between adjacent images . Bar , 5 # m . Table L Effects of Hemolymph and PTK Inhibitors on Filopodial Dynamics % of fllopodia Speed ( # m / min ) Length Adv Ret Stat ( # m ) Adv Ret ( n ) ( n ) ( n ) ( n ) Hemolymph Before 50 + 7 27 + 4 23 + 4 ( 4 ) 2 . 6 + 0 . 2 ( 5 ) 1 . 2 + 0 . 1 ( 30 ) 1 . 4 + 0 . 3 ( 16 ) After 73 + 3 * 20 + 4 7 + 3 ( 4 ) * 5 . 9 + 0 . 3 ( 5 ) * 2 . 2 + 0 . 2 ( 44 ) § 1 . 4 5 : 0 . 2 ( 12 ) Genistein Before 50 5 : 6 23 5 : 8 27 5 : 5 ( 4 ) 1 . 8 5 : 0 . 5 ( 5 ) 1 . 7 5 : 0 . 1 ( 30 ) 1 . 6 5 : 0 . 3 ( 14 ) After 87 5 : 7 * 8 5 : 5 5 + 3 ( 4 ) 7 . 5 + 1 . 3 ( 5 ) ~ 2 . 6 + 0 . 2 ( 52 ) ~ 3 . 1 5 : 0 . 6 ( 5 ) The dynamics of filopodia before and after either hemolymph or genistein addition were analyzed . Tip positions of 15 filopodia of each of four growth cones were measured 10 s apart before and 3 - 9 min after the addition of hemolymph and , in another four growth cones , before and 2 - 5 min after the addition of genistein . For each growth cone , the percentages of filopodia that had advanced , retracted , and remained stationary during the 10 s were determined . Data shown are means + SEM . The speeds of individual advancements and retractions in each condition were averaged to calculate the displayed means . We also determined the average lengths of filopodia in five different growth cones before and 5 - 10 rain after addition of hemolymph and , in another five growth cones , before and 5 - 10 rain after addition of genistein . Data shown are means of averaged lengths , n , number of experiments . * After treatment different from before treatment , P < 0 . 05 . P < 0 . 005 . § P < 0 . 0001 . speed of elongation of filopodia ( Table I ) . As a result of these two effects , most filopodia elongated considerably ( Fig . 8 , A and B ) . Underlying this was an elongation of the core bun - dles of actin filaments ( Fig . 8 C ) . Inhibitors of PTKs administered to growth cones on a polylysine substrate in the absence of hemolymph also caused a decrease in phosphotyrosine at filopodial tips con - comitant with filopodial lengthening . The inhibitors we Figure 8 . Elongation of filopodla and their core bundles of actin filaments when hemolymph is added acutely . VEC - DIC micrographs of a growth cone on a polylysine substrate before ( A ) and 11 rain after the addition of hemolymph ( B ) . Almost all of the filopodla have lengthened considerably . ( C ) A video fluorescence micrograph of this growth cone stained with phalloidln to visualize F - actin shows the core bundles to be as long as the filopodla , meaning that they must also have lengthened when growth was stimulated . Bars , 5 ~ m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 658 Figure 9 . Suppression of protein - tyrosine phosphorylation in the growth cone by an inhibitor of PTKs . The distribution of phos - photyrosine is assessed by video fluorescence microscopy 30 rain after the addition of genistein to neurons growing slowly on a poly - lysine substrate . Bright staining was not seen at the tips of filopodia ( arrowheads ) and is reduced throughout the growth cone . The im - age has been overexposed and contrast enhanced so that the pattern of the reduced staining could still be observed ; this also brightens the staining on the substrate . The dimness of the growth cone stain - ing is evident from its similarity to the substrate staining . Compare to Fig . 2 B . Bar , 5 / zm . used - genistein , lavendustin A , and herbimycin A - all are reported to have little effect on serine / threonine protein ki - nases at concentrations that cause profound inhibition of sev - eral PTKs ( Akiyama and Ogawara , 1991 ) . In addition , her - bimycin A has a mechanism of inhibition different from that of genistein and lavendustin A ( Fukazawa et al . , 1991 ) . As expected , there was a reduction in staining with an - tiphosphotyrosine antibody throughout the growth cone , in - cluding a large reduction at the tips of filopodia , within 30 min of the application of 100 / zM genistein ( Fig . 9 ) . No such reduction was seen in response to 100 # M genistin ( data not shown ) , a close structural analogue of genistein , which does not inhibit PTKs ( O ' Dell et al . , 1991 ) . Genistein ( Fig . 10 ; Table I ) , 10 / zM lavendustin A , and 5 / ~ M herbimycin A ( data not shown ) each caused rapid filopodial elongation within minutes ; genistin had no effect . Underlying the elongation was a lengthening of the core bundle of actin filaments of the filopodium ( Fig . 10 C ) . Removal of genistein from the cul - ture medium resulted in shortening of filopodia within minutes , though not completely back to their original lengths ( Fig . 11 ) . These reshortened filopodia had intense staining for phosphotyrosine at their tips ( data not shown ) . The lengthening caused by herbimycin A also reversed when the Figure 10 . Elongation of filopodia and their core bundles of actin filaments in response to an inhibitor of PTKs . VEC - DIC micrographs of a growth cone on a polylysine snbstrate before ( A ) and 15 min after ( B ) the addition of genistein . All of the filopodia have lengthened considerably . ( C ) A video fluorescence micrograph of this growth cone stained with phalloidin to visualize F - actin shows the core bundles to be as long as the filopodia , meaning that they must also have lengthened in response to genistein . Bars , 5 / ~ m . Figure 11 . Reversal of filopodial elongation caused by a PTK inhibitor . VEC - DIC images 1 rain before ( A ) and 11 min after ( B ) perfusion with genistein . Arrows point to filopodia waving above the substrate after rapid extension . ( C ) 5 min after removal of genistein , almost all of the filopodia have shortened considerably . Bar , 5 / zm . Wu and Goldberg Tyrosine Phosphorylation in FUopodia 659 drug was washed out ; we did not try to reverse the effects of lavendustin A . Analysis of filopodial dynamics before and several minutes after addition of genistein showed a change in dynamics similar to that seen with acute application of hemolymph : increases were seen in the fraction of filopodia elongating and the velocity during bouts of elongation ( Table I ) . Lavendustin A and , to lesser extents , genistein and her - bimycin A also caused some new filopodia to grow from the margins of the lameUipodium . Accompanying the filopodial lengthening caused by the PTK inhibitors was a forward movement of membrane - bound organelles within the body of the growth cone , which is also seen when hemolymph is ap - plied acutely ( Burmeister et al . , 1991 ) . Inhibition of PTKs caused a reduction in tyrosine phos - phorylation throughout the growth cone , not only at the tips of filopodia ( Fig . 9 ) . Is drug action on the filopodium alone sufficient to cause filopodial lengthening ? We attempted to address this question by using a micropipette to apply inhibi - tor focally . Brief pulses of pressure were used to emit small puffs of vehicle ( 0 . 5 % DMSO , 0 . 5 % Fast Green Sigma ) or vehicle containing 100 # M genistein ( the concentration used for bath application ) from a micropipette several microns away from filopodia . Puffing of vehicle resulted in no sig - nificant difference in the probability of lengthening ( at least 2 # m ) for filopodia relatively close to the micropipette com - pared with the rest of the filopodia ( 3 of 41 close filopodia lengthened , 4 of 58 other filopodia lengthened , seven growth cones ; see Materials and Methods for details of the analy - sis ) . Even when the micropipette was positioned over the growth cone and large puffs of vehicle emitted to bathe all of the filopodia ( as well as the lamellipodium ) , the average filopodial lengthening ( 0 . 03 + 0 . 03 # m / min , four growth cones ) was not significantly different from that observed in those growth cones before the approach of the micropipette ( 0 . 09 + 0 . 03 ) . Emission of puffs of genistein from mi - cropipettes several microns from the filopodia resulted , in contrast , in a significantly higher probability of lengthening for filopodia close to the micropipette compared with the rest of the filopodia ( 12 of 24 close filopodia lengthened , 5 of 48 other filopodia lengthened , six growth cones , P < 0 . 001 ) . Fig . 12 shows a particularly striking experiment in which initially only the filopodium closest to the micropipette elon - gated when puffing of genistein began , followed by lengthen - ing of its nearest neighbor ; both shortened when puffing stopped . Although these results show that genistein can fo - cally elicit filopodial lengthening , we cannot be certain that effective doses of the drug were not reaching the lamellipo - dium and thus we cannot be certain that reduction of pro - tein - tyrosine phosphorylation in the filopodium is sufficient to cause its lengthening . Discussion We have shown here that tyrosine - phosphorylated protein can be concentrated at the tips of growth cone filopodia of Aplysia neurons in culture . Though numerous pieces of re - cent evidence point to the importance of protein - tyrosine phosphorylation in axon growth ( see Introduction ) , there is little available information defining specific roles in the sub - cellular and molecular machinery of growth . Nor have specific localizations suggestive of such roles been reported . This is the first report of a localized distribution of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein within the business end of the grow - ing axon , the growth cone . The localization of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein at the tips of filopodia suggests that tyrosine phosphorylation could play a role in transducing en - vironmental cues into changes in growth cone behavior . In support of this suggestion , we also report here that the phos - phorylation is regulated by an environmental cue that changes filopodial dynamics . Significance of Filopodial Tips The tip of the filopodium is an intriguing place to find a large amount of tyrosine - phosphorylated protein . The growth cone is the most important part of the axon in determining the rate and direction of growth , and the filopodium is proba - bly the most important part of the growth cone in detecting the environmental cues that guide the axon . Filopodia in - crease markedly in number when growth cones of develop - ing axons reach points in vivo where a choice must be made among potential pathways ( Tosney and Landmesser , 1985 ; Bovolenta and Mason , 1987 ) . The importance of filopodia in pathfinding has been documented most thoroughly in the grasshopper . Pioneer axons ( the first in an area ) growing through the developing leg towards the central nervous sys - tem are guided by interactions of filopodia with specific guidepost cells ( Bentley and Candy , 1983 ; Candy and Bent - ley , 1986 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . In some places , contact of a single filopodium with the guidepost cell reorients the axon ( Candy and Bentley , 1986 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . When the formation of filopodia is suppressed by the use of cytochalasin , the pioneer axon grows in a disoriented fashion ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ) . The efficacy of sin - gle filopodia in steering has been seen in vitro as well , where it was shown that the neurite of a chick sensory neuron would grow across a band of inhospitable substrate when a filopo - dium first extended over that band to contact a favorable sub - strate ( Hammarback and Letourneau , 1986 ) . Axonal path - finding is mediated by negative as well as positive interactions of the growth cone with environmental cues ( Patterson , 1988 ) , and here , also , contact of a filopodium with the cue can produce the effect : freezing and then collapse of the growth cone occurs ( Bandtlow et al . , 1990 ) . The tip of the filopodium may be particularly important . First , it is often the distal part of the filopodium that makes contact with the environmental cue , and this contact can be sufficient to reorient growth towards a positive cue ( Ham - marback and Letourneau , 1986 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) or stop growth in response to a negative cue ( Bandtlow et al . , 1990 ) . Second , the tip may be specialized to interact with the environment . The filopodia of chick retinal neurons in culture attach to the substrate and other cells preferentially at their tips , and this adhesion seems to be mediated by fine fbrils that project from the tip ( Tsui et al . , 1985 ) . The filopo - dium of the grasshopper pioneer neuron sometimes in - vaginates deeply into a guidepost cell , so that a considerable length of the filopodium is making contact , yet only directly opposite the tip do coated vesicles form in the guidepost cell ( Bastiani and Goodman , 1984 ) . Lastly , actin subunits are probably preferentially added at the distal tip of the filopodial core bundle of filaments . This would be expected from the orientation of the filaments . Most probably have their " barbed " ends at the tip ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) ; this is usually the preferred end for addi - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 660 Figure 12 . Local effect of an inhibitor of PTKs on filo - podia . ( A ) A microelectrode filled with genistein ( top right corner ) is positioned several microns away from a growth cone on a polylysine sub - strate , without positive pres - sure being applied . ( B ) 1 min later , with positive pressure still off , there has been very little movement of filopodia . This growth cone was selected because its filopodia displayed relatively little spontaneous length changes , thus simplify - ing the interpretation of the experiment . Movement of filopodia can he assessed by comparison with numerous stationary particles on the substrate . ( C ) 54 s later , the microelectrode has just been moved closer to the growth cone and brief ( 4 - ms ) pulses of positive pressure are being applied repetitively ( 2 Hz ) to the microelectrode to emit puffs of genistein ( starting a few seconds before the image was taken ) . The puffs are visualized by the inclusion of Fast Green with the genistein , but cannot be seen in these single frames . A rapid bath perfusion of drug - free medi - um rapidly sweeps the emitted drug to the right . There has been essentially no movement of filopodia in the interval be - tween this and the preceding image . ( D ) The filopodium closest to the puffs ( filled ar - row ) has begun to elongate in the 20 - s interval between this and the preceding image . The arrowhead denotes a filopo - dial nub next to the growing filopodium , which does not elongate during drug applica - tion . ( E ) The filopodium has grown more during the next 20 s as the puffing continues . In addition , a shorter filopo - dium next to it ( open arrow ) has started to grow . ( F ) Both filopodia have continued to grow as puffing has continued during the next 29 s . No other filopodia on the growth cone have grown appreciably dur - ing the drug application . ( G ) Positive pressure was turned off 1 rain before this image was taken . Both filopodia that were growing during drug application have started to shorten . ( H ) The longer filopodium continues to shorten during the 90 - s interval between this and the previous image . Both fdopodia that had grown have returned nearly to their original lengths . Other filopodia of the growth cone have not changed length substantially . Bar , 5 # m . Wu and Goldberg Tyrosine Phosphorylation in Filopodia 661 tion of subunits ( Pollard and Cooper , 1986 ) . Confirmation of the preferential addition of subunits to the tip has come from two types of experiment . Monomeric actin microin - jected into mouse sensory neurons and PC12 cells in culture first appears incorporated into the filopodial core bundles at the distal tips ( Okabe and Hirokawa , 1991 ) . Also , after cytochalasin has caused the withdrawal of the peripheral ac - tin network of the Aplysia growth cone , F - actin first appears at the distal margin of the growth cone upon drug washout ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . Preferential addition of actin subunits at the distal tip implicates this as a key site of control of the length of the filament bundle and thus , presumably , of the filopodium . Signaling Mechanisms in the Filopodium It is not understood how the interaction of the filopodium with most environmental cues produces a change in growth cone behavior . It has been suggested that tight adhesion and the subsequent production of tension by filopodia causes trailing materials to move forward ( Bray and Chapman , 1985 ; Heidemann et al . , 1990 ) and that asymmetric pulling causes turning ( Bray , 1982 ) . Reorientation of axonal growth away from multiple adherent filopodia towards the direction of a single filopodium has suggested the involvement of bio - chemical signaling events in addition to , or instead of , such mechanical events ( Caudy and Bentley , 1986 ) . The paralysis and collapse of growth cones upon contact of a filopodium with a negative cue ( Bandtlow et al . , 1990 ) is also suggestive of biochemical or ionic signaling events . The only such sig - naling event so far demonstrated to operate in filopodia in response to an environmental cue is an increase in Ca2 + i in response to certain neurotransmitters ( Davenport et al . , 1993 ) . Our results here establish tyrosine phosphorylation as another potential signaling mechanism in the filopodium . It should be emphasized that tyrosine phosphorylation could participate in a strictly mechanical transduction of an en - vironmental cue by the filopodium ; for example , it could regulate the linking of a membrane receptor occupied by a substrate - bound ligand to the bundle of actin filaments in the filopodinm . We have shown that , in the Aplysia growth cone in culture , the tyrosine phosphorylation in the filopodium is responsive to an environmental cue , substrate - binding material of Aplysia hemolymph , that alters the dynamics of the filopo - dium . Growth cones rapidly respond to this material by reducing the amount of phosphotyrosine in the tips of the filopodia . The substrate - binding material in Aplysia hemo - lymph and ganglion - conditioned medium is uncharacter - ized , other than as a protein > 100 kD ( Goldberg et al . , 1991 ) . Because there may be multiple W - sensitive proteins of hemolymph that bind to the polylysine substrate , it is pos - sible that the change in filopodial dynamics and the reduction in phosphotyrosine at the tips of filopodia are not caused by the same protein . We think this unlikely because reduction of phosphotyrosine by application of inhibitors of PTKs caused a similar change in dynamics . There is recent prece - dent for rapid tyrosine dephosphorylation in the growth cone being caused by substrate - binding , neurite growth - promot - ing proteins . Soluble fragments of neural cell adhesion mole - cule and L1 cause tyrosine dephosphorylation of tubulin in plasma membranes of growth cone particles obtained by fractionation of embryonic rat brain ( Atashi et al . , 1992 ) . The functional significance , if any , of this is unknown , and tubulin is not the sole target for tyrosine dephosphorylation . Role of l ~ yrosine Phosphorylation in the Filopodium It seems likeliest that tyrosine - phosphorylated protein at the tips of the Aplysia filopodia has a role associated with the ac - tin filaments of the core bundle . These filaments comprise the major intracellular feature of the filopodium ( Letourneau and Ressler , 1983 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) , and the rapid rearward movement of the phosphorylated protein when the actin network is induced to withdraw by applica - tion of cytochalasin ( Fig . 5 ) implies an interaction of the pro - tein with the network . It also suggests that the tyrosine - phosphorylated protein is inside the filopodium rather than in the plasma membrane , since the 2A1 membrane anti - gen has been shown to remain concentrated at the edge of embryonic mouse growth cones after treatment with cyto - chalasin ( Sheetz et al . , 1990 ) . We suspect that the tyrosine - phosphorylated protein is a component of the subplasmalem - real Triton - insoluble globular material in which the distal ends of filopodial actin filaments appear to be embedded in electron micrographs of growth cones ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . What role in regulating the actin filaments of the filopo - dium might be played by protein - tyrosine phosphorylation ? Three possible roles of tyrosine phosphorylation are sug - gested to us by its location in the filopodlum . One possibility is that tyrosine phosphorylation regulates the linkage , via ac - cessory proteins , of the actin filaments to membrane recep - tors mediating adhesion to the substrate or a cell . This is suggested by the fact that large concentrations of phos - photyrosine have previously been found only at the adherens junction ( Maher et al . , 1985 ; Tarone et al . , 1985 ; Takata and Singer , 1988 ; Tsukita et al . , 1990 , which resembles the tip of the filopodium in being the point of termination of a bun - dle of actin filaments ( Burridge et al . , 1988 ) . Such a role is not in evidence in our experiments , because our microscopic data demonstrate the heavily phosphorylated tips to be nonadherent ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) ; nor do they become adherent upon dephosphorylation ( Fig . 7 ) . A second possibility is that tyrosine phosphorylation regulates the bundling of aodn fila - ments . There is evidence that bundles of actin filaments ho - mologous to those of the growth cone filopodium form in motile fibroblasts by an initial coalescence of the ends of fila - ments at the membrane ( Izzard , 1988 ) . Talin , which is a con - stituent of the focal contact ( and is a substrate for tyrosine phosphorylation Kellie et al . , 1991 ) , is concentrated at the ends of these bundles even in the absence of contact with the substrate ( DePasquale and Izzard , 1991 ) . It was therefore suggested that talin functions in coalescing the filament ends ( DePasquale and Izzard , 1991 ) . We have no information relevant to the possible involvement of tyrosine phosphoryla - tion at the tips of filopodia in coalescence of the ends of the actin filaments . A third possible role for tip phosphorylation is in regu - lating the length of actin filaments in the bundle . As dis - cussed above , actin is preferentially incorporated into fila - ments of the filopodium at the tip , so this should be a key site for regulation of filament dynamics . We showed that re - duction of phosphotyrosine at the tip coincided with length - ening of the filopodium ( and its core bundle of actin fila - ments ) when the growth cone responded acutely to alteration The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 662 of the substrate . We also showed that application of inhibi - tors of FTKs caused a reduction of tip phosphorylation ac - companied by lengthening of the filopodium . The fact that filopodia shortened rapidly on removal of the inhibitors ar - gues that tyrosine dephosphorylation shifts the intrinsic bal - ance between lengthening and shortening of the filament bundle towards lengthening , rather than removing an exter - nal impediment to lengthening such as attachment to the substrate , for shortening would not be expected to occur if the latter were true . Thus , these data indicate an association between reduction in tip phospborylation and filopodial lengthening and raise the possibility that the dephosphoryla - tion is involved in causing the lengthening . However , we can - not rule out the possibility that filopodial lengthening is secondarily caused by primary effects elsewhere in the growth cone of hemolymph and PTK inldbitors . Identifica - tion of the phosphorylated protein ( or proteins ) at the tips of filopodia and presentation of immobilized dephosphorylat - ing agents to individual filopodia could clarify this issue . Conclusion By projecting out from the obscuring scrim of phosphotyro - sine staining in the body of the growth cone , having a well - defined consistent internal cytoskeletal structure , and being an observable entity before and after treatment with FIX in - hibitors or growth - promoting material , the filopodium is an informative location to detect a focal concentration of phos - photyrosine . From a cell biological perspective , this work shows that tyrosine - phosphorylated protein can be concen - trated at the barbed ends of actin filaments in a context other than an adherens junction , and indicates an association be - tween changes in phosphorylation and changes in filament dynamics . From a neurobiological perspective , it provides evidence for tyrosine phosphorylation as a signaling mecha - nism in the filopodium that can respond to environmental cues controlling growth cone dynamics and therefore sug - gests one way in which tyrosine phosphorylation may be involved in axonal pathfinding during development and regeneration . We are grateful to Dr . Don Burmeister for assistance in confocal micros - copy and image processing , to Drs . Burmeister , Peter Danilo , and Michael Rosen for helpful discussions , to Drs . Burmeister and Lloyd Greene for critical readings of the manuscript , and to Ms . Yvette Francis and Mr . Vic - tor Santos for excellent technical assistance . D . Y . Wu was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) training grant MH15174 and NIH fellowship NS09225 . Additional support for the work was provided by NIH research grant NS25161 . Received for publication 2 March 1993 and in revised form 4 August 1993 . References Akiyama , T . , and H . Ogawara . 1991 . Use and specificity of genistein as inhibi - tor of protein - tyrosine klnaseS . Methods Enzymol . 201 : 362 - 370 . Alen ~ , S . , P . Cesalbore , E . Agustini , and F . Tag6 . 1985 . Differentiation of PC12 pbeochromecytoma cells induced by v - src oncogene . Nature ( Lond . ) . 316 : 557 - 559 . Atashi , J . R . , S . G . Klinz , C . A . Ingraham , W . T . Marten , M . Schachner , and P . F . Maness . 1992 . Neural cell adhesion molecules modulate tyrosine phos - phorylation of tubulin in nerve growth cone membranes . Neuron . 8 : 831 - 842 . Bandtlow , C . , T . Zachieder , and M . E . Schwab . 1990 . Oligodendrocytes arrest neurite growth by contact inhibition . J . Neurosci . 10 : 3837 - 3848 . Bare , D . L , J . M . Lander , M . B . Wilkie , and P . F . Maness . 1993 . p59fyn in rat brain is localized in developing axonal tracts and subpopulations of adult neurons and gila . Oncogene . 8 : 1429 - 1436 . Bastiani , M . J . , and C . S . Goodman . 1984 . Neuronal growth cones : specific interactions mediated by filopodial insertion and induction of coated vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 1849 - 1853 . Bentley , D . , and M . Caudy . 1983 . Pioneer axons lose directed growth after selective killing of guidepost cells . Nature ( Lond . ) . 304 : 62 - 65 . Bentley , D . , and A . Toroian - Raymond . 1986 . Disoriented pathfinding by pi - oneer neurone growth cones deprived of filopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature ( Lond . ) . 323 : 712 - 715 . Bixby , J . L . , and P . Jhabvala . 1992 . Inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation potentiates substrate - induced neurite growth . J . Neurobiol . 23 : 468 - 480 . Bovoletua , P . , and C . Mason . 1987 . Growth cone morphology varies with posi - tion in the developing mouse visual pathway from retina to first targets . J . Neurosci . 7 : 1447 - 1460 . Bray , D . 1982 . Fllopodial contraction and growth cone guidance . In Cell Be - havior . R . Bellalrs , A . Curtis , and O . Duan , editors . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . 299 - 317 . Bray , D . , and K . Chapman . 1985 . Analysis of microspike movements on the neuronal growth cone . J . Neurosci . 5 : 3204 - 3213 . Burmeister , D . W . , R . . Rivas , and D . J . Goldberg . 1991 . Substrate - bound factors stimulate engurgement of growth cone lamellipodia during neurite elongation . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 19 : 255 - 268 . Burridge , K . , K . Fath , T . Kelly , G . Nuckolls , andC . Turner . 1988 . Focal adhe - sions : transmembrane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 4 : 487 - 525 . Candy , M . , and D . Bentley . 1986 . Pioneer growth cone steering along a series of neuronal and non - neuronal cues of different affinities . J . Neurosci , 6 : 1781 - 1795 . Davenport , R . W . , P . Dou , V . Rehder , and S . B . Kater . 1993 . A sensory role for neuronal growth cone filopodia . Nature ( Lond . ) . 361 : 721 - 724 . DePasquale , J . A . , and C . S . Izzard . 1991 . Accumulation of talin in nodes at the edge of the lamellipodium and separate incorporation into adhesion plaques at focal contacts in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 1351 - 1359 . Elkins , T . , K . Zinn , L . McAllister , F . M . Hoffmann , and C . S . Goodman . 1990 . Genetic analysis of a Drosophila neural cell adhesion molecule : inter - action of fasciclin I and Abelson tyrosine kinase mutations . Cell . 60 : 565 - 575 . Forschar , P . , and S . J . Smith . 1988 . Actions of cytochalasins on the organiza - tion of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 1505 - 1516 . Forscher , P . , L . K . Kaczmarek , J . Buchanan , and S . Smith . 1987 . Cyclic AMP induces changes in distribution and transport of organelles within growth cones of Aplysia bag cell neurons . J . Neurosci . 7 : 3600 - 3611 . Fukazawa , H . , P . - M . Li , C . Yamamoto , Y . Murakami , S . Mizuno , andY . Ue - hara . 1991 . Specific inhibition of cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinages by herbimycin A in vitro . Biochem . Pharmacol . 42 : 1661 - 1671 . Goldberg , D . J . 1991 . Culturing the large neurons of Aplysfa . In Culturing Nerve Cells . G . Banker and K . Goslin , editors . MIT , Cambridge , MA . 155 - 175 . Goldberg , D . J . , and D . W . Burmeister . 1986 . Stages in axon formation : obser - vations of growth of Aplysia axons in culture using videe - enhanced con - trast - differetuial interference contrast microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1921 - 1931 . Goldberg , D . J . , and D . W . Burmeister . 1989 . Looking into growth cones . Trends Neurosci . 12 : 503 - 506 . Goldberg , D . J . , D . W . Burmeister , andR . J . Rivas . 1991 . Video microscopic analysis of events in the growth cone underlying axon growth and the regula - tion of these events by subswate - bunnd proteins . In The Nerve Growth Cone . P . C . Letourneau , S . B . Kater , and E . R . Macagno , editors . Raven Press , New York . 79 - 95 . Hammarback , I . A . , and P . C . Letourneau . 1986 . Neurite extension across regions of low cell - substratum adhesivity : implications for the guidepost hy - pothesis of axonal pathtinding . Dev . B / ol . 117 : 655 - 662 . Hariharan , I . K . , P . - T . Chuang , and G . M . Rubin . 1991 . Cloning and charac - terization of a receptor - class phosphotyrosine phosphatase gene expressed on central nervous system axons in Drosophila melanogaster . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 11266 - 11270 . Heidemann , S . R . , P . Lamoureux , and R . E . Buxbaum . 1990 . Growth cone be - havior and production of traction force . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1949 - 1957 . Howard , P . K . , B . M . Sefton , and R . A . Firtel . 1993 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of actin in Dictyostelium associated with cell - shape changes . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 259 : 241 - 244 . Izzard , C . S . 1988 . A precursor of the focal contact in cultured fibroblasts . Cell Motil . C ~ toskeleton . 10 : 137 - 142 . Kapfhammer , J . P . , and J . A . Raper . 1987 . Collapse of growth cone structure on contact with specific neurites in culture . J . Neurosci . 7 : 201 - 212 . Kellie , S . , A . R . Horvath , and M . A . Elmore . 1991 . Cytoskeleton targets for oncogenic tyrosine kinases . J . Cell Sci . 99 : 207 - 211 . Lamballe , F . , R . Klein , and M . Barbacid . 1991 . trkC , a new member of the irk family of tyrosine protein kinases , is a receptor for neurotrophin - 3 . Cell . 66 : 967 - 979 . Letourneau , P . C . , and A . H . Ressler . 1983 . Differences in the organization of actin in the growth cones compared with the neurites of cultured neurons from chick embryos . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 963 - 973 . Lewis , A . K . , and P . C . Bridgman . 1992 . Nerve growth cone lamellipodia con - tain two populations of actin filaments that differ in organization and polarity . J . Cell Biol , 119 : 1219 - 1243 . Loeb , D . M . , J . Maragus , D . Martin - Zanca , M . V . Chao , L . F . Pareda , and L . A . Greene . 1991 . The irk proto - oncogene rescues NGF responsiveness Wu and Goidberg ~ rosine Phosphorylation in Filopodia 663 in mutant NGF - nonresponsive PCI2 cell lines . Cell . 66 : 961 - 966 . Maher , P . A . 1988 . Nerve growth factor induces protein - tyrosine phosphoryla - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 6788 - 6791 . Maher , P . A . , E . B . Pasquale , Y . J . Wang , and S . J . Singer . 1985 . Phosphotyrosine - contaiuing proteins arc concentrated in focal adhesions and intercellular junctions in normal cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 82 : 6576 - 6580 . Maness , P . F . , M . Aubry , C . G . Shores , L . Frame , and K . H . Pfenninger . 1988 . e - src gene product in developing rat brain is enriched in nerve growth cone membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 5001 - 5005 . Matten , W . T . , M . Aubry , J . West , and P . F . Maness . 1990 . Tuhulin is phos - phorylated at tyrosine by pp60 ~ - ~ in nerve growth cone membranes . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1959 - 1970 . Miller , D . R . , G . M . Lee , and P . F . Maness . 1993 . Increased neurite outgrowth induced by inhibition of protein tyrosine kinase activity in PC12 pheochromocytoma cells . J . Neurochem . 60 : 2134 - 2144 . O ' Connor , T . P . , J . S . Duerr , and D . Bentley . 1990 . Pioneer growth cone steer - ing decisions mediated by single filopodial contacts in situ . J . Neurosci . 10 : 3935 - 3946 . O ' DelI , T . J . , E . R . Kandel , and S . G . N . Grant . 1991 . Long - term potentiation in the hippocampus is blocked by tyrosine kinase inhibitors . Nature ( Lond . ) . 353 : 558 - 560 . Okabe , S . , and N . Hirokawa . 1991 . Actin dynamics in growth cones . J . Neu - rosci . I 1 : 1918 - 1929 . Patterson , P . H . 1988 . On the importance of being inhibited , or saying no to growth cones . Neuron . 1 : 263 - 267 . Pollard , T . D . , and J . A . Cooper . 1986 . Actin and actin - binding proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 55 : 987 - 1035 . Rivas , R . J . , D . W . Burmeister , and D . J . Goldberg . 1992 . Rapid effects of laminin on the growth cone . Neuron . 8 : 107 - 115 . Schanen - King , C . , A . Nel , L . K . Williams , and G . Landreth . 1991 . Nerve growth factor stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of MAP2 kinase in PC12 cells . Neuron . 6 : 915 - 922 . Sheetz , M . P . , N . L . Baumrind , D . B . Wayne , and A . L . Pearlman . 1990 . Con - centration of membrane antigens by forward transport and trapping in neu - ronal growth cones . Cell . 61 : 231 - 241 . Squinto , S . P . , T . N . SilK , T . H . Aldrich , S . Davis , S . M . Bianco , C . Rad - ziejewski , D . J . Glass , P . Masiakowski , M . E . Furth , D . M . Valenzuela , P . S . DiStefano , and G . D . Yancopoulos . 1991 . trkB encodes a functional receptor for brain - derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin - 3 but not nerve growth factor . Cell . 65 : 885 - 893 . Takata , K . , and S . J . Singer . 1988 . Phosphotyrosine - modified proteins are con - centrated at the membranes of epithelial and endothelial cells during tissue development in chick embryos . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1757 - 1764 . Tarone , G . , D . Cirillo , F . G . Giancotti , P . M . Comoglio , and P . C . Marchisio . 1985 . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at dis - crete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp . Cell Res . 159 : 141 - 157 . Tian , S . - S . , P . Tsoulfas , and K . Zinn . 1991 . Three receptor - linked pro - tcin - tyrosine phosphatases are selectively expressed on central nervous sys - tem axons in the Drosophila embryo . Cell . 67 : 675 - 685 . Tosney , K . W . , and L . T . Landmesser . 1985 . Growth cone morphology and trajectory in the lumbosacral region of the chick embryo . J . Neurosci . 5 : 2345 - 2358 . Tsui , H . - C . T . , K . L . Lankford , and W . L . Klein . 1985 . Differentiation of neu - ronal growth cones : specialization of filopodial tips for adhesive interactions . Proe . Natl . Aead . Sei . USA . 82 : 8256 - 8260 . Tsukita , S . , K . Oishi , T . Akiyama , T . Yamanashi , T . Yamamoto , and S . Tsu - kita . 1991 . Specific proto - oncogenic tyrosinc kinases of src family are en - riched in cell - to - cell adhereus junctions where the level of tyrosine phos - phorylation is elevated . J . Cell Biol . I13 : 867 - 879 . Vcttcr , M . L . , D . Martin - Zanca , L . F . Parada , J . M . Bishop , and D . R . Kaplan . 1991 . Nerve growth factor rapidly stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of phospholipase C - - ~ I by a kinase activity associated with the product of the trk protooncogcnc . Proc . Natl . Aead . Sci . USA . 88 : 5650 - 5654 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 664