Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? An Experimental Test of Prospect Theory Under MPs Citation for published version ( APA ) : Linde , J . , & Vis , B . ( 2017 ) . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? An Experimental Test of Prospect Theory Under MPs . Political Psychology , 38 ( 1 ) , 101 - 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / pops . 12335 Document status and date : Published : 01 / 02 / 2017 DOI : 10 . 1111 / pops . 12335 Document Version : Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Please check the document version of this publication : • A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer - review . There can be important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record . People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication , or visit the DOI to the publisher ' s website . • The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review . • The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume , issue and page numbers . Link to publication General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal . If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act , indicated by the “Taverne” license above , please follow below link for the End User Agreement : www . umlib . nl / taverne - license Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at : repository @ maastrichtuniversity . nl providing details and we will investigate your claim . Download date : 08 Jul . 2019 Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? An Experimental Test of Prospect Theory Under MPs Jona Linde Maastricht University Barbara Vis Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam Political psychologists have been quick to use prospect theory in their work , realizing its potential for explaining decisions under risk . Applying prospect theory to political decision - making is not without problems , though , and here we address two of these : ( 1 ) Does prospect theory actually apply to political decision - makers , or are politicians unlike the rest of us ? ( 2 ) Which dimension do politicians use as their reference point when there are multiple dimensions ( e . g . , votes and policy ) ? We address both problems in an experiment with a unique sample of Dutch members of parliament as participants . We use well - known ( incentivized ) decision situations and newly developed hypothetical political decision - making scenarios . Our results indicate that politicians’ deviate from expected utility theory in the direction predicted by prospect theory but that these deviations are somewhat smaller than those of other people . Votes appear to be a more important determinant of politicians’ reference point than is policy . KEY WORDS : prospect theory , reﬂection effect , probability weighting , politicians , experiment , elite decision - making Over the past decades , psychologists and behavioral economists have produced an extensive body of research demonstrating that people deviate systematically from the predictions of expected utility theory by falling prey to decision - making biases ( see , e . g . , Camerer , 2003 ; Starmer , 2000 ) . These ﬁndings are relevant for political scientists , since expected utility theory is the basis of rational choice—still a , or even the , dominant approach in many ﬁelds of political science ( e . g . , Bueno de Mesquita , 1981 ; Mearsheimer , 2001 ; for a recent discussion on the usefulness of rational choice theory , see Hug , 2014 ) . Two of the most prominent deviations from expected utility theory are probability weighting and the reﬂection effect ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1981 ) . Probability weighting implies that people do not treat probabilities linearly and are very sensitive to the possibility of ensuring a sure outcome . The reﬂection effect means that peoples’ risk attitudes are inﬂuenced by whether outcomes are framed as gains or losses : for losses they are generally risk taking , but for gains they are risk averse . Prospect theory ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1992 ) is a theory of decision - making under risk and uncertainty that incorporates the body of research demonstrating deviations from expected utility theory . The choice regularities incorporated in prospect theory have been conﬁrmed 101 0162 - 895X V C 2016 The Authors . Political Psychology published by Wiley Periodicals , Inc . on behalf of International Society of Political Psychology . 350 Main Street , Malden , MA 02148 , USA , 9600 Garsington Road , Oxford , OX4 2DQ , and PO Box 378 Carlton South , 3053 Victoria , Australia This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License , which permits use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes . Political Psychology , Vol . 38 , No . 1 , 2017 doi : 10 . 1111 / pops . 12335 bs _ bs _ banner by numerous studies ( Starmer , 2000 ) , mostly using student samples . However , behavior in line with prospect theory has also been conﬁrmed for the general population ( Booij , van Praag , & van de Kuilen , 2009 ) , military decision - makers ( Haerem , Kuvaas , Bakken , & Karlsen , 2011 ) , physicians ( McNeil , Pauker , Sox , & Tversky , 1982 ) , patients ( Eraker & Sox , 1981 ) , and tax payers ( Chang , Nichols , & Schultz , 1987 ) . Prospect theory also explains many real - world examples of deviations from expected utility theory ( Camerer , 2003 ) . Political psychologists have been quick to incorporate insights from prospect theory , especially the reﬂection effect , in their work ( Levy , 2003 ; McDermott , 2004 ; Mercer , 2005 ; Vis , 2011 ) . 1 Exam - ples include studies of when governments pursue electorally risky reforms ( Vis , 2010 ; Vis & Van Kersbergen , 2007 ) , why individuals participate in collective action ( Fanis , 2004 ) , when states use extensive resources to resolve trade disputes with limited potential beneﬁts ( Elms , 2004 ) , why some Latin American leaders pursue painful neoliberal adjustments ( Weyland , 2002 ) , and why some demo - cratic leaders engage in international conﬂicts ( McDermott , 1998 ; Taliaferro , 2004 ) . These and other applications notwithstanding , prospect theory’s impact in political science has been limited . This may be because of the potential problems that arise when applying prospect theory to political decision - making ( Levy , 2003 ; Mercer , 2005 ) . Our study addresses two of these problems . The ﬁrst and main problem we focus on is prospect theory’s applicability to decisions by politi - cians . Prospect theory has been developed based on experiments with as participants students or , less often , members of the general population . But does the evidence for prospect theory also hold for pol - iticians ? Based on existing studies , the answer to this question is inconclusive . In this study , we there - fore test this question directly . The studies in political psychology we mentioned earlier typically suggest that prospect theory is applicable to politicians because it can explain political phenomena that expected util - ity theory cannot explain . However , because politicians may differ substantially from the gen - eral population , prospect theory could also not be applicable to politicians . First , politicians face decisions with uncertain outcomes on a regular basis and , without making any normative judgment , this makes them experienced in these types of decisions . Whether experienced decision - makers are also more likely to behave in line with expected utility theory is an open question though . Some studies ﬁnd they are ( List , 2004 ) , while others demonstrate they are not ( Fr (cid:2) echette , 2009 ) . Second , politicians are a very select group ; selected by themselves ( Mattozzi & Merlo , 2008 ) , their party ( Rahat , 2007 ) , and the electorate ( Besley , 2005 ) . They are selected based on certain characteristics , which possibly differ from the average person’s . This process could select good decision - makers who may be less likely to violate a normative decision - making theory such as expected utility theory . Third , a few studies that examine politicians’ attitudes toward risk directly suggest that these attitudes differ from those of the general popula - tion ( Fatas , Neugebauer , & Tamborero , 2007 ; Hess , von Scheve , Schupp , & Wagner , 2013 ) . Thus , while the success of prospect theory in explaining political phenomena suggests that pros - pect theory accurately describes politicians’ decision - making , the studies on expert decision - makers suggest it may not . However , none of these studies provides direct evidence of prospect theory’s applicability to politicians . To directly test the competing expectations , we need an experimental design that is similar to existing studies—and thereby able to establish prospect theory’s applicabil - ity—yet includes the “right” participants : politicians . Our experimental design does exactly this . 2 This design contributes to existing observational studies applying prospect theory since the latter cannot irrefutably demonstrate causal effects . Such studies show that prospect theory can explain an observed pattern , but they cannot assess if the behavior predicted by prospect theory is the causal effect 1 Political scientists focus mainly on the value function proposed by prospect theory instead of on probability weight - ing . Both probability weighting and the value function predict the reﬂection effect . 2 For details , see below and the online supporting information which is also available at www . highriskpolitics . org . 102 Linde and Vis ( Palfrey , 2009 ) . Our experiment instead provides direct evidence on prospect theory’s applicability to political decision - making by examining politicians’ decisions in a controlled environment . The second problem of applying prospect theory to political decision - making relates to the identi - ﬁcation of the reference point . Determining the reference point is always challenging because a theory of the reference point is absent ( Boettcher III , 2004 ; Levy , 1997 ) . But with outcomes in multiple dimensions , as is typically the case in political decision - making ( e . g . , a booming economy [ gain ] ver - sus an unsuccessful military intervention [ loss ] ) , determining the reference point is particularly chal - lenging . Behavioral decision research demonstrates that individuals ﬁnd making decisions with outcomes in multiple dimensions difﬁcult ( Renshon & Renshon , 2008 , p . 517 ) , not least emotionally ( i . e . , how to sacriﬁce one value / issue over another ? ) . Two important dimensions for politicians are the electoral dimension and the policy dimension ( Harmel & Janda , 1994 ; M € uller & Strøm , 1999 ) . Without a theory of the reference point , it is impossi - ble to predict whether a politician is more likely to take a risk - taking decision or a risk - averse one when she faces a loss in one dimension ( e . g . , an economic crisis ) and a gain in another ( e . g . , gaining seats in the polls ) . Two of our decision problems examine whether politicians reveal a reﬂection effect in the vote or economic policy outcomes dimension . A third problem explores which of these dimen - sions dominates when decisions have consequences in terms of both votes and economic policy outcomes . The participants in our experiment come from a unique sample of Dutch parliamentarians ( MPs , members of the lower chamber , de Tweede Kamer , n 5 46 , i . e . , 30 % of all parliamentarians ) , for which we collected data . The Dutch case lends itself well for testing whether politicians’ decision - making is in line with prospect theory . The speciﬁcs of the Dutch political system , such as its nation - wide party - list system and the high degree of proportionality , make it so that MPs do not need to be concerned with individual constituencies . This makes our experiment as clean as possible . Perhaps more importantly , MPs in the Netherlands are selected primarily by the party leadership . Such leaders have an incentive to select “experts , ” who would presumably be more likely to act in accordance with normative theories on decision - making such as expected utility theory . This makes the Dutch case a difﬁcult case to ﬁnd support for prospect theory . Given that existing work demonstrates that prospect theory’s predictions hold in a variety of Western democracies ( Post , Van den Assem , Baltussen , & Thaler , 2008 ; Shen & Chih , 2005 ) —but not necessarily in other contexts ( such as China , see Brumagim and Xianhua 2005 ) —our ﬁndings should be generalizable to other Western democracies . To assess whether our experimental design results in the well - established ﬁndings on prospect theory , we have also run the experiment with a student sample ( n 5 176 , see Appendix E in the online sup - porting information ) . The results of our experiment with the student sample are generally in line with existing ﬁndings . Our main ﬁndings are that politicians exhibit the reﬂection effect , avoiding risk when outcomes are ( framed as ) gains and taking risks when outcomes are ( framed as ) losses , although we do not ﬁnd this in all hypothetical political decision - making scenarios . We also ﬁnd suggestive evidence for the weighting of probabilities . However , politicians do not exhibit another common deviation from expected utility theory , the common ratio effect . These ﬁndings increase our understanding of the microfoundations of political actors’ decision - making under conditions of risk . Since most articles in political science using prospect theory base their hypotheses on the reﬂection effect , our article strengthens the validity of these studies’ ﬁndings . At the same time , our results suggest some caution when applying other predictions of prospect theory directly to political decision - making . The rest of this article is structured as follows . First , we discuss the main deviations from expected utility theory we focus on : probability weighting and the reﬂection effect . Next , we discuss existing studies’ ﬁndings on risky decision - making by politicians . Subsequently , we present our empirical design and results . The last section concludes . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 103 Deviations From Expected Utility Theory : Probability Weighting and Reﬂection Effect Although risk has several meanings in everyday language , for example as a close synonym for danger , in decision theory the risk of an option is the degree of uncertainty about a decision’s out - come . This risk is most commonly measured by the outcome’s variance . A choice is deﬁned as risk taking ( averse ) if for two options with an equal expected value the decision - maker prefers the option with the higher ( lower ) variance . Risk is clearly important in political decision - making since politi - cians can hardly ever be sure about their actions’ consequences . Examples include questions like : Will a new economic stimulus plan have the desired effect ? Will a foreign intervention succeed ? Will a new policy platform attract more votes ? Expected utility and prospect theory are the two most popular theories on decision - making under risk . Whereas expected utility theory prescribes how people should behave if they want to fulﬁll a number of attractive axioms , prospect theory aims to describe how people do behave . Expected utility is used as a descriptive theory as well , but ample evidence has shown that it fails in this respect ( Starmer , 2000 ) . Expected utility theory’s prescriptions imply that people should make consistent choices , while prospect theory aims to explain why people deviate systematically from these prescriptions . In expected utility theory , a ( risky ) option’s expected utility is the sum of each possible out - come’s utility multiplied by the probability of the outcome’s occurrence . Consequently , preferences are independent of the circumstances ; only the outcomes’ probabilities and their utility matter ; and probabilities have a linear effect on the option’s value . The shape of the utility function fully deter - mines decision - makers’ preferences toward risk : they are risk averse ( taking ) when utility is concave ( convex ) in terms of outcomes . Concave utility implies that each additional unit of a good is less valu - able than the last , for example , an extra apple is more valuable when you only have one apple than if you have two . This diminishing marginal value , or the shape of the utility function , deﬁnes risk atti - tudes in expected utility theory . Prospect theory , conversely , indicates that risk attitudes are not only determined by the out - comes’ utility but also by the reference point’s location and through probability weighting . Our experiment focuses on these behavioral regularities . Probability weighting means that , unlike in expected utility theory , the effect of an outcome’s probability on an option’s perceived value is not linear . Particularly , small probabilities ( generally p < 0 . 33 , see Wakker , 2010 , pp . 203 – 206 ) are overweighed and large probabilities are underweighted . Intuitively the idea behind this is that small deviations from absolute certainty ( either 0 % or 100 % chance ) have a large impact on perceptions , but a change in probability when something is already uncertain ( e . g . , a change from 20 % to 80 % probability ) has less of an impact . Probabilities are generally underweighted ; people act as if something is less likely to occur than it actually is . Figure 1 presents a prospect - theoretical probability weighting function . The reﬂection effect is the behavioral regularity that people try to avoid risk when facing gains , but they embrace risk when facing losses . Probability weighting contributes to this behav - ior . Because probabilities are generally underweighted , the chance of a good outcome receives too little weight , making a gamble for gains look less attractive . The probability of a bad out - come is also underweighted , so a gamble over losses looks more attractive . Diminishing sensi - tivity strengthens this effect because this leads to a utility function that is concave for gains and convex for losses . However , because small probabilities are overweighed , people prefer a cer - tain loss of equal expected value over a small probability of a large loss and prefer a small prob - ability of a large gain over its expected value . Taken together , this leads to a fourfold pattern : risk aversion for gains and risk taking for losses , but risk taking for unlikely gains and risk aver - sion for unlikely losses . This pattern is one of the “major phenomena of choice” that Tversky 104 Linde and Vis and Kahneman ( 1992 , p . 298 ) try to explain with prospect theory . A meta - analysis by K € uhberger , Schulte - Mecklenbeck , and Perner ( 1999 ) conﬁrms this general pattern . 3 The reﬂection effect has been used regularly in political science , for example , to explain when governments pursue reforms ( Vis , 2010 ; Vis & Van Kersbergen , 2007 ) or how leaders behave during international conﬂicts ( McDermott , 1998 ; Taliaferro , 2004 ) . The overweighting of small probabilities has been used to explain why politicians often advocate spending considerable resources to eliminate even the smallest chance of a bad outcome in international relations ( Levy , 2003 ) . In addition to the reﬂection effect and probability weighting , we also explored another prominent feature of prospect theory in our experiment : loss aversion . Loss aversion predicts that because losses hurt more than gains please , people are risk averse if they can both gain and lose money . This is reﬂected in a utility function that is steeper for losses than it is for gains . Loss aversion is typically found in existing work ( though not always ; see , e . g . , Ert & Erev , 2010 ) . In our experiment , however , we did not ﬁnd it in our student sample ( see Appendix E in the online supporting information ) and also not in our politicians sample . The ﬁrst ﬁnding suggests that there might be an issue with the valid - ity of the tasks testing for loss aversion , because of which we cannot draw meaningful conclusions for the politicians sample based on these tasks . 4 Existing Studies’ on Risky Decision - Making by Politicians What do existing studies focusing explicitly on politicians or other elite decision - makers con - clude about these actors’ decision - making under risk ? Do politicians and other elite decision - makers behave like the rest of us ? List and Mason ( 2011 ) ﬁnd that CEOs are not more likely to behave Figure 1 . Example of a probability weighting function . The x - axis displays the actual probability and the y - axis displays the weighted probability . 3 For small probabilities , K € uhberger et al . ( 1999 ) do not always ﬁnd risk seeking for gains and risk aversion for losses but often behavior close to risk neutrality . 4 Not ﬁnding evidence for loss aversion can be explained by the fact that our participants do not lose their own money in the experiment . Instead , losses were created by giving participants a sure amount from which they could lose . This may not be enough to induce a real feeling of loss since participants may see the ﬁxed amount as house money ( Thaler & Johnson , 1990 ) . That this manipulation did reveal the reﬂection effect suggests that the reﬂection effect may be more a feature of the nonlinear weighting of probabilities , while loss aversion is a genuine feature of a per - son’s preferences as prospect theory suggests . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 105 according to expected utility theory than are other people . Speciﬁcally , List and Mason ﬁnd that prob - ability weighting—a key feature of prospect theory as we discussed above—is in fact much stronger for CEOs than for their student control sample . Also , Haerem et al . ’s ( 2011 ) military decision - makers fail to behave as predicted by expected utility theory . However , the military decision - makers’ behav - ior does not accord to prospect theory’s predictions either . Instead , these actors are risk taking , inde - pendent of whether outcomes are framed as gains or as losses , while prospect theory predicts risk aversion in the gain domain . Nevertheless , conﬂicting expected utility theory’s predictions , the mili - tary decision - makers were affected by the loss or gain frame since they became ( even ) more risk tak - ing when outcomes where framed as losses . The only study that directly tests prospect theory’s predictions on a sample of politicians is Fatas et al . ’s ( 2007 ) replication of Quattrone and Tversky’s ( 1988 ) experiment on political choices . Quattrone and Tversky found evidence for the reﬂection effect and loss aversion among their sample ( consisting of students ) in hypothetical political decision - making scenar - ios . Fatas et al . presented these decision problems to a sample of 309 students ( the control group with no expertise in political choice ) and a sample of 32 elected politicians ( “experts” in political choice ) . Fatas et al . found that reference - point effects did not disappear in the sample of politicians . Still , Fatas et al . also found signiﬁcant differences between the expert ( politi - cians ) and nonexpert ( student ) samples regarding reference - point manipulations and decisions under risk . The latter results suggest that politicians might differ from the general population . However , Fatas et al . do not focus on politicians per se , but on politicians who could be expected to have strong expertise in decision - making under risk : politicians with a Ph . D . in economics—hardly representative for politicians in general . Although similar in terms of edu - cational background , their participants came from very different political arenas ( e . g . , Euro - pean parliament versus elected mayors ) , who may behave differently from one another . Compared to Fatas et al . , we have a larger sample of politicians all of whom are MPs who were not selected on the basis of their educational background . Furthermore , instead of focusing on political decision problems only , our study also includes decision problems that have been used many times before to reveal deviations from expected utility . Other studies examining politicians’ decisions under risk typically do not test prospect theory’s predictions directly , but they offer insights about politicians’ general attitude toward risk . Hess et al . ( 2013 ) ﬁnd that German Members of Parliament take more risks than the general population . This may be related to politicians being highly selected ( see the introduction of our article ) . If the selection process has a tournament structure , where many candidates compete for a political ofﬁce , this struc - ture could select people who are more willing to take risk ( Hvide , 2002 ) . Kam ( 2012 ) shows that Americans who are more risk taking are more likely to participate in political life . These studies are more in line with the assumption that risk attitude is largely a stable personality trait ( see also Ehrlich & Maestas , 2010 ) and not something that is shaped by the context in which a decision is made ( e . g . , whether an outcome is a loss or a gain ) . 5 However , general risk attitudes may interact with context effects . People who are generally more willing to take risks do so both in the loss and in the gain domains ( Kam & Simas , 2012 ; Kowert & Hermann , 1997 ) . This ﬁnding could mean that due to politi - cians’ tendency to take risks , we do not conﬁrm the reﬂection effect for them , but we ﬁnd , for exam - ple , that they are risk taking for gains and even more risk taking for losses—as Haerem et al . ( 2011 ) found for military decision makers . All in all , studies focusing on decision - making under risk by politicians and other elite decision - makers suggests that politicians may well deviate from expected utility theory in the same way other people do , but also that they may deviate less . 5 Attitudes toward risk can also be inﬂuenced by other variables , such as idiosyncratic , cultural , political , or ideological ones ( Levy , 1992 ) . 106 Linde and Vis Experimental Design and Results To test whether politicians are similar to the rest of us , that is , behave in line with prospect theory’s predictions , we presented participants in our experiment with a total of 13 decision tasks in three parts . Part I consisted of six choices between two lotteries ( so - called lottery - choice tasks ) and tested expected utility theory’s ( EUT ) main deviations . Part II consisted of three lottery - valuation tasks that tested for prospect theory’s fourfold pattern ( see the second section ) . Part III included four hypothetical political decision - making scenarios that tested whether prospect theory’s predictions , speciﬁcally the reﬂection effect , are also observed in hypothetical choice situations relating more directly to politicians’ real - world decision - making . In Parts I and II , we used well - established problems from the literature , allowing us to compare our ﬁndings to a large body of existing work . Conversely , except for the standard “Asian disease” problem , the newly developed problems in Part III assessed the effect and importance of two different dimensions : votes and ( economic ) policy outcomes . We discuss the tasks’ details prior to their results . In all tasks , the probabilities of possible outcomes are known . In most real - life decision situations , probabilities are unknown , a situation referred to as uncertainty or ambiguity in decision science . However , research shows that behavior is relatively similar under risk and under ambiguity ( see Trautmann & Van de Kuilen , 2016 for a discussion ) . To keep things simple for our participants , we therefore use known probabilities in our experiment . To validate the tasks , we ran the experiment with a student sample . 6 Here we only discuss the results of the politicians ; Appendix E in the online supporting information presents the results for the student sample . To prevent order effects , we presented participants with the three parts in a random order . Additionally , we randomized the order of tasks within the parts ( e . g . , the order of the six lot - teries in Part I ) . Appendix A in the online supporting information provides an English translation of the instructions for all three parts of the experiment . Task - related incentives , that is , incentives based on what happens during the task ( such as partici - pants’ choices ) ( Bardsley et al . , 2010 ) , give participants a reason to take the task seriously ( i . e . , to gen - erate experimental realism , cf . Druckman & Kam , 2011 , p . 44 ) . They also reduce participants’ tendency to provide socially desirable responses ( Camerer & Hogarth , 1999 ; see Bardsley et al . , 2010 : chap . 6 for an extensive discussion on incentives ) . 7 The latter may be especially relevant for politicians since Caprara , Barbaranelli , and Zimbardo ( 2003 ) found , based on a comparison between 103 Italian politicians and a large sample of the general public ( n 5 4 , 578 ) , that politicians scored sig - niﬁcantly higher on the personality characteristic social desirability . Therefore , we provided ﬁnancial incentives to our politician participants for the lottery - choice and lottery - valuation tasks . Politicians cannot be paid for participation in an experiment in the regular way . Instead , we used incentives in the form of a contribution to a charity that the participant could pick from seven well - known char - ities . 8 , 9 To make each decision that includes a monetary payoff relevant , but simultaneously ensure that tasks do not inﬂuence each other , we randomly selected one task that determined how much money was donated to the charity on behalf of the participant . Speciﬁcally , we randomly selected either the lottery - choice or the lottery - valuation part of the experiment , and then we randomly selected one task from this part . This avoided that participants’ choices were inﬂuenced by so - called portfolio 6 Druckman and Kam ( 2011 ) demonstrate that a convenience sample of students does not pose a problem for a study’s external validity . 7 Although the use of task - related incentives is not common ( yet ? ) in political science , it is the norm in experimental economics . For example , every single study based on experiments in the ﬂagship economics journal , The American Economic Review , published between 1970 and 1997 used task - related incentives ( Bardsley et al . , 2010 , p . 244 ) . 8 Amnesty International ; Cordaid ; Dutch Cancer Society ( KWF Kankerbestrijding ) ; Oxfam Novib ; Prins Bernhard Cul - tuurfonds ( charity focusing on cultural heritage ) ; Red Cross ; and World Wildlife Fund . 9 See Appendix E in the online supporting information for information on incentives in the student sample . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 107 effects ( e . g . , some safe and some risky choices for a balanced portfolio ) or by previous earnings ( Starmer & Sugden , 1991 ) . A total of 46 Members of Parliament ( i . e . , 30 % of the Dutch parliament ) participated in the experiment , which they performed online in the presence of at least one of the researchers . The num - ber of participants per session varied ( from 1 to 25 ) , but since the experiment was done individually and in silence , this did not inﬂuence our results . The ﬁrst experimental session was in September 2014 and the last one in January 2015 . During this period , there were no elections or other high - proﬁle political events . Of the participating MPs , 28 % were female ( a bit less than the 37 % female MPs in parliament ) , 81 % were university - educated ( in line with the full population of MPs ) , their average age was 43 . 5 ( idem ) , and 76 . 2 % described their political position as ( very ) right - wing ( substantially more than the around 50 % right - wing MPs in parliament ) . Probability Weighting Common Ratio Effect , Lottery - Choice Tasks 1 And 2 . Our ﬁrst two lottery - choice tasks ( see Table 1 and Appendix B in the online supporting information for a more detailed discussion ) assess the presence of probability weighting by examining whether a common ratio effect exists ( Allais , 1953 ; see Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 , 1984 ) . In lottery - choice tasks 1 and 2 , the expected utility of C is one - fourth that of A and that of D is one - fourth that of B . According to EUT , the ranking of A and B should thus be the same as that of C and D . However , in many earlier studies , and in our own student sample ( see Appendix E in the online supporting information ) , participants choose the riskier option ( B and D , a smaller probability to earn a larger amount ) more often in problem 2 than in prob - lem 1 . Prospect theory explains this deviation from EUT through probability weighting : the difference between 100 % and 80 % is seen as large because 80 % probability is underweighted , which makes A relatively attractive . The difference between 25 % and 20 % is seen as small ; both are pretty small probabilities , so they are not or hardly underweighted , making D relatively more attractive . If there is a common ratio effect , the predictions for task 1 and 2 are A and D . As Table 1 shows , we do not ﬁnd the common ratio effect for politicians . Although the risky option is chosen 9 % more often in problem 2 than it is in problem 1 , this effect is far from signiﬁcant . For both these tasks and the reﬂection effect tasks ( see Table 3 below ) , we explored whether the prob - ability of exhibiting the effect depends on several background variables ( age , ideology , time in parlia - ment , and gender ) , but none of these had a signiﬁcant effect . Lottery - Valuation Tasks . The lottery - valuation tasks explored probability weighting more gener - ally . Here we brieﬂy discuss the design ; Appendix C in the online supporting information presents a more detailed discussion . The design of our lottery - valuation tasks is similar to Tversky and Table 1 . Common Ratio Problem ( n 5 46 ) Task Percentage of Politicians Choosing Risky Option Task 1 A ) e 28 for sure or B ) e 40 with 80 % probability and e 0 with 20 % probability 63 . 04 % Task 2 C ) e 28 with 25 % probability and e 0 with 75 % probability or D ) e 40 with 20 % probability and e 0 with 80 % probability 71 . 74 % Difference ( percentage points ) 8 . 70 % p - value binomial - test 0 . 4545 Note . The predictions in case of a common ratio effect are displayed in bold . 108 Linde and Vis Kahneman ( 1992 ) . Each participant is presented with three lotteries , either framed as gains ( where outcomes are either e 0 or e 40 ) or as losses ( where outcomes are either – e 40 or e 0 ) . Each participant gets one lottery where the best outcome’s probability is 10 % , one where this probability is 50 % , and one where this probability is 90 % . We compensate participants for their potential losses by adding the maximum amount that could be lost in the lottery to the amount donated to the charity , independent of their choices . Then , the gain and loss treatments have exactly the same payoffs and the difference between the treatments is purely a difference in framing—which is precisely what we need . Partici - pants’ valuation for the lotteries is determined using a so - called multiple - price list ; the method we used allows for a valid elicitation of valuations ( see Appendix C in the online supporting information for the details ) . The results of the lottery - valuation tasks , presented in Table 2 , provide suggestive evidence for probability weighting , although it should be stressed that none of the observed differences are signiﬁ - cant due to a lack of power . Looking at the gain treatment , the politicians were , on average , willing to pay 16 cents more than the expected value of the lottery with a 10 % chance of winning . A willingness to pay more than a lottery’s expected value is in line with prospect theory because the small probabil - ity of 10 % is overweighed . Prospect theory predicts that the larger probabilities of 50 % and 90 % are underweighted . Conse - quently , people are risk averse and are willing to pay less for the lottery than its expected value . We ﬁnd this for the lottery with a 90 % probability of winning but not for the lottery with a 50 % probabil - ity of winning . None of the differences between the treatments are signiﬁcant , nor are the valuations signiﬁcantly different from the expected value . Taking lottery - choice tasks 1 and 2 and the lottery - valuation tasks together , there is some evi - dence that politicians suffer from probability weighting , but this evidence is weak . The responses go in the direction expected by prospect theory , but the treatment effects are not statistically signiﬁcant . For the lottery - valuation task , a lack of power prevents strong conclusions , but the results from lottery - choice tasks 1 and 2 suggest that politicians may behave somewhat more in line with expected utility theory than other people since they do not exhibit ( strong ) effects of probability weighting . 10 Reﬂection Effect Lottery - choice tasks 5 and 6 test for the presence of the reﬂection effect ( see Table 3 ) , the ﬁnding that people are risk averse when outcomes are presented as gains and risk taking when they are pre - sented as losses . In task 5 , outcomes are presented as gains ; in task 6 as losses . Because participants receive an additional e 60 in task 6 , the tasks are exactly the same in terms of ﬁnal outcomes . Table 2 . Lottery - Valuation Tasks , Average Difference Between the Valuation and the Expected Value of the Gain and Loss Treatments Lotteries for the Politicians Sample ( n 5 28 ) Probability of Highest Amount Gain Treatment Loss Treatment 10 % e 0 . 16 – e 0 . 25 50 % e 0 . 28 e 0 . 75 90 % – e 0 . 41 e 1 . 13 Note . The sample size is smaller than the full sample since participants were presented with either the gain , mixed , or loss lotteries , and those presented with the mixed lotteries are not reported . 10 We included one more task to explore probability weighting , a test of the so - called common consequence effect ( see , e . g . , Huck and M € uller [ 2012 ] and Appendix B for an explanation of the task and Appendix E , Table E . 2 , in the online supporting information for the results ) . Because we did not conﬁrm this effect in the student sample , we cannot draw deﬁnitive conclusions from this test for the politicians . However , the fact that we also do not conﬁrm the effect for politicians is a further indication that politicians are similar to other people . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 109 Cumulative prospect theory ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1992 ) explains the reﬂection effect as follows . Probability weighting is cumulative : It is the chance to get an outcome further from the reference point that is weighted , so in decision problem 5 , the 33 % chance to get e 60 is weighted , while in deci - sion problem 6 , the 67 % chance to get – e 60 is weighted . Because both probabilities are of moderate size , they are underweighted ( especially the 67 % ) , leading to risk aversion for gains and risk taking for losses . Since 33 % is likely to be underweighted less than 67 % , the prediction is that more people will choose the risky option ( C ) in problem 6 than in problem 5 ( A ) . Table 3 shows that we ﬁnd a strong reﬂection effect . The risky option is almost twice as popular when outcomes are presented as losses . Clearly , politicians are very vulnerable to the framing of outcomes as gains or losses . Also comparing the valuation of lotteries in the gain and loss treatments presented in Table 2 indicates that politicians exhibit a reﬂection effect . They are risk averse for small probability losses and large probability gains and risk seeking for large probability losses and small probability gains . However , it should again be noted that the results for the lottery - valuation task are not statistically signiﬁcant . Hypothetical Political Decision - Making Scenarios . Given that we ﬁnd a strong reﬂection effect in the lottery - choice and lottery - valuation parts , we can explore : ( 1 ) whether politicians also exhibit this effect in hypothetical political decisions and ( 2 ) which dimension , votes or policy , dominates when outcomes are gains in one dimension and losses in another . To this end , we present our partici - pants with newly developed hypothetical political decision - making scenarios . The scenarios use outcome dimensions that are important in decisions regularly made by politi - cians ( votes and economic policy outcomes ) . However , the scenarios remain a simpliﬁcation of real - ity ; they are not intended to be truly mundane . In the trade - off between experimental realism and manipulation control ( Iyengar , 2011 ) , we opt for control because this offers the best setting for identi - fying the dimension used as a reference point . We ask the participant to advise her parliamentary cau - cus to vote for or against a proposal , 11 which is a decision MPs face regularly and make individually ( with advice from their staff ) . Prospect theory is a theory on individual decisions ( as is expected utility theory ) , so this decision stays as close as possible to the theory and to our research question . 12 We tell our participants to assume that ( 1 ) the proposal has no other consequences than those mentioned in the question , ( 2 ) there is no better alternative proposal available , ( 3 ) their caucus is Table 3 . Reﬂection Effect Problem ( n 5 46 ) Task Percentage of Politicians Choosing Risky Option Task 5 A ) e 60 with 33 % probability and e 0 with 67 % probability or B ) e 20 for sure 39 . 13 % Task 6 C ) e 0 with 33 % probability and – e 60 with 67 % probability or D ) – e 40 for sure 76 . 09 % Difference ( in percentage points ) 36 . 96 % p - value binomial - test 0 . 0002 Note . The predictions in case of a reﬂection effect are displayed in bold . 11 In our student sample , participants were asked to put themselves in the position of a MP . 12 How an individual politician’s decision inﬂuences the outcome of the political process depends on many factors , such as the procedural rules or the power of different actors ( Kerr , MacCoun , & Kramer , 1996 ) . Still , existing evidence ( Charness , Karni , & Levin , 2007 ; Rockenbach , Sadrieh , & Mathauschek , 2007 ) indicates that groups violate expected utility just as individuals do , although they may be somewhat more rational . 110 Linde and Vis ideologically neutral towards the proposal , and ( 4 ) their vote choice is not affected by any potential coalition agreements . We do not expect our participants to fully conform to these assumptions . How - ever , stating these four assumptions explicitly likely reduces the probability that different participants take different decisions because they view the decision - situation differently . Every question is preceded by a description of the situation and the consequences of a vote in favor or against . In all scenarios , participants have to choose between a relatively risky ( high variance in outcomes ) and a relatively safe ( low variance in outcomes ) option in either a loss or a gain treat - ment . All four scenarios thus test for the presence of the reﬂection effect but they do so in different settings . Despite our instruction not to let ideology play a role , it may still be the case that left - wing politicians take different decisions than do right - wing politicians . This does not interfere with testing whether politicians behave in line with prospect theory’s predictions because prospect theory does not predict a particular choice but an effect of the framing of the decision situation . To further reduce the effect of ideology , we never describe an actual policy over which the participants may have preferen - ces , but we only describe the ( expected ) consequences of implementing the policy . The ﬁrst setting is the classical Asian disease problem ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1984 ) , presented as a choice between voting in favor of implementing program A or voting against it in which case pro - gram B is implemented . In the gain treatment , the program’s effects are described as follows : Program A is implemented with 200 people saved , or Program B is implemented with a one - third probability that 600 people are saved and a two - thirds probability that 0 people are saved . In the loss treatment , the program’s description is as follows : Program A is implemented and 400 people will die , or Pro - gram B is implemented with a one - third probability that 0 people will die and a two - thirds probability that 600 people will die . In the second , third , and fourth settings , we manipulate gains and losses by changing the earlier expectations . The current situation is either described as better ( gain setting ) or worse ( loss setting ) than these earlier expectations . Earlier expectations are manipulated such that in absolute terms , the outcomes are the same . This is the same procedure as Kahneman and Tversky ( 1979 , p . 273 ) used in two of their decision problems ( 11 and 12 ) . The potential results of voting in favor of the proposal or against it are explained in words and presented in a table outlining the changes relative to the earlier expectations . Appendix D in the online supporting information presents the complete scenarios . In the second setting , outcomes based on macroeconomic policy outcomes—unemployment and budget deﬁcits—deﬁne losses and gains . We choose this setting because politicians care about these outcomes , independent of their ideology . In the third setting , outcomes are gains and losses with respect to the votes for the decision - maker’s party . The fourth setting includes outcomes that are either gains in terms of votes and losses in terms of economic growth , or vice versa ( i . e . , a multidimensional trade - off ) . Our hypothetical decision - making scenarios complement those of Quattrone and Tversky ( 1988 ) , which take the perspective of a voter rather than of a politician . Our scenarios examine speciﬁc deci - sion situations and are thereby narrower than Quattrone and Tversky’s , allowing us to assess which dimension the participants take as their reference point . Because the scenarios with outcomes framed as losses are very similar to those framed as gains , we present participants with either the loss or the gain treatment . For each scenario , it was randomly determined whether a participant was presented with the loss or the gain frame , so it was possible that a participant would get the gain frame for one scenario and a loss frame for another scenario . We also randomly determined the order of the scenarios . When directly comparing loss and gain situations , we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant reﬂection effect for the Asian disease scenario ( Table 4 ) , but no signiﬁcant effect for the other three scenarios . However , for the scenario with both economic and electoral outcomes , our participants are over 15 percentage points more likely to choose the risky option when outcomes are losses in votes . This effect becomes signiﬁcant at a 5 % level if we analyze the data of all political decisions together ( n 5 164 ) and control Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 111 for background characteristics such as sex , age , parliamentary experience , and political orientation in a logistic regression ( Table 5 ) . None of the control variables have a signiﬁcant effect on the likelihood of choosing the risky option , although men and right - wing politicians may be a little more , and left - wing politicians a little less , likely to choose the risky option . Taken together , the ﬁndings from the incentivized reﬂection effect task , the lottery - valuation tasks and the Asian disease decision task all suggest that , like other people , politicians are susceptible to the reﬂection effect . However , in the hypothetical political decisions , our politicians only revealed the reﬂection effect in two of the four scenarios . One interpretation of this ﬁnding is that politicians Table 4 . Political Decision Problems ( n 5 46 ) Scenarios Loss Situation % Choosing Risky Option Gain Situation % Choosing Risky Option Fisher’s Exact Test p - value 1 ) Economic Outcomes 45 % 50 % 0 . 774 2 ) Votes 45 . 83 % 40 . 91 % 0 . 774 3 ) Votes and Economic Outcomes ( loss / gain in terms of votes ) 85 % 69 . 23 % 0 . 302 4 ) Asian Disease 88 . 46 % 30 % < 0 . 001 Table 5 . Logistic Regression of Choosing the Risky Option ( dependent variable ) on Characteristics of Politicians and Scenarios ( n 5 164 ) Variables Odds Ratio Scenario ( reference : economic outcomes ) Votes 0 . 576 [ 0 . 435 ] Votes and Economic Outcomes 1 . 904 [ 0 . 361 ] Asian Disease 0 . 569 [ 0 . 408 ] Loss Framing by Scenario Loss Frame for Economic Outcomes 0 . 860 [ 0 . 827 ] Loss Frame for Votes 1 . 599 [ 0 . 490 ] Loss Frame for Votes and and Economic Outcomes ( loss in terms of votes ) 8 . 684 * * [ 0 . 033 ] Loss Frame Asian Disease 14 . 633 * * * [ 0 . 001 ] Age ( years ) 1 . 033 [ 0 . 259 ] Time in Parliament ( months ) 0 . 995 [ 0 . 580 ] Man 2 . 077 [ 0 . 177 ] Right - Wing Politician ( reference : centrist ) 1 . 510 [ 0 . 500 ] Left - Wing Politician ( reference : centrist ) 0 . 290 [ 0 . 173 ] Constant 0 . 147 [ 0 . 140 ] Note . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 ; p - values , based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level , between brackets . 112 Linde and Vis are less vulnerable to the framing of outcomes if they are more familiar with the type of decision . Arguably this explains why they do exhibit the effect in the Asian disease example and not in the sce - narios with electoral or economic consequences . However , that does not explain why they do reveal the reﬂection effect in the scenario with votes and economic outcomes , which is probably most similar to real political decisions . Still , the effect is weaker for this scenario , suggesting that task familiarity may weaken the reﬂection effect for politicians . A possible competing explanation for the lack of a reﬂection effect in the votes scenario is that MPs tried to provide socially acceptable answers . Since it is not socially desirable to consider electoral outcomes , MPs do not carefully consider the votes scenario , but , for example , make a random choice . Economic outcomes do not lead to a reﬂection effect because in this scenario , the decision’s conse - quences do not inﬂuence the MP directly and are therefore considered more abstractly , leading to a decision that is more in line with expected utility theory . When both economic and electoral conse - quences are at stake , the outcomes are considered carefully , since a ﬂippant decision about economic consequences would be considered wrong . However , the electoral consequences , which are more directly relevant for the MP making the decision , grab the attention leading to a reﬂection effect in terms of electoral outcomes . 13 Note that the reﬂection effect is much weaker in this last scenario , sug - gesting that at least some of the MPs managed to suppress the possible urge to let the electoral conse - quences determine their decision . Another possible interpretation is that politicians , or people in general , are more likely to exhibit the reﬂection effect if the question is more difﬁcult . The Asian disease problem is hard because the type of decision is highly irregular and the life or death setting adds pressure to the decision . The sce - narios with votes or economic outcomes are very straightforward , but the scenario with votes and eco - nomic outcomes is more complicated since it entails trade - offs in different dimensions . Consequently , the scenario with votes and economic outcomes leads to a ( weak ) reﬂection effect . This interpretation does not explain why this reﬂection effect is revealed with respect to the votes dimension rather than the economic dimension when both are present . Both interpretations suggest that it is likely that MPs exhibit a reﬂection effect in their real - life decisions since these always entail possible votes and policy outcomes and are almost always more complicated than the scenarios we presented them with . In summary , our ﬁndings on the reﬂection effect are as follows . We found strong evidence for the reﬂection effect in the two tasks that are used most often to study this effect : the Asian disease scenario and a choice between lotteries with ﬁnancial outcomes . In the three political hypothetical decision - making scenarios , we only found a weaker effect in the scenario with electoral and economic consequences , rather than only consequences on one of these dimen - sions . In the scenario with electoral and economic consequences , the direction of the effect sug - gests that votes function as a reference point . We argue that these ﬁndings can be explained by a reference point in the votes dimension combined with socially acceptable answers , but we can - not exclude that task familiarity reduces the reﬂection effect . Conclusion Prospect theory has been used quite extensively in political psychology . In political science in general , prospect theory has not been applied on as wide a scale as might be expected given its poten - tial to explain decision - making under risk : a central feature of political decision - making . Problems 13 This explanation is in line with the results from our student sample ( see Table E . 6 in Appendix E in the online sup - porting information ) . Like the MPs , the students showed a reﬂection effect in the Asian disease and the votes and eco - nomic outcomes scenarios but not for the economic scenario . However , unlike the MPs , they did reveal a reﬂection effect in the votes scenario , plausibly because they did not have the same motivation to provide a socially acceptable answer . Instead , they behaved as they thought politicians would and therefore cared about electoral outcomes . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 113 that arise when applying prospect theory to such decision - making might be responsible for this . By means of an experiment with a sample of 46 Dutch members of parliament ( i . e . , 30 % of all MPs ) , we addressed two of these problems . First , does prospect theory hold for politicians like it does for the rest of us ? Second , which reference point do politicians use when a decision has implications in more than one dimension ( votes versus economic policy outcomes ) ? To address the ﬁrst problem—prospect theory’s applicability to political actors—we presented politicians with well - known ( incentivized ) decision situations used to study decision - making under risk . The tasks were validated using a student sample . Our ﬁndings suggest that politicians , like other people , display the reﬂection effect , but , unlike other people , not the common ratio effect . The reﬂec - tion effect was also conﬁrmed in the well - known Asian disease problem . The reﬂection effect is the element of prospect theory that is most widely applied in political science , and our results validate these applications . However , our ﬁndings also suggest that using other predictions of prospect theory to explain political behavior might be more problematic . For the second problem , which reference point politicians use with outcomes in more than one dimension , our evidence is less strong but nevertheless suggestive . We did not ﬁnd the reﬂection effect when outcomes were framed as economic or electoral consequences . Still , politicians exhibited the effect , albeit weaker , in the direction suggested by a reference point in terms of votes when there were both economic and electoral consequences . This suggests that task familiarity may mitigate the reﬂection effect , but it can also be explained by a reﬂection effect in terms of the outcome that inﬂuen - ces the politicians themselves the most—votes—possibly combined with socially acceptable answers . Some issues are worth examining further . Are our ﬁndings inﬂuenced by right - wing politicians being overrepresented in our sample ? Unfortunately , our sample is too small to test this . However , because the principles of expected utility theory resonate more with the ideological stance of right - wing politicians than with those of left - wing ones , we may assume that if either of the two would behave more in line with this theory , these would be the right - wing ones . If this is indeed the case , our sample made it harder to ﬁnd support for prospect theory , providing a conservative test of prospect theory for politicians . Still , this is a question worthy of empirical investigation . All in all , our experimental ﬁndings offer grounds for optimism regarding the application of the reﬂection effect , although perhaps with a measure of caution . Optimism may also be warranted regarding the decision - making abilities of politicians since they appear to abide by the normative pre - scripts of expected utility theory to a greater extent than most other people , although they do exhibit the reﬂection effect . The results have increased our understanding of the microfoundations of political decision - making and thereby make a valuable contribution to the existing observational studies among other areas of political psychology . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is funded by a VIDI grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research ( NWO , Grant No . 452 - 11 - 005 ) . Earlier versions of this article have been presented at the University of Antwerp , at the Dutch / Flemish Politicologenetmaal , at the University of Duisburg in 2014 , at the University of Leiden in 2015 , and at the 2015 Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association . We thank all participants for the many helpful comments and suggestions . In addition , thanks to Marinko Bobic and Gijs Schumacher for their constructive comments and to Die - uwertje Kuijpers and Mariken van der Velden who , additionally , also helped greatly with recruiting the politician participants . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Barbara Vis , Department of Political Science and Public Administration , Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam , De Boelelaan 1081 , 1081 HV Amsterdam , Netherlands . E - mail : b . vis @ vu . nl 114 Linde and Vis REFERENCES Allais , P . M . ( 1953 ) . Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque : Critique des postulats et axiomes de l’ecole Americaine . Econometrica , 21 ( 4 ) , 503 – 546 . Bardsley , N . , Cubitt , R . , Loomes , G . , Moffatt , P . , Starmer , C . , & Sugden , R . ( 2010 ) . Experimental economics : Rethinking the rules . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Besley , T . ( 2005 ) . Political selection . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 19 ( 3 ) , 43 – 60 . Boettcher III , W . A . ( 2004 ) . The prospects for prospect theory : An empirical evaluation of international relations applica - tions of framing and loss aversion . Political Psychology , 25 ( 3 ) , 331 – 362 . Booij , A . S . , van Praag , B . M . S . , & van de Kuilen , G . ( 2009 ) . A parametric analysis of prospect theory’s functionals for the general population . Theory and Decision , 68 ( 1 – 2 ) , 115 – 148 . Brumagim , A . L . , & Xianhua , W . ( 2005 ) . An examination of cross - cultural differences in attitudes towards risk : Testing prospect theory in the People’s Republic of China . Multinational Business Review , 13 ( 3 ) , 67 – 86 . Bueno de Mesquita , B . ( 1981 ) . The war trap . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Camerer , C . F . ( 2003 ) . Prospect theory in the wild : Evidence from the ﬁeld . In C . F . Camerer , G . Loewenstein , & M . Rabin ( Eds . ) , Advances in behavioral economics ( pp . 105 – 148 ) . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Camerer , C . F . , & Hogarth , R . M . ( 1999 ) . The effects of ﬁnancial incentives in experiments : A review and capital - labor - production framework . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 19 ( 1 – 3 ) , 7 – 42 . Caprara , G . V . , Barbaranelli , C . , & Zimbardo , P . G . ( 2003 ) . Personalities of politicians and voters : Unique and synergis - tic relationships . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 84 ( 4 ) , 849 – 856 . Chang , O . H . , Nichols , D . R . , & Schultz , J . J . ( 1987 ) . Taxpayer attitudes toward tax audit risk . Journal of Economic Psy - chology , 8 ( 3 ) , 299 – 309 . Charness , G . , Karni , E . , & Levin , D . ( 2007 ) . Individual and group decision making under risk : An experimental study of Bayesian updating and violations of ﬁrst - order stochastic dominance . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 35 ( 2 ) , 129 – 148 . Druckman , J . N . , & Kam , C . D . ( 2011 ) . Students as experimental participants : A defense of the “narrow data base . ” In J . N . Druckman , D . P . Green , J . H . Kuklinski , & A . Lupia ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of experimental political science ( pp . 41 – 57 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Ehrlich , S . , & Maestas , C . ( 2010 ) . Risk orientation , risk exposure , and policy opinions : The case of free trade . Political Psychology , 31 ( 5 ) , 657 – 684 . Elms , D . K . ( 2004 ) . Large costs , small beneﬁts : Explaining trade dispute outcomes . Political Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 241 – 270 . Eraker , S . A . , & Sox , H . C . ( 1981 ) . Assessment of patients’ preferences for therapeutic outcomes . Medical Decision Making : An International Journal of the Society for Medical Decision Making , 1 ( 1 ) , 29 – 39 . Ert , E . , & Erev , I . ( 2010 ) . On the descriptive value of loss aversion in decisions under risk . Harvard Business School Working Paper , 10 – 056 . Fanis , M . ( 2004 ) . Collective action meets prospect theory : An application to coalition building in Chile , 1973 – 75 . Politi - cal Psychology , 25 ( 3 ) , 363 – 388 . Fatas , E . , Neugebauer , T . , & Tamborero , P . ( 2007 ) . How politicians make decisions : A political choice experiment . Jour - nal of Economics , 92 ( 2 ) , 167 – 196 . Fr (cid:2) echette , G . R . ( 2009 ) . Laboratory experiments : Professionals versus students . Retrieved from https : / / ﬁles . nyu . edu / gf35 / public / print / Frechette _ 2009b . pdf Haerem , T . , Kuvaas , B . , Bakken , B . , & Karlsen , T . ( 2011 ) . Do military decision - makers behave as predicted by prospect theory ? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 24 ( 5 ) , 482 – 497 . Harmel , R . , & Janda , K . ( 1994 ) . An integrated theory of party goals and party change . Journal of Theoretical Politics , 6 ( 3 ) , 259 – 287 . Hess , M . , von Scheve , C . , Schupp , J . , & Wagner , G . G . ( 2013 ) . Members of German federal parliament more risk - loving than general population . DIW Economic Bulletin , 4 , 20 – 24 . Huck , S . , & M € uller , W . ( 2012 ) . Allais for all : Revisiting the paradox in a large representative sample . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 44 ( 3 ) , 261 – 293 . Hug , S . ( 2014 ) . Further twenty years of pathologies ? Is rational choice better than it used to be ? Swiss Political Science Review , 20 ( 3 ) , 486 – 497 . Hvide , H . K . ( 2002 ) . Tournament rewards and risk taking . Journal of Labor Economics , 20 ( 4 ) , 877 – 898 . Iyengar , S . ( 2011 ) . Laboratory experiments in political science . In J . N . Druckman , D . P . Green , J . H . Kuklinski , & A . Lupia ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of experimental political science ( pp . 73 – 88 ) . New York , NY : Cambrdige University Press . Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 115 Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1979 ) . Prospect theory : An analysis of decision under risk . Econometrica , 47 ( 2 ) , 263 – 291 . Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1984 ) . Choices , values , and frames . American Psychologist , 39 ( 4 ) , 341 – 350 . Kam , C . D . ( 2012 ) . Risk attitudes and political participation . American Journal of Political Science , 56 ( 4 ) , 817 – 836 . Kam , C . D . , & Simas , E . N . ( 2012 ) . Risk attitudes , candidate characteristics , and vote choice . Public Opinion Quarterly , 76 ( 4 ) , 747 – 760 . Kerr , N . L . , MacCoun , R . J . , & Kramer , G . P . ( 1996 ) . Bias in judgment : Comparing individuals and groups . Psychologi - cal Review , 103 ( 4 ) , 687 – 719 . Kowert , P . A . , & Hermann , M . G . ( 1997 ) . Who takes risks ? : Daring and caution in foreign policy making . Journal of Conﬂict Resolution , 41 ( 5 ) , 611 – 637 . K € uhberger , A . , Schulte - Mecklenbeck , M . , & Perner , J . ( 1999 ) . The effects of framing , reﬂection , probability , and payoff on risk preference in choice tasks . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 78 ( 3 ) , 204 – 231 . Levy , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Prospect theory and international relations : Theoretical applications and analytical problems . Political Psychology , 13 ( 2 ) , 283 – 310 . Levy , J . S . ( 1997 ) . Prospect theory , rational choice , and international relations . International Studies Quarterly , 141 ( 1 ) , 87 – 112 . Levy , J . S . ( 2003 ) . Applications of prospect theory to political science . Synthese , 135 ( 2 ) , 215 – 241 . List , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory : Evidence from the marketplace . Econometrica , 72 ( 2 ) , 615 – 625 . List , J . A . , & Mason , C . F . ( 2011 ) . Are CEOs expected utility maximizers ? Journal of Econometrics , 162 ( 1 ) , 114 – 123 . Mattozzi , A . , & Merlo , A . ( 2008 ) . Political careers or career politicians ? Journal of Public Economics , 92 ( 3 – 4 ) , 597 – 608 . McDermott , R . ( 1998 ) . Risk - taking in international politics : Prospect theory in American foreign policy . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . McDermott , R . ( 2004 ) . Prospect theory in political science : Gains and losses from the ﬁrst decade . Political Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 289 – 312 . McNeil , B . J . , Pauker , S . G . , Sox , H . C . , & Tversky , A . ( 1982 ) . On the elicitation of preferences for alternative therapies . New England Journal of Medicine , 306 ( 21 ) , 1259 – 62 . Mearsheimer , J . J . ( 2001 ) . The tragedy of great power politics . New York , NY : W . W . Norton . Mercer , J . ( 2005 ) . Prospect theory and political science . Annual Review of Political Science , 8 , 1 – 21 . M € uller , W . C . , & Strøm , K . ( 1999 ) . Policy , ofﬁce or votes ? How political parties in Europe make hard decisions . Cam - bridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Palfrey , T . R . ( 2009 ) . Laboratory experiments in political economy . Annual Review of Political Science , 12 , 379 – 388 . Post , T . , Van den Assem , M . J . , Baltussen , G . , & Thaler , R . H . ( 2008 ) . Deal or no deal ? Decision making under risk in a large - payoff game show . American Economic Review , 98 ( 1 ) , 38 – 71 . Quattrone , G . A . , & Tversky , A . ( 1988 ) . Contrasting rational and psychological analyses of political choice . American Political Science Review , 82 ( 3 ) , 719 – 736 . Rahat , G . ( 2007 ) . Candidate selection : The choice before the choice . Journal of Democracy , 18 ( 1 ) , 157 – 170 . Renshon , J . , & Renshon , S . A . ( 2008 ) . The theory and practice of foreign policy decision making . Political Psychology , 29 ( 4 ) , 509 – 536 . Rockenbach , B . , Sadrieh , A . , Mathauschek , B . ( 2007 ) . Teams take the better risks . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 63 ( 3 ) , 412 – 422 . Shen , C . H . , & Chih , H . L . ( 2005 ) . Investor protection , prospect theory , and earnings management : An international comparison of the banking industry . Journal of Banking & Finance , 29 ( 10 ) , 2675 – 2697 . Starmer , C . ( 2000 ) . Developments in non - expected utility theory : Hunt for a descriptive theory of choice under risk . Journal of Economic Literature , 38 ( 2 ) , 332 – 382 . Starmer , C . , & Sugden , R . ( 1991 ) . Does the random - lottery incentive system elicit true preferences ? An experimental investigation . American Economic Review , 81 ( 4 ) , 971 – 978 . Taliaferro , J . W . ( 2004 ) . Power politics and the balance of risk : Hypotheses on great power intervention in the periphery . Political Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 177 – 211 . Thaler , R . H . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 1990 ) . Gambling with the house money and trying to break even : The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice . Management Science , 36 ( 6 ) , 643 – 660 . Trautmann , S . T . , & Van de Kuilen , G . ( 2016 ) . Ambiguity attitudes . In G . Keren & G . Wu ( Eds . ) , The Blackwell hand - book of judgment and decision making ( pp . 89 – 116 ) . Malden , MA : Blackwell - Wiley . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1981 ) . The framing of decision and the psychology of choice . Science , 211 ( 1 ) , 453 – 458 . 116 Linde and Vis Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1992 ) . Advances in prospect theory : Cumulative representation of uncertainty . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 5 ( 4 ) , 297 – 323 . Vis , B . ( 2010 ) . Politics of risk - taking : Welfare state reform in advanced democracies . Amsterdam , Neth . : Amsterdam University Press . Vis , B . ( 2011 ) . Prospect theory and political decision - making . Political Studies Review , 9 ( 3 ) , 334 – 343 . Vis , B . , & Van Kersbergen , K . ( 2007 ) . Why and how do political actors pursue risky reforms ? Journal of Theoretical Politics , 19 ( 2 ) , 153 – 172 . Wakker , P . P . ( 2010 ) . Prospect theory : For risk and ambiguity . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Weyland , K . ( 2002 ) . The politics of market reform in fragile democracies : Argentina , Brazil , Peru , and Venezuela . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Supporting Information Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher’s website : Appendix A : English Translation of the Experimental Instructions Appendix B : Detailed Discussion of Lottery - Choice Tasks Appendix C : Detailed Discussion of Lottery - Valuation Tasks Appendix D : Hypothetical Political Scenarios Appendix E : Results of the Student Sample Compared to the MP Sample Table E . 1 . Common Ratio Problem Table E . 2 . Common Consequence Problem Table E . 3 . Reﬂection Effect Problem Table E . 4 . Lottery - Valuation Tasks , Average Difference Between the Valuation and the Expected Value of the Nine Different Lotteries for the Full Student Sample ( n 5 176 ) . Table E . 5 . Lottery - Valuation Tasks , Average Difference Between the Valuation and the Expected Value of the Nine Different Lotteries for Students with Incentives ( n 5 102 ) . Table E . 6 . Political Decision Scenarios for the Full Student Sample ( n 5 176 ) Do Politicians Take Risks Like the Rest of Us ? 117