HAL Id : hal - 03203128 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 03203128 Submitted on 20 Apr 2021 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Boundary Objects in Design Studies : Reflections on the Collaborative Creation of Isochrone Maps Romain Vuillemot , Philippe Rivière , Anaëlle Beignon , Aurélien Tabard To cite this version : Romain Vuillemot , Philippe Rivière , Anaëlle Beignon , Aurélien Tabard . Boundary Objects in Design Studies : Reflections on the Collaborative Creation of Isochrone Maps . Computer Graphics Forum , Wiley , 2021 . ￿hal - 03203128￿ Eurographics Conference on Visualization ( EuroVis ) 2021 R . Borgo , G . E . Marai , and T . von Landesberger ( Guest Editors ) Volume 40 ( 2021 ) , Number 3 Boundary Objects in Design Studies : Reﬂections on the Collaborative Creation of Isochrone Maps R . Vuillemot 1 , 3 , P . Rivière 3 , 4 , A . Beignon 2 , 3 , and A . Tabard 2 , 3 1 École Centrale de Lyon 2 Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 3 LIRIS , CNRS UMR5205 , F - 69621 , France 4 https : / / visionscarto . net / Figure 1 : Sample of boundary objects used is the study . ( 1 ) A mood board , ( 2 ) a paper prototype , ( 3 ) a concept illustration in vector graphics , and ( 4 ) a parametric interactive notebook . Abstract We propose to take an artifact - centric approach to design studies by leveraging the concept of boundary object . Design studies typically focus on processes and articulate design decisions in a project - speciﬁc context with a goal of transferability . We argue that design studies could beneﬁt from paying attention to the material conditions in which teams collaborate to reach design outcomes . We report on a design study of isochrone maps following cartographic generalization principles . Focusing on bound - ary objects enables us to characterize ﬁve categories of artifacts and tools that facilitated collaboration between actors involved in the design process ( structured collections , structuring artifacts , process - centric artifacts , generative artifacts , and bridging artifacts ) . We found that artifacts such as layered maps and map collections played a unifying role for our inter - disciplinary team . We discuss how such artifacts can be pivotal in the design process . Finally , we discuss how considering boundary ob - jects could improve the transferability of design study results , and support reﬂection on inter - disciplinary collaboration in the domain of Information Visualization . 1 . Introduction Design studies are widely used in Information Visualization ( In - foVis ) research . They often lead to reﬂection on design outcomes , design processes , and validation methods . Despite efforts to deﬁne best practices [ Mun09 ] , design studies have been controversial for their lack of reproducibility , raising questions about rigor , valid - ity , and contribution to the ﬁeld . In response , a growing body of work argues for valuing the situated knowledge they produce . Such knowledge should be assessed on whether it can be transferable to other contexts [ SMM12 ] , and judged on rigor criteria [ MD20 ] . In this paper , we focus on the material aspects of design studies . We are especially interested in how design artifacts are involved in collaborations in a visualization context . We ground our work in the Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) scholarship around the concept of boundary object i . e . artifacts that support work and communication within and across different communities of prac - tice [ SG89 ] . This concept is useful for identifying artifacts of rele - vance in collaborative activities and analyzing how actors with dif - ferent backgrounds work together . We argue that boundary objects can help us look beyond processes and designs , to better articulate how tools and collaborative artifacts shape design outcomes . This opens up the potential to improve the transferability and rigor of design studies . We ground our discussion in a design study of isochrone maps , ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . PublishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies illustrating how some tools and artifacts served as collaboration anchors within an interdisciplinary team . We draw on a project seeking to support spatial analysis tasks , especially for answering reachability - related questions such as where can I go in 15 min with a bus ? To tackle those issues , we leveraged cartographic general - ization principles . They provide transformation guidelines to im - prove map readability and combine data sources . However , despite many studies and a proposed visual semiotic [ Bru86 , BM91 , MS92 ] , generalization remains a manual process or task - speciﬁc pro - cess [ KAB ∗ 10 ] , and there has been few successes to automate it . We ﬁrst discuss the role of artifacts in design studies and intro - duce boundary objects . We then discuss our application domain , our application domain geo - spatial analysis and approach ( carto - graphic generalization ) , and the context of our design study . We present the maps we built , but also unpack our design process using boundary objects [ SG89 ] as a novel perspective to analyze visual - ization research by looking at the tools and artifacts we used sys - tematically . We generalize from this study by characterizing ﬁve categories of re - occurring artifacts : structured collections , struc - turing artifacts , process - centric artifacts , generative artifacts , and bridging artifacts . We conclude on the usefulness of considering transient artifacts used to better account for the collaborative dy - namics of the design process , and suggest how to better capture and reﬂect on boundary objects beyond our application domain . 2 . Related Work 2 . 1 . Design Studies Design studies are a widely used methodology in InfoVis research . By describing projects from problem framing to ﬁnal outcomes , they seek to contextualize visualization questions and contribu - tions , with an attention to processes and the knowledge of do - main experts [ SMM12 ] . More importantly , design studies empha - size critical reﬂection on the process itself [ BDFM14 ] , and even - tually identifying guidelines ( e . g . , [ MBW11 ] ) or transferable out - comes . We are particularly interested in the way design artifacts are used and discussed in design studies . This relates to the discussion on tactics [ SMM12 ] in design studies , e . g . , using paper or rapid code prototypes . However , besides prototypes , key collaborative artifacts are rarely discussed , despite the important role they play in setting the stage and deﬁning collaboration protocols [ Lee05 ] . In this article , we reﬂect on the use of tools and artifacts , e . g . mood boards † , process books , paper - based explorations , along - side digital sketches and code prototypes , and the associated de - sign activities we conducted to develop an isochrone maps gen - eralization . Such artifact - centric retrospectives have been identi - ﬁed as promising in the software engineering literature [ PPV00 , BBVB ∗ 01 , LB03 ] . Design study methods , like action research , emphasize transfer - ability over replicability as the main project outcome [ SMM12 ] . We argue that a focus on artifacts in collaboration can complement † Design mood boards “consist of a collection of visually stimulating im - ages and related materials” [ Luc12 ] the current focus on actors , processes , and prototypes in improv - ing transferability . Moreover , recent discussions on Design Stud - ies tackled the issue of rigor . Being more attentive to the artifacts , could improve transparency and enrich reﬂection on processes , two rigor criteria discussed by Meyer and Dykes [ MD20 ] . 2 . 2 . Boundary Objects Science and Technology Study scholars have developed the con - cept of boundary object [ BS00 ] to describe artifacts that move and support communication across different communities of practice . Maps and other graphical representations are canonical examples of such boundary objects . Based on their analysis of inter - disciplinary research collaborations Star [ SG89 ] deﬁnes it as ( quoting ) : “Objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to lo - cal needs and constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites . They are weakly structured in common use , and become strongly structured in individual - site use . ” The most noted property of boundary objects is their interpre - tive ﬂexibility , i . e . , the same object can be understood and used dif - ferently by different groups of people [ Sta10 ] . Griesemer and Star give the example of a map used to locate a place of recreation by one group , or animal habitats by another [ SG89 ] . While ﬂexibility is key , and boundary objects allow groups to work together without consensus , this does not mean a complete lack of structure . To become boundary objects , an arrangement on how to operate and collaborate must be established . Groups can work on common objects locally , making them more tailored to their local use and needs , i . e . something that is not interdisci - plinary , and then share it back in a way that works across the var - ious groups . The capacity to move back and forth between local specialized work and common share - able objects is constitutive of boundary objects , but it is also dynamic and negotiated . Star emphasizes two criteria , scale and scope , to delineate what is not a boundary object . In respect to scope , or granularity , Star suggests boundary objects are most useful at the organizational level [ Sta10 ] . Regarding scope , boundary objects are most useful when analyzing work arrangements of objects that can be built , ma - nipulated , or distributed . While not an exhaustive list , Star proposes four types of bound - ary objects that are developed by communities of practice over time [ SG89 ] : Repositories are collections of objects , or piles , that are indexed in a standardized way . Through indexing and standardization , repositories help manage problems of different lenses or units of analysis . Ideal Type are objects that are abstract or vague enough to be adaptable . They do not accurately describe details , but it is “good enough” for collaboration and coordination work . Coincident Boundaries are objects that deﬁne the scope . “They have the same boundaries but different internal contents” . Co - incident Boundaries are especially relevant when work is con - ducted remotely and autonomously , as they help deﬁne a shared referent . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 2 : Example of isochrone map : a central location with pe - ripheral areas that are reachable according to multiple time steps : 5min , 10min , and 15min ( each visible with a different red color gradient ) . Standardized Forms are standardized indices that have no ambi - guity as to what they refer to . Star refers to Latour “immutable mobiles” , i . e . “objects which can be transported over a long dis - tance and convey unchanging information” . Standardized forms are especially useful to communicate across distributed work groups , and remove uncertainty . Although many scholars used the boundary concepts as is , and reused Star’s categories . Some explored other types of collaborative situations and proposed other categories [ Lee05 ] . This has been the case notably by the Computer Supporter Cooperative Work com - munity , with a focus on digital artifacts . For instance , Lee proposes to consider boundary negotiating artifacts rather than boundary ob - jects , arguing that some artifacts are there either to negotiate roles , responsibilities , and agency in collaborative settings . She deﬁnes ﬁve types of boundary negotiating artifacts : ( 1 ) self - explanation , ( 2 ) inclusion , ( 3 ) compilation , ( 4 ) structuring , and ( 5 ) borrow - ing [ Lee07 ] . In the domain of Information Systems [ DM12 ] , schol - ars have studied how boundary objects can help coordinate stake - holders in terms of knowledge and power gaps within complex de - sign ecologies [ MLB07 ] . We will draw on the concept , the body of work surrounding it , and reﬂect on how it applies to visualization research in a multi - disciplinary context . We will focus on a speciﬁc project centering around the visualization and design of novel isochrone maps . 2 . 3 . Geo - spatial Analysis and Isochrone Maps To ground our discussion , we turn to a project focused on sup - porting geo - spatial analysis with Isochrone Maps . We sought to of - fer urban planners and citizens better geo - spatial analysis tools , to make more informed decisions . For instance , exploring how reach - able areas can be using one or multiple transport modes . Solving such problem often requires relying upon various layers of infor - mation ( basemaps for context , road and network , and eventually points of interest . Resulting reachability maps are often designed using isochrone maps , which are overlays that convey time using shapes . Figure 2 illustrates a typical isochrone map where the red color gradient indicates which part of the city is reachable from an origin in different time intervals . Isochrone maps are featured on many websites and have been applied to many application do - mains in mobility [ EGL ∗ 13 , ZFA ∗ 14 , OG15 ] , but there has been lit - tle attempt to visually improve them except at the algorithmic level ( e . g . , [ MG10 , GBCI11 ] ) . The closest work to improve isochrones visual appearance is IsoScope [ GKvN14 ] that conveys time vari - ability by animating isochrones over different times of the day , or lens - based visualizations blending detailed networks views , with isochrones for context [ LTD19 ] . 2 . 4 . Cartographic Generalization In this project , we drew on principles of cartographic generaliza - tion . Generalization is the process of abstracting maps by either adding , removing or transforming existing elements . Such a pro - cess is useful to improve map readability and is for instance cur - rently used to render different maps at different zoom levels . Gen - eralization roots back to paper cartography [ Bru86 , BM91 , MS92 ] , and there is still some active work to achieve if automatically in a digital environment [ BDM14 ] , but is not automatically achievable or is dedicated to a speciﬁc domain ( e . g . , taxi routes [ KAB ∗ 10 ] or touristic maps [ BMWW14 ] ) . Generalization can be summarized using the following [ Zhi13 ] dimensions such as : S ELECTION to re - move eliminate elements by category ( e . g . , roads or labels ) ; S IM - PLIFICATION to remove details ( e . g . , apply ﬁltering on curves ) ; S MOOTHING to reduce sharp shapes ( e . g . , angles ) ; E XAGGERA - TION to enlarge elements while keeping the geometry constraint ; C OMBINATION to combine different elements while keeping their individual semantic ; D ISPLACEMENT to change the position of el - ements ; ﬁnally , A GGREGATION to represent groups of objects dif - ferently ; E NHANCEMENT combines the E XAGGERATION and the S MOOTHING properties ( mostly on geometry ) process . Applying generalization principles to isochrone maps consists in following the former principles to both the basemap as well as all overlays , including the isochrone one . However , as the isochrone shapes are data - driven , they require a strong knowledge of the un - derlying isochrone generation processes from experts in GIS ( Geo - Graphical Information Systems ) and cartography . 3 . Case study context This work was conducted with the M 2 I PROJECT , a 4 - year , nation - ally funded project to improve urban mobility . We closely worked with domain experts in mobility to build visualizations for citi - zens and decision - makers . We discuss here work conducted within a speciﬁc work package that aims at building better reachability maps for decision - makers and urban planners . 3 . 1 . Actors and Resources We gathered an inter - disciplinary [ Ste91 ] team of 5 actors in this project with skills that match the needs we identiﬁed prior to star our design study : • D ES ( Designer ) is part - time Interaction Design student , with a background in graphics design ; • G IS ( Geographic Information Systems post - doc ) is full - time GIS Expert , with a background in geography ; ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 3 : Screenshot of our interactive notebook generating para - metric isochrones maps . It is based on an ObservableHQ notebook and exposes its design parameters as widgets ( e . g . , check - boxes ) or code ( e . g . , CSS ) . • M AP ( Cartograph ) is a freelance Cartographer with D3js [ BOH11 ] and ObservableHQ notebooks [ Bos20 ] ex - pertise , and a background in mathematics and journalism ; • V IS ( InfoVis researcher ) is Assistant Professor splitting time be - tween this research project , teaching and administrative duties ; • H CI ( Human - Computer Interaction researcher ) : Assistant Pro - fessor also splitting time between research projects , teaching and administrative duties . The actors have different backgrounds and expertise : they belong to different communities of practice [ Wen99 ] . In our case , we are situated within a funded project with deliverables and industry part - ners , a university research group , a computer science laboratory , in - formal research networks for academics , or professional networks for freelancers , engineers , and designers . Both V IS and H CI act as co - PIs of the project and are leads writing this article . They also were responsible for the early design study stages ( pre - condition ones [ SMM12 ] ) and lead the structure of the analysis part . 3 . 2 . Requirements Isochrone maps can become rather complex , and it may be difﬁcult to grasp details as some fairly complex areas . Moreover integrat - ing variability and uncertainty as underlying data is often inaccu - rate ( e . g . , bus schedule is theoretic ) and varies over time ( e . g . , bus frequency during day or nights ) . The straightforward solution of adding such information directly on the map would provide visual clutter . Building upon the cartographic generalization principles we introduced in the related work , we deﬁned a set of requirements : R1 keep geo - layers consistent R2 convey underlying structural information R3 simplify the visual complexity of isochrones R4 convey accessibility at varying travel durations R1 is motivated by the need to add more layers of informa - tion to the maps . While space - deformation techniques such as car - tograms [ Tob04 ] are quite popular to encode quantities spatially , they make it more complex to align layers and are harder to under - stand for non - experts . Even techniques that seek to limit deforma - tion [ BDD ∗ 16 , HKYA14 ] , are can lead to confusion . With R1 , all layers should use the same location , but also the same projection coordinate system , we did not consider the D ISPLACEMENT gen - eralization dimension . Nonetheless , we considered that minor dis - placement could be acceptable , e . g . , using simpliﬁed or enhanced shapes . Previous ( unpublished ) laboratory experiments with isochrones , as well as discussions with project stakeholders and users , showed us that dendrites and isolated accessible spots were hard to reason about . This motivated R2 and R3 . We tackled the simpliﬁcation re - quirement by using the S ELECTION generalization dimension that removes elements , as well as S IMPLIFICATION and S MOOTHING dimensions . Showing underlying structure ( R2 ) and varying travel durations ( R4 ) can be addressed with C OMBINATION . R4 is motivated by the variable nature of isochrone maps un - derlying information , such as the location of departure , travel date , mode , and duration . Thus reachability should reﬂect different types of reachability , e . g . , for different travel times . 3 . 3 . Documentation method We conducted the design study over a period of 15 weeks within the scope of the larger M 2 I PROJECT ( other sub - projects happened in parallel within and outside this project , all related to urban mo - bility ) . We tracked all interactions within the team by turning on the history features of our digital tools , to date and identify authors of the changes . We gathered a corpus that is representative of most in - teractions ( except informal face - to - face discussions ) . We focus our reporting in the next sections on the : 1 . lifecycle of tools and artifacts we organized as a timeline 2 . main artifacts produced and used during the project 3 . ﬁnal outcome we presented to our external project partners While we provide transparency in our reporting for those ele - ments ( and provide some of them as supplemental material ) , inter - nal and detailed working documents ( Google Documents , Calen - dars ) cannot be shared for privacy and disclosure agreement rea - sons . The ﬁnal result of this implementation is illustrated on ﬁg - ure 1 ( right ) and is detailed in section 6 . In the next section , we present the tools we used , analyze their role , and how they con - tributed to the ﬁnal outcomes . 4 . Lifecycle of Tools and Artifacts We identiﬁed 12 main moments in the design process ( see ﬁgure 4 ) , and 18 formal meetings . Each moment corresponded to interactions within the team geared towards a speciﬁc goal and leveraging arti - facts . The moments could be short , e . g . , a 2 - hour workshop , or span over several weeks . The work intensity could also vary from being a background activity of the team to being full - time work for sev - eral actors at once . In our description , we signal boundary objects with the same box used in ﬁgure 4 , e . g . the output of the meetings were captured in a shared document of meeting notes . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 4 : Collaboration timeline of the design study ( top is the beginning , the bottom is the end ) ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Design space of isochrone maps ( 1 ) We started the project by collecting existing isochrones examples , either from personal collections , found on the web or in the lit - erature . We structured this isochrone map collection in a shared spreadsheet that allowed anybody to contribute and discover the collection https : / / goo . gl / GV7Urg . We kept a total of 32 isochrone maps [ VLRT18 ] . Digital sketching of maps ( 2 ) When the designer joined the team , she started familiarizing her - self with the domain space , by sketching strategies to overlap isochrone maps and display variations in Adobe Illustrator . The work was shared using as a process book , in a shared online doc - ument , which supported exchanges around different maps between the H CI , V IS and D ES actors . Map mood boards ( 3 ) In parallel , the designer created two mood boards : a broad visual collection of accessibility maps , and a collection of basemaps . D ES used Pinterest ( http : / / pinterest . com / anaellebeignon / plan / ) , which is widely adopted by the de - sign community , for collecting and assembling visual material into collections , and D ES felt it was more appropriate for the task at hand . Design directions ( 4 ) After initial explorations , the team reﬂected on previous projects and ongoing explorations to deﬁne a new direction . The focus on generalization was not precisely articulated yet but centered on expressing isochrones variation , and better integrating basemaps , transit networks , and isochrones . These directions were captured as a list of requirements and mainly framed by the assistant pro - fessors , in the shared online document containing meeting notes . Rapid prototypes → data - based designs ( 5 ) The designer experienced well - known limits [ BDFM14 ] of data binding using graphics editing tools ( mainly vector operations in Adobe Illustrator , and sometimes shifting to Photoshop for com - plex masking or raster operations that were doable but costly to execute in Illustrator ) . Isochrones are highly complex data struc - tures that blend itinerary calculation with geometric shapes , mak - ing it hard to manipulate design parameters , while being faithful to data ( especially when injecting new ones to convey time or struc - ture R4 , R2 ) . This is reinforced in our case because of R1 which requires consistency between layers so if an isochrone is drawn on one layer , then it should match others ( e . g . , annotations , POIs , etc . ) . This led D ES to learn how to use QGIS from the G IS expert , to create data - driven SVG shapes that could be imported into Il - lustrator to simulate isochrone style information directly , treating network layers differently , or applying masks . The resulting maps were shared in an online process book , and discussed during team meetings to deﬁne new design directions , and identifying the cor - responding cartographic data that would be required . Design workshops ( 6 , 8 , 10 ) We conducted 3 design workshops involving the team at differ - ent stages of the project using paper - based designs . They aimed at exploring design variations for the various layers . The ﬁrst work - shop was very open - ended and explored the material properties of paper in combining map layers . The second workshop focused on variability and simpliﬁcation ( R3 ) . The third workshop bal - anced between a design review and a generative workshop focusing on incremental improvements . In all the workshops , we sketched paper maps with our own perspectives , critiqued them , and cap - tured them for later reviews . Designs → static tool ( 7 , 9 ) M AP built a tool that implemented the layers - based design , previ - ously created . One isochrone map created with QGIS and Illustra - tor by the designer ( displayed in ﬁgure 4 , phase 7 ) served as the main design direction . Unlike a classical isochrone , this design did not obfuscate the basemap , while providing more explanations on why distant zones around transit stations were easily reachable . This map and tool enabled us to 1 ) to explore rapidly design vari - ations that took hours or days to create with QGIS and Illustrator , and 2 ) inject realistic isochrones datasets to geo - reachability sce - narios . We could confront design ideas to realistic datasets , and for instance notice that some design elements did not have correspond - ing , e . g . , the direction of a transit line . At this stage , we picked a capital city which was familiar to the team and set a zoom level that allowed to have the city ﬁt within the page ( no need to zoom ) . The city was also well - known by the project’s partner who has independently built isochrones for this city as well . The tool was built with ObservableHQ [ Bos20 ] using D3 [ BOH11 ] , and querying the Navitia . io API . This led M AP to use API calls provided by G IS to gather the appropriate data ( phase 9 ) . Static tool → parametric tool ( 11 ) The longest phase was to code custom interactive design tools . Both the G IS and M AP built one and the prototypes enabled us to quickly explore data and design variations . G IS mostly tested data fetching through transit APIs and simpliﬁcation algorithms . The M AP prototype used Web technologies and became shared within the team with minimal UI exposing parameters we carried along from the design space identiﬁcation and which were reﬁned dur - ing previous steps . As we did not want to have too many param - eters , M AP only activated the ones related to layers visibility or level of details ( e . g . , tiles map scale level ) . When some parameters were too complex to expose using widgets , the code section of the notebook exposed variables that could be changed in - place through JavaScript or CSS . The selected parameter combinations were dy - namically saved through the URL so that D ES could easily share design explorations . The parametric tool is an ObservableHQ notebook ( https : / / observablehq . com / @ romsson / isochrone ) so all team members could look at the maps it produced and tweak the code . Towards the end of the design process , D ES edited CSS properties directly in ObservableHQ for more precise and faster design itera - tions . We present the ﬁnal design choices in section 6 . Expert Feedback . One of the co - PIs presented the ﬁnal designs to an external project coordinator related to the reachability maps design sub - project . We remotely presented 6 techniques in a slideshow of Generalized Maps screenshots . The expert provided feedback while discussing the differences with the ones they generated in their company . The discussion cen - tered on : 1 ) the relevance of layers : transit and road networks , mo - bility strategies ( bike , car , scooters , transit ) , points of interest , real - ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 5 : Illustration of one of the paper - based workshops we organized . One can see the various possibilities paper layers have to offer , from creating overlays ( right ) to ﬂipbooks with transparent layers ( middle ) . estate . On our side the discussion centered on their integration es - pecially aligning them ( R1 ) , and how to display temporal progres - sion R4 . 2 ) the strategy to reveal the underlying structure , while we aimed at displaying it outside the highly connected center R2 , the partner chose to display the journey from the center when a point was clicked on the map . 3 ) the accuracy of the maps produced ; this discussion centered on various locations around P ARIS , FR , and the shape of isochrones one should expect . Related to the accu - racy , we discussed the complexity of the underlying computations to offer results in interactive times , and strategies to simplify the presentation R3 . 5 . An Artifact - Centric Retrospective We now revisit the artifacts used by reﬂecting on their nature and their impact on the project . As encouraged by both Star [ Sta10 ] and Lee [ Lee07 ] , we extend and propose new categories of artifacts , when existing ones do not ﬁt . It should be noted that the status of a given artifact can change over time , as its status is deﬁned by the way it is used . A paper sketch can be generative during a creative workshop and become structuring if it is the one picked to be implemented . 5 . 1 . Structured Collections We created several collections of maps , i . e . an isochrone map col - lections , and two mood boards . But only the collection can be considered as a boundary object . The designer created the mood boards primarily for personal use as an inspiration source . They were loosely structured and contained elements that were not maps , but inspirational shapes or color compositions . They would fall in the self - explanation artifacts category [ Lee07 ] . The construction of the design space is an instance of the repos - itory deﬁnition [ Sta10 ] . Like all repositories , it had limits , and el - ements that we had to leave out because they were hard to char - acterize . For instance , the visual signature of isochrones ( e . g . , branches / dendrites , the organicity of the shapes , . . . ) The main ben - eﬁt of the design space is that it allowed us to identify and discuss isochrone properties . It also helped frame what should be consid - ered an isochrone , align everybody on the project , both internally but also with our project partners , and deﬁne the degrees of freedom for prototyping . The designer joined the project after it was created and it helped frame her understanding . 5 . 2 . Structuring Artifacts Our requirement list was the primary structuring artifact [ Lee07 ] . It guided our initial explorations and helped us negotiate a com - mon direction : the team members shared limitations they found to isochrones and directions they thought could lead to better designs . The other structuring artifacts we identiﬁed were two maps cre - ated by D ES and which served as the main development direction for M AP and G IS ( maps with stars on ﬁgure 4 , moments 5 and 7 ) . The code prototypes did not implement 100 % of the map designs because of technical limitations or changes in the design direction as the project evolved . The whole team referred to these map im - ages when discussing progress and iterations on the prototypes . These structuring artifacts had two properties : 1 ) they were piv - otal in the project i . e . setting design parameters and narrowing the design space , and 2 ) we came back to them at a different instance of the project to decide to check whether the design choices we were discussing were in line with these artifacts , as representations of the direction we had set . 5 . 3 . Process - centric Artifacts Process - centric artifacts are close to what Henderson calls con - scription devices : process - related artifacts that enlist group par - ticipation and capture created knowledge [ Hen99 ] . In our case , standup notes , meeting notes , and process books were the main process - centric artifacts . Meeting and standup notes are shared on - line documents that are captured by the team and that help capture progress , todos , and blocking problems . The process books of D ES , who also shared online documents , served a different role as she was the only one ﬁlling them with maps . But they were reviewed by the team members , who could comment on the various maps produced and guide asynchronously the process . We came back to these documents for writing the article , but dur - ing the project , they rather acted as an externalization of the team’s ongoing thoughts and activities , and as a short - term memory . We came back much more often to content that was less than a week or 10 days old . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 6 : Illustration of the 6 techniques D ES selected using the interactive code - based prototype . ( a ) I SOCHRONE , ( b ) D ETAILED , ( c ) S IMPLIFIED , ( d ) M ASK , ( e ) S HADING , ( f ) C ONTINUOUS . 5 . 4 . Generative Artifacts Two types of artifacts , paper maps , and ObservableHQ note - books served generative purposes . The inclusion artifacts from Lee [ Lee07 ] and the Ideal Type objects from Star [ SG89 ] serve a similar purpose , but are static . Whereas the artifacts discussed here are dynamic , they can be manipulated , shared , or remixed . Paper maps supported exploration , especially through their ma - terial properties : use of layers , opacity , and transparency , color combinations , drawing and inking strategies , paper types , cutting and stacking layers . In workshops , exploration strategies that would have been difﬁcult or impossible with digital tools became possible with paper , e . g . complex cuts , or dynamic opacity ( ﬁgure 5 shows generative artifacts co - created during a workshop ) . These generative artifacts did not serve directly as speciﬁcations . They were not using realistic or coherent data e . g . , transit network from one city and isochrone shape from another but enabled us to explore and generate ideas through layer operations and drawing . The ﬁnal parametric ObservableHQ notebook can also be con - sidered as a generative artifact : it supports design explorations , through interactive parametric controls , but also direct code modiﬁ - cations . Towards the end of the project , D ES would directly modify CSS from the notebook to get faster and more realistic feedback on design choices . We also observed a back and forth between paper and Observ - ableHQ notebooks : We used printed maps generated with the para - metric notebooks in the last workshop , and M AP introduced some suggestions from paper sketches as parameters in the notebook . One challenge with these generative artifacts has been scoping the exploration . The freedom of paper also created challenges and long discussions about the faithfulness of the sketches to the data . With the notebook , many parameters were tied to each other or redundant . Finding interesting combinations became difﬁcult as the expressiveness of the tool increased . 5 . 5 . Bridging Artifacts The paper , digital , and code prototypes , can be considered as bridg - ing artifacts . While most of the artifacts presented before were co - created by the team . The prototypes were developed by one actor , who then presented his / her work as a manifestation of the proto - type , either through screenshots or a link to a notebook . In any case , these artifacts were directed from one person to the rest of the team , expecting feedback , but no direct involvement in the pro - totype development . As the development progressed , D ES and M AP iterated upon de - sign choices , and ﬁxing technical problems . This process was often conversational , with team members reﬂecting on screenshots or ex - amples , with the overall project in mind . It is only in the latest stage of development of the ObservableHQ notebook , when it moved to be a tool that could be used , that its status changed to become gen - erative . Another type of bridging artifacts was the paper prototypes after they were created . Considered as generative artifacts during work - shops , the most interesting instances were captured as collections of maps and displayed as a mini - exhibit on an empty desk ( ﬁg - ure 5 right ) . The output of D ES ’s material explorations of paper maps was also stuck on walls . This was especially useful to trigger conversations within the team but also with colleagues , or visitors , making the project much easier to convey to an external audience . One of the co - PIs also assembled maps created with the paramet - ric tool into a slide - show , to share the team progress with project partners , and gather feedback on the designs . This is another in - stance of a bridging artifact with actors outside the team . Many of the bridging artifacts also served as snapshots of progress , that could be shared in - process books , or through direct communication channels . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Figure 7 : Isochrone maps examples of P ARIS , FR to characterize the reachability of different locations : highly connected to the transporta - tion network one ( left ) ; isolated one ( top right ) , external location with transportation mostly towards the center of the city ( top center ) ; and isochrone that display further information about reachability of distant locations . Click on text for the live interactive version . 6 . Project outcomes The ﬁnal outcome of our process is an ObservableHQ notebook and a set of techniques generated with it and illustrated both on ﬁgure 1 ( right ) , ﬁgure 6 and 7 . An Interactive notebook . The main result is the code - based proto - type developed during the study : M AP ’s ObservableHQ notebook ( ﬁgure 3 ) . While this UI is restricted to the notebook capabilities , it was sufﬁcient to expose the main parameters or the code to tweak during the feedback sessions we organized . This tool was used to generate all the isochrone illustrations in this paper We also used this tool to identify speciﬁc techniques we discuss next . Note that this tool was not intended to be part of our deliverables , but it reached such a level of expressiveness and interactivity that we de - cided to share it . Techniques . As D ES used the notebook to re - recreate static pro - totypes and test variations , it started converging towards one main technique ( ﬁgure 7 left ) we considered the ﬁnal result and ended the core phase of the design study [ SMM12 ] . This design display tran - sit lines in the dendrites , to explain their construction , and the tran - sit ﬂows / network structure . This is displayed outside the isochrone core where displaying network information would be too dense . We used 5 minutes steps with a color gradient , and transparency to ensure the base map would remain visible . Other techniques ( ﬁgure 6 ) show interesting points in the design space that were either candidate to the best technique , or interesting variations that would need further investigation : I SOCHRONE ( ﬁgure 6 - a ) is an isochrone map using 5 - minute dis - tance steps . A central darker layer of simpliﬁed bounding shapes account for variability , and for improving visual continuity ( R1 , R4 ) . D ETAILED ( ﬁgure 6 - b ) the isochrone central dark ﬁlling is removed to make the basemap more visible , a new layer with structuring transit routes outside the densely connected center conveys information about the underlying network ( C OMBINATION ) . Half - circle around stations convey the travel direction ( S IMPLIFICATION ) , and give temporal cues on reacha - bility from each of those stations ( R1 , R2 , R4 ) . S IMPLIFIED ( ﬁgure 6 - c ) is similar to D ETAILED , but the isochrone layer is completely removed ( S ELECTION ) and only simpliﬁed contours remain ( R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 ) . M ASK ( ﬁgure 6 - d ) emphasizes the basemap of the accessible parts , while connecting the dendrites with transit lines , and half - circle directions ( R1 , R2 , R3 ) . S HADING ( ﬁgure 6 - e ) emphasizes accessibility through an hill - shading effect ( E XAGGERATION ) , the isochrones lines provide precise information , while the hills provide a simpler and more continuous read of the accessibility ( R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 ) . C ONTINUOUS ( ﬁgure 6 - f ) extends the D ETAILED technique by providing more time steps ( in light blue ) , covering the whole map ( R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 ) . 7 . Discussions and Limits Through this project , we created interactive isochrone designs that comply with cartographic generalization rules . We identiﬁed inter - esting techniques variations and insights using our parametric tool ( ﬁgure 7 ) , and received positive feedback from our partners . Re - ﬂections on boundary objects in our process allowed us to retro - spectively classify them into 5 categories . This section discusses the limits of our study methodology . Following modern software development practices—such as Agile retrospectives [ BBVB ∗ 01 ] —we discussed our process dur - ing frequent meetings where each participant explained What worked well , What didn’t work well and Next steps or Actions . Some form of reﬂective activities were already implemented but mostly focused on improving communication and coordination . We also had stand - ups meeting every second day and structured our process around shared documents and code repositories . The list of requirements was always discussed and updated during those meetings . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Working with rapid iterations had the setback of discarding am - bitious , yet complex experiments . For instance , geometric simpliﬁ - cation ( e . g . , using Peucker’s algorithm ) was investigated as a treat - ment on the geometry of the central blob . But since preliminary re - sults were not satisfactory , as those experiments were time - boxed , we sought alternatives to such technique . The same happened as we moved away from a skeleton - based approach that were better performing than the simpliﬁcation we used . On a methodological level , we did not deﬁne anchor moments upfront . Deﬁning such moments , regardless of progress , could en - sure incremental documentation and foster dedicated moments for reﬂection . Along the same lines , we managed to maintain stand - up and meeting notes , but only D ES maintained a process book , which could have been extended to the whole team to better capture inter - actions and global progress . The fact that M AP worked remotely and that PIs had multiple ofﬁces on campus both facilitated and forced us to shift to online channels of communication and work , leading to more capture and documentation than may happen in smaller or co - located projects . This proved extremely beneﬁcial to our retrospective process . Looking back at our design process , we noticed that some of the artifacts categories were better supported ( e . g . , to manage or cap - ture them ) than others . This opens up opportunities for the develop - ment of collaborative tools that support InfoVis design processes : • The creation of structured collections was well supported , we used an online spreadsheet and Exhibit [ MG10 ] , but other tools such as SurVis [ BKW16 ] are already available to the community . • Managing framing artifacts was straightforward since their quan - tity was limited . One question is whether we could have im - proved them by applying more structure to them , or whether moving from map images to speciﬁcation lists could have im - proved our discussions and the resulting prototypes . • We captured generative artifacts mostly through screenshots and photos . This was quite limiting , animation effects were difﬁ - cult to convey and capture . Another challenge we encountered was collaborating around these artifacts remotely . Tools such as DoDoc [ GGED16 ] that support the capture of workshop activi - ties could be extended to better support remote collaboration . • Process - centric artifacts were the least supported . Different threads of design explorations were explored in parallel creat - ing a classical tension between a chronological structure and a thematic one on the design side . On the code side , it was much more challenging to capture and share progress . In both situations commenting on the content of the process - centric ar - tifacts was challenging , for instance , the documents only sup - ported comment on an image level , and commenting on Jupyter or ObservableHQ notebooks is still not well supported . Finally , although code can be versioned , most of the intermediary code prototypes are not accessible anymore , which means that we can - not reproduce intermediary results that we could ﬁnd interesting in retrospect . • Bridging artifacts were mostly used informally to support dis - cussions . Under such conditions , they were not captured , except if they were added to a process - centric artifact . Finally , maps or other visual representations should not only be considered as the ﬁnal artifact and end - result of cartographic or vi - sualization research . They supported cooperative work throughout the design process , being discussed and iterated upon . While vi - sualization design tools could better support interdisciplinary work and collaboration , in becoming more stable , they will likely codify how collaborations between disciplines should happen . This is an avenue for future work on design studies : investi - gating when boundary objects reach a stable stage and become “standards " , or whether such standards already exist in industry or academia . This is discussed implicitly in the literature around de - sign sheets , survey platforms , and other side outcomes of projects . But it is rarely articulated as such . Moreover , our work centered mostly on internal collaboration , yet many projects involve more loosely tied collaboration and exchanges with external stakehold - ers . This calls for further attention to artifacts that support collab - orations within and outside project teams . Science and Technology Studies also suggest that paying attention to power and political dynamics in larger projects and organizations , as they also shape the tools used , the value put in various design artifacts , and ﬁnal outcomes . 8 . Summary and Perspectives We took an artifact - centric approach to discuss our design process , by using boundary objects as an analytical lens . We reﬂected on our work and on the collaboration within an inter - disciplinary team developing novel visualizations . Our team had actors commonly in - volved in visualization research projects : PIs , researchers , design - ers , and engineers , with various areas of expertise , career paths , and belonging to different communities of practice . Our processes and tools of choice were different and had to be aligned to collaborate . The 5 artifacts categories we introduced ( structured collections , structuring artifacts , process - centric artifacts , generative artifacts , and bridging artifacts ) structured our work , tied it together , and sup - ported everyday collaboration . While some framing artifacts had an even stronger role and clearly shaped the project outcome . We structured our transcription of the design process around a collabo - ration timeline , with the evolution of the maps at each stage of the process . Our approach enabled us to present the end results— novel isochrone maps using cartographic generalization— but also inter - mediary collections , tools , and artifacts , that were used for personal but also inter - personal cooperation . This paper demonstrated the beneﬁts to complement the struc - ture of design studies [ SMM12 ] with an attention to collaboration artifacts . It may enable the InfoVis community to go beyond the narratives of controlled design processes that can be replicated re - gardless of the context in which they unfold . An artifact - centric approach can capture design practices that could be transferred and reused in other contexts , e . g . as tools and recipes that can be in - crementally incorporated in projects , rather than as a whole design process . 9 . Acknowledgments We thank Thomas Leysens for his technical contribution . This project was partially supported by the M2i project on Urban Mobil - ity funded by French Agency for Ecological Transition ( ADEME ) https : / / projet . liris . cnrs . fr / mi2 / . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies Supplementary materials http : / / github . com / sical / boundary - objects - design - studies / References [ BBVB ∗ 01 ] B ECK K . , B EEDLE M . , V AN B ENNEKUM A . , C OCKBURN A . , C UNNINGHAM W . , F OWLER M . , G RENNING J . , H IGHSMITH J . , H UNT A . , J EFFRIES R . : Manifesto for agile software development . [ BDD ∗ 16 ] B OUTS Q . W . , D WYER T . , D YKES J . , S PECKMANN B . , G OODWIN S . , R ICHE N . H . , C ARPENDALE S . , L IEBMAN A . : Visual Encoding of Dissimilarity Data via Topology - Preserving Map Deforma - tion . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22 , 9 ( Sept . 2016 ) , 2200 – 2213 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2500225 . [ BDFM14 ] B IGELOW A . , D RUCKER S . , F ISHER D . , M EYER M . : Re - ﬂections on How Designers Design with Data . In Proceedings of the 2014 International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( New York , NY , USA , 2014 ) , AVI ’14 , ACM , pp . 17 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2598153 . 2598175 . [ BDM14 ] B URGHARDT D . , D UCHÊNE C . , M ACKANESS W . : Abstract - ing Geographic Information in a Data Rich World : Methodologies and Applications of Map Generalisation . Springer , July 2014 . [ BKW16 ] B ECK F . , K OCH S . , W EISKOPF D . : Visual Analysis and Dis - semination of Scientiﬁc Literature Collections with SurVis . IEEE Trans - actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22 , 1 ( Jan . 2016 ) , 180 – 189 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467757 . [ BM91 ] B UTTENFIELD B . P . , M C M ASTER R . B . : Map Generalization : Making Rules for Knowledge Representation . Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical New York , 1991 . [ BMWW14 ] B IRSAK M . , M USIALSKI P . , W ONKA P . , W IMMER M . : Automatic generation of tourist brochures . Computer Graphics Forum 33 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 449 – 458 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cgf . 12333 . [ BOH11 ] B OSTOCK M . , O GIEVETSKY V . , H EER J . : D3 ; Data - Driven Documents . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph - ics 17 , 12 ( Dec . 2011 ) , 2301 – 2309 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2011 . 185 . [ Bos20 ] B OSTOCK M . : Observable . https : / / observablehq . com / , Dec . 2020 . [ Bru86 ] B RUNET R . : La carte - modèle et les chorèmes . Mappemonde 86 , 4 ( 1986 ) , 2 – 6 . [ BS00 ] B OWKER G . C . , S TAR S . L . : Sorting Things Out : Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences . MIT Press , Aug . 2000 . [ DM12 ] D OOLIN B . , M C L EOD L . : Sociomateriality and boundary ob - jects in information systems development . European Journal of Infor - mation Systems 21 , 5 ( Sept . 2012 ) , 570 – 586 . doi : 10 . 1057 / ejis . 2012 . 20 . [ EGL ∗ 13 ] E FENTAKIS A . , G RIVAS N . , L AMPRIANIDIS G . , M AGEN - SCHAB G . , P FOSER D . : Isochrones , Trafﬁc and DEMOgraphics . In Pro - ceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Ad - vances in Geographic Information Systems ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , SIGSPATIAL’13 , ACM , pp . 548 – 551 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2525314 . 2525325 . [ GBCI11 ] G AMPER J . , B ÖHLEN M . H . , C OMETTI W . , I NNEREBNER M . : Deﬁning isochrones in multimodal spatial networks . In Proceed - ings of the 20th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Man - agement , CIKM 2011 , Glasgow , United Kingdom , October 24 - 28 , 2011 ( 2011 ) , Macdonald C . , Ounis I . , Ruthven I . , ( Eds . ) , ACM , pp . 2381 – 2384 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2063576 . 2063972 . [ GGED16 ] G OURLET P . , G ARCIN S . , E VEILLARD L . , D ERVIEUX F . : DoDoc : A Composite Interface That Supports Reﬂection - in - Action . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( New York , NY , USA , 2016 ) , TEI ’16 , ACM , pp . 316 – 323 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839506 . [ GKvN14 ] G ORTANA F . , K AIM S . , VON L UPIN M . , N AGEL T . : Isoscope - Visualizing temporal mobility variance with isochrone maps . Poster Abstracts of IEEE VIS 2014 ( 2014 ) . [ Hen99 ] H ENDERSON K . : On Line and on Paper : Visual Representa - tions , Visual Culture , and Computer Graphics in Design Engineering . MIT Press , Jan . 1999 . [ HKYA14 ] H ONG S . R . , K IM Y . - S . , Y OON J . - C . , A RAGON C . R . : Trafﬁgram : Distortion for clariﬁcation via isochronal cartography . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , Apr . 2014 ) , CHI ’14 , Association for Computing Machinery , pp . 907 – 916 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557224 . [ KAB ∗ 10 ] K OPF J . , A GRAWALA M . , B ARGERON D . , S ALESIN D . , C O - HEN M . : Automatic Generation of Destination Maps . In ACM SIG - GRAPH Asia 2010 Papers ( New York , NY , USA , 2010 ) , SIGGRAPH ASIA ’10 , ACM , pp . 158 : 1 – 158 : 12 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1866158 . 1866184 . [ LB03 ] L ARMAN C . , B ASILI V . R . : Iterative and incremental devel - opments . a brief history . Computer 36 , 6 ( June 2003 ) , 47 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1109 / MC . 2003 . 1204375 . [ Lee05 ] L EE C . P . : Between Chaos and Routine : Boundary Negotiat - ing Artifacts in Collaboration . In ECSCW 2005 ( 2005 ) , Gellersen H . , Schmidt K . , Beaudouin - Lafon M . , Mackay W . , ( Eds . ) , Springer Nether - lands , pp . 387 – 406 . [ Lee07 ] L EE C . P . : Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Rou - tine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 16 , 3 ( June 2007 ) , 307 – 339 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 007 - 9044 - 5 . [ LTD19 ] L ISTEMANN M . , T RAPP M . , D ÖLLNE J . : Lens - based Fo - cus + Context Visualization Techniques for Interactive Exploration of Web - based Reachability Maps . Journal of WSCG 27 , 2 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 24132 / JWSCG . 2019 . 27 . 2 . 1 . [ Luc12 ] L UCERO A . : Framing , aligning , paradoxing , abstracting , and directing : How design mood boards work . In Proceedings of the De - signing Interactive Systems Conference on - DIS ’12 ( Newcastle Upon Tyne , United Kingdom , 2012 ) , ACM Press , p . 438 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318021 . [ MBW11 ] M UNZNER T . , B ARSKY A . , W ILLIAMS M . : Reﬂections on QuestVis : A Visualization System for an Environmental Sustain - ability Model . In Scientiﬁc Visualization : Interactions , Features , Metaphors , Hagen H . , ( Ed . ) , vol . 2 of Dagstuhl Follow - Ups . Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz - Zentrum fuer Informatik , Dagstuhl , Germany , 2011 , pp . 240 – 259 . doi : 10 . 4230 / DFU . Vol2 . SciViz . 2011 . 240 . [ MD20 ] M EYER M . , D YKES J . : Criteria for Rigor in Visualization De - sign Study . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 26 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 87 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2019 . 2934539 . [ MG10 ] M ARCIUSKA S . , G AMPER J . : Determining Objects within Isochrones in Spatial Network Databases . In Advances in Databases and Information Systems ( Sept . 2010 ) , Lecture Notes in Computer Sci - ence , Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , pp . 392 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 15576 - 5 _ 30 . [ MLB07 ] M ARK G . , L YYTINEN K . , B ERGMAN M . : Boundary Ob - jects in Design : An Ecological View of Design Artifacts . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 8 , 11 ( Nov . 2007 ) , 546 – 568 . doi : 10 . 17705 / 1jais . 00144 . [ MS92 ] M C M ASTER R . B . , S HEA K . S . : Generalization in digital car - tography . Association of American Geographers Washington , DC . [ Mun09 ] M UNZNER T . : A nested model for visualization design and val - idation . Visualization and Computer Graphics , IEEE Transactions on 15 , 6 ( 2009 ) , 921 – 928 . [ OG15 ] O TAMENDI F . J . , G ARCÍA - H EREDIA D . : Isochrones as In - dicators of the Inﬂuence of Trafﬁc in Public Health : A Visual Simu - lation Application in Ávila , Spain . International Journal of Environ - mental Research and Public Health 12 , 10 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 12556 – 12576 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph121012556 . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . R . Vuillemot , P . Rivière , A . Beignon , A . Tabard / Boundary Objects in Design Studies [ PPV00 ] P ERRY D . E . , P ORTER A . A . , V OTTA L . G . : Empirical Studies of Software Engineering : A Roadmap . In Proceedings of the Conference on The Future of Software Engineering ( New York , NY , USA , 2000 ) , ICSE ’00 , ACM , pp . 345 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 336512 . 336586 . [ SG89 ] S TAR S . L . , G RIESEMER J . R . : Institutional Ecology , ‘Transla - tions’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social Studies of Science 19 , 3 ( Aug . 1989 ) , 387 – 420 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 030631289019003001 . [ SMM12 ] S EDLMAIR M . , M EYER M . , M UNZNER T . : Design Study Methodology : Reﬂections from the Trenches and the Stacks . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18 , 12 ( 2012 ) , 2431 – 2440 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2012 . 213 . [ Sta10 ] S TAR S . L . : This is Not a Boundary Object : Reﬂections on the Origin of a Concept . Science , Technology , & Human Values 35 , 5 ( Sept . 2010 ) , 601 – 617 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0162243910377624 . [ Ste91 ] S TEMBER M . : Advancing the social sciences through the inter - disciplinary enterprise . The Social Science Journal 28 , 1 ( Jan . 1991 ) , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0362 - 3319 ( 91 ) 90040 - B . [ Tob04 ] T OBLER W . : Thirty Five Years of Computer Cartograms . Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 , 1 ( Mar . 2004 ) , 58 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8306 . 2004 . 09401004 . x . [ VLRT18 ] V UILLEMOT R . , L EYSENS T . , R IVIÈRE P . , T ABARD A . : An Online Corpus of Isochrone Maps . In CityVis – Urban Data Visualization ( Berlin , Germany , 2018 ) . [ Wen99 ] W ENGER E . : Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , and Identity . Cambridge University Press , Sept . 1999 . [ ZFA ∗ 14 ] Z ENG W . , F U C . W . , A RISONA S . M . , E RATH A . , Q U H . : Visualizing Mobility of Public Transportation System . IEEE Transac - tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20 , 12 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 1833 – 1842 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2014 . 2346893 . [ Zhi13 ] Z HILIN L . : Digital Map Generalization at the Age of Enlightenment : A Review of the First Forty Years : The Cartographic Journal : Vol 44 , No 1 . https : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1179 / 000870407X173913 , Nov . 2013 . ©2021TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2021TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd .