Zinc - dependent mechanical properties of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm - forming surface protein SasG Cécile Formosa - Dague a , Pietro Speziale b , Timothy J . Foster c , Joan A . Geoghegan c , 1 , and Yves F . Dufrêne a , d , 1 a Institute of Life Sciences , Université Catholique de Louvain , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium ; b Department of Molecular Medicine , Unit of Biochemistry , University of Pavia , 27100 Pavia , Italy ; c Department of Microbiology , Trinity College Dublin , Dublin 2 , Ireland ; and d Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology , B - 1300 Wavre , Belgium Edited by Scott J . Hultgren , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO , and approved December 2 , 2015 ( received for review September 29 , 2015 ) Staphylococcus aureus surface protein SasG promotes cell – cell ad - hesion during the accumulation phase of biofilm formation , but the molecular basis of this interaction remains poorly understood . Here , we unravel the mechanical properties of SasG on the surface of living bacteria , that is , in its native cellular environment . Nanoscale multiparametric imaging of living bacteria reveals that Zn 2 + strongly increases cell wall rigidity and activates the adhesive function of SasG . Single - cell force measurements show that SasG mediates cell – cell adhesion via specific Zn 2 + - dependent homophilic bonds be - tween β - sheet – rich G5 – E domains on neighboring cells . The force required to unfold individual domains is remarkably strong , up to ∼ 500 pN , thus explaining how SasG can withstand physiological shear forces . We also observe that SasG forms homophilic bonds with the structurally related accumulation - associated protein of Staphylococcus epidermidis , suggesting the possibility of multispe - cies biofilms during host colonization and infection . Collectively , our findings support a model in which zinc plays a dual role in activating cell – cell adhesion : adsorption of zinc ions to the bacterial cell surface increases cell wall cohesion and favors the projection of elongated SasG proteins away from the cell surface , thereby enabling zinc - dependent homophilic bonds between opposing cells . This work demonstrates an unexpected relationship between mechanics and adhesion in a staphylococcal surface protein , which may represent a general mechanism among bacterial pathogens for activating cell association . Staphylococcus aureus | biofilms | adhesion | SasG | atomic force microscopy T he bacterial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus causes a wide range of infections in humans , which are often associated with the ability of the bacteria to form biofilms on indwelling medical devices such as central venous catheters and prosthetic joints ( 1 – 4 ) . Biofilm formation involves initial adhesion of the bacteria to sur - faces , followed by cell – cell adhesion ( aggregation ) to form micro - colonies and a mature biofilm , and finally dispersal by the detachment of cell aggregates from the biofilm ( 5 ) . Currently , little is known about the molecular interactions driving biofilm formation by S . aureus due to the paucity of appropriate high - resolution probing techniques . Such knowledge may contribute to the development of novel compounds for therapy . Adhesion and biofilm formation by S . aureus involve a variety of cell wall components . Whereas adhesion to host proteins is me - diated by cell - wall – anchored ( CWA ) proteins ( 6 , 7 ) , intercellular adhesion was until recently thought to be promoted by the ex - pression of the polysaccharide intercellular adhesin ( PIA ) , also known as the poly - N - acetyl - glucosamine ( PNAG ) ( 8 , 9 ) . This positively charged polymer is able to bind the negatively charged bacterial surfaces . PIA , encoded by genes in the ica operon , rep - resents the most well - understood biofilm - mediating pathway in staphylococci ( 10 , 11 ) . However , many strains do not produce PIA and rely on CWA proteins to promote intercellular adhesion in an ica - independent manner ( 6 , 7 ) . A prototype of biofilm - forming CWA protein is SasG ( 12 – 15 ) , which mediates cell – cell adhesion through its “ B ” multidomain region ( 5 , 7 ) . B repeat sequences contain “ G5 ” domains ( ∼ 78 res - idues ) in a tandem array , separated by 50 - residue sequences known as the “ E ” regions ( Fig . 1 A ) ( 14 , 15 ) . SasG forms β - sheet – rich protein fibrils that protrude from the cell surface , which can be visualized by electron microscopy ( 12 ) . The proposed mechanism for SasG - mediated cell association is based on homophilic protein – protein interactions . SasG is covalently attached to the cell wall and undergoes limited cleavage within the B region to remove the N - terminal “ A ” region . The cleaved and exposed SasG B domains on neighboring cells interact with each other in a Zn 2 + - dependent manner , leading to cell – cell adhesion ( 13 ) . The G5 – E domains of the related accumulation - associated protein ( Aap ) of Staphylococ - cus epidermidis are also responsible for the Zn 2 + - dependent biofilm formation ( 15 ) . However , recent work also suggests that Aap could bind a ligand protein , the small basic protein ( Sbp ) , which accu - mulates on the cell surface and within the biofilm matrix ( 16 ) . Therefore , whereas SasG and Aap are believed to mediate in - tercellular adhesion via zinc - dependent homophilic bonds between opposing proteins , it is unclear whether this is the only mechanism at play . Also , the mode of action of zinc is controversial . Whereas Significance Hospital - acquired infections often involve surface - associated mi - crobial communities called biofilms that show increased resistance to antibiotics . A molecular understanding of the fundamental in - teractions driving adhesion and biofilm formation by microbial pathogens is a key step toward the development of novel anti - microbial therapies . Here we demonstrate that the SasG surface protein from Staphylococcus aureus displays remarkable zinc - dependent mechanical properties that are critical for its adhesive function during biofilm formation . We find that zinc activates SasG - mediated adhesion through a mechanism whereby adsorp - tion of zinc ions to the bacterial cell surface increases cell wall cohesion and favors zinc - dependent homophilic bonds between SasG proteins protruding from opposing cell surfaces . The zinc - dependent adhesive function of SasG represents a promising target for the design of antibacterial compounds . Author contributions : C . F . - D . , P . S . , T . J . F . , J . A . G . , and Y . F . D . designed research ; C . F . - D . performed research ; C . F . - D . , P . S . , T . J . F . , J . A . G . , and Y . F . D . analyzed data ; and C . F . - D . , P . S . , T . J . F . , J . A . G . , and Y . F . D . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence may be addressed . Email : yves . dufrene @ uclouvain . be or geoghegj @ tcd . ie . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1519265113 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1519265113 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6 M I C R O B I O L O G Y SasG dimerizes in vitro in a zinc - dependent manner , a direct link between homodimerization and biofilm formation has not yet been established . Rather , it has been suggested that zinc could mediate binding to anionic cell surface components like teichoic acids ( 14 ) . Direct biophysical analysis of SasG proteins on the surface of living cells would help to clarify these important issues . Recent advances in atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) techniques have enabled researchers to gain insight into the biophysical properties and molecular interactions of microbial cells ( 17 , 18 ) , including S . aureus ( 19 – 22 ) . A variety of AFM - based force spec - troscopy methods have been developed , in which the force acting on the AFM probe is measured with piconewton ( 10 − 12 N ) sen - sitivity as the probe is pushed toward the sample , then retracted from it ( 17 ) . In the past few years , a new force spectroscopy - based imaging mode , multiparametric imaging , has offered the possi - bility to image the surface structure of living cells , while mapping their mechanical and adhesive properties at unprecedented spa - tiotemporal resolution ( 23 – 28 ) . Unlike in conventional imaging , the method involves recording arrays of force curves across the cell surface , at improved speed , positional accuracy , and force sensitivity ( 26 ) . As the curves are recorded at high frequency , correlated images of the structure , adhesion , and mechanics of the cells can be obtained at the speed of conventional imaging . This technology has been used to image single filamentous bacterio - phages extruding from living bacteria ( 25 ) and to map adhesive nanodomains on fungal pathogens ( 28 ) . Furthermore , recent progress in single - cell force spectroscopy ( SCFS ) ( 18 , 29 , 30 ) has made it possible to understand the forces driving cell adhesion and biofilm formation . Here , a living cell is attached to the AFM probe , thereby enabling researchers to measure the interaction forces between the cell and a target surface ( 18 ) . Applying these newly developed modalities to staphylococci is a challenging problem , which would provide novel insights into the molecular bases of biofilm formation and biofilm - associated infections . Here , we combine multiparametric imaging and SCFS to in - vestigate the mechanical strength of SasG on living bacterial cells , thus in its fully functional environment . We use a S . aureus strain carrying a plasmid expressing SasG with eight consecutive G5 – E repeats [ hereafter S . aureus SasG 8 ( + ) cells ] . We show that in - tercellular adhesion involves the Zn 2 + - dependent – specific associ - ation of G5 – E repeats on opposing cells and that the elongated structure and mechanical strength of SasG make it ideally suited for that purpose . In addition , our results show that Zn 2 + plays a dual role that is more complex than anticipated before : adsorption of Zn 2 + to cell wall components increases the cohesion of the cell surface , thereby favoring the projection of highly elongated SasG proteins beyond other surface components and making them fully functional for Zn 2 + - dependent homophilic interactions . Results SasG Mediates Intercellular Adhesion . We first studied the involve - ment of SasG in cell – cell adhesion at the microscale ( Fig . 1 B – G ) . Fig . 1 B shows that SasG 8 ( + ) cells suspended in buffer did not form aggregates . Upon addition of 1 mM Zn 2 + , cell aggregates , 5 – 10 μ m in size , were observed ( Fig . 1 C ) . Addition of 1 mM EDTA disrupted the cell aggregates ( Fig . 1 D ) , whereas further addition of Zn 2 + re - stored them ( Fig . 1 E ) . Because aggregation was not observed in S . aureus cells expressing no SasG [ SasG 8 ( − ) cells ; Fig . 1 F and G ] , we conclude that SasG promotes Zn 2 + - dependent intercellular adhesion , in line with earlier reports ( 13 , 14 ) . Zn 2 + Strongly Alters the Structural , Mechanical , and Adhesive Properties of the Cell Surface . In view of the role of zinc in intercellular adhesion , we investigated the influence of this metal on the bio - physical properties of the cell surface . To this end , living bacteria were probed at the nanoscale using the new multiparametric im - aging technology . Fig . 2 A – L presents simultaneous AFM images of the topography , elasticity , and adhesion of two SasG 8 ( + ) cells recorded with a silicon nitride tip . In the absence of zinc , the cells showed a rough surface morphology , a moderate cell wall stiffness , and very poor adhesive properties ( Fig . 2 A , E , and I ) . To get further details on the cell surface structure , the cells were imaged in contact mode ( Fig . S1 A – C ) . Both height and deflection images featured a fuzzy contrast , and the roughness on 500 - nm × 500 - nm height images was 2 . 5 ± 1 nm ( mean ± SD from five different cells ) . As SasG 8 ( + ) and SasG 8 ( − ) cells showed similar morphology ( Fig . 2 M and Fig . S1 G – I ) and roughness ( 2 . 7 ± 0 . 5 nm ) , the observed structural features are not associated with SasG . To obtain quantitative information on cell wall mechanical properties , we determined the Young modulus of the bacteria ( Fig . 2 E ) . This parameter reflects the resistance of the cell wall to compression ( the higher the Young modulus , the stiffer the cell wall ) , and is obtained by converting force curves into force vs . in - dentation curves , and analyzing these curves with theoretical models like the Hertz model ( Fig . S2 A and B ; for detailed information , see ref . 31 ) . Fig . S2 A and B shows that the bacterial Young modulus was 495 ± 272 kPa ( mean ± SD on a total of n = 3 , 072 curves from three different cells ) . This moderate cell wall stiffness , in line with earlier measurements on S . aureus ( 20 ) , reflects the elasticity of peptidoglycan together with other cell wall components . Adhesion images were also recorded in parallel to probe the adhesive char - acter of the cell surface ( Fig . 2 I ) . The maximum adhesion force was assessed in every force curve and the value displayed as a colored pixel ( the brighter the pixel , the stronger the adhesion ) . The lack of adhesion contrast that we observed means that the cells poorly adhered to AFM tips , thus that , in the absence of zinc , SasG does not convey adhesive properties to the cell surface . Fig . 1 . Role of SasG in cell – cell adhesion . ( A ) Schematic representation of the SasGstructureemphasizingtheAdomain , notengagedincell – celladhesion , and the B repeat sequence containing G5 domains ( 78 residues ) in a tandem array , separated by the E regions ( 50 residues ) . ( B – E ) Optical microscopy images of S . aureus cells expressing full - length SasG [ SasG 8 ( + ) cells ] after resuspension in TBS buffer ( B ) or in TBS buffer containing 1 mM of ZnCl 2 ( C ) , after addition of 1 mM EDTA ( D ) , and further addition of 1 mM ZnCl 2 ( E ) . ( F and G ) Control experiment using S . aureus expressing no SasG [ SasG ( − ) cells ] in TBS buffer ( F ) or in TBS containing 1 mM of ZnCl 2 ( G ) . 2 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1519265113 Formosa - Dague et al . Remarkably , addition of zinc strongly altered the structural , mechanical , and adhesive properties of the cell surface ( Fig . 2 B , F , and J ) . The surface morphology , also shown in Fig . S1 D – F , was much smoother and better defined , with a roughness of only 0 . 4 ± 0 . 1 nm , an effect that we attribute to a change in the or - ganization and cohesion of the cell wall components . Supporting this view , the cell surface was stiffer , with a Young modulus of 1 , 092 ± 377 kPa ( Fig . 2 F and Fig . S2 A and C ) . Note that the Hertz model used to assess the Young modulus is valid for elastic surfaces and does not take into account tip - sample adhesion . Although the adhesion force ( ∼ 400 pN ) was much smaller than the maximum applied force ( 5 nN ) , absolute values of Young modulus should be considered with caution . In the future , it would be interesting to test the JKR ( Johnson , Kendall , and Roberts ) model , which applies to strongly adhesive samples . Nevertheless , the major change in the slopes of the force vs . indentation curves ( Fig . S2 A ) clearly demonstrates an increase in cell wall stiffness . Cells lacking SasG proteins [ SasG 8 ( − ) ] in the presence of Zn 2 + exhibited rougher surfaces ( roughness of 1 . 4 ± 0 . 5 nm , Fig . S1 G – I ) and a Young modulus of either 566 ± 149 kPa or 1 , 081 ± 142 kPa ( Fig . 2 P and Fig . S2 D and F ) . So , for some of the probed areas , the cell surface showed a stiffness similar to that of SasG 8 ( + ) cells in the presence of Zn 2 + , whereas in other areas it was softer . This finding suggests that SasG contributes only moderately to the cell surface stiffness . Presumably , Zn 2 + ions bind , crosslink , and collapse negatively charged cell wall components , like the polyphosphate groups of teichoic acids and the carboxyl units of peptidoglycan , thereby increasing the ri - gidity of the cell surface . We also found that Zn 2 + dramatically increased the adhesive properties of SasG 8 ( + ) cells ( Fig . 2 J ) . As SasG 8 ( − ) cells did not show such an effect ( Fig . 2 R ) , we conclude that the zinc - dependent adhesive properties of the cells are due to SasG . SasG 8 ( + ) cells showed homogeneous adhesive contrast , indicating that the protein was uniformly exposed on the cell surface . These data show that SasG strongly binds to the silicon nitride tip . As the tip surface bears negative charges , we expect that Zn 2 + ions will promote SasG – tip interactions via electrostatic bridges . The changes in structural and biophysical properties were reversed in the presence of 1 mM EDTA ( Fig . 2 C , G , and K ) and restored upon further addition of Zn 2 + ( Fig . 2 D , H , and L ) , thus indicating that the cell surface remodeling was highly dynamic and reversible . Next , we asked whether these cell surface changes could also be induced by other divalent ions . We found that addition of Ca 2 + ( Fig . S3 ) did not alter the structural , mechanical , and adhesive properties of the cell surface ( surface roughness of 2 . 7 ± 0 . 9 nm ; Young modulus of 507 ± 249 kPa ) , leading us to conclude that the staphylococcal cell surface dynamics demonstrated here depends specifically on Zn 2 + . The zinc - dependent elasticity and adhesion were correlated with the adhesion phenotype observed on the microscale ( Fig . 1 ) , suggesting strongly that these nanoscale cell surface properties are critical to intercellular adhesion . In summary , multiparametric imaging has revealed an un - anticipated and complex connection between the structural and physical dynamics of the S . aureus cell wall , which is tightly controlled by Zn 2 + ions . We believe that the zinc - induced stiff - ening and smoothening of the cell surface will favor the pro - jection of highly elongated SasG fibrils beyond other surface components , making them fully available for interaction . To further support the validity of this model , SasG proteins were specifically detected on the bacterial cell surface using single - molecule imaging ( 17 ) . Adhesion force maps were recorded across the cell surface using AFM tips modified with a mono - clonal antibody directed against SasG G5 – E repeats ( Fig . S4 ) . In the absence of zinc , the surface of SasG 8 ( + ) cells showed weak adhesion , indicating that SasG was poorly detected ( Fig . S4 A ) . By contrast , addition of zinc dramatically increased the adhesion forces ( Fig . S4 B ) , with many of the force profiles showing mul - tiple force peaks with long ruptures ( Fig . S4 C ) . As these features were not observed with SasG 8 ( − ) cells ( Fig . S4 D – F ) , they are attributed to the force - induced unfolding of individual G5 – E repeats ( see also Fig . 4 below for details ) . So , single - molecule imaging and multiparametric imaging demonstrate that zinc in - duces the massive exposure of SasG proteins on the cell surface . Force Spectroscopy Uncovers the Mechanical Strength of SasG Bonds in Living Cells . Is SasG engaged in homophilic bonds or in receptor – ligand bonds ? How strong are these bonds and how do they respond to mechanical force ? To answer these pertinent questions , force – distance curves were recorded between two individual S . aureus cells using SCFS . Fig . 3 shows the force data — i . e . , maximum adhesion force and rupture length histograms — obtained after a contact time of 100 ms for three representative pairs of SasG 8 ( + ) cells . The maximum adhesion force corresponds to the largest adhesion event in each force curve , whereas the rupture length is the distance of the last adhesion event , thus where the two cells separate . In the ab - sence of Zn 2 + , cells hardly adhered to each other ( adhesion fre - quency ranging from 5 to 31 % ) . By contrast , addition of Zn 2 + dramatically enhanced cell – cell adhesion , the adhesion frequency increasing up to 80 – 100 % . Force curves generally showed multiple Fig . 2 . Nanoscale multiparametric imaging unravels the structural and biophysical properties of S . aureus . ( A ) Height image of two dividing S . aureus cells expressing SasG [ SasG 8 ( + ) ] in TBS buffer and simultaneous ( E ) Young modulus and ( I ) adhesion image . Data were obtained in the same conditions following addition of 1 mM ZnCl 2 ( B , F , and J ) , of 1 mM ZnCl 2 then 1 mM of EDTA ( C , G , and K ) , and following further addition of 1 mM of ZnCl 2 ( D , H , and L ) . Control experiment using S . aureus cells expressing no SasG [ SasG 8 ( − ) ] in TBS buffer ( M , O , and Q ) or in TBS containing 1 mM ZnCl 2 ( N , P , and R ) . ( Scale bars : 1 μ m . ) Similar results were obtained for five SasG 8 ( + ) cells and five SasG 8 ( − ) cells from different cultures . Formosa - Dague et al . PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 6 M I C R O B I O L O G Y peaks with a maximum adhesion force of 414 ± 222 pN magnitude and a rupture length of 182 ± 76 nm ( mean ± SD on a total of n = 2 , 000 adhesive curves from five cells ) . Only small variations were observed from one cell pair to another , indicating that cell pop - ulations were homogeneous and showed reproducible proper - ties from one culture to another . The SasG - dependent cell – cell adhesion forces measured here are smaller than those reported for another S . aureus CWA protein , fibronectin - binding protein A ( FnBPA , up to 2 , 000 pN ) ( 32 ) . However , FnBPA - dependent cell – cell adhesion was estimated to involve about 10 cumulative homophilic bonds , whereas here , the observation of reproducible and well - defined unfolding signatures leads us to believe that they primarily involves single ( few ) protein pairs . Cell – cell adhesion was strongly inhibited upon addition of EDTA ( Fig . 3 E and F ) , the mean adhesion frequency and maximum adhesion force de - creasing to 34 % and 121 ± 56 pN ( mean ± SD on a total of n = 2 , 000 adhesive curves from five cells ) , and restored upon further addition of Zn 2 + ( Fig . 3 G and H ; adhesion frequency : 93 % ; adhesion force : 373 ± 167 pN ) . Multipeak force profiles were no longer seen in EDTA but restored when Zn 2 + was added again . When Ca 2 + was used instead of Zn 2 + , the cells showed hardly any adhesive interactions ( Fig . S3 ) , demonstrating the specificity of the zinc - dependent cell – cell adhesion . These results show that the adhesive and mechanical properties of SasG are highly dynamic and zinc dependent , in agreement with our multiparametric data . A substantial fraction ( ∼ 6 % ) of adhesive curves recorded in the presence of zinc showed multiple force peaks that were equally spaced ( Fig . 4 ) . These sawtooth patterns are reminiscent of those observed when stretching modular proteins such as titin and fibronectin ( 33 ) ; they originate from the force - induced unfolding of protein secondary structures ( α - helices , β - sheets ) . Some saw - tooth profiles ( Fig . 4 ) featured low force peaks ( 330 ± 38 pN , n = 51 ) , followed by high force peaks ( 512 ± 40 pN , n = 58 ) . The peaks were well fitted by the worm - like chain ( WLC ) model ( 33 ) , supporting further the notion they reflect the unfolding of mul - tidomain proteins . From the fits ( blue and red lines in Fig . 4 A ) , we extracted the protein contour length , L c , i . e . , the length of the fully extended molecule , and found that the gains in L c were constant : Δ L c = 14 ± 2 ( n = 51 ) and Δ L c = 21 ± 1 ( n = 58 ) for the low and high force peaks , respectively ( Fig . 4 C ) . Assuming that each residue contributes 0 . 38 nm to the contour length of a fully extended polypeptide chain and that the folded lengths of the E and G5 domains are 4 . 5 and 7 . 0 nm ( 34 ) , our measured ∼ 14 - and ∼ 21 nm - increments match the expected 50 and 78 residues of single E and G5 domains . This result , together with control ex - periments ( Fig . S5 ) , leads us to conclude that low and high force peaks represent the sequential unfolding of E and G5 domains . The unfolding forces of SasG measured on live cells are in the range of those determined in vitro for purified SasG using similar pulling speed ( 34 ) , but larger than unfolding forces reported for strong β - fold domains ( 150 – 300 pN ) , such as Ig and fibronectin domains ( 33 ) , thus indicating that SasG is a mechanically strong protein . The G5 – E domains are composed of flat , single - layer β - sheets lacking a compact hydrophobic core , explaining how SasG forms thin filaments on the cell surface ( 14 ) . Molecular dynamics ( MD ) simulations ( 34 ) revealed that the mechanical strength of SasG domains originates from tandemly arrayed mechanical clamps involving long stretches of hydrogen bonds and associated side - chain packing interactions along the β - strands . Whereas E and G5 repeats are structurally similar , the E segment has shorter N - ter - minal clamps and therefore has been shown to be significantly less stable than G5 ( 14 ) . SasG extension has been shown to involve obligate folding cooperativity of the E domains that couple non - adjacent G5 domains , forming interfaces that are more stable than Fig . 3 . Single - cell force spectroscopy of SasG bonds . ( A ) Adhesion force and ( B ) rupture distance histograms obtained in TBS buffer for three pairs ( see three different colors ) of S . aureus cells expressing full - length SasG [ SasG 8 ( + ) ] . “ n . a . ” values are the percentages of nonadhesive events . Inset in B is a fluorescence image of a single bacterium attached to the colloidal probe . ( C – H ) Force data obtainedinthesameconditionsfollowingadditionof1mMofZnCl 2 ( C and D ) , of 1 mM of ZnCl 2 , then 1 mM of EDTA ( E and F ) , and following further addition of 1 mM of ZnCl 2 ( G and H ) . Insets in D and H show representative force signatures andtheiroccurrence ( n = 1 , 200curvesineachcondition ) . Allcurveswereobtained using a contact time of 0 . 1 s , an applied force of 250 pN , and an approach and retraction speed of 1 . 0 μ m / s . Fig . 4 . Mechanical strength of SasG domains . ( A ) Representative force curve displaying sawtooth profiles with up to eight low force peaks followed by eight high force peaks , that were well fitted with the extensible worm - like - chain ( WLC ) model using a persistence length l p of 0 . 4 nm ( blue and red lines ) . ( B ) Unfoldingforce and ( C ) contour length gain ( Δ Lc ) histograms documenting the sequential unfolding of E domains ( blue ; n = 51 ) , followed by the more stable G5 domains ( red ; n = 58 ) . 4 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1519265113 Formosa - Dague et al . the domains themselves ( 34 ) . Unlike the in vitro force profiles ( 34 ) , unfolding signatures on live cells often showed low ( E domains ) and high ( G domains ) force peaks that were randomly distributed ( Fig . 3 D ) . This complex mechanical response may be associated with the unfolding of SasG domains engaged in homophilic bonds . We believe that the multimodular structure and remarkable mechanical strength of SasG are related to the protein ’ s function . During biofilm development , the elongated , rod - like shape of the adhesin will play a key role in bridging cells together . Owing to its mechanical strength , SasG will resist physiological shear forces and maintain cell – cell contacts . Under high mechanical force , the se - quential unfolding of SasG B repeats may expose extended con - formations in which previously masked adhesive residues may become available for interaction . A pertinent question is whether there is a functional advantage for SasG to alternate E and G5 domains . Gruszka et al . ( 34 ) suggested that the less stable E do - mains may behave as force buffers capable of relieving mechanical stress without complete unfolding of the SasG molecule . Thus , the protein may switch between a flexible state under force , and a stiff state with all domains folded when no force is applied . Another interesting observation is that unfolding profiles were seen at rather long distances , starting at 151 ± 50 nm ( n = 164 curves ; five cells ) and were generally preceded by poorly defined adhesive events . This observation indicates that B repeat unfolding was preceded by the deformation of another large region of the protein , i . e . , the A domain . Unfolding of a single A domain made of 368 amino acids should yield protein extensions of ∼ 132 nm . Considering that the straightening of the folded G5 – E chain will also contribute to protein extension , our ∼ 150 - nm length is con - sistent with the unfolding of A domains . Geoghegan et al . ( 13 ) showed that full - length SasG proteins on S . aureus are processed within the B domains , yielding cleaved proteins of various lengths at the cell surface . Our data suggest that at least a fraction of SasG proteins retain their full - length structure on the cell surface . It is tempting to speculate on the molecular basis for the mea - sured SasG cell – cell adhesion forces . Early work has revealed that tandem G5 domains associate in a zinc - dependent modular fashion , suggesting a zinc zipper model for G5 - domain – based intercellular adhesion in staphylococcal biofilms ( 35 ) . In such a model , we expect that multiple interactions between two proteins should disrupt one by one along the applied force , giving rise to constant force plateau signatures ( 36 ) . As this result was not observed here , our data argue against a zipper model . More recently , X - ray crystallography analysis ( 15 ) has suggested a twisted rope - like structure between bacterial cells , in which the antiparallel monomers wrap around one another . Hence , the β - sheet unfoldings we observed when separating two cells might be associated with the rupture of rope - like bonds . Intercellular Adhesion Involves Homophilic Bonds Between G5 – E Domains . To further understand the mechanisms of SasG - medi - ated adhesion , we analyzed the forces between S . aureus SasG 8 ( − ) cells , which express no SasG proteins on their surface ( Fig . S5 ) . Most curves recorded in the presence of Zn 2 + showed no adhesion , demonstrating that the large adhesion forces on SasG 8 ( + ) cells are mediated by SasG . Analysis of the forces between SasG 8 ( + ) and SasG 8 ( − ) cells ( Fig . S5 C and D ) led to the same observation , im - plying that the bonds between SasG 8 ( + ) cells involve SasG molecules on both cells . So , our data provide direct evidence that SasG me - diates cell – cell adhesion through homophilic bonds rather than re - ceptor – ligand binding . Hence , our work is not in favor of the model in which SasG would bind ligands on opposing cells , as was recently proposed for the interaction between Aap and the small protein Sbp , which accumulates on cells and within the biofilm matrix ( 16 ) . We also probed S . aureus SasG 1 ( + ) cells , which express SasG with single G5 – E repeats ( Fig . S5 E and F ) . Many curves were poorly adhesive , indicating that proteins with only one B repeat are not capable of mediating adhesion . Supporting further this view , multiparametric adhesion maps recorded with a silicon nitride tip showed very little adhesion even in the presence of zinc ( Fig . S5 G and H ) . These data show that the multidomain , rod - like structure of SasG is essential for its function . SasG Forms Homophilic Bonds with the Structurally Related Aap Protein . The Aap protein from S . epidermidis ( 15 , 35 ) has struc - tural and functional properties similar to those of SasG . We therefore hypothesized that these two proteins might interact to - gether by forming zinc - dependent homophilic bonds . Fig . S6 shows force data obtained between S . aureus SasG 8 ( + ) cells and S . epidermidis Aap ( + ) cells expressing , on average , eight B repeats . In the presence of Zn 2 + , strong adhesion was observed , with an adhesion frequency of 50 – 100 % . Control experiment with SasG 8 ( − ) cells ( Fig . S6 E – H ) showed that this interaction is specific to SasG . Force curves generally showed multiple peaks and a maximum adhesion force of 161 ± 79 pN magnitude and a rupture length of 168 ± 129 nm ( mean ± SD , n = 2 , 000 adhesive curves from five cells ) , thus with a lower force than for the SasG 8 ( + ) – SasG 8 ( + ) interaction . Hence , owing to their strong structural similarities , SasG and Aap can form homophilic bonds , thereby providing an elegant means to promote interspecies interactions in biofilms . This hitherto undescribed ability of S . aureus and S . epidermidis surface proteins to form homophilic bonds might be important during the formation of multispecies biofilms during infection . Discussion The role of cell surface mechanics in bacterial adhesion is an im - portant yet poorly understood issue . By means of newly developed AFM techniques , we have shown that the zinc - dependent nanomechanical properties of SasG play a key role in defining its adhesive function , providing a molecular foundation for its ability to mediate cell association during biofilm formation . Unlike in vitro biomolecular assays , our live - cell experiments enabled us uniquely to analyze functional SasG proteins directly on the surface of live cells , thus in a biologically relevant conformation . Recombinant CWA protein domains purified from the cytoplasm of Escherichia coli may fold differently and impurities may be present that could influ - ence functional activity in vitro . Therefore , it is very challenging to develop live - cell nanoscopy methods to study proteins that have been secreted through the cell membrane , anchored to the cell wall pep - tidoglycan and displayed in the S . aureus cell surface environment . The strength of SasG - mediated interactions was quantified , showing that it represents a major driving force for cell – cell adhesion . The SasG G5 – E domains are engaged in specific Fig . 5 . Proposed model for the zinc - dependent activation of intercellular adhesion . ( A ) Zn 2 + alters the cell wall organization thereby making SasG fully functional . In the absence of Zn 2 + , cell wall components including negatively charged teichoic acids ( TAs ) and poly - γ - glutamic acid ( PGA ) , are freely dis - tributed and protrude from the cell surface , therefore masking SasG proteins . Addition of Zn 2 + dramatically alters the cell wall organization by interaction with negatively charged TA and PGA . Zn 2 + binding increases the cell surface stiffness and decreases the cell surfaceroughness , allowing SasG proteins to be fully available for interaction . ( B ) Zn 2 + promotes homophilic bonds between protruding SasG repeats on opposing cells , thereby leading to intercellular adhesion . For the sake of clarity the A domain is not shown . Formosa - Dague et al . PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 6 M I C R O B I O L O G Y Zn 2 + - dependent homophilic bonds , rather than in receptor – ligand bonds . Loading these bonds with mechanical force leads to the sequential unfolding of mechanically strong E and G5 domains . Intercellular forces are not observed with bacteria expressing SasG with single G5 – E repeats , confirming that the elongated multidomain structure of SasG is important for cell – cell association . The remarkable strength of the protein is con - sistent with tandemly arrayed clamp motifs within the folded domains , explaining how bacteria in the biofilm are capable of withstanding physiological shear forces . We expect that under high mechanical stress , SasG domains will unfold and may expose extended conformations with enhanced adhesive properties . We discovered a previously unidentified role for zinc , that is , controlling the relationship between bacterial cell wall mechanics and the adhesive function of SasG . Collectively , our results support a model ( Fig . 5 ) whereby zinc activates intercellular adhesion not only by promoting SasG homophilic bonds , but also by inducing the collapse of cell surface constituents , triggering the projection of highly elongated SasG structures beyond other surface components , and in turn , enabling homophilic binding between opposing cells . Finally , owing to strong structural similarities , SasG and Aap are capable of forming zinc - dependent homophilic bonds , thus pro - moting interspecies interactions in mixed biofilms . In conclusion , our study demonstrates an unexpected rela - tionship between nanomechanics and adhesion in a staphylococcal surface protein and highlights the complex influence of zinc ions in activating the protein function . Zinc - dependent cell surface dynamics may represent a general mechanism for activating ad - hesion in biofilm - forming species . Controlling this phenomenon may provide a means for developing antibiofilm strategies . Methods The following S . aureus strains were used in this study : S . aureus strain SH1000 containing the plasmid pALC2073sasG + or an empty vector ( 13 ) S . epidermidis strain 1457 ( wild - type strain ) or its Δ aap mutant strain ( 37 ) . Bacteria were grown in tryptic soy broth ( TSB ) supplemented with chloram - phenicol ( 10 μ g / mL ) for S . aureus , or with tetracycline ( 5 μ g / mL ) for S . epi - dermidis Δ aap strain , at 37 °C , under agitation ( 180 rpm ) until stationary phase was reached . Before AFM experiments , cells were harvested by centrifugation ( 1 , 000 × g , 3 min ) and washed two times in Tris buffer saline ( TBS , Tris 50 mM , NaCl 150 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) . Aggregation assays and AFM methods are described in SI Methods . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Sylvie Derclaye and David Alsteens for helping with the single - molecule imaging experiments . Work at the Université Catholique de Louvain was supported by the National Fund for Scientific Research ( FNRS ) , the FNRS - Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology ( WELBIO ) under Grant WELBIO - CR - 2015A - 05 ; the Federal Of - fice for Scientific , Technical , and Cultural Affairs ( Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Programme ) ; and the Research Department of the Communauté Française de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) . C . F . - D . holds a “ MOVE - IN Louvain ” Incoming Post - Doctoral Fellowship , cofounded by the Marie Curie Actions of the European Commission . Y . F . D . is a Research Director at the FNRS . 1 . CostertonJW , StewartPS , GreenbergEP ( 1999 ) Bacterialbiofilms : A commoncauseof persistent infections . Science 284 ( 5418 ) : 1318 – 1322 . 2 . López D , Vlamakis H , Kolter R ( 2010 ) Biofilms . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 ( 7 ) : a000398 . 3 . Lister JL , Horswill AR ( 2014 ) Staphylococcus aureus biofilms : Recent developments in biofilm dispersal . Front Cell Infect Microbiol 4 : 178 . 4 . Hogan S , Stevens NT , Humphreys H , O ’ Gara JP , O ’ Neill E ( 2015 ) Current and future approachestothepreventionandtreatmentofstaphylococcalmedicaldevice - related infections . Curr Pharm Des 21 ( 1 ) : 100 – 113 . 5 . Hobley L , Harkins C , MacPhee CE , Stanley - Wall NR ( 2015 ) Giving structure to the bi - ofilm matrix : An overview of individual strategies and emerging common themes . FEMS Microbiol Rev 39 ( 5 ) : 649 – 669 . 6 . Speziale P , Pietrocola G , Foster TJ , Geoghegan JA ( 2014 ) Protein - based biofilm ma - trices in Staphylococci . Front Cell Infect Microbiol 4 : 171 . 7 . Foster TJ , Geoghegan JA , Ganesh VK , Höök M ( 2014 ) Adhesion , invasion and evasion : The many functions of the surface proteins of Staphylococcus aureus . Nat Rev Microbiol 12 ( 1 ) : 49 – 62 . 8 . Otto M ( 2008 ) Staphylococcal biofilms . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 322 : 207 – 228 . 9 . Mack D , et al . ( 1996 ) The intercellular adhesin involved in biofilm accumulation of Staphylococcusepidermidis isalinearbeta - 1 , 6 - linkedglucosaminoglycan : Purification and structural analysis . J Bacteriol 178 ( 1 ) : 175 – 183 . 10 . O ’ Gara JP ( 2007 ) ica and beyond : Biofilm mechanisms and regulation in Staphylo - coccus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus . FEMS Microbiol Lett 270 ( 2 ) : 179 – 188 . 11 . Laverty G , Gorman SP , Gilmore BF ( 2013 ) Biomolecular mechanisms of staphylococcal biofilm formation . Future Microbiol 8 ( 4 ) : 509 – 524 . 12 . Corrigan RM , Rigby D , Handley P , Foster TJ ( 2007 ) The role of Staphylococcus aureus surface protein SasG in adherence and biofilm formation . Microbiology 153 ( Pt 8 ) : 2435 – 2446 . 13 . Geoghegan JA , et al . ( 2010 ) Role of surface protein SasG in biofilm formation by Staphylococcus aureus . J Bacteriol 192 ( 21 ) : 5663 – 5673 . 14 . Gruszka DT , et al . ( 2012 ) Staphylococcal biofilm - forming protein has a contiguous rod - like structure . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 17 ) : E1011 – E1018 . 15 . Conrady DG , Wilson JJ , Herr AB ( 2013 ) Structural basis for Zn2 + - dependent in - tercellular adhesion in staphylococcal biofilms . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 ( 3 ) : E202 – E211 . 16 . Decker R , et al . ( 2015 ) An 18 kDa scaffold protein is critical for Staphylococcus epi - dermidis biofilm formation . PLoS Pathog 11 ( 3 ) : e1004735 . 17 . Dufrêne YF ( 2014 ) Atomic force microscopy in microbiology : New structural and functional insights into the microbial cell surface . MBio 5 ( 4 ) : e01363 – 14 . 18 . Dufrêne YF ( 2015 ) Sticky microbes : Forces in microbial cell adhesion . Trends Microbiol 23 ( 6 ) : 376 – 382 . 19 . Xu C - P , et al . ( 2008 ) Staphylococcus aureus - fibronectin interactions with and without fibronectin - binding proteins and their role in adhesion and desorption . Appl Environ Microbiol 74 ( 24 ) : 7522 – 7528 . 20 . Francius G , Domenech O , Mingeot - Leclercq MP , Dufrêne YF ( 2008 ) Direct observation of Staphylococcus aureus cell wall digestion by lysostaphin . J Bacteriol 190 ( 24 ) : 7904 – 7909 . 21 . Lower SK , et al . ( 2010 ) A tactile response in Staphylococcus aureus . Biophys J 99 ( 9 ) : 2803 – 2811 . 22 . Casillas - Ituarte NN , Lower BH , Lamlertthon S , Fowler VG , Jr , Lower SK ( 2012 ) Disso - ciation rate constants of human fibronectin binding to fibronectin - binding proteins on living Staphylococcus aureus isolated from clinical patients . J Biol Chem 287 ( 9 ) : 6693 – 6701 . 23 . Heu C , Berquand A , Elie - Caille C , Nicod L ( 2012 ) Glyphosate - induced stiffening of Ha - CaT keratinocytes , a Peak Force Tapping study on living cells . J Struct Biol 178 ( 1 ) : 1 – 7 . 24 . Alsteens D , et al . ( 2012 ) High - resolution imaging of chemical and biological sites on living cells using peak force tapping atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 28 ( 49 ) : 16738 – 16744 . 25 . Alsteens D , Trabelsi H , Soumillion P , Dufrêne YF ( 2013 ) Multiparametric atomic force microscopy imaging of single bacteriophages extruding from living bacteria . Nat Commun 4 : 2926 . 26 . Dufrêne YF , Martínez - Martín D , Medalsy I , Alsteens D , Müller DJ ( 2013 ) Multi - parametric imaging of biological systems by force - distance curve - based AFM . Nat Methods 10 ( 9 ) : 847 – 854 . 27 . Chopinet L , Formosa C , Rols MP , Duval RE , Dague E ( 2013 ) Imaging living cells surface and quantifying its properties at high resolution using AFM in QI ™ mode . Micron 48 : 26 – 33 . 28 . Formosa C , et al . ( 2015 ) Multiparametric imaging of adhesive nanodomains at the surface of Candida albicans by atomic force microscopy . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 11 ( 1 ) : 57 – 65 . 29 . Helenius J , Heisenberg C - P , Gaub HE , Muller DJ ( 2008 ) Single - cell force spectroscopy . J Cell Sci 121 ( 11 ) : 1785 – 1791 . 30 . BeaussartA , etal . ( 2013 ) Single - cellforcespectroscopyofprobioticbacteria . BiophysJ 104 ( 9 ) : 1886 – 1892 . 31 . Touhami A , Nysten B , Dufrêne YF ( 2003 ) Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of mi - crobial cells by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 19 ( 11 ) : 4539 – 4543 . 32 . Herman - Bausier P , El - Kirat - Chatel S , Foster TJ , Geoghegan JA , Dufrêne YF ( 2015 ) Staphylococcus aureus fibronectin - binding protein A mediates cell - cell adhesion through low - affinity homophilic bonds . MBio 6 ( 3 ) : e00413 – e00415 . 33 . RiefM , GautelM , OesterheltF , FernandezJM , GaubHE ( 1997 ) Reversibleunfoldingof individual titin immunoglobulin domains by AFM . Science 276 ( 5315 ) : 1109 – 1112 . 34 . Gruszka DT , et al . ( 2015 ) Cooperative folding of intrinsically disordered domains drives assembly of a strong elongated protein . Nat Commun 6 : 7271 . 35 . Conrady DG , et al . ( 2008 ) A zinc - dependent adhesion module is responsible for in - tercellular adhesion in staphylococcal biofilms . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 ( 49 ) : 19456 – 19461 . 36 . Kellermayer MSZ , et al . ( 2005 ) Reversible mechanical unzipping of amyloid beta - fibrils . J Biol Chem 280 ( 9 ) : 8464 – 8470 . 37 . Schaeffer CR , et al . ( 2015 ) Accumulation - associated protein enhances Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilmformation under dynamic conditionsand is required for infection in a rat catheter model . Infect Immun 83 ( 1 ) : 214 – 226 . 38 . Roche FM , Meehan M , Foster TJ ( 2003 ) The Staphylococcus aureus surface protein SasG and its homologues promote bacterial adherence to human desquamated nasal epithelial cells . Microbiology 149 ( Pt 10 ) : 2759 – 2767 . 39 . Köhler G , Milstein C ( 1975 ) Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity . Nature 256 ( 5517 ) : 495 – 497 . 40 . Ebner A , et al . ( 2007 ) A new , simple method for linking of antibodies to atomic force microscopy tips . Bioconjug Chem 18 ( 4 ) : 1176 – 1184 . 6 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1519265113 Formosa - Dague et al .