Title Dynamin - 2 controls complement receptor 3 - mediated phagocytosis completion and closure Authors Anna Mularski 1 , 2 , Ryszard Wimmer 1 , 3 , Floriane Arbaretaz 1 , 4 , Gabriel Le Goff 1 , and Florence Niedergang 1 * 1 Université de Paris , Institut Cochin , CNRS , INSERM , F - 75014 Paris , France . 2 Present address : Department of Physics , Chemistry and Pharmacy ( FKF ) , University of Southern Denmark 3 Present address : Institut Curie , PSL Research University , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , UMR 144 , Paris , France . 4 Present address : Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers - UMRS 1138 , Sorbonne Université * Corresponding author : Dr . Florence Niedergang Institut Cochin ; Team Biology of Phagocytes , infection and immunity ; “Infection , Immunity and Inflammation” Department 22 , rue Méchain , 75014 Paris , France . Phone : 00 33 1 40 51 64 21 Email : florence . niedergang @ inserm . fr Keywords Actin - phagocytosis - complement receptor - dynamin – closure - Abstract Phagocytosis is the mechanism of the internalization of large particles , microorganisms and cellular debris . The complement pathway represents one of the first mechanisms of defense against infection and the complement receptor 3 ( CR3 ) , which is highly expressed on macrophages , is a major receptor for many pathogens and debris . Key to dissecting the mechanisms by which CR3 - mediated phagocytosis occurs , is understanding how the complex actin binding protein machinery and associated regulators interact with actin during phagocytosis , from triggering of receptor , through to phagosome formation and closure . However , how CR3 - mediated phagosome completion and closure are orchestrated is not known . Here , we reveal that dynamin - 2 is recruited concomitantly with polymerised actin at the site of the nascent phagosomes and accumulates until membrane scission . Inhibition of dynamin activity leads to stalled phagocytic cups and a decrease in the amount of F - actin at the site of phagocytosis . Acute inhibition of dynamin activity in living phagocytosing cells established that dynamin - 2 plays a critical role in the effective scission of the CR3 - phagosome from the plasma membrane . Thus , dynamin - 2 has two distinct roles in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis , in the assembly of the F - actin phagocytic cup and during phagosome scission . Introduction Phagocytosis is the mechanism of the internalization of large particles , microorganisms and cellular debris ( Niedergang and Grinstein , 2018 ; Uribe - Querol and Rosales , 2020 ) . In the professional phagocytes of the immune system , phagocytosis plays a key role in the development of immune responses via cytokine secretion and presentation of antigen derived from the internalized material . Phagocytosis is also important for normal turnover and remodelling of tissues and disposal of dead cells . Phagocytosis is initiated by the triggering of surface receptors that bind directly to surface determinants of microorganisms or receptors for opsonins like immunoglobulins or complement that coat the particulate antigen . Signal transduction downstream of the phagocytic receptors involves local reorganization of the plasma membrane , and the underlying actin cytoskeleton , resulting in the internalisation of the phagocytic target . The complement receptor ( CR ) 3 , which is highly expressed on macrophages , is a direct receptor for many pathogens and binds activated complement molecules deposited on microorganisms or cells ( Torres - Gomez et al . , 2020a ) . It is a phagocytic integrin also known as α M β 2 that needs to be activated to bind to extracellular ligands . The actin dynamics play a key role both in the activation of the integrin receptors and in the downstream signaling pathways that are controlled by the small GTPase RhoA , the formin mDia1 and the Arp2 / 3 nucleator ( Caron and Hall , 1998 ; Colucci - Guyon et al . , 2005 ; May et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , a subtle interplay between the microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton is important for CR3 - mediated phagocytosis ( Allen and Aderem , 1996 ; Binker et al . , 2007 ; Lewkowicz et al . , 2008 ) . The early steps of CR3 engagement and signalling have been dissected to show how the Syk kinase and focal adhesion proteins act as a molecular clutch to promote phagocytosis ( Jaumouille et al . , 2019 ) . However , much less is known about the later steps of phagosome formation and closure downstream of the CR3 . CR3 - mediated phagocytosis was initially reported to rely on particle “sinking” , without extensive formation of membranous lamellipodia ( Allen and Aderem , 1996 ; Kaplan et al . , 1977 ) . Some membrane extension and ruffling activity has however been associated with CR3 – mediated phagocytosis ( Jaumouille et al . , 2019 ; Patel and Harrison , 2008 ) . Here we investigated whether dynamin - 2 , an important mediator of budding and scission of small vesicles , that also has the property to bind and bundle actin filaments , plays a role in integrin - phagosome formation and scission . Complement - mediated phagocytosis was investigated in primary human monocyte - derived macrophages ( hMDMs ) using super resolution microscopy and phagocytosis assays with actin quantification . Concomitant recruitment of F - actin and Dynamin - 2 was monitored at the onset of CR3 - mediated phagocytosis by live cell imaging with total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) . Actin quantification in phagocytosis assays revealed that Dynamin - 2 is vital for the formation of the phagocytic cup , and therefore , efficient phagocytosis . Dynamic live cell imaging revealed that dynamin - 2 is required for the CR3 - phagosome closure in macrophages . Results : Dynamin - 2 is recruited concomitantly with actin at the site of CR3 - phagosome formation We used primary human macrophages and direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( dSTORM ) to inform our studies of the role on dynamin - 2 in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . First , to study the earliest stages of CR3 - phagosome formation , frustrated phagocytosis experiments ( shown schematically in Figure 1A ) were performed . For this , human monocyte - derived macrophages ( hMDMs ) were allowed to spread on coverslips opsonised first with IgM , and then with C5 - deficient complement . Cells were fixed and F - actin stained , and prior to dSTORM observation of the frustrated phagocytic cup , it was verified that the cell body was visible at a higher z . On the complement opsonised coverlips , frustrated phagocytic regions were irregular in shape , and revealed no areas of reduced F - actin density ( Figure 1B , lower ) , which is different from the reported subcellular circular distribution of F - actin upon FcR ligation ( Barger et al . , 2019 ; Marie - Anais et al . , 2016b ; Marion et al . , 2012 ) . To quantify the distribution of F - actin in the spreading zone , the smallest possible circle ( red Figure 1B ) was drawn around frustrated phagocytic cups , and 8 radial lengths ( dashed yellow , Figure 1B ) were measured as demonstrated in Figure 1B . The standard deviations of these radial lengths for 7 cells undergoing frustrated phagocytosis condition were plotted ( Figure 1C ) . By this measure , as phagocytic spreading approaches circular , the standard devation of the radial lengths would approach 0 . The plot in Figure 1C indicates that the distribution of F - actin in the frustrated CR3 - mediated phagocytic spreading zone was heterogeneous and did not exhibit the circularity that is characteristic of FcR - phagocytosis ( Barger et al . , 2019 ; Marie - Anais et al . , 2016b ; Marion et al . , 2012 ) . The closer the phagocytic spreading is to a circle , the closer the standard devation of the radial lenths would be to 0 . To view the phagosome morphology in a ‘3D’ arrangement , and at a later stage , hMDMs were allowed to perform a “3D phagosome closure assay” as described previously ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016a ; Mularski et al . , 2018 ) . For this , hMDMs sediment onto coverslips coated with red blood cells ( RBCs ) opsonised with IgM followed by complement ( C’ - IgM - RBC ) , and noncovalently bound to a poly - L - lysine activated surface ( shown schematically in Figure 1D ) . Cells were allowed to phagocytose the opsonised RBCs for 10 – 15 minutes prior to fixation and staining to detect both F - actin and dynamin - 2 by dSTORM ( Figure 1E ) . F - actin is accumulated in focal adhesion structures as well as at the site of nascent phagosomes ( Figure 1E , left panel ) . Dynamin - 2 is enriched in these F - actin rich phagocytic cups , although not exactly at the same place as F - actin accumulations ( Figure 1E , middle panel ) . A tessellation - based colocalization analysis ( Levet et al . , 2015 ) was performed yielding a colocalization value for each single molecule localization of each species separately , minimizing false positive colocalization . The colocalization parameter , the Spearman coefficient , can have values from - 1 ( anticorrelation ) through 0 ( no correlation and therefore a low probability of colocalisation ) to 1 ( perfect correlation and therefore a high probability of colocalisation ) . The analysis allowed for a comparison of the actin - dynamin and dynamin - actin colocalization in the cell body ( blue dashed line , Figure 1E ) and the phagocytic cups ( white dashed line , Figure 1E ) . The Spearman coefficients of actin with dynamin and dynamin with actin from analysis of regions of interest in the cell body are close to zero ( means of 0 . 024 and 0 . 15 respectively ) , indicating a low probability of colocalisation ( Figure 1F ) . The Spearman coefficients for actin - dynamin and dynamin - actin colocalisation from regions of interest around phagocytic cups yield positive means ( means of 0 . 30 and 0 . 28 respectively ) , indicating a higher probability of colocalization in the phagocytic cups than in the cell body ( Figure 1F ) . To better describe the role dynamin - 2 plays in CR3 - dependent phagocytosis , we used TIRFM to observe the dynamics of recruitment of F - actin and dynamin - 2 in RAW264 . 7 macrophages transfected to transiently express actin - mCherry and dynamin - 2 - GFP . Cells were exposed to coverslips coated with C’ - IgM - RBC ) noncovalently bound to poly - L - lysine activated surface . After transfected cells were allowed to sediment to the surface , phagocytic cup extension and closure around the bound RBCs were observed in the TIRF region , as described in detail in ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016a ; Mularski et al . , 2018 ) and shown schematically in Figure 1G . A time - course of a macrophage undergoing CR3 mediated phagocytosis is shown in Figure 1H . F - actin and dynamin - 2 are recruited concomitantly throughout the phagocytic event , from membrane extension around the RBC , through to fusion and scission , before clearance back towards cortical levels . Dynamin - 2 was recruited with actin at the tips of membrane extensions surrounding the RBC and accumulated at the site of phagosome closure and scission before clearance . These results indicate that dynamin - 2 is part of the phagosome formation and completion steps . Phagocytosis , but not association , is impaired by dynamin - 2 inhibition . To determine the role of dynamin - 2 in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis , we inhibited its function prior to performing phagocytosis assays . hMDMs , treated with DMSO ( control ) or dynasore ( 80 µ M ) were centrifuged in medium containing C’ - IgM - RBCs for 2 min to synchronise phagocytosis . Macrophages were either fixed at this point to assess the efficiency of RBC association ( 0 min ) , or , were allowed to phagocytose C’IgM - RBCs for 60 min at 37°C to evaluate phagocytic efficiency . For both time points , following fixation , macrophages were stained for external RBCs ( Figure 2A , B , D and E ) . The number of external and internal RBCs was quantified . The association index , the average number of cell - associated ( bound + internalised ) RBCs at 0 min and the phagocytic index , the average number of internalized cells at 60 min , were calculated . The indices of association from 3 independent experiments on different donors ( Figure 2C ) , revealed no significant difference between cells treated with DMSO or dynasore , in their ability to engage with C’IgM - RBCs . The indices of phagocytosis ( Figure 2F ) however , demonstrate that phagocytic efficiency is significantly reduced in cells treated with dynasore relative to control cells ( * * p < 0 . 01 ) . This result indicates that CR3 receptor activation at the cell surface is not affected after treatment with the dynamin - 2 inhibitor . As such , inhibiting dynamin - 2 with dynasore monohydrate leads to the impairment of phagocytosis without interfering with integrin - receptor binding to the complement ligand . Inhibition of dynamin - 2 decreases F - actin recruitment to the phagocytic cup . Phagocytosis is an active process requiring F - actin polymerisation to provide the force with which membranes are deformed to envelop the phagocytic target ( Mularski and Niedergang , 2017 ; Torres - Gomez et al . , 2020a ) . As CR3 - mediated phagocytosis is impaired when dynamin - 2 is inhibited , F - actin quantification was performed at the site of phagocytosis in cells treated with DMSO ( control ) or dynasore ( 80 µ M ) . Phagocytosis was synchronised by centrifugation of hMDMs with C’ - IgM - RBCs for 2 min . Macrophages were then allowed to phagocytose C’ - IgM - RBCs for 15 min , then fixed and stained for external RBCs and F - actin . Quantification was performed on 4 different macrophage preparations from 4 different donors . In control cells , many F - actin rich phagocytic cups under C’ - IgM - RBCs were easily located ( Figure 3A ) . When dynamin - 2 was inhibited , although sRBCs were associated with the membrane , there were less phagocytic cups ( Figure 3B ) . Regions of interest were selected where C’ - IgM - RBCs were attached and a phagocytic cup was visible . F - actin recruitment was quantified as described in the Materials and Methods section . The index of F - actin enrichment at sites of phagocytosis was 1 . 8±0 . 7 ( Figure 3C ) in the control cells treated with DMSO . Macrophages pre - treated with dynasore monohydrate exhibited a significantly lower F - actin ratio cup to body index : 0 . 75±0 . 4 ( Figure 3D ) , representing a greater than 50 % decrease in the F - actin recruitment at the site of CR3 - phagocytosis in dynasore - treated macrophages . Therefore , F - actin enrichment in CR3 phagocytic cups is decreased when dynamin - 2 is inhibited by dynasore monohydrate implicating dynamin - 2 in the actin assembly of the CR3 phagocytic cup . Timely inhibition of Dynamin - 2 prevents CR3 phagosome scission in living cells . The role of Dynamin - 2 in mediating scission of endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane has been well characterised ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; Morlot and Roux , 2013 ) . To determine if dynamin - 2 is implicated in the last steps of phagosome closure in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis , living RAW 264 . 7 macrophages transiently expressing Lifeact - mCherry and dynamin - 2 - GFP were allowed to start assembling a phagosome in the 3D phagosome formation and closure assay set - up ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016a ; Mularski et al . , 2018 ) . This mode of observation ( shown schematically in Figure 4A ) allows for simultaneous visualization of the phagocytic cup extension and closure with TIRF illumination , and the base of the phagocytic cup to be observed using epifluorescence ( at an elevation of 3 µ m above the coverslip ) . As macrophages neared the step of phagosome closure , the activity of dynamin was inhibited by the direct application of dynasore monohydrate to the phagocytosing cell . A representative cell is shown in Figure 4B . In the first 90 s of observation , prior to the addition of dynasore monohydrate , TIRF illumination reveals a cell undergoing phagosome closure , with concomitant accumulation of F - actin and dynamin - 2 and a diminishing view of the RBC . After the addition of dynasore monohydrate at 90 s , a maximum in the F - actin and Dynamin - 2 fluorescence is reached , followed by clearance of both proteins from the site without closure occurring ( as the RBC is still visible ) . In the F - actin epifluorescence images , we see that prior to the addition of dynasore monohydrate , the RBC is in the ‘neck’ of the cell . The Dynamin - 2 epifluorescence images indicate that Dynamin - 2 is not well expressed in the base of the phagocytic cup , meaning that Dynamin - 2 clears from the region before F - actin , though the position of the RBC is still visible . After the addition of dynasore monohydrate , the epifluorescence images indicate that the RBC has moved into the cell body , though the TIRFM images indicate that closure has not taken place . The epifluorescence images reveal that scission has not taken place . These experiments demonstrate that dynamin - 2 accumulates together with F - actin and that timely inhibition of Dynamin - 2 in living macrophages prevents CR3 phagosome closure and scission . Discussion : In this study , we reveal that dynamin - 2 is crucial for CR3 integrin - mediated phagosome completion and closure . Dynamin - 2 acts at two levels , both during actin polymerisation and membrane deformation , and during phagosome closure . The CR3 - mediated phagocytosis was often described as a “sinking” process relying on the formation of reduced phagocytic cups ( Allen and Aderem , 1996 ; Kaplan et al . , 1977 ) . As pointed out recently ( Jaumouille et al . , 2019 ; Patel and Harrison , 2008 ) , and when analysed using live cell imaging methods , it becomes visible that this type of phagocytosis does also generate some membrane extensions . dSTORM and live TIRFM experiments used in this study revealed ‘waves’ of F - actin that close over the phagocytic target ( Figures 1 and 2 ) , rather than an F - actin ring , characteristic of FcR - mediated phagocytosis , that closes around the target ( Allen and Aderem , 1996 ; Marie - Anais et al . , 2016b ; Marion et al . , 2012 ; Schlam et al . , 2015 ) . As CR3 is an integrin , formed by the α M β 2 pair , the actin structures formed around the target particle are similar to focal adhesions , in that they contain talin , vinculin and associated proteins ( Torres - Gomez et al . , 2020a ) . Integrins activity is highly regulated by conformational changes . During the “inside - out” phase of integrin activation , there is an actomyosin - dependent stretching of talin that allows the release of RIAM and subsequent binding to vinculin ( Torres - Gomez et al . , 2020b ; Vigouroux et al . , 2020 ) , which reinforces the association to the β 2 tail and its activation . Interestingly , dynamin - 2 was not implicated in regulating these actin - dependent steps of integrin activation in human macrophages , as the association of macrophages to the complement - opsonised particles was not modified when dynamin - 2 activity was perturbed ( Figure 2 ) . In the same line , the surface delivery of the CR3 receptors is not altered , as association of complement - opsonized RBCs was no different than in control cells when dynamin activity was impaired . Instead , dynamin - 2 was critical for the “outside - in” signal downstream of CR3 leading to actin polymerisation . This complex pathway involves the tyrosine kinase Syk , the small GTPases of the Rho family RhoG , and the actin nucleators VASP , Arp2 / 3 and Formin , as well as an actomyosin activity to orchestrate this integrin - mediated phagosome formation ( Torres - Gomez et al . , 2020a ) . Here we provide novel evidence that dynamin - 2 controls actin polymerisation as well as membrane scission downstream of the phagocytic CR3 . Indeed , dynamin - 2 has been shown to interact directly with actin in vitro , and its interaction with short F - actin filaments was found to promote its GTPase activity and its oligomerisation , which was confirmed in cellulo ( Gu et al . , 2014 ) . It was recently further deciphered how dynamin bundles actin filaments in vitro and how this mechanism could play a role in the context of cell fusion ( Zhang et al . , 2020 ) . The assembly - stimulated GTPase activity of dynamin triggers rapid GTP hydrolysis and helix disassembly . This mechanism of actin bundling could also be relevant in the context of CR3 - phagocytosis . We have indeed shown previously that the integrity of the F - actin network is necessary for sustained recruitment and function of dynamin - 2 downstream of the phagocytic receptors for the Fc portion of Immunoglobulins ( FcR ) and , reversely , that dynamin - 2 activity was necessary for an efficient assembly of the F - actin cup upon FcR ligation ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016b ) . This is also in line with observations that actin polymerisation precedes dynamin recruitment at clathrin - coated pits in the last phases of clathrin - mediated endocytosis before the scission and release of vesicles ( Grassart et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Given the specificities of the CR3 integrin signaling and morphological features of the phagocytic cups , that dynamin - 2 plays a crucial role during CR3 - phagosome shaping and closing is particularly noteworthy . Live cell imaging was instrumental to determine that dynamin - 2 is required for CR3 - phagosome closure and scission . Simultaneous TIRF and epifluorescence observation of living macrophages undergoing CR3 mediated phagocytosis allowed visualisation of dynasore monohydrate induced stalling of phagocytosis : the partially internalised phagocytic target still visible as dynamin - 2 and F actin clear from the site . This result suggests that dynamin - 2 is required for the membrane scission . Interestingly , the macropinocytic capture that shares many morphological features with CR3 - phagocytosis has been described to be independent from dynamin activity ( Le Roux et al . , 2012 ; Liberali et al . , 2008 ) . In the context of CR3 - phagocytosis , F - actin could help control the membrane tension and therefore complement the constriction activity of dynamin - 2 for scission , as proposed ( Morlot and Roux , 2013 ) . Thus , dynamin might contribute to the mechano - sensing and – responding strategies used by the phagocytic cells to adapt their response to the physical properties of their targets , which is highly relevant to clear pathogens , debris and tumor cells ( Mularski and Niedergang , 2017 ) . Materials and Methods : Antibodies , Plasmids and Reagents : The following antibodies were used : rabbit anti - Sheep RBCs ( SRBC ) ( ICN Biochemicals ) ; F ( abʹ ) 2 - donkey anti - rabbit IgM ( Jackson Immunoresearch ) ; anti - dynamin - 2 ( kindly provided , via Mathieu Boissan ( Hospital Saint - Antoine , Paris ) , by the De Camilli Lab ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) ) ; F ( ab’ ) 2 - Goat anti - Rabbit IgG - Alexa Fluor 555 ( Life Technologies ) ; C5 deficient serum human ( Sigma ) ; Phalloidin - Alexa 488 & 647 ( Molecular Probes ) . The plasmid encoding Lifeact - mCherry was kindly provided by G . Montagnac ( Institut Curie ) ; the plasmids encoding DynWT - GFP was provided by Mark Mc Niven ( Mayo Clinic ) . Dynasore monohydrate ( Merck ) was used at 80 µm in phagocytosis assays and in phagosome closure assays . Cell Culture : RAW264 . 7 macrophages were maintained in complete medium consisting of RPMI 1640 - glutamax supplemented with 10 mM HEPES , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 50 μM β - mercaptoethanol and 10 % fetal calf serum ( all from Gibco ) . Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from whole blood of healthy donors ( Etablissement Français du Sang Ile - de - France , Site Trinité , INSERM agreement # 18 / EFS / 030 ensures all donors have provided written informed consent to provide anonymous samples ) by density gradient sedimentation using Ficoll - Plaque ( GE Healthcare ) . Cells were allowed to adhere in 6 or 24 well plates at 37°C for 2 h in adhesion medium ( RPMI 1640 - Glutamax supplemented with 2 mM L - glutamine and 100 μg / ml streptomycin / penicillin ) before cultivating them in complete medium ( RPMI 1640 - glutamax supplemented with 10 % FCS , 2 mM L - glutamine and 100 μg / ml streptomycin / penicillin ) . Every 2 days , complete medium was exchanged . The adherent monocytes were left to differentiate into macrophages ( referred to as human monocyte - derived macrophages ( hMDM ) in the text as described previously ( Jubrail et al . , 2020 ) and used for experiments from day 5 to day 10 of differentiation . Phagocytosis Assay : Phagocytosis Assays were performed with human monocyte - derived macrophages ( hMDM ) on 12 mm glass coverslips before incubation with complement bound , IgM - opsonized sheep red blood cells ( C - IgM - RBC ) as described elsewhere ( Braun et al . , 2004 ) . C - IgM - RBC are resuspended in serum - free medium containing dynamin - 2 inhibitors : dynasore monohydrate ( 80 μM ) or DMSO as a control . Optimal dynasore monohydrate concentration was determined in previous studies ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016b ) . hMDMs were exposed to inhibitors for 10 min prior to incubation with C - IgM - RBCs . After 2 min of centrifugation ( 500 g , RT ) to ensure sedimentation of C - IgM - RBCs . Macrophages were allowed to internalise C - IgM - RBCs at 37 °C for specified times then fixed in 4 % PFA ( ParaFormAldehyde 4 % , PBS 1X ) for 45 min at 4 °C . Cells were then permeabilised labelled with F ( abʹ ) 2 anti - rabbit IgG coupled to Cy3 in PBS1X / 2 % FCS before permeabilisation with 0 . 05 % saponin and staining with phalloidin Alexa - 488 in PBS1X / saponin 0 . 05 % / 2 % FCS , and nuclei were stained with DAPI ( DiAmidino Phenyl Indole ) . External and internalised RBCs were counted in 25 randomly chosen cells , and the phagocytic index , i . e . the mean number of phagocytosed RBCs per cell , was calculated . The number of cell - associated ( bound + internalised ) RBCs , was also counted , to calculate the association index ( mean number of associated RBCs per cell ) . Both phagocytic and attachment indices are expressed as percentages of control DMSO treated cells . Images were acquired using an inverted wide - field microscope ( Leica DMI6000 ) with a 100× ( 1 . 4 NA ) objective and a ( MicroMAX Princeton Instruments ) camera . Actin enrichment was quantified in phagocytic cups , maximum and average fluorescence intensities of a selected region of interest were background corrected by subtracting the mean value from a membrane region in the same cell with no phagocytosis event . Ratio values obtained by dividing the fluorescence intensities in the phagocytic cups by fluorescence intensities in the cell body were calculated as in ( Braun et al . , 2007 ) . Electroporation of RAW264 . 7 cells : Cells were transfected by electroporation with Cell Project electrobuffer kits . One 100 mm plate of cells , grown to sub - confluence , and 20 μg of plasmid ( 10 μg per plasmid for co - transfection ) were used for each electroporation . Cells were electroporated in 4 mm cuvettes ( Biorad ) at 250 V , 900 μF in an electroporation apparatus ( X pulser Bio - Rad Laboratories ) then immediately resuspended in complete culture medium and plated . Cells were used for experiments 15 – 18 hours post electroporation . Phagosome Closure Assay : Functionalised glass bottom dishes for phagosome closure assays were prepared according to the method described in ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016a ; Mularski et al . , 2018 ) . Briefly , C - IgM - SRBCs were centrifuged onto 35 mm glass bottom dishes ( MatTek ) pretreated with 0 . 01 % poly - L - lysine in PBS for 30 min at RT . After washing once with 10 % BSA in PBS , dishes were incubated in 10 % BSA to saturate exposed poly - L - lysine . Dishes were then washed and filled with pre - warmed serum - free microscopy medium and maintained at 37 °C . Transfected cells were then allowed to sediment onto C - IgM - RBCs adhered to the dish surface . Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy ( TIRFM ) : TIRFM was performed using a Till PHOTONICS iMIC microscope equipped with an oil ‐ immersion objective ( Apo N 100 × , NA1 . 49 Olympus America Inc . ) , a heating chamber maintained at 37 ° C and two cameras : a cooled iXonEM camera and an iXon3 897 Single Photon Detection EMCCD Camera ( Andor Technology ) . The critical angle was determined prior to imaging by scanning through incident angles from 0° to 5° to maximise evanescent wave induced fluorescence ( Marie - Anais et al . , 2016a ) . Excitation was performed with 491 and 561 nm lasers . For the phagosome closure assay , images were acquired at 50 ms per frame in bright field illumination , TIRF mode and in epifluorescence mode with Polychrome illumination at 3 µm increment . TIRFM image stacks were processed using ImageJ Color Profiler software ( NIH ) . Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( dSTORM ) : Prior to fixaxion , coverslips were washed three times in PHEM buffer preheated to 37° C ( PHEM buffer : 60mM PIPES , 25mM HEPES , 5mM EGTA , 2mM Mg ( CH3CO ) 2 ( Sigma ) , pH6 . 9 ) . Cells were then fixed for 15 min in 4 % PFA and 0 . 02 % glutaraldehyde ( Sigma ) preheated to 37° C . Permeabilization was then performed for 15 min at RT in 1X PBS / 4 % PFA , 0 . 02 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 5 % TritonX100 ( Sigma ) . Cells were incubated with the polyclonal anti - dynamin - 2 , then with with F ( ab’ ) 2 - Goat anti - Rabbit IgG - Alexa Fluor 555 ( Life Technologies ) . Coverslips were mounted on microscope slides with 80 µ L cavities filled with optimized dSTORM buffer ( Abbelight ) containing phalloidin - 647 ( Molecular Probes ) for F - actin staining . Microscopy was performed on a Leica SR GSD ( DMI 6000B ) equipped with an oil immersion objective ( HCX PL APO 160x , NA1 . 43 , Leica ) , 532 and 642 nm lasers and an EMCCD Andor iXon Ultra 897 . Protein enrichment and localisation was quantified using ThunderSTORM ( Ovesny et al . , 2014 ) and SR - Tesseler ( Levet et al . , 2015 ) . Tesselation based colocalization analysis was performed using Coloc - Tesseler software ( Levet et al . , 2015 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank the IMAG’IC facility members and in particular Beatrice Durel for their help with dSTORM , and Christophe Le Clainche ( Institute for Integrative Biology , Gif - sur - Yvette , France ) for discussions on the project . IMAG’IC is a member of the National Infrastructure France BioImaging ( ANR - 10 - INBS - 04 ) . The authors thank Sophie Echène for the illustrations in this paper . Competing interests No competing interests declared . Funding Work in the F . N . laboratory was supported by CNRS , Inserm , Université de Paris , and a grant from Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( ANR 16 - CE13 - 0007 - 01 ) that included AM’s salary and the gratifications to support FA and RW . References Allen , L . A . and Aderem , A . ( 1996 ) . Molecular definition of distinct cytoskeletal structures involved in complement - and Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J Exp Med 184 , 627 - 37 . Barger , S . R . , Reilly , N . S . , Shutova , M . S . , Li , Q . , Maiuri , P . , Heddleston , J . M . , Mooseker , M . S . , Flavell , R . A . , Svitkina , T . , Oakes , P . W . et al . ( 2019 ) . Membrane - cytoskeletal crosstalk mediated by myosin - I regulates adhesion turnover during phagocytosis . Nat Commun 10 , 1249 . Binker , M . G . , Zhao , D . Y . , Pang , S . J . and Harrison , R . E . ( 2007 ) . Cytoplasmic linker protein - 170 enhances spreading and phagocytosis in activated macrophages by stabilizing microtubules . J Immunol 179 , 3780 - 91 . Braun , V . , Deschamps , C . , Raposo , G . , Benaroch , P . , Benmerah , A . , Chavrier , P . and Niedergang , F . ( 2007 ) . AP - 1 and ARF1 Control Endosomal Dynamics at Sites of FcR mediated Phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 18 , 4921 - 4931 . Braun , V . , Fraisier , V . , Raposo , G . , Hurbain , I . , Sibarita , J . B . , Chavrier , P . , Galli , T . and Niedergang , F . ( 2004 ) . TI - VAMP / VAMP7 is required for optimal phagocytosis of opsonised particles in macrophages . Embo J 23 , 4166 - 76 . Caron , E . and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Identification of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 , 1717 - 21 . Colucci - Guyon , E . , Niedergang , F . , Wallar , B . J . , Peng , J . , Alberts , A . S . and Chavrier , P . ( 2005 ) . A role for mammalian diaphanous - related formins in complement receptor ( CR3 ) - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Curr Biol 15 , 2007 - 12 . Ferguson , S . M . and De Camilli , P . ( 2012 ) . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 , 75 - 88 . Ferguson , S . M . , Raimondi , A . , Paradise , S . , Shen , H . , Mesaki , K . , Ferguson , A . , Destaing , O . , Ko , G . , Takasaki , J . , Cremona , O . et al . ( 2009 ) . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev Cell 17 , 811 - 22 . Grassart , A . , Cheng , A . T . , Hong , S . H . , Zhang , F . , Zenzer , N . , Feng , Y . , Briner , D . M . , Davis , G . D . , Malkov , D . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2014 ) . Actin and dynamin2 dynamics and interplay during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 205 , 721 - 35 . Gu , C . , Chang , J . , Shchedrina , V . A . , Pham , V . A . , Hartwig , J . H . , Suphamungmee , W . , Lehman , W . , Hyman , B . T . , Bacskai , B . J . and Sever , S . ( 2014 ) . Regulation of dynamin oligomerization in cells : the role of dynamin - actin interactions and its GTPase activity . Traffic 15 , 819 - 38 . Jaumouille , V . , Cartagena - Rivera , A . X . and Waterman , C . M . ( 2019 ) . Coupling of beta2 integrins to actin by a mechanosensitive molecular clutch drives complement receptor - mediated phagocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 21 , 1357 - 1369 . Jubrail , J . , Africano - Gomez , K . , Herit , F . , Mularski , A . , Bourdoncle , P . , Oberg , L . , Israelsson , E . , Burgel , P . R . , Mayer , G . , Cunoosamy , D . M . et al . ( 2020 ) . Arpin is critical for phagocytosis in macrophages and is targeted by human rhinovirus . EMBO Rep 21 , e47963 . Kaplan , G . , Allen , L . A . and Aderem , A . ( 1977 ) . Differences in the mode of phagocytosis with Fc and C3 receptors in macrophages . Scand J Immunol 6 , 797 - 807 . membrane trafficking plays a key role in CR - mediated phagocytosis . Le Roux , D . , Le Bon , A . , Dumas , A . , Taleb , K . , Sachse , M . , Sikora , R . , Julithe , M . , Benmerah , A . , Bismuth , G . and Niedergang , F . ( 2012 ) . Antigen stored in dendritic cells after macropinocytosis is released unprocessed from late endosomes to target B cells . Blood 119 , 95 - 105 . Levet , F . , Hosy , E . , Kechkar , A . , Butler , C . , Beghin , A . , Choquet , D . and Sibarita , J . B . ( 2015 ) . SR - Tesseler : a method to segment and quantify localization - based super - resolution microscopy data . Nature Methods 12 , 1065 - 1071 . Lewkowicz , E . , Herit , F . , Le Clainche , C . , Bourdoncle , P . , Perez , F . and Niedergang , F . ( 2008 ) . The microtubule - binding protein CLIP - 170 coordinates mDia1 and actin reorganization during CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 183 , 1287 - 98 . Liberali , P . , Kakkonen , E . , Turacchio , G . , Valente , C . , Spaar , A . , Perinetti , G . , Bockmann , R . A . , Corda , D . , Colanzi , A . , Marjomaki , V . et al . ( 2008 ) . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropinosomes requires the phosphorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . Embo J 27 , 970 - 81 . Marie - Anais , F . , Mazzolini , J . , Bourdoncle , P . and Niedergang , F . ( 2016a ) . " Phagosome Closure Assay " to Visualize Phagosome Formation in Three Dimensions Using Total Internal Reflection Fluorescent Microscopy ( TIRFM ) . J Vis Exp . Marie - Anais , F . , Mazzolini , J . , Herit , F . and Niedergang , F . ( 2016b ) . Dynamin - Actin Cross Talk Contributes to Phagosome Formation and Closure . Traffic 17 , 487 - 99 . Marion , S . , Mazzolini , J . , Herit , F . , Bourdoncle , P . , Kambou - Pene , N . , Hailfinger , S . , Sachse , M . , Ruland , J . , Benmerah , A . , Echard , A . et al . ( 2012 ) . The NF - kappaB Signaling Protein Bcl10 Regulates Actin Dynamics by Controlling AP1 and OCRL - Bearing Vesicles . Dev Cell 23 , 954 - 67 . May , R . C . , Caron , E . , Hall , A . and Machesky , L . M . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat Cell Biol 2 , 246 - 8 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 , 691 - 8 . Morlot , S . and Roux , A . ( 2013 ) . Mechanics of dynamin - mediated membrane fission . Annu Rev Biophys 42 , 629 - 49 . Mularski , A . , Marie - Anais , F . , Mazzolini , J . and Niedergang , F . ( 2018 ) . Observing Frustrated Phagocytosis and Phagosome Formation and Closure Using Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy ( TIRFM ) . Methods Mol Biol 1784 , 165 - 175 . Mularski , A . and Niedergang , F . ( 2017 ) . Phagosome formation and sealing : a physical point of view . In Phagocytosis : Overview , History and Role in Human Health and Disease , ( ed . C . Rosales ) , pp . 111 - 134 : Nova Science Publishers , Inc . Niedergang , F . and Grinstein , S . ( 2018 ) . How to build a phagosome : new concepts for an old process . Curr Opin Cell Biol 50 , 57 - 63 . Ovesny , M . , Knzek , P . , Borkovek , J . , Svindrych , Z . and Hagen , G . ( 2014 ) . ThunderSTORM : a comprehensive ImageJ plug - in for PALM and STORM data analysis and super - resolution imaging . Bioinformatics 30 , 2389 - 2390 . Patel , P . C . and Harrison , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Membrane ruffles capture C3bi - opsonized particles in activated macrophages . Mol Biol Cell 19 , 4628 - 39 . Schlam , D . , Bagshaw , R . D . , Freeman , S . A . , Collins , R . F . , Pawson , T . , Fairn , G . D . and Grinstein , S . ( 2015 ) . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase enables phagocytosis of large particles by terminating actin assembly through Rac / Cdc42 GTPase - activating proteins . Nat Commun 6 , 8623 . Torres - Gomez , A . , Cabanas , C . and Lafuente , E . M . ( 2020a ) . Phagocytic Integrins : Activation and Signaling . Front Immunol 11 , 738 . Torres - Gomez , A . , Sanchez - Trincado , J . L . , Toribio , V . , Torres - Ruiz , R . , Rodriguez - Perales , S . , Yanez - Mo , M . , Reche , P . A . , Cabanas , C . and Lafuente , E . M . ( 2020b ) . RIAM - VASP Module Relays Integrin Complement Receptors in Outside - In Signaling Driving Particle Engulfment . Cells 9 . Uribe - Querol , E . and Rosales , C . ( 2020 ) . Phagocytosis : Our Current Understanding of a Universal Biological Process . Front Immunol 11 , 1066 . Vigouroux , C . , Henriot , V . and Le Clainche , C . ( 2020 ) . Talin dissociates from RIAM and associates to vinculin sequentially in response to the actomyosin force . Nat Commun 11 , 3116 . Zhang , R . , Lee , D . M . , Jimah , J . R . , Gerassimov , N . , Yang , C . , Kim , S . , Luvsanjav , D . , Winkelman , J . , Mettlen , M . , Abrams , M . E . et al . ( 2020 ) . Dynamin regulates the dynamics and mechanical strength of the actin cytoskeleton as a multifilament actin - bundling protein . Nat Cell Biol 22 , 674 - 688 . Figure legends Figure 1 : STORM visualisation of hMDMs undergoing frustrated and ‘3D’ phagocytosis show accumulation of F - actin and dynamin - 2 . Schematic representation of a cell undergoing frustrated phagocytosis ( A ) . Primary human macrophages are deposited on coverslips coated with IgG ( FcR ) or IgM + complement ( CR3 ) and then fixed , permeabilized and actin was labeled with phalloidin - Alexa 647 and cells were visualised with STORM ( B ) , bar = 2 . 5 µ m . Radial lengths of the frustrated phagocytic cups were measurered and the standard devations of these were plotted ( C , 7 cells ) . Schematic representation of a cell undergoing ‘3D’ phagocytosis ( D ) . Primary human macrophages are allowed to sediment on to coverslips coated with loosely bound IgG ( FcR ) or IgM + complement ( CR3 ) opsonised red blood cells and then fixed , permeabilized and labeled . Actin was labelled with phalloidin - Alexa 647 and Dynamin - 2 with Alexa - 555 . Cells were visualised with STORM ( E ) , bar = 2 . 5 µ m . Image analysis determined Spearman coeffcients for actin ( red circles ) and dynamin ( green circles ) in regions of interest in cell body ( E , blue dashed line , 9 cell body regions ) and phagocytic cups ( E , white dashed line , 14 phagocytic cups ) ( F ) . Phagosome closure assay was performed using RAW 264 . 7 macrophages transiently expressing both Lifeact - mcherry and Dynamin - 2 - GFP . Shown schematically in G , cells are allowed to phagocytose opsonized particles that are non - covalently bound to the coverslip , allowing the site of closure to be observed using TIRFM . TIRFM images of Lifeact - mcherry ( H , top row ) and Dynamin - 2 - GFP ( H , middle row ) and brightfield images ( H , bottom row ) were captured every 2 s for 10 min at 37° . The RBC phagocytosed is clearly visible in brightfield images at 0 s and 60 s ( B , bottom row , red circles ) , but pulled from the focal plane by the cell from 90s . Bar = 5 µ m . Figure 2 : Pharmacological Inhibition of Dynamin - II impairs phagocytosis but not association . hMDMs were treated with DMSO ( control , A & D ) or Dynasore monohydrate ( 80 µm , B & E ) . hMDMs were then allowed to phagocytose IgM - C3 opsonised sRBC for 0 min ( A & B ) and 60 min ( D & E ) , fixed and stained to detect sRBCs with Cy3 - coupled anti - rabbit IgM antibodies . The indices of association ( C ) and phagocytosis ( F ) were calculated in 25 cells per donor at 0 and 60 min respectively . The means of 3 independent experiments are plotted ( * p < 0 , 01 ) . Bar = 10 µ m . Figure 3 : Pharmacological inhibition of dynamin - 2 decreases the F - actin recruitment to the phagocytic cup . hMDMs were treated with DMSO ( control ) or dynasore monohydrate ( 80 µm ) . hMDMs were allowed to phagocytose IgM - C3 opsonised sRBC for 15 min , then fixed and stained to detect sRBCs with Cy3 - coupled anti - rabbit IgM antibodies , as well as F - actin with phalloidin - Alexa488 . Images for DMSO ( A ) and dynasore treated ( B ) cells were acquired using an inverted wide - field microscope ( Leica DMI6000 ) with a 100× ( 1 . 4 NA ) objective . Bar , 10 μm . Actin enrichment was quantified in phagocytic cups ( A , B , red arrows ) , maximum fluorescence intensities of selected regions of interest were background corrected by subtracting the maximum intensity value from a membrane region in the same cell with no phagocytic event . Ratio values obtained by dividing the fluorescence intensities in the phagocytic cups by fluorescence intensities in the cell body were calculated ( C ) . This ratio can be expressed as a percentage of F - actin enrichment relative to control cells ( D ) . The results of four independent experiments are plotted ( n = 15 actin cups / condition , * * * * p < 0 . 01 ) . Bar = 10 µ m , inset box = 12 µ m . Figure 4 : Inhibition of Dynamin - 2 prevents phagosome scission in living cells . Phagosome closure assay was performed using RAW 264 . 7 macrophages transiently expressing both Lifeact - mcherry and Dynamin - 2 - GFP . Shown schematically in A , cells are allowed to phagocytose opsonized particles that are non - covalently bound to the coverslip , allowing the site of closure to be observed using TIRFM , and the base of the phagocytic cup to be observed using epifluorescence ( at an elevation of 3 µ m above the coverslip ) . TIRFM images of Lifeact - mcherry ( B , top row ) and Dynamin - 2 - GFP ( B , second row ) , epifluorescence images of Lifeact - mcherry ( B , third row ) and Dynamin - 2 - GFP ( B , fourth row ) and brightfield images ( B , bottom row ) were captured every 2 s for 10 min at 37° . The RBC phagocytosed is clearly visible in brightfield images at 0 s and 60 s ( B , bottom row , red circles ) , but pulled from the focal plane by the cell from 90s . At 90 s , Dynasore monohydrate was added to the fluid cell such that the final concentration was 80 µ M ( B , red line ) . The epifluorescence images show that the RBC has been internalised . Bar = 5 µ m . G G A Opsonised coverslip Frustrated phagocytosis E F - actin Dynamin F - actin Dynamin BF 0 s 60 s 90 s 105 s 120 s 300 s TIRF TIRF G H Opsonised red blood cell Incident light Reflected light TIRF Merge ‘3D’ phagocytosis D Opsonised red blood cell B C F Merge Phase Cy3 0 min 60 min CONTROL DYNASORE DYNASORE CONTROL Merge Phase Cy3 Merge Phase Cy3 Merge Phase Cy3 0 min 60 min A C D F B E 15 min DYNASORE CONTROL Phase Merge F - actin RBCs Phase Merge RBCs A B C F - actin CONTROL Phase D Opsonised red blood cells Incident light Reflectedlight 90s 0 s 60 s 120 s 180 s 240 s 300 s F - actin Dynamin BF TIRF TIRF F - actin Dynamin EPI EPI A B TIRF EPI