2000 ASME CURRICULUM INNOVATION AWARD WINNER WWW . ASME . ORG / EDUCATE / CIA Dan Jensen , ASME Member Associate Professor Department of Engineering Mechanics United States Air Force Academy , CO dan . jensen @ usafa . af . mil Krisitin Wood , ASME Member Professo r Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Texas , Austin , TX 78712 wood @ mail . utexas . edu INCORPORATING LEARNING STYLES TO ENHANCE MECHANICAL ENGINEERING CURRICULA BY RESTRUCTURING COURSES , INCREASING HANDS - ON ACTIVITIES , & IMPROVING TEAM DYNAMICS Beginning in 1997 and continuing to the present , the U . S . Air Force Academy ( USAFA ) and the Univ . of Texas at Austin ( UTA ) have collaborated in a project to use learning style theory to enhance Mechanical Engineering curricula . Our primary learning styles indicator has come from the Myers Briggs Type Indicator ( MBTI ) ; although two other learning styles indicators ( VARK and 6 Hats ) and four models of the learning process ( Kolb , Bloom’s taxonomy , Scaffolding and Inductive / Deductive ) were also incorporated . The project focused initially on our undergraduate design methodology courses . However , the impact of this work has now affected a large number of other courses in our departments . We have endeavored to extend , significantly , what others have done in this area [ Bonwell 1998 , Dunn 1978 , Eder 1994 , Felder 1988 , 1996 , Lumsdaine 1995 , McCaulley 1990 ] to enhance our curriculum . I . OVERVIEW & EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES The three educational objectives which have driven this project are : 1 . Reformulate course content to better correspond with what is known about diverse learning styles . 2 . Use hands - on and multimedia content in conjunction with learning styles theory to enhance specific “target” lectures which students previously identified as low - motivation or low - interest . 3 . Use learning style theory to enhance team dynamics , both in terms of initial team formation and improving team communication . The project , overall , has resulted in dramatic increases in learning effectiveness for many of our courses . Specifically , a completely revised syllabus for the Design Methodology classes at both USAFA and UTA has resulted in significant increases in student ratings for those classes . Similar results occurred due to evolution of our machine design courses . Our assessment indicates that the addition of hands - on content and multimedia in a number of these courses has significantly improved motivation and interest , especially for certain under - represented learning styles . Finally , the team dynamics work has resulted in a new team formation algorithm , which has led to significant improvements in team performance and better team communication . Overall , these enhancements have resulted in the publication / presentation of 17 papers ( 3 still in review ) and 1 book , and they have affected 7 classes at USAFA and 8 classes at UTA ( some of which are interdisciplinary classes ) . Over 600 students at USAFA , and a similar number at UTA , have benefited directly from this work . In addition , colleagues at Univ . of Missouri - Rolla , Stanford , University of the Pacific , and MIT have collaborated with us in this work and , as a result , some of these techniques are included in their classes as well . II . LEARNING STYLES & PROCESSES For our study , we selected three methods to categorize student’s learning styles : ( 1 ) MBTI , ( 2 ) VARK , and ( 3 ) 6 Hats . In addit ion , we have incorporated four models of the learning process : ( 1 ) Kolb , ( 2 ) Bloom’s taxonomy , ( 3 ) Scaffolding , and ( 4 ) Inductive / Deductive flows . Each of these is described briefly below . II . 1 MBTI Overview The MBTI type indicator includes four categories of preference [ Jung 1971 , Keirsey 1984 , 2000 , McCaulley 1976 , 1983 , 1990 ] . The first category describes whether a person interacts with their environment , especially with people , in an initiating ( extroverted ) or more passive ( introverted ) role . Extroverts tend to gain energy from their surroundings while introverts usually gain energy by processing information internally . The second category gives information on how a person processes information . Those who prefer to use their five senses to process the information ( sensors ) are contrasted with those who view the intake of information in light of either its place in an overarching theory or its future use ( intuitors ) . This sensor vs . intuitor category is seen by most researchers to be the most important of the four categories in terms of implications for education [ Borchert 1999 , Feland 2000 , Jensen1998 - 1 , 1999 - 2 , Myers 1985 ] . The third category for MBTI preference represents the manner in which a person evaluates information . Those Page 2 who tend to use a logical “cause and effect” strategy ( thinkers ) are contrasted with those who use a hierarchy based on values or on the manner in which an idea is communicated ( feelers ) . The final MBTI type category indicates how a person makes decisions or comes to conclusions . Those who tend to want to be sure that all of the data has been thoroughly considered ( perceivers ) are contrasted with those who summarize the situation as it presently stands and make decisions quickly ( judgers ) . The four letter combination of these indicators ( “E” vs . “I” for extrovert and introvert ; “S” vs . “N” for sensor and intuitor ; “T” vs . “F” for thinker and feeler ; “J” vs . “P” for judger and perceiver ) constitute a person’s MBTI “type” . Table 1 , which is adapted from Manual : the Myers - Briggs Type Indicator [ McCaulley 1976 , Myers 1985 ] , gives a brief overview of the four MBTI categories . TABLE 1 : OVERVIEW OF MBTI II . 2 VARK Overview The present work also builds on student learning preferences , as obtained from an instrument called the VARK Catalyst . Rather than being a diagnostic tool for determining a student’s learning preference , the VARK test serves as a catalyst for reflection by the student [ Bonwell 1998 ] . The student takes a simple 13 - question test that is aimed at discovering how they prefer to receive and process information . After taking the test , the student receives a “preference score” for each of four areas . The first area is Visual ( V ) . This area indicates how much the student prefers to receive information from depictions “of information in charts , graphs , flow charts , and all the symbolic arrows , circles , hierarchies , and other devices that instructors use to represent what could have been presented in words . ” The second area is Aural ( A ) . This area indicates the student’s preference for hearing information , i . e . , the student learns best from a lecture , tutorial , or talking with other students . The third area is Read / Write ( R ) . This area shows a student’s preference for information displayed as words , and is perhaps the most common instructional method used in Western education . The fourth area is Kinesthetic ( K ) . In short , this area indicates a student’s preference for “learning by doing . ” By definition , the “K” area refers to a student’s “perceptual preference related to the use of experience and practice ( simulated or real ) . The scoring of the test also allows for the student to show mild , moderate , or strong learning preferences for each of the four areas . II . 3 6 - Hats Overview In the original 6 - Hats work [ DeBono 1985 ] , six communication styles / roles are identified . Each style / role is associated with a certain color . When a person is using that particular style / role , they are said to be wearing that “hat” . The current work focuses on the use of these 6 styles / roles in a different manner than the original work . The idea in this present work is simply that each individual has established patterns of communication which can be identified using the 6 - Hats categories . Once these preferred communication styles / roles are identified , they may be used in a design team formulation strategy ( TFS ) to both balance communication styles / roles as well as to ensure certain styles / roles are present . II . 4 Kolb Cycle Overview The Kolb model describes an entire cycle around which a learning experience progresses [ Kolb 1984 ] . The goal , therefore , is to structure learning activities that will proceed completely around this cycle , providing the maximum opportunity for full comprehension . This model has been used extensively to evaluate and enhance teaching in engineering [ Murphy 1998 , Otto 1998 , Stice 1987 , Terry 1993 ] . The cycle is shown in Figure 1 . Figure 1 – Kolb Cycle Concrete Experience Abstract Hypothesisand Conceptualization ReflectiveObservation Active Experimentation ( dissection , reverse engineering , case studies ) ( discussions , journals , perturbations , individual activities ) ( modeling , analysis , theory ) ( lab experiments , teardown , testing , simulations ) 1 2 3 4 Process Information T a k e - I n I n f o r m a t i on Why ? What ? How ? WhatIf ? II . 5 Bloom’s Taxonomy Bloom’s taxonomy gives 6 levels at which learning can occur [ Krathwohl 1964 , Terry 1993 ] . In general , a higher the level corresponds to a more advanced or mature Manner in Which a Person Interacts With Others E Focuses outwardly on others . Gains energy from others . Focuses inwardly . Gains energy from ideas and concepts . I EXTROVERSION INTROVERSION Manner in Which a Person Processes Information S Focus is on the five senses and experience . Focus is on possibilities , future use , big picture . N SENSING INTUITION Manner in Which a Person Evaluates Information T Focuses on objective facts and causes & effect . Focuses on subjective meaning and values . F THINKING FEELING Manner in Which a Person Comes to Conclusions J Focus is on timely , planned conclusions and decisions . Focus is on adaptive process of decision making . P JUDGEMENT PERCEPTION Page 3 learning process . Thus , we aspire to focus our instruction in higher education toward the higher levels . The six levels are given in Table 2 . TABLE 2 – Overview of Bloom’s Taxonomy Level Name : Description 1 Knowledge : List or recite 2 Comprehension : Explain or paraphrase 3 Application : Calculate , solve , determine or apply 4 Analysis : Compare , contrast , classify , categorize , derive , model 5 Synthesis : Create , invent , predict , construct , design , imagine , improve , produce , propose 6 Evaluation : Judge , select , decide , critique , justify , verify , debate , assess , recommend II . 6 Scaffolding and Inductive / Deductive Learning The term “scaffolding” encompasses the idea that new knowledge is best assimilated when it is linked to previous experience [ Agogino 1995 , Hsi 1995 , Linn 1995 ] . A well - planned flow of material that builds on itself and integrates real - world examples obviously helps provide this “scaffold” for learning . The terms “deductive learning or inductive learn ing” refer to learning from general to specific or visa - versa . For example showing the theory and then working an example is a form of an deductive process . Most courses use deductive approaches . The literature argues that this approach is not always appropriate [ Felder 1996 ] . It appears that a mix of the two approaches provides the best learning environment . III . METHODOLOGY & ASSESSMENT FOR THREE EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES Below , a methodology and assessment are given which correspond to each of the 3 educational objectives listed above . Only overviews of our work in each area are possible here due to space considerations . The references provide far more detail in each category . III . 1 . Reformulated Courses III . 1 . 1 Methodology for Courses In an effort to accommodate various learning styles , our Design Methodology classes have been evolved to include both a reverse engineering / redesign emphasis as well as an original design component [ Jensen 1998 - 1 , 1999 - 2 , 2000 - 2 , Lefever 1996 , 2000 , Otto 1996 , 1998 , 2000 ] ] . The course is split approximately in half , with the first half covering redesign and the second half covering original design . Typically , in the redesign portion , small design teams ( 3 - 5 students ) compete to improve on customer requirements using toys or small consumer products ( Figure 2 ) . A suite of design methods guides the redesign process . The specific redesign methodology used is shown in [ Jensen 1998 - 1 , Otto 1998 , 2000 ] . The original design portion focuses on an ASME student competition , an assistive technology device for people with disabilities , or similar project . Both the redesign and original design portions include full embodiment of the design . Figure 2 – Example Consumer Products A similar reformulation has been undertaken in our Machine Design courses . A remote controlled ( RC ) car ( Figure 3 ) has been introduced to function as a sort of mechanical breadboard . The car is used in the second half of the course where machine components are analyzed and designed . A RC car has been identified that has a number of parts which can be analyzed for failure as well as a number of parts which could be optimized . Typically , students are asked to analyze approximately 6 of the systems including subsystems such as fasteners , shafts , gears and clutches . In addition to requiring certain types of analysis , as covered in class , students are asked to analyze / optimize a number of systems which have NOT been covered ( but are addressed in the text or supporting materials ) . This approach is adopted in the context of a RC car competition that is held in place of a comprehensive final exam [ Wood 2000 ] . Figure 3 – Remote - Controlled Car III . 1 . 2 Assessment of the Reformulated Courses The reformulation of the design classes to include a reverse engineering / redesign component has led to substantial improvements in course ratings at both USAFA and UTA as documented in [ Jensen 1998 - 1 , 2000 - 2 , Otto 1998 ] . Examples at USAFA include a 16 % increase in student’s ratings on the “intellectual challenge and encouragement of independent thought” and a 13 % increase in the student’s perception of the instructor’s concern for their learning . The UTA courses experienced similar improvements , even up to a 50 % increase in course ratings . In addition , the evolution of these courses gives the students two iterations ( redesign and original design ) to use the design tools . We have found this extra iteration increases the retention of this material between their first design course and their capstone course . Page 4 The decision to include redesign content is also reinforced by a number of learning styles issues . First , our work has demonstrated that certain types of students ( MBTI Type - S and VARK type - K ) perform significantly better when reverse engineering / redesign type content is included [ Jensen 1998 - 1 ] . These students typically have an aversion to purely abstract content . The inclusion of the reverse engineering / redesign component allows them to learn the design methods while manipulating an actual product , as opposed to applying the methods only to abstract paper designs , as is sometimes done in original design projects . Second , various models of the learning process were found to correspond more fully with the new course structures . In particular the new course structures allowed us to traverse the complete Kolb cycle [ Otto 1998 ] , particularly providing emphasis in the areas of “concrete experience” and “active experimentation” . We are able to move farther down the Bloom’s taxonomy of learning , providing more opportunities for levels 4 - 6 . A redesign component also significantly enhances consistency with scaffolding theories by creating a framework for discussing design tools . Finally , it creates a very natural “inductive” environment by simply having a specific product as the example while discussing the design theories and methodologies . Assessment regarding the reformulation of our Machine Design courses has also been very positive . The trends show an increase in reception by the students , especially regarding the ability to reason independently and the relevance of the content material . Students resonated with the refined course . The course material was evaluated as very difficult and challenging , yet the students perceived that an active and project - learning forum greatly added to their ability to understand and retain the material [ Wood 2000 ] . III . 2 Enhancing Target Lectures Our second educational objective is to use hands - on and multimedia content in conjunction with learning styles theory to enhance specific “target” lectures that students previously identified as low - motivation or low - interest . Lessons learned by previous researchers who have incorporated hands - on content were used as a starting point [ Aglan 1996 , Carlson 1995 , Catalano 1996 , Kresta 1998 , Regan 1996 ] . III . 2 . 1 Methodology for Targeted Lectures For our sophomore , junior , and senior design courses , our hands - on content took the form of low cost , simple devices like a fingernail clipper , mechanical pencil or quick grip clamp [ Jensen 1998 - 1 , 1999 - 2 , 2000 - 2 , Lefever 1996 , Otto 1998 ] . Enough of these devices were distributed in class for each student or pair of students to manipulate a device . A specific design method or theory would be presented and related directly to the hands - on device . For our Intro . to Mechanics and Solid Mechanics courses , various hands - on photoelastic devices were developed [ Borchert 1999 , Jensen 1999 - 1 , Shakerin 1999 , 2000 ] . Again , enough devices were used so that each student or pair of students had their own device . These devices were designed to qualitatively illustrate different stress distribution concepts . One such device is shown in Figure 4 . Each device was constructed for under $ 30 . In some cases the hands - on content was mixed with multimedia visualization content [ Bowe 2000 , Jensen 1998 - 2 , 1999 - 1 , Talreja 2000 ] . Figure 4 – Photoelastic Device III . 2 . 2 Assessment for the Targeted Lectures Although our assessment shows that all learning style types benefited from the new content , students with specific learning styles were seen to benefit more dramatically than others . Table 3 shows data from one of our assessment studies [ Jensen 1999 - 2 ] . A short 4 - question survey was given to the students after each class . The targeted lectures ( which were previously identified as “low motivation / low interest” ) , experienced a reversal of that trend and were rated in the 62 nd and 52 nd percentile overall by the MBTI S - Types and N - types respectively . As with the reformulated courses described above , the learning styles that indicated the greatest benefit were those that focused on non - abstract ( tactile or visual ) learning processes [ Borchert 1999 , Jensen 1998 - 1 , 1999 - 1 , 1999 - 2 ] . Table 3 – Percentile Ranks for Targeted Lectures 1 min . Surve y Question MBTI S - TYPE MBTI N - TYPE Lecture was interesting ? 70 48 Lecture helped me learn ? 58 50 Lecture helped me to apply material ? 59 58 Lecture motivated me to explore subject further ? 59 53 Average 62 52 The response to the photo - elastic devices was very positive . We saw again that the MBTI S - Type and VARK K - Type found the content more useful then their N - Type and nonK - Type counterparts . In particular , S - Types were able to increase their scores on quizzes given before and Page 5 after the material by 26 % while N - Types only increased their scores by 18 % [ Borchert 1999 ] . Although the vast majority of our assessment has shown these techniques to be positive , one example to the contrary is given in [ Bowe 2000 , Talreja 2000 ] . In this case students in our Intro . to Mechanics course at USAFA definitively stated that they did NOT prefer our multimedia content to a traditional lecture . Although originally baffled by this , follow - up assessment has provided a hypothesis , for which we are currently running an “educational experiment” , to verify . It seems that the connection between the multimedia and the student’s primary goal of simple survival was not properly established . In addition , the multimedia , which used finite element results to provide visualization of basic stress distributions associated with certain loading types , was probably posed at slightly too high a level for this course . It is worthy of note that , although the student’s perception was negative , our assessment showed that the multimedia DID provide insight into the conceptual material and enhance problem solving ability , exactly as it was designed to do . After fine - tuning our presentation and lowering the complexity of the material slightly , we expect a reversal of the student’s negative perception . We plan to report the results next summer . The addition of hands - on and multimedia content to these targeted lectures fits well with “scaffolding” theories . The hands - on or multimedia give the student a “starting place” in which to frame the new ideas they are learning . The use of hands - on material and multimedia is thus an example of inductive presentation . III . 3 . Team Enhancements III . 3 . 1 Methodology for Team Enhancements Based on previous research in the area of team formation and team dynamics [ Brickell 1994 , Wilde 1993 ] , we have developed and evaluated a new technique for forming teams and identifying their most likely communication strengths and weaknesses [ Feland 2000 , Jensen 2000 - 1 ] . The new technique uses both MBTI and a new instrument we developed from the “6 - Hats Communication Styles” literature [ DeBono 1985 ] . The technique is simple to implement . It requires that each student first determine their MBTI type . We use the web - based Keirsey form [ Keirsey 2000 ] , which takes the student about 10 minutes to complete . Each student must also complete a “6 - Hats Communication Styles Instrument” which we have developed [ Jensen 2000 - 1 ] . This takes an additional 10 - 15 minutes . Although our team - formation technique has a number of very explicitly stated objectives , the overarching goal is to ensure breadth of communication styles and information processing preferences within a team . A specific algorithm designed to accomplish this goal is given in the paper . In both our design teams ( sophomore and senior ) courses and in our cooperative learning groups ( intro . mechanics courses ) , these techniques have led to improvements in team effectiveness . In addition , these methods have provided the professors with concrete tools for addressing communication issues among the teams . Specifically , students are trained to appreciate and capitalize on differences in communication and information processing styles within their group . Furthermore , we use these techniques to coach teams to communicate both honestly and respectfully , which we believe facilitates team unity and effectiveness [ Feland 2000 ] . III . 3 . 2 Assessment on the Team Enhancements The learning style based team formation and team communication work has had very positive results . A survey instrument was developed to measure the ability of teams to accomplish several specific goals . These goals were taken directly from the goals of the MBTI and 6 - Hats team formation strategies , but would also be considered standard team effectiveness criteria . Examples of these goals include good team leadership , creativity , problem solving , conflict resolution , and ability to meet deadlines . The results , as measured by this team effectiveness survey , show a dramatic increase when team formation criteria from BOTH of these team formation techniques ( 6 - Hats and MBTI ) techniques are used simultaneously . Specifically , the overall team effectiveness index rose 84 % when these two techniques were used in tandem as compared to when either technique is used exclusively [ Jensen 2000 - 1 ] . Also , both the 6 hats and MBTI based techniques have provided professors with concrete tools for use in identifying team weaknesses and strengths in the communication area [ Feland 2000 ] . IV . USEFULNESS TO OTHER INSTITUTIONS The three educational enhancements described briefly above have already been implemented in various forms at our own institutions ( USAFA and UTA ) . In addition , various forms of our enhancements have been used at Univ . of Missouri - Rolla , Stanford , MIT and University of the Pacific . Some of the features of these educational enhancements which makes them suitable for wide use are : ( a ) It is NOT necessary to have a extensive knowledge of learning styles to implement our techniques . The MBTI , as used in our work , is based on the Keirsey instrument [ Keirsey 1984 , 2000 ] , which is available , along with sufficient background , on the web . The use of this instrument is free and only takes about 10 minutes for students to complete . ( b ) The specifics for reformatting a design course to include a reverse engineering / redesign component are given in a detailed , simple - to - follow format in [ Jensen 1998 - 1 , Otto 1998 ] . Similarly , the information needed to reformulate a machine design course is provided in [ Wood 2000 ] . ( c ) As described in the various papers , the hands - on content is low cost and easy to build [ Borchert 1999 , Jensen 1999 - 2 ] . The most expensive hands - on demo is about $ 30 ( with the exception of the RC cars ) . Page 6 Pictures of some of the hands - on devices used in the design classes as well as the photoelastic devices are included in the papers . Although the RC cars are much more expensive per unit ( about $ 200 / car ) , teams of 3 - 5 students can effectively work to analyze or redesign the car , resulting in a more manageable $ per student cost . ( d ) The multimedia we have developed for use in Mechanics courses [ Bowe 2000 , Borchert 1999 ] is currently available in Power Point form from the authors . We anticipate that this content will be available in the coming year in interactive web - based form from Wiley Publishers . ( e ) The 6 hats based instruments are included in a simple , easy - to - use format in the paper [ Jensen 2000 - 1 ] and are available in a Excel version . As opposed to the some MBTI based team formation algorithms , the one used in this work is simple , easy to use and has been quantitatively shown to increase team effectiveness . In addition , it lends itself easily to aiding in team communication counseling . Acknowledgements The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Department of Engineering Mechanics at the U . S . Air Force Academy as well as the financial support of the Dean’s Assessment Funding Program . Support is acknowledged from the Institute for Information and Technology Applications ( IITA ) at the USAF Academy which funded some of the earlier MBTI work and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research which has funded some of the design work . Also , the National Science Foundation through grant DUE9751315 and the School of Engineering at the University of the Pacific provided equipment funding . Particular thanks goes to Colonel Cary Fisher , Head of the Department of Engineering Mechanics at USAFA and to Dr . Said Shakerin at the University of the Pacific . This work is also supported , in part , by the National Science Foundation under both an NSF Young Investigator Award and a Career Young Investigator Award , Ford Motor Company , Desktop Manufacturing Corporation , Texas Instruments , W . M . Keck Foundation , and the June and Gene Gillis Endowed Faculty Fellow in Manufacturing . In addition , the authors heartily thank Dr . Phillip Schmidt , Dr . Richard Crawford , Dr . Ilene Busch - Vishniac , and Ms . Irem Tumer for their efforts in advancing the courses at UT - Austin . References 1 . Aglan , H . A . , Ali , S . F . , “Hands - on Experiences : An Integral Part of Engineering Curriculum Reform , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 327 - 330 , Oct . , 1996 . 2 . Agogino , A . , Shi , S . , “Scaffolding Knowledge Integration through Designing Multimedia Case Studies of Engineering Design , ” Proceeding of the ASEE Frontiers in Education conference , pp . D1 . 1 - 1 . 4 , 1995 . 3 . Bonwell , C . C . , “Active Learning and Learning Styles , ” Active Learning Workshops Conference , USAF Academy , Co , July , 1998 . 4 . Brickell , J . L . , Porter , D . B . , Reynolds , M . F . , Cosgrove , R . D . , “Assigning Students to Groups for Engineering Design Projects : A Comparison of Five Methods” , Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 259 - 262 , July 1994 . 5 . Borchert , R . , Jensen , D . , Yates , D . , “Hands - on and Visualization Modules for Enhancement of Learning in Mechanics : Development and Assessment in the Context of Myers Briggs Types and VARK Learning Styles , ” Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conf . , Charlotte , NC , June , 1999 . 6 . Bowe , M . , Jensen , D . , Feland , J . , Self , B . , “When Multimedia Doesn’t Work : An Assessment of Visualization Modules for Learning Enhancement in Mechanics” , Submitted to Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference , St Louis , June 2000 7 . Carlson , L . E . , “First Year Engineering Projects : An Interdisciplinary , Hands - on Introduction to Engineering , Proceeding of the ASEE Annual Conference , pp . 2039 - 2043 , 1995 . 8 . Catalano , G . D . , Tonso , K . L . , “The Sunrayce ’95 Idea : Adding Hands - on Design to an Engineering Curriculum , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 193 - 199 , Jul . , 1996 . 9 . DeBono , E . , Six Hats Thinking , Little , Brown and Co , Boston , MA , 1985 . 10 . Dunn , R . , Dunn , K . Teaching Students through Their Individual Learning Styles : A Practical Approach . Reston , Virginia : Prentice Hall , 1978 . 11 . Eder , W . E . , “Comparisons – Learning Theories , Design Theory , Science , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 111 - 119 , Apr . , 1994 . 12 . Feland , J . and Jensen , D . , “A Simple Approach for Using Myers Briggs Type Indicator Data to Enhance Engineering Education” , Proceedings of the ASEE South West Regional Conference , Golden , CO , March , 2000 . 13 . Felder , R . M . , Silverman , L . K . , “Learning and Teaching Styles in Engineering Education , ” Engineering Education , pp . 674 - 681 , Apr . , 1988 . 14 . Felder , R . M . , “Matters of Style , ” ASEE Prism , pp . 18 - 23 , Dec . , 1996 . 15 . Hsi , S . , Agogino , A . , “Scaffolding Knowledge Integration through Designing Multimedia Case Studies of Engineering Design , ” Proceeding of ASEE Frontiers in Education Conference , 1995 . 16 . Jensen , D . D . , Murphy , M . D . , Wood , K . L . , “Evaluation and Refinement of a Restructured Introduction to Engineering Design Course Using Student Surveys and MBTI Data , ” , Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference , Seattle WA , June , 1998 . 17 . Jensen , D . D . and Pramono , E . , “A Method for Teaching Finite Elements Which Combines the Advantages of Commercial Pre and Post - Page 7 Processing with Student Written Software , “ Computer Applications in Engineering Education , Vol . 6 , No . 2 , pp . 105 - 114 , June 1998 . 18 . Jensen , D . , Borchert , R . , “MSC / Patran Used to Improve Education by Providing Visualization of Stress Concepts , ” MSC World , Feb . , 1999 . 19 . Jensen , D . , Bowe , M . , “Hands - on Experiences to Enhance Learning of Design : Effectiveness in a Reverse Engineering / Redesign Context When Correlated with MBTI and VARK Types , ” Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conf . , Charlotte , NC , June , 1999 . 20 . Jensen , D . , Feland , J . , Bowe , M . , Self , B . , “A 6 - Hats Based Team Formation Strategy : Development and Comparison with an MBTI Based Approach” , Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference , St Louis , June 2000 . 21 . Jensen , D . , Wood , K . , Bezdek , J . , Otto , K . , “Reverse Engineering and Redesign : Courses to Incrementally and Systematically Teach Design” , submitted to Journal of Engineering Education , Jan 2000 . 22 . Jung , C . G . Psychological Types , Volume 6 of the collected works of C . G . Jung , Princeton University Press , 1971 ( original work published in 1921 ) . 23 . Kersey , D . , Bates , M . Please Understand Me . Del Mar : Prometheus Press , 1984 . 24 . Keirsey web site www . keirsey . com , 2000 . 25 . Kolb , D . A . , Experimental Learning : Experience as the Source of Learning and Development . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall , 1984 . 26 . Krathwohl , D . R . , Bloom , B . S . , Maisa , B . B . , “Taxonomy of Educational Objectives : The Classification of Educational Goals , ” Handbook II , Affective Domain , New York : David McKay Co . Inc , 1964 . 27 . Kresta , S . M . , “Hands - on Demonstrations : An Alternative to Full Scale Lab Experiments , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 7 - 9 , Jan . , 1998 . 28 . Lefever , D . and Wood , K . L . , “Design for Assembly Techniques in Reverse Engineering and Redesign , ” ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Irvine , CA , Paper No . 37 DETC / DTM - 1507 . 1996 . 29 . Lefever , D . , Wood , K . , Greer , M . , Jensen , D . , Nowack , M . , “Reverse Engineering and Redesign : Design for Assembly Techniques” , Submitted to Journal of Research in Engineering Design , Jan 2000 . 30 . Linn , M . C . , “Designing Comp uter Environments for Engineering and Computer Science : Scaffolded Knowledge Integration Framework , ” Journal of Science Education and Technology , Vol . 4 , No . 2 , 1995 . 31 . Lumsdaine , M . , Lumsdaine , E . , “Thinking Preferences of Engineering Students : Implications for Curriculum Restructuring , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 193 - 204 , Apr . 1995 . 32 . McCaulley , M . H . , “Psychological Types in Engineering : Implications for Teaching , ” Engineering Education , Vol . 66 , No . 7 , pp . 729 - 736 , April 1976 . 33 . McCaulley , M . H . , Godleski , E . S . , Yokomoto , C . F . , Harrisberger , L . , Sloan , E . D . , “Applications of Psychological Type in Engineering Education , ” Engineering Education , pp . 394 - 400 , Feb . , 1983 . 34 . McCaulley , M . H . , Mary , H . , “the MBTI and Individual Pathways in Engineering Design” , Engineering Education , Vol . 80 , pp . 537 - 542 , July / Aug . 1990 . 35 . Murphy , M . , Jensen , D . , “Integrating CAD into an Already Packed Curriculum : Is Another Class Necessary ? , ” Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conf . , Seattle , WA , June , 1998 . 36 . Myers , I . B . , McCauley , M . H . , Manuel : A Guide to the Development and Use of Myers Briggs Type Indicator ( 2 nd ed . ) , Palo Alto , CA , Consulting Psychologists Press , 1985 . 37 . Otto , K . N . and Wood , K . L . , “A Reverse Engineering and Redesign Methodology for Product Evolution , ” ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Irvine , CA , Paper No . DETC / DTM - 1523 , 1996 . 38 . Otto , K . , Wood , K . L . , Murphy , M . D . , Jensen , D . D . , “Building Better Mousetrap Builders : Courses to Incrementally and Systematically Teach Design , ” Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference , Seattle WA , June , 1998 . 39 . Otto , K . , Wood , K . , Product Design , Prentice Hall , 2000 . 40 . Regan , M . , Sheppard , S . , “Interactive Multimedia Courseware and the Hands - on Learning Experience : An Assessment , ” Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 123 - 131 , Apr . , 1996 . 41 . Shakerin , S . , Jensen , D . , “Photoelasticity and its Synergism with the Finite Element Method : A report on NSF ILI Grant DUE 9751315 , ” Invited publication in Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conf . , Charlotte , NC , June , 1999 . 42 . Shakerin , S . , Jensen , D . , “Enhancement of Mechanics Education by Means of Photoelasticity and the Finite Element Method” , International Jour . of Mechanical Engineering Education , accepted for publication , Feb , 2000 . 43 . Stice , J . E . , “Using Kolb’s Learning Cycle to Improve Student Learning , ” Engineering Education , pp . 291 - 296 , Feb . , 1987 . 44 . Talreja , R , Jensen , D . , Bowe , M . , “Information and Technology in Education” , Issues in Engineering Education ( Session 52 - ED - 1 ) , AIAA Annual Aerospace Sciences Conference , Reno NV , Jan 2000 . Page 8 45 . Terry , R . E . , Harb , J . N . , “Kolb , Bloom , Creativity , and Engineering Design , ” 1993 ASEE Annual Conference Proceeding , pp . 1594 - 1600 , 1993 . 46 . Wilde , D . J . , “Mathematical Resolution of MBTI Creativity Data into Personality Type Components” , Design Theory and Methodology , ASME , DE - Vol . 53 , pp37 - 43 , 1993 . 47 . Wood , J . , and Wood , K . L . , “The Tinkerer’s Pendulum for Machine System’s Education : Creating a Basic Hands - On Environment with Mechanical Breadboards” , Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference , St . Louis , MO , June , 2000 .