141 What is a participatory design result ? Tone Bratteteig Dept . of Informatics , Univ . of Oslo Gaustadalléen 23B , N - 0373 Oslo , Norway tone @ ifi . uio . no Ina Wagner Dept . of Informatics , Univ . of Oslo Gaustadalléen 23B , N - 0373 Oslo , Norway ina . wagner @ tuwien . ac . at ABSTRACT In this paper we discuss what the result of a Participatory Design ( PD ) process is and how it can be described and evaluated . We look at several PD projects and discuss if they have a participatory result and how we know that it is participatory . We also ask if the users recognize their contribution , and if the designers have to ‘take side’ . We also identify impediments to achieving a participatory result , looking at issues like : conflicting views that are difficult to voice , issues that are difficult to negotiate , how real - life complexities cannot be addressed in the project ( or by the artifact ) . These issues are linked to earlier discussions on power and politics in PD . We conclude that achieving a participatory design result is important in PD and gives meaning and direction to PD processes . CCS Concepts ● Human - Centered computing ● Participatory design Keywords Participatory design ; participatory design result ; power - to 1 . INTRODUCTION “ [ C ] an we have good participatory processes that do not show evidence of more democratic ide als in the resulting artefacts ? ” asks Balka [ 3 : 79 ] . Her question echoes Nygaard and Bergo [ 41 ] in their restructuring of the classic ‘Iron and Metal Project’ to produce results that the Iron and Metal Workers’ Union ( MWU ) could use to influence their position : “ Results are all action carried out by the MWU , centrally and locally , which on the basis of activities and insight gained within the project are aiming at giving the MWU and its members increased influence on the planning , control and data processing of the firms . ” ( p . 7 ) . In this paper we discuss what the result of a Participatory Design ( PD ) process is ( and can be ) and how it can be described and evaluated . The question is not new ; it has been accompanying PD from its beginnings . The quote from Balka stems from a debate in the Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems SJIS , where she comments on Kyng’s call for ‘ modernizing PD ’ [ 34 ] . Kyng argues in favor of a “multifaceted future of PD” rather than “misplaced calls for ‘explicit political agreement’ among PD researchers” ( p . 1 ) . One contributor to the debate is Shapiro , who comments : “PD does not only garner ideas for better design , but seeks to protect users ( and their users , e . g . , callers to call centres ) from the ‘techno - slavery’ of false models enforced by blind and rigid systems , a kind of digi - Fordism . However , since this puts it ‘ at war ’ with other perspectives , it raises major political problems for its realisation ” [ 50 : 72 ] . An example of this is the UTOPIA project ( 1981 - 84 ) , which was aimed at strengthening the graphical workers’ position in a newspaper by designing a computerized tool for them that only people with their graphical competence could use . The ‘Text and Image Processing System’ TIPS was never realized [ 23 ] , and in the 1980s newspapers instead bought computer systems that enabled journalists to take over the graphical part of newspaper editing . Shapiro echoes Nygaard and Bergo with his strong political and ethical stand illustrating a long - standing , central concern of PD : that participatory designers needs to take sides . We read the comments from Balka and Shapiro as an urge to increase our focus on the outcomes of PD projects , and move our attention from the current prevailing emphasis on how to carry out the PD process when identifying a project as a PD project or when judging how successful a PD project has been . PD can be practiced in many ways but has a strong ethical stand : to involve users in the design of IT artifacts , which distinguishes PD from other user - oriented approaches . In her comment Balka continues by discussing what if the result does not show evidence of democratic ideals – is this a good participatory process ? “ And if so , is that enough ? ” [ 3 : 79 ] . As a start we propose to think of a participatory design result as one that “ shows evidence of democratic ideals ” by increasing the agency of its users and giving them a voice in matters they did not have before . More modest results can include artifacts that enable independent living or help people perform new interesting tasks , or even more modest : expand users’ skills or help people do their work in better ways . We explore these questions in this paper . The paper is structured as follows : we first examine what makes a participatory design result and refer how this has been discussed in PD . As a second step we describe how a participatory design result can be achieved , using a variety of project examples . Then we identify impediments to achieving such a result and how these have been addressed within PD . We link this to earlier discussions on power and politics in PD . The last section discusses the importance of the participatory design result and how it gives meaning and direction to PD . 2 . WHAT COUNTS AS A PARTICIPATORY DESIGN RESULT ? The first challenge when discussing what makes a participatory design result is related to identifying the design result of a PD project . Also Nygaard and Bergo’s discuss this : “It i s essential both for the NCC 1 and the MWU that the project gives results . But how are we to decide what is to be regarded as a result ? We feel that the right thing to do is to initiate a self - accelerating activity within the MWU . … Measured by this standar d , research reports are only useful to the extent they are releasing central and local action within the MWU . ” [ 41 : 7 ] . 1 NCC : Norwegian Computing Center , the research institute where Nygaard worked . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact (cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:35)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74) Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . (cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:48) PDC ' 16 , August 15 - 19 , 2016 , Aarhus , Denmark ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4046 - 5 / 16 / 08 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940316 142 Nygaard and Bergo’s critical position is similar to ( Participatory ) Action Research , which aims at giving ordinary people a voice in research . The idea is that including and eliciting many potentially dissenting views may help new and unexpected aspects of a phenomenon come to the fore ( e . g . [ 6 ] ) . Because of the strong link between inquiry and action , “ the credibility and validity of AR [ Action Research ] knowledge is measured to a large degree by the ‘ workability ’ of solutions – that is , their ability to address real problems in the lives of the participants ” [ 29 : 158 ] and to contribute to changes wanted by the participants [ 29 , 55 ] . In line with this view Floyd [ 24 ] argues for a “process - oriented perspective” on PD seeing “software in connection with human learning , work and communication , taking place in an evolving world with changing needs . ” ( p . 194 ) . From a process - oriented view the design result is an artifact in use in a context . Ideally , a project outcome should be evaluated in a real use situation , when users have had a chance to integrate it into whatever they are doing and ( eventually ) develop new forms of practice . However , many PD projects are not in a position to take this step beyond ‘project time’ . What is the design result then : the potential benefit of the artifact that has been designed ; the increased knowledge about practices in a field and possibilities for change supported by an artifact ? Is this sufficient for a PD project ? If evaluation beyond project time is not possible , then the result of a PD project has to be what exists when the project ends . Bossen et al . [ 16 ] have addressed these questions through the term ‘ user gains ’ , which may be indirect ( “ their voices have been heard in the design process ” ) or more direct ( “ such as personal skills and areas of competence , improved quality of work or life , and influence on the work place” ) . They contend that such gains are rarely assessed in PD projects for a variety of reasons : “ How people appropriate the opportunities offered in individual design projects , and how these materialize in ways of working and living remain relatively unexplored . Most PD projects evaluate the process and outcome during the process and at the end . Studies of subsequent effects on working conditions or organizational changes in connection with PD projects are rare , which is partly related to the fact that many projects remain research and exploratory projects ” ( p . 142 ) . This lack of evidence has been and is a major concern for the PD community and some participatory designers focus on developing strategies for designing IT - based artifacts that can be appropriated in use ( e . g . [ 52 ] ) . What is also emphasized is that a PD project does not only produce artifacts of different sorts ( IT - based or not ) . Another type of outcome is the changes that result from carrying out the process , such as new knowledge and skills , new collaborations and networks . Also here , it makes a difference whether these outcomes are actively taken up by an organization or community to bring about change or whether they remain limited to the personal experiences and gains of individual participants . Reporting insights from a PD project’s various dimensions is common practice in PD . As many PD projects today have moved from workplaces to supporting communities and different ‘publics’ they have to deal with a multiplicity of issues for which the design of an IT artifact is not necessarily an answer . Hence , emphasizing a wider range of possible outcomes is important . However , for a PD project in which an IT artifact is part of the solution , thinking about how to assess its potential for change is a key issue : how can it contribute to the ‘ action ’ Nygaard and Bergo [ 41 ] were looking for . How can this potential be characterized ? If we go back to the reasons for involving users in design , we find three concerns [ 11 ] that may lead to different ambitions for action or change . The first rather practical objective of a PD project may be “ improving the knowledge upon which the systems are built ” [ 11 : 74 ] while aiming to build a better ‘tool’ for the users [ 22 ] . This ambition can be achieved by including users as informants as well as co - designers . Better tools result in user gains like “ personal skills and areas of competence , improved quality of work or life ” [ 16 ] and may lead to increased “ influence on the workplace” if users strengthen their competencies and position . Several PD projects have had this as their aim , e . g . , some of the first PD projects : UTOPIA [ 23 , 27 ] where graphical workers’ position in the newspapers was strengthened by a new expert tool . The ‘tool perspective’ that characterized some of the early PD work has been extended by the ambition to “design for design after design” [ 7 ] . Here the design result is assessed with respect to whether it allows a shift of focus “ from design games aiming at useful products and services to design games aiming to create good environments for design games at use time . Typically this will lead at project time to an occupation with identifying , designing , and supporting social , technical , and spatial infrastructures that are configurable and potentially supportive of future design games in everyday use” ( p . 172 ) . A second practical concern is “ enabling people to develop realistic expectations , and reducing resistance to change ” [ 11 : 74 ] , where the ambition is to ensure that the resulting artifacts support the current and planned changes . This ambition can be realized through more limited forms of user involvement , where the participatory process is designed to merely increase users’ ‘loyalty’ to the resulting arti fact / change [ 42 ] . A third and more far reaching ambition is to increase “ workplace democracy by giving the members of an organization the right to participate in decisions that are likely to affect their work ” [ 11 : 74 ] . This requires giving users a voice in changes that concern them . When evaluating a PD result it should therefore be possible to recognize the users’ voice in decisions that have consequences for them – including those decisions that are materialized in artifacts . This is , however , not trivial [ 18 , 19 ] . In the next section we will analyze some PD projects in order to come closer to how this can be achieved . A point of debate within the PD community has been that increasing workplace democracy as a participatory design result may depend on the design team ‘taking sides’ , by for example supporting the interests of the more vulnerable and most directly affected users against other stakeholder interests [ 13 ] . Proponents of the socio - technical school , which is related to PD , have been criticized for their “ harmonious view of social relations in the workplace ” [ 4 ] . Enid Mumford , for example , though she “ acknowledged differences of interest , she consistently argued that participative action can fulfill the needs of managers and employees at the same time . By taking worker needs seriously , morale is boosted and productivity increases ” [ 51 : 483 ] . In contrast , the so - called ‘critical school’ , which is represented by projects such as MWU and UTOPIA ( e . g . [ 23 ] ) , sought collaboration with trade unions that were highly critical of how employers introduced and used IT systems . The researchers took sides and got directly involved in the politics of the workplace . The political legacy of early PD has been widely debated . Some PD researchers ( like Kyng ) think that politics cannot be pursued in the same way as in the early days of PD . Given the pressure that results from the current crisis of the global economy , the managerial imperative that progressively also governs public institutions , such as hospitals and universities , the decline of trade union power in many countries , the increase of precarious forms of labor etc . , it may seem rather difficult to assume a conflict - oriented or ‘agonistic perspective’ in PD [ 12 ] . Even in the early days a strong focus on conflicting interests in design ( like the UTOPIA project ) did not always give results [ 23 ] , as 143 described above . Supporting t he ‘weak party’ does not necessarily imply taking an adversarial stand towards other stakeholders . The focus on the political has implied a concern for how power is exercised in the use context as well as in the PD process . Max Weber [ 54 ] saw power as the possibility that someone can “carry out his own wi ll despite resistance” ( p . 53 ) . In line with this view Dahl defines power as “A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do” [ 21 : 202 - 3 ] . This one - dimensional view of power has been debated but even some of his critics ( e . g . , [ 1 , 36 ] ) shar e the view that “A exercises power over B when A affects B in a manner contrary to B’s interests . ” [ 36 : 30 ] . By taking sides the researchers implicitly adopt a view on “ power as domination , largely characterized as power over ” [ 28 : 33 ] , where the PD researchers aim to strengthen the position of the ‘ weak party ’ through artifacts ( and associated practices ) developed in the project [ 23 , 11 ] . However , a critical position can also adopt a less confrontational approach , emphasizing what Pitkin [ 45 ] defines as ‘power to’ : the agency or capacity to shape action , which partly depends on access to resources , partly on ‘power / knowledge’ in the Foucaul dian sense ( e . g . [ 25 ] ) . In contrast , ‘empowerment’ defined as “to give … legal power or authority , to endow with an ability or to enable” [ 48 : 306 ] points to a person being given power rather than the agency intrinsic to ‘power to’ . Thinking of possible outcomes of a PD project , increasing users’ ‘power to’ can range from rather small achievements , for example enabling users to do their work better and with more satisfaction ( see the first concern above ) to , in Shapiro’s words , protecting them from ‘techno - slavery’ ( in line with the second concern above ) . Accounting for the whole spectrum of possible outcomes , from modest to dramatic , poses several challenges . In order to come closer to a way to evaluate what counts as a participatory design result , we discuss different ways of achieving such an outcome to then reflect on what the obstacles to a PD project can be . We think that it is critical to include this second step in our analysis in order to make clear that although a PD project may not achieve a participatory design result it may contribute in other ways by , for example , laying the grounds for future projects . 3 . DIFFERENT WAYS OF ARRIVING AT A PARTICIPATORY DESIGN RESULT A challenge when accounting for the outcomes of a PD project is whether having achieved a participatory design result would have been possible without the participation of users . We have shown in [ 18 ] that a participatory design result is not possible without users having contributed to creating choices , even if not all decisions have been taken in a participatory way . This view is shared by Robertson and Wagner [ 46 ] who argue : “The success of the outcome is fundamentally linked to the different voices who have been able to contribute to its design” ( p . 65 ) . For the purpose of our analysis we have looked closer into some PD projects . We selected projects that illustrate different ways of arriving at a participatory design result , but they are not ‘representative’ in any way . We have discussed the project asking : (cid:120) Does the project have a participatory outcome ? How can it be described ? (cid:120) How do we know ? Was it evaluated and how ? (cid:120) Can users recognize their contribution ( voice ) in the design result ? (cid:120) Was ‘taking sides’ a key requisite for a participatory design result to be developed ? The Florence project was started as the first Norwegian PD project aimed at designing an alternative IT system together with nurses [ 11 , 40 ] , and was seen as the reference case in a Nordic research program on PD [ 31 ] . The original project vision that an IT system should strengthen nurses’ position in conflict with other professional groups ( e . g . , medical doctors ) was rejected by the participating nurses . They emphasized the need to collaborate with everyone in the ward , including the medical doctors . When taking a decision about which of at the possible choices for computer support to pursue , the designers followed the nurses’ first priority ( providing support for the shift report meeting ) although it seemed technically unchallenging . But the designers understood enough of the nursing practices to accept the nurses’ arguments [ 10 , 11 ] . The prototype was a direct imp lementation of the nurses’ sketch of how they wanted patient information to be arranged on the screen . Its programming turned out to be difficult . The nurses had based their specification on the Macintosh computers that they had worked with during the mutual learning period . However , the computer available to the project did not have an object - oriented interface ( this was in the 1980s ) : it did not support neither graphical nor drag - and - drop interaction . The programming therefore took longer than expected , but turned out successful in the end . The resulting prototype made it simple to update and access patient information , and its reports were used as flexible work sheets for the nurses on duty . The Nursing System was implemented and used by the nurses and other professional groups in the ward for almost a year after the project ended , until the machine broke down . The designers were happy about being able to implement a robust system that behaved like an object - oriented system , while the nurses were happy for the support that the system and its reports gave them . The few nursing assistants that refused to use the system , made drawings of the printed reports by hand , hence used the system’s logic in their work . Also the medical doctors appreciated the overview given by the system . The Nursing System was later used as a requirement specification when the hospital invested in a new IT system for nurses . Hence , the design result of Florence was a computer system that supported one specific professional group in their work . Bjerknes and Bratteteig [ 10 ] emphasize that the ‘application perspective’ they assumed did not allow them cater for the relations of the nurses to other groups in the hospital . Sisom is a mobile application designed for children with cancer that supports them in documenting their symptoms before seeing a medical doctor . The system presents a child’s logic of talking about experienced symptoms . It gives children a voice they would not have without the tool in consultations with a doctor , using a language that is close to their own . This increases their influence on what is taken into consideration when the doctor makes choices about further treatment while supporting the doctor’s need f or evidence - based medicine . Moreover , the children have their opinion recorded and documented in the hospital system along with other documents . Thus , the Sisom project had a clear participatory result [ 18 , 17 ] . Even though the project leader of Sisom involved children in the design of the system , following the approach of Alison Druin [ 20 ] , the project was only partially participative , as the children mainly provided ideas for the user - interface and the language for talking about symptoms . This was made explicit by the project leader : “ Good design for ill children requires knowledge , and pedagogical , psychological and clinical insights children don’t have . In our work we had to make sure to meet the goals of Sisom and a set of pre - defined criteria . Especially , we had to ensure to design software that could help children to report their symptoms and problem experiences , without being too time - consuming and challenging . Not all of the children’s 144 ideas were therefore , feasible ” [ 49 : 634 ] . The design team in Sisom was dedicated to give very ill children a voice ; hence it took sides , but not ‘against’ the other stakeholders in the hospital system . On the contrary , it sought to anchor the system in evidence - based medicine , hence acknowledging the ways medical doctors think about illness . They also selected solutions that they fitted into the existing IT infrastructure . The system is still in use in the hospital . Our third example is one of a set of e - Government projects involving municipal workers and citizens in Denmark . The projects aimed at understanding design choices regarding citizen - government collaboration in general . An exploratory prototype in support of planning and applying for parental leave was designed in several iterations and evaluated with parents ( using ‘pluralistic prototype walkthroughs’ ) and municipal caseworkers [ 14 ] . The resulting prototype has not been installed and evaluated in real use . However , the prototyping sessions describe its potential as a participatory design result , which allows dealing with issues such as “ the relationships between the parents , as individuals and together , with their shared parental leave ; the relationship between exploring the laws and regulations , and making binding decisions with the municipality ; the role of the timeline as a plan , versus that of a record of past events ; the timeline as a reflection of authoritative knowledge versus that of capturing improvised traces ; and finally the tensions that lie in timelines’ crossing of communities of professionals and parents ” ( p . 529 ) . This PD project has a particularly complex political agenda . This agenda evolved through ethnographic studies that helped understand the complexity of service provision and the tensions resulting from caseworkers dual role as counselors and bureaucrats , the multiplicity of actors and their potentially conflicting actions , as well as the different approaches of citizens to information sharing . The project’s vision of ‘participatory citizenship’ is grounded in a deep understanding of these tensions . Looking at these three projects several observations stand out . First , they had different kinds of participatory design results . Florence and Sisom resulted in systems that were successfully used , supporting nurses in their work and giving ill children a voice , respectively . The nurses were able to recognize their voice in the prototype as it was an implementation of their own sketch . Also the children could recognize some of their ideas in the Sisom system . However , all design decisions in Sisom were taken by the adult participants based on their evaluation of the children’s input . Hence , in Sisom the participatory design result was achieved through a process with limited user participation . The web - based timeline , CaseLine , remained an exploratory prototype . The system was never implemented , mainly for budgetary reasons , including “ relatively high maintenance costs due to the regular implementation of new laws ” [ 15 : 55 ] . Hence , this is a project with a potential participatory result : the understanding of the basic issues in how to support ‘participatory citizenship’ was achieved through designing the prototype in collaboration with selected users . But we do not know how participatory the system would be in practice . It is also not clear if users in this project would be able to recognize their particular contribution in the prototype , even though they contributed ideas . The three projects handled ‘politics’ in a rather different way . Florence and Sisom took sides : Florence through collaborating with nurses and not directly with the Nurses Association , they also accepted the nurses’ wish to include medical doctors and nursing assistants in the project as they were central for the nurses’ work in the ward . But , no patients were involved . Sisom focused on strengthening the position of very ill children in consultations with doctors . At the same time , the project ’ s emphasis on evidence - based symptoms can be seen as a facilitating the system for the doctors . The two projects enha nced their primary users’ ‘power to’ in ways that also affected the existing ‘power over’ constellations in the use situation : Florence by advocating the nurses’ logic , Sisom by representing children’s voice in the patient - doctor communication . In contrast , the e - Government project explicitly focused on the potentially conflicting positions and tensions between municipal workers , their managers and citizens . Hence , this project put conflict in the center of design , asking : “ How may the democratic interface and coordination mechanisms between an organization and the larger society be designed so that it supports both transparency and democracy of citizens and the participation and influence of workers on their everyday work processes and the quality of services and decisions ? ” [ 15 : 54 ] . Aiming to represent potentially conflicting interests requires negotiation [ 53 ] but does not necessarily imply a focus on ‘power over’ rather than ‘power to’ . 4 . IMPEDIMENTS TO ACHIEVING A PARTICIPATORY DESIGN RESULT In her request for a renewed focus on the participatory design result , Balka [ 3 ] asks “ [ I ] f we remain clear in our commitment to our ideals and have good processes that do not yield the result s we desire , what other factors … may be impeding our success in achieving the outcomes we desire ? ” ( p . 79 ) . Sometimes arriving at a participatory design result may not be within reach of a participatory design team , even if it follows the methods and techniques of PD . There are cases in which the constellations that frame the project may make it difficult to achieve a result that incr eases the ‘power to’ of users . Our next step is to widen the analysis : together with the project examples we will discuss to make our points , looking at (cid:120) The arenas of design and participation the different projects address and engage with ; (cid:120) The multiplicity and kinds of participating stakeholders ; (cid:120) The size of a project and the complexity of the domain . 4 . 1 Arenas for design and participation Going back to the distinction between ‘arenas for de sign and participation’ , as introduced by Gärtner and Wagner [ 26 ] , may be helpful in understanding impediments to achieving a participatory design result . They divided the space in which the actors engaged in systems design move into three social arenas , “ whereby each arena constitutes an heterogeneous , zoned space ” . The arenas are : (cid:120) A : Designing work - designing systems , (cid:120) B : Designing organizational frameworks for action , (cid:120) C : Designing the industrial relations context or , more generally speaking , the political and policy context . This arena can be divided into inter - organizational relations ( business or stakeholder organizations ) and working life ( institutions , legislation ) [ 11 ] . Thinking in terms of arenas , the chances for PD seem to depend on to which extent the space for design and participation ( Arena A ) is framed by decisions in the other two arenas ; and , consequently , on the chances for a PD project to get involved in those . From this perspective issues , such as the size and ambition of a project , the complexity of the domain , the type and number of stakeholders and their interests , come to the fore . Florence clearly focused on the work of nurses and managed to stay within Arena A . As Bjerknes and Bratteteig [ 10 ] write : “ Our system would probably not be useful in any other place . However , the idea of distribution of information about coordination of work could easily be transferred to other wards . 145 But the layout of the Work Paper ( and some of the information ) would have to be redesigned and tailored to the actual ward . One part of the explanation for this is that the idea for the Work Paper System came originally from the nurses in the cardiology ward ” ( p . 260 ) . Hence , Florence resulted in ‘ not - so - fancy , but useful , utensil ’ that helped nurses in their work [ 10 ] . The organization of the project included a full time anthropologist and a nurse . The nurse was the project’s connection to Arena B , sharing the insights and ‘alternative technical solutions’ developed in the project with the Nurses Association as a basis for their IT policy . The Sisom project focused on designing a mobile application for ill children to be used during their stay in hospital . The fact that the children were supported in describing their symptoms influences their consultation with doctors and nurses , having them better prepared , with symptoms being described in their own language . Sisom was well received in the hospital , not only due to a shared commitment to improving the children’s treatment but also due to the project leader’s clever definition of the project . It was clear from the start that the technical solution had to fit the already existing IT infrastructure of the hospital . This excluded other potentially interesting solutions from the beginning . Also , in building the vocabulary of symptoms , the project leader insisted on an evidence - based approach . This meant that the vocabulary used in the medical literature was translated into the terms that children would normally use when talking about how they feel and what is wrong with them . We can say that Sisom was carefully framed within Arena B and that this contributed to its success . The participatory design result emerged from the children’s ideas and was carefully tailored to fit into a predefined framework . The e - Government project resulting in CaseLine had to arrive at a deep understanding of Arena B and C before being able to engage in Arena A . This involved looking into how decisions are arrived at in Danish municipalities , how cases of different kind and complexity are handled ( including all the legal requirements and possibilities ) , how municipal workers deal with their double role of administering cases according to the rules and collaborating with citizens , and so forth . This led to discovering that issues of workplace democracy do not automatically harmonize with requests for stronger citizen involvement in the design and provision of services . CaseLine reflects some of these considerations and it would not have been possible without the ethnographic work involved in understanding the conditions of e - Government . Hence , this PD case is less ‘self - contained’ than Florence and Sisom , not only because the design team chose this path but because of the nature of the domain . In order to illustrate arena C , we will refer to the UTOPIA project , which was more confrontational in addressing the political and policy context . The project collaborated with the graphical workers union in the Scandinavian countries , collaborating on making an alternative tool for graphical workers that would strengthen their position – and job security – in the newspaper [ 23 , 27 ] . Similar to the MWU , they addressed Arena C as well as Arena A : Arena C paved the way for concrete actions in Arena A , while Arena A produced results that were shared with the Labour Union and hence were possible to utilize on a national level ( Arena C ) for legislation . The MWU project is probably one of the PD projects most explicitly addressing a political agenda . Here local action in collaboration with local shop stewards and trade union representatives concretized problems and alternatives , while a national strategy was developed in the central trade union . The local activities were seen as measures to reach the strategic goals of the long - term strategy [ 36 ] . The result of the local activities was local data agreements regulating use and development of IT in a number of MWU industry plants . At the national level the result was reworked into a general data agreement for the national Labour Union , and later to legislation that regulates employees’ influence and participation in changes in the workplace and its IT solutions [ 41 , 38 ] . In discussing IT design in a hospital context Balka et al . [ 2 ] demonstrate that projects almost always require facing issues that are negotiated in Arenas B and C . A PD result cannot be achieved without taking account of issues like staffing , working hours , policies concerning the acquisition of IT infrastructure , but many of these issues will most often not be negotiable in the context of a PD project . 4 . 2 Single versus multiple accountabilities In the Florence project the design team directly collaborated with the nurses who would later use the system . Not all PD projects have this possibility , for a variety of reasons . For example , Sisom engaged with healthy children as the project leader thought the children in the hospital ward to be too ill to be able to participate in a series of design workshops . Hence , these children were protected ; this means that their perspective was excluded . Imagining being very sick is difficult for a healthy child but this was not deemed to be problematic since the main aim was designing a system that would be attractive for children to use . Working with representatives of a group or perspective instead of those who will use it in the end does not necessarily make achieving a participatory result more difficult . PD researchers have argued that in these cases a particular group or organization is necessary that takes care of the design result passing it on to end users [ 13 ] . In some projects , like for example UTOPIA , a trade union had this role . However , who to engage with continues to be a key issue and there is a commitment in PD to give people a voice who would otherwise not be heard : “ Defining those who may have the ‘ right to participate ’ is made difficult by constraining forces – political power , organisational and professional boundaries ; and … some of those who may contribute to and benefit from partic ipating may even not be ‘found’” [ 46 : 72 ] . In many cases finding the right participants is simply a prerequisite to being able to develop a participatory result . An obvious example is urban planning , where excluding certain groups and their perspectives – e . g . cyclists , non - seeing people , single mothers , immigrants - will most likely not have the participatory result it would have had if these people been heard [ 18 ] . Another issue is the long - term perspective that may be required in some projects in order to come up with a solution that reaches into the future . For example , Bødker and Zander [ 15 ] argue : “ We see a need to push more for vanguards and early movers among citizens rather than for representativity and greatest common denominator arguments in order to achieve strong IT systems ” ( p . 56 ) . In some domains a participatory design result may indeed need participants who are able to envision more radical transformations of our daily lives ( e . g . [ 44 ] ) . We find similar discussions about the ‘selection of users’ in PD projects that include non - technical users outside of work settings ( i . e . , in their homes or in public spaces ) , where the mutual learning activities are reduced by time and space and where the users’ prior competence is crucial for doing PD [ 32 , 30 ] . Few PD researchers have looked into the role of researchers in a PD project . It is ‘automatically’ assumed that they sub ordinate their research interests to the ‘higher goal’ of a participatory result for those who will use an IT artifact . Concerning Florence , Bjerknes and Bratteteig [ 10 ] found : “ Our experience is that , in the scientific community , technical challenges mean making computer systems that may be characterized as 146 ' epaulets ' : they have technical , fancy features , but are not particularly useful . Making small , simple , but useful computer systems , more like ' utensils ' , does not give as much credit even if the development process may be just as challenging ” ( p . 258 ) . The designers ( and researchers ) in Florence developed a solution that was not fancy , because this was what the nurses had to be declared to be most useful for them . However , their fellow researchers’ critical comments on their choice demonstrated that PD researchers are also accountable to their own home discipline and its quality standards [ 10 ] . In his account of a ‘failed’ PD project Pedersen [ 44 ] has argued that stakeholders are not just project participants . They also have relationships with their ‘constituencies’ to negotiate and maintain that are external to the project . He perceives this as a basic conflict , arguing : “ it seems implausible that the dual obligation of participatory design participants to negotiate internal differences – while at the same attempting to instigate and manage a new difference between present and future – should not somehow strain their external relationships to a lesser or greater extent ” ( p . 125 ) . Hence , researchers may have to balance their commitment to a participatory design result with other agenda , including their own research interests and their organization’s reward structures . Moreover , Pedersen identifies a tension between the need to be critical and constructive ( in the sense of moving towards a design result ) at the same time . The ‘Mobility in Maintenance’ project he analyzes included not only construction workers but also a commercial ‘solution’ provider . Pedersen describes how the pressure to deliver a result ( in the form of future scenarios that built on a mobile solution ) prevented the researchers from being critical , since “ a negative result in the form of critique alone , of methods , technologies , and work practice might not have felt like a contribution ” ( p . 117 ) . In this case the whole setup of the project made being critical difficult . We see a more general question here : does lack of space and time for a more critical attitude , which stakeholder constellations , deadlines , and so forth may make difficult to pursue , also reduce the possibilities for achieving a participatory result ? It seems almost ‘a given’ in PD that engaging with users in a process of mutual learning will ensure ‘being critical’ . However , already one of the founders of PD , Kristen Nygaard , emphasized the importance for designers to respect users’ decisions even if they disagree . He also discussed all the choices the researcher does as part of doing research [ 39 ] . This is also the ethnographer’s dilemma described by Bittner : “ Field workers are , of course , not unaware of the need to contrive access to information and explanation , but they tend to view it as a matter of maintaining trustful relations with people whose activities and lives they study and of cultivating open - mindedness and perceptual subtlety on their own part ” [ 8 : 119 ] . Being able to arrive at a participatory result not only depends on whether a PD project finds the ‘right’ users and is able to manage potential conflicts between stakeholder interests . It in a more general sense is bound by the fact that researchers ( and designers ) cannot assume a privileged condition from where to speak ‘critically’ . They may become part of a context in which not all concerns can be voiced and some conditions may not be negotiable . 4 . 3 Issues of complexity The chances to arrive at a participatory design result are also to do with size and complexity . The larger the organization , the greater the number of stakeholders but also the ambition to make a difference in ‘real use’ the more difficult it may be to maximize participation on the one hand , increase the ‘power to’ of users on the other hand . Some PD projects are framed as research projects ; some are dependent on external support ( for example investors , as in CaseLine ) to move into ‘real use’ . This constrains their possibility to make a difference in practice . Complexity is also an issue for Martin et al . [ 37 ] , who describe the difficulties of handling everyday practicalities of very large projects in complex contexts . In many instances the exigencies of keeping the project on track resulted in participatory concerns being at times marginalized . Martin et al . point , for example , at the difficulties of understanding the work practices of all the different user groups and taking account of them , observing : “ In these circumstances , the problem emerges of human factors effectively being downgraded , being dumped ( perhaps by necessity in this type of project ) down the schedule , or treated as ‘other’ types of problem and are perhaps not adequately addressed ” ( p . 142 ) . They describe how health care policies set targets the project could not afford to fail and how a myriad of organizational issues made it difficult to coordinate work : “ In these circumstances , issues such as hardware provision , data point placement , database configuration and population , interface design , and training are inextricably linked to other projects and organizational working associated with modernization and investment in IT ” ( p . 150 ) . Keeping users in mind and involving them competed with many other design considerations . Although the project was not set up as a ‘typical’ PD project , it was clear that designers and analysts “ aspired to user participation , understanding , and involvement from the stakeholders ” ( p . 136 ) . In their analysis Martin et al . deem participatory methods as having been unsuccessful in the design of the ERP . Hence , we cannot say that this project had a participatory design result . We find another set of complexities in PD projects that design for ( and with ) very heterogeneous user groups . In a PD project with elderly people living independently at home , many of the concrete project activities address problems that only one or a few people experience : those who are there to participate . Since different people experience ageing in rather different ways , the PD process becomes very local and the PD results are difficult to ‘ measure ’ beyond the participants’ opinions and evaluation [ 30 ] . Making PD results more ‘ general ’ requires including participants representing the ‘general elderly person’ , i . e . based on medical or nursing knowledge , thereby reducing the influence of the participants . Looking at a range of projects that found it difficult to achieve a participatory design result , we have identified a series of ‘impediments’ that are to do with : (cid:120) Designers and users facing issues that are difficult to negotiate and change ; (cid:120) Difficulties in making conflicting perspectives in a project heard and in ‘ managing ’ them ; (cid:120) Complexities that emerge in real use and cannot be met by the designed IT artifact ; (cid:120) Complex distributed processes and competing design considerations that make it difficult to consistently apply PD methods and techniques : (cid:120) Speaking to highly specific and diverse user needs . Differences in socio - cultural context form another set of potential impediments . Winschiers - Theophilus et al . [ 56 ] reflect on what they learned from practicing PD in a community project in Namibia . They give examples of how they had to change their approach in response to the tradition of community and participation in sub - Saharan African cultures . Such reflections are rare . In general , how participatory designers and their design teams deal with impediments they may meet in their projects is rather poorly documented . The context of a PD project presents a range of challenges to achieving a participatory design result . The arenas for design 147 and participation available to the project limit what can be negotiated and influenced . The collection of stakeholders in a project may similarly restrict the space of action for the project and hence the possibility for arriving at a participatory result . PD aims to design close to use , therefore the ‘wicked problems’ of everyday practices in the use context – and design context – are very present . A participatory design result is partly an outcome of a ( participatory ) design process but needs to be appropriated in a use context to unfold its potential . This is a process on which a PD project may have little ( if any ) influence . 5 . DISCUSSION We have looked at a series of projects to better understand what is a participatory design result , how is it achieved and what may make it difficult to accomplish it . From our discussion of PD projects we want to raise four points in particular : (cid:120) Differences between small and big projects ; (cid:120) Different strategies of addressing politics and power ( or avoiding it ) ; (cid:120) Knowing that a design result is participatory ; (cid:120) The relationship between participatory process and participatory result . 5 . 1 Diversity of ambitions and achievements There are obvious differences between small and big projects . But how do we capture what is small and what is big ? The big projects address complex issues , eventually spanning various organizations or organizational units , and involve multiple stakeholders . What makes a project big may also be the characteristics of a domain where work processes are complex and multiple dependencies have to be taken into account . We may encounter these situations in areas such as health care , product development or manufacturing . Smaller projects may concentrate on problems that are more contained , focusing for example on one specific aspect of a practice and one main user group . Many PD projects in support of one user group are of this kind . Hence , much depends on the context that a PD project sets up to work within , its bounded - ness and the ability of the designer team to control or influence key structural aspects that may turn out to be impediments to achieving a participatory design result . Florence and Sisom are examples of PD projects where this was possible . We think that the ‘arena’ concept is useful in describing the context a PD project addresses or has to deal with . The difference between small and big is , however , also to do with the ambition and vision of a project . Caseline took such a wider perspective , addressing municipal workers , citizens and their complex relationships . Based on the experiences in the UTOPIA project , Ehn and Kyng [ 22 ] suggested a tool perspective to designing computer support . The tool for page - making that was developed ( in prototypal form ) built on the skills of workers and meant to improve ( and not decrease ) their skills . Bjerknes and Bratteteig [ 11 ] were rather critical of this approach at the time , arguing that the UTOPIA project r estricted itself to developing “ a support to graphical workers at the expense of women and unski lled men in the composers’ room” ( p . 78 ) . The aim was “ to control the craftsmanship by one occupational group rather than to support a set of work tasks carried out by that group in coordination with other occupational groups ” ( p . 79 ) . Hence , the design result was only participatory for the skilled crafts workers . The tool perspective did not address the wider issues that are to do with the fact that the making of a newspaper is collaborative work based on a particular division of labor . In a debate with Kyng about what was called the Collective Resource Approach at that time , Bansler and Kraft [ 5 ] make a rather strong point : “ Providing workers , at least a few privileged ones , with a greater selection of tools is a worthwhile project . In itself , however , such technocratic tinkering does little to address fundamental issues of power and control in the work place , for example , the pace and intensity of work - or whether there will be any work at all , and for whom ” ( p . 98 ) . They point to another dimension of what may be called the ambition and vision of a project : a PD project’s strategy of addressing politics and power . One could argue that UTOPIA primarily aimed at developing an artifact that would be a tool for increasing the graphical workers ’ ‘power over ’ or at least reduce the ‘power over ’ of the owner of the newspaper . The outset was conflict , hence the designer team aimed at shifting the power . This is different from the Florence project that started out with the ambition to increase the nurses ‘power over ’ . But it turned out that they preferred more ‘power to ’ . The same goes for Sisom : the design result was not perceived in terms of ‘power over’ but as a tool for improving the therapies that children receive . Their ‘power to’ was seen as a means for achieving this . Identifying a clear political perspective in projects that start out from conflict and ‘agonistic’ perspectives may be easier than in projects that aim at developing a collaborative tool . This confirms the argument put forward by Pansardi [ 43 ] that the distinction between ‘power to’ and ‘power over’ is not so clear cut ; it “ is nothing more than an analytical distinction between two aspects of a single concept of power , and , since they always occur together , an investigation of the former is always also an investigation of the latter” ( p . 86 ) . Although we follow Pitkin’s emphasis on ‘power to’ as an important concept , we can see that in some PD projects the design result offers users ‘power to’ as well as ‘power over’ . Conflicting and not necessarily harmonizing perspectives may be treated in different ways and this will show in the design result . Bødker and Zander [ 15 ] summarize their experiences as “ identify win - win situations , rather than to maximize part icipation” ( p . 49 ) . What is meant by that is that in some contexts participatory designers may be well advised to move from ideals of democracy and politics to designing better systems : “ ‘Better’ seems to mean being less prone to failure , and generally aiming for win - win situations between stakeholders . … At the municipal workplace , PD projects can concentrate on win - win situations ; these are pockets where management can tolerate empowerment and loss of control” ( p . 57 ) . Here PD makes a deliberate move away from taking sides to finding a balance , without assuming a harmonious view . With these observations we want to point out that there are different ways of addressing politics and power and also of making them show in the design result . Our aim in this paper was to find out : how can we possibly know that a design result is participatory ? Ending the discussion we come back to some of the points that we have made earlier about the projects we discussed , reflecting on them . Acknowledging that Sisom resulted in a participatory tool is relatively easy . We can assume that without having engaged in an in - depth study of its use in the hospital . The reason is that the artifact itself suggests important changes to its use situation , namely giving children a voice that they not have had before in the meeting with medical doctors . It was easy to see during ‘project t ime’ how it opened a way for children to talk about their symptoms . However , we cannot know whether their ‘power to’ also turns into ‘power over’ in consultations with medical doctors even if this is strongly suggested by the imagined use situation . The same holds for the collaborative urban planning tool . It became clear that it provided ordinary citizens with a voice , helping them to contribute to an urban project in ways that the participating urban planners thought to 148 be relevant and important . What is not easy to know is the weight these voices would have had in a highly politicized context . We conclude from th is that the ‘power to’ aspect of a participatory design result is often clearer and less ambiguous than the ‘power over’ aspect . However , additional aspects have to be accounted for . The participatory outcome of the system from the Florence project very much depends on how nurses actually use it . It was meant to be a tool that would support the nurses in their daily work . In addition to facilitating individual tasks it was supposed to support the distribution of information and coordination of work among the nurses . This increases the common knowledge that is necessary for treating and caring for the patients – it was made as a tool improving the nurses’ work . However , it also helped other professions in the ward to appreciate the nurses’ logic implemented in the Nursing system . Moreover , the experiences with the participatory process enabled the nurses to better define the requirements for any future system they would need . Knowing whether these participatory results have been achieved in practice requires studying the system in a variety of situations of real use over time . In PD projects with many different stakeholders that aim at opening venues for more citizen participation , such as for example in a municipality context , it is even more difficult to know how participatory the outcomes actually are . There are many different types of citizens to account for and their engagement may be temporary . In these contexts , as Bødker and Zander [ 15 ] maintain , “ long - term issues of sustainability and political strategy must be addressed ” ( p . 55 ) . 5 . 2 Revisiting the notion of participatory design result Returning to our initial reflections we can now be more specific about what counts as a participatory design result . We made a distinction between different ‘ambitions’ b ut also pointed at the need of demonstrating and evaluating the contribution of a PD project . In the best case it is possible to observe how a design result is appropriated in use ( after design ) and assess the difference that it makes in the lives of its users . But even when this is not possible , we see opportunities for taking a critical view onto the artifacts that are left after the project . Some of the projects we have described represent examples of artifacts that offer better tools for the users , increasing their ‘ power to ’ and by this indicating a potential to also increase their ‘ power over ’ . An example is the Florence project . Adding the levels of influence indicated by the arena concept , we can assess whether the tool influences the work place ( arena A ) or also stretches into the organization of work ( arena B ) where it has the potential to change existing power structures . Projects that aim at fostering ( workplace ) democracy cannot realize this potential without challenging power structures . This more ambitious goal of PD , which was clearly present in the first PD projects , implies giving users a voice – and a say [ 33 ] – so that they can assume power over their situation . It also has as a precondition that users participate in the major design decisions and that these become visible in the artifact [ 17 , 18 ] . Moreover , it is important to understand if the designed artifact presupposes ( or suggests ) changes of power structures in the use situation as a prerequisite or as an effect of using the artifact . The urban planning project exemplifies an artifact that presupposes a change in the use situation ( and hence it was not used after project time ) . Sisom had an empowering design result , giving children a voice in a hierarchical relationship , without requiring or bringing about a more fundamental change of power relations in the hospital . This last ambition is easier to achieve with a critical and maybe even conflict - oriented view , but we have shown that also emphasizing the ‘ power to ’ of users can lead to changes in their ‘ power over ’ . Finally , reflecting on projects without being able to promote concrete change but sharing participants’ insights and experiences is a key aspect of research and may over time contribute to the changes PD argues for . In this sense it is important to look at the obstacles against achieving a participatory design result . For example CaseLine was not implemented due to funding problems but provided basic insights into how to support ‘participatory citizenship’ . This is knowledge other projects can build upon . A final overarching question is the relationship between a participatory process and a participatory result . We have addressed this elsewhere [ 9 , 18 ] . In both , UTOPIA and the Florence project the design result would not have been possible without strong user participation . UTOPIA emulated the work process of page - making building on workers’ skills . Florence implemented the nurses’ choice and their ske tch of a user interface . Although Sisom was only partially participatory , using the children’s input as sources of inspiration , the result would not have been possible without the children’s input in the design process . However , it certainly did not exploit all possibilities of sharing power with the participating children . Actually all design decisions were taken in their absence . CaseLine used lots of techniques of involving users – municipal workers as well as citizens . At the same time it was driven by insights that the researchers ’ gained in their ethnographic studies reflecting upon them . Our conclusion here is not straightforward : users do not have to participate in all stages of a PD project for it to have a participatory result . This is certainly a question that needs more research . 6 . CONCLUDING REMARKS In this paper we have discussed what the result of a PD process is – and can be – and how it can be described and evaluated . We started out with Kristen Nygaard’s definition that results are “actions carried out by the MWU” , i . e . , changes that the ‘users’ realize themselves . However , most PD projects are not in a position to follow up on the changes that may happen after project time . We have therefore discussed how we can evaluate the results that exist when the project ends . We followed Balka in claiming that a participatory design result is one that “shows evidence of democratic ideals” by increasing the agency of its users and giving them a voice in matters they did not have before . In the paper we have discussed how to describe an artifact’s potential to contribute to democracy and action . We have concluded that a participatory design result strengthens the users’ ‘power to’ act and that this in turn may strengthen their ‘power over’ . Increasing the users’ ‘power to’ does not require a conflict - oriented view , but a critical perspective is needed in order to recognize the power structures of the use situation and hence be able to address them In conclusion , we think that focusing on the outcomes of a PD project is important as it helps develop a deeper understanding of what PD can possibly achieve in different contexts and under different conditions . There is variety of ways to achieve a participatory design result , and there are many different ways that a PD result can be participatory . There are also many possible impediments to achieving a participatory result . In this light , developing strategies for how to support better integration of a design result into the future use situation , even if the project does not have the possibility to accompany this process , is an important long - term goal for PD . The current emphasis on ‘infrastructuring’ [ 11 ] captures some of this ambition , directing the designer’s attention to the possibilities o f ‘designing for design after design’ so as to facilitate the appropriation of a design result in different contexts of use . 149 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bachrach , P . and Baratz , M . S . 1975 . Power and its two faces revisited - a reply to Geofrey Debham . The American Political Science Review , 69 , 3 : 900 - 904 . [ 2 ] Balka , E . , Bjørn , P . , and Wagner , I . 2008 . Steps Toward a Typology for Health Informatics . In Proceedings of CSCW 2008 ( San Diego , USA ) , ACM , New York , 515 - 524 . [ 3 ] Balka , E . 2010 . Broadening Discussion about Participatory Design . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 22 , 1 : 77 - 84 . [ 4 ] Bansler , J . 1989 . Systems development research in Scandinavia : three theoretical schools . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 1 , 9 : 3 - 20 . [ 5 ] Bansler , J . and Kraft . 1994 . The Collective Resource Approach : The Scandinavian Experience . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 6 , 1 . [ 6 ] Bergold , J . and Thomas , S . 2012 . Participatory research methods : A methodological approach in motion . Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung , 191 - 222 . [ 7 ] Binder , T . , Ehn , P . , Jacucci , G . , De Michelis , G . , Linde , P . , & Wagner , I . 2011 . Design Things . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press . [ 8 ] Bittner , E . 1973 . Objectivity and realism in sociology . In G . Psathas ( Ed . ) , Phenomenological Sociology : Issues and Applications . New York : Wiley , 109 – 125 . [ 9 ] Bjerknes , G . and Bratteteig , T . 1987 . Perspectives on description tools and techniques in system development , Docherty et al ( eds ) : System Design for Human Development and Productivity : Participation and Beyond , North - Holland , Amsterdam : 319 - 330 . [ 10 ] Bjerknes , G . and Bratteteig , T . 1988 . Computers — utensils or epaulets ? The application perspective revisited . AI & Society , 2 , 3 : 258 - 266 . [ 11 ] Bjerknes , G and Bratteteig , T . 1995 . User participation and democracy : A discussion of Scandinavian research on system development . Scandinavian Journal of information systems 7 , 1 : 258 - 266 . [ 12 ] Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . and Hillgren , P - A . 2012 . Agonistic participatory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign , 8 , 2 - 3 : 127 - 144 . [ 13 ] Blomberg , J . , Suchman , L . , and Trigg , R . 1996 . Reflections on a Work - Oriented Design Project . Human - Computer - Interaction , 11 , 3 : 237 - 266 . [ 14 ] Bohøj , M . , Borchorst , N . G . , Bouvin , N . O . , Bødker , S . and Zander , P - O . 2010 . Timeline collaboration . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , 523 - 532 . [ 15 ] Bødker , S . and Zander , P - O . 2015 . Participation in design between public sector and local communities . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies , ACM , New York , 49 - 58 . [ 16 ] Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , and Iversen , O . S . 2010 . User gains and PD aims : assessment from a participatory design project . " In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM , New York , 141 - 150 . [ 17 ] Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . 2016 ( in press ) . Unpacking the notion of participation in Participatory Design , Journal of CSCW . [ 18 ] Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . 2014 . Disentangling Participat - ion . Power and Decision - making in Participatory Design , Springer Verlag CSCW series . [ 19 ] Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . 2014 . Design decisions and the sharing of power in PD . In Proceedings of Participatory Design Conference II ( PDC’14 ) : 29 - 32 [ 20 ] Druin , A . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology , 21 : 1 - 25 . [ 21 ] Dahl , R . 1957 . The concept of power . Behavioral Science , 2 : 201 - 15 . [ 22 ] Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . 1986 . A tool perspective on design of interactive computer support for skilled workers . DAIMI Report Series 14 . 190 . [ 23 ] Ehn , P . 1990 . Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Lawrence Erlbaum Publ . [ 24 ] Floyd , C . 1987 . Outline of a Paradign Change in Software Engineering . In Bjerknes , G ; Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . ( eds ) . Computers and Democracy . A Scandinavian Challenge Avebury , Aldershot : 191 - 210 . [ 25 ] Foucault , M . 1972 . The Subject and Power . Critical Inquiry , 8 , 4 : 777 - 795 . [ 26 ] Gärtner , J . and Wagner , I . 1996 . Mapping actors and agendas : political frameworks of systems design and participation . Human - Computer Interaction Journal , 11 , 3 : 187 - 214 . [ 27 ] Graffiti no 7 : Alternatives in text and image , 1984 . The Utopia project . [ 28 ] Haugaard , M . 2012 . Rethinking the four dimensions of power : domination and empowerment . Journal of Political Review 5 , 1 : 33 - 54 . [ 29 ] Hayes , G . R . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 18 , 3 : 15 . [ 30 ] Joshi , S . and Bratteteig , T . 2016 ( in press ) . Design for Prolonged Mastery . On Involving Old People in Participatory Design . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems . [ 31 ] Kaasbøll , J . 1983 . The Research Programme SYDPOL : SYstem Development environment and Profession Oriented Languages , Nordforsk Publikationnserie 1983 : 2 , Department of Informatics , University of Oslo . [ 32 ] Kanstrup , AM . and Christiansen , E . 2006 . Selecting and evoking innovators : combining democracy and creativity . Proceedings of NordiCHI , 321 - 330 . [ 33 ] Kensing , F . and Greenbaum , J . ( 2012 ) . Heritage : having a say . In J . Simonsen and T . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . London / New York , Routledge : 21 - 37 . [ 34 ] Kyng , M . 1991 . Designing for cooperation : cooperating in design . Communications of the ACM , 34 , 12 : 65 - 73 . [ 35 ] Kyng , M . 2010 . Bridging the Gap Between Politics and Techniques : On the next practices of participatory design , Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 22 , 1 : 49 - 68 . [ 36 ] Lukes , S . 1974 . Power : A Radical View . London , Macmillan . [ 37 ] Martin , D . , Mariani , J . and Rouncefield , M . 2009 . Practicali - ties of participation : Stakeholder involvement in an electron - ic patient records project . Configuring User - Designer Relations . Springer London : 133 - 155 . [ 38 ] Mathiassen , L . , Rolskov , B . and Vedel , E . 1983 . Regulating the Use of EDP by Law and Agreements . In Briefs , U . , Ciborra , C . and Schneider , L . ( eds ) . Systems 150 Design For , With , and By the Users , North - Holland , Amsterdam : 251 - 264 . [ 39 ] Nygaard , K . 1992 . How Many Choices Do We Make ? How Many Are Difficult . In : Floyd et al ( eds . ) Proceedings from Software Development and Reality Construction , Springer - Verlag , Berlin : 52 - 59 [ 40 ] Nygaard , K . 1996 . “Those were the days” – or “ heroic times are here again ” . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 8 , 2 : 91 - 108 . [ 41 ] Nygaard , K . and Bergo , O . T . 1975 . The trade unions - New users of research . Personnel Review , 4 , 2 : 5 - 10 . [ 42 ] Nygaard , K . and Fjalestad , J . ( 1981 ) : Group Interests and Participation in Information Systems Development , Microelectronics , Productivity and Employment , Paris : OECD . [ 43 ] Pansardi , P . 2012 . Power to and power over : two distinct concepts of power ? Journal of Political Power , 5 , 1 : 73 - 89 . [ 44 ] Pedersen , J . 2007 . Protocols of research and design . Reflections on a participatory design project ( sort of ) . ( PhD thesis ) , IT University , Copenhagen . [ 45 ] Pitkin , H . F . 1972 . Wittgenstein and Justice : On the Significance of Ludwig Wittgenstein for Social and Political Thought . Berkeley , CA . University of California Press . [ 46 ] Robertson , T . and Wagner , I . 2012 . Ethics : Engagement , representation and politics - in - action . In J . Simonsen & T . Robertson ( Eds . ) Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . London / New York : Routledge : 64 - 85 . [ 47 ] Robertson , T . , Leong , T . W . , Durick , J . , and Koreshoff , T . 2014 . Mutual learning as a resource for research design . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference , Volume 2 , ACM , New York : 25 - 28 . [ 48 ] Rodwell , C . M . 1996 . An analysis of the concept of empow - erment . Journal of Advanced Nursing , 23 , 2 : 305 - 313 . [ 49 ] Ruland , C . M . , Starren , J . and Vatne , Trun , M . 2008 . Participatory design with children in the development of a support system for patient - centered care in pediatric onco - logy . Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 41 , 4 : 624 – 635 . [ 50 ] Shapiro , D . 2010 . A Modernised Participatory Design ? A response to Kyng . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 22 , 1 : 69 - 76 . [ 51 ] Stahl , B . C . 2007 . ETHICS , morality and critique : An essay on Enid Mumford’s socio - technical approach . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 8 , 9 : 479 - 490 . [ 52 ] Stevens , G . , Pipek , V . and Wulf , V . 2010 . Appropriation infrastructure : mediating appropriation and production work . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( JOEUC ) 22 . 2 : 58 - 81 . [ 53 ] Strauss , A . 1979 . Negotiations . Varieties , contexts , processes , and social order . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . [ 54 ] Weber , M . 1978 . Economy and Society : An Outline of Interpretive Sociology , Berkeley , CA . University of California Press . [ 55 ] Whyte , W . F . ( ed ) 1991 . Participatory Action Research , Beverly Hills : Sage . [ 56 ] Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Chivuno - Kuria , S . , Koch Kapuire , G . , Bidwell , N . J . and Blake , E . 2010 . Being participated : a community approach . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM , New York : 1 - 10 .