ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Neuropathic Pain : A Maladaptive Response of the Nervous System to Damage Michael Costigan , Joachim Scholz , and Clifford J . Woolf Neural Plasticity Research Group , Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care , Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02129 ; email : mcostigan @ partners . org , scholz . joachim @ mgh . harvard . edu , cwoolf @ partners . org Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 2009 . 32 : 1 – 32 First published online as a Review in Advance on March 17 , 2009 The Annual Review of Neuroscience is online at neuro . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . neuro . 051508 . 135531 Copyright c (cid:2) 2009 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0147 - 006X / 09 / 0721 - 0001 $ 20 . 00 Key Words neural plasticity , synaptic facilitation , disinhibition , neuroimmune interaction , pain phenotype Abstract Neuropathic pain is triggered by lesions to the somatosensory nervous system that alter its structure and function so that pain occurs spon - taneously and responses to noxious and innocuous stimuli are patho - logically ampliﬁed . The pain is an expression of maladaptive plastic - ity within the nociceptive system , a series of changes that constitute a neural disease state . Multiple alterations distributed widely across the nervous system contribute to complex pain phenotypes . These alter - ations include ectopic generation of action potentials , facilitation and disinhibition of synaptic transmission , loss of synaptic connectivity and formation of new synaptic circuits , and neuroimmune interactions . Al - though neural lesions are necessary , they are not sufﬁcient to generate neuropathic pain ; genetic polymorphisms , gender , and age all inﬂuence the risk of developing persistent pain . Treatment needs to move from merely suppressing symptoms to a disease - modifying strategy aimed at both preventing maladaptive plasticity and reducing intrinsic risk . 1 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 NOCICEPTIVE PAIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 INFLAMMATORY PAIN . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 DYSFUNCTIONAL PAIN . . . . . . . . . . . 3 MECHANISMS COMMON TO DIFFERENT CHRONIC PAIN STATES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Immune Mediator Detection . . . . . . . 6 Peripheral Sensitization . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Central Sensitization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 NEUROPATHIC PAIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Transformation of Acute Neural Injury to Neuropathic Pain . . . . . . 7 MECHANISMS OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Ectopic Impulse Generation . . . . . . . . 10 Ectopic Transduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Central Sensitization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Low - Threshold A β Fiber - Mediated Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Disinhibition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Structural Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Neurodegeneration and Chronic Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Neuro - Immune Interactions . . . . . . . . 14 Seeing Pain in Patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 THE NEUROPATHIC PAIN PHENOTYPE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Animal Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . 16 Lost in Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Subtypes of Clinical Neuropathic Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 GENETIC DETERMINANTS OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN . . . . . . . 19 Pain Heritability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Genetic Risk of Developing Neuropathic Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 INTRODUCTION Diseases affecting the somatosensory nervous system can provoke lasting pain in addition to sensory deﬁcits . ( See sidebar , Neuropathic Pain Symptoms . ) Here we review the neurobiolog - ical mechanisms that operate at multiple sites within the nervous system to produce neuro - pathic hypersensitivity . To understand the na - tureandspeciﬁcfeaturesofneuropathicpain ( as deﬁned by Treede etal . 2008 , given on the next page ) in Treede etal . 2008 ) , we ﬁrst compare it with the other pain syndromes : nociceptive , inﬂammatory , and dysfunctional pain . NOCICEPTIVE PAIN To guard against tissue injury , it is imperative that the body is aware of potentially damaging stimuli . This awareness is achieved by a noxious stimulus - detecting sensory system ( Figure 1 ) . Nociceptive pain is an alarm mediated by high - threshold unmyelinated C or thinly myelinated A δ primary sensory neurons that feed into nociceptivepathwaysofthecentralnervoussys - tem ( CNS ) ( Woolf & Ma 2007 ) . These noci - ceptor neurons express specialized transducer ion channel receptors , mainly transient recep - tor potential ( TRP ) channels , tuned to respond to intense thermal or mechanical stimuli as well as exogenous and endogenous chemical medi - ators ( Dhaka etal . 2006 ) . For nociceptive pain to subserve its protective function , the sensa - tion must be so unpleasant that it cannot be ig - nored . Nociceptive pain occurs in response to noxious stimuli and continues only in the main - tained presence of noxious stimuli ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . It alerts us to external stimuli , such as pinprick or excessive heat , and internal stimuli , such as myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease . Certain diseases may generate recurrent or ongoing noxious stimuli to produce chronic nociceptive pain . One ex - ample is osteoarthritis : Normal weight bearing in the presence of mechanical deformation of the joint may produce sufﬁcient force to acti - vatehigh - thresholdsynovialmechanoreceptors ( Torres etal . 2006 ) . Loss of nociception , as in hereditary dis - orders associated with congenital insensitivity to pain ( Cox etal . 2006 , Indo 2001 ) , leads to repeated injury and inadvertent self mutila - tion , illustrating the highly adaptive function of nociceptive pain . 2 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 INFLAMMATORY PAIN This pain occurs in response to tissue injury and the subsequent inﬂammatory response . Here the imperative shifts from protecting the body against a potentially damaging noxious stim - ulus to addressing the consequences of dam - age . To aid healing and repair of the injured body part , the sensory nervous system un - dergoes a profound change in its responsive - ness ; normally innocuous stimuli now produce pain and responses to noxious stimuli are both exaggerated and prolonged ( Juhl etal . 2008 ) ( Figure 1 ) . Heightened sensitivity occurs within the inﬂamed area and in contiguous noninﬂamed areas as a result of plasticity in nociceptors and central nociceptive pathways ( Huang etal . 2006 , Hucho & Levine 2007 , Woolf & Salter 2000 ) . Because the pain system after inﬂammation is sensitized , it no longer acts just as a detector for noxious stimuli but can be activated also by low - threshold innocuous inputs ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . Ablation of a speciﬁc set of nociceptor neurons , those expressing the tetrodotoxin - resistant sodium channel Nav1 . 8 , eliminates inﬂammatory pain but leaves neu - ropathic pain intact , indicating a fundamental difference in the neuronal pathways responsible for these pain states ( Abrahamsen etal . 2008 ) . Typically , inﬂammatory pain disappears after resolution of the initial tissue injury . However , in chronic disorders such as rheumatoid arthri - tis the pain persists for as long as inﬂammation is active ( Michaud etal . 2007 ) . DYSFUNCTIONAL PAIN The remaining two major pain states , neuro - pathic pain and a group of clinical syndromes that can best be called dysfunctional pain , are maladaptive in the sense that the pain nei - ther protects nor supports healing and repair ( Figure 1 ) . Instead , these pain syndromes are caused by a malfunction of the somatosensory NEUROPATHIC PAIN SYMPTOMS Imagine an excruciating pain every time clothes touch your skin , spontaneous burning that feels like boiling water , bursts of “pins and needles” in your feet when you walk , a continuous crush - ing pain after an amputation as if your phantom foot is being squeezed , a band of searing pain around your body at the level at which you have lost all sensation after a spinal cord injury . These are just some of the devastating symptoms patients with neuropathic pain may experience . Neuropathic pain : maladaptive plasticity caused by a lesion or disease affecting the somatosensory system alters nociceptive signal processing so that pain is felt in the absence of a stimulus , and responses to innocuous and noxious stimuli are enhanced Nociceptive pain : physiological pain produced by noxious stimuli that activate high - threshold nociceptor neurons Inﬂammatory pain : pain hypersensitivity due to peripheral tissue inﬂammation involving the detection of active inﬂammation by nociceptors and a sensitization of the nociceptive system Dysfunctional pain : ampliﬁcation of nociceptive signaling in the absence of either inﬂammation or neural lesions apparatus itself , and this malfunction can be considered a disease in its own right . Dysfunc - tional pain occurs in situations in which there is no identiﬁable noxious stimulus nor any de - tectableinﬂammationordamagetothenervous system . It is unclear in most cases what causes the manifestation or persistence of dysfunc - tional pain . In conditions such as ﬁbromyal - gia , irritable bowel syndrome , and interstitial cystitis , the pain appears to result from an au - tonomous ampliﬁcation of nociceptive signals inside the CNS ( Nielsen etal . 2008 , Staud & Rodriguez 2006 ) with a disturbed balance of ex - citationandinhibitionincentralcircuits ( Julien etal . 2005 ) and altered sensory processing that can be detected by functional imaging ( Staud etal . 2008 ) . Dysfunctional pain syndromes share some features of neuropathic pain : tem - poral summation with a progressive buildup in pain in response to repeated stimuli ( windup ) , spatial diffuseness , and reduced pain thresholds ( Staud etal . 2007 ) . Primary erythermalgia and paroxysmal extreme pain disorder , which are caused by gain - of - function mutations in the Nav1 . 7 voltage - gated sodium channel ( Drenth & Waxman 2007 ) , may be considered peripherally mediated dysfunctional pain , but here the molecular causes are known . These muta - tions are hereditary channelopathies of the −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Figure 1 Pain syndromes . A summary of key features that distinguish and characterize the four major pain syndromes ; nociceptive pain ( a ) , inﬂammatory pain ( b ) , dysfunctional pain ( c ) , and neuropathic pain ( d ) . ( Image adapted from Grifﬁn & Woolf 2007 ) www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 3 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Clinically relevant stimuli : abnormal mechanical forces ( osteoarthritis ) , organ injury ( angina , ischemic claudication ) Physiological stimuli : mechanical ( pinprick ) , thermal ( noxious heat or cold ) , chemical injury Clinically relevant stimuli : tissue trauma , surgery , joint inflammation as in rheumatoid arthritis Spinal cord Brainstem Thalamus DRG Nociceptor Cortex Mastcell Macrophage Neutrophilgranulocyte Central amplification Peripheral amplification Nociceptive pain No nervous system lesion or inflammation Stimulus - dependent pain Evoked by high - intensity ( noxious ) stimuli Adaptive Protects by signaling potential tissue damage Time ( responseduration ) P a i n a Inflammatory pain Active inflammation Spontaneous and stimulus - dependent pain Sensory amplification Evoked by low - and high - intensity stimuli Adaptive and reversible Protects by producing pain hypersensitivity during healing Time ( responseduration ) P a i n b No stimulus Normallynonpainfulstimulus Painfulstimulus 4 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Fibromyalgia Primary erythermalgia PNS lesion or disease : nerve trauma , toxic and metabolic neuropathies , Herpes zoster , AIDS CNS lesion or disease : Stroke , spinal cord injury , multiple sclerosis Central amplification Central amplification Peripheralamplification Peripheralamplification Neuroimmuneinteractionsin the periphery and the CNS Central amplification Central amplification Dysfunctional pain No known structural nervous system lesion or active peripheral inflammation Spontaneous and stimulus - dependent pain Sensory amplification Evoked by low - and high - intensity Present with lack of stimulus Maladaptive and potentially persistent Time ( responseduration ) P a i n c Maladaptive and commonly persistent Abnormal amplification maintained independent of the lesion or disease Time ( responseduration ) P a i n d Neuropathic pain Nervous system lesion or disease Marked neuroimmune response Spontaneous and stimulus - dependent pain Sensory amplification Evoked by low - and high - intensity stimuli No stimulus Normallynonpainfulstimulus Painfulstimulus www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 5 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Externalstimulus Primary allodynia Primary hyperalgesia Nociceptor Low - threshold neuron Sensitizedterminal Peripheral sensitization Innocuous stimulus Innocuous stimulus Noxious stimulus Noxious stimulus Peripheral sensory pathways Central sensory pathways Sensation Sensitized central pathway Central sensitization Nociceptor Secondary allodynia Secondary hyperalgesia Ectopic activity Sensitized central pathway Low - threshold neuron Paresthesia No peripheralstimulus Nociceptor Spontaneous pain Low - threshold neuron Dysesthesia and spontaneous pain Sensitized central pathway Figure 2 Stimulus - response relations and pain mechanisms . A representation of the relationship between external noxious and innocuous stimuli and the sensory responses they evoke , depending on which afferent ﬁber is activated ( nociceptor or low - threshold neuron ) and whether the sensitivity of either the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) or the central nervous system ( CNS ) is disturbed to amplify the response to stimuli ( sensitization ) and generate ectopic impulses . peripheral nervous system , which cause pain by ectopic activity of primary sensory neurons due to increased membrane excitability in the ab - sence of axonal lesions or demyelination . MECHANISMS COMMON TO DIFFERENT CHRONIC PAIN STATES Although inﬂammatory , dysfunctional , and neuropathic pain are distinct in terms of their etiology and clinical features ( Figure 1 ) , they have some mechanisms in common . Immune Mediator Detection Nociceptors respond directly to cytokines , chemokines , and other inﬂammatory mediators produced in inﬂamed tissues ( Binshtok etal . 2008 ) . Interleukin - 1 β ( IL1 β ) , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) , bradykinin , and nerve growth factor elicit action potential discharge by 6 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 increasing sodium and calcium currents at the nociceptor peripheral terminal . After neural damage , these same inﬂammatory mediators are produced by peripheral immune cells and microglia in the spinal cord and contribute to neuropathic pain by activating nociceptive neurons . Peripheral Sensitization Inﬂammatory mediators activate intracellular signal transduction pathways in the nocicep - tor terminal , prompting an increase in the production , transport , and membrane inser - tion of transducer channels and voltage - gated ion channels . The threshold for activation is reduced and membrane excitability increases ( Figure 2 ) . A reduction in thermal and me - chanical pain thresholds also occurs in some patients with peripheral nerve lesions , which might reﬂect nociceptor sensitization owing to increased membrane excitability without inﬂammation ( irritable nociceptors ) ( Fields etal . 1998 ) . Central Sensitization Central sensitization , a form of use - dependent synaptic plasticity , is a major pathophysiologi - cal mechanism common to inﬂammatory , neu - ropathic , and dysfunctional pain ( Figure 2 ) . Activity generated by nociceptors during in - ﬂammation produces rapid - onset homo - and heterosynaptic facilitation in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord . In neuropathic pain , ongoing activity originating in injured nerves is the trig - ger for central sensitization . In dysfunctional pain , thetriggerisunclear . Centralsensitization resembles activity - dependent synaptic plastic - ity in the cortex with involvement of various synapticmodulatorsandexcitatoryaminoacids , alterations in ion channel kinetics and prop - erties , increased density of ionotropic recep - tors , and activation of kinases pre - and post - synaptically . The increase in synaptic strength enables previously subthreshold inputs to ac - tivate nociceptive neurons , reducing their threshold , enhancing their responsiveness , and expanding their receptive ﬁelds . Homosynaptic PNS : peripheral nervous system CNS : central nervous system facilitation of nociceptor inputs in the spinal cord is a form of long - term potentiation ( LTP ) . For heterosynaptic facilitation , the initial input that triggers nociceptor activation is different from the facilitated input . Low - threshold affer - ents convert to pain drivers , and input outside the injury site is recruited . NEUROPATHIC PAIN Pain and loss of function are intimately associ - ated with the reaction of the nervous system to neural damage , and both provide important di - agnostic clues that such damage has occurred . Peripheral neuropathic pain results from le - sions to the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) caused by mechanical trauma , metabolic dis - ease , neurotoxic chemicals , infection , or tumor invasion and involves multiple pathophysiolog - ical changes both within the PNS and in the CNS ( Dworkin etal . 2003 , Woolf & Mannion 1999 ) . Central neuropathic pain most com - monly results from spinal cord injury , stroke , or multiple sclerosis ( Ducreux etal . 2006 ) . The conventional approach to neuropathic pain has been to classify and treat it on the basis of the underlying disease ( Dworkin etal . 2007 ) . However , such an etiological approach does not capture the essential feature of neuropathic pain , which is the manifestation of maladap - tive plasticity in the nervous system . The pri - marydiseaseandtheneuraldamageitcausesare only the initiators of a cascade of changes that lead to and sustain neuropathic pain . Although treatment targeted at the primary pathology is obviously essential , understanding the mecha - nisms responsible for the maladaptive plasticity offers speciﬁc therapeutic opportunities to pre - vent the development of neuropathic hypersen - sitivity and normalize function in established neuropathic pain . Transformation of Acute Neural Injury to Neuropathic Pain Once neuropathic pain is generated , the sensory hypersensitivity typically persists for prolonged periods , even though the original www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 7 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 cause may have long since disappeared , as after nerve trauma . The syndrome can never - theless progress if the primary disease , such as diabetes mellitus or nerve compression , contin - ues to damage the nervous system . Neuropathic pain is not an inevitable consequence of neural lesions , though . On the contrary , the pain asso - ciated with acute neural damage usually transi - tions to chronic neuropathic pain in a minor - ity of patients . This transition to chronicity is most obvious after surgical nerve lesions where the extent and timing of the lesion are deﬁned ( Kehlet etal . 2006 ) . For damage of a relatively small nerve , such as the ilioinguinal nerve during hernia repair , the risk of persistent ( more than two years ) pain is on the order of ∼ 5 % ( Kalliomaki etal . 2008 ) , whereas sectioning a large nerve , such as the sciatic nerve or multiple intercostal nerves during thoracotomy , produces sustained neuro - pathicpainin30 % – 60 % ofpatients ( Ketz2008 , Maguire etal . 2006 ) . Understanding why one individual develops chronic pain and another with an effectively identical lesion is spared is obviously crucial to developing strategies to abort such transitions . Injury such as brachial plexus avulsion during birth does not pro - duce pain in neonates ( Anand & Birch 2002 ) , whereas ∼ 40 % of adults develop severe chronic pain when subjected to the same injury ( Htut etal . 2006 ) , indicating that neuropathic pain depends in some way on the maturity of the nervous system ( Moss etal . 2007 ) . Epidemiological studies on the prevalence of neuropathic pain indicate a high incidence ( ∼ 5 % ) ( Bouhassira etal . 2008 , Dieleman etal . 2008 , Torrance etal . 2006 ) . Associated risk fac - tors include gender , age , and anatomical site of the injury . Smaller studies on persistent neuro - pathicpainaftersurgeryindicatethatpainatthe time of surgery and the severity of acute post - operative pain increase the incidence of chronic pain ( Poleshuck etal . 2006 ) , although it is un - clear whether the risk increases because acute postoperative pain was inadequately managed or individuals who have a higher inherent sus - ceptibility to developing persistent pain also suffer more intense acute pain . Emotional and cognitive factors inﬂuence how patients react to chronic pain ( Haythornthwaite etal . 2003 ) , but it is much less certain if these factors contribute to the risk of developing pain . Two interdependent processes appear to be major general contributors to developing neu - ropathic pain : the balance between compen - satory and decompensatory reactions of the nervous system to neural damage , and a genetic background that either enhances or protects an individual from the establishment of neuro - pathic pain . Many of the changes that occur in response to neural injury are potentially adap - tive : removal of cell and myelin debris , changes in receptors that counterbalance the loss of input , other alterations that dampen ion ﬂuxes and metabolic stress after the acute injury , re - cruitment of antiapoptotic survival strategies to prevent neuronal cell death , induction of ax - onal growth and sprouting , synaptic remodel - ing , and remyelination ( Benn & Woolf 2004 , Cafferty etal . 2008 ) . However , many are clearly maladaptive : abnormal stimulus thresholds and sensitivity , ectopic impulse generation , conduc - tion slowing or block , reduced inhibition , inap - propriate connectivity , abortive growth , neu - ronal loss , and glial scarring . Some of these changes occur early after the initial damage and participate in the induction phase of neuro - pathic pain , others develop later and help main - tainthepain , andinsomeindividuals , theremay occasionally be a slow resolution . MECHANISMS OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN Major known mechanisms responsible for pe - ripheral neuropathic pain are represented in Figure 3 ( Campbell & Meyer 2006 , Finnerup etal . 2007a ) . Much less is understood about −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Figure 3 A summary of the major mechanisms underlying peripheral neuropathic pain , their location , and the triggers responsible for their activation . ( Image adapted from Grifﬁn & Woolf 2007 ) 8 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Dorsal root ganglion Ectopic action potentialgeneration Collateralsprouting Altered transduction Site of axonal injury Dorsal horn Spinal cord To brain Peripheral ampliﬁcation and spontaneous activity mediated by : Altered expression and traﬃcking of receptors and ion channels Change in ion channel threshold and kinetics Collateral axon growth . . . triggered by : Neurotrophic factors Signals from immune cells and denervated Schwann cells Intact primary sensory neurons b Neuronalcell death Altered synaptic transmission and central sprouting Increased axonal sensitivity to mechanical , thermal , and chemical stimuli → ectopic transduction Peripheral and central ampliﬁcation mediated by : Changes in transmitter synthesis and signaling Increased membrane excitability Peripheral and central axon growth . . . triggered by : Loss of peripheral neurotrophic factors Spontaneous and receptor - mediated activity Retrograde signaling Signals from immune cells and denervated Schwann cells Injured primary sensory neurons a Ectopic action potential generation Central ampliﬁcation mediated by : Homo - and heterosynaptic facilitation Disinhibition Changes in central nociceptive circuits . . . triggered by signals from : Injured and uninjured primary aﬀerents Invading immune cells , microglia , and astrocytes Second order sensory neurons c Altered synaptic connectivity Descending pathways from brainstem nuclei Sympathetic - sensory neuron coupling www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 9 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 DRG : dorsal root ganglion Central sensitization : an increase in synaptic strength in nociceptive circuits that results from synaptic facilitation or a reduction in inhibition themechanismsunderlyingcentralneuropathic pain ( Crown etal . 2008 , Detloff etal . 2008 , Finnerup etal . 2007b ) . Ectopic Impulse Generation Animportantfeatureofneuropathicpainispain in the absence of an identiﬁable stimulus . Spon - taneous pain arises as a result of ectopic ac - tionpotentialgenerationwithinthenociceptive pathways and does not originate in peripheral terminals in response to a stimulus ( Figures 2 and 3 ) . Theoretically , ectopic activity could be generated at any anatomical level proximal to those brain regions that mediate the sensory ex - perience . Compelling evidence for peripheral neuropathic pain , however , points to substan - tial ectopic activity arising in primary sensory neurons . After peripheral nerve damage , spon - taneous activity is generated at multiple sites , including in the neuroma ( the site of injury with abortedaxongrowth ) , inthecellbodyofinjured dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) neurons ( Amir etal . 2005 ) , and in neighboring intact afferents ( Wu etal . 2002 ) . Spontaneous pain may arise both from ectopic activity in nociceptors ( Bostock etal . 2005 ) andfromlow - thresholdlargemyeli - nated afferents ( Campbell etal . 1988 ) due to central sensitization and altered connectivity in the spinal cord ( Woolf etal . 1992 ) ( Figure 2 ) . After spinal cord injury , spontaneous pain may result from increases in the intrinsic excitabil - ity of second - order neurons ( Balasubramanyan etal . 2006 , Hains & Waxman 2007 ) . Voltage - gated sodium channels contribute largely to the generation of ectopic activity as indicated by the robust inhibitory effects of lo - cal anesthetics , which are nonselective sodium channel blockers ( Sheets etal . 2008 ) . DRG neurons express several sodium channels that are either sensitive or resistant to tetrodotoxin ( TTX ) ( Fukuoka etal . 2008 ) . However , which of these channels is responsible for the ab - normal generation of action potentials is not entirely clear . Studies using gene knockdown with antisense oligonucleotides support a spe - ciﬁc role for the Nav1 . 3 channel , which is up - regulated in DRG neurons after nerve injury ( Hains etal . 2003 ) , but knockout of the chan - nel fails to alter neuropathic pain – like behav - ior or ectopic activity ( Nassar etal . 2006 ) . On the other hand , preclinical models cannot di - rectly measure spontaneous pain , a major fail - ing that limits their utility as models of pain in patients . The TTX - resistant channel Nav1 . 8 , which is predominantly expressed by nocicep - tors , does not support propagation of full - amplitude action potentials ( Pinto etal . 2008 ) and instead modulates membrane excitability , particularly when phosphorylated ( Hudmon etal . 2008 ) . Experiments using Nav1 . 8 an - tisense and shRNA knockdown as well as pharmacological blockade with conotoxin and small - drug antagonists indicate a major role for this channel in generating neuropathic pain ( Dongetal . 2007 , Ekbergetal . 2006 , Goldetal . 2003 , Jarvis etal . 2007 , Joshi etal . 2006 , Roza etal . 2003 ) . However , Nav1 . 8 knockout does not reduce the neuropathic pain phenotype ( Nassar etal . 2005 ) , low - dose TTX blocks the expression and development of neuropathic pain ( Nieto etal . 2008 ) , and Nav1 . 8 is markedly downregulated after axonal injury , producing a substantial reduction in TTX - R current den - sities ( Berta etal . 2008 ) . Although conditional deletion of Nav1 . 7 in nociceptors does not re - duce neuropathic pain ( Nassar etal . 2005 ) , se - lective blockers for the channel display efﬁcacy as antineuropathic agents ( Hoyt etal . 2007 , Schmalhofer etal . 2008 ) . Global or conditional knockout of single ion channels does not appear to be a useful way to tease out their value as tar - gets for analgesics because of compensation and redundancy . The hyperpolarization - activated cyclic nucleotide - modulated channel ( HCN ) , which contributes to the pacemaker current I ( h ) , also generates ectopic activity in DRG neurons after nerve injury ( Luo etal . 2007 ) . Opening the neuronal voltage - gated potassium channel subfamily Q ( KCNQ ) , which is a mediator of the M current , selectively reduces activity in axotomized but not uninjured axons ( Roza & Lopez - Garcia 2008 ) and in human C - ﬁber axons ( Lang etal . 2008 ) , suggesting that this channel may be involved in regulating ectopic 10 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 activity . Similarly , axotomy reduces calcium - activated potassium currents in DRG neurons , which will also result in increased membrane excitability ( Sarantopoulos etal . 2007 ) . There are likely several ectopic ion channel drivers that raise membrane excitability in different ways and in different neurons . What triggers the changes in sensory neu - ron ion channel expression ? An importin - dependent retrograde signal that involves RasGTPase ( Yudin etal . 2008 ) activates mas - sivetranscriptionalchanges ( ∼ 2000transcripts ) in the soma of injured neurons , including al - tered regulation of ion channels ( Costigan etal . 2002 ) and their accessory subunits ( Pertin etal . 2005 ) . It is likely that master switches such as the transcription factors Sox11 , c - Jun , and ATF3 orchestrate these changes ( Seijffers etal . 2007 ) . Gene translation in axons appears to be important , both to signal the injury ( Yudin etal . 2008 ) and to synthesize local effectors ( Jimenez - Diaz etal . 2008 ) . Neighboring unin - jured neurons show fewer phenotypic changes than do injured ones ( Decosterd etal . 2002 ) , and these may be generated by signals from denervated Schwann cells ( Wu etal . 2002 ) . Some of these signals , including cytokines and growth factors , may increase sodium and TRP channel currents in the axon and cell soma of neurons by posttranslational changes ( Jin & Gereau 2006 , Zhu & Oxford 2007 ) . Mice with a deletion of Cav2 . 2 ( the N - type calcium channel ) show reduced neuro - pathic pain - like behavior ( Saegusa etal . 2001 ) . Intrathecal delivery of ω - conopeptide MVIIA , which blocks Cav2 . 2 in a non - use - dependent fashion , decreases neuropathic pain in preclin - ical models and patients , presumably by re - ducing transmitter release from nociceptors ( McGivern 2006 ) . The calcium channel aux - iliary α 2 δ 1 subunit helps stabilize the pore - forming α subunit of these channels in the membrane . Gabapentin and pregabalin , among the ﬁrst - line treatments for neuropathic pain ( Dworkin etal . 2007 ) , bind to the α 2 δ 1 pro - tein , interfere with the interaction between the auxiliary subunit and the α subunit , and impair membrane insertion of the channel ( Hendrich Peripheralsensitization : an increase in the sensitivity of the peripheral terminals of nociceptors due to a decrease in transduction threshold and an increase in membrane excitability Allodynia : a painful response to a usually innocuous stimulus Secondary hypersensitivity : pain from normal peripheral sensory inputs outside inﬂamed tissue due to plasticity ( sensitization ) within the CNS TRP : transient receptor potential etal . 2008 ) . Both Cav2 . 2 and α 2 δ 1 subunits are upregulated in DRG neurons following nerve injury ( McGivern 2006 ) , which suggests that an N - type calcium channel complex may play a dominant role in pathological nociceptive sig - nal transmission from the periphery . Differ - ent Cav2 . 2 splice forms , including one that is highly enriched in nociceptor neurons , consti - tute molecular switches for different nociceptor functions during neuropathic pain ( Altier etal . 2007 ) . Ectopic Transduction Enhanced sensitivity of injured sensory neu - rons to endogenous thermal and chemical stim - uli may initiate spontaneous pain , whereas enhanced mechanical sensitivity can elicit dysesthesia or pain in response to tapping an injured nerve ( Tinel’s sign ) . Peripheral nerve axons exhibit sensory transduction capacities to noxious heat identical to their peripheral ter - minals in the skin , with the threshold charac - teristic of the noxious heat - sensitive TRPV1 channel ( 41 ◦ C ) ( Hoffmann etal . 2008 ) . Iso - lated peripheral nerves can also be sensitized to heat by intracellular signal transduction pathways ( Fischer & Reeh 2007 ) . Therefore , normal body temperature may elicit sponta - neous activity after nerve injury if the thresh - old of TRPV1 in axons were reduced to 38 ◦ C ( Biggs etal . 2008 ) . Knockdown of the chan - nel with shRNA reduces neuropathic pain – like behavior ( Christoph etal . 2008 ) . Central Sensitization Stimulus - evoked neuropathic pain could arise either as a result of peripheral sensitization of intact afferents ( Fields etal . 1998 ) or from ampliﬁcation within the CNS due to central sensitization ( Woolf & Salter 2000 ) . Synaptic facilitation seems to predominate in most patients with peripheral neuropathic pain and in all patients with central neuropathic pain . It contributes to dynamic tactile allodynia as well as secondary hypersensitivity ( Figure 2 ) ( Campbell & Meyer 2006 ) . Presynaptic functional changes after peripheral nerve www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 11 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 NMDA : N - methyl - D - aspartate injury that increase synaptic strength include alterations in the synthesis of transmitters and neuromodulators ( Obata etal . 2003 ) and in calcium channel density ( Hendrich etal . 2008 , Li etal . 2004 ) . Postsynaptic changes involve phosphorylation of N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) subunits ( Ultenius etal . 2006 ) and increased receptor density due to trafﬁcking and enhanced synthesis of ion channels and scaffold proteins ( Cheng etal . 2008 , Iwata etal . 2007 , Miyabe etal . 2006 , Takasusuki etal . 2007 , Tao etal . 2003 ) . Drugs that attenuate central sensitization by acting on calcium chan - nel subunits to decrease transmitter release and on NMDA channels to reduce transmitter action ( Chizh etal . 2007 ; Jorum etal . 2003 ) are effective treatment options in neuropathic pain ( Dworkin etal . 2007 ) . Although central sensi - tization was ﬁrst described in the dorsal horn , similar synaptic changes occur in structures involved in the emotional aspects of pain such as the amygdala , anterior cingulate gyrus , and prefrontal cortex ( Fu etal . 2008 , Pedersen etal . 2007 ) , and these may represent a substrate for long - term cognitive and mood changes that are learned and retained , for example , conditioned fear and addictive behavior . Central sensitization is different from cen - tralization , which hypothesizes that , after pe - ripheral nerve injury , changes intrinsic to the CNS develop and maintain pain independent of any ongoing peripheral input ( Devor 2006 ) . Thesechangespotentiallyincludeincreasedex - citability ( Balasubramanyan etal . 2006 ) , struc - tural alterations in synaptic circuitry ( Woolf etal . 1992 ) , degeneration of inhibitory in - terneurons ( Scholz etal . 2005 ) , and alterations in the brain stem regulation of nociceptive transmission ( Vera - Portocarrero etal . 2006 ) . Low - Threshold A β Fiber - Mediated Pain Neuropathic pain involves a profound switch in sensitivity such that low - intensity input can generate pain , a disruption of the normal pattern of pain speciﬁcity ( Perl 2007 ) . The hypersensitivity occurs largely in the absence of peripheral sensitization ; includes areas outside of injured nerve territories ; is typically associated with a loss of C - ﬁber peripheral terminals , and sensitivity ( Devigili etal . 2008 ) ; and disappears when conduction in large myeli - nated ﬁbers is blocked ( Campbell etal . 1988 ) . Furthermore , ablation of the vast majority of nociceptor neurons does not alter the devel - opment and manifestation of neuropathic pain ( Abrahamsen etal . 2008 ) , whereas selec - tive pharmacological blockade of large neuroﬁlament - 200 - positive A β ﬁbers abol - ishes dynamic tactile allodynia in nerve injury models ( Yamamoto etal . 2008 ) . The obvious conclusion from these data is that low - threshold A β ﬁbers , which normally signal innocuous sensations , begin after neural lesions to produce pain ( Khan etal . 2002 ; Witting etal . 2006 ) . In keeping with this ﬁnding , loss of the PKC γ interneurons in the ventral part of the superﬁcial dorsal horn ( lamina IIi ) that are driven only by A β ﬁber innocuous input ( Neumann etal . 2008 ) leads to reduced neuropathic but preserved nociceptive pain ( Malmberg etal . 1997 ) . Furthermore , after nerve injury polysynaptic and monosynaptic A β ﬁber input to neurons increases in the most superﬁcial laminae of the dorsal horn ( Okamoto etal . 2001 ) , an area that normally only receives input from A δ and C ﬁbers ( Lu & Perl 2005 ) . Although noxious stimuli activate ERK MAP kinase in superﬁcial dorsal horn neurons in noninjured animals ( Ji etal . 1999 ) , after peripheral nerve injury A β ﬁber stimulation acquires this capacity ( Matsumoto etal . 2008 ) . Tactile stimulation also begins to induce c - Fos in these nociceptive neurons ( Bester etal . 2000 ) . Somehow , as a consequence of peripheral nerve injury , low - threshold input from large myelinated ﬁbers is transferred from nonnociceptive to nociceptive circuits in the spinal cord . How does this plasticity occur ? Disinhibition A number of changes either independently or together can promote A β ﬁber – mediated pain : 12 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 central sensitization , disinhibition , and central afferent terminal sprouting . Inhibitory dorsal horn interneurons synapse with the central terminals of primary sensory neurons and presynaptically modulate afferent input . Spinal interneurons also regulate activity in postsynaptic transmission neurons through GABAergic and glycinergic inhibition . Pharmacological removal of GABAergic or glycinergic control provokes tactile allodynia ( Thompson etal . 1993 ) and increases synaptic currents from A β ﬁbers to nociceptive lamina I neurons ( Baba etal . 2003 , Miraucourt etal . 2007 , Torsney & MacDermott 2006 ) . Descending pathways that modulate the spinal transmission of nociceptive input orig - inate in the anterior cingulate gyrus , amyg - dala , and hypothalamus and are relayed to the spinal cord through brain stem nuclei in the periaqueductal gray and rostroven - tral medulla . The inhibitory transmitters in these pathways include norepinephrine , 5 - hydroxytryptamine , and endogenous opioids . After nerve injury , this intricate system of in - hibitory control shifts . Tonic noradrenergic inhibition that acts on α 2 - adrenoceptors ap - pears to be suspended ( Rahman etal . 2008 ) , and the net effect of descending serotoniner - gic input changes from inhibition to facilitation ( Bee & Dickenson 2008 , Vera - Portocarrero etal . 2006 ) . Amine uptake inhibitors like tricylic antidepressants or serotonin nore - pinephrine reuptake inhibitors ( SNRIs ) boost endogenous inhibition by increasing the levels of norepinephrine ( Matsuzawa - Yanagida etal . 2008 ) . Followingnerveinjury , primaryafferentsre - duce their expression of μ opioid receptors , and dorsal horn neurons are less sensitive to inhibition by μ opioid agonists ( Kohno etal . 2005 ) . Furthermore , several different mecha - nisms contribute to a loss of pre - and postsy - naptic GABAergic inhibition in the spinal cord . In nociceptive lamina I neurons , the transmem - brane gradient for chloride ions changes af - ter nerve injury so that activation of GABA A receptors no longer leads to hyperpolariza - tion . Instead , it may induce depolarization , GABA : gamma amino butyric acid Hyperalgesia : a heightened response to a noxious stimulus provoking paradoxical excitation and sponta - neous activity ( Keller etal . 2007 ) . BDNF re - leased from active microglia causes this dis - turbance by inducing a downregulation of the potassium chloride cotransporter isoform 2 ( Coull etal . 2005 ) . Independently , inhibition in the superﬁcial dorsal horn of the spinal cord is compromised by a loss of GABAer - gic interneurons ( Scholz etal . 2005 ) , reduc - ing afferent stimulation - evoked GABAergic in - hibitory postsynaptic currents ( IPSCs ) ( Moore etal . 2002 ) . Preventing apoptotic cell death fully restores GABAergic IPSCs and attenuates mechanical allodynia , hyperalgesia , and cold al - lodynia after nerve injury ( Scholz etal . 2005 ) . Loss of spinal inhibitory interneurons may con - tribute to the persistence of neuropathic pain , although pain - like behavior after sciatic nerve injury in the absence of neuronal cell death has been reported ( Polgar etal . 2005 ) . De - spite the apparent role of GABAergic disin - hibition in neuropathic pain , GABA A receptor modulators such as benzodiazepines or GABA B receptor agonists are rarely used to treat neu - ropathic pain because they have a narrow ther - apeutic window . Speciﬁc GABA agonists that bindtothe α 2 or α 3 butnot α 1 subunitsofspinal GABA A receptors may allow analgesia with - out sedation or motor impairment ( Knabl etal . 2008 ) . Structural Changes Peripheral axonal injury prompts sensory neu - rons into an actively growing state by increas - ing the expression of regeneration - associated genes ( Costigan etal . 2002 ) . This peripheral sprouting aids the reconnection of damaged peripheral axons with their targets . However , increasing the intrinsic capacity to grow can also lead to a sprouting of the central axon ter - minals of injured neurons in the spinal cord ( Woolf etal . 1992 ) . Large myelinated A β ﬁbers normally terminate in the ventral laminae of the dorsal horn ( lamine III - V ) , whereas thinly myelinated A δ ﬁbers and unmyelinated C - ﬁber nociceptors terminate in the superﬁcial lam - inae ( I and II ) . Following peripheral nerve www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 13 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 injury , bulk - labeling , single afferent ﬁlling , and A ﬁber marker experiments all suggest that A β ﬁbers sprout into lamina II ( Kohama etal . 2000 ; Soares etal . 2002 , 2007 ; Watanabe etal . 2007 ; Woolf etal . 1992 ) . However , these ﬁnd - ings remain controversial because some of the labeling techniques lack speciﬁcity , and un - injured A - ﬁbers are present in lamina II in some species ( Bao etal . 2002 , Woodbury etal . 2008 ) . Nevertheless , these structural changes , if they do occur , may be an anatomical sub - strate for the entry of low - threshold A β ﬁber input into nociceptive pathways after nerve injury . Neurodegeneration and Chronic Pain Both primary sensory and dorsal horn neu - rons die after peripheral nerve injury . Primary afferents degenerate after transection of their peripheral axons , with a much greater loss of small - diameter neurons , including nociceptors , than large myelinated neurons ( Okamoto etal . 2001 , Tandrup etal . 2000 ) . A loss of ∼ 20 % of superﬁcialdorsalhornneuronsoccursafterpar - tial peripheral nerve injury . The degeneration of spinal neurons occurs protracted over sev - eral weeks and is most likely a consequence of sustained ectopic activity of primary sensory afferents and glutamate - mediated excitotoxi - city ( Scholz etal . 2005 ) . Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) investigations in patients with chronic neuropathic pain hint that neurode - generation may also occur in the brain . Voxel - based morphometry shows decreases in gray matter volume and density in MRIs of the brain of patients with chronic back pain , phantom pain , migraine , tension - type headache , and ﬁ - bromyalgia , although with varying degree and regional distribution ( May 2008 ) . The nature of these structural changes remains to be de - termined , as well as whether neurodegenera - tion is a cause and if analgesic treatment can prevent the changes . These ﬁndings raise the possibility that neuropathic pain may have el - ements that resemble neurodegenerative dis - eases and requires neuroprotective treatment strategies . Neuro - Immune Interactions In the PNS , immune surveillance is performed by macrophages , which identify and clear cel - lular debris and present surface antigens to ac - tivate T - lymphoctyes . Both macrophages and T - lymphocytes communicate via cytokines and chemokines with neurons , Schwann cells , and DRG satellite cells . Macrophage activation is a central component of the Wallerian de - generation distal to axonal injury , and im - mune activation in the injured nerve and DRG appears to contribute to pain hypersensitiv - ity ( Scholz & Woolf 2007 ) . Microglia , the macrophages of the CNS , are massively acti - vated in the dorsal horn soon after peripheral nerve injury . Microglial activation occurs in a topographically organized fashion close to the central terminals of injured afferents ( Beggs & Salter 2007 , Scholz etal . 2008 ) , and mi - croglial cells release many immune modulators that contribute to the induction and mainte - nance of neuropathic pain by altering neuronal function ( Saab etal . 2008 , Suter etal . 2007 ) ( Table 1 ) . Fractalkine ( CX3CL1 ) , for example , is expressed by neurons and astrocytes , whereas its receptor CX3CR3 is expressed on microglia , suggesting a signaling role by the chemokine betweenthesecells ( Milliganetal . 2008 ) . CCL2 ( MCP - 1 ) and its receptor CCR2 are both up - regulated in the DRG and distributed to the spinal cord after nerve injury ( White etal . 2007 ) . Intrathecal administration of CX3CL1 or CCL2 produces pain in na¨ıve animals , while their neutralization prevents neuropathic pain hypersensitivity ( Abbadie 2005 , Watkins etal . 2007 ) . Signaling molecules that act on microglia in the spinal cord after nerve injury include ATP which through activation of P2X4 and P2X7 receptors ( Inoue 2006 , Inoue etal . 2007 , Trang etal . 2006 ) leads to BDNF release and IL1 β synthesis , respectively . Microglia both produce and are a target of the C5a anaphylatoxin pep - tide , a member of the complement system ( Grifﬁn etal . 2007 , Mika 2008 ) . The Toll - like receptors TLR - 2 , TLR - 3 and TLR - 4 are also critically involved in immune - mediated pain 14 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Table 1 Immune modulators of neuropathic pain Drug Mechanism of action Effect in preclinical neuropathic models Review / reference Minocycline Tetracycline antibiotic . Immunosuppression in part mediated through p38 MAP kinase inhibition . Inhibits microglial activation . Reduces tactile allodynia most effectively when treatment begins prior to nerve injury Mika 2008 , Scholz & Woolf 2007 Propentofylline , AV - 411 , Pentoxifylline Nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitors Reduce mechanical allodynia by suppressing microglial and astrocyte activity . Often associated with a decrease in proinﬂammatory cytokines Mika 2008 , Scholz & Woolf 2007 Methotrexate Reduces folate , blocks de novo purine and thymidylate synthesis Inhibits microglial activation and proliferation . Most effective when given early after nerve injury Scholz etal . 2008 Nucleotide receptor antagonists Activation of P 2 X and P 2 Y receptors modulates the activity of peripheral immune cells and microglia Block the activation of peripheral macrophages and spinal microglia Inoue etal . 2007 p38 MAP kinase inhibitors Inhibit important signaling pathways in microglial cells Reduce tactile allodynia . Most effective when treatment begins prior to nerve injury Ji & Suter 2007 Neutralizing antibodies and receptor - trapping strategies Modulators of cytokine synthesis and activity directed against IL1 , IL6 , IL10 , TNF , and others Reduce the biological effects of proinﬂammatory cytokines . IL10 has antiinﬂammatory activity Mika 2008 , Watkins etal . 2007 Complement inhibitors Block activation of complement factors expressed by microglia Inhibition of complement pathways including the activation of C5 , which acts as an immune cell chemoattractant in the spinal cord dorsal horn Mika 2008 , Grifﬁn et al . 2007 Cannabinoids Activate the CB 2 receptor , which is expressed predominantly on microglia CB 2 regulates immune cell proliferation and migration . CB 2 agonists reduce mechanical allodynia Romero - Sandoval etal . 2008 signaling in the dorsal horn ( DeLeo etal . 2004 , Guo & Schluesener 2007 , Obata etal . 2008 ) . Microglial responses to nerve injury are char - acterized by activating p38 - MAP kinase , ex - tracellular signal – related kinase ( ERK ) , and Src - family kinases ( Ji & Suter 2007 ) . Another example for neuron - glia interactions contribut - ing to neuropathic pain are the matrix met - alloproteinases MMP2 and MMP9 . They are produced by both neurons and glia and me - diate pain hypersensitivity by initiating IL1 β cleavage and microglial and astrocytic activa - tion ( Kawasaki etal . 2008 ) . Inhibition of im - mune function represents a major avenue for therapeutic intervention for neuropathic pain ( Table 1 ) . Seeing Pain in Patients Preclinical research focuses largely on single molecules , changes in particular neurons or deﬁned circuits , and how they contribute to behavioral alterations that are considered sur - rogates of neuropathic pain . Functional mag - neticresonanceimaging ( fMRI ) usesbloodoxy - gen level dependent ( BOLD ) signals to detect changesincerebralactivityinpatientswithneu - ropathic pain , and this technique allows the www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 15 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 study of discriminative sensory , emotional , mo - tivational , and modulatory responses in partic - ular regions of the brain and brain stem ( May 2007 , Tracey 2008 , Tracey & Mantyh 2007 ) . The reorganization of the somatosensory cor - tex after peripheral nerve lesions reveals the plasticity of the brain ( Flor 2003 ) . Patients with chronic pain show strong activation of the pre - frontal cortex , the same area that shows reduc - tioningraymatterdensity ( Balikietal . 2008 ) , as well as disruption in resting functional connec - tivity of widespread cortical areas ( Baliki etal . 2008 ) . Imaging studies provide an opportunity to obtain objective measures of subjective sen - sations to identify which areas of the brain are likely involved in the processing of neuropathic pain and to evaluate the location and mecha - nisms of treatment effects ( Becerra etal . 2006 ) . THE NEUROPATHIC PAIN PHENOTYPE Animal Surrogate Models Many rodent models of neuropathic pain have been developed ( Table 2 ) . Some have been designed to mimic human diseases , others to explore pathophysiological mechanisms in the nervous system , and some as a convenient means to screen for putative analgesics . Al - though these models collectively have great utility in exploring the maladaptive plasticity induced by neural damage , they are generally less useful as direct surrogates of pain pheno - types in patients and , by themselves , not al - ways good predictors of the involvement of particular targets or processes in human neuro - pathic pain . How distinct forms of neural dam - age activate different sets of changes in the no - ciceptive system , particularly over a time course that is relevant to the transition from acute to chronic pain , and how these changes engage differentoutcomemeasuresneedtobecarefully explored . Reﬂexive changes in the thresholds to deﬁned stimuli , complex behaviors that cap - ture sensory and mood disturbances , and alter - ations in operant behavior or choice paradigms that may reﬂect spontaneous pain also need to be investigated further . We still do not have enough insight into which speciﬁcally pain - related mechanisms in the nervous system are responsible for behavioral outcome measures in animals . Because subjective symptoms cannot be evaluated , the representation of neuropathic pain in animal models is necessarily incomplete and the human experience of pain too complex to be fully reproduced . Outcome measures in rodent models rely on motor activity , such as withdrawal or re - duced weight bearing , and therefore locomotor as well as sensory function are assayed ( Vierck etal . 2008 ) . Nevertheless , tactile allodynia in rodent models appears to correspond with neu - ropathicmechanicalhypersensitivityinpatients ( Koltzenburg etal . 1994 , Rowbotham & Fields 1996 ) . Pharmacological studies show that ef - fective analgesic drugs for human neuropathic pain ( gabapentin , morphine , ﬂuoxetine ) but not ineffective ones ( indomethacin ) also reduce ro - dent tactile allodynia ( LaBuda & Little 2005 ) . Furthermore , heat hyperalgesia and tactile sen - sitivity do not correlate in mice ( Mogil etal . 1999b ) or in humans ( Koltzenburg etal . 1994 , Rowbotham & Fields 1996 ) . Lost in Translation Treating neuropathic pain in patients remains a major challenge because relief is only par - tial in most patients , and responders to treat - ment cannot be identiﬁed . One reason for the lack of clinical improvement is the inability to determine active pain mechanisms in patients . Quantitative sensory testing and electrophysio - logical investigations such as nerve conduction studies or evoked potentials , though they reveal informationonthefunctionofdifferenttypesof sensory nerve ﬁbers , do not provide insight into thecellularandmolecularprocessesresponsible for the pain ( Hansson etal . 2007 ) . Functional imaging reveals abnormal processing of sen - sory input in patients but is limited to research studies ( Tracey & Mantyh 2007 ) . Skin biopsies document sensory ﬁber loss as an indicator of deafferentation ; however , they are invasive and not suitable for routine clinical practice . These 16 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 T a b l e 2 A n i m a l m od e l s o f n e u r op a t h i c p a i n a M od e l N a t u r e o f i n j u r y E x t e n t o f n e u r a l d a m a g e a n d l e s i o n s i t e B e h av i o r a l p h e n o t y p e C li n i ca l c o rr e l a t e S c i a t i c n e r v e t r a n s e c t i o n ( W a ll e t a l . 1979 ) T r a n s e c t i o n a n d li g a t i o n o f s c i a t i c n e r ve ∼ 60 % o f D R G c e ll s ; m i d n e r ve . A N e r ve t r a u m a , i a t r o g e n i c n e r ve i n j u r y P a r t i a l s c i a t i c n e r v e li g a t i o n ( S e l t z e r e t a l . 1990 ) P a r t i a l li g a t i o n o f s c i a t i c n e r ve ∼ 30 % o f D R G c e ll s ; m i d n e r ve ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A , M H , T H , C A P a r t i a l p e r i p h e r a l n e r ve i n j u r y Sp i n a l n e r v e li g a t i o n ( K i m & C h u n g 1992 ) L i g a t i o n o f t h e L 5 a n d L 6 s p i n a l n e r ve s ∼ 100 % D R G c e ll s ; p r o x i m a l n e r ve ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A , M H , T H , C A P r o x i m a l p e r i p h e r a l n e r ve d a m a g e , e . g . , a f t e r d i s c p r o l a p s e Sp a r e d n e r v e i n j u r y ( D e c o s t e r d & W oo l f 2000 ) L i g a t i o n a n d t r a n s e c t i o n o f t w o o f t h r ee d i s t a l s c i a t i c n e r ve b r a n c h e s ∼ 40 % o f D R G c e ll s ; d i s t a l n e r ve . M A , M H , C A P a r t i a l p e r i p h e r a l n e r ve d a m a g e C h r o n i c c o n s t r i c t i o n i n j u r y ( B e nn e tt & X i e 1988 ) L oo s e li g a t u r e o f t h e s c i a t i c n e r ve w i t h c h r o m i c g u t s u t u r e M a i n l y m y e li n a t e d ax o n s , < 30 % o f D R G c e ll s ; m i d n e r ve ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A , M H , T H , C A N e r ve e n t r a p m e n t , e . g . , ca r p a l t u nn e l s y n d r o m e S c i a t i c i n ﬂ a mm a t o r y n e u r op a t h y ( C h ac u r e t a l . 20 0 1 ) P e r i n e u r a l i n j e c t i o n o f i mm u n e ac t i v a t o r ( z y m o s a n o r C F A ) N o ax o n a l l o ss ; s e c o n d a r y D R G c e ll d a m a g e ; m i d n e r ve M A P e r i p h e r a l n e u r i t i s P e r i p h e r a l n e r v e d e m y e li n a t i o n ( W a ll ac e e t a l . 2003 ) I mm u n e - o r t o x i n - m e d i a t e d d e m y e l i n a t i o n M i n i m a l ax o n l o ss ; s e c o n d a r y D R G c e ll d a m a g e ; m i d n e r ve M A , T H D e m y e li n a t i o n , e . g . , d i a b e t i c n e u r op a t h y D i a b e t i c n e u r op a t h y ( S u lli v a n e t a l . 2008 ) S t r e p t o z o t o c i n , d i e t , g e n e t i c m od e l s P r i m a r il y d i s t a l ax o n l o ss ; s y s t e m i c i n j u r y o f t h e P N S ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A , T H y po D i a b e t i c n e u r op a t h y V i r a l n e u r op a t h y ( W a ll ac e e t a l . 2007 ) H e r p e s s i m p l e x v i r u s , v a r i z e ll a z o s t e r v i r u s , H I V ( g p 120 ) D i s t a l ax o n d a m a g e ; D R G c e ll d a m a g e ; d i s t a l n e r ve ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A Z o s t e r - a ss o c i a t e d p a i n , po s t h e r p e t i c n e u r a l g i a H I V - a ss o c i a t e d n e u r op a t h y D r u g - i n d u c e d n e u r op a t h y ( P e l t i e r & R u ss e ll 2002 ) V i n c r i s t i n e , p ac li t ax e l , c i s p l a t i n D i s t a l ax o n l o ss ; D R G c e ll d a m a g e ; s y s t e m i c i n j u r y o f t h e P N S ; i n t ac t ax o n s i n t e r ac t i n g w i t h S c h w a nn c e ll s M A P o l y n e u r op a t h y ca u s e d b y t u m o r c h e m o t h e r a p y a A bb r ev i a t i o n s : A , a u t o t o m y ; C A , c o l d a ll od y n i a ; M A , m e c h a n i ca l a ll od y n i a ; M H , m e c h a n i ca l h y p e r a l g e s i a ; T H , t h e r m a l ( h e a t ) h y p e r a l g e s i a ; T H y po , t h e r m a l h y po a l g e s i a www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 17 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 I denti fi cation of res p onders to mechanistica ll y de fi ned treatments Pain subty p es estab l ished in c l inica l tria l s Cellular and molecular p ain mechanisms E nvironmental factors : Nervous system l esion or disease Comorbidity Access to hea l th care Ana l gesic treatment a b G enetic factors : Inherent susceptibi l ity to deve l op c l inica ll y re l evant pain G enera l pain sensitivity Neura l and immune capacities for adaptation versus ma l adaptation 10 0 0 5 7 Pain p henoty p e of the individua l patient 0 Spontaneouspain Dysesthesia M echanica l a ll odynia Pinprick hypera l gesia Heat hypera l gesia Co l d a ll odynia Pain intensity for each symptom and sign , measured on a numerica l rating sca l e 10 0 Spontaneouspain Dysesthesia M echanica l a ll odynia Pinprick hypera l gesia Heat hypera l gesia Co l d a ll odynia M atching of the p atient ’ s p henoty p e with a treatment - responsive pain subtype 10 0 0 5 7 0 T argeted p rescri p tion of ana l gesic treatment Figure 4 Phenotypic classiﬁcation of pain . ( a ) Environmental and genetic factors determine the recruitment of adaptive and maladaptive neurobiological mechanisms . Patients will , depending on the mechanisms active , exhibit distinct constellations of symptoms and signs that constitute their pain phenotype . ( b ) When symptoms and signs are evaluated with standardized assessment tools , the phenotype of an individual patient can be compared with pain subtypes established in clinical trials . Correlation of treatment response with a matching pain subtype will then allow targeted analgesic therapy . difﬁculties have prevented the establishment of mechanism - based classiﬁcations of neuro - pathic pain and the development of treatment strategies targeted at particular mechanisms ( Figure 4 ) . Subtypes of Clinical Neuropathic Pain Diagnostic labels for neuropathic pain con - ditions are usually based on anatomy , as for example in small ﬁber neuropathy or radic - ular low back pain , or etiology , as in pos - therpetic neuralgia or diabetic polyneuropathy . They designate the underlying lesion or dis - ease of the nervous system without revealing features of the pain that may reﬂect the mecha - nisms responsible . Conditions associated with neuropathic pain produce a variety of symp - toms and signs , some of which correlate closely with a particular disease , such as tic douloureux 18 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 in trigeminal neuralgia . More often , however , symptoms and signs overlap across diagnos - tic entities , indicating both that some mecha - nisms responsible for the manifestation of pain - related symptoms and signs may be common among different conditions and that different mechanisms may produce a similar outcome . To develop a successful targeted approach to pain management , it will be important to deter - mine , for example , if a patient is suffering from spontaneousorevokedpain , whichmechanisms arecausingthepain , andhowthesemechanisms respond to drugs with different mechanisms of actions . Instead , crude rating scales of global pain intensity are usually employed in clini - cal practice and research trials to measure pain and the efﬁcacy of analgesic drugs . Pain assess - ment often constitutes an evaluation of sensory painqualities , theaffectiveresponsetopain , and physicalandpsychosocialfunctioning , butnone of these parameters reveals neurobiological fea - tures of pain that can be targeted by treatment interventions . Treatment recommendations for neuro - pathic pain are issued for particular condi - tionsdeﬁnedbydiseaseetiology ( Finnerupetal . 2005 ) , despite the fact that the etiology of neu - ral damage is not equivalent to the neurobio - logical mechanisms responsible for persisting pain . Assuming that all forms of neuropathic pain are similar , evidence of analgesic efﬁcacy in one disease is often applied to neuropathic pain in general ( Finnerup etal . 2005 ) . As a conse - quence , algorithms designed to determine the best analgesic treatment for an individual pa - tientfocusoncomorbiditiesandassociatedrisks of adverse effects and not on the nature or phe - notype of pain ( Dworkin etal . 2007 ) . Given the inability to identify pain mechanisms in patients , a standardized and comprehensive classiﬁcation of pain phenotypes may provide thenextbestapproachtocapturerelevantinfor - mation that may indirectly reﬂect pain mech - anisms . To deﬁne such subtypes of pain , it would be necessary to comprehensively exam - ineconstellationsofpain - relatedsymptomsand signs and reveal distinct and reliable patterns of association . Single symptoms or signs are not suitable because they may be caused by different mechanisms ; for example , mechani - cal allodynia is observed in models of periph - eral or central sensitization , reduced inhibitory control in the spinal cord , or after microglial activation in the dorsal horn . A standardized assessment of symptoms and signs would al - low investigators to test the effects of anal - gesic drugs on unique features of particular pain subtypes and thus improve the translation of preclinical ﬁndings ( Joshi etal . 2006 ) . This information might help predict treatment re - sponse in individual patients by matching their pain proﬁles with established pain subtypes that are known to respond to certain treatments ( Figure 4 ) . GENETIC DETERMINANTS OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN Geneticvariantsthataltertheriskofdeveloping neuropathic pain and the degree of its severity offer an opportunity for investigators to deﬁne molecular mechanisms ; they may also provide diagnostic tools and targets for treatment . Two general strategies are possible for human ge - netic studies : identifying rare mutations with large effects that produce distinct genetic dis - eases , or studying common genetic variants with smaller effects in large patient cohorts . Inbred mouse strains can be used to establish the extent to which neuropathic pain – like be - havior is heritable , whereas expression proﬁling and mutation studies can identify those genes that affect the pain phenotype , and by which mechanism . Analysis of analgesic targets can also identify genetic modulators of neuropathic pain ( Table 3 ) . Pain Heritability Because many causes of neural damage as - sociated with neuropathic pain are sporadic , it is rarely possible to rely on family history and classic genetic techniques to evaluate the degree to which a heritable susceptibility for www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 19 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Table 3 Pharmacological evidence for genes involved in neuropathic pain Gene product ( drug target ) Site of action Drug Molecular mechanism of action Clinical utility in neuropathic pain Opioid receptor ( μ , OPRM1 ) CNS Morphine , oxycodone , fentanyl OPRM1 agonists inhibit synaptic transmission , activate central inhibitory circuits Mixed results ; some utility in PHN and DPN . Multiple routes of administration available Voltage - gated sodium channels PNS Lidocaine , bupivacaine Nonselective sodium channel blocker Topical application in peripheral NP , e . g . , in PHN CNS / PNS Carbamazepine , lamotrigine , mexiletine , amitryptiline Nonselective sodium channel blockers stabilize an inactive channel state Trigeminal neuralgia , phantom limb pain Calcium channel ( N - type , Cav2 . 2 ) CNS ω - conotoxin N - type calcium channel blocker reduces neurotransmitter release Intrathecal delivery for severe chronic pain Calcium channel auxiliary subunits ( α 2 δ 1 or CACNA2D1 ) PNS / CNS Gabapentin , pregabalin Bind to the α 2 δ 1 - subunit of voltage - gated calcium channels , reduce trafﬁcking of the channels , decrease transmitter release from primary afferents Effective in peripheral NP NMDA receptor CNS Ketamine , memantine , dextromethorphan NMDA receptor antagonists reduce central sensitization Limited by adverse effects Monoamine transporters ( NAT and SERT ) CNS Tricyclic antidepressants , selective noradrenaline ( SNRIs ) or serotonin ( SSRIs ) reuptake inhibitors Block monoamine reuptake , reinforce brain stem inhibitory pathways Effective in NP , especially PHN and painful diabetic neuropathy Cannabiniod receptors ( CNR1 and CNR2 ) PNS / CNS δ - 9 - tetrahydrocannabinol , cannabidiol , synthetic cannabinoids CNR1 agonists reduce nociceptor activation and transmitter release . CNR2 suppress immune reactions Effective in central pain ( multiple sclerosis ) TRPV1 PNS Capsaicin , resiniferatoxin TRPV1 agonists desensitize C - ﬁber nociceptors and provoke their degeneration Topical application in peripheral NP Abbreviations : DPH , diabetic peripheral neuropathy ; NP , neuropathic pain ; PHN , post - herpetic neuralgia . developing the pain is involved . However , two recent twin studies using experimental ( noci - ceptive ) pain models in healthy volunteers have estimated the impact of inherited heritability of pain sensitivity with a broad range 20 % – 60 % ( Nielsen etal . 2008 , Norbury etal . 2007 ) , the signiﬁcance of which is difﬁcult to interpret . A study using 11 inbred mice strains tested with 12 different pain measures revealed heritabil - ity between 30 % and 76 % ( Mogil etal . 1999a ) . With respect to pain - like behavior following nerve injury , three measures were recorded : the paw withdrawal threshold for mechanical stim - uli , the thermal pain threshold ( latency of re - sponse ) , and autotomy ( scratching and biting of the denervated hindpaw ) . These behaviors gave heritability estimates of 45 % , 45 % , and 63 % , respectively , and suggest that the neuropathic pain phenotype varies widely in outbred rodent strains , as it does in patients . 20 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Genetic Risk of Developing Neuropathic Pain In humans , the genetic risk of developing neu - ropathic pain after neural injury , its extent , presentation , and duration are very likely to re - sult from multiple risk - conferring genes . Case - control studies using whole - genome analysis or candidate gene association studies can be con - ductedtoidentifythesegenes . Associationstud - ies compare allele frequencies between unre - lated subjects with and without a particular trait to identify DNA regions correlated with the trait . Alleles are DNA codes at a given position on the genome that constitute markers of coin - herited regions of DNA known as haplotype blocks . A haplotype block signiﬁcantly coinher - ited with a trait is a strong indication that the DNA contains a version of a gene that in some way modiﬁes the carriers’ phenotype to create the trait . Candidate gene association studies have preliminarily identiﬁed polymorphisms in catechol - O - methyltransferase ( COMT ) that modulate nociceptive and dysfunctional ( tem - poromandibular joint disorder ) pain ( Di - atchenko etal . 2005 , Nackley etal . 2006 ) . COMT is an enzyme in the metabolism cascade for dopamine , norepinephrine , and epinephrine . Higher COMT activity leads to lower transmitter and pain levels ( Diatchenko etal . 2007 ) . Other such association studies have linked polymorphisms in the μ - opioid receptor 1 ( OPRM1 ) to morphine sensitiv - ity ( Lotsch & Geisslinger 2007 ) and in the melanocortin - 1 receptor ( MCR1 ) to κ - opioid - induced analgesia in females ( Mogil etal . 2003 ) . No whole - genome association study has been conducted yet for neuropathic pain . The problems are formidable : how to phenotype pa - tients in a standardized way to eliminate spuri - ous associations , which controls to use , and how large the cohorts need to be to retain sensitivity buteliminatefalsepositiveresultsthatmayarise from multiple testing . An estimated 2000 – 5000 patients and controls would be required for studies assaying 1 million SNPs at a signiﬁcance level of < 10 − 7 ( Wellcome - Consortium 2007 ) . Potential whole - genome association studies in - clude comparisons of patients who do and do not develop neuropathic pain after iatrogenic nerve injury and diabetic patients with periph - eralneuropathywithandwithoutpain . Another approach is to use alternative experimental methods to identify potential gene targets that canthenbetestedinsmallercohortsforassocia - tion . This approach has led to the identiﬁcation of a haplotype in the enzyme GTP cyclohydro - lase1 ( GCH1 ) thatreducestheriskofpersistent radicular back pain after discectomy ( Tegeder etal . 2006 ) . This GCH1 haplotype has a pop - ulation frequency of 15 . 4 % ( ∼ 2 % – 3 % of in - dividuals have two copies and 20 % have one copy ) , and homozygous carriers display lower experimental pain thresholds than do indi - viduals with no copy ( Tegeder etal . 2006 , 2008 ) . White blood cells from individuals with the haplotype have normal basal BH4 lev - els , but GCH1 activity fails to increase in response to a stress challenge ( Tegeder etal . 2006 ) . GCH1 was identiﬁed in a study using ex - pression proﬁles to identify genes regulated in the DRG of rats after peripheral nerve in - jury ( Tegeder etal . 2006 ) . Analysis of three dis - tinct nerve injury models consistently indicated de novo expression of enzymes involved in the synthesis and recycling of tetrahydrobiopterin ( BH4 ) . BH4 is an essential cofactor for aro - matic amine hydroxylases that synthesize sero - tonin and catecholamines and for all nitric ox - ide synthases ( Tegeder etal . 2006 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Increased BH4 synthesis in the injured DRG contributes to increase nitric oxide release and produces a large calcium ﬂux in DRG neurons . GCH1 is the rate - limiting enzyme for the syn - thesis of BH4 , and inhibition of GCH1 pro - ducesanalgesiainrodentmodelsofneuropathic pain . These ﬁndings demonstrate the validity of translational pain research and the power of studying neuropathic pain in parallel in preclin - ical and clinical models . www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 21 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Figure 5 A summary of the major mechanisms connecting tetrahydrobiopterin ( BH4 ) functions as a cofactor and its role in chronic pain . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Neural damage to either the PNS or CNS provokes maladaptive responses in nociceptive pathways that drive spontaneous pain and sensory ampliﬁcation . This maladaptive plas - ticity leads to persistent changes and , therefore , needs to be considered a disease state of the nervous system in its own right , independent of the etiological factor that triggered it . 2 . Multiple mechanisms are responsible for neuropathic pain . In the PNS , they include altered gene expression and changes in ion channels that lead to ectopic activity . In the CNS , the regulation of many genes also changes . In addition , synaptic facilitation and loss of inhibition at multiple levels of the neuraxis produce central ampliﬁcation . Neuronal cell death and aberrant synaptic connectivity provide the structural basis for persistently altered processing of both nociceptive and innocuous afferent input . 22 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 3 . Neural damage provokes vigorous and highly organized neuroimmune interactions that playakeyroleininitiatingmanycellularmechanismsthatunderliepersistentneuropathic pain . 4 . Genetically determined susceptibility is likely to combine with the environment to de - termine the risk of developing neuropathic pain . 5 . Given the complexity of numerous intertwined genetic , cellular , and molecular compo - nents that cause neuropathic pain , clinical classiﬁcations need to incorporate multiple aspects of the pain phenotype to guide the identiﬁcation of underlying mechanisms and help assess the likelihood of response to treatment . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . Will selective sensory neuron – speciﬁc sodium channel blockers have utility in peripher - ally derived neuropathic pain ? 2 . Theutilityofpreclinicalmodelsofneuropathicpain , forcandidategeneidentiﬁcationand validation , pain mechanisms deﬁnition , and the investigation of treatment interventions need to be critically evaluated . 3 . Will it be possible to reveal mechanisms of neuropathic pain in humans ? 4 . Will a mechanism - based clinical approach lead to improvements in diagnosis and treatment ? 5 . Will disease - modifying therapy prevent the development of neuropathic pain ? 6 . Once established , can neuropathic pain ever be reversed ? 7 . Will genes identiﬁed by expression proﬁling and SNP association studies provide targets for novel analgesics and biomarkers of neuropathic pain ? 8 . Whole genome association studies in carefully phenotyped cohorts are needed to identify genetic contributions to the risk of developing neuropathic pain . DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS C . W . is Chairman of the scientiﬁc advisory board of Solace Pharmaceuticals , which develops therapies for neuropathic pain and has licensed submitted patents on tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis and polymorphisms in GCH1 from the Massachusetts General Hospital . He is or has been a consultant / advisor to Hydra Biosciences , Pﬁzer , Abbott , and GlaxoSmithKline and has received researchsupportfromPﬁzerandGlaxoSmithKline . J . S . hasbeenaconsultanttoPﬁzerandreceives or has received research support from Pﬁzer and GlaxoSmithKline . M . C . is a consultant to Solace Pharmaceuticals . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank the NIH for support . www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 23 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 LITERATURE CITED Abbadie C . 2005 . Chemokines , chemokine receptors and pain . Trends Immunol . 26 : 529 – 34 Abrahamsen B , Zhao J , Asante CO , Cendan CM , Marsh S , etal . 2008 . The cell and molecular basis of mechanical , cold , and inﬂammatory pain . Science 321 : 702 – 5 Altier C , Dale CS , Kisilevsky AE , Chapman K , Castiglioni AJ , etal . 2007 . Differential role of N - type calcium channel splice isoforms in pain . J . Neurosci . 27 : 6363 – 73 AmirR , KocsisJD , DevorM . 2005 . Multipleinteractingsitesofectopicspikeelectrogenesisinprimarysensory neurons . J . Neurosci . 25 : 2576 – 85 Anand P , Birch R . 2002 . Restoration of sensory function and lack of long - term chronic pain syndromes after brachial plexus injury in human neonates . Brain 125 : 113 – 22 Baba H , Ji RR , Kohno T , Moore KA , Ataka T , etal . 2003 . Removal of GABAergic inhibition facilitates polysynaptic A ﬁber - mediated excitatory transmission to the superﬁcial spinal dorsal horn . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 24 : 818 – 30 Balasubramanyan S , Stemkowski PL , Stebbing MJ , Smith PA . 2006 . Sciatic chronic constriction injury pro - ducescell - type - speciﬁcchangesintheelectrophysiologicalpropertiesofratsubstantiagelatinosaneurons . J . Neurophysiol . 96 : 579 – 90 BalikiMN , GehaPY , ApkarianAV , ChialvoDR . 2008 . Beyondfeeling : chronicpainhurtsthebrain , disrupting the default - mode network dynamics . J . Neurosci . 28 : 1398 – 403 BaoL , WangHF , CaiHJ , TongYG , JinSX , etal . 2002 . Peripheralaxotomyinducesonlyverylimitedsprouting of coarse myelinated afferents into inner lamina II of rat spinal cord . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 : 175 – 85 Becerra L , Morris S , Bazes S , Gostic R , Sherman S , etal . 2006 . Trigeminal neuropathic pain alters responses in CNS circuits to mechanical ( brush ) and thermal ( cold and heat ) stimuli . J . Neurosci . 26 : 10646 – 57 Bee LA , Dickenson AH . 2008 . Descending facilitation from the brainstem determines behavioural and neu - ronal hypersensitivity following nerve injury and efﬁcacy of pregabalin . Pain 140 ( 1 ) : 209 – 23 Beggs S , Salter MW . 2007 . Stereological and somatotopic analysis of the spinal microglial response to periph - eral nerve injury . Brain Behav . Immun . 21 : 624 – 33 Benn SC , Woolf CJ . 2004 . Adult neuron survival strategies—slamming on the brakes . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 : 686 – 700 Bennett GJ , Xie YK . 1988 . A peripheral mononeuropathy in rat that produces disorders of pain sensation like those seen in man . Pain 33 : 87 – 107 Berta T , Poirot O , Pertin M , Ji RR , Kellenberger S , Decosterd I . 2008 . Transcriptional and functional pro - ﬁles of voltage - gated Na ( + ) channels in injured and non - injured DRG neurons in the SNI model of neuropathic pain . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 37 : 196 – 208 Bester H , Beggs S , Woolf CJ . 2000 . Changes in tactile stimuli - induced behavior and c - Fos expression in the superﬁcial dorsal horn and in parabrachial nuclei after sciatic nerve crush . J . Comp . Neurol . 428 : 45 – 61 Biggs JE , Yates JM , Loescher AR , Clayton NM , Robinson PP , Boissonade FM . 2008 . Effect of SB - 750364 , a speciﬁc TRPV1 receptor antagonist , on injury - induced ectopic discharge in the lingual nerve . Neurosci . Lett . 443 ( 1 ) : 41 – 45 Binshtok AM , Wang H , Zimmermann K , Amaya F , Vardeh D , etal . 2008 . Nociceptors are interleukin - 1 β sensors . J . Neurosci . In press Bostock H , Campero M , Serra J , Ochoa JL . 2005 . Temperature - dependent double spikes in C - nociceptors of neuropathic pain patients . Brain 128 : 2154 – 63 Bouhassira D , Lanteri - Minet M , Attal N , Laurent B , Touboul C . 2008 . Prevalence of chronic pain with neuropathic characteristics in the general population . Pain 136 : 380 – 87 Cafferty WB , McGee AW , Strittmatter SM . 2008 . Axonal growth therapeutics : regeneration or sprouting or plasticity ? Trends Neurosci . 31 : 215 – 20 Campbell JN , Meyer RA . 2006 . Mechanisms of neuropathic pain . Neuron 52 : 77 – 92 Campbell JN , Raja SN , Meyer RA , Mackinnon SE . 1988 . Myelinated afferents signal the hyperalgesia asso - ciated with nerve injury . Pain 32 : 89 – 94 Chacur M , Milligan ED , Gazda LS , Armstrong C , Wang H , etal . 2001 . A new model of sciatic inﬂammatory neuritis ( SIN ) : induction of unilateral and bilateral mechanical allodynia following acute unilateral peri - sciatic immune activation in rats . Pain 94 : 231 – 44 24 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 ChengHT , SuzukiM , HegartyDM , XuQ , WeyerbacherAR , etal . 2008 . Inﬂammatorypain - inducedsignaling events following a conditional deletion of the N - methyl - d - aspartate receptor in spinal cord dorsal horn . Neuroscience 155 ( 3 ) : 948 – 58 Chizh BA , Gohring M , Troster A , Quartey GK , Schmelz M , Koppert W . 2007 . Effects of oral pregabalin and aprepitant on pain and central sensitization in the electrical hyperalgesia model in human volunteers . Br . J . Anaesth . 98 : 246 – 54 Christoph T , Bahrenberg G , De Vry J , Englberger W , Erdmann VA , etal . 2008 . Investigation of TRPV1 loss - of - functionphenotypesintransgenicshRNAexpressingandknockoutmice . Mol . CellNeurosci . 37 : 579 – 89 Costigan M , Befort K , Karchewski L , Grifﬁn RS , D’Urso D , etal . 2002 . Replicate high - density rat genome oligonucleotidemicroarraysrevealhundredsofregulatedgenesinthedorsalrootganglionafterperipheral nerve injury . BMC Neurosci . 3 : 16 Coull JA , Beggs S , Boudreau D , Boivin D , Tsuda M , etal . 2005 . BDNF from microglia causes the shift in neuronal anion gradient underlying neuropathic pain . Nature 438 : 1017 – 21 Cox JJ , Reimann F , Nicholas AK , Thornton G , Roberts E , etal . 2006 . An SCN9A channelopathy causes congenital inability to experience pain . Nature 444 : 894 – 98 Crown ED , Gwak YS , Ye Z , Johnson KM , Hulsebosch CE . 2008 . Activation of p38 MAP kinase is involved in central neuropathic pain following spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 213 ( 2 ) : 257 – 67 Decosterd I , Ji RR , Abdi S , Tate S , Woolf CJ . 2002 . The pattern of expression of the voltage - gated sodium channels Na ( v ) 1 . 8 and Na ( v ) 1 . 9 does not change in uninjured primary sensory neurons in experimental neuropathic pain models . Pain 96 : 269 – 77 Decosterd I , Woolf CJ . 2000 . Spared nerve injury : an animal model of persistent peripheral neuropathic pain . Pain 87 : 149 – 58 DeLeo JA , Tanga FY , Tawﬁk VL . 2004 . Neuroimmune activation and neuroinﬂammation in chronic pain and opioid tolerance / hyperalgesia . Neuroscientist 10 : 40 – 52 Detloff MR , Fisher LC , McGaughy V , Longbrake EE , Popovich PG , Basso DM . 2008 . Remote activation of microglia and pro - inﬂammatory cytokines predict the onset and severity of below - level neuropathic pain after spinal cord injury in rats . Exp . Neurol . 212 : 337 – 47 Devigili G , Tugnoli V , Penza P , Camozzi F , Lombardi R , etal . 2008 . The diagnostic criteria for small ﬁbre neuropathy : from symptoms to neuropathology . Brain 131 : 1912 – 25 Devor M . 2006 . Centralization , central sensitization and neuropathic pain . Focus on “sciatic chronic con - striction injury produces cell - type - speciﬁc changes in the electrophysiological properties of rat substantia gelatinosa neurons . ” J . Neurophysiol . 96 : 522 – 23 DhakaA , ViswanathV , PatapoutianA . 2006 . TRPionchannelsandtemperaturesensation . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 29 : 135 – 61 Diatchenko L , Nackley AG , Tchivileva IE , Shabalina SA , Maixner W . 2007 . Genetic architecture of human pain perception . Trends Genet . 23 : 605 – 13 Diatchenko L , Slade GD , Nackley AG , Bhalang K , Sigurdsson A , etal . 2005 . Genetic basis for individual variations in pain perception and the development of a chronic pain condition . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 : 135 – 43 Dieleman JP , Kerklaan J , Huygen FJ , Bouma PA , Sturkenboom MC . 2008 . Incidence rates and treatment of neuropathic pain conditions in the general population . Pain 137 : 681 – 88 Dong XW , Goregoaker S , Engler H , Zhou X , Mark L , etal . 2007 . Small interfering RNA - mediated se - lective knockdown of Na ( V ) 1 . 8 tetrodotoxin - resistant sodium channel reverses mechanical allodynia in neuropathic rats . Neuroscience 146 : 812 – 21 Drenth JP , Waxman SG . 2007 . Mutations in sodium - channel gene SCN9A cause a spectrum of human genetic pain disorders . J . Clin . Invest . 117 : 3603 – 9 Ducreux D , Attal N , Parker F , Bouhassira D . 2006 . Mechanisms of central neuropathic pain : a combined psychophysical and fMRI study in syringomyelia . Brain 129 : 963 – 76 Dworkin RH , Backonja M , Rowbotham MC , Allen RR , Argoff CR , etal . 2003 . Advances in neuropathic pain : diagnosis , mechanisms , and treatment recommendations . Arch . Neurol . 60 : 1524 – 34 Dworkin RH , O’Connor AB , Backonja M , Farrar JT , Finnerup NB , etal . 2007 . Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain : evidence - based recommendations . Pain 132 : 237 – 51 www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 25 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Ekberg J , Jayamanne A , Vaughan CW , Aslan S , Thomas L , etal . 2006 . muO - conotoxin MrVIB selectively blocks Nav1 . 8 sensory neuron speciﬁc sodium channels and chronic pain behavior without motor deﬁcits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 17030 – 35 Fields HL , Rowbotham M , Baron R . 1998 . Postherpetic neuralgia : irritable nociceptors and deafferentation . Neurobiol . Dis . 5 : 209 – 27 Finnerup NB , Otto M , McQuay HJ , Jensen TS , Sindrup SH . 2005 . Algorithm for neuropathic pain treatment : an evidence based proposal . Pain 118 : 289 – 305 Finnerup NB , Sindrup SH , Jensen TS . 2007a . Chronic neuropathic pain : mechanisms , drug targets and measurement . Fundam . Clin . Pharmacol . 21 : 129 – 36 Finnerup NB , Sorensen L , Biering - Sorensen F , Johannesen IL , Jensen TS . 2007b . Segmental hypersensitivity and spinothalamic function in spinal cord injury pain . Exp . Neurol . 207 : 139 – 49 Fischer MJ , Reeh PW . 2007 . Sensitization to heat through G - protein - coupled receptor pathways in the isolated sciatic mouse nerve . Eur . J . Neurosci . 25 : 3570 – 75 Flor H . 2003 . Remapping somatosensory cortex after injury . Adv . Neurol . 93 : 195 – 204 Fu Y , Han J , Ishola T , Scerbo M , Adwanikar H , etal . 2008 . PKA and ERK , but not PKC , in the amygdala contribute to pain - related synaptic plasticity and behavior . Mol . Pain . 4 : 26 Fukuoka T , Kobayashi K , Yamanaka H , Obata K , Dai Y , Noguchi K . 2008 . Comparative study of the distri - bution of the alpha - subunits of voltage - gated sodium channels in normal and axotomized rat dorsal root ganglion neurons . J . Comp . Neurol . 510 : 188 – 206 Gold MS , Weinreich D , Kim CS , Wang R , Treanor J , etal . 2003 . Redistribution of Na ( V ) 1 . 8 in uninjured axons enables neuropathic pain . J . Neurosci . 23 : 158 – 66 Grifﬁn RS , Costigan M , Brenner GJ , Ma CH , Scholz J , etal . 2007 . Complement induction in spinal cord microglia results in anaphylatoxin C5a - mediated pain hypersensitivity . J . Neurosci . 27 : 8699 – 708 Grifﬁn RS , Woolf CJ . 2007 . Pharmacology of analgesia ( Chapter 16 ) . In Principles of Pharmacology : The Patho - physiological Basis of Drug Therapy , ed . DE Golan , AH Tashjian , E Armstrong , AW Armstrong , pp . 263 – 82 . Baltimore , MD : Lippincott , Williams , and Wilkins . 2nd ed . Guo LH , Schluesener HJ . 2007 . The innate immunity of the central nervous system in chronic pain : the role of Toll - like receptors . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 64 : 1128 – 36 Hains BC , Klein JP , Saab CY , Craner MJ , Black JA , Waxman SG . 2003 . Upregulation of sodium channel Nav1 . 3 and functional involvement in neuronal hyperexcitability associated with central neuropathic pain after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 23 : 8881 – 92 Hains BC , Waxman SG . 2007 . Sodium channel expression and the molecular pathophysiology of pain after SCI . Prog . Brain Res . 161 : 195 – 203 HanssonP , BackonjaM , BouhassiraD . 2007 . Usefulnessandlimitationsofquantitativesensorytesting : clinical and research application in neuropathic pain states . Pain 129 : 256 – 59 Haythornthwaite JA , Clark MR , Pappagallo M , Raja SN . 2003 . Pain coping strategies play a role in the persistence of pain in post - herpetic neuralgia . Pain 106 : 453 – 60 HendrichJ , VanMinhAT , HeblichF , Nieto - RostroM , WatschingerK , etal . 2008 . Pharmacologicaldisruption of calcium channel trafﬁcking by the alpha2delta ligand gabapentin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 3628 – 33 Hoffmann T , Sauer SK , Horch RE , Reeh PW . 2008 . Sensory transduction in peripheral nerve axons elicits ectopic action potentials . J . Neurosci . 28 : 6281 – 84 Hoyt SB , London C , Ok H , Gonzalez E , Duffy JL , etal . 2007 . Benzazepinone Nav1 . 7 blockers : potential treatments for neuropathic pain . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 17 : 6172 – 77 Htut M , Misra P , Anand P , Birch R , Carlstedt T . 2006 . Pain phenomena and sensory recovery following brachial plexus avulsion injury and surgical repairs . J . Hand . Surg . 31 : 596 – 605 Huang J , Zhang X , McNaughton PA . 2006 . Inﬂammatory pain : the cellular basis of heat hyperalgesia . Curr . Neuropharmacol . 4 : 197 – 206 Hucho T , Levine JD . 2007 . Signaling pathways in sensitization : toward a nociceptor cell biology . Neuron 55 : 365 – 76 Hudmon A , Choi JS , Tyrrell L , Black JA , Rush AM , etal . 2008 . Phosphorylation of sodium channel Na ( v ) 1 . 8 by p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase increases current density in dorsal root ganglion neurons . J . Neurosci . 28 : 3190 – 201 26 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Indo Y . 2001 . Molecular basis of congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis ( CIPA ) : mutations and poly - morphisms in TRKA ( NTRK1 ) gene encoding the receptor tyrosine kinase for nerve growth factor . Hum . Mutat . 18 : 462 – 71 InoueK . 2006 . Thefunctionofmicrogliathroughpurinergicreceptors : neuropathicpainandcytokinerelease . Pharmacol . Ther . 109 : 210 – 26 Inoue K , Koizumi S , Tsuda M . 2007 . The role of nucleotides in the neuron - glia communication responsible for the brain functions . J . Neurochem . 102 : 1447 – 58 Iwata H , Takasusuki T , Yamaguchi S , Hori Y . 2007 . NMDA receptor 2B subunit - mediated synaptic transmis - sion in the superﬁcial dorsal horn of peripheral nerve - injured neuropathic mice . Brain Res . 1135 : 92 – 101 Jarvis MF , Honore P , Shieh CC , Chapman M , Joshi S , etal . 2007 . A - 803467 , a potent and selective Nav1 . 8 sodium channel blocker , attenuates neuropathic and inﬂammatory pain in the rat . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 8520 – 25 Ji RR , Baba H , Brenner GJ , Woolf CJ . 1999 . Nociceptive - speciﬁc activation of ERK in spinal neurons con - tributes to pain hypersensitivity . Nat . Neurosci . 2 : 1114 – 19 Ji RR , Suter MR . 2007 . p38 MAPK , microglial signaling , and neuropathic pain . Mol . Pain 3 : 33 Jimenez - Diaz L , Geranton SM , Passmore GM , Leith JL , Fisher AS , etal . 2008 . Local translation in primary afferent ﬁbers regulates nociception . PLoS ONE 3 : e1961 JinX , GereauRWt . 2006 . Acutep38 - mediatedmodulationoftetrodotoxin - resistantsodiumchannelsinmouse sensory neurons by tumor necrosis factor - alpha . J . Neurosci . 26 : 246 – 55 Jorum E , Warncke T , Stubhaug A . 2003 . Cold allodynia and hyperalgesia in neuropathic pain : the effect of N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) receptor antagonist ketamine - a double - blind , cross - over comparison with alfentanil and placebo . Pain 101 : 229 – 35 Joshi SK , Mikusa JP , Hernandez G , Baker S , Shieh CC , etal . 2006 . Involvement of the TTX - resistant sodium channel Nav 1 . 8 in inﬂammatory and neuropathic , but not post - operative , pain states . Pain 123 : 75 – 82 JuhlGI , JensenTS , NorholtSE , SvenssonP . 2008 . Centralsensitizationphenomenaafterthirdmolarsurgery : a quantitative sensory testing study . Eur . J . Pain 12 : 116 – 27 Julien N , Goffaux P , Arsenault P , Marchand S . 2005 . Widespread pain in ﬁbromyalgia is related to a deﬁcit of endogenous pain inhibition . Pain 114 : 295 – 302 Kalliomaki ML , Meyerson J , Gunnarsson U , Gordh T , Sandblom G . 2008 . Long - term pain after inguinal hernia repair in a population - based cohort ; risk factors and interference with daily activities . Eur . J . Pain 12 : 214 – 25 Kawasaki Y , Xu ZZ , Wang X , Park JY , Zhuang ZY , etal . 2008 . Distinct roles of matrix metalloproteases in the early - and late - phase development of neuropathic pain . Nat . Med . 14 : 331 – 36 Kehlet H , Jensen TS , Woolf CJ . 2006 . Persistent postsurgical pain : risk factors and prevention . Lancet 367 : 1618 – 25 Keller AF , Beggs S , Salter MW , De Koninck Y . 2007 . Transformation of the output of spinal lamina I neurons after nerve injury and microglia stimulation underlying neuropathic pain . Mol . Pain 3 : 27 Ketz AK . 2008 . The experience of phantom limb pain in patients with combat - related traumatic amputations . Arch . Phys . Med . Rehabil . 89 : 1127 – 32 KhanGM , ChenSR , PanHL . 2002 . Roleofprimaryafferentnervesinallodyniacausedbydiabeticneuropathy in rats . Neuroscience 114 : 291 – 99 Kim SH , Chung JM . 1992 . An experimental model for peripheral neuropathy produced by segmental spinal nerve ligation in the rat . Pain 50 : 355 – 63 Knabl J , Witschi R , Hosl K , Reinold H , Zeilhofer UB , etal . 2008 . Reversal of pathological pain through speciﬁc spinal GABAA receptor subtypes . Nature 451 : 330 – 34 Kohama I , Ishikawa K , Kocsis JD . 2000 . Synaptic reorganization in the substantia gelatinosa after peripheral nerve neuroma formation : aberrant innervation of lamina II neurons by Abeta afferents . J . Neurosci . 20 : 1538 – 49 Kohno T , Ji RR , Ito N , Allchorne AJ , Befort K , etal . 2005 . Peripheral axonal injury results in reduced mu opioid receptor pre - and post - synaptic action in the spinal cord . Pain 117 : 77 – 87 Koltzenburg M , Torebjork HE , Wahren LK . 1994 . Nociceptor modulated central sensitization causes me - chanical hyperalgesia in acute chemogenic and chronic neuropathic pain . Brain 117 ( Pt . 3 ) : 579 – 91 www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 27 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 LaBuda CJ , Little PJ . 2005 . Pharmacological evaluation of the selective spinal nerve ligation model of neuro - pathic pain in the rat . J . Neurosci . Methods 144 : 175 – 81 Lang PM , Fleckenstein J , Passmore GM , Brown DA , Grafe P . 2008 . Retigabine reduces the excitability of unmyelinated peripheral human axons . Neuropharmacology 54 : 1271 – 78 Li CY , Song YH , Higuera ES , Luo ZD . 2004 . Spinal dorsal horn calcium channel alpha2delta - 1 subunit upregulation contributes to peripheral nerve injury - induced tactile allodynia . J . Neurosci . 24 : 8494 – 99 Lotsch J , Geisslinger G . 2007 . Current evidence for a modulation of nociception by human genetic polymor - phisms . Pain 132 : 18 – 22 Lu Y , Perl ER . 2005 . Modular organization of excitatory circuits between neurons of the spinal superﬁcial dorsal horn ( laminae I and II ) . J . Neurosci . 25 : 3900 – 7 Luo L , Chang L , Brown SM , Ao H , Lee DH , etal . 2007 . Role of peripheral hyperpolarization - activated cyclic nucleotide - modulated channel pacemaker channels in acute and chronic pain models in the rat . Neuroscience 144 : 1477 – 85 Maguire MF , Ravenscroft A , Beggs D , Duffy JP . 2006 . A questionnaire study investigating the prevalence of the neuropathic component of chronic pain after thoracic surgery . Eur . J . Cardiothorac . Surg . 29 : 800 – 5 Malmberg AB , Chen C , Tonegawa S , Basbaum AI . 1997 . Preserved acute pain and reduced neuropathic pain in mice lacking PKCgamma . Science 278 : 279 – 83 Matsumoto M , Xie W , Ma L , Ueda H . 2008 . Pharmacological switch in Abeta - ﬁber stimulation - induced spinal transmission in mice with partial sciatic nerve injury . Mol . Pain 4 : 25 Matsuzawa - YanagidaK , NaritaM , NakajimaM , KuzumakiN , NiikuraK , etal . 2008 . Usefulnessofantidepres - sants for improving the neuropathic pain - like state and pain - induced anxiety through actions at different brain sites . Neuropsychopharmacology 33 : 1952 – 65 May A . 2007 . Neuroimaging : visualising the brain in pain . Neurol . Sci . 28 ( Suppl . 2 ) : S101 – 7 May A . 2008 . Chronic pain may change the structure of the brain . Pain 137 : 7 – 15 McGivern JG . 2006 . Targeting N - type and T - type calcium channels for the treatment of pain . Drug Discov . Today 11 : 245 – 53 MichaudK , BombardierC , EmeryP . 2007 . Qualityoflifeinpatientswithrheumatoidarthritis : Doesabatacept make a difference ? Clin . Exp . Rheumatol . 25 : S35 – 45 Mika J . 2008 . Modulation of microglia can attenuate neuropathic pain symptoms and enhance morphine effectiveness . Pharmacol . Rep . 60 : 297 – 307 Milligan ED , Sloane EM , Watkins LR . 2008 . Glia in pathological pain : a role for fractalkine . J . Neuroimmunol . 198 : 113 – 20 Miraucourt LS , Dallel R , Voisin DL . 2007 . Glycine inhibitory dysfunction turns touch into pain through PKCgamma interneurons . PLoS ONE 2 : e1116 Miyabe T , Miletic G , Miletic V . 2006 . Loose ligation of the sciatic nerve in rats elicits transient up - regulation of Homer1a gene expression in the spinal dorsal horn . Neurosci . Lett . 398 : 296 – 99 Mogil JS , Wilson SG , Bon K , Lee SE , Chung K , etal . 1999a . Heritability of nociception I : responses of 11 inbred mouse strains on 12 measures of nociception . Pain 80 : 67 – 82 Mogil JS , Wilson SG , Bon K , Lee SE , Chung K , etal . 1999b . Heritability of nociception II . ‘Types’ of nociception revealed by genetic correlation analysis . Pain 80 : 83 – 93 Mogil JS , Wilson SG , Chesler EJ , Rankin AL , Nemmani KV , etal . 2003 . The melanocortin - 1 receptor gene mediates female - speciﬁc mechanisms of analgesia in mice and humans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 4867 – 72 Moore KA , Kohno T , Karchewski LA , Scholz J , Baba H , Woolf CJ . 2002 . Partial peripheral nerve injury promotes a selective loss of GABAergic inhibition in the superﬁcial dorsal horn of the spinal cord . J . Neurosci . 22 : 6724 – 31 Moss A , Beggs S , Vega - Avelaira D , Costigan M , Hathway GJ , etal . 2007 . Spinal microglia and neuropathic pain in young rats . Pain 128 : 215 – 24 Nackley AG , Shabalina SA , Tchivileva IE , Satterﬁeld K , Korchynskyi O , etal . 2006 . Human catechol - O - methyltransferase haplotypes modulate protein expression by altering mRNA secondary structure . Science 314 : 1930 – 33 Nassar MA , Baker MD , Levato A , Ingram R , Mallucci G , etal . 2006 . Nerve injury induces robust allodynia and ectopic discharges in Nav1 . 3 null mutant mice . Mol . Pain 2 : 33 28 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Nassar MA , Levato A , Stirling LC , Wood JN . 2005 . Neuropathic pain develops normally in mice lacking both Nav1 . 7 and Nav1 . 8 . Mol . Pain 1 : 24 Neumann S , Braz JM , Skinner K , Llewellyn - Smith IJ , Basbaum AI . 2008 . Innocuous , not noxious , input activates PKCgamma interneurons of the spinal dorsal horn via myelinated afferent ﬁbers . J . Neurosci . 28 : 7936 – 44 Nielsen CS , Stubhaug A , Price DD , Vassend O , Czajkowski N , Harris JR . 2008 . Individual differences in pain sensitivity : genetic and environmental contributions . Pain 136 : 21 – 29 Nieto FR , Entrena JM , Cendan CM , Pozo ED , Vela JM , Baeyens JM . 2008 . Tetrodotoxin inhibits the devel - opment and expression of neuropathic pain induced by paclitaxel in mice . Pain 137 : 520 – 31 Norbury TA , MacGregor AJ , Urwin J , Spector TD , McMahon SB . 2007 . Heritability of responses to painful stimuli in women : a classical twin study . Brain 130 : 3041 – 49 Obata K , Katsura H , Miyoshi K , Kondo T , Yamanaka H , etal . 2009 . Toll - like receptor 3 contributes to spinal glial activation and tactile allodynia after nerve injury . J . Neurochem . In press ObataK , YamanakaH , FukuokaT , YiD , TokunagaA , etal . 2003 . Contributionofinjuredanduninjureddorsal root ganglion neurons to pain behavior and the changes in gene expression following chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve in rats . Pain 101 : 65 – 77 Okamoto M , Baba H , Goldstein PA , Higashi H , Shimoji K , Yoshimura M . 2001 . Functional reorganization of sensory pathways in the rat spinal dorsal horn following peripheral nerve injury . J . Physiol . 532 : 241 – 50 Pedersen LH , Scheel - Kruger J , Blackburn - Munro G . 2007 . Amygdala GABA - A receptor involvement in mediating sensory - discriminative and affective - motivational pain responses in a rat model of peripheral nerve injury . Pain 127 : 17 – 26 Peltier AC , Russell JW . 2002 . Recent advances in drug - induced neuropathies . Curr . Opin . Neurol . 15 : 633 – 38 Perl ER . 2007 . Ideas about pain , a historical view . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 : 71 – 80 Pertin M , Ji RR , Berta T , Powell AJ , Karchewski L , etal . 2005 . Upregulation of the voltage - gated sodium channel beta2 subunit in neuropathic pain models : characterization of expression in injured and non - injured primary sensory neurons . J . Neurosci . 25 : 10970 – 80 Pinto V , Derkach VA , Safronov BV . 2008 . Role of TTX - sensitive and TTX - resistant sodium channels in Adelta - and C - ﬁber conduction and synaptic transmission . J . Neurophysiol . 99 : 617 – 28 Poleshuck EL , Katz J , Andrus CH , Hogan LA , Jung BF , etal . 2006 . Risk factors for chronic pain following breast cancer surgery : a prospective study . J . Pain 7 : 626 – 34 Polgar E , Hughes DI , Arham AZ , Todd AJ . 2005 . Loss of neurons from laminas I - III of the spinal dorsal horn is not required for development of tactile allodynia in the spared nerve injury model of neuropathic pain . J . Neurosci . 25 : 6658 – 66 Rahman W , D’Mello R , Dickenson AH . 2008 . Peripheral nerve injury - induced changes in spinal alpha ( 2 ) - adrenoceptor - mediated modulation of mechanically evoked dorsal horn neuronal responses . J . Pain 9 : 350 – 59 Romero - Sandoval EA , Horvath RJ , DeLeo JA . 2008 . Neuroimmune interactions and pain : focus on glial - modulating targets . Curr . Opin . Investig . Drugs 9 : 726 – 34 Rowbotham MC , Fields HL . 1996 . The relationship of pain , allodynia and thermal sensation in post - herpetic neuralgia . Brain 119 ( Pt . 2 ) : 347 – 54 Roza C , Laird JM , Souslova V , Wood JN , Cervero F . 2003 . The tetrodotoxin - resistant Na + channel Nav1 . 8 is essential for the expression of spontaneous activity in damaged sensory axons of mice . J . Physiol . 550 : 921 – 26 Roza C , Lopez - Garcia JA . 2008 . Retigabine , the speciﬁc KCNQ channel opener , blocks ectopic discharges in axotomized sensory ﬁbres . Pain 138 ( 3 ) : 537 – 45 Saab CY , Waxman SG , Hains BC . 2008 . Alarm or curse ? The pain of neuroinﬂammation . Brain Res . Rev . 58 : 226 – 35 Saegusa H , Kurihara T , Zong S , Kazuno A , Matsuda Y , etal . 2001 . Suppression of inﬂammatory and neuro - pathic pain symptoms in mice lacking the N - type Ca 2 + channel . EMBO J . 20 : 2349 – 56 Sarantopoulos CD , McCallum JB , Rigaud M , Fuchs A , Kwok WM , Hogan QH . 2007 . Opposing effects of spinal nerve ligation on calcium - activated potassium currents in axotomized and adjacent mammalian primary afferent neurons . Brain Res . 1132 : 84 – 99 www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 29 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Schmalhofer W , Calhoun J , Burrows R , Bailey T , Kohler MG , etal . 2008 . ProTx - II , a selective inhibitor of NaV1 . 7sodiumchannels , blocksactionpotentialpropagationinnociceptors . Mol . Pharmacol . 74 ( 5 ) : 1476 – 84 Scholz J , Abele A , Marian C , Haussler A , Herbert TA , etal . 2008 . Low - dose methotrexate reduces peripheral nerve injury - evoked spinal microglial activation and neuropathic pain behavior in rats . Pain 138 : 130 – 42 Scholz J , Broom DC , Youn DH , Mills CD , Kohno T , etal . 2005 . Blocking caspase activity prevents transsy - naptic neuronal apoptosis and the loss of inhibition in lamina II of the dorsal horn after peripheral nerve injury . J . Neurosci . 25 : 7317 – 23 Scholz J , Woolf CJ . 2007 . The neuropathic pain triad : neurons , immune cells and glia . Nat . Neurosci . 10 : 1361 – 68 Seijffers R , Mills CD , Woolf CJ . 2007 . ATF3 increases the intrinsic growth state of DRG neurons to enhance peripheral nerve regeneration . J . Neurosci . 27 : 7911 – 20 Seltzer Z , Dubner R , Shir Y . 1990 . A novel behavioral model of neuropathic pain disorders produced in rats by partial sciatic nerve injury . Pain 43 : 205 – 18 Sheets PL , Heers C , Stoehr T , Cummins TR . 2008 . Differential block of sensory neuronal voltage - gated sodiumchannelsbylacosamide [ ( 2R ) - 2 - ( acetylamino ) - N - benzyl - 3 - methoxypropanamide ] , lidocaine , and carbamazepine . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 326 : 89 – 99 Soares S , Barnat M , Salim C , von Boxberg Y , Ravaille - Veron M , Nothias F . 2007 . Extensive structural remod - eling of the injured spinal cord revealed by phosphorylated MAP1B in sprouting axons and degenerating neurons . Eur . J . Neurosci . 26 : 1446 – 61 Soares S , von Boxberg Y , Lombard MC , Ravaille - Veron M , Fischer I , etal . 2002 . Phosphorylated MAP1B is induced in central sprouting of primary afferents in response to peripheral injury but not in response to rhizotomy . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 : 593 – 606 Staud R , Craggs JG , Perlstein WM , Robinson ME , Price DD . 2008 . Brain activity associated with slow temporal summation of C - ﬁber evoked pain in ﬁbromyalgia patients and healthy controls . Eur . J . Pain 12 ( 8 ) : 1078 – 89 Staud R , Robinson ME , Price DD . 2007 . Temporal summation of second pain and its maintenance are useful for characterizing widespread central sensitization of ﬁbromyalgia patients . J . Pain 8 : 893 – 901 Staud R , Rodriguez ME . 2006 . Mechanisms of disease : pain in ﬁbromyalgia syndrome . Nat . Clin . Pract . Rheumatol . 2 : 90 – 98 Sullivan KA , Lentz SI , Roberts JL Jr , Feldman EL . 2008 . Criteria for creating and assessing mouse models of diabetic neuropathy . Curr . Drug Targets 9 : 3 – 13 Suter MR , Wen YR , Decosterd I , Ji RR . 2007 . Do glial cells control pain ? Neuron . Glia Biol . 3 : 255 – 68 Takasusuki T , Fujiwara T , Yamaguchi S , Fukushima T , Akagawa K , Hori Y . 2007 . Enhancement of synaptic transmission and nociceptive behaviour in HPC - 1 / syntaxin 1A knockout mice following peripheral nerve injury . Eur . J . Neurosci . 26 : 2179 – 87 Tandrup T , Woolf CJ , Coggeshall RE . 2000 . Delayed loss of small dorsal root ganglion cells after transection of the rat sciatic nerve . J . Comp . Neurol . 422 : 172 – 80 Tao YX , Rumbaugh G , Wang GD , Petralia RS , Zhao C , etal . 2003 . Impaired NMDA receptor - mediated post - synaptic function and blunted NMDA receptor - dependent persistent pain in mice lacking postsynaptic density - 93 protein . J . Neurosci . 23 : 6703 – 12 Tegeder I , Adolph J , Schmidt H , Woolf CJ , Geisslinger G , Lotsch J . 2008 . Reduced hyperalgesia in homozy - gous carriers of a GTP cyclohydrolase 1 haplotype . Eur . J . Pain 12 ( 8 ) : 1069 – 77 Tegeder I , Costigan M , Grifﬁn RS , Abele A , Belfer I , etal . 2006 . GTP cyclohydrolase and tetrahydrobiopterin regulate pain sensitivity and persistence . Nat . Med . 12 : 1269 – 77 Thompson SW , Woolf CJ , Sivilotti LG . 1993 . Small - caliber afferent inputs produce a heterosynaptic facilita - tion of the synaptic responses evoked by primary afferent A - ﬁbers in the neonatal rat spinal cord in vitro . J . Neurophysiol . 69 : 2116 – 28 Torrance N , Smith BH , Bennett MI , Lee AJ . 2006 . The epidemiology of chronic pain of predominantly neuropathic origin . Results from a general population survey . J . Pain 7 : 281 – 89 Torres L , Dunlop DD , Peterfy C , Guermazi A , Prasad P , etal . 2006 . The relationship between speciﬁc tissue lesions and pain severity in persons with knee osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 14 : 1033 – 40 30 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Torsney C , MacDermott AB . 2006 . Disinhibition opens the gate to pathological pain signaling in superﬁcial neurokinin 1 receptor - expressing neurons in rat spinal cord . J . Neurosci . 26 : 1833 – 43 Tracey I . 2008 . Imaging pain . Br . J . Anaesth . 101 : 32 – 39 Tracey I , Mantyh PW . 2007 . The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation . Neuron 55 : 377 – 91 Trang T , Beggs S , Salter MW . 2006 . Purinoceptors in microglia and neuropathic pain . Pﬂugers Arch . 452 : 645 – 52 Treede RD , Jensen TS , Campbell JN , Cruccu G , Dostrovsky JO , etal . 2008 . Neuropathic pain : redeﬁnition and a grading system for clinical and research purposes . Neurology 70 : 1630 – 35 Ultenius C , Linderoth B , Meyerson BA , Wallin J . 2006 . Spinal NMDA receptor phosphorylation correlates with the presence of neuropathic signs following peripheral nerve injury in the rat . Neurosci . Lett . 399 : 85 – 90 Vera - Portocarrero LP , Zhang ET , Ossipov MH , Xie JY , King T , etal . 2006 . Descending facilitation from the rostralventromedialmedullamaintainsnerveinjury - inducedcentralsensitization . Neuroscience 140 : 1311 – 20 Vierck CJ , Hansson PT , Yezierski RP . 2008 . Clinical and pre - clinical pain assessment : Are we measuring the same thing ? Pain 135 : 7 – 10 Wall PD , Devor M , Inbal R , Scadding JW , Schonfeld D , etal . 1979 . Autotomy following peripheral nerve lesions : experimental anesthesia dolorosa . Pain 7 : 103 – 11 Wallace VC , Blackbeard J , Pheby T , Segerdahl AR , Davies M , etal . 2007 . Pharmacological , behavioural and mechanistic analysis of HIV - 1 gp120 induced painful neuropathy . Pain 133 : 47 – 63 Wallace VC , Cottrell DF , Brophy PJ , Fleetwood - Walker SM . 2003 . Focal lysolecithin - induced demyelination of peripheral afferents results in neuropathic pain behavior that is attenuated by cannabinoids . J . Neurosci . 23 : 3221 – 33 WatanabeK , KonnoS , SekiguchiM , SasakiN , HondaT , KikuchiS . 2007 . Increaseof200 - kDaneuroﬁlament - immunoreactive afferents in the substantia gelatinosa in allodynic rats induced by compression of the dorsal root ganglion . Spine 32 : 1265 – 71 Watkins LR , Hutchinson MR , Ledeboer A , Wieseler - Frank J , Milligan ED , Maier SF . 2007 . Norman Cousins lecture . Glia as the “bad guys” : implications for improving clinical pain control and the clinical utility of opioids . Brain Behav . Immun . 21 : 131 – 46 Watkins LR , Hutchinson MR , Milligan ED , Maier SF . 2007 . “Listening” and “talking” to neurons : im - plications of immune activation for pain control and increasing the efﬁcacy of opioids . Brain Res . Rev . 56 : 148 – 69 Wellcome - Consort . 2007 . Genome - wide association study of 14 , 000 cases of seven common diseases and 3 , 000 shared controls . Nature 447 : 661 – 78 White FA , Jung H , Miller RJ . 2007 . Chemokines and the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 20151 – 58 Witting N , Kupers RC , Svensson P , Jensen TS . 2006 . A PET activation study of brush - evoked allodynia in patients with nerve injury pain . Pain 120 : 145 – 54 WoodburyCJ , KullmannFA , McIlwrathSL , KoerberHR . 2008 . Identityofmyelinatedcutaneoussensoryneu - rons projecting to nocireceptive laminae following nerve injury in adult mice . J . Comp . Neurol . 508 : 500 – 9 Woolf CJ , Ma Q . 2007 . Nociceptors—noxious stimulus detectors . Neuron 55 : 353 – 64 Woolf CJ , Mannion RJ . 1999 . Neuropathic pain : aetiology , symptoms , mechanisms , and management . Lancet 353 : 1959 – 64 Woolf CJ , Salter MW . 2000 . Neuronal plasticity : increasing the gain in pain . Science 288 : 1765 – 69 Woolf CJ , Shortland P , Coggeshall RE . 1992 . Peripheral nerve injury triggers central sprouting of myelinated afferents . Nature 355 : 75 – 78 WuG , RingkampM , MurinsonBB , PogatzkiEM , HartkeTV , etal . 2002 . Degenerationofmyelinatedefferent ﬁbers induces spontaneous activity in uninjured C - ﬁber afferents . J . Neurosci . 22 : 7746 – 53 Yamamoto W , Sugiura A , Nakazato - Imasato E , Kita Y . 2008 . Characterization of primary sensory neurons mediating static and dynamic allodynia in rat chronic constriction injury model . J . Pharm . Pharmacol . 60 : 717 – 22 www . annualreviews . org • Neuropathic Pain 31 A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV379 - NE32 - 01 ARI 10 May 2009 8 : 35 Yudin D , Hanz S , Yoo S , Iavnilovitch E , Willis D , etal . 2008 . Localized regulation of axonal RanGTPase controls retrograde injury signaling in peripheral nerve . Neuron 59 : 241 – 52 ZhuW , OxfordGS . 2007 . Phosphoinositide - 3 - kinaseandmitogenactivatedproteinkinasesignalingpathways mediate acute NGF sensitization of TRPV1 . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 34 : 689 – 700 RELATED RESOURCES Foulkes T , Wood JN . 2008 . Pain genes . PLoS Genet . 4 : e1000086 Lacroix - Fralish ML , Mogil JS . 2009 . Progress in genetic studies of pain and analgesia . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 49 : 97 – 121 Pain Genes Database . 2008 . http : / / www . jbldesign . com / jmogil / enter . html 32 Costigan · Scholz · Woolf A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR379 - FM ARI 20 May 2009 14 : 8 Annual Review of Neuroscience Volume 32 , 2009 Contents Neuropathic Pain : A Maladaptive Response of the Nervous System to Damage Michael Costigan , Joachim Scholz , and Clifford J . Woolf (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Synaptic Mechanisms for Plasticity in Neocortex Daniel E . Feldman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 33 Neurocognitive Mechanisms in Depression : Implications for Treatment Luke Clark , Samuel R . Chamberlain , and Barbara J . Sahakian (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 57 Using Diffusion Imaging to Study Human Connectional Anatomy Heidi Johansen - Berg and Matthew F . S . Rushworth (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 75 Serotonin in Affective Control Peter Dayan and Quentin J . M . Huys (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 95 Physiology and Pharmacology of Striatal Neurons Anatol C . Kreitzer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 127 The Glial Nature of Embryonic and Adult Neural Stem Cells Arnold Kriegstein and Arturo Alvarez - Buylla (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 149 Representation of Number in the Brain Andreas Nieder and Stanislas Dehaene (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 185 Neuronal Gamma - Band Synchronization as a Fundamental Process in Cortical Computation Pascal Fries (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 209 The Neurobiology of Individual Differences in Complex Behavioral Traits Ahmad R . Hariri (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 225 The Science of Neural Interface Systems Nicholas G . Hatsopoulos and John P . Donoghue (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 249 The Neuropsychopharmacology of Fronto - Executive Function : Monoaminergic Modulation T . W . Robbins and A . F . T . Arnsten (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 267 v A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR379 - FM ARI 20 May 2009 14 : 8 The Inﬂuence of Stress Hormones on Fear Circuitry Sarina M . Rodrigues , Joseph E . LeDoux , and Robert M . Sapolsky (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 289 The Primate Cortical Auditory System and Neural Representation of Conspeciﬁc Vocalizations Lizabeth M . Romanski and Bruno B . Averbeck (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 315 Establishment of Axon - Dendrite Polarity in Developing Neurons Anthony P . Barnes and Franck Polleux (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 347 Axon Growth and Guidance : Receptor Regulation and Signal Transduction Michael O’Donnell , Rebecca K . Chance , and Greg J . Bashaw (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 383 Cerebellum and Nonmotor Function Peter L . Strick , Richard P . Dum , and Julie A . Fiez (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 413 Advances in Light Microscopy for Neuroscience Brian A . Wilt , Laurie D . Burns , Eric Tatt Wei Ho , Kunal K . Ghosh , Eran A . Mukamel , and Mark J . Schnitzer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 435 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 23 – 32 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 507 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 23 – 32 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 511 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Neuroscience articles may be found at http : / / neuro . annualreviews . org / vi Contents A nnu . R e v . N e u r o s c i . 2009 . 32 : 1 - 32 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f S ou t h D a ko t a on 09 / 15 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .