Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles Arpita Upadhyaya , Jeffrey R . Chabot , Albina Andreeva , Azadeh Samadani , and Alexander van Oudenaarden * Department of Physics , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 77 Massachusetts Avenue , Cambridge , MA 02139 Edited by Thomas D . Pollard , Yale University , New Haven , CT , and approved February 20 , 2003 ( received for review November 18 , 2002 ) Actin polymerization provides a powerful propulsion force for numerous types of cell motility . Although tremendous progress has been made in identifying the biochemical components neces - saryforactin - basedmotility , theprecisebiophysicalmechanismsof force generation remain unclear . To probe the polymerization forces quantitatively , we introduce an experimental system in which lipid vesicles coated with the Listeria monocytogenes viru - lence factor ActA are propelled by actin polymerization . The polymerization forces cause signiﬁcant deformations of the vesi - cle . We have used these deformations to obtain a spatially resolved measure of the forces exerted on the membrane using a model based on the competition between osmotic pressure and mem - brane stretching . Our results indicate that actin exerts retractile or propulsive forces depending on the local membrane curvature and that the membrane is strongly bound to the actin gel . These results are consistent with the observed dynamics . After a slow elonga - tion of the vesicle from a spherical shape , the strong bonds between the actin gel and the membrane rupture if the retractile forces exceed a critical value , leading to a rapid release of the vesicle’s trailing edge . E longation of protein polymers by successive addition of monomeric subunits is a form of movement that is observed in a variety of biological systems ( 1 ) . The building block of the most extensively explored polymerization engine is the cytoskel - etal protein actin . Eukaryotic cells change shape and move by polymerizing actin at the leading edge of lamellipodia and filopodia ( 2 , 3 ) . The rocketing of endocytic vesicles after being pinched off from the plasma membrane ( 4 ) and the propulsion of vesicles in Xenopus oocytes and extracts require actin - based machinery ( 5 , 6 ) . Several pathogenic bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri recruit the host cell’s actin to propel themselves through the cytoplasm . Studies on actin - based motility of bacterial pathogens ( 7 , 8 ) have greatly advanced our knowledge of the biomolecular basis of eukaryotic cell motility . The Listeria transmembrane protein ActA , which is distributed asymmetrically on the bacterial surface , is the only bacterial protein essential for motility ( 9 ) . ActA activates the host’s Arp2 (cid:1) 3 protein complex , which nucle - ates actin polymerization at the bacterial surface ( 10 ) and multiplies filaments by branching ( 11 – 13 ) . Moving bacteria are associated with a ‘‘comet tail’’ consisting of actin filaments crosslinked together to form a dense cylindrical gel ( 14 ) . Re - cently , the necessary biochemical components for actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella were identified , and motility was reconstituted in vitro by using purified proteins ( 15 ) . Despite many advances in identifying the biochemical basis of actin - dependent motion ( 16 , 17 ) , the precise mechanisms of force generation remain unclear . How individual actin filaments cooperatively generate large forces leading to motion and de - formation is not understood . In particular , the link between microscopic theories , which describe actin polymerization as a Brownian ratchet ( 18 – 20 ) , and macroscopic models that con - sider stresses arising in the entire actin gel ( 21 ) is missing . Revealing the complete mechanism requires quantitative exper - iments that directly probe the forces arising from actin polymer - ization . Biophysical studies on actin polymerization were facil - itated greatly by the development of in vitro systems that explore actin - driven motility of nonbiological cargo such as protein - coated beads ( 22 – 25 ) . However , the shapes of rigid beads are insensitive to spatial and temporal changes in the forces exerted by the actin gel . Here we introduce an experimental system in which synthetic phospholipid vesicles containing a fraction of ActA - conjugated lipids are propelled by actin . This system has several advantages with respect to the bead assays . The vesicle membrane more closely resembles the plasma membrane of protruding lamelli - podia and filopodia . Further , the lipid - membrane composition can be controlled precisely , and membrane - associated proteins are free to diffuse in the membrane . Most importantly , the vesicles can be used to measure forces due to actin polymeriza - tion . The vesicle membrane , being mechanically flexible , can deform significantly because of the strong forces arising from actin polymerization . Changes in vesicle shape reflect changes in the forces generated by the polymerizing actin gel , and vesicles thus can be used as sensitive spatial and temporal force sensors . Here we characterize the spatial distribution and temporal dynamics of actin - based polymerization forces exerted on a phospholipid membrane . Materials and Methods ActA Purification and Labeling . ActA - His was purified from L . monocytogenes strain DP - L2723 ( a kind gift of Daniel Portnoy , University of California , Berkeley ) expressing a truncated actA gene encoding amino acids 1 – 613 with a COOH - terminal six - histidine tag replacing the transmembrane domain ( 10 ) . A single colony of DP - L2723 was inoculated in 50 ml of Luria – Bertani ( LB ) broth with 50 (cid:1) g (cid:1) ml chloramphenicol , grown at 37°C for 6 h , then transferred to 1 liter of LB broth with 10 (cid:1) g (cid:1) ml chloramphenicol , and grown overnight at 37°C . After 16 h the cells were pelleted by centrifugation . Protein in the supernatant was precipitated with ammonium sulfate to 50 % saturation and after centrifugation resuspended in assay buffer ( 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 (cid:1) 100 mM KCl (cid:1) 1 mM MgCl 2 ) with 1 mM DTT (cid:1) 1 mM PMSF (cid:1) 1 mM benzamidine . After a second centrifugation at 3 , 500 (cid:1) g for 15 min , the supernatant containing ActA - His was sterilized by filtration and stored at (cid:2) 80°C . Fluorescently labeled ActA - His was prepared from L . monocytogenes strain DP - L4363 ( a kind gift of Peter Lauer and Daniel Portnoy , University of California , Berkeley ) expressing the truncated actA - His gene containing an additional cysteine amino acid . ActA - His - Cys was purified as described above and conjugated to fluorescein - 5 - maleimide ( Molecular Probes ) . The dye was dissolved in DMSO at a concentration of 10 mM . ActA - His - Cys at 0 . 5 mg (cid:1) ml was incubated with an excess of fluorescein - 5 - maleimide for 1 h at room temperature . After completion of the reaction , the un - bound fluorescent dye was removed by gel filtration using a Sephadex G - 25 column ( Molecular Probes ) . This paper was submitted directly ( Track II ) to the PNAS ofﬁce . * Towhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedat : DepartmentofPhysics , Room13 - 2008 , MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology , 77MassachusettsAvenue , Cambridge , MA02139 . E - mail : avano @ mit . edu . www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 0837027100 PNAS (cid:2) April 15 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 8 (cid:2) 4521 – 4526 B I O P H Y S I C S Formation of Vesicles . A mixture of 90 % egg phosphatidylcholine lipids ( Avanti Polar Lipids ) and 10 % nickel - chelating lipids ( 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - { [ N ( 5 - amino - 1 - carboxypentyl ) imino - diacetic acid ] succinyl } , Avanti Polar Lipids ) dissolved in chlo - roform was evaporated on the inner surface of a round - bottom glass flask . For experiments with fluorescent lipids , 0 . 5 % Ore - gon green - labeled lipids ( 1 , 2 - dihexadecanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine , Molecular Probes ) were added to the mixture . The flask with the dried lipid layer was placed in a vacuum dessicator for several hours . Vesicle formation was initiated by rehydration with assay buffer . The crude vesicle suspension , containing large clumps of lipids and smaller vesi - cles , was spun at 1 , 000 (cid:1) g for 1 min , and the supernatant ( consisting of smaller vesicles ) was used for labeling with ActA . Equal volumes of vesicle suspension and ActA stock were incubated for 1 h at room temperature while shaking and then transferred to ice . For each experiment , new lipids were rehy - drated and coated with ActA before use . Motility Assays . ActA - coated lipid vesicles ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) l ) were mixed with 5 (cid:1) l of bovine brain extract , 0 . 5 (cid:1) l of purified Arp2 (cid:1) 3 complex ( at a concentration of 450 (cid:1) g (cid:1) ml ; kind gifts of Bill Brieher , Harvard Medical School , Boston ) , 5 (cid:1) l of assay buffer containing 2 mM ATP , 0 . 5 (cid:1) l of ATP regenerating mix ( 150 mM creatine phosphate (cid:1) 20 mM ATP (cid:1) 2 mM EGTA (cid:1) 20 mM MgCl 2 ) , 0 . 3 (cid:1) l of antiphotobleach solution ( 0 . 05 mg / ml catalase (cid:1) 0 . 1 mg / ml glucose oxidase (cid:1) 2 . 5 mg / ml glucose ) , and 0 . 5 (cid:1) l of mo - nomeric actin ( 1 : 50 rhodamine - labeled , Cytoskeleton , Denver ) . Five microliters of the mixed sample was placed between a glass slide and a 22 - mm square coverslip . The spacing between the coverslip and slide was (cid:3) 10 (cid:1) m , ensuring that the motion of the observed vesicles was not constrained by the observation cham - ber . Observations were made on a Nikon Eclipse TE 300 inverted microscope using phase contrast and epifluorescence with a (cid:1) 100 objective ( numerical aperture , 1 . 4 ) . Images were captured by using a cooled charge - coupled device camera ( Princeton Instruments , Trenton , NJ ) and analyzed with META - MORPH ( Universal Imaging , Media , PA ) software and MATLAB ( Mathworks , Natick , MA ) . Results ActA - conjugated lipid vesicles are introduced into a motility assay containing rhodamine - labeled actin monomers and cyto - plasmic extract from bovine brain supplemented with the Arp2 (cid:1) 3 complex . Once added to the motility assay , the vesicles aggregate into large structures typically 10 – 50 (cid:1) m in diameter . After a few minutes of incubation , vesicles ( 1 – 6 (cid:1) m in diameter ) are pinched off from the aggregates . Remarkably , these vesicles spontaneously achieve a persistent unidirectional motion . Pro - pelled by actin polymerization , the vesicles move with velocities of 0 . 8 (cid:4) 0 . 2 (cid:1) m (cid:1) min , leaving curved Listeria - like actin comet tails ( up to 100 (cid:1) m in length ) in their wake ( Fig . 1 a ) . The measured velocities of Listeria in identical motility assays are 1 . 9 (cid:4) 0 . 3 (cid:1) m (cid:1) min . The actin filaments are observed to form a cup that encloses only one hemisphere of the vesicle . To determine the distribution of ActA on the vesicle surface , we used fluorescently labeled ActA to coat the lipid vesicles . After motility is initiated , the spatial distribution of ActA is highly polarized and closely correlated with the position of the actin cup in the moving vesicle , as seen from phase - contrast and fluores - cence images ( Fig . 1 b and c ) . As the actin cup changes shape and orientation around the vesicle , we observe that ActA redistrib - utes itself to always remain colocalized with the actin . Because the phospholipid bilayer is a two - dimensional fluid , a homoge - nous ActA distribution would be expected based on diffusion of the ActA - conjugated lipids . However , the experimentally ob - served polarization indicates an affinity between ActA and actin filaments . Fig . 1 d shows a schematic of the three main structural ingredients of our vesicle - motility system : the lipid bilayer vesicle , ActA molecules , and actin filaments . Vesicles displayed motile behavior only when the concentration of chelating lipids was (cid:3) 10 % . For larger ( 50 % ) or smaller ( 2 % ) concentration , no motility was observed . Use of synthetic lipids such as 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine did not change the motil - ity characteristics of the vesicles . The forces required to deform a unilamellar vesicle from its rest shape are determined by the energies required to bend and stretch the membrane and change the volume of the vesicle against an osmotic pressure . The bending energy is several orders of magnitude smaller than the latter two and therefore can be neglected ( 26 ) . We observe that vesicles deform signif - icantly from a quasispherical shape to a more elongated shape in response to actin polymerization . As the vesicle deforms , its surface stretches , setting up a membrane tension that induces stresses pulling the membrane inward to restore its original area . Simultaneously , an outward osmotic pressure develops due to a decrease in volume . The total stress is the sum of the osmotic pressure and the stress induced by stretching . The area and volume changes and the corresponding stresses must be in opposite directions if the vesicle is not to collapse . The front of the vesicle , which is not in contact with actin , assumes a spherical shape that minimizes the total energy . Here , the osmotic pres - sure and the stress due to membrane stretching balance . At any Fig . 1 . Actin - driven motility of lipid vesicles coated with ActA . ( a ) Fluores - cence images of an actin - propelled vesicle at three time points . A fraction of thelipids ( 0 . 5 % ) waslabeledwithOregongreen . Actinwaslabeled ( 2 % ) with rhodamine ( red ) . ( Left ) Fluorescenceimagesofactincomettails . ( Center ) Lipid ﬂuorescence . ( Right ) Overlay of Left and Center . Parts of the lipid structures containing both lipids and actin appear yellow in the images . The yellow region on the vesicle clearly shows the actin ‘‘cup’’ enclosing one hemisphere of the vesicle . The bottom left shows the lipid aggregate from which the vesicle emerged . Time is indicated in seconds in the bottom right corners . ( b ) Phase - contrast image of a moving vesicle with a phase - dense comet tail . ( c ) Fluorescence image of the same vesicle as shown in b with ﬂuorescently labeled ActA molecules ( blue ) . ActA is colocalized with the actin cup on the vesicle surface . ( d ) Schematic diagram of a lipid bilayer vesicle ( green ) coated with ActA ( blue ) and surrounded by a mesh of actin ﬁlaments ( red ) in contact with the membrane . ( Scale bars , 4 (cid:1) m . ) 4522 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 0837027100 Upadhyaya et al . other point , the total stress is balanced by the stress due to actin polymerization . This leads to the simple result that the local stress is the product of the tension and the curvature difference between the actin - free region and any other point on the vesicle surface ( see Estimation of Stress Distribution ) . Therefore , an analysis of the curvatures provides important information re - garding the stress distribution . Fig . 2 a shows the fluorescence image of a vesicle deformed into a typical ‘‘teardrop’’ shape ( t (cid:5) 240 sec ; Fig . 1 a ) . We analyzed the shape of this vesicle to obtain the curvature differences along its surface as shown in Fig . 2 b . The curvature difference can be both positive and negative , resulting in inward and outward stresses at the surface . Fig . 2 c shows a schematic representation of the forces on the surface of the vesicle shown in Fig . 2 a . We find that the actin - induced stresses can be both retractile ( actin pulls the membrane at the trailing part of the vesicle ) and protrusive ( actin pushes the membrane at the vesicle sides ) . The pulling stress is highest in regions of greatest curva - ture , as depicted by the large arrow at the trailing edge of the vesicle . Fig . 2 d shows histograms of the curvature difference (cid:6) (cid:2) between the actin – membrane interface along the vesicle and the spherical cap for 50 deformed vesicle shapes . We find that this difference is always positive ( squeezing ) at the vesicle sides and negative ( retractile ) at the trailing end . Although we do not have an accurate measure for the area and volume changes of the vesicle and hence the membrane tension , we can use the curvature analysis to obtain an upper bound for the stresses and get an order of magnitude estimate for the range of these stresses for various vesicle shapes . The maximum tension that can be supported by typical bilayer membranes is on the order of 3 – 4 mN (cid:1) m for 2 – 3 % area increase ( 27 ) . Consequently , based on the curvature differences , the maximum pulling stresses are on the order of 6 – 8 nN (cid:1) (cid:1) m 2 , and squeezing stresses are on the order of 3 – 4 nN (cid:1) (cid:1) m 2 . The above analysis gives a description of the spatial distribu - tion of stresses at the membrane – actin interface of a deformed vesicle at any time instant . Observation of the moving vesicles over time shows that the vesicles exhibit dramatic shape changes as they move , indicating that the external forces causing the deformations are not constant . Fig . 3 a shows successive images of a vesicle that elongates from an initially quasispherical shape Fig . 2 . Spatial distribution of forces on a deformed vesicle . ( a ) Fluorescence imageofthetypicalteardropshapeassumedbyamovingvesicledeformedbyactin . ThecolorschemeisthesameasdescribedforFig . 1 . ( Scalebar , 3 (cid:1) m . ) ( b ) Plotofthecurvaturedifferencebetweenthesphericalcapandapointonthevesiclesurfaceasafunctionofthespatialcoordinatealongthevesiclesurface . T and S denote the tip of the trailing edge and the sides of the vesicle , respectively . Thecurvaturedifferencegoesfromamaximumnegativevalueat the trailing end (cid:6) (cid:2) T to a smaller positive value (cid:6) (cid:2) S at the sides . The noisy appearance of the curvature proﬁle is due to numerical estimation from a digitized image . ( c ) Contour of the vesicle , the curvature of which is shown in b . The arrows represent the stress at the membrane – actin interface ; the relative sizes of the arrows are proportional to the magnitudes of the curva - ture difference , and the direction of the arrows indicates the direction of the stress experienced . ( d ) Histograms showing the maximum positive and nega - tive curvature differences occurring on the tip of the trailing end and the vesicle sides , respectively , of 50 deformed vesicle shapes . Fig . 3 . Dynamicsoftheelongationandreleaseofavesiclefromtheactingel . ( a ) Time sequence of phase - contrast ( Left ) and ﬂuorescence ( Right ) images of a vesicle going through a slow - elongation and rapid - release phase . Phase - contrastimagesshowthevesicleandatrailingcomettail . Fluorescenceimages show the intensity of rhodamine - actin in gray scale . The actin cup elongates fromaninitialshallowshapeandcreepsaroundthevesicle , becomingshallow againasthevesicleappearstobereleasedsuddenlyfromthecupandbecomesspherical . The time elapsed in seconds is shown on the bottom right corner of the ﬂuorescence images . ( Scale bar , 3 (cid:1) m . ) ( b and c ) Instantaneous velocity of the back ( V B ) and front ( V F ) of the moving vesicle as a function of time . Time - lapse images acquired at intervals of 20 sec were used to quantify the velocity and shapes . The solid lines are a guide to the eye . ( d ) Aspect ratio of vesicle shape as a function of time . Aspect ratio is deﬁned as the maximum length divided by the maximum width perpendicular to the length . The highest velocity occurs just after the vesicle reaches its maximum length . ( Inset ) Aspect ratio of a vesicle that repeats the elongation – relaxation cycle severaltimes . Theverticaldottedlinesindicatethepartofthetimeseriesthat is shown in greater detail in d . ( e ) The distance traveled by the front ( open circles ) and back ( ﬁlled circles ) of a stepping vesicle , as a function of time . ( f ) Overlay of vesicle contours from phase - contrast images at successive time steps ( 20 - sec intervals ) of motion , showing oscillations in velocity . In regions where the contours are further apart ( solid arrow ) , the trailing edge of the vesiclemovesrapidly ; regionsofdenselypackedcontourlines ( dashedarrow ) depict slower forward motion during vesicle elongation . Upadhyaya et al . PNAS (cid:2) April 15 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 8 (cid:2) 4523 B I O P H Y S I C S and then returns to a more spherical shape . The trailing end of the vesicle in contact with the actin gel appears to be released from the cup immediately after reaching maximum deformation . Both ends move at a steady velocity of (cid:3) 0 . 4 (cid:1) m (cid:1) min between t (cid:5) 0 and 300 s ( Fig . 3 b and c ) . During this period the vesicle slowly evolves from a quasisphere with an aspect ratio of (cid:3) 1 . 2 to a significantly elongated shape ( aspect ratio (cid:5) 1 . 7 ; Fig . 3 d ) . The elongation of the vesicle is accompanied by an increase in the actin - cup surface area as the polymerizing actin creeps around the membrane . Between t (cid:5) 300 and 360 s , the vesicle returns to its spherical shape . The trailing end snaps forward at a speed of 2 . 5 (cid:1) m (cid:1) min ( Fig . 3 b ) ( six times faster than its initial velocity ) , indicating that the vesicle membrane is released from the actin gel . These observations , along with the fact that there is a retractile force at the trailing end , suggest that the membrane is bound to the actin gel . The elongation - and - release process can occur several times in succession , resulting in a distinct stepping motility of the vesicles as illustrated in Fig . 3 d Inset and e . The trailing end of the vesicle moves in steps ( indicating a release from the actin cup ) , whereas the leading end moves more smoothly . The step - like motion is clearly visible in the overlay of vesicle contours at successive time steps ( Fig . 3 f ) . The typical stepping time is on the order of 5 min , and the step size is on the order of the vesicle diameter ( 2 (cid:1) m ) . To follow the time evolution of vesicle shapes , we incorporated the dynamics of actin polymerization in a simple model of vesicle deformation ( see Vesicle - Deformation Model for details ) . The model consists of an axisymmetric vesicle of quasispherical shape represented as a discretized closed curve . Part of the vesicle consists of points representing actin filaments in contact with the surface . The stresses at the actin – membrane interface can be estimated by comparing the deformed vesicle shape to its rest shape . The vesicle shape evolves from the rest shape as each point on the actin - covered section is moved perpendicular to the membrane , reflecting the addition of actin monomers . The local polymerization rate is a function of the local stress . As the vesicle deforms due to actin polymerization , it develops a membrane tension and osmotic pressure as described before . The total local stress is the sum of the osmotic pressure and the stress induced by stretching . The front portion of the vesicle , which is not in contact with actin , is allowed to assume a spherical shape that minimizes the total energy . The actin - covered points are then redistributed such that they cover half of the actin - free region to account for the experimentally observed ‘‘creeping’’ of the actin cup around the vesicle . Fig . 4 a shows the experimental time series of a vesicle as it goes from an initially spherical shape to a more elongated shape . We start the model from a shape with the same aspect ratio as in Fig . 4 a Left and follow the model shapes as they change over time due to actin polymerization . The stress distribution on the vesicle surface is shown in Fig . 4 b for shapes with similar aspect ratios as in Fig . 4 a . The color scale indicates the value of the local stress . Note that as the vesicle deforms , it experiences larger pulling forces at its trailing end and larger squeezing forces on its sides . The directionality of the stress distribution is preserved over time , and we observed both pulling and squeezing forces at different times . The stress profiles , shown in Fig . 4 c , illustrate how the stresses change from a shallower to a steeper profile as the vesicle deforms . The stress values are of the same order and within the upper bound obtained from the simple curvature analysis . Discussion We have used an experimental system of actin - propelled lipid vesicles to characterize the forces due to actin polymerization . Several previous studies have developed in vitro reconstituted systems using bacteria ( 15 ) and protein - coated beads ( 22 – 25 ) to explore the mechanisms underlying actin - based motility . Actin polymerizes on the surface of these objects into a crosslinked gel , and the force due to polymerization is sufficient to produce forward motion . Because the rigid bacteria and beads are resistant to deformation , significant elastic stresses build up in the actin gel ( 21 ) . Because the stress response of the actin gel is hard to visualize , rigid loads such as bacteria or beads are not very good experimental systems for characterizing the forces arising from polymerization . In contrast , when a flexible mem - brane vesicle is deformed , the stresses due to polymerization cause a measurable response in the vesicle by stretching the membrane or changing the vesicle volume . Earlier studies have demonstrated the actin - driven motility of endocytic vesicles ( 4 ) , endosomes and lysosomes ( 5 ) , and synthetic vesicles ( 6 ) . Mem - brane vesicles propelled by major sperm protein have also been observed in cell - free extracts ( 28 ) . However , these lipid - vesicle systems were never used to measure the magnitude , direction , and distribution of the forces generated at the actin – membrane interface . Our experiments with deformable lipid vesicles pro - vide direct visual demonstration of the distribution of actin forces on a moving load represented by the changes in vesicle shape . Our results demonstrate that to deform a vesicle from a quasispherical shape to the elongated shapes observed experi - mentally , actin exerts both retractile and propulsive forces depending on the local membrane curvature . We can understand this as follows . Some of the actin filaments may be tethered to Fig . 4 . Evolutionofstressesonavesiclesurface . ( a ) Differentialinterference contrast microscopy and ﬂuorescence images of a deforming vesicle as it changes shape over time . The vesicle deforms from an initial quasispherical shape to an elongated shape . The time in seconds is denoted in the bottom right corner . ( Scale bar , 3 (cid:1) m . ) ( b ) Simulated contours of a deforming vesicle from the model . The local stresses as obtained from the model are indicated in color around the part of the vesicle that is in contact with actin . The color bar shows the variation of the color scale with the stress values . ( c ) Stress proﬁles along the actin – membrane interface for the three different time pointsshown . Thebluelinecorrespondstothelast , mostdeformedshape , the redlinecorrespondstotheintermediateshape , andtheblacklinecorresponds to the original shape . T , tip of the trailing end ; S , vesicle sides . 4524 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 0837027100 Upadhyaya et al . the vesicle surface , whereas others are free to polymerize . In response to the membrane stretching due to deformation , the tethered filaments exert a tensile stress on the membrane surface . We find that the average magnitude of the maximum protrusive actin pressure is in the range of a few nN (cid:1) (cid:1) m 2 . For a density of a few hundred actin filaments per (cid:1) m 2 ( deduced from electron microscopy studies such as in refs . 14 and 29 ) , each filament contributes on the order of 10 pN . The maximum retractile force is larger than the propulsive forces . The presence of a retractile force localized at the trailing edge of the vesicle implies that the membrane has to be bound to the actin - filament network . Otherwise , the teardrop - shaped vesicle would relax immediately to its spherical equilibrium shape . Additionally , the colocalization of ActA and F - actin ( Fig . 1 c ) indicates an affinity between the two proteins , which could be due to a direct binding between these two proteins or mediated by a third protein such as the Arp2 (cid:1) 3 complex . This affinity is consistent with recent nanometer tracking ( 30 ) , laser tweezers ( 31 ) , and electron microscopy ( 32 ) experiments . However , we do not obtain an explicit measure of the strength of association between the vesicle and the actin tail , which could arise from a few strong bonds or many weak bonds . These results constrain Brownian ratchet models used to describe the microscopic polymerization mechanism ( 18 , 19 ) , which assume that the actin filaments are not attached to the lipid membrane . A recent extension of the Brownian ratchet model incorporates these experimental findings ( 20 ) . Binding between actin and the membrane is also included in an alternate model of clamped - filament elongation ( 33 ) and a continuum model for Listeria propulsion ( 21 ) . The elongation of the vesicle , which corresponds to an in - crease in the retractile stresses at the trailing edge , is followed by a rapid return to a spherical shape . We propose that the relaxation occurs because the retractile force at the trailing edge of the vesicle reaches a critical value beyond which the bonds between actin and the membrane rupture . We estimate that stresses on the order of 5 – 10 nN (cid:1) (cid:1) m 2 are required to break the bonds , which would lead to a force of (cid:3) 10 – 20 pN per filament , assuming a density of filaments similar to that observed in Listeria ( 14 , 29 ) . After rupture , the vesicle membrane moves to its equilibrium shape at a velocity much larger than the actin - polymerization speed . This behavior is reminiscent of the hop - ping of a Listeria mutant ( 21 , 34 ) and the stepping motion of beads ( 25 ) . However , the mechanism of this motility is very different in our system , because the stress is generated mainly in the deformable membrane rather than in the actin gel . Another key feature of our experimental system is that unidirectional motion is made possible by the reorganization of a membrane - associated protein , ActA , in contrast to beads that must undergo a symmetry - breaking event ( 23 ) . Spontaneous development of polarity in vesicles is fundamentally different , because ActA is free to diffuse in the plane of the membrane . Similar mechanisms involving protein reorganization may be at work in the plasma membrane to induce unidirectional motion in a moving cell . Because actin polymerization can deform the membrane significantly , our results show that the physical prop - erties of the membrane and its stress response may be important in determining the shape of the cell membrane . Further , the cell may alter the physical parameters of the plasma membrane , e . g . , membrane tension ( 35 ) , and thus regulate its dynamics . The general phenomena deduced from our observations are likely to play an important role in actin - polymerization dynamics at the leading edge of lamellipodia and filopodia of eukaryotic cells . Spatially controlled actin polymerization is at the origin of eukaryotic cell motility . Local actin polymerization generates a directed force that pushes the cell membrane forward . Such a directed force deforms the cell membrane at the leading edge and is accompanied by large changes in cell shape . Despite the higher level of biochemical complexity in moving cells as com - pared with our model experimental system , the basic physical ingredients are the same : polymerizing actin filaments interact - ing with a deformable membrane to produce shape changes and motion . Our vesicle - motility system reveals phenomena resulting from the interplay of polymerization and membrane deforma - tion and provides a measure of spatially resolved actin forces and their dynamics . Appendix Estimation of Stress Distribution . The fractional volume change of a deformed vesicle corresponds to an osmotic pressure (cid:7) acting to push the membrane outward . The corresponding area stretching introduces a membrane tension (cid:3) that is isotropic over the surface of the vesicle because the membrane is fluid . The front portion of the vesicle that is not in contact with actin assumes a spherical shape characterized by the principal curvatures , (cid:2) 1 and (cid:2) 2 . The stress (cid:4) due to stretching over the spherical cap is given by (cid:4)(cid:5) (cid:3) (cid:8) (cid:2) 1 (cid:6) (cid:2) 2 (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) cap , where (cid:2) cap is the total curvature that is balanced by the osmotic pressure . Therefore , (cid:7) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:4) cap (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) cap . This gives us a measure of the osmotic pressure in terms of the tension and the total curvature of the spherical cap . At any other point x on the vesicle surface , the total stress , which is balanced by the stress due to actin polymerization , is given by the sum of the osmotic pressure and the local tensile stress at that point . (cid:3) x (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:4) x (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) cap (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) x (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:8) (cid:2) cap (cid:7) (cid:2) x (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:6) (cid:2) The stress therefore is linearly proportional to the difference in curvature between the spherical cap and any other point on the vesicle surface . Vesicle - Deformation Model . To estimate the forces exerted by actin polymerization on the membrane we make the following as - sumptions . ( i ) Membrane bending can be ignored . ( ii ) Vesicles are unilamellar . ( iii ) In their rest state the vesicles are not stretched and have no osmotic pressure across the membrane . As the vesicles are prepared in a solution of similar ionic strength as the motility assay and assemble in the absence on any external forces on the vesicles , they will equilibrate to a nonstretched state without an osmotic pressure . ( iv ) Vesicles are axisymmetric spheroids of revolution . The model considers an axisymmetric vesicle partially covered with actin filaments in contact with the surface at several points . The spacing of these points d is chosen to reflect the density of actin filaments seen in electron microscopy studies ( 14 , 29 ) . These filaments are assumed to be bound to the surface . The outward osmotic pressure (cid:7) of a vesicle of volume V is given by (cid:7) (cid:5) RT (cid:4) n V (cid:7) C o (cid:5) , where C o is the external concentration of solute molecules impermeant to the vesicle membrane , n is the number of moles of such solutes within the vesicle , R is the ideal gas constant , and T is the absolute temperature . The osmolarity , determined by using a vapor - pressure osmometer ( VAPRO 5500 , Wescor , Logan , UT ) , was measured to be C o (cid:5) 239 (cid:4) 5 mM from eight different batches of brain extract . For a membrane deformed from an area A o to an area A , the area dilation (cid:8) is related to the membrane tension (cid:3) by ( 36 , 37 ) Upadhyaya et al . PNAS (cid:2) April 15 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 8 (cid:2) 4525 B I O P H Y S I C S (cid:8) (cid:6) A o (cid:7) A A o (cid:5) k B T 8 (cid:9) k c ln (cid:4) 1 (cid:6) (cid:3) a min2 (cid:9) 2 k c (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1) K a . We experimentally confirmed this relation for our composite egg – phosphatidylcholine (cid:1) nickel - chelating lipids by using a ves - icle - aspiration method ( 36 ) . The relation between the membrane tension and the area dilation yields the bending modulus k c and the stretching modulus K a . We measured these parameters and found k c (cid:5) 9 (cid:4) 3 k B T and K a (cid:5) 102 (cid:4) 40 mN (cid:1) m ( n (cid:5) 14 ) . The full data set was best fit by assuming a shortest possible wave - length of membrane undulation a min (cid:3) 50 nm . Based on the tension the total stress at the membrane – actin interface is given by the sum of the stress due to the area stretching and osmotic pressure , (cid:4) tot (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:2) 1 (cid:6) (cid:2) 2 (cid:9) (cid:3)(cid:6) RT (cid:4) n V (cid:7) n V o (cid:5) , where (cid:2) 1 and (cid:2) 2 are the local principal curvatures . The speed of a polymerizing gel is limited by the opposing stress ( 38 ) , (cid:10) p (cid:5) (cid:10) po exp (cid:4) (cid:2) W k B T (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:10) po exp (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:4) tot ad 2 k B T (cid:5) , where W is the work done against the opposing stress . This work is expressed as the opposing stress , integrated over the surface area per filament [ d 2 (cid:5) ( 25 nm ) 2 ; ref . 14 ] to get a force and multiplied by the distance over which a single polymerization event occurs ( a (cid:5) 2 . 7 nm , the effective actin monomer size ; k B , Boltzmann’s constant ) . At a given time , each point on the vesicle is moved a distance dr (cid:5) v p dt perpendicular to the vesicle ( v po dt (cid:5) 5 nm ) . The actin - covered section of the vesicle will evolve according to the polymerization speed determined by local stresses . Because the vesicle always has A (cid:10) A o and V (cid:11) V o , we cap the actin - covered section in such a way to maximize V while minimizing A . This is best realized by a spherical cap , which has the minimum energy of any accessible state . After every time step , the stress at each modeled point on the membrane is calculated . Before the next iteration , we redistribute the mod - eled points such that they cover half of the spherical cap . This is consistent with experimental images in that the part of the vesicle not in contact with actin resembles a hemisphere , and the actin cup is observed to creep around the vesicle as it deforms . For multilamellar vesicles , the membrane elastic properties depend on the number of layers ( 39 ) . Changing the stretching modulus of the membrane by a factor of 4 changes the maximum stresses by up to a factor of 2 . 0 . The stress profile changes with the stretching modulus but is characterized by negative stresses at the end and positive stresses on the sides always . We thank P . Lauer and D . Portnoy for the gift of L . monocytogenes strains D - LP2723 and D - LP4363 , necessary for purifying ActA - His and ActA - His - Cys . B . Brieher and T . Mitchison ( Harvard Medical School ) are greatly acknowledged for providing the brain extract and Arp2 (cid:1) 3 complex . We thank D . Lauffenburger ( Massachusetts Institute of Tech - nology ) for critically reviewing the manuscript and H . Carrel and M . Thattai ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) for helpful discussions . This work was supported by National Science Foundation CAREER Grant PHY - 0094181 . 1 . Bray , D . ( 2001 ) Cell Movements ( Garland , New York ) . 2 . Lauffenburger , D . A . & Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . 3 . Mitchison , T . J . & Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . 4 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Wunderlich , I . & Almers , W . ( 1999 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 . 5 . Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Mitchison , T . J . & Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 . 6 . Ma , L . , Cantley , L . C . , Janmey , P . A . & Kirschner , M . W . ( 1998 ) J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1125 – 1136 . 7 . Dramsi , S . & Cossart , P . ( 1998 ) Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 137 – 166 . 8 . Cameron , L . A . , Giardini , P . A . , Soo , F . S . & Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 110 – 119 . 9 . Kocks , C . , Marchand , J . B . , Gouin , E . , d’Hauteville , H . , Sansonetti , P . J . , Carlier , M . F . & Cossart , P . ( 1995 ) Mol . Microbiol . 18 , 413 – 423 . 10 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . & Mitchison , T . J . ( 1998 ) Science 281 , 105 – 108 . 11 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 . 12 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . & Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . 13 . Amann , K . J . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 306 – 310 . 14 . Tilney , L . G . , DeRosier , D . J . & Tilney , M . S . ( 1992 ) J . Cell Biol . 118 , 71 – 81 . 15 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . 16 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . & Carlier , M . F . ( 2001 ) Science 25 , 1502 – 1506 . 17 . Borisy , G . G . & Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . 18 . Peskin , C . , Odell , G . & Oster , G . ( 1993 ) Biophys . J . 65 , 316 – 324 . 19 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 1996 ) Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . 20 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 2003 ) Biophys J . 84 , 1591 – 1605 . 21 . Gerbal , F . , Chaikin , P . , Rabin , Y . & Prost , J . ( 2000 ) Biophys . J . 79 , 2259 – 2275 . 22 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 . 23 . van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 493 – 499 . 24 . Noireaux , V . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Friederich , E . , Prost , J . , Antony , C . , Louvard , D . & Sykes , C . ( 2000 ) Biophys . J . 78 , 1643 – 1654 . 25 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , Wiesner , S . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Carlier , M . F . & Sykes , C . ( 2002 ) Nature 417 , 308 – 311 . 26 . Sackmann , E . ( 1995 ) in Structure and Dynamics of Membranes , eds . Lipowsky , R . & Sackmann , E . ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) , pp . 213 – 304 . 27 . Kwok , R . & Evans , E . ( 1981 ) Biophys . J . 35 , 637 – 652 . 28 . Italiano , J . E . , Jr . , Roberts , T . M . , Stewart , M . & Fontana , C . A . ( 1996 ) Cell 84 , 105 – 114 . 29 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1025 . 30 . Kuo , S . C . & McGrath , J . L . ( 2000 ) Nature 407 , 1026 – 1029 . 31 . Gerbal , F . , Laurent , V . , Ott , A . , Carlier , M . F . , Chaikin , P . & Prost , J . ( 2000 ) Eur . Biophys . J . 29 , 134 – 140 . 32 . Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . & Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) Curr . Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 . 33 . Dickinson , R . B . & Purich , D . L . ( 2002 ) Biophys . J . 82 , 605 – 617 . 34 . Lasa , I . , Gouin , E . , Goethals , M . , Vancompernolle , K . , Violaine , D . , Vande - kerckhove , J . & Cossart , P . ( 1997 ) EMBO J . 16 , 1531 – 1540 . 35 . Raucher , D . & Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 – 136 . 36 . Evans , E . & Rawicz , W . ( 1990 ) Phys . Rev . Lett . 17 , 2094 – 2097 . 37 . Helfrich , W . & Servuss , R . - M . ( 1984 ) Nuovo Cimento D 3 , 137 – 151 . 38 . Hill , T . L . & Kirschner , M . W . ( 1982 ) Int . Rev . Cytol . 78 , 1 – 125 . 39 . Svetina , S . & Zeks , B . ( 1992 ) Eur . Biophys . J . 21 , 251 – 255 . 4526 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 0837027100 Upadhyaya et al .