Doing Organizational Identity : Earnings Surprises and the Performative Atypicality Premium * Paul Gouvard , Università della Svizzera italiana Amir Goldberg , Stanford University Sameer B . Srivastava , University of California , Berkeley August 9 , 2021 Abstract Research on the role of categories in markets encapsulates a puzzle : prior work has theorized and generally found that organizations suffer negative evaluations when they deviate from categorical expectations ; however , organizations are , in many cases , rewarded for being atyp - ical . We propose that this puzzle’s roots lie in the fact that prior research has conceptualized atypicality solely through the lens of categorical membership . We instead propose that atyp - icality can also arise performatively—based on organizational members’ interactions with external audiences . Integrating the performative approach to identity with the logic of cate - gorization in markets , we introduce the construct of performative atypicality —the extent to which organizational members’ identity performances diverge from audience expectations . Drawing on the two - stage valuation model of the candidate - audience interface , we theorize that , while categorical atypicality leads audiences to discount an organization , performa - tive atypicality is instead rewarded . Applying a deep - learning method to conversational text in over 90 , 000 earnings calls that firms hold with financial analysts , we develop a novel , language - based measure of performative atypicality . We find that performative atypicality leads to : ( a ) greater variance in analyst forecasts ; and ( b ) more inflated forecasts . Paradoxi - cally , this premium of performative atypicality results in the adverse outcome of a negative earnings surprise . * We thank participants of the Duke University , Fuqua School of Business Finance Seminar and the Berkeley Haas Culture Conference for helpful comments and feedback . The usual disclaimer applies . Direct all correspondence to Paul Gouvard : gouvap @ usi . ch . 1 Research on the role of categories in markets presents a seeming paradox . On the one hand , it consistently demonstrates that organizations that defy categorical expectations suffer negative consequences because audiences pay less attention to them , struggle to make sense of them , and , ultimately , find them inherently less appealing ( Hannan , Mens , Hsu , Kovács , Negro , Pólos , Pon - tikes , and Sharkey , 2019 ; Zuckerman , 1999 ; Leung and Sharkey , 2013 ; Goldberg , Hannan , and Kovács , 2016 ; Pontikes , 2012 ; Smith , 2011 ) . At the same time , however , organizations that explore novel opportunities outside established categorical boundaries are often rewarded with outsized success ( Deephouse , 1999 ; Durand and Calori , 2006 ; Zuckerman , 2017 ) . Why do or - ganizations sometimes suffer penalties for subverting the categorical order , while in other cases they reap benefits from doing so ? In answering this question , existing literature has tended to conceptualize atypicality through a narrow and singular lens of category membership . This literature generally sees organizations as fixed entities that are evaluated against shared classification criteria and infers categorical atyp - icality from primary attributes such as an organization’s product features . Firms with attributes that deviate from these criteria exhibit what we refer to as categorical atypicality . But organi - zational identity is not static . Drawing on constructivist theories of social identity ( Berger and Luckmann , 1967 ; West and Zimmerman , 1987 ) , we argue that organizational identity is not some - thing that an organization essentially has but rather a routine accomplishment that it needs to continuously do . Firms enact their identities through their constant and ongoing interactions with external audiences . Organizations that , in their interactions with outside stakeholders , diverge from the meanings commonly expressed in such interactions by their peers exhibit what we term performative atypicality . Building on the two - stage model of valuation ( Zuckerman , 2016 ) , we argue that categorical and performative atypicality relate to different stages of the valuation process . Whereas categor - ical atypicality is especially salient in the first stage , when audiences associate an organization with a recognized category , performative atypicality is salient in the second stage , when audiences assess the extent to which the organization differs from its categorical peers . Consequently , while audiences find it difficult to infer the identity of categorically atypical organizations , leading them 1 to discount such organizations , performatively atypical organizations enjoy the benefits of differ - entiation . We refer to this advantage as the performative atypicality premium . Using word embedding models , we develop a novel measure of performative atypicality from the spoken texts of firm leaders during quarterly earnings calls . Consistent with our theory , we demonstrate that performative atypicality varies within - firm and that stock analysts respond to this variation in formulating their predictions about firm performance . Moreover , we show that performative atypicality is associated with ambiguity , and that , all things equal , performatively atypical firms enjoy a premium , leading analysts to systematically over - estimate these firms’ future earnings . Thus , the premium of performative atypicality paradoxically leads to the adverse outcome of a negative earnings surprise . THEORY Categorical and Performative Atypicality What does it mean to be an atypical organization ? We draw on two different and mostly tan - gential approaches to the study of atypicality and its consequences . The first , which has been influential in research on organizations , conceptualizes organizational identity through a cate - gorical lens ( Zuckerman , 1999 ; Hannan et al . , 2019 ) . 1 This approach understands sense - making as a classificatory process , wherein external observers ( often referred to abstractly as the “audi - ence” ) , drawing on a shared set of criteria , divide organizations into distinct groups of similar entities . Prototypical membership in these groups is mutually exclusive : a typical restaurant , for example , is distinctively different from a typical hospital . Organizations that exhibit feature combinations that crosscut categorical boundaries are difficult to classify . We refer to this kind of multi - category membership as categorical atypicality . A categorical approach to atypicality has two implications . First , it orients researchers toward an organization’s primary attributes , most commonly those that relate to the products it makes or the services it provides . 2 A restaurant , for example , is defined first and foremost by the fact that 2 it serves food , whereas a hospital’s definition is rooted in the services it provides to people in medical need . Second , because it anchors on these primary attributes , a categorical approach tends to see organizational identity as static . Although firms can change their products and busi - ness scope , this evolution is mostly incremental and slow . Shifts in classification are therefore relatively rare . When dramatic changes do occur , such as IBM’s transition from computer man - ufacturing to business consulting ( Harreld , O’Reilly , and Tushman , 2007 ) , they normally unfold over long periods of time . Categorical identity is consequently stable or slow - changing through - out an organization’s lifetime . An alternative approach hails from constructivist social identity theories ( Berger and Luck - mann , 1967 ) , specifically those that emphasize the performative nature of social interaction . Orig - inally applied to gender ( West and Zimmerman , 1987 ) and later extended to social identity more broadly ( West and Fenstermaker , 1995 ) , this approach maintains that identity is not a fixed des - ignation but rather an attribution that is established repeatedly through interaction . Unlike the categorical approach which focuses on fixed attributes , this perspective emphasizes the dynamic and emergent aspects of identity . To be understood by others as having a specific identity—e . g . , a woman , an economist or an Evangelical—one’s interactional performances need to conform to audiences’ expectations about how such an identity is behaviorally enacted . An identity , in other words , is not something one innately has but something one continuously does . Performances that diverge from expectations—e . g . , a woman exhibiting stereotypically masculine behaviors or an economist behaving like an historian—are identity inconsistent . We refer to this type of incongruence as performative atypicality . We argue that , like individual actors , organizations are subject to evaluations of performa - tive atypicality . Indeed , research on organizational identity often analogizes it to how persons construct their self - identity , wherein members of the organization—predominantly its leaders— formulate an answer to the question “who are we ? ” ( Albert and Whetten , 1985 ; Whetten , 2006 ) . Early work in this vein emphasized the enduring aspects of organizational identity . A more recent stream has questioned the assumption of stability , examining instead how organizational identities shift and evolve over time . This work builds on the premise , grounded in symbolic interaction - 3 ism ( Mead , 1934 ; Goffman , 1959 ) , that individual identity is constructed through interpersonal interaction ( e . g . , Ibarra and Barbulescu , 2010 ) . Extending this view to organizational identity formation , work taking a dynamic view has predominantly focused on the interactional processes by which organizational members develop their own perceptions of their organization’s identity ( Corley and Gioia , 2004 ; Gioia , Patvardhan , Hamilton , and Corley , 2013 ; Schultz and Hernes , 2012 ; Hatch and Schultz , 2002 ) . These studies often emphasize the deliberative ways by which organizational leaders respond to outside influences in fashioning their firm’s image ( e . g . , Gioia and Thomas , 1996 ) . We shift focus from organizational members’ to outsiders’ perceptions , contending that a similar dynamism extends to how external evaluators form impressions of an organization . Such impressions are formed not only from the attributes of the products or services these organiza - tions offer . Rather , external evaluations also arise through routine interactions between external audiences and organizational members . 3 Whether introducing a new product at a trade show , responding to questions from the business press , or participating in a quarterly earnings call with financial analysts , business leaders are engaged in a meaning - laden social performance with ex - ternal audiences . Such performances communicate both denotative and connotative information . Denotative in - formation relates to the literal meanings being enunciated , namely , functional information about current or anticipated future performance such as sales forecasts , new products in development , leadership transitions , and impending mergers or divestitures . Performers’ subtle and often un - conscious word or behavioral choices also convey a wide range of connotative meanings that are not explicitly communicated . These connotative meanings shape audiences’ high - level in - terpretations of speakers’ discursive performances . This is where implicit and culturally shared schemas are being invoked ( Zilber , 2006 ) . For example , when Tesla’s iconoclast CEO Elon Musk repudiated “moats” in a controversial earnings call in May 2018 , audiences interpreted his comments as a rejection of a strategy that is focused on sustaining competitive advantage . Musk was communicating to investors that his com - pany is , instead , pursuing a strategy of dynamic innovation . 4 Recent research demonstrates that 4 connotative meanings communicated in language implicitly affect audience evaluations . The use of generic language in academic abstracts , for example , increases readers’ perceptions of the re - search’s importance , holding its substantive content constant ( DeJesus , Callanan , Solis , and Gel - man , 2019 ) . Similarly , reaffirmations of monetary assumptions in The Federal Reserve Chair’s speeches counterintuitively lead investors to question these assumptions , resulting in increased market uncertainty ( Harmon , 2019 ) . Although categorical and performative atypicality are related , they are distinct forms of atyp - icality . Each , we contend , corresponds to different aspects of sense - making . The former relates predominantly to inferences that outside observers make about what kind of an organization a firm is and , consequently , who its competitors are . Categorical atypicality , in other words , relates to the constitutive elements of a firm’s identity . Performative atypicality , in contrast , relates more to inferences about how an organization goes about doing what it does . These might be fundamental to how it operates , but not to what it , in essence , is . Tesla , for example , would still be seen as an electric vehicle company even if its CEO were to step down and his performatively atypical antics were replaced with more conventional behaviors . But if the company were to shift from manufacturing cars to manufacturing office furniture , its categorical identity would have shifted , irrespective of these antics . Similarly , organizations can be performatively atypical if they interact with stakeholders in ways that are inconsistent with how their competitors interact , even if they are categorically typical—that is , their products are similar to their competitors’ . Until the early 2000s , for exam - ple , Apple Computer , as it was still known at the time , had a fairly conventional product portfolio primarily focused on personal computer hardware and software . From a categorical perspective it was not especially difficult to classify . Nevertheless , its interactions with outside audiences were quite atypical . This atypicality was personified in the public performances of its founder and CEO , Steve Jobs , whose iconic jeans and black turtleneck stood in stark contrast to the formality of companies like Microsoft and IBM , connoting Apple’s nimbleness and innovation relative to its competitors’ staid bureaucracy . We recognize that the distinction between the categorical and performative elements of or - 5 ganizational identity can be blurry , and that these two dimensions of atypicality are potentially intertwined . The National Rifle Association , for example , a non - profit gun rights advocacy group , was mostly focused on marksmanship and hunting until the late 1970s , when it shifted focus to partisan political influence . This shift was both categorical , relating to the organization’s core mission and activities , and performative , as reflected in its leaders’ rhetoric . Nevertheless , as we show below , the two forms of atypicality are largely uncorrelated , at least in the for - profit data we examine . In the majority of cases , shifts in performative identity do not necessarily relate to shifts in categorical identity . Unlike categorical atypicality , performative atypicality is dynamically produced and is there - fore more likely to fluctuate over an organization’s lifespan . This does not mean that an orga - nization’s performative atypicality is necessarily unstable ; in fact , as we show below , a large proportion of the variance in performative atypicality is attributable to stable differences between organizations . Nevertheless , this dynamism suggests that an organization’s performative atypi - cality can change significantly , and dramatically , over time . To the same extent that organiza - tional members’ perceptions of their own organization’s identity can evolve over time , particularly through the interactions they have with external stakeholders ( Gioia , Schultz , and Corley , 2000 ; Gioia et al . , 2013 ) , we expect this dynamism to apply also to how these stakeholders make sense of the organization . The Performative Atypicality Premium A common assumption in the literature on categorical membership and its consequences is that outside observers draw on a two - stage process when evaluating an organization ( Zuckerman , 2016 ) . In the first stage , they assess what kind of organization it is by associating it with a cat - egory . This association determines which criteria will be used to evaluate the organization and , importantly , what reference group it will be compared to . In the second stage , once an organiza - tion’s categorical identity has been established , audience members evaluate the extent to which it is distinct from its competitors . 6 This two - stage process has been used to explain why categorically atypical organizations , es - pecially those that straddle multiple categories , suffer negative consequences despite the fact that differentiation is a fundamental source of competitive advantage and that markets reward novelty ( Barney , 1991 ; Deephouse , 1999 ) . While audiences generally seek and favor distinct organiza - tions , they evaluate such distinction positively only if they can make sense of these organizations . When external evaluators are confused about the categorical identity of an organization , they find it difficult to interpret its performance and to compare it to others . Consequently , categorically atypical organizations , despite their potential appeal , are systematically penalized ( Zuckerman , 2017 ) . With little exception , this work perceives atypicality to be a function of an organization’s categorical membership . Because categorical identity is very slow to change , this implies that an organization’s atypicality is inferred on the basis of the same features during both stages of the valuation process . An organization , therefore , cannot simultaneously enjoy the benefits of intelligibility that come with being perceived as typical in the first stage and the benefits of dif - ferentiation that come with being perceived as atypical in the second . Organizations consequently need to make a choice where to locate on the categorical atypicality continuum . Yet , despite the strong incentive for categorical conformity , atypicality is not only prevalent , it is also often rewarded with success . Apple Inc . , for example , has increasingly diversified its product portfolio since the early 2000s , launching convention - defying products such as the iPad . Contra baseline expectations of category theory , this atypical strategy was met with persistent success , making Apple the world’s largest company in terms of market capitalization . Existing research normally explains this seeming empirical abnormality as the result of relaxed classifi - cation standards during the first valuation stage . This easing can stem from the fact that certain audience members are more tolerant of atypicality than others ( Pontikes , 2012 ; Bowers , 2014 ; Goldberg et al . , 2016 ) , that audiences are less stringent about classification in certain domains ( Chatterji , Luo , and Seamans , 2021 ; Carnabuci , Operti , and Kovács , 2015 ; Haans , 2019 ) , or that certain organizations—such as Apple—enjoy greater latitude to defy categorical conventions due to their history or status ( Rao , Monin , and Durand , 2005 ; Smith , 2011 ; Sgourev and Althuizen , 7 2014 ; Durand and Kremp , 2015 ) . We propose , instead , that while categorical atypicality influences audience impressions mostly during the first stage of the valuation process , performative atypicality is especially salient in the second stage . Organizations can therefore enjoy the benefits of differentiation stemming for performative atypicality without necessarily paying the costs of being difficult to classify . This does not mean that performative atypicality is necessarily inconsequential during the first stage of valuation . We assume , however , that when outside observers have access to concrete information about the organization’s products or services—as is the case with investors evaluating for - profit firms—they primarily draw on this information in making inferences about the organization’s type . 5 Its performative atypicality can then facilitate its perceived distinctiveness . Figure 1 provides an illustration of the two - stage valuation model and its relationship with the two forms of atypicality . It depicts a hypothetical audience member—for example , a securities analyst—evaluating three firms , labeled A , B and C . In the first stage , the analyst assesses each firm’s categorical atypicality by determining its identity on the basis of its products and services . Whereas firms A and B are easily classifiable , firm C exhibits attributes that make it categorically ambiguous . Consistent with existing theory , we expect firm C to be devalued relative to the other two . In the second stage , each firm’s preformative atypicality is assessed relative to the typical performances of its peers . Because firms A and B are perceived as near categorically identical , they are compared to the same set of peers . But while firm A stands out as unique , firm B ’s performances are similar to its peers . Consequently , we contend , firm A will be seen more favorably . That performative atypicality can be interpreted as a positive signal may seem counterintuitive at first . After all , individual atypical performances , such as gender noncompliant behaviors , are normally strongly frowned upon . This is the case because the typical behaviors associated with gender , or other social identities , are central to the maintenance of social order . Norm defying behaviors are seen as threats to this perceived natural order and are therefore opposed , especially by those who benefit most from maintaining the status quo ( Meadow , 2018 ) . In most market contexts , however , audiences are concerned with maximizing value rather 8 than maintaining normative order . 6 They commonly perceive uniqueness and nonconformity as indications of such value ( Durand and Calori , 2006 ; Haans , 2019 ) . This is particularly the case for investors in the setting we empirically investigate below . As strategy scholars have persistently demonstrated , being different is a source of advantage in markets because it makes an organiza - tion distinct in the eyes of audiences and provides it with resources that are difficult to imitate ( Barney , 1991 ; Deephouse , 1999 ) . While categorical atypicality is , ultimately , a liability leading to an “illegitimacy discount” ( Zuckerman , 1999 ) , performative atypicality , we contend , is inter - preted by audiences as a predominantly positive indicator about strategic positioning and future performance . We refer to this advantage as the performative atypicality premium . The spectacular rise and fall of WeWork , the shared work space management company , pro - vides an instructive example of the performative atypicality premium . Founded in 2010 , WeWork was by no means a categorically unusual organization . Shared work spaces were not a novel idea at the time , and competitors such as Regus were already managing such spaces across the globe for two decades prior to WeWork’s entry into the market . Nevertheless , WeWork was perceived as inherently different . Owing to its founder’s , Adam Neumann , eccentric style—occasionally spotted walking barefoot on the streets of Manhattan and frequently professing unconventional aspirations , such as living forever , in interviews and public appearances—the company was seen as innovative and pioneering relative to its gray , conventional , and seemingly unambitious com - petitors . In the eyes of many , WeWork was not a typical real estate company but a “capitalist kibbutz” ushering a new model of work and collaboration . 7 Leading and experienced investors , most prominently SoftBank , were tempted by this performative atypicality . As Neumann himself confessed , these investments were based more on “our energy and spirituality than . . . on a mul - tiple of revenue . ” 8 Upon filing its initial public offering prospectus in 2019 , however , it became apparent that WeWork’s revenue model , profitability strategy , and governance structure were in - herently flawed . The IPO was subsequently withdrawn , and the company’s valuation , peaking at a staggering $ 47B , was cut by almost 80 % . 9 Performative Atypicality and Analyst Predictions We contend that the performative atypicality premium is prevalent in many market contexts but focus our attention on securities analysts . As Zuckerman ( 1999 , 2000 ) and a variety of studies since ( Bowers , 2014 ; Smith , 2011 ) demonstrate , investors and analysts strongly rely on cate - gorical distinctions when evaluating firms . They are therefore highly sensitized to instances of atypicality . At the same time , for reasons we discuss below , analysts often reward atypicality . We therefore expect the performative atypicality premium to be pronounced in their valuations . Firms can perform their identities in various forms and media , ranging from formal documents submitted to regulatory agencies to stylistic signals made through subtle office design choices . To derive performative atypicality , we focus on quarterly earnings calls : periodic calls that the management teams of most publicly traded firms in the U . S . hold with the financial analysts who cover their stocks . During these calls , managers discuss their recent financial performance , as well as their strategy and prospects for the future . Calls typically unfold in two stages : managers first read prepared statements and then engage in a more informal question and answer ( Q & A ) session . By all accounts , quarterly earnings calls are highly scripted , tightly controlled , and ritualized ( Lee , 2016 ) . Yet managers often reveal new or unexpected information—either deliberately or inadvertently—as they interact with each other and with analysts . Overall , speakers convey both conscious and unselfconscious meanings about the organization . We propose two hypotheses . First , we argue that , like categorical atypicality , performative atypicality produces ambiguity for audiences . Unlike categorical ambiguity , however , perfor - mative ambiguity arises not because audiences are unable to identify what kind of organization the one under consideration is or who its competitors are . Rather , ambiguity emerges precisely because the organization communicates meanings that are inconsistent with those typically com - municated by similar organizations . These unusual meanings make it more likely that different analysts will reach different conclusions about the firm’s future performance . We therefore antici - pate that performative atypicality will lead to greater disagreement in analysts’ earnings forecasts . Thus , we expect : 10 Hypothesis 1 : Performative atypicality will be associated with greater variability in analysts’ earnings forecasts in the following period . Second , as we argued above , we propose that performatively atypical firms will enjoy a val - uation premium . We focus on earnings surprises , the extent to which a firm’s reported quarterly profits diverge from median analyst expectations . As work in accounting and finance demon - strates , deviations from analyst forecasts affect future valuations and are commonly interpreted as a reflection of information - flow inefficiency in the market ( e . g . , Kasznik and McNichols , 2002 ) . When making their predictions , analysts presumably take into account the variety of information—especially hard data relating to performance—available about a firm . An earnings surprise corresponds to a bias in analysts’ estimations above and beyond this information . A nega - tive earnings surprise occurs when analysts , on average , overestimate a firm’s future performance . We consider such a surprise as indicative of a premium in response to meanings communicated during a quarterly earnings call . We expect the performative atypicality premium to be prevalent in analysts’ predictions for two main reasons . First , analysts occupy a cross - pressured position in financial markets . They rely on established industry categories to cluster firms and thus are often presented as enforcers of the market order ( Zuckerman , 1999 , 2004 ) . Yet , they gain recognition and status based on their ability to introduce novelty in their reports and , in particular , new or emerging categories ( Giorgi and Weber , 2015 ; Pontikes and Kim , 2017 ) . Analysts can therefore benefit from adopting behaviors akin to that of “market makers” ( Pontikes , 2012 ) as they risk losing ground to their peers if they fail to identify “the next big thing . ” Navigating these contradictory pressures , analysts , we expect , will be especially responsive to performative atypicality as it signals novelty without necessarily challenging existing categorical distinctions . Additionally , securities analysts have good reasons to interpret performative atypicality as a positive signal of future firm performance . As research by strategy scholars shows , top execu - tives often use language strategically to hinder their rivals’ actions . For instance , incumbents’ use of vague language reduces threat of entry as interested entrants have more difficulty figuring 11 out incumbents’ strategy ( Guo , Sengul , and Yu , 2019 ) . Similarly , firms framing their strategic moves using vague or distant timelines successfully delay the response of their rivals ( Nadkarni , Pan , and Chen , 2018 ) . To the extent that performative atypicality begets ambiguity , analysts may interpret it as an indication of strategic obfuscation , formulating higher expectations regarding future performance as a result . Thus , analysts have incentives to promote atypical firms and to be more optimistic about them . Overall , we expect that : Hypothesis 2 : Performative atypicality will be associated with negative earnings surprises in the following period . Previous work on atypicality and firm valuation has tended to focus on investment flows ( e . g . , Smith , 2011 ) . Because these studies seek to estimate the atypicality discount above and beyond firm fundamentals , they typically employ complex methods of taking these fundamentals into account ( e . g . , excess value calculations in Zuckerman [ 1999 ] ) . Earnings surprises obviate this need . Analyst performance predictions presumably take into account these analysts’ perceptions of how firm fundamentals should affect future performance . The earnings surprise represents the extent to which this consensus estimation is biased . DATA AND METHODS Data Our data , which come from Seeking Alpha ( https : / / seekingalpha . com / ) , include 99 , 307 transcripts of quarterly earnings calls for 5 , 986 firms from 2008 to 2016 . We trained a word embedding model ( described in greater detail below ) on the text of these calls to develop quarterly measures of performative atypicality for each firm . We then merged our measures of performative atypicality with analyst estimates from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System ( I / B / E / S , using unadjusted data ) to derive our dependent variables and with firm performance data from Compustat . To 12 test our hypotheses , we use firm - quarter observations for which we could measure performative atypicality , our dependent variables ( earnings surprise and analyst disagreement ) , as well as a host of additional control variables described below . This results in a total of 68 , 178 firm - quarter observations . To ensure that our estimates are not driven by outliers or especially small firms and consistent with standard practice , we winsorize the dependent variables at the 99 % level on both ends and remove observations for firms’ whose stock price is less than $ 1 or whose book value is less that $ 5M . Measuring Performative Atypicality Word Embedding Models We derived our measure of performative atypicality using word embedding models , a neural network - based unsupervised machine learning method for representing words in a high - dimensional vector space . These models are especially well - suited to analyzing connotative information in conversational text and are inspired by the distributional hypothesis , which states that the mean - ing of a word depends on the contexts in which it appears ( Harris , 1954 ; Lenci , 2018 ) . The approach we use in this study relies on the continuous bag - of - words ( CBOW ) method , wherein a two - layer neural network is trained to predict a word based on its surrounding words ( Mikolov , Sutskever , Chen , Corrado , and Dean , 2013 ) . Each word is then projected to a location in a shared vector space with several hundred dimensions . Although these dimensions are often uninterrupt - ible to human observers , the resulting vectors are generally found to capture meaningful semantic relations between words , such that the distance between two words in this high - dimensional space inversely corresponds to their semantic similarity ( Mikolov et al . , 2013 ) . Word embedding models are especially useful for our purposes as they are effective at cap - turing connotative meanings above and beyond the literal meanings of words . In a powerful demonstration of this connotative ability , Garg , Schiebinger , Jurafsky , and Zou ( 2018 ) show that implicit gendered associations in the meanings of various occupations track with these occupa - tions’ historical gender compositions . Kozlowski , Taddy , and Evans ( 2019 ) similarly illustrate 13 how different lifestyle activities invoke class , race , and gender identities . These studies identify specific dimensions of meaning—gender , class or race—by measuring the distance between a fo - cal word and exemplars in the relevant meaning dimension ( e . g . , “woman” ) . Because we are not focused on specific words or specific dimensions of meaning , we employ a different approach , wherein we measure the similarity between two earnings calls as the distance between their cen - troids ( averaged across all words in each call ) in embedding space . This captures the overall similarity in meanings being conveyed in the two calls . To illustrate the advantage of our approach , consider a situation in which we have three real estate firms—A , B , and C—and three words in the vocabulary—“office , ” “space , ” and “person - ality . ” Assume further that Firm A uses only the word “office” in its transcript , that Firm B uses both the words “office” and “space” in equal proportions , and that Firm C uses both the words “space” and “personality” in equal proportions . A simple frequentist approach that does not take into account the semantic relationships between words would find that the calls of Firm B and C have the same level of similarity to the call of Firm A . Yet Firm B ought to be considered closer to Firm A than to Firm C given the semantic dissimilarity between “personality” and “office” or “space” relative to the latter two’s similarity . Like the WeWork example we highlighted above , firm C’s vocabulary carries meanings that are not common in real estate parlance . We pre - processed each transcript following usual guidelines in natural language process - ing ( i . e . , removing digits , punctuation , and stopwords and then tokenizing the text ) . After pre - processing , we trained word embedding models on a quarterly basis to account for potential shifts in word meanings that may have occurred over our observation period ( Hamilton , Leskovec , and Jurafsky , 2016 ) . The word “onboarding , ” for example , originally used to denote employee so - cialization , has begun shifting in meaning over the last decade to describe the process by which users are educated and integrated into using a digital platform ( Vicinanza , Goldberg , and Srivas - tava , 2020 ) . Specifically , for each quarter , we trained a model on transcripts representing calls that took place in the focal quarter or in the three preceding ones . For example , the model for Q4 2016 was trained on transcripts of earnings calls that occurred between Q1 2016 and Q4 2016 . We use quarter - specific vocabularies containing 10 , 000 words each . We then represented firms 14 within this semantic space and derived a measure of performative atypicality by considering each firm’s distance in this space from its competitors . Measure Construction To measure performative atypicality , we first represented each transcript as the sum over the words it contains of each word’s embedding vector by the word’s frequency in the transcript . Let f 2 F index firms , q 2 Q index quarters , and C fq denote a quarterly earnings call for firm f at quarter q . We represent each call’s embedding centroid as follows : V f ; q = ∑ w 2 C f ; q W f ; q ( w ) (cid:1) V w ; q ( 1 ) where V w ; q is the embedding vector for word w at time q and W f ; q ( w ) is the proportion of word w in document C f ; q . The centroid V f ; q represents the firm’s location in embedding space at the time of the earnings call . To evaluate the firm’s typicality relative to categorically similar competitors , we measure the distance between this centroid and the centroid of all peer firms in the preceding three quarters as follows : P V f ; q = 1 j P f ; q j ∑ p 2 P f ; q 1 3 ∑ t 2 ( q (cid:0) 3 ; q (cid:0) 1 ) V p ; t ( 2 ) where P f ; q is the set of f ’s peers . To determine a firm’s set of peers we draw on the Text - based Network Industry Classification developed by Hoberg and Phillips ( 2016 ) . Drawing on firms’ product descriptions in their annual 10 - K statements , this classification identifies a set of competitors for each firm in a given year . This classification is particularly suited for our purposes for two reasons . First , because it depends on product descriptions , this classification comes closer to identifying competitors than traditional industry classifications such as SIC or NAICS . 9 Second , because the set of competitors varies by firm , firms are not lumped into mutually exclusive categories . This is especially applicable to multi - category organizations and is more consistent with how audiences classify firms . 15 We define performative atypicality as the cosine distance between a firm’s centroid and its peer centroid . To account for the right - tailed skewness of this measure , we log transform it as follows : P A f ; q = log ( 1 (cid:0) cos ( V f ; q ; P V f ; q ) ) ( 3 ) Performative atypicality , P A f ; q , is high ( low ) for firms that have calls in which the semantic meanings expressed are quite unusual ( commonplace ) relative to the meanings expressed in calls of peers . 10 Performative atypicality is sensitive to the length of the earnings call . Longer calls provide an opportunity for a wider range of meanings to be discussed , mechanically reducing performative atypicality . We therefore remove calls that include fewer than 200 words , and include call length as a control variable in multivariate models . Where we report uni - or bivariate distributions , we use the performative atypicality measure adjusted for call length . This measure is calculated as the residual in a linear model wherein performative atypicality is predicted from the logged number of words in a call . Validating the Word Embedding Model We first sought to validate our word embedding models . There are two main techniques for doing so : most - similar queries and word analogy tasks . The idea with most - similar queries is to find words that are closest in semantic space to a focal word and assess whether it makes sense for these words to be in close proximity to one another . For example , in a corporate setting , the word “board” might refer to a board of directors , whereas in construction a “board” might reference a physical object . In our data , the words closest to “boards” in Q4 2016 were : “committee , ” “direc - tors , ” and “CEOs . ” In the same time period , the words closes to “drilling” were “completions , ” “exploration , ” and “fracking . ” Because we fit different word embedding models for different time periods , we can also re - cover subtle changes in word meanings that occurred during our observation period . As an illus - tration , in the model for Q4 2006 , the word closest to “phones” was “cell , ” given that cell phones 16 were still common and smartphones had not yet come on the scene . In Q4 2016 , the word closest to “phones” was “smartphones , ” which by then had become ubiquitous . Our queries also revealed that the models capture context - specific semantic relationships . For example , the word “color” is often used by analysts when they ask managers to “give some more color” on a given topic . Consistent with this meaning of the word in the context of analyst calls , we found that the words closest to “color” throughout the observation period were : “granularity , ” “detail , ” and “insight . ” To further establish model validity , we examined whether mathematical operations in the vector space produced by our embeddings model could solve analogical reasoning problems . For example , Mikolov et al . ( 2013 ) showed that “King” - “Man” + “Woman” = “Queen . ” That is , their model captured the notion that man is to king as woman is to queen . Applying this approach to our embedding models , we found , for example , that “Boeing” - “USA” + “Europe” = “Airbus . ” Examples of other analogy tasks we tested on our models are shown in Table 1 . Overall , these analyses indicated that our embedding models captured semantically meaningful relationships between words used in quarterly earnings calls . Categorical Atypicality We do not directly hypothesize about categorical atypicality given that its relationship with ana - lyst valuations has been extensively demonstrated in prior work . Nevertheless , we include it as an independent variable in all our models for two reasons . First , we aim to demonstrate that , con - sistent with our theorizing , categorical and performative atypicality exhibit different patterns and relate differently to analyst valuations . In particular , while we expect performative atypicality to be correlated with negative earning surprises , we do not expect that to be the case for categorical atypicality . Second , we seek to demonstrate that categorical and performative atypicality are re - lated to valuations independently of one another ; performative atypicality is not merely a proxy for categorical atypicality . Following Bowers ( 2014 ) and Zuckerman ( 2004 ) , we implement categorical atypicality as an organization’s “coherence , ” inferred from the degree of stock coverage overlap between the analysts covering its stock . This operationalization assumes that an organization’s categorical 17 atypicality is reflected in the extent to which it draws a varied or homogeneous set of evaluators . Organizations covered by analysts who tend to cover different stocks are , by this construction , categorically atypical . To construct this measure , we first calculate for each pair of analysts i and j their level of coverage overlap as p ij = min ( m ij n i ; m ij n j ) , where m ij is the number of stocks covered by both analysts and n i is the number of stocks covered by analyst i . A stock is covered by an analyst when the analyst issued at least one forecast for the focal stock in the year up to and including the current quarter . We then define categorical atypicality for firm f as : CA f = 1 (cid:0) ∑ I fq (cid:0) 1 i ∑ J f j > i p ij (cid:1) c fi (cid:1) c fj I f ( I f (cid:0) 1 ) / 2 ( 4 ) where I f is the number of analysts covering firm f and c fi = 1 if analyst i covers firm f or c fi = 0 otherwise . Note that for notation simplicity , we disregard time in equation 4 , but construct the variable separately for each firm - quarter pairing . This measure is sensitive to the number of analysts covering the firm , I f . As the number of analysts grows , the likelihood of stock coverage overlap between any two analysts increases and thus categorical atypicality decreases mechanically . We therefore include number of estimates as a control variable in multivariate models . Where we report uni - or bivariate distributions , we use the categorical atypicality measure adjusted for number of estimates . This measure is calculated as a the residual in a linear model wherein categorical atypicality is predicted from the number of estimates . Dependent Variables Analyst Disagreement . To test Hypothesis 1 , we use the standard deviation in analysts’ estimates for a given quarter . We compute this variable directly based on analysts’ estimates , using each analyst’s most recent estimate for a given quarter . To mitigate the influence of extreme values , we winsorize this variable at the top and bottom 1 percent . Earnings Surprise . To test Hypotheses 2 , we compute earnings surprise for a given quarter . Fol - lowing standard practice in research on earnings surprises , we use the difference between a firm’s 18 reported earnings per share and analysts’ consensus estimate ( i . e . , the median estimate across an - alysts for a given quarter ) divided by the firm’s stock price at the end of the preceding quarter ( Guo et al . , 2019 ; Westphal , Park , McDonald , and Hayward , 2012 ; Barron , Byard , and Yu , 2008 ; Livnat and Mendenhall , 2006 ) . We then multiply it by 100 so that a earnings surprise of 1 means that the earnings surprise is 1 percent . For example , for a firm with a reported earnings of 1 , a consensus estimate of 0 . 99 and a stock price of 1 , the earnings surprise is then 100x ( 1 - 0 . 99 ) / 1 = 1 percent . To mitigate the influence of extreme values , we winsorize this variable at the top and bottom 1 percent ( as for example in Skinner and Sloan , 2002 ; Bochkay , Hales , and Chava , 2019 ) . 11 The mean earnings surprise is slightly negative in our sample , which is in line with other studies using similar measurement of surprise ( such as Akbas , 2016 ; Lee , 2016 ; Hartzmark and Shue , 2018 ; Livnat and Mendenhall , 2006 ) . Control Variables We include a variety of control variables to account for additional factors that can affect the de - pendent variables . The controls fall into three main categories : firm , call , and analyst attributes . Moreover , to control for mean differences between industries , we include industry fixed effects in all models that do not include firm fixed effects . The industry classification is based on the Text - based Fixed Industry Classifications ( Hoberg and Phillips , 2016 ) , which is the equivalent of two - digit SIC codes . Firm Attributes Assets . We control for firm size using log of assets . Leverage . We control for leverage , measured as total liabilities over total assets and winsorized at the top and bottom 1 percent . Leveraged firms have limited access to credit and greater cash flow constraints , which makes them more likely to experience a negative earnings surprise . Moreover , as previous research suggests , investors’ reactions to the information communicated in earnings calls is contingent on firms’ risk profiles ( Pan , McNamara , Lee , Haleblian , and Devers , 2018 ) . 19 Preceding positive surprise . Recent surprises convey signals on future performance that may influence the perception of market participants ( e . g . Pfarrer , Pollock , and Rindova , 2010 ; Shan - thikumar , 2012 ) . We thus control for past earnings surprises using a dummy that takes a value of 1 if there was a positive earnings surprise in the preceding quarter and 0 otherwise . 12 Call Attributes Order in quarter . Interviews we conducted with communication professionals who advise man - agement teams on how to prepare for quarterly earnings calls suggested that firms sometimes make strategic choices about when to schedule their call relative to other firms . In some situa - tions , firms prefer to go early in the call order so they can shape the industry narrative . In other cases , they prefer to go later so they can hear from their peers before deciding on their own mes - saging . We therefore control for the order of a firm’s call in a given quarter relative to other firms in the same industry . Positivity . Managers strategically influence the tone of conference calls ( D’Augusta and DeAn - gelis , 2020 ) . As these strategic efforts may correlate both with atypicality and future earnings , we control for the positivity of the earnings call . To do so , we use Loughran and McDonald’s ( 2011 ) sentiment dictionary for financial disclosures . We compute positivity as the difference between the number of positive and negative words divided by their sum . Time horizon . The time orientation of an earnings call may convey signals about the firm’s sub - sequent ability to achieve robust performance in the future . We therefore control for the call’s time horizon using DesJardine and Bansal’s ( 2019 ) dictionary of short - term and long - term ori - ented words . Specifically , we operationalize time horizon as the difference between the number of long - term words and the number of short - term words divided by their sum . Litigiousness . A high litigation risk may impact subsequent surprise ( Matsumoto , 2002 ) . Addi - tionally , firms may purposefully use atypical language to remain ambiguous regarding ongoing litigations . We thus control for the “litigiousness” of calls using the proportion of litigious words in the call . We again used Loughran and McDonald’s ( 2011 ) sentiment dictionary for financial disclosures to identify litigious words . 20 Length . As mentioned above , an earnings call’s length mechanically correlates with performative atypicality . Call length may also be related to future earning surprises , for example , if it is indica - tive of firm risk , above and beyond its mechanical relationship with performative atypicality . We therefore include the log of the total number of words in the call after tokenization as a control . Analyst Attributes Analysts churn . Analysts have some latitude is deciding which firms to cover . The composition of analysts is likely related to the probability of an earnings surprise and may be spuriously related to performative atypicality . In particular , because analysts specialize by industry , they may be discouraged by performative atypicality , resulting in their decision not to cover such firms . More - over , atypical firms may attract inexperienced analysts . Both of these mechanisms would lead to larger surprises . To ensure that this is not driving our result , we control for analyst churn—i . e . , the proportion of analysts producing an estimate for the current quarter that did not produce an estimate for the preceding one . Number of estimates . As noted above , the number of analysts covering a firm mechanically cor - relates with its categorical atypicality . Additionally , firms that draw a smaller number of analysts may be more likely to experience earnings surprise . We thus control for analysts’ coverage using the total number of analysts publishing an estimate for the firm’s earnings in the current quarter . Disagreement . In models where earnings surprise is our dependent variable , we control for the standard deviation in analysts’ estimates given that surprises are more likely to occur when ana - lysts have divergent expectations of future performance . RESULTS Performative Atypicality’s Properties Before directly testing our hypotheses , we begin with exploring the distributional properties of performative atypicality . Figure 2 plots the kernel density for performative atypicality . As the figure demonstrates , performative atypicality roughly follows a normal distribution . 21 Figure 3 plots standardized performative atypicality ( adjusted for call length ) as a function of standardized categorical atypicality ( adjusted for number of estimates ) . Each dot corresponds to one firm , such that its location on the plot corresponds to the firm’s levels of atypicality , averaged across all time periods . Dot sizes are proportional to firm size ( in assets ) . We highlight various firms for illustrative purposes . The patterns in Figure 3 support our baseline assumptions about performative atypicality . First , consistent with intuitive expectations , innovative technology firms such as Twitter and Facebook are among the highest in performative atypicality overall . Differences within indus - tries also conform to these expectations . Tesla , for example , is significantly more performatively atypical than Ford . Similarly , Nvidia and Google are much higher in performative atypicality than Microsoft or Dell . And whereas major banks such as JPMorgan Chase are below aver - age in performative atypicality , Green Dot—a mobile banking platform—is among the highest . Importantly , differences in performative atypicality are not merely reflections of differences in technological innovation . Sprint , for example , stands out relative to other mobile operators , while General Motors is much more performatively atypical than Ford , despite both having almost iden - tical categorical atypicality levels . Second , the mean levels of performative atypicality substantially vary between industries . Al - though there is significant variation within the food industry between firms such as Kellogg , Her - shey and Kraft Heinz , their mean performative atypicality is low relative to software companies . This underscores the need to account for mean differences between industries when estimating between - firm effects , as we do below . Third , it is evident that the two forms of atypicality—performative and categorical—capture different phenomena . Although the two adjusted measures are significantly correlated at the mean firm level ( (cid:26) = 0 : 092 ; p < 0 : 001 ) , this correlation is weak . Overall , across all quarterly obser - vations , the correlation between the adjusted measures is even weaker ( (cid:26) = 0 : 035 ; p < 0 : 001 ) . Firms like Akamai ( a provider of distributed computing platforms , cybersecurity and cloud com - puting ) and Intuit ( a financial services and software company ) , which are among the highest in categorical atypicality , exhibit below mean levels of performative atypicality . While their prod - 22 uct portfolios comprise quite unusual combinations , their performances in quarterly earning calls are fairly standard . Finally , while there is significant variation in performative atypicality between firms , a sub - stantial proportion of the variance is explained by fluctuations within - firm . As the inset in Figure 3 illustrates , even Tesla and Ford , two car manufacturers with , respectively , consistently high and low performative atypicality , exhibit significant within - firm variation . In fact , as Panel A of Fig - ure 4 shows , roughly half of the variance in performative atypicality is explained by differences between firms ; the rest is attributable to within - firm fluctuations . In contrast , between - firm dif - ferences explain roughly 85 % of the variance in categorical atypicality . This is also reflected in Panel B of the Figure , plotting the kernel densities for the standard deviation , by firm , for both types of ( adjusted and standardized ) atypicality measures . As this plot demonstrates , there is far greater variation within firm for performative atypicality than there is for categorical atypicality . Consistent with our theorizing , categorical atypicality is a significantly more static firm attribute than performative atypicality . In other words , what a firm constitutes changes less frequently than what it does in its public performances . This is also evident in Panel C of Figure 4 , which plots mean ( standardized ) performative and categorical atypicality over time . Once again , we see that performative atypicality is less sta - ble than categorical atypicality . Changes in mean levels of performative atypicality closely track movement in the S & P 500 index , whereas changes in categorical atypicality do not , suggesting that firms have more latitude to diverge from performative conventions during times of growth . During the first three years of our observation window , when the market was reeling from the 2008 financial crash and the great recession that followed , mean levels of performative atypical - ity were suppressed . Consistent with research on threat rigidity ( Staw , Sandelands , and Dutton , 1981 ) , firms often resort to more conservative actions during times of uncertainty and instability . Whether merely self - presentational or a true reflection of firm behavior , we interpret the relation - ship between market uncertainty and performative atypicality as an indication , consistent with our theory , that the latter is a signal of a firm’s deviation from conventional practices . 23 Main Results We test the two hypotheses by examining the relationship between performative atypicality and the dependent variables using between - and within - firm model specifications . We use ordinary least squares and cluster standard errors by firm in all models to account for within - firm interde - pendencies . All variables are measured at the quarter level . Given that , as Figures 3 and 4 show , performative atypicality varies by industry and time , we include industry and period fixed effects . Because we cannot identify random sources of variation in performative atypicality , our modeling strategy ultimately does not yield causal estimates . Nevertheless , in addition to including fixed effects , we lag the dependent variables ( as well as performance controls ) such that the effects of atypicality are estimated for analyst disagreement and earnings surprises in the subsequent quar - ter . While not fully addressing endogeneity concerns , this brings us closer to a causal estimate . For ease of interpretation , both atypicality measures are standardized . Table 3 reports results for between - firm OLS models , where the two dependent variables— analyst disagreement and earnings surprise—are modeled as a function of performative and cat - egorical atypicality . We include industry - quarter fixed effects to account for variation that is attributable to changes within industries over time . These models should therefore be interpreted as reflecting the effects of differences in atypicality between firms that are competing in the same industry and at the same time . Consistent with Hypothesis 1 , Models 1 to 3 demonstrate that performative atypicality is re - lated to an increase in analyst disagreement . This effect is comparable in size to the effect of categorical atypicality on disagreement . As Model 3 shows , these two effects are independent . Holding industry - time effects constant , ambiguity grows with both forms of atypicality . Mod - els 4 - 6 follow the same specifications in predicting earnings surprises . Here we see that only performative atypicality is significantly ( and strongly ) related to the outcome . Consistent with Hypothesis 2 , analysts tend to overestimate the future performance of firms that exhibit high per - formative atypicality . We contend that this is because they associate this form of atypicality with innovation and creativity . The marginal effects of performative atypicality on analyst disagree - ment ( Model 3 ) and earnings surprise ( Model 6 ) are plotted in Figure 5 . 24 Table 4 reports analogous models with within - firm specifications . These models include firm fixed effects , as well as separate industry and year fixed effects . 13 They also control for the level of analyst disagreement to ensure that the effects we model are attributable to analysts’ tenden - cies to overestimate future performance above and beyond their level of disagreement . Results for performative atypicality mirror those produced by between - firm specifications : in support of Hypothesis 1 , Models 1 to 3 demonstrate that analyst disagreement increases with performative atypicality , and , in support of Hypothesis 2 , Models 4 to 6 demonstrate that performative atypical - ity is associated with a negative earnings surprise . The marginal effects on analyst disagreement ( Model 3 ) and earnings surprise ( Model 6 ) are plotted in Figure 6 . Effects for categorical atypicality , however , are no longer significant in all models . This is because , as we argued above , categorical atypicality is a more stable attribute than performative atypicality . Not only is there far less within - firm variation in categorical atypicality than there is in performative atypicality ( Figure 4 , Panel A ) , when firms experience shifts in categorical atypicality , analysts appear to be less responsive to such change . We conjecture that this is because they tend to see firms’ categorical identities as fixed . Overall , the results reported in Tables 3 and 4 provide support for our two hypotheses . Whether focused on time - and industry - invariant differences between firms or on changes within a firm throughout its lifespan , they demonstrate that performative atypicality is associated with greater ambiguity and with a valuation premium that results in the adverse outcome of a negative earnings surprise . Extension : Moderation Analysis To understand potential sources of heterogeneity in the performative atypicality premium , we conducted additional analyses that focused on firms’ R & D expenditures . Previous research in - dicates that , like performative atypicality , R & D spending is associated with greater perceived uncertainty about a firm’s future performance and more volatile earnings . Moreover , as is the case with performative atypicality , investors appear to overestimate the extent to which R & D in - vestments signal a firm’s growth potential , as reflected in the excess value of R & D intense firms 25 ( Chan , Lakonishok , and Sougiannis , 2001 ) . Firms that invest in research and development are perceived as growth - focused . If R & D intensity and performative atypicality have similar effects on investors’ interpretation , we expect them to offset one another . More specifically , we expect the performative atypicality premium to be attenuated for firms that are R & D active , as these firms already enjoy a favorable outlook in the eyes of investors . There are a variety of ways to estimate R & D expenditures ( e . g . , as a proportion of sales , book value , or profits ) , and each yields very different estimates . We opted to construct a simple binary variable , which is set to 1 if a firm reports any R & D expenditures and to 0 otherwise . This variable represents whether a firm engages or does not engage in research and development . 14 Table 5 reports the results of between - ( Model 1 ) and within - firm ( Model 2 ) models of earn - ings surprise as a function of an interaction between R & D activity and performative atypicality . These models use the same specifications reported in the main results . In both models , perfor - mative atypicality is associated with a negative earnings surprise , but this effect is attenuated for R & D active firms . The marginal effects from both models are plotted in Figure 7 . As these plots show , performative atypicality significantly predicts analysts’ optimism only for firms that are not R & D active . Although the interaction between R & D activity and preformative atypicality is significant for both models , the differences between R & D active and inactive firms are less pronounced in within - firm models , as Figure 7 shows . Our results are robust to different opera - tionalizations of R & D intensity as reported in the Appendix . DISCUSSION Organizational research has overwhelmingly conceptualized atypicality as a unidimensional con - struct : an organization can only occupy a single location on the typicality - atypicality continuum . We argued , instead , that atypicality arises in two distinct and potentially orthogonal ways . Au - diences make inferences about an organization’s categorical atypicality by examining the prod - ucts and services it provides and about its performative atypicality by continuously observing 26 how its members’ interact with external stakeholders . While extant literature has consistently demonstrated the negative consequences of categorical atypicality , we showed that performative atypicality is instead associated with a valuation premium . Thus , counter to the perspective that prevails in the literature , atypicality can sometimes be an asset rather than a liability . Yet , in the context of financial analysts’ making earnings forecasts , this premium can paradoxically result in the adverse outcome of a negative earnings surprise . We speculate that the performative atypicality premium operates in other contexts in which it does not necessarily result in a disadvantageous outcome . From venture capitalists’ decisions about investing in early stage companies to consumers’ product choices , we expect that perfor - matively atypical organizations enjoy an advantage relative to their typical competitors . More broadly , our theoretical developments and findings make several contributions to the literatures on categories in markets and on organizational identity . Contributions Although existing work has exclusively theorized atypicality through a categorical lens , we con - jecture that , in practice , it has often conflated categorical and performative atypicality . Consider the common focus in the categories literature on the penalty accruing to category - spanning restau - rants ( Goldberg et al . , 2016 ; Rao et al . , 2005 ) . Menus , for example , are frequently used in this research stream as product descriptions for the purpose of inferring atypicality ( e . g . , Kovács and Johnson , 2014 ) . Restaurants that include terms that are typical of different cuisines—such as ciabatta ( Italian ) and chapati ( Indian ) —are considered atypical by this construction . But menus are also performative . Some minimally list ingredients , whereas others include more evocative descriptions about how these ingredients are “tossed in our homemade secret BBQ sauce . ” The mere insinuation of customer choice , for example , connotes the restaurant’s lack of culinary so - phistication ( Jurafsky , 2015 ) . Seen in this light , our findings make several contributions to the literature on categories and markets . First , our results shed new light on the dual pressures of conformity and differentiation that organizations face . As others have argued ( Schneiberg and Berk , 2010 ) , organizational literature 27 has mostly paid attention to the disciplinary role that categories play in markets . To explain why it is the case that organizations are nevertheless sometimes rewarded for atypicality , this litera - ture has either argued that some organizations have more leeway than others to defy categorical expectations or that some audiences and contexts enforce categorical codes less stringently than others . In contrast , our findings suggest that the same organization can enjoy the benefits of atyp - icality without necessarily suffering the penalties of categorical ambiguity , even in the eyes of the same audience . It can do so by being performatively atypical but categorically compliant . This suggests that organizations have more agency than conventionally assumed in resolving the tension between conformity and differentiation . Second , performative atypicality points attention to the dynamic nature of organizational iden - tity construction . Whereas prior work has conceptualized categorical atypicality as a relatively stable organizational attribute , we demonstrate that performative atypicality is fluid ( Figure 4 ) . Indeed , our results show that analysts respond to within - firm changes in performative atypicality but are insensitive to similar fluctuations in categorical atypicality ( Tables 3 and 4 ) . The implications of this dynamism go beyond the temporal shifts that organizations exhibit in their performative atypicality . The categorical and performative aspects of organizational identity relate to different types of identity formation processes . While categorical identity is an attribute that an organization has by virtue of the kinds of markets it competes in , performative iden - tity is something that an organization continuously does . Doing organizational identity does not necessarily imply temporal changes in identity ; organizational performances can be repeatedly consistent . Rather , unlike the unilateral nature of categorical decisions made by organizations , performative dynamism emerges through the multilateral interactions between an organization and its audiences ( Berger and Luckmann , 1967 ) . The process by which organizational identity is constituted performatively likely has impli - cations for organizational success . For example , are stable performative identities , irrespective of their atypicality or perhaps contingent on it , more conducive to success than fluid ones ? To what extent is the process by which performative change unfolds consequential for firm perfor - mance ? For example , Leung ( 2014 ) finds that individuals that exhibit erratic career trajectories 28 suffer in the labor market relative to those who experience the same scope of change but in a more gradual manner . A similar dynamic might be applicable to an organization’s performative atypi - cality . Addressing such questions will require extending our new measure to estimate changes in an organization’s performative identity relative to itself . While we leave these efforts for future work , we note that our findings and methodological innovations echo recent developments in the work on organizational identity , as perceived from the point of view of organizational members . Whereas early work in this vein emphasized the en - during nature of identity ( Albert and Whetten , 1985 ) , a more recent literature has highlighted that organizational identity is malleable and can evolve over time . Some of these accounts emphasize the actions of organizational leaders . Schultz and Hernes ( 2012 ) , for example , document the pro - cess by which the LEGO Group reconstructed its identity between 2000 and 2008 by invoking memories of the past and transforming them into claims about the future . Studies such as these have generally subscribed to a teleological view of organizational change , which assumes that change is purposefully adaptive and slow . Other work has theorized how organizational identity emerges and adapts through members’ interactions with outsiders ( e . g . , Gioia et al . , 2013 ) . Consistent with the latter , we bring the performative aspect of identity , which has been studied extensively at the individual level of analysis , to the organizational level . In our conceptualization , organizational members adapt their collective identity through everyday interactions with outside stakeholders . In some cases , these identity performances can be purposeful—for example , when members seek to proactively shape the organization’s image in the minds of external audiences . Yet , in many cases , including the context of highly scripted quarterly earnings calls , identity per - formances can be enacted without conscious awareness or intent—for example , when members inadvertently “leak” meanings or , more importantly , when they adjust their own interpretations in reaction to these interactive experiences . This constitutive aspect has often been emphasized in research on identity “performativity” ( e . g . , Butler , 2006 ) . Like the work on categorical atypi - cality , the work on identity performativity has tended to overemphasize the disciplining aspects of social performances , for example , how girls internalize societal expectations through their in - teractive performances of gender identity . Market , audiences , however , are less motivated by 29 normative incentives . This suggests that performative channels can be an avenue through which new identities are negotiated and solidified , rather than merely old ones being reinforced . Finally , we make a methodological contribution to organizational identity research . Prior work has employed qualitative research methods ( e . g . , Glynn , 2000 ) or surveys ( e . g . , Brickson , 2005 ) to measure different facets of organizational identity . In similar fashion to recent method - ological advances in the study of organizational culture ( Srivastava , Goldberg , Manian , and Potts , 2018 ; Corritore , Goldberg , and Srivastava , 2020 ; Li , Mai , Shen , and Yan , 2020 ) , we harness the tools of computational linguistics and deep learning to develop fine - grained and time - varying measures of organizational identity . We believe that this approach can readily be extended to other domains in which organizational members enact collective identity—for example , when organizational leaders engage with clients on social media ( Lee , Hosanagar , and Nair , 2018 ; Liu , Shin , and Burns , 2021 ) or respond to activist challenges from social movement organizations ( King , 2008 ; Weber , Rao , and Thomas , 2009 ; McDonnell , King , and Soule , 2015 ) . Limitations and Future Directions We recognize that this study has certain limitations , which point to useful avenues for future research . First , one of the downsides of using word embedding models is that the vectors repre - senting firms’ calls are uninterpretable . Thus , it is not possible to characterize the atypicality we observe in earnings calls . We conjecture , based on our interviews with professionals who advise management teams on how to prepare for these calls , that atypicality may reflect various attempts by management to frame potentially negative news in a more positive light ( cf . Suslava , 2018 ) . Future work can profitably supplement word embedding models with other natural language pro - cessing tools that can characterize the content of calls . Like most prior work on this topic , we examined the relationship between organizational atyp - icality and audience behaviors but did not directly measure the cognitive mechanisms channeling these outcomes . Some of the analyses we conducted shed light on these mechanisms . For exam - ple , we find that performative atypicality is associated with greater disagreement , suggesting that it produces ambiguity . Similarly , the attenuated effects for R & D active firms ( Table 5 ) , which are 30 generally more confusing to investors but are also more likely to be interpreted as being innova - tive and creative , are congruent with our assumptions that performative atypicality is interpreted as a positive signal about a firm’s potential growth . Moreover , by controlling for firm , call , and analyst attributes , we rule out certain alternative explanations ( for example , that the relationship between a firm’s performative atypicality and its future earnings surprise is fully attributable to its past performance ) . Overall , these findings are consistent with our cognitive arguments about the two - stage valuation process and its relationship with performative atypicality . We also acknowledge that our study focused on just one domain in which performative atyp - icality is expressed—i . e . , quarterly earnings calls with financial analysts—and its impact on one form of valuation—i . e . , earnings forecasts in the subsequent quarter . Yet we recognize that orga - nizational members engage in identity performances in a wide range of contexts—for example , when senior executives are interviewed by the business press , when new products are introduced at trade shows , and when an entrepreneurial team makes a fundraising pitch to a group of ven - ture capitalists—and these different performances might have varying implications for a broader set of outcomes such as a firm’s share price or equity valuation . We leave to future research the task of measuring performative atypicality across multiple domains of audience interaction and of understanding how it relates to different forms of valuation . Next , despite our use of models that include firm fixed effects and thus account for unob - served , time - invariant heterogeneity between firms , as well as our use of lagged variables , we are not able to make strong causal claims with our empirical setup . For example , it is possible that an anticipated negative earnings surprise leads managers to communicate in performatively atypical ways and that this atypicality is interpreted by analysts differently than we posit . One way to pin down the causal link from performative atypicality to negative earnings surprise would be to conduct a lab study . Participants could , for example , be randomly assigned to conditions in which they are exposed to the same substantive information about a firm that is presented in ways that are more or less performatively atypical relative to other firms . Participants could then be asked to provide specific quantitative forecasts of the firm’s earnings in the next quarter . Such a study would serve as a useful complement to this one—though questions about external validity would 31 arise unless actual financial analysts could be recruited as participants . Another limitation of our approach is that it does not account for the process by which analysts select into covering particular firms or attending specific calls . It is possible that the composition of analysts covering a stock could shift in ways that are related to performative atypicality and earnings surprise . Our use of analyst churn as a control variable partially addresses this concern but does not rule the potentially confounding role of selection . We leave for future research the task of disentangling the effects of selection from that of performative atypicality . Finally , our results paint previous results related to the effects of categorical atypicality in a different color . While our results are consistent with the claim that categorical atypicality leads to confusion , we do not find evidence for a categorical atypicality discount : categorical atypicality is insignificant in all of the earnings surprise models . We speculate that this relates to the fact that we explore earnings surprises , whereas previous work examined stock performance . It could be the case that we do not find an effect because categorical atypicality has offsetting effects on analysts’ predictions . 15 Our inability to reproduce the categorical atypicality discount could also be related to our operationalization of categorical atypicality , consistent with prior work , as the inverse of the mean overlap in analyst coverage . This measure is one step removed from categorical atypicality in that it relates to analysts’ perceptions of atypicality rather than objective atypicality per se . 16 CONCLUSION Extant literature has tended to focus on the negative implications of organizational atypicality . Building on constructivist theories of identity , we propose that organizational members “do” or - ganizational identity and introduce a novel form of atypicality—performative atypicality . Con - tra prevailing wisdom , we demonstrate that performative atypicality can result in a premium in the eyes of external stakeholders , wherein securities analysts overestimate a firm’s future suc - cess . Organizational members’ performances can be detected in the natural language they use in interactions with audiences . As we show , these subtle semantic deviations can have profound 32 economic consequences . 33 Notes 1 The term identity has been used by organizational scholars in a variety ways , at times at odds with one another . Many use the term as reference to the ways by which members of an organization understand its core and enduring attributes ( e . g . Whetten , 2006 ; Gioia , 1998 ) . Our focus , in contrast , is on perceptions of external audiences ( Hsu and Hannan , 2005 ) . We define identity as the various meanings that outside observers typically associate with an organization . Our theoretical focus also stands in contrast to the concept of organizational image , which is commonly conceived as the ways by which organizational members imagine that outside stakeholders view their organization ( Gioia et al . , 2000 ) . 2 In fact , this research is often founded on assumptions about the prototypical nature of categorical cognition ( Hannan et al . , 2019 ; Paolella and Durand , 2015 ) . 3 A related literature on organizational impression management has also emphasized external stakeholders’ per - ceptions . That work often focuses on the purposeful actions that organizational leaders take in order to influence their status and approval in the eyes of outside audiences ( Highhouse , Brooks , and Gregarus , 2009 ) . Our approach , instead , focuses on the interactional ways by which these impressions are formed , emphasizing the role of typicality , or lack thereof , in shaping these impressions . 4 https : / / hbr . org / 2018 / 05 / a - 40 - year - debate - over - corporate - strategy - gets - revived - by - elon - musk - and - warren - buffett 5 Consider the following scenario as illustration . A passerby inadvertently walking into an Apple Store in London shortly after its opening in 2004 might have been confused about its purpose . With products on display as if they were art , employees dressed as docents and no checkout , it looks more like a museum or an art gallery than an electronics store . This confusion would likely cause discomfort . In contrast , a shopper knowing this is an Apple retail store would have experienced no such confusion and instead would have perceived the store’s performative atypicality as yet another indication of Apple’s uniqueness . The setting we explore below is closer to the latter than the former scenario . 6 There are obvious exceptions to this rule . In market domains pervaded by authenticity , compliance with nor - mative expectations is part of the value proposition . For example , consumers undervalue Chinese restaurants that adhere to health regulations because contemporary hygiene standards can be inconsistent with traditional Chinese food preparation practices ( Lehman , Kovács , and Carroll , 2014 ) . 7 https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2019 / 11 / 02 / business / adam - neumann - wework - exit - package . html 8 https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / stevenbertoni / 2017 / 10 / 02 / the - way - we - work / ? sh = 30044b521b18 9 This is especially the case in industries in which different firms offer differentiated products . As Hoberg and Phillips ( 2016 ) show , for example , the Business Services industry is , in effect , differentiated into multiple submarkets . 10 The results reported below are robust to an alternative construction of this variable whereby peer firms are determined on the basis of their 2 - digit SIC classification . 34 11 Note that our use of unadjusted I / B / E / S data addresses the ”rounding problem” identified by Payne and Thomas ( 2003 ) . We use CRSP adjustment factors to account for cases where stock splits occur in between a forecast and earnings announcement . 12 In unreported models , we also include a dummy variable for past negative earnings surprise . Our results are robust to this specification , which we do not report for the sake of brevity . 13 We do not include quarter fixed effects as that would absorb too much variation . 14 We use this binary operationalization for two reasons . First , partly due to accounting reasons , R & D expenditure reporting tends to fluctuate significantly during the year and is often a poor representations of true R & D intensity , which tends to be relatively stable . Second , while there is obviously significant variance in R & D intensity between firms , ultimately the most pertinent distinction for our purposes is that between R & D active and inactive firms . The latter’s investment in research makes their future performance more difficult to predict . 15 We conducted a variety of additional between - firm analyses in which we relaxed the number of controls and the industry - quarter fixed effects . We found no statistically significant relationship between categorical atypicality and earnings surprise in any of these models . 16 An alternative operationalization might focus on the actual products a firm makes . Such an approach might be better suited for a model , like ours , that includes both categorical and performative atypicality , as it obviates confounding perceptions in the construction of the measure . We conducted a set of preliminary analyses that oper - ationalized categorical atypicality as the overlap between the competitors of a focal firm’s competitors , as derived from the Text - based Network Industry Classification . The relationship between performative atypicality and nega - tive earnings surprise is robust to this implementation . Given that this operationalization introduces a set of choices that require further investigation , we do not report thee results in this paper and intend to explore them in subsequent work . 35 REFERENCES Akbas , F . 2016 “The Calm before the Storm . ” The Journal of Finance , 71 : 225 – 266 . Albert , S . and D . A . Whetten 1985 “Organizational Identity . ” Research in Organizational Behavior , 7 : 263 – 295 . Barney , J . 1991 “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage . ” Journal of Management , 17 : 99 – 120 . Barron , O . E . , D . Byard , and Y . Yu 2008 “Earnings Surprises That Motivate Analysts to Reduce Average Forecast Error . ” The Accounting Review , 83 : 303 – 325 . Berger , P . L . and T . Luckmann 1967 The Social Construction of Reality : A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge . New York : Anchor . Bochkay , K . , J . Hales , and S . Chava 2019 “Hyperbole or Reality ? Investor Response to Extreme Language in Earnings Conference Calls . ” The Accounting Review , 95 : 31 – 60 . Bowers , A . 2014 “Relative Comparison and Category Membership : The Case of Equity Analysts . ” Orga - nization Science , 26 : 571 – 583 . Brickson , S . L . 2005 “Organizational Identity Orientation : Forging a Link between Organizational Identity and Organizations’ Relations with Stakeholders . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 : 576 – 609 . 36 Butler , J . 2006 Gender Trouble : Feminism and the Subversion of Identity . New York : Routledge 1st edition edition . Carnabuci , G . , E . Operti , and B . Kovács 2015 “The Categorical Imperative and Structural Reproduction : Dynamics of Technological Entry in the Semiconductor Industry . ” Organization Science , 26 : 1734 – 1751 . Chan , L . K . C . , J . Lakonishok , and T . Sougiannis 2001 “The Stock Market Valuation of Research and Development Expenditures . ” The Journal of Finance , 56 : 2431 – 2456 . Chatterji , A . K . , J . Luo , and R . C . Seamans 2021 “Categorical Competition in the Wake of Crisis : Banks vs . Credit Unions . ” Organization Science , . Corley , K . G . and D . A . Gioia 2004 “Identity Ambiguity and Change in the Wake of a Corporate Spin - Off . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 49 : 173 – 208 . Corritore , M . , A . Goldberg , and S . B . Srivastava 2020 “Duality in Diversity : How Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Cultural Heterogeneity Relate to Firm Performance . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 65 : 359 – 394 . D’Augusta , C . and M . D . DeAngelis 2020 “Does Accounting Conservatism Discipline Qualitative Disclosure ? Evidence From Tone Management in the MD & A . ” Contemporary Accounting Research , 37 : 2287 – 2318 . Deephouse , D . L . 1999 “To Be Different , or to Be the Same ? It’s a Question ( and Theory ) of Strategic Balance . ” Strategic Management Journal , 20 : 147 – 166 . 37 DeJesus , J . M . , M . A . Callanan , G . Solis , and S . A . Gelman 2019 “Generic Language in Scientific Communication . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 : 18370 – 18377 . DesJardine , M . and P . Bansal 2019 “One Step Forward , Two Steps Back : How Negative External Evaluations Can Shorten Organizational Time Horizons . ” Organization Science , 30 : 761 – 780 . Durand , R . and R . Calori 2006 “Sameness , Otherness ? Enriching Organizational Change Theories With Philosophical Considerations On The Same And The Other . ” Academy of Management Review , 31 : 93 – 114 . Durand , R . and P . - A . Kremp 2015 “Classical Deviation : Organizational and Individual Status as Antecedents of Confor - mity . ” Academy of Management Journal , 59 : 65 – 89 . Garg , N . , L . Schiebinger , D . Jurafsky , and J . Zou 2018 “Word Embeddings Quantify 100 Years of Gender and Ethnic Stereotypes . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115 : E3635 – E3644 . Gioia , D . A . 1998 “From Individual to Organizational Identity . ” In Identity in Organizations : Building The - ory through Conversations Foundations for Organizational Science 17 – 31 . Thousand Oaks , CA , US : Sage Publications , Inc . Gioia , D . A . , S . D . Patvardhan , A . L . Hamilton , and K . G . Corley 2013 “Organizational Identity Formation and Change . ” Academy of Management Annals , 7 : 123 – 193 . Gioia , D . A . , M . Schultz , and K . G . Corley 2000 “Organizational Identity , Image , and Adaptive Instability . ” Academy of Management Review , 25 : 63 – 81 . 38 Gioia , D . A . and J . B . Thomas 1996 “Identity , Image , and Issue Interpretation : Sensemaking During Strategic Change in Academia . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 : 370 – 403 . Giorgi , S . and K . Weber 2015 “Marks of Distinction : Framing and Audience Appreciation in the Context of Investment Advice . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 60 : 333 – 367 . Glynn , M . A . 2000 “When Cymbals Become Symbols : Conflict over Organizational Identity within a Sym - phony Orchestra . ” Organization Science , 11 : 285 – 298 . Goffman , E . 1959 The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life . New York , NY : Anchor 1 edition edition . Goldberg , A . , M . T . Hannan , and B . Kovács 2016 “What Does It Mean to Span Cultural Boundaries ? Variety and Atypicality in Cultural Consumption . ” American Sociological Review , 81 : 215 – 241 . Guo , W . , M . Sengul , and T . Yu 2019 “Rivals’ Negative Earnings Surprises , Language Signals , and Firms’ Competitive Ac - tions . ” Academy of Management Journal , 63 : 637 – 659 . Haans , R . F . J . 2019 “What’s the Value of Being Different When Everyone Is ? The Effects of Distinctive - ness on Performance in Homogeneous versus Heterogeneous Categories . ” Strategic Management Journal , 40 : 3 – 27 . Hamilton , W . L . , J . Leskovec , and D . Jurafsky 2016 “Cultural Shift or Linguistic Drift ? Comparing Two Computational Measures of Seman - tic Change . ” Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process - ing . Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2016 : 2116 – 2121 . 39 Hannan , M . T . , G . L . Mens , G . Hsu , B . Kovács , G . Negro , L . Pólos , E . Pontikes , and A . J . Sharkey 2019 Concepts and Categories : Foundations for Sociological and Cultural Analysis . Columbia University Press . Harmon , D . J . 2019 “When the Fed Speaks : Arguments , Emotions , and the Microfoundations of Institutions . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 64 : 542 – 575 . Harreld , J . B . , C . A . O’Reilly , and M . L . Tushman 2007 “Dynamic Capabilities at IBM : Driving Strategy into Action . ” California Management Review , 49 : 21 – 43 . Harris , Z . S . 1954 “Distributional Structure . ” WORD , 10 : 146 – 162 . Hartzmark , S . M . and K . Shue 2018 “A Tough Act to Follow : Contrast Effects in Financial Markets . ” The Journal of Finance , 73 : 1567 – 1613 . Hatch , M . J . and M . Schultz 2002 “The Dynamics of Organizational Identity . ” Human Relations , 55 : 989 – 1018 . Highhouse , S . , M . E . Brooks , and G . Gregarus 2009 “An Organizational Impression Management Perspective on the Formation of Corporate Reputations . ” Journal of Management , 35 : 1481 – 1493 . Hoberg , G . and G . Phillips 2016 “Text - Based Network Industries and Endogenous Product Differentiation . ” Journal of Political Economy , 124 : 1423 – 1465 . Hsu , G . and M . T . Hannan 2005 “Identities , Genres , and Organizational Forms . ” Organization Science , 16 : 474 – 490 . 40 Ibarra , H . and R . Barbulescu 2010 “Identity as Narrative : Prevalence , Effectiveness , and Consequences of Narrative Identity Work in Macro Work Role Transitions . ” The Academy of Management Review , 35 : 135 – 154 . Jurafsky , D . 2015 The Language of Food : A Linguist Reads the Menu . New York : W . W . Norton & Com - pany reprint edition edition . Kasznik , R . and M . F . McNichols 2002 “Does Meeting Earnings Expectations Matter ? Evidence from Analyst Forecast Revi - sions and Share Prices . ” Journal of Accounting Research , 40 : 727 – 759 . King , B . G . 2008 “A Political Mediation Model of Corporate Response to Social Movement Activism . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 53 : 395 – 421 . Kovács , B . and R . Johnson 2014 “Contrasting Alternative Explanations for the Consequences of Category Spanning : A Study of Restaurant Reviews and Menus in San Francisco . ” Strategic Organization , 12 : 7 – 37 . Kozlowski , A . C . , M . Taddy , and J . A . Evans 2019 “The Geometry of Culture : Analyzing the Meanings of Class through Word Embed - dings . ” American Sociological Review , 84 : 905 – 949 . Lee , D . , K . Hosanagar , and H . S . Nair 2018 “Advertising Content and Consumer Engagement on Social Media : Evidence from Face - book . ” Management Science , 64 : 5105 – 5131 . Lee , J . 2016 “Can Investors Detect Managers’ Lack of Spontaneity ? Adherence to Predetermined Scripts during Earnings Conference Calls . ” Accounting Review , 91 : 229 – 250 . 41 Lehman , D . W . , B . Kovács , and G . R . Carroll 2014 “Conflicting Social Codes and Organizations : Hygiene and Authenticity in Consumer Evaluations of Restaurants . ” Management Science , 60 : 2602 – 2617 . Lenci , A . 2018 “Distributional Models of Word Meaning . ” Annual Review of Linguistics , 4 : 151 – 171 . Leung , M . D . 2014 “Dilettante or Renaissance Person ? How the Order of Job Experiences Affects Hiring in an External Labor Market . ” American Sociological Review , 79 : 136 – 158 . Leung , M . D . and A . J . Sharkey 2013 “Out of Sight , Out of Mind ? Evidence of Perceptual Factors in the Multiple - Category Discount . ” Organization Science , 25 : 171 – 184 . Li , K . , F . Mai , R . Shen , and X . Yan 2020 “Measuring Corporate Culture Using Machine Learning . ” The Review of Financial Stud - ies , . Liu , X . , H . Shin , and A . C . Burns 2021 “Examining the Impact of Luxury Brand’s Social Media Marketing on Customer Engagement : Using Big Data Analytics and Natural Language Processing . ” Journal of Business Research , 125 : 815 – 826 . Livnat , J . and R . R . Mendenhall 2006 “Comparing the Post – Earnings Announcement Drift for Surprises Calculated from Ana - lyst and Time Series Forecasts . ” Journal of Accounting Research , 44 : 177 – 205 . Loughran , T . and B . Mcdonald 2011 “When Is a Liability Not a Liability ? Textual Analysis , Dictionaries , and 10 - Ks . ” The Journal of Finance , 66 : 35 – 65 . 42 Matsumoto , D . A . 2002 “Management’s Incentives to Avoid Negative Earnings Surprises . ” The Accounting Re - view , 77 : 483 – 514 . McDonnell , M . - H . , B . G . King , and S . A . Soule 2015 “A Dynamic Process Model of Private Politics : Activist Targeting and Corporate Recep - tivity to Social Challenges . ” American Sociological Review , 80 : 654 – 678 . Mead , G . H . 1934 Mind , Self and Society . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Meadow , T . 2018 Trans Kids : Being Gendered in the Twenty - First Century . Univ of California Press . Mikolov , T . , I . Sutskever , K . Chen , G . S . Corrado , and J . Dean 2013 “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality . ” In C . J . C . Burges , L . Bottou , M . Welling , Z . Ghahramani , and K . Q . Weinberger ( eds . ) , Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 3111 – 3119 . Curran Associates , Inc . Nadkarni , S . , L . Pan , and T . Chen 2018 “Only Timeline Will Tell : Temporal Framing of Competitive Announcements and Rivals’ Responses . ” Academy of Management Journal , 62 : 117 – 143 . Pan , L . , G . McNamara , J . J . Lee , J . J . Haleblian , and C . E . Devers 2018 “Give It to Us Straight ( Most of the Time ) : Top Managers’ Use of Concrete Language and Its Effect on Investor Reactions . ” Strategic Management Journal , 39 : 2204 – 2225 . Paolella , L . and R . Durand 2015 “Category Spanning , Evaluation , and Performance : Revised Theory and Test on the Cor - porate Law Market . ” Academy of Management Journal , 59 : 330 – 351 . Pfarrer , M . D . , T . G . Pollock , and V . P . Rindova 43 2010 “A Tale of Two Assets : The Effects of Firm Reputation and Celebrity on Earnings Sur - prises and Investors’ Reactions . ” Academy of Management Journal , 53 : 1131 – 1152 . Pontikes , E . G . 2012 “Two Sides of the Same Coin : How Ambiguous Classification Affects Multiple Audi - ences’ Evaluations . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 57 : 81 – 118 . Pontikes , E . G . and R . Kim 2017 “Strategic Categorization . ” In From Categories to Categorization : Studies in Sociology , Organizations and Strategy at the Crossroads volume 51 of Research in the Sociology of Organi - zations 71 – 111 . Emerald Publishing Limited . Rao , H . , P . Monin , and R . Durand 2005 “Border Crossing : Bricolage and the Erosion of Categorical Boundaries in French Gas - tronomy . ” American Sociological Review , 70 : 968 – 991 . Schneiberg , M . and G . Berk 2010 “From Categorical Imperative to Learning by Categories : Cost Accounting and New Cat - egorical Practices in American Manufacturing , 1900 – 1930 . ” In G . Hsu , G . Negro , and Ö . Koçak ( eds . ) , Categories in Markets : Origins and Evolution volume 31 of Research in the Sociology of Organizations 255 – 292 . Emerald Group Publishing Limited . Schultz , M . and T . Hernes 2012 “A Temporal Perspective on Organizational Identity . ” Organization Science , 24 : 1 – 21 . Sgourev , S . V . and N . Althuizen 2014 ““Notable” or “Not Able” : When Are Acts of Inconsistency Rewarded ? ” American Sociological Review , 79 : 282 – 302 . Shanthikumar , D . M . 2012 “Consecutive Earnings Surprises : Small and Large Trader Reactions . ” The Accounting Review , 87 : 1709 – 1736 . 44 Skinner , D . J . and R . G . Sloan 2002 “Earnings Surprises , Growth Expectations , and Stock Returns or Don’t Let an Earnings Torpedo Sink Your Portfolio . ” Review of Accounting Studies , 7 : 289 – 312 . Smith , E . B . 2011 “Identities as Lenses : How Organizational Identity Affects Audiences’ Evaluation of Or - ganizational Performance . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 56 : 61 – 94 . Srivastava , S . B . , A . Goldberg , V . G . Manian , and C . Potts 2018 “Enculturation Trajectories : Language , Cultural Adaptation , and Individual Outcomes in Organizations . ” Management Science , 64 : 1348 – 1364 . Staw , B . M . , L . E . Sandelands , and J . E . Dutton 1981 “Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior : A Multilevel Analysis . ” Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 26 : 501 – 524 . Suslava , K . 2018 Three Essays on Equity Valuation and the Predictive Ability of Quantitative and Qualita - tive Corporate Disclosures . Ph . D . thesis Rutgers University - Graduate School - Newark . Vicinanza , P . , A . Goldberg , and S . Srivastava 2020 “Who Sees the Future ? A Deep Learning Language Model Demonstrates the Vision Ad - vantage of Being Small . ” , . Weber , K . , H . Rao , and L . G . Thomas 2009 “From Streets to Suites : How the Anti - Biotech Movement Affected German Pharma - ceutical Firms . ” American Sociological Review , 74 : 106 – 127 . West , C . and S . Fenstermaker 1995 “Doing Difference . ” Gender & Society , 9 : 8 – 37 . West , C . and D . H . Zimmerman 1987 “Doing Gender . ” Gender & Society , 1 : 125 – 151 . 45 Westphal , J . D . , S . H . Park , M . L . McDonald , and M . L . A . Hayward 2012 “Helping Other CEOs Avoid Bad Press : Social Exchange and Impression Management Support among CEOs in Communications with Journalists . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 57 : 217 – 268 . Whetten , D . A . 2006 “Albert and Whetten Revisited : Strengthening the Concept of Organizational Identity . ” Journal of Management Inquiry , 15 : 219 – 234 . Zilber , T . B . 2006 “The Work of the Symbolic in Institutional Processes : Translations of Rational Myths in Israeli High Tech . ” Academy of Management Journal , 49 : 281 – 303 . Zuckerman , E . W . 1999 “The Categorical Imperative : Securities Analysts and the Illegitimacy Discount . ” Amer - ican Journal of Sociology , 104 : 1398 – 1438 . Zuckerman , E . W . 2000 “Focusing the Corporate Product : Securities Analysts and De - Diversification . ” Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 45 : 591 – 619 . Zuckerman , E . W . 2004 “Structural Incoherence and Stock Market Activity . ” American Sociological Review , 69 : 405 – 432 . Zuckerman , E . W . 2016 Optimal Distinctiveness Revisited 183 – 199 . Zuckerman , E . W . 2017 The Categorical Imperative Revisited : Implications of Categorization as a Theoretical Tool . 46 Figures 1 2 Categorical Atypicality What kind of organization is this ? Performative Atypicality How does this organization act ? Software ComputerHardware Printers Engines Photography A A C Atypicality and Two - Stage Valuation A’s peers B’s peers B B Figure 1 : An illustration of our theoretical model , depicting a hypothetical audience member evaluating three firms labeled A , B and C . Grayed dots represent other firms . In the first stage each firm is located in a stylized categorical space , where labels correspond to categories and dashed lines represent perceived categorical boundaries . In the second stage each firm is located in a stylized performative space populated by its perceived group of peers . - 4 . 5 - 4 - 3 . 5 - 3 - 2 . 5 - 2 - 1 . 5 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 K e r ne l D en s i t y Performative Atypicality Figure 2 : Kernel density for Performative Atypicality 47 - 0 . 4 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Categorical Atypicality - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 P e r f o r m a t i v e A t y p i c a li t y Twitter Google FacebookNVIDIA Dell Amazon Intuit Akamai Microsoft Bank of America Green Dot JPMorgam Chase Citigroup Goldman Sachs H & R Block Tesla Ford GM Sprint Verizon AT & T Kellogg Kraft Heinz Hershey Netflix Blockbuster Q1 ' 11 Q1 ' 12 Q1 ' 13 Q1 ' 14 Q1 ' 15 Q1 ' 16 - 1 . 5 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 P e r f o r m a t i v e A t y p i c a li t y Tesla Ford Figure 3 : Atypicality by firm . Each dot represents one firm’s mean ( standardized ) performative and categorical atypicality ( for firms with a minimum of 10 quarterly observations ) . Highlighted firms are color coded by FIC200 industry . The inset plots Tesla’s and Ford’s performative atypicality over time . Atypicality Categorical Performative 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 V a r i an c e E x p l a i ned b y F i r m s 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 K e r ne l D en s i t y SD in Atypicality by Firm PerformativeCategorical Q1 ' 08 Q1 ' 09 Q1 ' 10 Q1 ' 11 Q1 ' 12 Q1 ' 13 Q1 ' 14 Q1 ' 15 Q1 ' 16 - 0 . 5 - 0 . 4 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 A t y p i c a li t y 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 S & P 500 I nde x Mean Atypicality by Time Categorical S & P 500 Performative A B C Figure 4 : ( A ) The proportion of variance in performative and categorical atypicality explained by fixed firm differences . ( B ) Kernel densities for the standard deviation , by firm , in performative and categorical atypicality . ( C ) Mean performative and categorical atypicality by quarter . The dotted line corresponds to the S & P 500 index . 48 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality 0 . 03 0 . 035 0 . 04 0 . 045 0 . 05 0 . 055 0 . 06 A na l ys t D i s ag r ee m en t Between - Firm Marginal Effects - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 E a r n i ng s S u r p r i s e Between - Firm Marginal Effects Figure 5 : Marginal effects of between - firm performative atypicality on analyst disagreement ( left ) and earnings surprise ( right ) ( Models 3 and 6 , Table 3 ) . - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality 0 . 04 0 . 042 0 . 044 0 . 046 0 . 048 0 . 05 0 . 052 0 . 054 A na l ys t D i s ag r ee m en t Within - Firm Marginal Effects - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality - 0 . 2 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 1 - 0 . 05 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 E a r n i ng s S u r p r i s e Within - Firm Marginal Effects Figure 6 : Marginal effects of within - firm performative atypicality on analyst disagreement ( left ) and earnings surprise ( right ) ( Models 3 and 6 , Table 4 ) . - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 E a r n i ng s S u r p r i s e Between - Firm Marginal Effects R & D Inactive R & D Active - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Performative Atypicality - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 E a r n i ng s S u r p r i s e Within - Firm Marginal Effects R & D Inactive R & D Active Figure 7 : Marginal effects of between - firm ( left ) and within - firm ( right ) performative atypicality on earnings surprise by firm R & D activity ( Table 5 ) . 49 Tables Table 1 : Sample Analogy Tasks Applied to the Word Embedding Model for Q4 2016 Analogy Task Answer Toyota - Japan + Germany = ? BMW Boeing - USA + Europe = ? Airbus Huawai - China + Korea = ? Samsung Amazon - America + China = ? Alibaba Youtube + Series = ? Netflix Amazon - Stores = ? AWS ( Amazon Web Services ) Google + Finance = ? Yahoo Microsoft - Windows = ? Dell Employees - Managers + Parents = ? Children Stakeholders - Stakes + Stocks = ? Stockholders CEO - Organization + Finance = ? CFO Shareholders - Shares + Property = ? Landlord Managers - Management + Consulting = ? Consultants 50 Table 2 : Descriptive Statistics and Correlations VARIABLES ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) Min Max Mean Median Std . Dev . ( 1 ) Earnings surprise 1 . 000 - 11 . 39 5 . 525 - 0 . 023 0 . 0533 1 . 459 ( 2 ) Disagreement - 0 . 093 1 . 000 0 0 . 444 0 . 0467 0 . 0247 0 . 0677 ( 3 ) Performative Atyp . - 0 . 028 0 . 028 1 . 000 - 4 . 440 0 . 0995 - 2 . 490 - 2 . 525 0 . 571 ( 4 ) Categorical Atyp . - 0 . 020 - 0 . 081 0 . 156 1 . 000 0 0 . 993 0 . 774 0 . 785 0 . 104 ( 5 ) Log of assets 0 . 019 0 . 195 - 0 . 248 - 0 . 481 1 . 00 1 . 920 14 . 76 7 . 637 7 . 629 1 . 890 ( 6 ) Leverage - 0 . 057 0 . 123 - 0 . 102 - 0 . 253 0 . 498 1 . 000 0 . 0765 1 . 015 0 . 541 0 . 548 0 . 223 ( 7 ) Prec . pos . surp . 0 . 114 - 0 . 053 - 0 . 062 - 0 . 056 0 . 078 - 0 . 025 1 . 000 0 1 0 . 611 1 0 . 488 ( 8 ) Order in quarter - 0 . 020 - 0 . 033 0 . 097 0 . 122 - 0 . 238 - 0 . 105 - 0 . 053 1 . 000 0 68 24 . 65 23 10 . 98 ( 9 ) Positivity 0 . 066 - 0 . 150 - 0 . 103 0 . 040 - 0 . 031 - 0 . 038 0 . 132 0 . 039 1 . 000 - 1 0 . 857 0 . 0943 0 . 107 0 . 219 ( 10 ) Horizon 0 . 017 0 . 085 0 . 014 - 0 . 117 0 . 223 0 . 077 0 . 029 - 0 . 019 0 . 075 1 . 000 - 1 0 . 714 - 0 . 648 - 0 . 673 0 . 192 ( 11 ) Litigious - 0 . 022 0 . 062 0 . 099 - 0 . 047 0 . 055 0 . 075 - 0 . 029 - 0 . 010 - 0 . 175 0 . 077 1 . 000 0 1 0 . 248 0 0 . 432 ( 12 ) Log of length 0 . 033 0 . 051 - 0 . 519 - 0 . 251 0 . 378 0 . 084 0 . 070 - 0 . 115 0 . 126 0 . 159 - 0 . 049 1 . 000 5 . 298 9 . 243 7 . 470 7 . 568 0 . 514 ( 13 ) Analysts churn 0 . 012 - 0 . 080 0 . 059 0 . 103 - 0 . 123 - 0 . 057 - 0 . 017 0 . 018 0 . 029 - 0 . 018 0 . 005 - 0 . 087 1 . 000 0 1 0 . 187 0 . 143 0 . 201 ( 14 ) No of estimates 0 . 050 0 . 100 - 0 . 238 - 0 . 392 0 . 551 0 . 086 0 . 101 - 0 . 141 0 . 048 0 . 133 - 0 . 032 0 . 489 - 0 . 118 1 48 9 . 938 8 7 . 400 51 Table 3 : Between - Firm Models Analyst Disagreement y Earnings Surprise y ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Categorical Atypicality 0 . 002 (cid:3) 0 . 002 (cid:3) - 0 . 011 - 0 . 010 ( 2 . 14 ) ( 2 . 13 ) ( - 0 . 95 ) ( - 0 . 91 ) Performative Atypicality 0 . 002 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 002 (cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 041 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 041 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 84 ) ( 2 . 81 ) ( - 4 . 13 ) ( - 4 . 13 ) Firm Attributes Leverage y 0 . 009 (cid:3) 0 . 009 (cid:3) 0 . 009 (cid:3) - 0 . 362 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 364 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 366 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 23 ) ( 2 . 17 ) ( 2 . 29 ) ( - 6 . 76 ) ( - 6 . 78 ) ( - 6 . 82 ) Log of assets y 0 . 005 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 005 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 005 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 035 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 035 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 034 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 6 . 63 ) ( 6 . 65 ) ( 6 . 67 ) ( 4 . 47 ) ( 4 . 56 ) ( 4 . 35 ) Preceding pos . surprise - 0 . 004 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 004 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 004 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 243 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 243 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 242 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 5 . 00 ) ( - 5 . 05 ) ( - 4 . 95 ) ( 15 . 00 ) ( 15 . 00 ) ( 14 . 96 ) Call Attributes Order in quarter - 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 - 0 . 002 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 002 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 002 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 0 . 33 ) ( - 0 . 31 ) ( - 0 . 42 ) ( - 3 . 43 ) ( - 3 . 37 ) ( - 3 . 33 ) Positivity - 0 . 025 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 024 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 025 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 158 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 145 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 148 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 9 . 48 ) ( - 9 . 17 ) ( - 9 . 24 ) ( 4 . 13 ) ( 3 . 82 ) ( 3 . 86 ) Horizon 0 . 011 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 010 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 010 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 033 0 . 045 0 . 045 ( 4 . 45 ) ( 4 . 17 ) ( 4 . 17 ) ( 0 . 90 ) ( 1 . 23 ) ( 1 . 23 ) Litigious 0 . 002 0 . 002 0 . 002 - 0 . 050 (cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 047 (cid:3) - 0 . 047 (cid:3) ( 1 . 46 ) ( 1 . 36 ) ( 1 . 34 ) ( - 2 . 68 ) ( - 2 . 54 ) ( - 2 . 53 ) Log of length 0 . 000 0 . 002 0 . 002 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 038 - 0 . 039 ( 0 . 22 ) ( 1 . 53 ) ( 1 . 58 ) ( - 0 . 06 ) ( - 1 . 62 ) ( - 1 . 63 ) Analyst Attributes Analysts churn - 0 . 017 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 017 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 017 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 093 (cid:3) 0 . 093 (cid:3) 0 . 094 (cid:3) ( - 8 . 44 ) ( - 8 . 43 ) ( - 8 . 48 ) ( 2 . 54 ) ( 2 . 55 ) ( 2 . 57 ) No . of estimates y 0 . 000 (cid:3) 0 . 000 (cid:3) 0 . 000 (cid:3) 0 . 006 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 006 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 006 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 50 ) ( 2 . 17 ) ( 2 . 43 ) ( 3 . 50 ) ( 3 . 90 ) ( 3 . 67 ) Disagreement y - 1 . 343 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 333 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 330 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 5 . 36 ) ( - 5 . 33 ) ( - 5 . 32 ) Constant 0 . 011 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 165 0 . 107 0 . 124 ( 0 . 97 ) ( - 0 . 17 ) ( - 0 . 48 ) ( - 0 . 99 ) ( 0 . 60 ) ( 0 . 69 ) Industry - Quarter FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 61670 61670 61670 61670 61670 61670 R 2 0 . 225 0 . 225 0 . 225 0 . 127 0 . 128 0 . 128 t statistics in parentheses , Standard errors clustered by firm y Lagged variables , (cid:3) p < 0 : 05 , (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 01 , (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 001 52 Table 4 : Within - Firm Models Analyst Disagreement y Earnings Surprise y ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Categorical Atypicality - 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 0 . 014 0 . 013 ( - 0 . 48 ) ( - 0 . 44 ) ( 0 . 66 ) ( 0 . 61 ) Performative Atypicality 0 . 001 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 001 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 034 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 034 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 3 . 38 ) ( 3 . 37 ) ( - 3 . 43 ) ( - 3 . 40 ) Firm Attributes Leverage y 0 . 045 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 045 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 045 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 534 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 533 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 532 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( 10 . 13 ) ( 10 . 12 ) ( 10 . 11 ) ( - 4 . 77 ) ( - 4 . 77 ) ( - 4 . 76 ) Log of assets y 0 . 021 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 021 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 021 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 023 - 0 . 023 - 0 . 022 ( 11 . 55 ) ( 11 . 56 ) ( 11 . 55 ) ( - 0 . 69 ) ( - 0 . 68 ) ( - 0 . 67 ) Preceding pos . surprise - 0 . 003 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 003 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 003 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 075 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 074 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 075 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 4 . 93 ) ( - 4 . 90 ) ( - 4 . 90 ) ( 5 . 58 ) ( 5 . 56 ) ( 5 . 56 ) Call Attributes Order in quarter 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 - 0 . 000 ( 0 . 62 ) ( 0 . 70 ) ( 0 . 70 ) ( - 0 . 33 ) ( - 0 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 40 ) Positivity - 0 . 015 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 015 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 015 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 278 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 271 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 271 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 10 . 33 ) ( - 10 . 20 ) ( - 10 . 19 ) ( 7 . 16 ) ( 7 . 01 ) ( 6 . 99 ) Horizon 0 . 004 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 003 (cid:3) 0 . 003 (cid:3) - 0 . 022 - 0 . 015 - 0 . 015 ( 2 . 64 ) ( 2 . 42 ) ( 2 . 42 ) ( - 0 . 58 ) ( - 0 . 38 ) ( - 0 . 38 ) Litigous 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 001 - 0 . 056 (cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 055 (cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 055 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 0 . 96 ) ( 0 . 90 ) ( 0 . 90 ) ( - 3 . 15 ) ( - 3 . 10 ) ( - 3 . 10 ) Log of length - 0 . 000 0 . 001 0 . 001 - 0 . 015 - 0 . 045 - 0 . 045 ( - 0 . 38 ) ( 1 . 19 ) ( 1 . 19 ) ( - 0 . 61 ) ( - 1 . 79 ) ( - 1 . 79 ) Analyst Attributes Analysts churn - 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 0 . 098 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 098 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 098 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 1 . 12 ) ( - 1 . 12 ) ( - 1 . 11 ) ( 3 . 01 ) ( 3 . 01 ) ( 3 . 00 ) No . of estimates y 0 . 001 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 001 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 001 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 002 0 . 002 0 . 002 ( 6 . 17 ) ( 6 . 17 ) ( 6 . 15 ) ( 0 . 66 ) ( 0 . 67 ) ( 0 . 69 ) Disagreement - 1 . 939 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 932 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 931 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 6 . 55 ) ( - 6 . 54 ) ( - 6 . 53 ) Constant - 0 . 137 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 146 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 146 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 548 0 . 779 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 775 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 9 . 44 ) ( - 9 . 60 ) ( - 9 . 60 ) ( 1 . 93 ) ( 2 . 67 ) ( 2 . 66 ) Firm FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 61440 61440 61440 61440 61440 61440 R 2 0 . 516 0 . 516 0 . 516 0 . 214 0 . 215 0 . 215 t statistics in parentheses , Standard errors clustered by firm y Lagged variables , (cid:3) p < 0 : 05 , (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 01 , (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 001 53 Table 5 : Earnings Surprise by R & D Activity ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Between - Firm Within - Firm Performative Atypicality - 0 . 065 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 056 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 4 . 54 ) ( - 3 . 94 ) Categorical Atypicality - 0 . 013 0 . 011 ( - 1 . 11 ) ( 0 . 54 ) R & D Active 0 . 069 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 74 ) R & D Active (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 053 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 049 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 92 ) ( 2 . 69 ) Analyst Disagreement - 1 . 315 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 960 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 5 . 27 ) ( - 6 . 61 ) Constant 0 . 126 0 . 756 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 0 . 71 ) ( 2 . 60 ) Firm Attributes Yes Yes Call Attributes Yes Yes Analyst Attributes Yes Yes Industry - Quarter FE Yes No Firm FE No Yes Year FE No Yes Observations 61392 61199 R 2 0 . 129 0 . 213 t statistics in parentheses , Standard errors clustered by firm (cid:3) p < 0 : 05 , (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 01 , (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 001 54 APPENDIX : Robustness Checks In table 5 we report the relationship between performative atypicality , interacted with R & D activ - ity , and earnings surprise . Here we report additional analyses with different operationalizations of the R & D activity variable . In the main paper we operationalize R & D activity as a binary variable , distinguishing between firms that engage in R & D and those that do not ( where firms that report any R & D expenditures during our observation window are defined as R & D active ) . Here , we produce two additional operationalizations of R & D activity which further differentiate between R & D active firms . As is conventional in the finance and accounting literatures , we define R & D intensity as the R & D expenditure divided by sales , averaged by year to smooth seasonal fluctu - ations . The first measure differentiates between low and high R & D activity firms at the median of R & D intensity , and the second between low , medium and high R & D intensity firms by tercile . A firm’s level of R & D activity is determined as its average level . Table A1 reproduces the models reported in Table 5 with these variables , with Models 1 and 3 reporting the median - based variable , and Model 2 and 4 the tercile - based variable . The omitted category in all models is firms with no R & D activity . Models 1 and 2 report between - firm specifi - cations , and models 3 and 4 within - firm ones . Our finding that performative atypicality premium is attenuated for R & D active firms is robust to these specifications . The effect is concentrated in highly active firms when examining between - firm effects ( Model 1 ) , but this is less the case when examining effects within firm . Overall , these results demonstrate that R & D activity attenuates the preformative atypicality premium . 55 Table A1 : Robustness Checks - Earnings Surprise by R & D Intensity Between - Firm Within - Firm Median Tercile Median Tercile ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Performative Atypicality - 0 . 065 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 065 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 055 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 0 . 055 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 4 . 52 ) ( - 4 . 54 ) ( - 3 . 88 ) ( - 3 . 89 ) Categorical Atypicality - 0 . 012 - 0 . 012 0 . 011 0 . 011 ( - 1 . 10 ) ( - 1 . 08 ) ( 0 . 53 ) ( 0 . 54 ) R & D Intensity by Median Low R & D 0 . 062 (cid:3) ( 2 . 34 ) High R & D 0 . 063 ( 1 . 93 ) Low R & D (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 032 0 . 043 (cid:3) ( 1 . 65 ) ( 2 . 09 ) High R & D (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 073 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 051 (cid:3) ( 3 . 32 ) ( 2 . 25 ) R & D Intensity by Tercile Low R & D 0 . 072 (cid:3) ( 2 . 47 ) Med R & D 0 . 048 ( 1 . 44 ) High R & D 0 . 066 ( 1 . 68 ) Low R & D (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 046 (cid:3) 0 . 061 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 2 . 06 ) ( 2 . 65 ) Med R & D (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 060 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 050 (cid:3) ( 2 . 67 ) ( 2 . 18 ) High R & D (cid:2) Performative Atypicality 0 . 055 (cid:3) 0 . 027 ( 2 . 20 ) ( 0 . 97 ) Analyst Disagreement - 1 . 318 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 314 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 965 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) - 1 . 965 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ( - 5 . 28 ) ( - 5 . 26 ) ( - 6 . 63 ) ( - 6 . 63 ) Constant 0 . 113 0 . 128 0 . 749 (cid:3)(cid:3) 0 . 756 (cid:3)(cid:3) ( 0 . 63 ) ( 0 . 71 ) ( 2 . 58 ) ( 2 . 60 ) Firm Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Call Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Analyst Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry - Quarter FE Yes Yes No No Firm FE No No Yes Yes Year FE No No Yes Yes Observations 61395 61395 61201 61201 R 2 0 . 129 0 . 129 0 . 213 0 . 213 t statistics in parentheses , standard errors clustered by firm (cid:3) p < 0 : 05 , (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 01 , (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 : 001 56