Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 , pp . 371 - 390 / September 2001 371 R ESEARCH A RTICLE M EDIA AND G ROUP C OHESION : R ELATIVE I NFLUENCES ON S OCIAL P RESENCE , T ASK P ARTICIPATION , AND G ROUP C ONSENSUS 1 By : Youngjin Yoo Weatherhead School of Management Case Western Reserve University Cleveland , OH 44106 U . S . A . yyoo @ po . cwru . edu Maryam Alavi Goizueta Business School Emory University Atlanta , GA 30322 U . S . A . Maryam _ Alavi @ bus . emory . edu Abstract Organizations deploy advanced communication media such as audio and videoconferencing to enhance and extend group communication inter - actions . However , established groups ( i . e . , groups with a history of working together ) can view and use the same technology differently from groups without any past experiences of working together . This study examines the relative influences of media condition and group cohesion on social presence , task participation , and group consen - sus . Results from a controlled laboratory experi - ment with 45 triads of college students working on 1 Ron Weber was the accepting senior editor for this paper . a decision - making task showed that media condi - tion ( audio conferencing vs . desktop video - conferencing ) has significantly smaller influences on social presence and task participation than group cohesion in established groups . The study found that influence of group cohesion over social presence is additive , rather than substitutive , to that of media condition . The study also estab - lished that task participation played a more impor - tant role than social presence in determining the degree of consensus among group members in computer - mediated communication environments . Keywords : Desktop videoconferencing , group cohesion , social presence , media richness , group history , group consensus , task participation ISRL Categories : CB0904 , AA09 , UF , AI0105 Introduction As communication and network technologies con - tinue to play an increasingly important role in modern organizations , scholars have attempted to explain how users(cid:146) perceptions of different com - munication media are formed and how different communication media influence task outcomes . In one category of research , scholars have focused on the media condition . They have argued that mechanical characteristics of media are the primary forces that influence users(cid:146) Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 372 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 perceptions of communication interactions , as well as their task performance ( e . g . , Daft and Lengel 1984 , 1986 ; Dennis and Kinney 1998 ; Rice 1992 ; Short et al . 1976 ) . This media - dependent per - spective focuses on (cid:147)invariant(cid:148) mechanical characteristics of media , such as bandwidth , com - munication cues , and feedback speed . Typically , however , it does not include contextual and social factors that might influence one(cid:146)s perception of technology . A second category of research draws on a more general social construction perspective of technology ( Bijker 1995 ; Orlikowski 1992 ) . Here , scholars have focused instead on how social factors influence users(cid:146) perceptions of media and media choices , arguing that media in use ( that is , socially constructed media ) may exhibit different characteristics than media as conceived ( e . g . , DeSanctis and Poole 1994 ; Fulk 1993 ; Fulk et al . 1990 ; Lee 1994 ; Markus 1994 ; Ngwenyama and Lee 1997 ; Walther 1995 ; Yates and Orlikowski 1992 ) . These studies have found that social factors , such as cohesion among group members , organizational culture , and norms , pro - foundly influence the way in which media are used in organizations . However , they usually have not considered the role of different media conditions . While these two categories of research address different aspects of communication media choice and use , a greater understanding can be gained by considering their findings together . Recently , scholars have started to synthesize the two categories of research ( e . g . , Burke and Chidam - baram 1999 ; Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Chidam - baram 1996 ; Trevino et al . 2000 ; Webster and Trevino 1995 ) . However , the relative influences of media condition and social factors on individuals(cid:146) perception and use of communication media have not been compared directly . Accordingly , in this paper , we report the results of research that compares the relative influences of the media condition and group cohesion on social presence , task participation , and group consensus . We argue that , while the media condition itself will influence the degree of social presence and task participation for zero - history groups , group cohesion will have a significantly larger influence on them than media condition for established groups . Social presence here refers to the degree of salience of the other person in the interaction and the consequent salience of the interpersonal relationship ( Short et al . 1976 ) . In addition to synthesizing two categories of media research by comparing the influences of media condition and group cohesion on social presence , this paper also contributes to the literature by examining the role of task participation . The small group literature has found that task participation is an important variable that influences the quality of group outcomes ( Green and Taber 1980 ; Hiro - kawa 1988 ; Hirokawa and Pace 1983 ) . In com - munication media literature , users(cid:146) perceptions of media have been highlighted as the key variable that influences communication effectiveness . However , task participation and various factors that might influence it have not been fully examined in the context of communication media research . This paper is organized as follows : We first review the existing literature on media perception and the factors that impact it . Next , we develop our research model and present results from a controlled laboratory experiment that involved 45 triads of college students . Finally , we discuss the implications of our findings for future research and management of communication media in organi - zations . Theoretical Framework and Research Hypotheses Media - Dependent Perspective Until recently , the media - dependent perspective has largely dominated the literature regarding electronic media and its impact on group task outcomes . This perspective presumes that the mechanical characteristics of the electronic com - munication system are inherent , and that the fit between these characteristics and the type of the task supported by the system determines the task outcomes . Social presence theory and media richness theory are two prominent theories that reflect this perspective . Social presence theory ( Short et al . 1976 ) regards social presence as a quality inherent in a com - Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 373 munication medium . The theory further argues that communication media that convey more cues would lead to a higher degree of social presence . Therefore , media that provide more communi - cation cues are judged as being warm , personal , sensitive , and sociable . Similarly , media richness theory argues that a medium(cid:146)s (cid:147)richness(cid:148)(cid:151)i . e . , its ability to change understanding within a time interval ( Daft and Lengel 1986 , p . 560 ) (cid:151)is determined by certain invariant fixed mechanical characteristics of the medium , such as feedback speed , the number of cues , the degree of personalization , and the language variety . Both social presence theory and media richness theory argue that rich media or media with a high degree of social presence are better suited to ambiguous and equivocal tasks that require resolution of different views and opinions among people . Conversely , lean media are better for uncertain tasks that require the quick transmission of information and facts . Numerous studies using various forms of computer - mediated communication media , such as group support systems and electronic mail , have found that the use of media with a small number of cues and communication channels tends to (cid:147)depersonalize(cid:148) the communication interactions ( Rice 1984 ; Siegel et al . 1986 ; Sproull and Kiesler 1986 ) . Drawing on this stream of literature , Culnan and Markus ( 1987 ) suggest that the mechanical characteristics of the system , such as bandwidth and the number of communication cues , alter interpersonal variables . More recently , Sarbaugh - Thompson and Feldman ( 1998 ) found that the overall volume of organizational com - munication declined as the use of electronic mail increased . Much of the lost communication involved greetings . Not only do the mechanical characteristics of media influence the degree of social presence and media richness , but they also influence task participation among group members . For example , past research examining the impact of a video channel in small group communication and learning has shown that a video channel can distract group members from the focal task . Olson et al . ( 1995 ) found that groups communicating with both video and audio channels spent less time stating and clarifying issues when compared with groups communicating with audio only . Festinger and Maccoby ( 1964 ) found that a video signal distracted group members(cid:146) attention from the audio speech content , particularly if it was irrelevant to the focal task . Similarly , Stephenson et al . ( 1976 ) observed that audio - only dyads had more task orientation than dyads with both audio and video channels . In education research , Kozma ( 1986 ) notes a short window of engage - ment , during which learners will attend to material presented via a video channel . After this point , their minds shift away from the materials . Phillips and Santoro ( 1989 ) noted that lean media steered users away from irrelevant ( i . e . , non - task ) interpersonal interactions by directing attention to the process and content of problem - solving discussion . Similarly , Smolensky et al . ( 1990 ) found an inverse relationship between the frequency of social interactions and decision - making success with electronic communication media . These studies suggest that communication media with high social presence , such as a video channel , might distract individuals from the focal task . The group decision - making literature notes that active task participation is an important antecedent to positive group outcomes ( Green and Taber 1980 ; Hirokawa 1988 ; Hirokawa and Pace 1983 ) . However , the relationships among communication media , task participation , and the task outcomes in computer - mediated environ - ments have not been studied in the past . There - fore , such mixed empirical results concerning the impact of communication media on task perfor - mance might have arisen because of the lack of attention devoted to task participation . Taken together , the literature reviewed above suggests that the mechanical characteristics of communication media influence task outcomes by influencing ( 1 ) the degree of social presence of communication interactions and ( 2 ) task partici - pation . More specifically , communication media with many communication cues and channels , such as desktop videoconferencing , would enhance the degree of social presence , thereby improving the quality of outcomes of equivocal tasks . Yet the same media might potentially lower group member task participation , thus hindering effective task performance by the group . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 374 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 Therefore , in the context of a zero - history group where there is no source of social influence , we hypothesize : H1 : In a zero - history group condition , a video channel will increase the degrees of social presence per - ceived by the group members . H2 : In a zero - history group condition , a video channel will lower the degrees of task participation of group mem - bers . Social Construction Perspective and Group Cohesion Past empirical studies have provided mixed sup - port for the core arguments of media - dependent theories ( e . g . , Daft et al . 1987 ; Dennis and Kinney 1998 ; Rice 1992 ; Russ et al . 1990 ; Valacich et al . 1994 ) . The inconsistent results of the use of electronic communication technology become more evident when the outcomes of a particular medium are reviewed . For example , while some studies found video technology to be as effective as face - to - face interactions , or more effective than audio - only environments ( e . g . , Abel 1990 ; Valacich et al . 1994 ) , others found no significant effect of video technology ( e . g . , Alavi et al . 1995 ; Dennis and Kinney 1998 ; Meader 1995 ) . Recently , in response to such inconsistent empirical results , researchers have begun to examine the perception of communication media in (cid:147)social(cid:148) contexts ( e . g . , Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Chidambaram 1996 ; McGrath et al . 1993 ; Walther 1995 ) . In particular , it has been shown that the richness of communication interactions via so - called (cid:147)lean(cid:148) media sometimes can be increased among individuals who know each other . For example , Walther argues that lean media still can support the exchange of rich social information among individuals over time . He found that the exchange of social information over leaner media became as effective as richer media over a period of time . Chidambaram also found that the per - ceived social presence of group support systems increased as group members spent more time with their communication partners , although initially they found the text - based technology constraining . Carlson and Zmud make a similar argument more forcefully in their channel expansion theory . They identify four experiential factors(cid:151)experience with the channel , experience with the message topic , experience with the organizational context , and experience with communication partners(cid:151)that expand individuals(cid:146) perceptions of the richness of a given medium . They found that familiarity with a communication partner expanded the perceived richness of electronic mail . Similarly , McGrath et al . found that established norms and relationships among group members enabled them to exchange complex and equivocal information via relatively lean communication media . Taken together , these studies point out that social factors such as cohesion and familiarity among group members can significantly influence the way group members perceive communication media . In par - ticular , these studies have found that the mem - bers of a group who are cohesive and familiar with one another can perceive mechanically lean communication media as rich media . While these studies make important contributions to the literature , they have yet to conduct a direct comparison of the relative influence of such social factors and the media condition on group pro - cesses and outcomes . In this study , we examined the relative influences of the media condition and group cohesion on group members(cid:146) media perception and task outcomes . Group cohesion refers to members(cid:146) attraction to the group ( Hogg 1992 , p . 30 ) . It is often described as a psychological force that binds people together ( Keyton and Springston 1990 ) . Group cohesion is an outcome of the group development process ( Forsyth 1990 ; Tuckman 1965 ) . Thus , established groups(cid:151)i . e . , groups with a past history of working together(cid:151)can form different levels of cohesion among members over time ( Spink and Carron 1994 ; Tschuschke and MacKenzie 1989 ) . A number of authors have argued that group cohesion influences both socio - emotional and task - related aspects in the group process ( Hagstrom and Selvin 1965 ; Mudrack 1989 ; Mullen et al . 1994 ; Spink and Carron 1994 ) . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 375 Some studies have shown that cohesive group members exhibit more positive , personal , and favorable communication interactions ( Hogg 1992 ; Lott and Lott 1965 ; Piper et al . 1983 ) . Kerr and Jermier ( 1978 ) hypothesized that group cohesion would meet the group members(cid:146) affiliative needs . Thomas and Griffin ( 1983 ) , meanwhile , concluded that group cohesion could create a more positive task design , while Narayanan and Nath ( 1984 ) found that highly cohesive work groups showed more positive superior - subordinate and peer - to - peer relations . These studies imply that cohesive groups will have sociable , warm , and personal interactions between members , which is likely to enhance the social presence of communication interactions over a given communication medium . Group cohesion also appears to influence task participation and performance ( Evans and Dion 1991 ; Hogg 1992 ; Hoogstraten and Vorst 1978 ; Klein and Mulvey 1995 ; Narayanan and Nath 1984 ; Podsakoff et al . 1997 ; Spink and Carron 1994 ) . According to Klein and Mulvey , to Hogg , and to Lott and Lott , increased task performance by cohesive groups is due primarily to more - frequent , less - inhibited , and improved task - related communication . We argue , therefore , that group cohesion will increase social presence and task participation among the members of established groups . Drawing on recent empirical findings ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Chidambaram 1996 ; Walther 1995 ) , we suggest that for established groups , group cohesion will have a greater influence on social presence and task participation than will media condition . H3 : In an established group condition , group cohesion will increase the degrees of social presence per - ceived by the group members . H4 : In an established group condition , group cohesion will increase the degrees of task participation of group members . H5 : In an established group condition , the influence of group cohesion on social presence and task partici - pation will be larger than that of media condition . H6 : The direct influence of media condition on social influence and task participation will be lower in the established group condition than in the zero - history group condition . Finally , we argue that social presence and task participation will positively influence task out - comes . Specifically , in the context of decision - making tasks where the desired outcome is a high level of consensus among group members , we expect that a high level of social presence will improve consensus among group members . In this regard , Short et al . ( 1976 ) argue that a high level of social presence helps people to overcome and to reconcile their differences of opinion in decision - making tasks . Similarly , Daft and Lengel ( 1986 ) argue that a high level of media richness is necessary for a negotiation task , for which the goal is a consensus among group members . The model also posits that a high level of task participation enhances group consensus ( McGrath 1984 ) . Thus , we hypothesize : H7 : A high degree of social presence will improve group consensus . H8 : A high degree of task participation by group members will improve group consensus . Figure 1 presents the research model tested in this study . In this model , we want to compare directly the relative influences of group cohesion and media conditions on social presence and task participation . As shown in diagram ( a ) , we pro - pose that media condition will have a significant influence on social presence and task partici - pation for zero - history groups where there is no source of social influence . However , as shown in diagram ( b ) , we propose that group cohesion will have a significant influence on social presence and task participation for established groups that have developed different levels of cohesion over time . Because zero - history groups have no prior basis for forming group cohesion , we do not include the group cohesion construct in the model for zero - history groups . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 376 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 MediaCondition SocialPresence Task Participation ( - ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) Consensus MediaCondition SocialPresence Task Participation ( - ) ( - ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) Consensus MediaCondition Social Presence Task Participation Consensus Group Cohesion ( + ) ( - ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) MediaCondition Social Presence Task Participation Consensus Group Cohesion ( + ) ( - ) ( - ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( + ) ( a ) Zero - History Group with No Source of Social Influence ( b ) Established Group with Group Cohesion as a Source o Social Influence Figure 1 . A Conceptual Model of Group History and Electronic Communication Technology Method To test our research model and hypotheses , we conducted a laboratory experiment in which we manipulated media ( audio conferencing vs . desk - top videoconferencing ) in two different group his - tory environments ( zero - history vs . established ) . Both were between - subject manipulations . Participants Participants were recruited from an undergraduate introductory computer literacy course at a busi - ness school at a large state university in the United States . A total of 45 triads ( 24 audio con - ferencing and 21 desktop videoconferencing ; 24 zero - history and 21 established ) participated in the experiments . Among the 135 participants , 51 % were female , and the average age was 21 years . No participant had used desktop video - conferencing prior to the experiment . Task Past research showed especially mixed results in terms of the role of (cid:147)rich(cid:148) media for equivocal tasks . Therefore , we used a task that had no clear decision - making criteria and no demons - trably correct answers . The (cid:147)Van Management(cid:148) task ( Mennecke and Wheeler 1993 ) was selected . In this task , the participants were asked to select a recipient of a new van from a group of five sales managers whose biographical information and reasons for needing the van were provided . All participants had exactly the same information , and the goal of the task was to come to an agreement as a group . The groups were allowed to choose Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 377 only one recipient . Because the task had no demonstrably correct answer , it was classified as a decision - making task ( McGrath 1984 ) . Independent Variables Group Cohesion Zero - history and established groups were recruited from different sections of the same course . Participants in the zero - history group condition were scheduled individually and first met their teammates when they came to the experi - mental session . To minimize possible in - class contacts among the participants , all the experi - ments with zero - history groups were completed before the mid - point of the semester . Participants in the established group condition were asked to form a group of three at the beginning of the semester for a semester - long project . In addition , they were required to com - plete two computer - programming projects as a group before participating in the experiment . Experimental sessions for the established group condition started after the mid - point of the semes - ter . Thus , by the time these groups participated in the experiment , they could be characterized as established ( McGrath 1984 ) . To verify group history , participants were asked at the end of the experiment how many hours they had worked together prior to the experiment . On average , the groups in the established group condition had worked together for 32 . 6 hours , while those in the zero - history group condition had worked together for fewer than 0 . 05 hours ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Instead of performing explicit manipulation of group cohesion for the study , we measured the degree of naturally occurring group cohesion among group members in the established group condition during the course of their semester - long project . The degree of group cohesion was measured using Evans and Jarvis(cid:146) ( 1986 ) Group Attitude Scale ( GAS ) . The GAS measures the affective aspect of group cohesion ( Evans and Dion 1991 ) . It has been used in previous computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) research that has examined the influence of technology on group cohesion ( Alavi et al . 1995 ; Anson et al . 1995 ) . The GAS has 20 items on a nine - point scale , whereby 1 = strongly disagree and 9 = strongly agree , such that a higher score represents a higher degree of attraction to the group . The GAS was administered immediately after the session . Media Conditions Groups were randomly assigned to a media condition . For the audio conferencing treatment , group members were located in three separate rooms with a three - way conference call and computer application - sharing capability . For the desktop videoconferencing treatment , group members in three separate rooms were connected via desktop videoconferencing systems that provided full motion video , audio , and computer application - sharing . 2 Group members were given a brief introduction to the tool and were asked to perform a warm - up session that lasted about 15 to 20 minutes . The point of this exercise was to familiarize them with the media environments to which they had been assigned . Mediating Variables Social Presence Social presence was measured using the original measure developed and tested by Short et al . ( 1976 ) . As previously noted , social presence refers to the degree of salience of the other person in the communication interactions and the consequent salience of the interpersonal rela - tionship . The social presence measure has been used in several empirical studies reported in Short et al . , as well as in other studies ( e . g . , Chidambaram 1996 ; Straub and Karahanna 1998 ) . A higher score represents a communication interaction with a higher degree of social presence . Four items were measured immediately after the session , using a seven - point semantic anchoring scale . 2 For this study , AT & T(cid:146)s Visitium systems connected via two ISDN lines that provide a bandwidth of 128 kilobits per second . were used For audio conferencing , the same two ISDN lines were used . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 378 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 Task Participation Task participation was measured using the instru - ments developed and tested by Green and Taber ( 1980 ) . These are five Likert - type items mea - sured on a five - point scale . A higher score represents a higher degree of participation in the task process . Dependent Variable Consensus Group consensus was measured by examining the changes in each participant(cid:146)s decision pre - ferences after his or her group had reached a consensus . Immediately after the session , each participant was asked how the decision should be made , independent of what the group had decided . We then counted the number of partici - pants who picked an alternative sales manager (cid:151)that is , a manager who was different from the one that was chosen by the group(cid:151)as the recipient of the van in the case ( minimum = 0 , maximum = 3 ) . If the group reached a high level of consensus , individual participants would show no shift from the manager selected by the group . As such , a low number of individual members who shifted their choices indicates a high degree of consensus among group members . Analyses We performed our analyses at the group level . In order to ensure that participants(cid:146) perceptions could indeed be aggregated at the group level , we examined whether sufficient convergence existed among participants in each group on all percep - tual measures . An inter - rater reliability coefficient ( James coefficient ) was used to examine the intra - group reliability of responses ( James et al . 1984 ) . The average intra - group reliability scores for the perceptual variables used in this study ranged from 0 . 74 to 0 . 86 . This demonstrates that suffi - cient convergence existed among participants in a group , based on these measures . We then calculated the average scores of the individual items for each group and used those scores in our analysis at the group level . We used a structural equation modeling technique called Partial Least Squares ( PLS ) . 3 Among the many benefits of structural equation modeling tools , compared to traditional multivariate statistical methods such as MANOVA or multiple regression combined with exploratory factor analysis , is their capacity to estimate simulta - neously both the structural component ( i . e . , path model ) and the measurement component ( i . e . , factor model ) ( Fornell and Bookstein 1982 ; Fornell and Larcker 1981 ; Hayduck 1987 ; Loehlin 1992 ) . We chose PLS among several structural equation modeling tools , including EQS , AMOS , and LISREL because , unlike other tools , PLS does not require a large sample size ( Barclay et al . 1995 ; Fornell and Bookstein 1982 ) . Furthermore , PLS is more suitable when the objective is causal - predictive testing , rather than testing an entire theory ( Barclay et al . 1995 ; Chin 1998a , 1998b ) . Given that the model presented in the previous section has not been tested in its entirety and considering the sample size of 45 groups , we opted to use PLS . Results To test our research model , we ran PLS twice : first , to test the model shown in Figure 1 ( a ) with the zero - history group condition sample ( Model 1 ) ; and second , to test the model shown in Figure 1 ( b ) with the established group condition sample ( Model 2 ) . For both models , the media condition variable was dummy coded with audio con - ferencing as (cid:147)0(cid:148) and desktop videoconferencing as (cid:147)1 . (cid:148) The results are presented in two stages : tests of the measurement models and tests of the structural models . Test of the Measurement Models We tested the measurement model for each sample separately by examining ( 1 ) individual item reliability , ( 2 ) internal consistency , and ( 3 ) discriminant validity . We assessed individual item reliability by examining the loadings of the 3 We used PLS - GRAPH version 2 . 19 to run PLS for our study . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 379 measures on their corresponding construct . The PLS results showed that several items for GAS and task participation had low factor loading scores . Although a common rule of thumb suggests that the factor loading should exceed . 7 , it is also important to retain as many items as possible from the original scale to preserve the integrity of the original research design , as well as the comparability of the results with other studies that use the same scales ( Barclay et al . 1995 ) . According to Barclay et al . and to Duxbury and Higgins ( 1991 ) , well - established scales some - times show poor factor loadings when they are used in causal modeling . Barclay et al . noted that since most scales are developed for a particular theoretical and research con - text , it is not surprising that some of the scales ( or scale items ) do not display the same psychometric properties when used in theoretical and research contexts distinct from those in which they were first developed . ( pp . 295 - 296 ) Duxbury and Higgins also observe that (cid:147) [ the common rule of thumb regarding the . 7 factor loading score ] is generally not applied when standard scales from the literature are used(cid:148) ( p . 66 ) . Low factor loading scores may also be a result of the small sample size . Given that all the scales used in our research were standard scales from the literature that have not been used in causal modeling in the past , we dropped three items from the original GAS and two items from task participation that showed extremely poor factor loading ( below . 5 ) from our final analysis . Item 3 of task participation in Model 1 and item 1 of social presence in Model 2 showed low factor loading scores below our cut - off point of . 5 . Because these items exhibited acceptable factor loading scores in the other model of the study , however , we included these two items in our final analysis . Table 1 shows the factor and cross - factor loadings of retained items for both models . Internal consistency was examined using the composite scale reliability index developed by Fornell and Larcker ( 1981 ) , which is a measure similar to Cronbach(cid:146)s alpha . Fornell and Larcker recommended using a criterion cut - off of . 7 or higher . Table 2 shows the internal consistency of each scale used in the study . All constructs met the recommended criterion for both models . In PLS , the discriminant validity of items is assessed using criteria similar to a multi - trait / multi - method analysis ( Barclay et al . 1995 ) . One criterion is that the construct represented should share more variance with its measures than it shares with other constructs in a model . To assess discriminant validity , Fornell and Larcker suggest use of the measure of Average Variance Extracted , the average variance shared between a construct and its measures . This measure should be greater than the variance shared between the construct and other constructs in the model . Table 2 shows the correlation matrix for the constructs of both models . The lower triangle represents the results from the zero - history group sample , while the upper triangle represents those of the established group sample . The scores in the diagonal of this matrix are the square roots of the Average Variance Extracted . For adequate discriminant validity , the diagonal elements should be greater than the off - diagonal elements in the corresponding rows and columns . Results shown in Table 2 indicate that both samples met this criterion . Another criterion is that no measure - ment item should load more highly on a construct other than the construct it intends to measure . An examination of factor and cross - factor loadings ( Table 1 ) showed that all items satisfied this criterion for both samples . Tests of Structural Models Figure 2 and Table 3 show the results of the structural models for both samples . In the zero - history group condition , we hypothesized that video channel would enhance social presence and lower task participation ( H1 and H2 ) . In the zero - history group condition , the results of the PLS analysis of Model 1 suggest that media conditions significantly influenced the social presence of communication interactions and task participation . Compared to audio conferencing , the beta coeffi - cients of paths from media condition to social presence and task participation indicate that desktop videoconferencing increased the scores Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 380 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 Table 1 . Loading and Cross - Loadings of Measures Cohesion Social Presence Task Participation ( E ) ( Z ) ( E ) ( Z ) ( E ) Cohesion 1 . 89 . 64 . 59 2 . 86 . 60 . 43 3 . 85 . 46 . 62 4 . 68 . 31 . 30 5 . 52 . 32 . 09 6 . 89 . 54 . 36 7 . 86 . 60 . 37 8 . 88 . 61 . 25 9 . 75 . 40 . 41 10 . 75 . 56 . 56 12 . 74 . 43 . 43 13 . 79 . 65 . 65 15 . 56 . 29 . 29 16 . 52 . 30 . 30 17 . 58 . 42 . 42 18 . 52 . 31 . 31 20 . 53 . 31 . 31 Social Presence 1 . 18 . 76 . 42 - . 12 - . 02 2 . 70 . 92 . 94 - . 24 . 39 3 . 65 . 79 . 95 - . 20 . 27 4 . 28 . 88 . 67 - . 09 . 07 Task Participation 1 . 17 - . 26 . 19 . 84 . 62 3 . 32 - . 12 . 36 . 25 . 50 5 . 54 - . 03 . 21 . 76 . 92 Note . Factor and cross - factor loading scores are shown separately for zero - history group sample ( Z ) and established group sample ( E ) , except cohesion . Largest factor loadings for each item are boldfaced and underlined . Only the items retained after the preliminary analysis are shown here . The numbers shown in the first column represent the original number as it appeared in the questionnaire . Table 2 . Means , Standard Deviations , Internal Consistencies , Correlation of Constructs No . Items Audio ( n = 24 ) Video ( n = 21 ) Internal Consistency a Correlation of Constructs b M SD M SD ( Z ) ( E ) 1 2 d 3 4 5 1 . Media Condition c 1 NA NA NA - . 27 . 14 - . 28 . 19 2 . Cohesion d 17 7 . 51 0 . 88 7 . 45 1 . 00 NA 0 . 95 NA NA / . 73 . 66 . 55 - . 42 3 . Social Presence 4 5 . 35 0 . 64 5 . 84 0 . 71 0 . 90 0 . 85 . 46 NA . 84 / . 77 . 30 - . 27 4 . Task Participation 3 4 . 36 0 . 29 4 . 22 0 . 35 0 . 70 0 . 73 - . 58 NA - . 20 . 70 / . 71 - . 70 5 . # of shifts c 1 0 . 59 0 . 37 0 . 50 0 . 34 NA NA . 45 NA . 06 - . 32 NA a Internal consistency was calculated separately for the zero - history sample ( Z ) and the established group sample ( E ) . b Correlations for the zero - history group sample are shown in the lower triangle and correlations for established group sample are shown in the upper triangle . Boldfaced elements on the diagonal represent the square root of the average variance extracted . The first score in the lower half of the cell is from the zero - history group sample and the one in the upper half of the cell is from the established group sample . For adequate discriminant validity , the elements in each row and column for the sample should be smaller than the boldfaced element in that row or column for the respective sample . c For Partial Least Square ( PLS ) analysis , this measure considered a single indicator . Therefore , internal consistency and average variance extracted for this measure could not be calculated with PLS . d Only the established sample was included . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 382 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 MediaCondition SocialPresence R 2 = . 22 Task Participation R 2 = . 34 ConsensusR 2 = . 10 - . 62 * * - 0 . 01 0 . 32 . 46 * * MediaCondition SocialPresence R 2 = . 22 Task Participation R 2 = . 34 ConsensusR 2 = . 10 - . 62 * * - 0 . 01 0 . 32 . 46 * * MediaCondition SocialPresence R 2 = . 54 Task ParticipationR 2 = . 32 ConsensusR 2 = . 53 Group Cohesion . 75 * * . 54 * * . 07 . 34 * - . 13 . 70 * * MediaCondition SocialPresence R 2 = . 54 Task ParticipationR 2 = . 32 ConsensusR 2 = . 53 Group Cohesion . 75 * * . 54 * * . 07 . 34 * - . 13 . 70 * * Table 3 . A Summary Table of PLS Analyses Paths Zero - history Group Sample Established Group Sample Beta ( S . D . ) Beta ( S . D . ) Media ! Social Presence 0 . 46 * * ( 0 . 57 ) 0 . 34 * ( 0 . 56 ) Media ! Task Participation - 0 . 62 * * ( 0 . 74 ) - 0 . 13 ( 0 . 62 ) Social Presence ! # of shifts 0 . 01 ( 1 . 12 ) - 0 . 07 ( 0 . 60 ) Task Participation ! # of shifts - 0 . 32 ( 0 . 60 ) - 0 . 70 * * ( 0 . 67 ) Group cohesion ! Social Presence 0 . 75 * * ( 0 . 18 ) Group Cohesion ! Task Participation 0 . 54 * * ( 0 . 54 ) R 2 Social Presence 0 . 22 0 . 54 Task Participation 0 . 34 0 . 32 # of shifts 0 . 10 0 . 53 * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ( one - tailed test ) ( a ) Zero - History Group with No Source of Social Influence ( b ) Established Group with Group Cohesion as a Source of Social Influence * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ( one - tailed test ) Figure 2 . A Summary of PLS Analysis Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 383 of social presence measure by 46 % and reduced the scores of task participation measure by 62 % . Thus , both H1 and H2 are supported . For the established group condition , we hypothe - sized that group cohesion would increase both social presence and task participation ( H3 and H4 ) . The results of the PLS analysis of Model 2 show that group cohesion significantly affects social presence and task participation . As such , both H3 and H4 are supported . Moreover , in established groups , we hypothesized that group cohesion would influence social presence and task participation above and beyond the influence of media condition ( H5 ) . To test this hypothesis , we compared the relative importance of group cohesion and media condition for social presence and task participation . Statistically , we conducted two unpaired t - tests . The first compared the beta coefficient from group cohesion to social presence and the beta coefficient from media condition to social presence . The second test compared the beta coefficient from group cohesion to task participation and the beta coefficient from media condition to task participation . Both tests were conducted using the results of Model 2 . As we had anticipated , the results of the established group condition indicate that group cohesion had a greater influence than media condition on social presence ( t = 3 . 397 , p < 0 . 001 ) and task participation ( t = 3 . 875 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Therefore , H5 is supported . We also examined whether the direct influences of media condition on social presence and task participation were diminished statistically in the established group condition , compared to those in the zero - history group condition ( H6 ) . To test this hypothesis , we again conducted two unpaired t - tests , comparing beta coefficients of Model 1 and Model 2 for the paths from media condition to social presence and task participation . As ex - pected , the direct influence of media condition on task participation was significantly lower in the established group condition than in the zero - history group condition ( t = - 2 . 388 , p < 0 . 05 ) . However , contrary to our expectations , no statis - tical difference existed between the established groups and the zero - history groups in terms of the direct influence of media condition on social presence ( t = 0 . 710 , p = 0 . 481 ) . Thus , H6 is partially supported . Finally , we hypothesized that high degrees of social presence and task participation would help groups to achieve consensus among members ( H7 and H8 ) . In the zero - history group , the results suggest that social presence and task participation do not affect the level of consensus among group members , thereby rejecting the prediction of the media - dependent perspective . The R 2 for the dependent variable was only 0 . 10 with the zero - history group sample . In the established condition , we found that task participation improved group consensus . However , the path from social presence to the level of consensus among group members was not significant . Taken together , H7 is not supported and H8 is supported only in the established group condition . Discussion and Conclusion Media , Group Cohesion , and Social Presence Our results provide support for both the media - dependent and the social construction perspec - tives . We found that group cohesion influenced the group members(cid:146) perceptions of communication media in established groups , a finding that sup - ports the social construction perspective . We also found that group cohesion did not reduce the absolute direct influence of media condition over social influence . This finding supports the media - dependent perspective . Furthermore , the influence of group cohesion over social presence appears to be additive(cid:151)rather than substitutive(cid:151)to that of media condition . In this regard , our findings are consistent with those of previous studies which found that both media condition and social factors are important and complementary in influencing users(cid:146) perceptions and use of communication media ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Chidambaram et al . 1991 ; Trevino et al . 2000 ; Walther 1995 ; Webster and Trevino 1995 ) . Building on Bijker(cid:146)s ( 1995 ) notion of interpretive flexibility in the social construction of technology , Orlikowski ( 1992 ) noted that interpretive flexibility Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 384 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 of technology is bound by two constraining factors : material characteristics of the technology and institutional contexts . On the one hand , users(cid:146) interpretations of technology are limited by the physical and material characteristics of that tech - nology . On the other hand , they are also con - strained by the institutional and social contexts affecting users during the technology(cid:146)s design and use . Our results provide further support for this argument . The social presence perceived by the participants in the study , particularly in established groups , was bound simultaneously by media condition and social contexts , which was repre - sented by the strength of group cohesion . Previous studies have argued that communication technology is purely socially constructed , such that mechanical characteristics of the media would play a minimal role in forming users(cid:146) perceptions and beliefs ( Fulk 1993 ; Lee 1994 ; Markus 1994 ; Ngwenyama and Lee 1997 ) . However , our results suggest that media condition might have a more stable influence on social presence than was believed previously . Given the significant influence of group cohesion for established groups , our results suggest that a theoretical integration of the media - dependent and the social construction perspectives might help us to better understand how users(cid:146) perceptions of communication media are formed . The significant influence of group cohesion over social presence in established groups that we found in this study does not mean that group history would necessarily enhance social pre - sence . Rather , we simply found a positive corre - lation between the level of group cohesion and social presence . Therefore , low levels of group cohesion among members of established groups may mean that the social presence of com - munication interactions among them is also low . Media , Group Cohesion , and Task Participation In this study , we also examined the influences of media condition and group cohesion upon task participation , a consideration that has largely been ignored in previous studies in this area . We found that the video channel lowered the task parti - cipation by group members , while group cohesion improved it . Past research of social loafing in groups that used group support systems has shown that the anonymity provided by communication media ( particularly lean media with limited social cues ) could increase a tendency toward social loafing among group members ( Dennis and Valacich 1993 ; Kerr and Bruun 1983 ) . Our results suggest another possible way that communication media can reduce task participation : rich media with many social cues . While we lack data indicating how and why the video channel lowered task participation in our study , the previous studies described earlier in the paper suggest that the established group members with the video channel might have been distracted due to socialization . Given the influence of task participation on group consensus , future research needs to examine how and why different communication media influence task participation in computer - mediated communi - cation environments . Social Presence , Task Participation , and Group Consensus Finally , we examined how both social presence and task participation influence the degree of consensus among group members in a decision - making task . Our results showed that neither social presence nor task participation influenced the degree of group consensus in the zero - history group condition . It is unclear why we obtained this outcome . The low R 2 score of consensus of PLS results of Model 1 suggests that other variables not included in our model influence the degree of consensus among the members in the zero - history groups . Furthermore , a closer examination of the results indicates that a lack of variance ( . 64 ) with a low mean score ( . 26 ) of the dependent variable might have caused the low R 2 score in the zero - history group condition . In the established group condition , we found that only task participation influenced the level of group consensus . In the past , researchers in the computer - mediated communication field have tried Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 385 to understand how group members form their perceptions of communication media . Our results indicate , however , that more research is neces - sary to evaluate the influences of media condition and social factors on task participation in computer - mediated communication environments . Limitations Like other social science research , this project has several limitations . First , this study employs an experimental design such that it inherits the limitations of this research methodology . The high degree of internal validity achieved in such a controlled laboratory experiment somewhat limits its capacity for general application . Therefore , any results from this investigation should be con - sidered in light of task type , group characteristics , technology environments , and context . Second , the role of group cohesion in relation to social presence and task outcomes was examined in a single session . Future research could employ a longitudinal design in order to determine whether our results can be replicated . That is , instead of performing cross - sectional comparisons between zero - history and established groups as we did in this study , one might follow the life cycle of groups to study how the relative influences of media conditions and group cohesion change over time . Third , the brief duration that participants spent with desktop videoconferencing is also a limitation of the current study . What we have observed in our research should be recognized as an early usage stage of a new technology . Our objective was not to see how individuals change the way they perceive and use given communication media over time as they become more familiar with the technology . Rather , our primary intention was to examine how individuals in established and zero - history groups respond differently when they are first introduced to a new technology . This initial perception and usage pattern is one of the most critical factors in the successful implementation of a new technology ( Tyre and Orlikowski 1994 ; Weick 1990 ) , especially in voluntary cases ( Davis et al . , 1989 ) . The current study sheds light on this initial use process . Implications for the Use of Electronic Communication Technology For managers , this study illuminates the need to consider group cohesion when various tech - nologies are deployed to support groups . It may be that the same technology will be perceived and used differently by various groups of users , thereby resulting in potentially different outcomes . When deploying desktop videoconferencing systems in organizations , managers may obtain the best results by using them for initial meetings of distributed groups , or meetings of groups that have a fluid membership structure such as virtual or zero - history groups . The practical literature on videoconferencing ( Dixon 1998 ; Stuart 1998 ; Svenning and Ruchinskas 1984 ) suggests that organizations that have deployed video technology have experienced different results , based on the prior relationship among participants . Our results confirm this observation . Also , our results suggest that when limited to lean electronic communication technology with limited bandwidth , managers need to pay special atten - tion to the development of group history and social relationships among members , which can provide additional means of reducing complexity . According to our results , a unit change ( in either direction ) of group cohesion among established group members , measured in Group Attitude Scale , can cause a change ( in the same direction ) of social presence by 75 % . On the other hand , an addition of a video channel would increase social presence by only 34 % for established groups . Similarly , our results suggest that a unit increase in GAS would increase task participation by 54 % , while an addition of a video channel would not cause any significant change in task participation . Taken together , these results suggest that , when constrained to lean communication media , managers can focus on improving group cohesion to improve the group(cid:146)s task outcomes . Future Research Directions Several directions for future research emerge from our study . First , given that both media condition and social factors influence the ways that group Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 386 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 members perceive and use technology , future research can examine dynamic structuration processes through which new social structures of computer - mediated communication environments emerge . Structuration theory ( Giddens 1984 ) argues that individuals are active creators of social structures , which , in turn , restrict individuals(cid:146) acts . From a structuration perspective , the results of this study suggest that , in enacting the social struc - tures embodied in communication technology , individuals draw on other sources of social struc - tures ( such as group norms ) provided by group history , creating (cid:147)emergent(cid:148) social structures of the technology . Furthermore , our results suggest that these emergent structures might play a bigger role in determining task outcomes than the mechanical characteristics of the technology . Future research needs to investigate this dynamic interplay between technology and various social structures , using a process - oriented methodology based on structuration theory . Bijker(cid:146)s theory of social construction of technology and Weick(cid:146)s con - ceptualization of modern technology as equivoque also would provide additional theoretical bases for such endeavors . Moreover , we suggest that the field should broaden its scope of inquiry by including other less studied , yet potentially important , mediating variables , such as task participation . In particular , we suggest that future research should examine more closely both the impact of different media on task participation and the social psychological process surrounding it . Given the important role that task participation played in influencing group consensus in this study , such inquiry might help both researchers and practitioners to better understand how one can improve the task outcomes in increasingly prevalent computer - mediated communication environments . Finally , a further examination of other communi - cation tools such as electronic mail , group support systems , groupware , and virtual reality could prove valuable . Electronic mail and group support sys - tems are considered to be among the leanest media , while groupware such as Lotus Notes(cid:153) can be used to convey a high level of information . Further research of the influence of group history on the quality of communication interaction in such electronic communication environments will help organizations to better use such tools . Acknowledgements The authors are extremely grateful to the senior editor , Ron Weber , for the time and attention he has given to this manuscript . We also thank the associate editor and three anonymous reviewers for their many useful suggestions . References Abel , M . J . " Experiences in an Exploratory Distri - buted Organization , " in Intellectual Teamwork : The Sociological and Technical Bases of Collaborative Work , J . Galegher , R . E . Kraut and C . Egido ( Ed . ) , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hills - dale , NJ , 1990 , pp . 489 - 510 . Alavi , M . , Wheeler , B . C . , and Valacich , J . S . " Using IT to Reengineer Business Education : An Exploratory Investigation of Collaborative Telelearning , " MIS Quarterly ( 19 : 3 ) , 1995 , pp . 293 - 312 . Anson , R . , Bostrom , R . , and Wynne , B . " An Experiment Assessing Group Support System and Facilitator Effects on Meeting Outcomes , " Management Science ( 41 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 189 - 208 . Barclay , D . , Higgins , C . , and Thompson , R . " The Partial Least Squares ( PLS ) Approach to Causal Modeling , Personal Computer Adoption and Use as an Illustration , " Technology Studies ( 2 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 285 - 309 . Bijker , W . E . Of Bicycle , Bakelites , and Bulbs : Toward a Theory of Sociotechical Change , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 . Burke , K . , and Chidambaram , L . " How Much Bandwidth Is Enough ? A Longitudinal Examina - tion of Media Characteristics and Group Out - comes , " MIS Quarterly ( 23 : 4 ) , 1999 , pp . 557 - 580 . Carlson , J . R . , and Zmud , R . W . " Channel Expan - sion Theory and the Experiential Nature of Media Richness Perceptions , " Academy of Management Journal ( 42 : 2 ) , 1999 , pp . 153 - 170 . Chidambaram , L . " Relational Development in Computer - Supported Groups , " MIS Quarterly ( 20 : 2 ) , 1996 , pp . 143 - 165 . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 387 Chidambaram , L . , Bostrom , R . P . , and Wynne , B . E . " A Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Group Decision Support Systems on Group Development . , " Journal of MIS ( 7 : 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 7 - 25 . Chin , W . W . " Issues and Opinion on Structural Equation Modeling , " MIS Quarterly ( 22 : 1 ) , 1998a , pp . VII - XVI . Chin , W . W . " The Partial Least Squares Approach to Structural Equation Modeling , " In Modern Methods for Business Research , G . A . Mar - coulides ( ed . ) , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , 1998b , pp . 295 - 336 . Culnan , M . J . , and Markus , M . L . " Information Technologies , " in Handbook of Organizational Communication : An Interdisciplinary Perspec - tive , F . M . Jablin , L . L . Putnam , K . H . Roberts , and L . W . Porter ( eds . ) , Sage , Newbury Park , CA , 1987 , pp . 421 - 443 . Daft , R . L . , and Lengel , R . H . " Information Rich - ness : A New Approach to Managerial Behavior and Organizational Design , " in Research in Organizational Behavior ( 6 ) , B . Staw and L . Cummings ( eds . ) , JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 1984 , pp . 191 - 233 . Daft , R . L . , and Lengel , R . H . " Organizational Information Requirements , Media Richness and Structural Design , " Management Science ( 32 ) , 1986 , pp . 554 - 571 . Daft , R . L . , Lengel , R . H . , Trevino , R . H . , and Klebe , L . " Message Equivocality , Media Selec - tion , and Manager Performance : Implications for Information Systems , " MIS Quarterly ( 11 : 3 ) , 1987 , pp . 355 - 366 . Davis , F . D . , Bagozzi , R . , and Warshaw , P . R . " User Acceptance of Computer Technology : A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models , " Management Science ( 35 : 8 ) , 1989 , pp . 982 - 1003 . Dennis , A . R . , and Kinney , S . T . " Testing Media Richness Theory in the New Media : The Effects of Cues , Feedback , and Task Equivocality , " Information Systems Research ( 9 : 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 256 - 274 . Dennis , A . R . , and Valacich , J . S . " Computer Brainstorms : More Heads Are Better than One , " Journal of Applied Psychology ( 78 : 4 ) , 1993 , pp . 531 - 537 . DeSanctis , G . , and Poole , M . S . " Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use : Adaptive Structuration Theory , " Organization Science ( 5 : 2 ) , 1994 , pp . 121 - 147 . Dixon , G . " Desktop Videoconferencing , " Presen - tations ( 12 : 1 ) , 1998 , pp . 83 - 88 . Duxbury , L . E . , and Higgins , C . A . " Gender Dif - ferences in Work - Family Conflict , " Journal of Applied Psychology ( 76 : 1 ) , 1991 , pp . 60 - 74 . Evans , C . R . , and Dion , K . L . " Group Cohesion and Performance : A Meta - Analysis , " Small Group Research ( 22 : 2 ) , 1991 , pp . 203 - 216 . Evans , C . R . , and Jarvis , P . A . " The Group Attitude Scale : A Measure of Attraction to Group , " Small Group Behavior ( 17 : 2 ) , 1986 , pp . 203 - 216 . Festinger , L . , and Maccoby , N . " On Resistance to Persuasive Communications , " Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology ( 68 : 4 ) , 1964 , pp . 359 - 366 . Fornell , C . , and Bookstein , F . " Two Structural Equation Models : LISRELS and PLS Applied to Consumer Exit - Voice Theory , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 19 ) , 1982 , pp . 440 - 452 . Fornell , C . , and Larcker , D . " Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 18 ) , 1981 , pp . 39 - 50 . Forsyth , D . R . Group Dynamics ( 2 nd ed . ) , Brooks / Cole Publishing Company , Pacific Grove , CA , 1990 . Fulk , J . " Social Construction of Communication Technology , " Academy of Management Journal ( 36 : 5 ) , 1993 , pp . 921 - 950 . Fulk , J . , Schmitz , J . , and Steinfield , C . W . " A Social Influence Model of Technology Use , (cid:148) in Organizations and Communication Technology , J . Fulk and C . Steinfield ( eds . ) , Sage , Newbury Park , CA , 1990 , 117 - 140 . Giddens , A . The Constitution of Society , Univer - sity of California Press , Berkely , CA , 1984 . Green , S . G . , and Taber , T . D . " The Effects of Three Social Decision Schemes on Decision Group Process , " Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Performance ( 25 ) , 1980 , pp . 97 - 106 . Hagstrom , W . O . , and Selvin , H . C . " The Dimen - sions of Cohesiveness in Small Groups , " Sociometry ( 28 ) , 1965 , pp . 30 - 43 . Hayduck , L . A . Structural Equation Modeling with LISREL : Essentials and Advances , Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore , MD , 1987 . Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 388 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 Hirokawa , R . Y . " Group Communication and Decision - Making Performance : A Continued Test of the Functional Perspective , " Human Communication Research ( 14 : 4 ) , 1988 , pp . 487 - 515 . Hirokawa , R . Y . , and Pace , R . " A Descriptive Investigation of the Possible Communication - Based Reasons for Effective and Ineffective Group Decision Making , " Communication Monographs ( 50 ) , 1983 , pp . 363 - 379 . Hogg , M . A . The Social Psychology of Group Cohesiveness : From Attraction to Social Iden - tity , New York University Press , New York , 1992 . Hoogstraten , J . , and Vorst , H . C . M . " Group Cohesion , Task Performance , and the Experi - menter Expectancy Effect , " Human Relations ( 31 : 11 ) , 1978 , pp . 939 - 956 . James , L . R . , Demaree , R . G . , and Wolf , G . " Estimating Within - Group Interrater Reliability with and Without Response Bias , " Journal of Applied Psychology ( 69 ) , 1984 , pp . 85 - 98 . Kerr , N . L . , and Bruun , S . E . " Dispensability of Member Effort and Group Motivation Losses : Free - Rider Effects , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ( 44 : 1 ) , 1983 , pp . 78 - 97 . Kerr , S . , and Jermier , J . M . " Substitutes for Leadership : Their Meaning and Measurement , " Organizational Behavior and Human Performance ( 22 ) , 1978 , pp . 375 - 403 . Keyton , J . , and Springston , J . " Redefining Cohesiveness in Groups , " Small Group Research ( 21 : 2 ) , 1990 , pp . 234 - 254 . Klein , H . J . , and Mulvey , P . W . " Two Investiga - tions of the Relationships Among Group Goals , Goal Commitment , Cohesion , and Perfor - mance , " Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ( 61 : 1 ) , 1995 , pp . 44 - 53 . Kozma , R . " Implications of Instructional Psycho - logy for the Design of Educational Television , " Educational Communication and Technology Journal ( 34 : 1 ) , 1986 , pp . 11 - 19 . Lee , A . S . " Electronic Mail as a Medium for Rich Communication : An Empirical Investigation Using Hermeneutic Interpretation , " MIS Quar - terly ( 18 : 2 ) , 1994 , pp . 143 - 157 . Loehlin , J . C . Latent Variable Models : An Intro - duction to Factor , Path , and Structural Analysis , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ , 1992 . Lott , A . J . , and Lott , B . E . " Group Cohesiveness as Interpersonal Attraction , " Psychological Bulletin ( 64 ) , 1965 , pp . 259 - 309 . Markus , M . L . " Electronic Mail as the Medium of Managerial Choice , " Organization Science ( 5 : 4 ) , 1994 , pp . 502 - 527 . McGrath , J . E . Groups : Interaction and Perfor - mance , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1984 . McGrath , J . E . , Arrow , H . , Gruenfeld , D . H . , Hollingshead , A . B . , and OConnor , K . M . " Groups , Tasks , and Technology : The Effects of Experience and Change , " Small Group Research ( 24 ) , 1993 , pp . 406 - 420 . Meader , D . K . " Supporting Distributed , Design Discussion : A Study of the Effects of Video on Engagement and Critical Discussion in Desktop , Multimedia Conferencing , " unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , University of Michigan , 1995 . Mennecke , B . E . , and Wheeler , B . C . " Task Matters : Modeling Group Task Processes in Experimental CSCW Research , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , Maui , HI , 1993 , pp . 71 - 81 . Mudrack , P . E . " Group Cohesiveness and Produc - tivity : A Closer Look , " Human Relations ( 42 : 9 ) , 1989 , pp . 771 - 785 . Mullen , B . , Anthony , T . , Salas , E . , and Driskell , J . E . " Group Cohesiveness and Quality of Decision Making : An Integration of Tests of the Group - think Hypothesis , " Small Group Research ( 25 : 2 ) , 1994 , pp . 189 - 204 . Narayanan , V . K . , and Nath , R . " The Influence of Group Cohesiveness on Some Changes Induced by Flexitime : A Quasi - Experiment , " Journal of Applied Behavioral Science ( 20 : 3 ) , 1984 , pp . 265 - 276 . Ngwenyama , O . K . , and Lee , A . S . " Communi - cation Richness in Electronic Mail : Critical Social Theory and the Contextuality of Meaning , " MIS Quarterly ( 21 : 2 ) , 1997 , pp . 145 - 167 . Olson , J . S . , Olson , G . M . , and Meader , D . K . " What Mix of Video and Audio is Useful for Remote Real - Time Work ? , " Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Denver , CO , 1995 , pp . 362 - 368 . Orlikowski , W . J . " The Duality of Technology : Rethinking the Concepts of Technology in Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 389 Organizations , " Organization Science ( 3 : 3 ) , 1992 , pp . 398 - 427 . Phillips , G . M . , and Santoro , G . M . " Teaching Group Discussion via Computer - Mediated Communication , " Communication Education ( 38 ) , 1989 , pp . 151 - 161 . Piper , W . E . , Marrache , M . , LaCroix , R . , Richardsen , M . , and Jones , B . D . " Cohesion as a Basic Bond in Groups , " Human Relations ( 36 ) , 1983 , pp . 93 - 108 . Podsakoff , P . M . , MacKenzie , S . B . , and Ahearne , M . " Moderating Effects of Goal Acceptance on the Relationship between Group Cohesiveness and Productivity , " Journal of Applied Psychology ( 82 : 6 ) , 1997 , pp . 974 - 983 . Rice , R . E . " Evaluating New Media Systems , " in New Directions for Program Evaluation ( 23 ) , 1984 , pp . 53 - 71 . Rice , R . E . " Task Analyzability , Use of New Media , and Effectiveness : A Multi - Site Explora - tion of Media Richness , " Organization Science ( 3 : 4 ) , 1992 , pp . 475 - 500 . Russ , G . S . , Daft , R . L . , and Lengel , R . H . " Media Selection and Managerial Characteristics in Organizational Communications , " Management Communication Quarterly ( 4 : 2 ) , 1990 , pp . 151 - 175 . Sarbaugh - Thompson , M . , and Feldman , M . S . " Electronic Mail and Organizational Communi - cation : Does Saying (cid:145)Hi(cid:146) Really Matter ? , " Organization Science ( 9 : 6 ) , 1998 , pp . 685 - 698 . Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . The Social Psychology of Telecommunications , Wiley , London , 1976 . Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , and McGuire , T . W . " Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communication , " Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ( 37 ) , 1986 , pp . 157 - 186 . Smolensky , M . W . , Carmody , M . A . , and Halcomb , C . G . " The Influence of Task Type , Group Structure and Extraversion on Uninhibited Speech in Computer - Mediated Communication , " Computers in Human Behavior ( 6 ) , 1990 , pp . 261 - 272 . Spink , K . S . , and Carron , A . V . " Group Cohesion Effects in Exercise Classes , " Small Group Research ( 25 : 1 ) , 1994 , pp . 26 - 42 . Sproull , L . , and Kiesler , S . " Reducing Social Con - text Cues : Electronic Mail in Organizational Communication , " Management Science ( 32 : 11 ) , 1986 , pp . 1492 - 1512 . Stephenson , G . M . , Ayling , K . , and Rutter , D . R . " They Role of Visual Communication in Social Exchange , " British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology ( 15 ) , 1976 , pp . 113 - 120 . Straub , D . , and Karahanna , E . " Knowledge Worker Communications and Recipient Avail - ability : Toward a Task Closure Explanation of Media Choice , " Organization Science ( 9 : 2 ) , 1998 , pp . 169 - 175 . Stuart , D . C . " Get the Picture ? , " Communication News ( 35 : 7 ) , 1998 , pp . 56 - 57 . Svenning , L . L . , and Ruchinskas , J . E . " Organi - zational Teleconferencing , " in New Media : Communication , Research , and Technology , R . Rice ( ed . ) , Sage , Newbury Park , CA , 1984 , pp . 217 - 248 . Thomas , J . , and Griffin , R . " The Social Informa - tion Processing Model of Task Redesign : A Review of the Literature , " Academy of Manage - ment Review ( 8 ) , 1983 , pp . 672 - 682 . Trevino , L . K . , Webster , J . , and Stein , E . W . " Making Connections : Complementary Influ - ences on Communication Media Choices , Atti - tudes , and Use , " Organization Science ( 11 : 2 ) , 2000 , pp . 163 - 182 . Tschuschke , V . , and MacKenzie , K . R . " Empirical Analysis of Group Development : A Methodo - logical Report , " Small Group Behavior ( 20 : 4 ) , 1989 , pp . 419 - 427 . Tuckman , B . W . " Developmental Sequence in Small Groups , " Psychological Bulletin ( 63 : 6 ) , 1965 , pp . 384 - 399 . Tyre , M . J . , and Orlikowski , W . J . " Windows of Opportunity : Temporal Patterns of Technological Adaptation in Organizations , " Organization Science ( 5 : 1 ) , 1994 , pp . 98 - 118 . Valacich , J . S . , Mennecke , B . E . , Watcher , R . M . , and Wheeler , B . C . " Extensions to Media Rich - ness Theory : A Test of the Task - Media Fit Hypothesis , " Proceedings of the Hawaii Inter - national Conference on Systems Science , Maui , HI , 1994 , pp . 11 - 20 . Walther , J . B . " Relational Aspects of Computer - Mediated Communication : Experimental Observations Over Time , " Organization Science ( 6 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 186 - 203 . Webster , J . , and Trevino , L . K . " Rational and Social Theories as Complementary Explana - Yoo & Alavi / Media and Group Cohesion 390 MIS Quarterly Vol . 25 No . 3 / September 2001 tions of Communication Media Choice : Two Policy - Capturing Studies , " Academy of Management Journal ( 38 : 6 ) , 1995 , pp . 1544 - 1572 . Weick , K . E . " Technology as Equivoque : Sense - making in New Technologies , " in Technology and Organizations , P . S . Goodman , L . E . Sproull and Associates ( ed . ) , Jossey - Bass . , San Francisco , 1990 , pp . 1 - 44 . Yates , J . , and Orlikowski , W . J . " Genres of Organizational Communication : A Structura - tional Approach to Studying Communication and Media , " Academy of Management Review ( 17 : 2 ) , 1992 , pp . 299 - 326 . About the Authors Youngjin Yoo is an assistant professor in the Information Systems Department at the Weather - head School of Management , Case Western Reserve University . He holds a Ph . D . in informa - tion systems from the University of Maryland . Youngjin(cid:146)s primary research interests focus on the design of socio - technical information environments for large organizations . His work has appeared in several books and journals , including Academy of Management Journal , Journal of Management Education , and Information Systems Management . He is currently studying creation and transfer of distributed knowledge in multi - unit organizations . Maryam Alavi is the John and Lucy Cook Chair of Information Strategy at the Goizueta Business School , Emory University . Maryam(cid:146)s publications have appeared in several academic journals including Academy of Management Journal , Education Technology Research and Develop - ment , Information Systems Research , Manage - ment Science , and MIS Quarterly . She has served on the editorial boards of several journals including Information Systems Research , MIS Quarterly , and Journal of MIS . Maryam is the twice - elected Vice President of Education of the Association for Information Systems ( AIS ) and was awarded the Marvin Bower Fellowship at the Harvard Business School ( 1996 - 1997 ) . She was elected an AIS Fellow in 2000 and was the recipient of the IBM Faculty Partnership Award in 2001 .