“INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFICACY OF HUMAN MESENCHYMAL STROMAL ( STEM ) CELL IN PRE - CLINICAL RODENT MODEL OF ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME ( ARDS ) ” by Rajdeep Kaur Gill A thesis submitted in conformity with the requirements for the degree of Masters of Science Physiology University of Toronto © Copyright by Rajdeep Kaur Gill 2015 ii Investigation of the efficacy of human mesenchymal stromal / stem cells ( MSCs ) in the pre - clinical relevant model of ARDS Rajdeep Kaur Gill Master of Science The Department of Physiology University of Toronto 2015 Abstract Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome ( ARDS ) is a devastating disease , for which there is no treatment . Mesenchymal Stromal Cell ( MSCs ) holds considerable therapeutic potential for ARDS patients . Bone marrow derived MSCs ( BM - MSCs ) are the most investigated source , but the umbilical cord derived MSCs [ termed HUCPVCs ] have potential advantages . We wished to determine the efficacy of HUCPVCs compared to BM - MSCs in pre - clinical ARDS models . Initial studies characterized a novel 2 - hit ARDS model of fecal peritonitis combined with ventilation induced lung injury ( VILI ) . Subsequent studies demonstrated that BM - MSCs – but not HUCPVSs - demonstrate modest efficacy in this model . In contrast , HUCPVCs showed benefit in a single hit endotoxin induced ARDS . Additional studies demonstrated the safety of these cells in uninjured animals . In conclusion , HUCPVCs have therapeutic potential in ARDS and deserve further exploration . III Acknowledgments I am genuinely privileged to have had the ongoing support and continuous guidance of my respected supervisor Dr . John Laffey during my M . Sc degree program at the University of Toronto . He is remarkable intellect , enthusiasm ; innovative thoughts with high standards of scientific input at various stages of my studies have nurtured me to continually perform with confidence . Dr . Laffey is a true inspirational role model for the pursuit of a successful career and I am indebted to have him as my supervisor . This dissertation would not have been possible without his continuous guidance , critical scientific input and his invaluable time . I owe deepest gratitude to my program advisory committee members Dr . Brian Kavanagh and Dr . Haibo Zhang . Their valuable scientific advice , words of encouragement , unreserved time and care as well continuous feedback on my thesis project is highly appreciated . My co - supervisor , Dr . Gerard Curley holds an immense respect in my heart and has played very vital role during my degree program at St . Michael’s Hospital , Toronto . In early stages of my research project , he imparted me in - vivo training to learn the involved experimental procedures quickly as well develop needed technical skills with ease and proficiency . He is a brilliant scientist , very supportive individual and possess an approachable attitude to resolve as well discuss scientific or technical issues . It would have not been possible for me to present this piece of scientific work without his continuous expert guidance on many fronts . On personal front , he bears a personality whose presence will give you immense mental support that everything will progress in timely manner and my sincere regards for his dedicated contributions . Dr . Jeremy Scott ( Research Associate ) with whom I got a chance to interact on a frequent basis to discuss my enrolment application . Dr . Scott is very knowledgeable person and brings an invaluable guidance experience for graduate students from his past teaching experience . Dr . Mirjana Jerkic ( Research Associate ) who joined our research group in middle of my study program have been a great source of strength and motivation . She is very dedicated , hardworking individual with scientific intellect and got chance to learn western blotting , assays as well interpreting the experimental results using advanced software’s . Her contributions , intellectual guidance in time - crunching situations are highly appreciated by me . IV Steve Dixon ( Research Technician ) with whom I worked continuously , rigorously and performed all the experimental procedures as very good team members . His past invaluable experience in handling animals provided me with an opportunity to learn quickly as well discuss technical questions on routinely basis . His contribution to this study projects are highly appreciated and was great company during lengthy ventilation procedures . Julie Khang ( Laboratory Manager from Dr . Zhang Lab ) is a cheerful personality and brings live to the work environment . She has been immense source of support that boosts your confidence and would invest plenty of time to hear your concerns as well provide recommendations . My sincere thanks to our research collaborators , Dr . Armand Keating , Dr . Jed Davies and their respective group members for providing us with isolated and fully characterized MSCs for my project studies . Also , I would appreciate the contributions of Dr . Martin Wojtowicz and Rosalie Pang from the physiology department of University of Toronto for their student support . To all my friends in the research laboratory who helped to create positive , enthusiastic and motivating work environment during difficult time that I was fortunate to be in , many thanks to you Dr . Claire Masterson , Dr . Linda Garces - Ramirez , Grace Hogan , Mirna Ghazarian and Hajera Amatullah . I was fortunate to have all of them not as my co - workers but made new friends for life time and wish you all good luck in all future endeavors . I dedicate this degree to my supervisor , Dr . John Laffey who provided me an opportunity to pursue post - graduate degree with student funding support from his research funds . I would like to acknowledge continuous strong enthusiastic overseas support from my adorable parents , Rajinder Pal Singh Gill ( dad ) , Manjit Kaur Gill ( mom ) and Gagandeep Singh Gill ( brother ) . My sincere regards to my family friend , Gurvinder S Thandi and his kids for keeping me in high spirits and motivating me to pursue desired professional opportunities . V Table of Contents Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii Table of Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . x Chapter 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Chapter 2 Methods and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 Chapter 3 Establishment of a 2 - hit Sepsis - VILI model of ARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 Chapter 4 Investigate the therapeutic potential of bone marrow versus umbilical cord derived MSCs in Sepsis - VILI model of ARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 Chapter 5 Investigate the therapeutic potential of bone marrow versus umbilical cord derived MSCs in Endotoxin model of ARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 Chapter 6 Discussion and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157 VI List of Tables 1 . Table 1 . 1 Characteristics of Human Lung Injury 2 . Table 1 . 2 Surface Markers expressed by BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs . 3 . Table 2 . 1 Animal health and Distress Scoring 4 . Table 2 . 2 Parameters to examine Signs of Disease or Pain . 5 . Table 2 . 3 Distress scoring criteria for the animals . 6 . Table 2 . 4 Tissue Processing Protocol . 7 . Table 3 . 1 Important differences between animal models . 8 . Table 3 . 2 Sepsis - Fecal Pellet Dose response study . 9 . Table 3 . 3 Induction of severe VILI in septic animals . 10 . Table 4 . 1 The Paracrine soluble factors secreted by MSCs . 11 . Table 4 . 2 Series 1C Summarized results on effect of MSCs in Sepsis - VILI model 12 . Table 5 . 1 Series 3A Summarized results on effect of MSCs in LPS model . 13 . Table 5 . 1B Series 3BSummarized results on safety of administered MSCs in uninjured model . VII List of Figures 1 . Figure 1 . 1 : The pathogenesis of lung injury during the acute phase with normal alveolus . 2 . Figure 3 . 1A : Flow Schematic for Series 1A Fecal - pellet optimal dose study for sepsis . 3 . Figure 3 . 1B : Flow Schematic for Series 1B VILI severity feasibility study . 4 . Figure 3 . 1C : Flow schematic for Series 1C Design of Sepsis - VILI model . 5 . Figure 4 . 1 : Flow Schematic for Series 2 Effect of MSCs therapy in Sepsis - VILI model . 6 . Figure 5 . 1 : Flow Schematic for Series 3A Effect of MSCs therapy in LPS model . 7 . Figure 5 . 2 : Flow Schematic for Series 3B Safety of administered MSCs in an uninjured model . VIII List of Graphs 1 . Graph 3 . 1 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI on animal weight change from Day 1 to Day 16 . 2 . Graph 3 . 2 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on static compliance . 3 . Graph 3 . 3 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on oxygenation . 4 . Graph 3 . 4 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on alveolar white cell counts . 5 . Graph 3 . 5 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on alveolar neutrophil counts . 6 . Graph 3 . 6 : Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on lung wet / dry weight ratios . 7 . Graphs 3 . 6 Effect of Sepsis - VILI procedures on BAL proteins . 8 . Graph 4 . 1 : Effect of MSCs therapy on animal weight in Sepsis - VILI model . 9 . Graph 4 . 2 : Effect of MSCs therapy on static compliance in Sepsis - VILI model . 10 . Graph 4 . 3 : Effect of MSCs therapy on oxygenation in Sepsis - VILI model . 11 . Graph 4 . 4 : Effect of MSCs therapy on alveolar white cell counts in Sepsis - VILI model . 12 . Graph 4 . 5 : Effect of MSCs therapy on alveolar neutrophil counts in Sepsis - VILI model . 13 . Graph 4 . 6 : Effect of MSCs therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios in Sepsis - VILI model . 14 . Graph 4 . 7 : Effect of MSCs therapy on BAL proteins in Sepsis - VILI model . 15 . Graph 4 . 8 : Effect of BM - hMSCs in repairing damaged lung tissue in Sepsis - VILI model . 16 . Graph 5 . 1A : Effect of MSCs therapy on animal weight in LPS model . 17 . Graph 5 . 2A : Effect of MSCs therapy on static compliance in LPS model . 18 . Graph 5 . 3A : Effect of MSCs therapy on alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient in LPS model . 19 . Graph 5 . 4A : Effect of MSCs therapy on alveolar white cell counts in LPS model . 20 . Graph 5 . 5A : Effect of MSCs therapy on alveolar neutrophil counts in LPS model . 21 . Graph 5 . 6A : Effect of MSCs therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios in LPS model . 22 . Graph 5 . 7A : Effect of MSCs therapy on BAL proteins in LPS model . 23 . Graph 5 . 1B : Safety and effect of MSCs on animal weight in uninjured lung 24 . Graph 5 . 2B : Safety and effect of MSCs on static compliance in uninjured lungs . 25 . Graph 5 . 3B : Safety and effect of MSCs on oxygenation in uninjured lungs . 26 . Graph 5 . 4B : Safety and effect of MSCs on alveolar white cell counts in uninjured lungs . 27 . Graph 5 . 5B : Safety and effects of MSCs on alveolar neutrophil counts in uninjured lungs IX 28 . Graph 5 . 6B : Safety and effect of MSCs on lung wet / dry ratios in uninjured model . 29 . Graph 5 . 7B : Safety and effect of MSCs on BAL proteins in uninjured model . X List of Abbreviations ARDS Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome ALI Acute Lung Injury Ad - MSCs Adipose derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells BAL Bronchoalveolar Lavage BM - hMSCs Bone marrow derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells BSA Bovine Serum Albumin COPD Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease CPAP Continuous positive airway pressure ECM Extracellular matrix EGF Epidermal growth matrix GM - CSF Granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor HUCPVCs Human Umbilical Cord Perivascular Stem Cells ICAM Intracellular adhesion molecule ICU Intensive care unit IFN - β Interferon β IL1 - R Interleukin 1 receptor IL - 1β Interleukin 1 IL - 1 Interleukin 1 IL - 6 Interleukin 6 IL - 8 Interleukin 8 IP Intraperitoneal IR Ischemia reperfusion IV Intravenous IT Intratracheally ICU Intensive Care Unit KGF Keratinocyte growth factor LPS Lipopolysaccharide LIS Lung injury Score MV Mechanical ventilation MSCs Mesenchymal Stem Cells MAP Mean arterial blood pressure MCL - 1 Myeloid Cell Leukemia - 1 ( an anti ‐ apoptotic factor ) MV Mechanical ventilation MIF Macrophage migration inhibitory factor MIP - 2 Macrophage inflammatory protein 2 alpha MODS Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome NE Neutrophil Elastase NO Nitric oxide synthase PAOP Pulmonary Artery Occlusion Pressure PBS Phosphate buffered saline PEEP Positive end - expiratory pressure ROS Reactive oxygen species SOFA Sequential Organ Failure Assessment XI RNA Ribonucleic acid TB Tuberculosis TGF Transforming growth factor TLR Toll - like receptor TLR - 3 Toll - like receptor 3 TNF Tumour necrosis factor TNFR Tumour necrosis factor receptor TNF - α Tumour necrosis factor receptor V T Tidal Volume VILI Ventilator Induced Lung Injury 1 Thesis Hypothesis “Investigation of the efficacy of human mesenchymal stromal / stem cells ( MSCs ) in the pre - clinical relevant model of ARDS” Hypothesis We hypothesized that administration of MSCs either bone - marrow derived or umbilical cord derived will attenuate the progression of lung injury . Aims of Project The goal of this study was to compare the therapeutic potential of MSCs derived from bone marrow ( BM - hMSCs ) and umbilical cord ( HUCPVCs ) . 1 ) To establish a novel 2 - hit severe , reproducible , clinically relevant model of ARDS using Sepsis - VILI 2 ) To compare the therapeutic effects of BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs in Sepsis - VILI rodent model . 3 ) To investigate the efficacy of two cell doses ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg and 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) for both BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs in the Sepsis - VILI model . 4 ) To investigate the safety of administered MSCs cell doses in Sepsis - VILI model . 5 ) To investigate the efficacy of bone marrow versus umbilical cord Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in LPS model induced lung injury . 6 ) To investigate the safety of administered MSCs in LPS model induced lung injury . My thesis supervisor , Dr . John Laffey and colleagues have previously reported that MSCs are efficacious in a variety of models of pulmonary infection ( i . e . , pneumonia ) , systemic sepsis and 2 ventilator - induced lung injury [ 1 , 2 ] . The main goal of our research program is to improve our understanding of the potential efficacy of MSCs for the treatment of ARDS , and to translate this novel therapeutic approach for critically ill patients . As such , I hope to contribute significantly to advances in this area . Mesenchymal Stem / Stromal Cells ( MSCs ) offer hope for ARDS sufferers and early findings in simple pre - clinical ARDS models are promising . We do not know whether MSCs are effective in more clinically relevant models of ARDS and critical illness . We do not know the best dosage regimen , and our understanding of the mechanism of MSC action is also uncertain . Lastly , safety concerns regarding MSCs need to be addressed , including the risk of secondary bacterial infection as a result of their immunosuppressive properties . Predictions from Hypothesis We will use a newly - established , complex model of sepsis and ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) to ensure the potential for translation to complex human disease ; i . e . , to increase the likelihood that MSC’s are effective in actual ARDS sufferers . This model reflects the actual clinical course encountered by patients ( i . e . , a proportion of septic patients require ventilation and develop a worsened lung injury ) and will allow the testing of novel therapeutic modalities that may advance treatment of such patients and reduce morbidity / mortality . This will allow for a true assessment of the potential for translation of this novel therapeutic approach for patients with this devastating disease . If successful , stem cell therapies would help save the lives of critically ill patients , improving the quality of life of survivors and potentially reduce healthcare costs . 3 Chapter 1 Introduction Background Acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) was originally described by Dr . Thomas L . Petty [ 3 ] and co - workers in 1967 . ARDS is a syndrome of acute respiratory failure with progressive arterial hypoxemia , severe dyspnea and a marked increase in the work of breathing . It includes damage to the alveolar - capillary barrier , together with infiltration of inflammatory cells into the air spaces and the development of pulmonary edema . As a result of decades of basic and clinical research , considerable progress has been made in understanding the pathophysiology of ARDS . In humans , the clinical diagnosis of ARDS is based on a well - defined set of clinical parameters as set out in the recent Berlin Definition [ 4 ] detailed below . a ) Timing : Acute onset of worsening respiratory symptoms within 1 week . b ) Chest Imaging : Radiological evidence of bilateral opacities not fully explained by effusions , lobar / lung collapse or nodules . c ) Oxygenation : A ratio of the partial pressure of arterial oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen ( PaO 2 / FIO 2 ) of less than 300 . According to the Berlin definition , ARDS is characterized on the basis of three mutually exclusive categories of hypoxemia as measured by the PaO 2 / FiO 2 ratio : mild ( PaO 2 / FiO 2 ≤ 300mmHg but > 200mmHg with PEEP or CPAP ≥ 5cm H 2 O which may be delivered noninvasively ) , moderate ( PaO 2 / FiO 2 ≤ 200mmHg but > 100mmHg with PEEP ≥ 5cm H 2 O ) and severe ( PaO 2 / FiO 2 ≤ 100mmHg with PEEP ≥ 5cm H 2 O ) d ) Origin of Edema : Respiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload . 4 Causes of ARDS The primary clinical disorder associated with ARDS in humans is pneumonia , which can be bacterial , viral or fungal [ 5 , 6 ] . The second most common cause of ARDS is severe sepsis , which may be associated with pneumonia or a nonpulmonary infectious source , such as peritonitis . Other causes of ARDS include aspiration of gastric contents ; hemorrhage and shock following major trauma , severe acute pancreatitis , and transfusion - associated lung injury and drug reactions [ 7 , 8 ] . Although mechanical ventilation ( MV ) is an essential intervention to support life in ARDS , it can also contribute to lung injury , termed Ventilator Induced Lung Injury ( VILI ) [ 9 ] . ARDS can progress to organ failure such as cardiovascular , renal , abnormal liver function , hematologic abnormalities including anemia and thrombocytopenia , which can ultimately lead to death . Since there is more than one underlying cause for this devastating disease it is very challenging to model the lung injury observed in critically ill patients in pre - clinical studies in animals . While clinical and basic science investigation over the past four decades have provided a better understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that initiate and propagate lung injury in humans , further investigation needs to be carried out in order to develop much needed therapies for this devastating disease . Epidemiology of ARDS A prospective epidemiologic study in 1999 – 2000 estimated an annual incidence of ARDS of 190 , 000 adult patients in the United States [ 10 ] . An aging population and an increasing incidence of sepsis may result in a higher disease burden over the next decade and beyond . Notwithstanding this , based on the NIH Heart , Lung and Blood Institute ( NHLBI ) ARDS Network trials , 60 - day mortality has declined from 36 % in 1996 – 1997 to 26 % in 2004 – 2005 [ 11 ] . The most recent ARDS Network clinical trials reported a 60 - day mortality of 22 % in adult patients despite higher APACHE III scores and a higher incidence of shock at enrollment compared with a prior trial in 2006 . In addition , pediatric patients also suffer from ARDS and several reports have been published [ 7 , 8 ] . Higher mortality rates have been reported in African American and Hispanic patients in comparison to Caucasian patients ; however , the contribution of genetic or environmental factors for this racial and ethnic disparity are not yet clear [ 12 ] . With a mean healthcare cost of $ 128 , 860 per hospital stay ( in 2006 ) , the cost of ARDS to Canada likely 5 approaches $ 4 billion annually [ 13 ] . Mortality remains high comparable to that seen from HIV infection or breast cancer , while ARDS survivors subsequently experience a poorer quality of life [ 14 ] . Clinical Pathological Phases of ARDS In 1977 , Bachofen and Weibel [ 6 ] characterized pathological findings in the lungs of patients with ARDS at different time points as discussed below ; a ) The acute or early exudative phase ( 1 - 6 days ) : There is evidence of interstitial and alveolar edema with accumulation of neutrophils , macrophages and red blood cells in alveoli . This is accompanied by evidence of both endothelial and epithelial injury with denuding of alveolar epithelium . Prominent hyaline membranes in alveoli are also observed . b ) ( b ) The sub - acute or fibroproliferative phase ( 7 - 14 days ) : Alveolar edema is reabsorbed and there is evidence of early repair with proliferation of alveolar epithelial type II cells . To reline the alveolar walls , these type II cells differentiate into new type I cells . There may also be infiltration of fibroblasts with some evidence of collagen deposition . c ) The chronic or fibrotic phase ( after 14 days ) : This phase is accompanied by further accumulation of mononuclear cells and alveolar macrophages in alveoli and progression of fibrosis , together with ongoing evidence of alveolar epithelial repair . In many patients , resolution progresses without fibrosis , with gradual reabsorption of edema and a decline in acute inflammation . Pathogenesis of ARDS The pathogenesis of ARDS can be best understood by focusing on ( a ) the factors which are responsible for the accumulation of protein rich and neutrophilic pulmonary edema in the lung interstitium and in the distal air spaces of the lung and ( b ) the mechanisms that impair the removal of pulmonary edema fluid and inflammatory cells from the lung [ 15 ] . The protein - rich edema fluid in ARDS is associated with large numbers of neutrophils , monocytes , denuded epithelial cells , and 6 pro - inflammatory markers including cytokines , proteases , oxidants , and pro - coagulant factors [ 15 ] as represented in Figure 1 . 1 . Figure 1 . 1 Pathogenesis of lung injury during the acute phase in comparison to normal alveolus Figure 1 . 1 representing a ) The normal alveolus and b ) The injured alveolus in the acute phase of the acute respiratory distress ( ARDS ) Note : This figure is based on Figure 2 adapted from reference Michael A . Mathay and Rachel L . Zemans , Annu . Rev . Pathol . Mech . Dis 2011 [ 15 ] . Originally the figure was adapted with permission from the Massachusetts Medical Society for this publication . 7 a ) Lung Endothelial Injury An increase in lung vascular permeability in ARDS occurs primarily at the level of the microcirculation and results in accumulation of protein - rich pulmonary edema even in the presence of normal lung vascular pressures [ 16 , 17 ] . The injury to the lung endothelium can occur by several mechanisms , though neutrophil - dependent lung injury is the most studied [ 18 , 19 ] . In many experimental models , transfusion - associated lung injury [ 20 ] or acid - induced lung injury [ 21 , 22 ] , neutrophils are a critical final pathway of lung injury . In the setting of both infectious and non - infectious lung injury , neutrophils accumulate in the lung microvasculature and become activated , leading to degranulation , release of several toxic mediators including proteases , reactive oxygen species , pro - inflammatory cytokines and pro - coagulant molecules , which results in sustained loss of normal endothelial barrier function . Some of these inflammatory mediators act directly on the lung endothelium , which results in the increased expression of chemokines as well as cell - surface molecules that are important for leukocyte adhesion [ 23 ] . The neutrophil - dependent lung injury is important but it also needs to be placed in the context of the vital role that neutrophils play in host defense , particularly against bacterial infection [ 24 ] . Thus , although neutrophil depletion attenuates lung injury in animal models , the lack of functioning neutrophils obviously impairs innate immunity . It has also become evident that platelets play an important role in neutrophil - mediated lung injury . Several recent lines of evidence point to an additive and even synergistic effect of platelets in conjunction with neutrophils in causing lung endothelial injury . The platelets can directly interact with neutrophils and monocytes and are themselves a source of pro - inflammatory cytokines [ 25 ] . The neutrophils integrate signals received from the endothelium to communicate between the vessel wall and platelets to cause vascular injury [ 23 ] . b ) Alveolar Epithelial Injury The neutrophils can cross the alveolar epithelium without inducing an increase in lung epithelial permeability [ 26 , 27 ] . The degree to which neutrophils are activated ( primed ) by exposure to chemokines and other pro - inflammatory stimuli , also appear to play an important role in alveolar epithelial injury . The trans - epithelial migration of neutrophils into the distal air spaces of the lung 8 involves three sequential steps : adhesion , migration and post - migration [ 28 ] . The various molecules involved in this process include CD11b / CD18 [ 29 - 31 ] and CD47 [ 32 ] . CD11b / CD18 is the primary molecule involved in the initial adhesion of neutrophils to the basolateral surface [ 29 ] , although there is some evidence for CD18 - independent transmigration of neutrophils also [ 30 ] . Recent studies [ 32 - 34 ] suggest that once neutrophils have traversed the epithelium and entered the air spaces , they adhere to the apical surface and phagocytose and kill bacteria . However , these activated neutrophils also damage the alveolar epithelium by release of toxic intracellular molecules that induce dissolution of tight junctions as well as apoptosis and necrosis of alveolar epithelial type I and type II cells . The toxic mediators include proteases such as elastase and matrix metalloproteinase , cationic peptides such as defensins and reactive oxygen species [ 28 ] . There is considerable evidence that apoptosis of the alveolar epithelium may be important in human lung injury [ 35 , 36 ] . c ) Pulmonary Edema In early ARDS , the volume of aeratable lung is reduced by alveolar edema and surfactant dysfunction . This is reflected in the concept of a “small” lung early in ARDS versus a “stiff” lung later in the course . Increased permeability of microvascular barriers , resulting in extravascular accumulation of protein - rich edema fluid , is a cardinal feature of acute inflammation and a central pathophysiologic mechanism in ARDS . The equation described by Starling in 1896 characterizes fluid flux across a semipermeable membrane and has been applied both experimentally and clinically to predict pulmonary edema formation in humans . The prime factors in this equation are the hydrostatic and oncotic gradients between the vasculature and interstitium coupled with the degree of capillary permeability . When fluid deposition exceeds the capacity of the lung to remove such fluid , accumulation of extravascular water occurs . Patients with ARDS and sepsis demonstrate variable degrees of capillary permeability , increasing the effect of hydrostatic pressure gradients relative to the oncotic pressure gradients as molecules responsible for maintaining oncotic pressure may be allowed freely to cross such leaky barriers . Accumulation of extravascular lung water and exudation of plasma proteins into the alveolar space creates the interstitial edema recognized as a feature of ARDS . 9 A variety of mediators , pathways , and molecular systems contribute to altered alveolar endothelial and epithelial permeability [ 20 , 37 , 38 ] . Molecular approaches to specifically reverse increased - permeability pulmonary edema have been long sought in ARDS research . Promising mediators and pathways under investigation include sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( SPP ) , a lipid recognized by G protein – coupled receptors on endothelial cells [ 39 ] , and the Robo4 / Slit signaling system [ 40 ] both of which stabilize the endothelial barrier . Reabsorption of alveolar edema occurs through vectorial transport of sodium and chloride across alveolar epithelial type I and II cells to create a mini – osmotic gradient to reabsorb water . This process is impaired in ARDS because of apoptosis and necrosis of alveolar epithelium and defects in transcellular ion transport induced by proinflammatory cytokines , oxidants , hypoxia and mechanical ventilation [ 41 ] . Lecuona and colleagues reported that high tidal volume ventilation induced a reduction in energy - dependent sodium transport [ 42 ] . Effective reabsorption of edema fluid from the air spaces requires reestablishment of an effective epithelial barrier [ 26 ] . Re - epithelialization occurs initially by proliferation of type II cells , and the traditional view is that type II cells are the main source of new alveolar epithelial cells [ 43 ] . Nevertheless , there is new evidence that progenitor cells may exist in strategic niches in bronchoalveolar junctions and that the alveolar epithelium can be activated to regenerate the epithelial and endothelial barriers [ 44 , 45 ] . 10 Mechanical Ventilation ( MV ) Mechanical ventilation – although necessary to support respiration during anesthesia for surgical procedures and to sustain life in patients with ARDS – may directly or indirectly damage the lung . This is termed ventilation - induced lung injury ( VILI ) [ 46 ] . The demonstration that low – tidal volume protective ventilation strategies can improve patient survival in ARDS has been hailed as a key therapeutic advance of the past decade [ 47 ] . This entails the use of lower tidal volumes ( 6 - ml / kg ) compared to more traditional tidal volumes of 10 - 15ml / kg , thus reducing over - distention of the lung and further injury [ 48 ] . Mechanical ventilation compounds the degree of lung injury in patients with ARDS through a variety of mechanisms . Experimental studies in the 1970s and early 1980s [ 49 - 51 ] suggested that the practice of ventilating patients with tidal volumes of 10 to 15 ml kg - 1 and airway pressures greater than 35 to 40 cm H 2 O may contribute to lung injury in ARDS . These insights in animal models were later demonstrated clinically with results from a single - center study in Brazil in 1998 [ 52 ] and from the multicenter National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute - supported ARDS Network clinical trial in 2000 [ 47 ] . Animal studies have demonstrated that a ventilation strategy with lower tidal volumes and lower airway pressures is protective in ARDS due to a variety of mechanisms , including reduced lung endothelial injury , reduced lung epithelial injury , reduced lung inflammation and accelerated resolution of alveolar edema . Ventilation with higher tidal volumes and elevated airway pressures causes increased lung inflammation , in addition to direct mechanical injury to the lung epithelium and endothelium . These studies in humans patients ventilated with lower tidal volumes and lower airway pressures reported significant decreases in BAL and plasma concentration of many inflammatory and anti - inflammatory mediators ( TNF - α , IL - 8 , IL - 1β , IL - 6 , IL - 8 , soluble TNF receptors , IL - 1 RA ) [ 53 ] Pathophysiology of VILI Since the first report by Greenfield et al . [ 54 ] demonstrated that MV with large tidal volumes and pressures alters the surface properties of canine lung extracts in vitro and in vivo , studies have evaluated the mechanisms responsible for mechanical ventilation induced lung injury . Experimental studies suggest two main mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury : volutrauma , 11 injury from excess distension ; and atelectrauma , local shear injury from tidal opening and closing . Furthermore , the central role of mechano - transduction ( i . e . the conversion of a mechanical stimulus into chemical activity ) , and local and systemic inflammation ( termed biotrauma ) [ 55 ] induced by excess lung stretch has been identified . Biotrauma results from direct damage to epithelial and endothelial cells , which results in recruitment of inflammatory cells and cytokines into both the alveolar space and the systemic circulation , resulting in lung and distal organ injury . Mechano - transduction and excess stretch of alveolar epithelial cells results in a variety of responses including entry of calcium into cells , enhanced permeability of the endothelial membrane [ 56 ] , altered membrane lipid trafficking [ 57 ] and increased activity of stress - responsive genes [ 58 ] , all of which participate in the genesis of VILI . Role of PEEP and low volume injury Webb and Tierney [ 50 ] demonstrated that pulmonary edema was lessened by the application of 10 cmH 2 O during ventilation with 45 cmH 2 O peak airway pressures in isolated rodent lungs , although the beneficial effect was attributed to the preservation of surfactant . Later studies exhibited preservation of the alveolar epithelial layer in animals ventilated with PEEP in comparison to those ventilated with zero end - expiratory pressure ( ZEEP ) [ 59 ] . PEEP prevented the repetitive opening and closing of terminal units , thereby decreasing shear stress at this level . Similar observations have been made by other investigators , either in intact animals [ 60 , 61 ] or in perfused canine lobes [ 62 ] . The disadvantage of overinflation and overdistention , the potential for low - volume injury , was later given attention by the Slutsky group [ 63 ] . Their work in isolated rat lungs demonstrated that repetitive opening and collapse lead to a decrease in lung compliance and injury to the epithelial cells that line small airways and alveolar ducts . Role of Inflammatory mediators in VILI Mechanical ventilation causes release of soluble mediators from the lungs into the bloodstream , which may result in injury to the lungs themselves and to other organs [ 64 , 65 ] Studies conducted by Tremblay and colleagues [ 66 ] in ventilated isolated , perfused rat lungs demonstrated that BAL 12 TNF - α was increased by injurious ventilation strategies , along with pro - inflammatory cytokines , IL - 1β , IFN - γ , IL - 6 , the chemokine macrophage inflammatory protein ( MIP ) - 2 and the anti - inflammatory cytokine IL - 10 . The increase in cytokines was greater if rats were pre - treated with endotoxin . High tidal volume ventilation also increased the expression of c - fos mRNA , a transcription factor important in early stress response [ 66 ] . Pugin and colleagues [ 67 ] cultured human alveolar macrophages on flexible silastic membranes and exposed the cells to cyclic stretch for up to 32 hours . Cyclic strain induced an increase in the secretion of IL - 8 . When the macrophages were pretreated with lipopolysaccharide , TNF - α and IL - 6 secretion also increased to a greater extent in strained cells compared with static cultures . Ranieri and colleagues reported significant decreases in BAL and plasma concentrations of many inflammatory and anti - inflammatory mediators ( TNF - α , IL - 1β , IL - 6 , IL - 8 , soluble TNF receptors , IL - 1 RA ) in patients ventilated with a lung protective strategy consisting of a 7 . 6ml / kg V T with 14 . 8 cm H 2 O PEEP as compared to those ventilated with 11 . 1 ml / kg V T and 6 . 5 cm H 2 O PEEP [ 68 ] . A reduction in plasma IL - 6 levels was observed in patients ventilated with low tidal volumes compared with conventional tidal volumes in the National Institutes of Health Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network study [ 47 ] . In patients undergoing general anesthesia for elective surgery , the importance of circulating inflammatory mediators is less clear . Some patients undergoing elective surgery have similar levels of circulating cytokines whether the ventilation parameters are injurious or ‘protective’ [ 69 ] ; in addition , profound elevation in circulating cytokines can occur despite the use of ‘protective’ ventilation and the absence of structural lung injury [ 70 ] . Such lack of correlation suggests that these molecules may be markers of tissue inflammation or repair rather than pathogenic mediators . Thus , levels of circulating mediators might not reflect the net effect on tissue or cellular injury , and a simple correlation of a specific circulating cytokine level with the degree of injury cannot prove—and might not indicate—pathogenic effect . This also explains why mediator inhibition would have multiple and unpredictable effects . 13 Activation of inflammatory cells during VILI Polymorphonuclear leukocytes ( PMNs ) play a vital role in the pathogenesis of ARDS [ 71 ] . Current evidence suggests a role of PMNs as the major effector cells in the generation of the tissue injury characteristic of VILI [ 55 ] . For example , neutrophil - deleted animals had markedly improved oxygenation and decreased evidence of injury after lung lavage and / or mechanical ventilation versus a control group treated with lavage and injurious ventilation alone [ 72 ] . More recently , Zhang et al . [ 53 ] examined the hypothesis that mechanical ventilation could lead to activation of PMNs in excess of that expected with ARDS alone . In these studies , PMNs isolated from normal human volunteers were incubated with BAL fluid from ARDS patients ventilated with either conventional mechanical ventilation or a protective ventilation strategy . Neutrophils were assessed post - incubation for evidence of PMN activation . BAL from the conventional ventilation strategy group enhanced neutrophil activation more markedly than BAL from the group ventilated with the protective strategy [ 53 ] . These findings suggest that mechanical ventilation can lead to release of mediators that prime neutrophils , possibly providing a mechanism by which PMNs mediate tissue injury in VILI . Contribution of VILI to Pulmonary Edema VILI induces alterations in microvascular permeability via several potential mechanisms . These range from a physiological increase in pore size with lung volume changes to direct mechanical injury , and loss of alveolar - capillary barrier function . As the epithelium is progressively stretched , there is a non - reversible opening of water - filled channels between alveolar cells , resulting in the free diffusion of small solutes and albumin across the epithelial barrier . Webb and Tierney in 1974 [ 50 ] described the onset of pulmonary edema in rats ventilated with high peak inspiratory pressures . Later in 1980s , Parker et al . [ 51 , 73 ] demonstrated an increase in the capillary filtration coefficients is isolated dog lungs when they were ventilated with peak airway pressure above 20 cm H 2 O and similar changes were reported in larger animals by Kolobow [ 73 ] . Mead and colleagues [ 74 ] speculated that high lung stretch rapidly results in cellular lesions and permeability type pulmonary edema . The clearance of edema from the airspaces is also impaired by mechanical 14 ventilation : large tidal volumes induce a reduction in energy dependent sodium transport and retard fluid re - absorption [ 42 ] . 15 ARDS – A therapeutic challenge Despite being a focus of ongoing intensive research efforts over four decades , there are no treatments for ARDS , and management remains focused on strategies that minimize ventilator - induced lung injury ( 4 ) . Unsuccessful large scale clinical trials of therapeutic strategies targeting the underlying pathophysiological processes implicated in the development of ARDS , including nitric oxide ( 5 , 6 ) , anti - oxidants ( 7 - 10 ) , surfactants ( 11 ) , corticosteroids ( 12 ) , immunomodulating agents such as IL - 10 , GM - CSF ( 13 ) neutrophil elastase inhibitor ( 14 ) and statins ( 15 ) highlight the need for novel approaches for ARDS . Supportive strategies that have shown benefit in ARDS include low tidal volume mechanical ventilation , conservative intravenous fluid administration [ 75 ] , prone positioning for severely hypoxemic patients and the use of muscle relaxants [ 76 - 81 ] . Fluid - conservative therapy It was clearly demonstrated 30 years ago that reducing lung vascular hydrostatic pressures decreases lung edema in the setting of increased lung vascular permeability [ 82 , 83 ] . This beneficial effect can be explained by a favorable effect on Starling forces : lower vascular pressures reduce trans vascular fluid filtration , particularly in the presence of increased lung vascular permeability . In addition , animal studies indicate that reduced lung vascular pressure can attenuate lung endothelial translocation of P - selectin and accumulation of intravascular neutrophils [ 84 ] . The ARDS network studied 1 , 000 patients in a randomized trial that compared a liberal with a restrictive fluid - administration strategy . The fluid - restrictive strategy significantly reduced the average duration of mechanical ventilation by 2 . 5 days [ 85 ] . A reduction in angiopoietin - 2 levels in plasma was observed in patients treated with a fluid conservative strategy , supporting an anti - inflammatory mechanism of action [ 86 ] . Lung Protective Ventilation Low tidal volume mechanical ventilation reduces accumulation of pulmonary edema by preserving the barrier properties of the alveolar endothelium and alveolar epithelium [ 50 , 51 , 59 , 66 ] . In rats , the rate of resolution of alveolar edema was 3 - fold higher with 6 versus 12ml / kg tidal volumes , in part because of reduced epithelial cell injury [ 87 ] . Reductions in markers of lung epithelial injury 16 have also been observed in clinical studies of lung - protective mechanical ventilation [ 88 ] . Low - tidal volume mechanical ventilation down regulates mechanosensitive proinflammatory pathways resulting in reduced neutrophil accumulation in the alveoli , lower plasma levels of IL - 6 , IL - 8 , and soluble TNF receptor I [ 65 , 89 ] and may even reduce injury in distal organs . For example , ventilation with high tidal volume in rabbits with acid - induced ALI caused apoptosis of renal tubular cells , an effect that was attenuated with the use of lower tidal volumes , while low tidal volume ventilation was associated with an increase in renal failure - free days in patients with ARDS [ 47 ] . Prone Positioning Prone positioning was first proposed by Bryan in 1974 [ 76 ] to improve oxygenation in patients with respiratory failure . Prone positioning was associated with a redistribution of lung densities and a decrease in PaCO 2 which was associated with reduced mortality [ 77 - 79 ] . The distribution of ventilation and perfusion during prone positioning has been studied in a surfactant - depleted sheep model of respiratory failure by Richter et al [ 80 ] which demonstrated an enhanced ventilation perfusion ratio . Although several randomized trials of prone ventilation failed to demonstrate improved survival in unselected populations of patients with ARDS , a more recent study in a subpopulation with severe ARDS ( PaO 2 : FiO 2 < 150 mmHg , FiO 2 ≥0 . 6 , PEEP ≥5 cm H 2 O ) who were mechanically ventilated with low tidal volumes and early ( within 33 hours of intubation ) , high - dose ( 17 consecutive hours ) prone ventilation ( PROSEVA ) revealed a reduction in 28 - day mortality ( 16 versus 33 percent ) and 90 - day mortality ( 24 versus 41 percent ) . [ 81 ] . Inhaled Nitric Oxide Nitric oxide is a selective pulmonary vasodilator which modulates lung inflammation . Recently , a systematic review analyzed 12 randomized , clinical trials of inhaled nitric oxide , enrolling a total of 1 , 237 patients with ARDS . Nitric oxide did not affect mortality or duration of ventilation , but it was associated with a small improvement in PaO 2 / FIO 2 ratio . The data from 3 large trials representing three quarters of these 1 , 237 patients showed an increased risk of renal dysfunction [ 90 ] . 17 Other Therapies Many pharmacotherapies for ARDS , including corticosteroids , nitric oxide , surfactant , ketoconazole , lysofylline , N - acetyleysteine , fish oil and beta - adrenergic agonists have initially shown efficacy in animal models , but have not led to clinical success [ 91 , 92 ] . Muscle [ 93 ] paralysis has been demonstrated to improve outcome when used in the first 72 hours in patients with severe ARDS . Nutritional supplements with ω - 3 fatty acid may be harmful [ 94 ] . Unfortunately , there remains no effective pharmacologic treatment for ARDS [ 95 ] . 18 Cell therapy for ARDS Cell therapy , particularly with allogeneic mesenchymal stem / stromal cells ( MSCs ) , has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for ARDS . A growing body of evidence highlights the potential benefits of cell - based therapy for lung disease . MSCs appear to modulate inflammation and restore epithelial and endothelial function , via both paracrine and cell contact dependent effects [ 96 ] . Diverse paracrine mechanisms exist , including the release of cytokines , growth factors ( such as kerotinocyte growth factor ) and antimicrobial peptides . MSCs have demonstrated the ability to decrease injury and enhance function in other organs , including the kidney [ 97 ] , liver [ 98 ] and heart [ 99 - 101 ] . MSCs may directly attenuate bacterial sepsis [ 96 , 102 , 103 ] , the commonest and most severe cause of ARDS . Preclinical studies demonstrate promising results using MSCs for diverse lung disorders , including emphysema , bronchopulmonary dysplasia , fibrosis and ARDS . The mechanisms responsible for the therapeutic effects of MSCs are not completely understood and need to be explored in order to ensure effective clinical translation . Mesenchymal Stem / Stromal Cells MSCs were first isolated from bone marrow in 1976 by Friedenstein et al . [ 104 ] . Since then , MSCs have also been isolated from other tissue sources , such as fat [ 105 ] , muscle [ 106 ] , dermis , placenta [ 107 ] . MSCs comprise less than 0 . 1 % of all bone marrow cells , but can be isolated from whole bone marrow aspirates by their ability to adhere to plastic and form colonies . The enormous expansion potential of MSCs in culture makes them an attractive candidate as a cellular therapy [ 108 ] . As MSCs do not possess a unique surface marker , the International Society of Cellular Therapy [ 109 ] has specified three criteria that characterize MSCs : ( 1 ) adherence to plastic in standard tissue culture conditions ; ( 2 ) expression of surface markers such as CD73 , CD90 , CD105 and the absence of markers including CD45 , CD34 , CD14 or CD11b ; and ( 3 ) the capacity to differentiate into mesenchymal lineages including osteoblasts , adipocytes and chondroblasts under in vitro conditions [ 109 ] . MSCs therapeutic potential is based on their low immunogenicity , their immunomodulatory and antimicrobial properties and ability to secrete endothelial and epithelial growth factors [ 110 - 114 ] . These immunomodulatory actions have been demonstrated in a wide range of disease states 19 including sepsis , acute lung injury , acute myocardial ischemia , stroke , kidney injury , inflammatory bowel disease , graft - versus - host disease ( GVHD ) , multiple sclerosis , diabetes mellitus and organ transplantation [ 115 ] . Role of MSCs in Sepsis Recent in vivo studies have provided evidence for the beneficial effects of MSCs in the treatment of sepsis [ 116 ] . The effect of MSCs on survival , inflammation and bacterial clearance was tested by Mei and colleagues [ 103 ] in a murine model of polymicrobial sepsis . Sepsis was induced in C57B1 / 6J mice by cecal ligation and puncture ( CLP ) followed by intravenous injection of MSCs or saline 6 hours later . 28 - hours post - CLP , mice were sacrificed and plasma , BAL and tissue were collected for analysis [ 103 ] . Animals treated with MSCs had significantly reduced bacterial counts in comparison to saline controls , suggesting that MSCs directly or indirectly modulate the ability of the host’s phagocytes to clear bacterial infection or directly participate in bacterial clearance . Nemeth et al . [ 96 ] studied the role of MSCs in mice , administered 24 - hours prior to or 1 hour after caecal ligation and puncture . The MSCs treated group resulted in improved survival , reduced organ dysfunction , including improved alveolar - capillary barrier function , reduced neutrophil oxidative injury and increased circulating neutrophils , in addition to reduced bacteria in blood . Krasnodembskaya and colleagues [ 102 ] studied the effect of human MSCs derived from bone marrow on the bacterial growth of gram - negative and gram - positive bacteria . There was marked inhibition of bacterial growth by MSCs as well their conditioned media in comparison to control medium or normal lung fibroblasts . An analysis of expression of major antimicrobial peptides indicated that MSCs secreted the human cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide , hCAP - 18 / LL - 37 . The role of LL - 37 was further investigated in an in vivo mouse model of E . coli pneumonia , which resulted in reduced bacterial growth in lung homogenates and in BAL fluid . Gupta and colleagues [ 117 ] found that treatment with MSCs enhanced clearance of E . coli from the alveolar space of mice as early as 4 hours after instillation . Another study from the Matthay group [ 118 ] in gram negative peritoneal sepsis in mice demonstrated that survival was significantly improved when intravenous human MSCs were given 4 hours after high dose intraperitoneal injection of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . The number of bacteria in the blood stream was significantly reduced in MSC - treated mice compared to PBS or 20 fibroblast - treated controls . In a study conducted by Kim and colleagues , ARDS was induced by intratracheal E . coli instillation , 3 hours after which MSCs , fibroblasts or phosphate - buffer saline were intratracheally administered . Survival was analyzed 7 days post - injury . Administration of MSCs increased survival and attenuated lung injury . In addition , MSC treatment resulted in reduced lung water content three days post - injury and reduced bacterial counts in blood and BAL seven days post - injury . Role of MSCs in repairing Ventilator Induced lung injury ( VILI ) Low tidal volume protective ventilation strategies improve patient survival in patients with ARDS , a key therapeutic advance of the past decade . [ 47 ] . Even following low stretch ventilation strategies , it appears difficult to avoid regional areas of high lung stretch [ 119 ] . Although mechanisms of ventilation contributing to injury are increasingly understood [ 120 ] , we need to develop therapeutic strategies that enhance alveolar regeneration and repair . MSCs have demonstrated the potential to enhance repair after stretch - induced lung injury . VILI activates a transient inflammatory and fibroproliferative response accompanied by the release of cytokines , chemokines and growth factors . Curley et al [ 2 ] recently demonstrated that keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) secreted by MSCs contributes to alveolar epithelial repair . MSCs decreased the inflammatory and cytokine response post - VILI by reducing alveolar infiltration of inflammatory cells as well as decreasing the concentrations of alveolar TNF - α and IL - 6 . Hurdles to clinical translation of MSCs for human ARDS MSCs are a promising therapeutic strategy for ARDS . However , further pre - clinical and clinical studies must be conducted to explore the important mechanistic pathways responsible for reduced injury and enhanced repair of the lung . In particular , there is a need to establish the therapeutic efficacy of MSCs in clinically relevant animal models of ARDS , as well as long - term studies to definitively answer safety and efficacy concerns . Establishing a clinical relevant animal model of human ARDS Animal models provide a bridge between patients and the laboratory bench . Hypotheses generated in human studies can be tested directly in animal models to assess their relevance in intact living 21 systems . Without animal models , there would be no way to test clinical hypotheses generated in patients using intact biological systems as well validate laboratory findings before testing them in human experimentation . Animal model studies are most relevant if characteristic features of the disease of interest are present in the model . 1 . 4 . 5 . 1 Characteristics of ARDS in an animal model Ideally , an animal model should capture one or more of the features of human ARDS as detailed in Table 1 . 3 . However , a number of differences between animals and humans precludes direct comparison ; (cid:1) Respiratory rates of rats ( 70 - 115 ) and mice ( 250 - 300 bpm ) far exceed that of adult humans ( 12 - 16 bpm ) making it manipulated parameter of ARDS . (cid:1) The relatively small size of rodent is an important consideration for the collection of blood samples at different study time points . It is easier to obtain sufﬁcient quantities of blood or to obtain multiple blood samples in larger species such as the rabbit or nonhuman primates . The ability to obtain multiple blood samples is important when the study design requires monitoring of physiological parameters , such as blood gases , plasma cytokines , and leukocyte counts over time . (cid:1) The difference in size of lungs of rodent and human lungs is also an important consideration . While lung structure is quite similar in rodents as in humans , the lungs are much smaller . (cid:1) The lung injury observed in critically ill humans is exacerbated by a number of interventions such as prolonged ventilation or hemodynamic support which is difficult reproduce in animals . I . Table 1 . 1 : Characteristics of Human Lung Injury Table 1 . 1 Characteristics of Human lung injury Clinical Features Physiological changes Acute Onset , diffuse bilateral alveolar injury , acute exudative phase and repair with fibrosis 22 Biological changes Pathological changes V / Q abnormalities , severe hypoxemia , decreased compliance , impaired alveolar fluid clearance Increased endothelial and epithelial permeability , increase in cytokine concentrations in the lungs , protease activation , coagulation abnormalities Neutrophilic alveolar infiltrates , intra - alveolar coagulation and fibrin deposition , injury of the alveolar epithelium with denudation of the basement membrane Note : This table is based on Table 1 adapted from Gustavo Matute - Bello et al . , from Am J Phsiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2008 [ 121 ] . 1 . 4 . 5 . 2 MSCs source and cell culture limitation Obtaining a sufficient number of cells from bone marrow for expansion in culture to achieve therapeutic effects may be a limitation of this source . On the other hand , MSCs from umbilical cord are more readily accessible , their isolation is straightforward , they can be bio - preserved with minimal loss of potency , and they can be used as an ‘off the shelf’ allogeneic therapy as a result of their minimal immunogenicity . However , MSCs from sources other than bone marrow differ in the expression of cellular markers and their ability to proliferate as well differentiate into different lineages [ 122 , 123 ] . The therapeutic effect of MSCs from sources other than bone marrow has not been evaluated in pre - clinical models of ARDS . 1 . 4 . 5 . 3 Optimization of dose regimens MSCs modulate immune cell functions in a dose - dependent manner in vitro . Similarly , a strong direct correlation was found between the number of cells applied and the therapeutic outcomes in treating chronic wound and heart infarction [ 124 - 126 ] . The ideal dose selection of MSCs for critically ill patients with ALI remains a matter of conjecture . Extrapolation from animal studies and from human studies of MSC administration in other disease states may be used as a guide . For 23 example , 1 - 2 million cells / kg has been used safely in healthy subjects and in patients with disease [ 127 ] . However , these doses will need validation in the critical care setting . In addition , the relative benefit of single versus multiple dose administration regimens is unclear . Despite being a cell therapy , there is still a very real danger of adverse effects as seen with pharmacological interventions . The highest tolerable dose and lower limits of dose effectiveness have not been established . The mean doses administered in pre - clinical models of ARDS were almost 30 * 10 6 cells / kg in mice and over 20 * 10 6 cells / kg in rats without adverse effects [ 128 ] . In the Phase II clinical trial of MSCs patients with COPD , patients were given four doses of MSCs , 100 * 10 6 cells per infusion , which is much lower than the doses used in many of the preclinical ARDS studies [ 129 ] . 24 MSCs from an umbilical cord A rich source of human mesenchymal stem / stromal cells can be found in the perivascular region of the human umbilical cord , which has been termed human umbilical cord perivascular cells ( HUCPVCs ) . HUCPVCs present several advantages over other stem cell tissue sources . First , human umbilical cord is seen as biological waste and is typically discarded after birth . Its use therefore presents no ethical concerns . Secondly independent in vitro studies have shown that HUCPVCs demonstrate similar phenotypic characteristics to BM - hMSCs with a significantly greater colony forming unit fibroblast ( CFU - F ) frequency than BM - hMSCs [ 130 ] . HUCPVCs represent an allogeneic source to treat a variety of pediatric genetic , hematologic , immunologic and oncologic disorders [ 131 - 134 ] . Characterization of HUCPVCs HUCPVCs are capable of differentiating into mesenchymal phenotypes including osteogeneic , chondrogenic and adipogenic lineages when provided with appropriate differentiation media supplemented with specific growth factors [ 123 ] . HUCPVCs demonstrate increased osteogenesis in comparison to BM - hMSCs [ 130 ] . For example , mineralization is detected as day 10 in HUCPVCs versus 14 days in BM - MSCs cultured under osteogenic conditions [ 130 ] . HUCPVCs are well defined by flow cytometry based on their size and granularity , which allows gating to investigate the respective cellular markers expressed [ 135 ] as represented in Table 1 . 2 . The immunological profile of HUCPVCs is similar to that of BM - MSCs [ 123 ] . They do not cause alloreactivity in mismatched lymphocytes in vitro and suppress an active immune response . In addition , they are also capable of reducing the activation of T lymphocytes . Taken together , these studies , conducted by various researchers including our collaborators from Dr . Jed Davies research team , suggest that HUCPVCs are bioequivalent to BM - hMSCs and holds promise as a potential therapy for ARDS . 25 II . Table 1 . 2 : Surface Markers expressed by BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs Table 1 . 2 : Surface markers expressed by BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs Surface Markers HUCPVCs BM - hMSCs CD13 CD14 CD29 CD31 CD34 CD38 CD44 CD45 CD73 CD90 CD105 CD106 CD146 HLA - ABC HLA - DR + + + + - + + + + - - - + + + + - + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + - + + + + - + + + + - - - + + + + - + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + - Note : This table is based on Table 1 adapted from Stefano Gambardella et al . from Int J Clin Exp Med , 2010 [ 136 ] Advantages HUCPVCs over BM - MSCs for clinical translation BM - MSCs are isolated by an invasive surgical procedure ( bone marrow aspiration ) , undertaken on healthy volunteers ( usually donors are from 18 - 35 years age group ) . This requirement is a limiting factor in the generation of large quantities of MSCs , such as are required for a clinical trial . In addition , HUCPVCs are isolated from tissue that is traditionally discarded ( umbilical cord ) after birth . Since there are currently over 130 million births throughout the world annually , the 26 perivascular tissue of the human umbilical cord represents a rich and unlimited alternative supply of MSCs for cell - based therapies . BM - MSCs are present in extremely low frequency in adult marrow ( 1 : 100 , 000 ) , which decreases even further with increasing donor age [ 137 , 138 ] , whereas the colony - forming units frequency ( CFUF ) of perivascular cells in nucleated cells from umbilical cord is 1 : 300 [ 139 ] . Both BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs have the potential to differentiate into mesenchymal phenotypes including bone , cartilage and fat [ 123 ] . However , HUCPVCs can generate an osteogenic phenotype at a faster rate than BM - MSCs [ 130 ] . HUCPVCs are bio - equivalent to BM - MSCs in the cellular markers expressed as detailed in Table 1 . 2 . However , HUCPVCs express lower levels of HLA - DR and CD - 106 in comparison to BM - MSCs [ 140 ] . The low expression of HLA - ABC in HUCPVCs makes them favorable for allogeneic cell therapy in comparison to BM - MSCs [ 140 ] . HUCPVCs express higher levels of CD146 , which is considered a useful marker of cells applicable for neovascularization and tissue repair [ 141 , 142 ] . Therapeutic Potential of HUCPVCs in Lung Injury HUCPVCs appear phenotypically similar to BM - MSCs , including immunologic phenotype , gene expression , and ability to enhance tissue repair [ 122 , 141 ] . Progression of acute respiratory distress syndrome is demonstrated by loss of lung tissue as a result of inflammation and fibrosis . Recently , the exogenous administration of BM - hMSCs significantly attenuated the bleomycin - induced lung injury by downmodulating the inflammatory responses and ameliorating their fibrotic effects [ 143 ] . However in lung diseases , it is not known yet if HUCPVCs are capable of modulating injurious immune responses and encouraging tissue repair . A recent study reported that transplantation of HUCPVCs to wild - type newborn rat pups significantly attenuated the hyperoxia - induced lung injury in surviving animals [ 144 ] . However , further investigation in relevant clinical models is needed to explore the clinical potential of HUCPVCs in ARDS . 27 Summary and Conclusions ARDS is a highly complex disease process . Earlier concepts of distinct disease phases , from an early ‘pro - inflammatory’ to a later ‘fibrotic’ phase now appear to be an over - simplification . It is increasingly apparent that these phases largely co - exist , with evidence of ‘pro - inflammatory’ responses leading to host damage , an impaired immune response to pathogens , and of repair and fibrosis all present in the complex milieu that is clinical ALI / ARDS . Given this , it is perhaps not surprising that strategies targeted at single aspects of the disease process have been unsuccessful . This suggests the need to consider more complex therapeutic approaches , aimed at reducing early injury while maintaining host immune competence , and facilitating ( or at least not inhibiting ) lung regeneration and repair . MSCs offer considerable hope as a therapy for ARDS . They are immunomodulatory , antibacterial , enhance pulmonary edema clearance , and can enhance repair following lung injury . Hurdles to clinical translation of MSCs for ARDS need to be addressed . There is a need to conduct pre - clinical studies in complex 2 - hit animal models to confirm the therapeutic potential of MSCs , while MSCs from umbilical cord represent an attractive but unproven source of MSCs for translation to early phase clinical studies . This thesis aims to investigate the potential of MSCs from umbilical cord in a novel 2 hit model of ARDS in rodents . 28 Chapter 2 Methods and Materials Isolation and culture of BM - hMSCs 2 . 1 . 1 Source , isolation and culture of BM - hMSCs from Bone Marrow The human bone marrow derived BM - hMSCs isolated from different donors and characterized according to the standard criteria [ 109 ] were provided by our collaborator , Dr . Armand Keating , ( Orsino Laboratories , Princess Margaret Cancer Centre , Toronto , Canada ) . Briefly , the bone marrow aspirates ( 10 - 20ml ) were collected from the healthy adult volunteers using informed consent according to the approved protocols from the local institutional review board ( IRB ) . Heparinized bone marrow aspirates were then mixed with a double volume of phosphate - buffered saline ( dPBS ) later centrifuged at 900 * g for 10 min at 37°C . The cell pellet was re - suspended in PBS to obtain a final density of 1 * 10 8 cells / ml . Aliquots ( 5ml ) were layered over a 1 . 073 g / ml on Ficoll solution and centrifuged at 900 * g for 30 min . The collected mononuclear cells from the inter - phase were re - suspended in dPBS and centrifuged at 900 * g for 10 min at 20°C . The cells were suspended in DMEM Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium - low glucose ( DMEM - LG ) ( Life technologies , Gaithersburg , MD , USA ) , supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 1 % antibiotic - antimycotic solution ( Life technologies ) and plated at 3 * 10 7 cells / 175 cm 2 . The cultures were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 . When cultures reached 80 % confluence , the cells were passaged 3 - 4 times and fully characterized by flow cytometry . Characterization of BM - hMSCs The flow cytometry analysis was performed on the isolated BM - hMSCs in culture to characterize them . For this , cells were washed with dPBS and incubated for 30 min in 2 % FBS / PBS containing the following conjugated anti - human antibodies ( 1 : 50 dilution ) : CD90 - fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) ( Serotec ) , CD44 - allophycocyanin ( APC ) , CD105 - phycoerythrin ( PE ) ( all eBiosciences ) , CD11b - PE , CD34 - PE , CD45 - PE , CD73 - PE ( all BD Biosciences ) . The cell suspensions were then washed twice and re - suspended in 2 % FBS / PBS for flow cytometric analysis ( Cytomics FC500 , Beckman Coulter ) . Immunophenotyping and tri - lineage differentiation were performed on passage 29 4 ( P4 ) cells using low glucose DMEM media ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with glutamax and was antibiotic free to conform to minimal criteria defining MSCs [ 109 ] . Passaging , Cryopreservation and Thawing of BM - hMSCs The cultures were observed for uniform distribution , adherence , morphology , floating cells and any signs of contamination . The cells were cultured in low glucose DMEM ( 1X from Life Technologies ; Cat no . 11054 ) supplemented with 10 % Human MSC Screened FBS ( Hyclone ; Cat SH30070 . 01 ) , 1 % Penicillin - Streptomycin ( Hyclone ; SV30010 ) and 1 % Glutamax TM - I CTS TM ( Life Technologies ; Ref A12860 - 01 ) in CO 2 incubator ( Thermo Scientific ; HERAcell 150i model ) at 37°C . The media in flasks ( Thermo Scientific ; T - 175 flasks ) were replaced every alternate day . At 80 % confluency , the cultures were passaged by washing cells with DPBS without calcium chloride and magnesium chloride ( Life Technologies ; Cat 14190 - 144 ) . Cells were detached using 5ml / 175cm 2 of trypsin ( Life Technologies ; Cat A12859 - 01 ) and the flasks placed back in incubator for 5 min . The trypsin activity was then stopped using complete media , collected cells were centrifuged ( Thermo Scientific Sorvall ST16R ) at 400 rpm for 5 min at 22°C . Tryphan blue 0 . 4 % solution ( MP Biomedicals , LLC ; Cat 1691049 ) counts were performed using a haemocytometer ( Fisher Scientific ; Cat 0267151B ) . The cells were expanded at a seeding density of 0 . 5 * 10 6 cells / 175cm 2 flasks . The remaining cells were cryo - preserved for future use in a freezing medium containing 40 % complete media , 50 % FBS and 10 % DMSO ( Bioshop ; DMS666 . 100 ) . The vials were prepared at density of 1 * 10 6 / ml of freezing medium . The prepared vials were kept overnight in container called “Mr . Frosty” which is simple system designed to achieve a rate of cooling very close to - 1°C / min which is an optimal rate of cell preservation ( Nalgene TM ; Cat 5100 - 001 ) . The vials were transferred to liquid N 2 cylinder ( Thermo Scientific , JR Plus ) after 24 h . Later , the storage records were maintained . Preparation of BM - hMSCs for use in the animal studies The BM - hMSCs were always prepared fresh and generally used in our in vivo studies at passage P3 or P4 . When cell cultures reached 80 % confluence , the BM - hMSCs culture flasks were trypsinized , the cells were pelleted down in 50ml falcon tube ( BD ; Ref 352070 ) by centrifugation . The cell pellet was then suspended in 10ml of dPBS and cells counts were performed . The required volume of the cell suspension for cell dosage was separated in a 15 ml ( BD ; Ref 352096 ) falcon 30 tube and the volume of suspension was made up to 5ml by adding dPBS to wash cells and later centrifuged at 400 rpm for 5 min at 22°C . The supernatant was then carefully removed without disturbing the cell pellet and suspended in 500μl of dPBS with addition of 1mM EDTA pH 7 . 5 ( Ambion ; Cat 9261 ) solution to avoid cell clumping . The cell suspension was then aspirated into a 1ml syringe ( BD ) using 22 G 1 1 / 2 needle . Administration of BM - hMSCs cells to the animals Freshly prepared BM - hMSCs cells were administered to the animals intravenously ( IV ) via tail vein very slowly while the animal was recovering post - experimental procedures . The cells were gently vortexed during administration to avoid clumping of cells . After hMSC administration , the tail vein was flushed with 300ul of dPBS . Following this , the tail vein cannula was removed and gentle pressure was applied using sterile gauze to prevent or stop bleeding . Later , the animal tail was cleaned with sterile gauze and examined for any signs of necrotic tail vein post - cell administration procedures . 31 Isolation and Culture of HUCPVCs Source of HUCPVCs and their characteristics A rich source of human mesenchymal stem / stromal cells is the perivascular region of the human umbilical cord , and the isolated cells were termed human umbilical cord perivascular cells ( HUCPVCs ) . HUCPVCs present several advantages over other tissue sources . They are considered bio - equivalent to BM - hMSCs [ 130 ] cells as they are adherent cells , express similar markers and have potency to de - differentiate into the bone , cartilage and adipose lineage [ 145 , 146 ] . This cell type overcomes some of the limitations of BM - MSCs such as loss of multipotentiality and proliferative potential with increasing donor age . HUCPVCs have a higher clonogenic frequency than BM - MSCs and contain stem cell self - renewing properties with multilineage differentiation potential in vitro and in vivo . HUCPVCs have been investigated for tissue regenerative properties for skin , wound and cardiac diseases [ 147 ] . Isolation of HUCPVCs from Umbilical cord Isolated and the characterized cells vials were obtained from our collaborators , Dr Jed Davies from Tissue Regenerating Therapeutics ( TRT ) , based in Toronto , Canada . Briefly , the umbilical cords were donated by the patients undergoing full - term cesarean section after written informed consent according to a protocol approved by the University of Toronto and Sunnybrook and Women’s College of Health Sciences Centre , Toronto . After the collection of 20 - 30cm length of cord in an 8oz the collection container filled with α - MEM ( 1X ) Minimum Essential Medium culture medium ( Gibco ) and antibiotics it was delivered to the laboratory facility at an ambient temperature conditions [ 123 ] . The cord was then placed on a sterile dissecting tray and cut into 4 - 5 cm segments . Both Umbilical cord arteries were dissected including their associated perivascular tissue and were then looped and tied using silk sutures to prevent hematopoietic or endothelial contamination . These loops were digested overnight at 37°C in a phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; Gibco , Gaithersburg , MD , USA ) solution containing 1 mg / ml type I collagenase ( Worthington Biochemical Corporation , Lakewood , NJ , USA ) . The cells were then removed from the supernatant collected , washed , counted and plated at density of 4 , 000 cells / cm 2 . HUCPVCs were grown α - MEM ( 1X ) Minimum Essential Medium supplemented with 15 % fetal bovine serum ( both from Gibco ) at 37ºC in humidified incubator containing 5 % CO 2 . This extraction procedure 32 results in a cell population ( HUCPVCs ) with a high frequency of colony - forming unit - fibroblast ( CFU - F ) - driving cells . Characterization of HUCPVCs The isolated HUCPVCs [ 122 ] were tested for several markers like CD34 - , CD45 - , CD44 + , CD49e + , CD73 + , CD90 + , CD105 indicating MSC phenotype . In addition to this , the flow cytometric analysis revealed that ~ 50 % of HUCPVCs have ~ 2 . 5 - fold increase in CD146 expression relative to BM - MSCs [ 123 ] . CD146 is usually expressed on circulating endothelial cells and is present in diseases such as inflammatory , immune , infectious , neoplastic and cardiovascular disease [ 141 ] . Thus , it is considered an ideal marker of a source of cells for therapeutic neovascularization and vascular repair [ 141 ] . The sorted population of HUCPVCs expressing CD146 + maintains their differentiation potential . The Wnt - signaling pathway plays an important role in regulating the differentiation potential of BM - MSCs [ 148 - 150 ] . It is being shown that HUCPVCs not only express Wnt signaling genes but also possess the complete molecular machinery necessary to transduce signal through Wnt signaling pathways [ 123 ] . Thus , similar to BM - MSCs , Wnt signaling pathway plays vital role in regulation of HUCPVCs . The expression of endothelial marker CD31 which is a marker of inflammatory , immune , infectious or cardiovascular diseases is also increased by 2 . 5 folds in HUCPVCs compared to BM - hMSCs [ 151 ] . Passaging , cryopreservation and thawing of HUCPVCs Isolated and the characterized P2 cells were obtained from Dr Jed Davies Laboratory of Tissue Regenerating Therapeutics ( TRT ) , Toronto , Canada . To obtain enough number of cells for treatment groups , the cell vials were thawed , expanded and working stock of expanded cells at P - 3 were prepared as described here . Briefly , 1ml cell vials were thawed using 9ml of α - MEM ( 1X ) Minimum Essential Medium culture medium ( Life Technologies ; ref 12571 - 063 ) supplemented with 10 % Fetal Bovine serum ( FBS from Hyclone , Cat No . SH30070 . 03 ) and antimicrobials : pencillin G 159 U / ml ( Sigma ; P8721 ) , Gentamicin ( Sigma ; G - 1397 ) , Amphotericin B ( Sigma , A9528 ) and cells were centrifuged in 15ml eppendorf vials ( BD ) at 400rpm for 5 min at 22°C using centrifuge ( Thermoscientific Sorvall ST16R ) . The cells were counted and plated at a seeding density of 0 . 25 * 10 6 cells / T175cm 2 culture flasks ( Thermoscientific ; Cat 132913 ) . The cultures were observed for uniform distribution , adherence , morphology , floating cells and any signs of 33 contamination . At 80 % confluency , the cultures were passaged by washing cells with dPBS without calcium chloride and magnesium chloride ( Life Technologies ; Cat 14190 - 144 ) . Cells were detached using 5ml / 175cm 2 of trypsin ( Life Technologies ; Cat A12859 - 01 ) and the flasks placed back in the incubator for 5 mins . Trypsin activity was then stopped using complete media , cells were collected and centrifuged ( Thermo Scientific Sorvall ST16R ) at 400rpm for 5 mins at 22°C using 50ml falcon tube ( BD ) . Tryphan blue 0 . 4 % solution ( MP Biomedicals , LLC ; Cat 1691049 ) was used to perform counts using haemocytometer ( Fisher Scientific ; Cat 0267151B ) . The cells were expanded in culture media at seeding density 0 . 25 * 10 6 cells / T175cm 2 . The remaining cells were cryopreserved for future use in freezing medium containing 50 % α - MEM culture media supplemented with 10 % DMSO ( Bioshop ; DMS666 . 100 ) and 40 % FBS . The vials were prepared at density of 1 * 10 6 / ml of freezing medium . The prepared vials were kept overnight in container called Mr . Frosty which is simple system designed to achieve a rate of cooling very close to - 1°C / minute which is an optimal rate of cell preservation ( Nalgene TM ; Cat 5100 - 001 ) and transferred to liquid N 2 cylinder ( Thermo Scientific , JR Plus ) after 24 h . Later , storage records were maintained . These stocked vials were thereafter thawed , cultured and used for cell treatment group . Preparation of HUCPVCs for use in the animal studies HUCPVCs generally used in our in vivo studies at P3 or P4 cells were always prepared fresh . When cell cultures reached 80 % confluence , HUCPVCs culture flasks were trypsinized , and cells were pelleted down in 50ml falcon tube ( BD ; Catalogue No . 352070 ) by centrifugation . The cells pellet was then suspended in 10mls of dPBS and cells counts were performed . The required volume of the cell suspension for cell dosage was separated in a 15ml ( BD ; Catalogue No . 352096 ) falcon tube and the volume of suspension was made up to 5mls by adding dPBS to wash cells and later centrifuged at 400 rpm for 5 min at 22°C . The supernatant was then carefully removed without disturbing the cell pellet and suspended in 500ul of DPBS with addition of 1mM EDTA pH 7 . 5 ( Ambion ; Cat 9261 ) ) solution to avoid cells clumping . The cell suspension was then aspirated into a 1ml syringe ( BD ) using 22 G 1 1 / 2 needle . 34 Administration of HUCPVCs cells to the animals Freshly prepared HUCPVCs cells were administered to animals intravenously ( IV ) via tail vein very slowly while the animal was recovering post - experimental procedures . The cells were gently vortexed during administration to avoid clumping of the cells . After HUCPVCs administration , the tail vein was flushed with 300µl of dPBS . Following this , the tail vein cannula was removed and gentle pressure was applied using sterile gauze to prevent or stop bleeding . Later , the animal tail was cleaned using sterile gauze and examined for any signs of necrotic tail vein post - cell administration procedures 35 Animal Studies Permissions and approvals All experiments were conducted in dedicated investigator laboratory facilities at the Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science of St . Michael’s Hospital , Toronto , Canada . All the animal experimental procedures were approved by the animal care committee ( ACC ) . Specialized training on rodent handling and surgeries was provided by the vivarium department to all the project members before initiating the animal experiments . All the animal experiments were carried out using specific pathogen free adult male Spargue Dawley rats obtained from Charles River Laboratories , Quebec , Canada . Animal Health and Distress Scoring Protocol All the animals undergoing the experimental procedures were carefully monitored pre and post procedures on a range of parameters designed to evaluate their health condition as detailed in following Table 2 . 1 , Table 2 . 2 and Table 2 . 3 below : I . Table 2 . 1 : Animal health and Distress Scoring Physiological and Nutritional Parameters Rectal Temp . Respiratory Rate Mean ( Range ) Heart Rate Mean ( Range ) Average Water Intake ( Daily ) Urine Excreted Daily Daily Food Intake 37 º C 92 ( 70 - 115 ) 350 ( 250 - 450 ) 20 - 25 mls 10 - 15mls 10 - 20g 36 II . Table 2 . 2 : Parameters to Examine Signs of Disease or Pain Signs of Disease and Pain in Rats Ocular Eyelids ½ to fully closed Eyes Sunken Discharge ( porphyrin - red staining ) Respiratory Increased Rate Labored Nasal Discharge ( porphyrin ) Difficulty in breathing Appearance Ruffled Fur Weight Loss Dehydration Muscle wasting ( atrophy ) Diarrhea Fecal Staining Hypothermia Sunken abdomen Behavior Timid 37 III . Table 2 . 3 : Distress Scoring criteria for the animals Apprehensive Aggressive Quiet Unresponsive Self - mutilation Low BUA ( bowel movement , urine , appetite ) Posture Hunched , weakness Locomotion Unsteady gait Animal Distress Scoring Criteria Parameters Score 0 Score 1 Score 2 Weight No Loss < 10 % > 10 % Piloerection None Mild Severe Activity Normal Lethargic Not Moving Porphyrin Staining None Mild Severe Stool Normal Runny Diarrhea Infection None Mild Severe Temperature Normal ( 37 ºC ) Cool ( 32 - 36 ºC ) Hypothermia ( < 32 ºC ) 38 Combined Systemic Sepsis and Ventilation Induced Lung Injury ( VILI ) Model Induction of the systemic Sepsis 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 Anesthesia and intravenous access for sepsis surgery The animals were gently physically restrained and an intraperitoneal injection of 0 . 2ml of ketamine ( 50 mg / kg ; Ketalean from Bimeda - MTC Animal Health Inc . Cambridge , ON , Canada ) was administered . Later , the animal was transferred to an anesthetic closed Tec 4 vaporizer chamber ( Serial No . BARP 00248 from Ohmed Rexdale , Canada ) containing a blended mixture of 4 to 5 % Iso - fluorane ( Pharmaceutical Partner of Canada Inc . , Richmond , Canada ) with O 2 . The animal was continuously monitored during induction of anesthesia and removed from the vaporizer chamber after 2 ~ 3 min following loss of consciousness . Later , the animal was placed on its one side on heating pad to maintain the blood circulation , the lubricating opthalamic ointment ( Allergan Inc . , Ontario Canada ; DIN 00210889 ) was applied and the tail vein region swabbed using an alcohol soaked gauze . The veins on the lateral or the dorsal surfaces of the tail were located and then cannulated using 24G angiocath ( Becton Dickinson Infusion , Utah , US ) and angiocath was secured using tape . The cannulated vein was gently flushed using 0 . 9 % saline flush ( Baxter Corporation ; JB1323 ) to ensure access to vein . 2 . 4 . 1 . 2 Preparation of the abdominal region for surgery To prepare the animal for surgery a 1 inch square region fur from the belly region was shaved using an Oster Golden A5 razor blade and cleaned using 70 % isopropyl alcohol ( Jedmon Products Ltd ; NPN 00825751 ) . Later , the animal was transferred back into the anesthesia chamber for a few minutes before being orotracheally intubated . 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 Oro - tracheal intubation Protocol After prepping for surgery , the animal was transferred to an anesthetic closed Tec 4 vaporizer chamber containing blended mixture of 4 to 5 % Iso - fluorane with O 2 . The tail vein access was obtained as discussed in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 . The oro - tracheal intubation was performed where 14 G 39 intravenous catheter ( Becton Dickinson Infusion Therapy system Inc . , Utah , US ) was placed in with help of guide wire 8 . 5 Fr 10cm sheath length ( Arrow International ; Product No . SB - 09803 ) . The intubation support stand from ( Harvard Apparatus ) was used while performing . 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 Administration of the drugs during procedures Excluding the baseline and the animal sacrifice procedures , all the animals were administered 0 . 1ml Cisatracurium besilate ( 20mg / 10ml ; Nimbex ) and 0 . 1ml Alfaxalone ( 10mg / ml ; Alfaxan from Abbott Laboratories , Saint Laurent , Quebec , Canada ) intravenously via tail vein very 9 min to maintain the planes of anesthesia . 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 Baseline measurement of the lung function An intravenous access and oro - tracheal intubation was performed as discussed in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 . After the confirmation of depth of anaesthesia by demonstrating absence of a response to toe pinch , 0 . 2ml Cisatracurium besilate ( 20mg / 10ml ; Nimbex ) and 0 . 2ml Alfaxalone ( 10mg / ml ; Alfaxan from Abbott Laboratories , Saint Laurent , Quebec , Canada ) were administered intravenously before connecting them to ventilator . The animals were ventilated by using a small animal ventilator ( SAR - 1000 from CWE Inc . Philadelphia , US ) with an inspired O 2 gas mixture of 30 % oxygen , respiratory rate of 80 breaths / min , tidal volume of 6ml . kg - 1 and positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) of 2 ~ 2 . 5 cm H 2 O . To minimize the lung de - recruitment , a recruitment maneuver consisting of a positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) of 15 cm H 2 0 were applied every 5 min for 30 seconds . The animals were ventilated for 20 min , the static lung compliance was measured by injecting an incremental 1ml volumes of room air using 10ml ( BD ) syringe via the tracheostomy tube and continued until a total volume of 5ml was injected . The depth of anaesthesia was continuously monitored while 0 . 1ml of alfaxan and 0 . 1ml of cis - atricurium were administered as required to maintain anesthesia and paralysis respectively . The body temperature of the animals were maintained at 36 - 37 . 5°C by using a thermostatically controlled blanket system ( TCAT - 2LV controller from Physitemp , Clifton , NJ , US ) and monitored with an indwelling rectal temperature probe . 40 2 . 4 . 1 . 6 Surgical implantation of the Fecal / Blood clot in the Peritoneum The surgical area was prepared with Betadine ( Purdue Pharma , Pickering , Canada ) using aseptic technique . The sterile drapes were placed over the rat to isolate the surgical site . While the animal was undergoing the baseline recruitment procedures , 1ml / kg of blood was withdrawn from the tail artery using a 3ml syringe ( BD ) with a 25 5 / 8 G needle ( BD ) . The fresh fecal pellet weighing 0 . 1gm was mixed with the blood gently . This prepared fecal / blood pellet was then transferred into 7ml plastic pasteur pipettes cut at the bulb and was kept ready to be inserted while performing the abdominal surgery . After the recruitment maneuvers were completed and the baseline static lung compliance measured , the rat was administered 0 . 1ml of alfaxan and 0 . 1ml of cis - atricurium to maintain anesthesia and paralysis respectively A midline incision was made into the abdomen followed by blunt dissection which was wide enough to insert the fecal blood pellet into the peritoneal cavity . The peritoneum was then sutured using a sterile absorbable polyglactin 910 coated VICRYL ( Ethicon Inc . ; J443 ) in continuous pattern . The abdomen was sutured in an interrupted pattern . The surgical region was later wiped with 3 % hydrogen peroxide topical solution ( Swan , Smyrna , TN ) and sprayed with quatricide solution . 2 . 4 . 1 . 7 Exclusion and Termination Criteria Before entry into any experimental procedures , all animals were physically monitored for any obvious signs of infection or sickness from their behavior and movements in the cage as detailed in Section 2 . 3 . 2 . Following this , animals were randomized into respective study groups . 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 Recovery of the animals post sepsis surgery Once the sepsis surgery was performed , the administration of anesthetics was discontinued and animal were ventilated at normal settings to assist them recover as well breath on their own . Once spontaneous breathing was adequate ( RR > 60 bpm ) ventilation was discontinued . The animals were extubated once fully awake and able to move limbs or head . In cases , where animal took longer to recover they were transferred into 100 % O 2 closed cage to assist recovery . A subcutaneous analgesics injection of 0 . 05 mg / kg buprenorphine ( Temgesic from RB Pharmaceutical Limited , Slough UK ) was administered followed by fluid replacement using 41 10ml / kg saline 0 . 9 % NaCl ( Baxter Corporation ; JB1323 ) to prevent dehydration . At the end of day procedures , animals were transferred back to vivarium facility for overnight stay . Induction of the Ventilation - induced Lung Injury ( VILI ) 2 . 4 . 2 . 1 Anesthesia , intravenous access and tracheal intubation for VILI All these procedures were performed in similar manner as discussed in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , section 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 and section 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 . 2 . 4 . 2 . 2 Assessment of the lung function before initiating VILI The respiratory lung function 24 post - sepsis / Pre - VILI was measured according to 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . The baseline static compliance measure and Pre - VILI measure were used to calculate our post - VILI targets . 2 . 4 . 2 . 3 Induction of VILI The respiratory static compliance 24 h post - sepsis or Pre - VILI was measured as discussed in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . After this , injurious ventilation was initiated by switching ventilator to pressure control mode as detailed in section 2 . 6 . 3 . Once VILI targets of static lung compliance were achieved VILI was stopped by switching the ventilator settings to volume control mode as detailed in section 2 . 6 . 3 and the animals were recovered . 2 . 4 . 2 . 4 Exclusion and Termination Criteria to proceed with VILI 24 h post - sepsis surgery , the health condition of the animal was monitored for any obvious signs of infection or sickness from their behavior and movements in the cage as detailed in Section 2 . 3 . 2 . The respiratory static compliance measure at 24 h post - sepsis was used to decide whether the animal could sustain VILI procedures . The animals with significant decrease in static lung compliance after sepsis surgery were excluded from the study as they cannot sustain VILI or would be injured beyond our VILI targets or even die , which was observed in few instances . 42 2 . 4 . 2 . 5 Recovery of the animals post - VILI After the post - VILI static lung compliance targets were reached , the administration of 0 . 1ml of alfaxan and 0 . 1ml of cis - atricurium was discontinued . The ventilator was switched to volume control mode settings as detailed in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . The animals were ventilated at normal settings to assist them recovering from injurious VILI procedures as well breath on their own . Once the spontaneous adequate breathing of Respiratory rate > 60 bpm was achieved then the ventilation was discontinued . The animals were extubated once fully awake and able to move limbs or head . In the cases where the animal took longer to recover , they were transferred into 100 % O 2 closed cage to assist recovery . A subcutaneous analgesics injection of 0 . 05mg / kg buprenorphine ( Temgesic from RB Pharmaceutical Limited , Slough UK ) was administered , followed by fluid replacement of 10ml / kg saline 0 . 9 % NaCl ( Baxter Corporation ; JB1323 ) to prevent dehydration . At the end of day procedures , the animals were transferred back to vivarium facility for overnight stay . 43 Endotoxin Induced Lung Injury Model Anesthesia , intravenous access and tracheal intubation All these procedures were performed following manner as described in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , section 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 and section 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 . Assessment of the lung function pre - Endotoxin instillation The animals were ventilated as per baseline ventilation protocol of section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 and baseline static lung compliance was measured before instillation of Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) ( Sigma Aldrich Strain 055 : B5 ; L4005 ) . Intra - tracheal instillation of endotoxin The LPS dose in suspension of 300µl of dPBS was aliquoted in 1ml ( BD ) syringe consisting of 0 . 7ml of air . The animal was disconnected from ventilator by making sure that intubation tube was in place . With help of the intubation stand , the animal was hooked from teeth and stood at vertical position . Then , endotoxin with air is instilled through the intubation tube . Later quickly , 2mls of empty air was injected to push the endotoxin down into the lungs . Immediately , the animals were connected back to ventilator and observed for breathing profile with ECG probes reconnected . Assessment of the lung function post - LPS instillation After instillation of LPS , the animal were given 1 recruitment and ventilated for another 5 min following which static lung compliance post - LPS instillation was measured by injecting incremental 1ml volumes of room air using 10ml ( BD ) syringe via the tracheostomy tube and continued until a total volume of 5ml was injected . Later , the animals were ventilated for 30 min comprising of 3 recruitments each 9 min apart , the drugs administered and the static lung compliance function measured 30 - mins post - LPS administration . 44 Exclusion and Termination Criteria Before entry into any experimental procedures , all animals were physically monitored for any obvious signs of infection or sickness from their behavior and movements in the cage as detailed in Section 2 . 3 . 2 . Following this , animals were randomized into respective study groups . After the instillation of endotoxin , the animals were observed for any signs of severe laboured breathing , lethargic cage movements and blood in urine . If the animals looked very sick they were euthanized and tissue collection was performed . Recovery of the animals post - Endotoxin installation At the end of procedures , the administration of anesthetics was discontinued and the animals were ventilated at volume control mode as per section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 to assist them recover as well breath on their own . The ventilation was discontinued , once spontaneous adequate breathing of respiratory rate of more than 60 bpm was achieved . The animals were extubated once fully awake and able to move limbs or head . In cases , where the animal took longer to recover they were transferred into 100 % O 2 closed cage to assist recovery . A subcutaneous analgesics injection of 0 . 05mg / kg buprenorphine ( Temgesic from RB Pharmaceutical Limited , Slough UK ) was administered followed by fluid replacement using 10ml / kg saline 0 . 9 % NaCl ( Baxter Corporation ; JB1323 ) to prevent dehydration . At the end of the day procedures , the animals were transferred back to the vivarium facility for overnight stay . 45 Assessment of Injury Severity Anesthesia intravenous access and tracheal intubation . All these procedures were performed in a manner described in section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 of methods and material of Chapter 2 . Mechanical Ventilation Settings The SAR - 1000 Small Animal Ventilator ( CWE Inc . Ardmore Philadelphia , US ) was used for all the animal experimental procedures . It is designed to provide safe and reliable mechanical ventilation for mice , rats and other small laboratory animals . This ventilator operates on the flow - time principle , where a measured airflow is gated into the animal for the time set and delivering known tidal volume ( V t ) . The ventilator is operational in 2 modes which are volume or pressure control mode . We used different ventilator control settings during the experimental procedures as detailed below ; Ventilator settings for Protective Ventilation ( Volume Control Mode ) The animals were ventilated using the volume control mode settings with an inspired gas mixture of 30 % oxygen of the respiratory rate of 80 breaths / min ; inspired flow rate of 450ml / min , tidal volume ( V t ) of 6 ml / kg and positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) of 2 . 0 - 2 . 5 cm H 2 O . To minimize lung de - recruitment , recruitment maneuvers consisting of 15 cm H 2 O PEEP for 30 breaths were applied every 5 min throughout the protocol . The depth of anesthesia was continuously monitored while 0 . 5mg of cis - atricurium and 2 . 5mg of alfaxan were administered every 9 min . The body temperature were maintained at 36 - 37 . 5°C by using a thermostatically controlled blanket system ( TCAT - 2LV controller from Physitemp , Clifton , NJ , US ) and monitored using an indwelling rectal temperature probe . Ventilator settings for Injurious Ventilation ( Pressure Control Mode ) For injurious ventilation , the pressure control mode settings of ventilator were used . This consisted of high peak inspiratory pressure of 35 cm H 2 O , respiratory rate of 18 breaths / min , inspiratory 46 flow rate of 500ml / min with 0 PEEP to induce the lung injury . Throughout , the VILI procedures animals were administered 0 . 5mg of cis - atricurium and 2 . 5mg alfaxan every 9 min with the body temperature monitored . The VILI targets were calculated from the pre - sepsis and 24h post - sepsis static lung compliance measures . Once the VILI targets were achieved , the VILI was stopped the ventilator was switched to volume control mode settings as per section 2 . 6 . 3 and animals were recovered . AD Instruments and Labchart Software AD Instruments are critically concerned about the safety issues involved in connecting electrical devices to the experimental subjects . All the AD Instruments products are designed , manufactured and serviced under the internationally recognized ISO9001 : 2008 quality management system ( QMS ) . The respiratory instruments manufactured allow acquiring flow , lung volumes , respiratory and pulmonary pressures and lung sounds from the animals being ventilated . All the animal experiment studies were performed using these instruments to evaluate the various physiological parameters especially of the lung function . The PowerLab 8 / 35 data acquisition ( DAQ ) : This device connects the channels of the ventilator , all the ADI electric devices which are then all linked to Labchart software for the data acquisition Animal Bio Amp FE136 for ECG : A galvanically isolated , high performance , software - controlled differential amplifier suitable for the measurement of a wide variety of biological signals in the animals and isolated tissues . Bio Amp FE132 : The Bio Amp is a galvanically isolated , high - performance differential bio amplifier optimized for the measurement of a wide variety of biological signals such as ECG , EMG and EEG recordings . LabChart software is specifically designed for working with life sciences data . Simple to use and suitable for a broad range of signal types , LabChart ' s broad set of features makes it easy and fast to record , display and parameterize data . 47 End - studies and tracheostomy surgery procedures We were interested in establishing severe clinically relevant , recoverable model of ARDS and follow at different time - points . Due to this , the tracheostomy surgery was only performed as end - point of studies followed by the tissue collection . The animals were injected 0 . 5mls of mixture of 0 . 4mls ketamine ( 100mg / kg ) and 0 . 1mls Xylazine ( 10mg / kg ) ( Rompun from Bayer Health Care Inc . Toronto , Canada ) intraperitonealy before performing the tracheostomy surgery . The fur from the tracheal region was removed and blunt dissection was carried out using arterial forceps through the pre - tracheal muscles and the fascia to reveal the trachea . The trachea was dissected out , and an incision was made between the 4th and 5th tracheal rings . A tracheostomy tube ( 2 - mm internal diameter ) was inserted and secured . Right pre - tracheal muscles and strap muscles of the neck were retracted and the right carotid artery was located together with the vagus nerve and adherent sheath . The nerve and sheath were dissected from the length of visible carotid artery and intra - arterial access ( Becton Dickinson ; 22G cannula ) was sited . By tail vein cannula , 200 units / rat Heparin i . e . ( 500 Units · kg−1 ) ( CP Pharmaceuticals , Wrexham , United Kingdom ) was administered before cannulating the carotid artery . The baseline ventilation procedures were performed as per section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 and blood was drawn before the lung function measure to measure gas oxygenation at 30 % O 2 . To calculate , an alveolar - arterial ( A - a ) oxygen gradient the ventilator was switched to 100 % ( FiO2 1 . 0 ) which was accomplished over a 15 minute interval at the end of each protocol . Animal Euthanasia At the end point of the studies and measuring different physiological parameters , the animals were killed by exsanguination . The blood was collected and 3ml of plasma was aliquoted in eppendorf tubes ( 1ml per aliquot ) and tubes were stored at - 80ºC . Postmortem of the animals and tissue collection Immediately after - euthanasia , the animal post - mortem was performed followed by the thoracotomy and the heart - lung block was dissected from the thorax . The right lower lobe was isolated , excised , weighed and placed in a 60°C oven . The tissue weight was followed for 72 hours for calculation of wet / dry weight ratios . The bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) collection was performed by injecting 15 ml of sterile NaCl ( 0 . 9 % ) via the tracheostomy into lung , in 5ml 48 increments . Retrograde flow of every 5ml of NaCl was collected into a 15ml conical tube ( BD ) . 2ml of this fluid was spun down in two separate 1 . 5ml eppendorf tubes for 5 min at 1300 rpm for trypan counts and cyto - spin slides preparation . The remaining BAL fluid was centrifuged at 1500g for 20 min at 4ºC and 4ml of supernatant was aliquoted in 8 eppendorf tubes each containing 500μl of BAL sample stored at - 80°C for later protein analysis . 49 Analysis of Samples Bronchoalveolar Lavage ( BAL ) Analysis 2 . 7 . 1 . 1 Total Cell Counts from the BAL sample The total number of cells per ml of BAL fluid was evaluated . Each undiluted concentrated ( 10 times ) sample of BAL was counted using trypan method . A standard Neubauer hemocytometer counting chamber ( Fisher Scientific ) was used , counting cells in the four 1 / 25mm 2 corners . 10µl of the BAL fluid were pipetted underneath the haemocytometer coverslip . To obtain the total cells per ml , this total count was divided by 4 , multiplied by 10 , 000 ( correction factor ) , multiplied by 20 ( tryphan dilution ) and 0 . 1 ( sample concentration ) . 2 . 7 . 1 . 2 Differential Cell Counts from BAL sample 1ml of the undiluted BAL fluid was centrifuged at 15 , 000g for 1 min . 700µl was removed , and the remaining 300 µl was used to re - suspend the cell pellet . 60 µl each from this concentrated cell suspension was pipetted into the plastic funnel each of a cyto - spin cartridge ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific ) . The cartridge , along with a glass slide , was spun for 5 min at 400 rpm in the cytospin centrifuge ( Shandon ) . The cells were transferred to the glass slide and fluid became adherent to the blotting paper on the underside of the cyto - spin cartridge . Slides were then stained using the Diff - Quik method using Hemacol staining kit ( EMD chemicals Inc . , Gibbstown , NJ , US ; 65044 - 93 ) . Slides were immersed 4 times in methanol , 3 times in eosin , and 3 times in methylene blue and allowed to dry . To obtain the differential cell count of inflammatory cells ( macrophages , neutrophils , monocytes ) 3 random areas on the slides were selected for counting the percentage of neutrophils and other cells types in the bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) sample . 2 . 7 . 1 . 3 Quantification of the protein from the BAL sample The commercially available protein assay kit - Micro BCA TM Protein assay kit ( Thermo Scientific ; 23235 ) was used to quantify protein in BAL samples . Each sample was examined in duplicates . Due to the high concentration of the protein in the BAL samples , 1 in 10 dilution of each sample in PBS were prepared . The standards for the assay were prepared as outlined in kit instructions to 50 get a working range of the protein concentrations from 0 - 400µg / ml . The working reagent ( WR ) was prepared by mixing 25 parts of BCA™ Reagent A with 24 parts of BCA™ Reagent B and 1 part of reagent MC ( Reagent MA : MB : MC ; 25 : 24 : 1 ) . 150 μl of each standard or unknown sample replicate were pipetted into each microplate well . Later , 150 μl of the WR was added to each well . The plate was mixed gently using a plate shaker ( DiaMed , Lab Supplies Inc . ) for 30 seconds . The plate was then covered and incubated at 37ºC for 2 h before being cooled to room temperature . After incubation the plate reading was performed at using Spectra Max 340 device from Molecular devices at 562nm . Later , the BAL proteins were calculated using 4 - fit standard curve formula . Preparation of Lung Tissue for Histological analysis 2 . 7 . 2 . 1 Preparation of Lung Tissue for Histologic Analysis The left lung lobe was fixed for the histological analysis during the tissue collection procedures . The pulmonary artery was cannulated and the left atrium was incised . The pulmonary circulation was perfused with 0 . 9 % of saline flush ( Baxter Corporation ; JB1323 ) at a constant hydrostatic pressure of 35 cm H 2 O until the left atrial effluent was clear of blood . After washing , the left lung was inflated through the tracheal catheter using 10 % formalin solution neutral buffer ( Sigma Life Sciences ; HT501128 ) at a pressure of 25 cm H 2 O . The left atrium was then tied off to prevent pulmonary venous inflow into the atrium , creating a constant distending pressure across the pulmonary vasculature , and maximally distending the pulmonary vessels . After fixing the tissue , the pulmonary artery and trachea were ligated . The lung was stored in 10 % formalin in 50ml ( BD ) falcon tube kept in inverted position to be processed for histological analysis . 2 . 7 . 2 . 2 Processing of the Lung tissue The vertical axis of the fixed tissues was identified and the tissue was cut into 5 equal sections named ( A , B , C , D and E ) and were placed in the labeled histoprocessing cassettes ( Fisherbrand Histoette II Biopsy Cassettes ; Cat No . 15182702A ) . The cassette lids were closed tightly making sure that they do not open during processing . The cassettes were labeled with the animal ID and an appropriate section of the lung tissue contained in it . The tissues were processed overnight using Leica TP1020 Automatic Tissue Processor as per protocol detailed in the table 2 . 4 . 51 IV . Table 2 . 4 : Tissue Processing Protocol Tissue Processing Protocol Station No . Reagent Vacuum Duration 1 Formalin No 1 h 2 Formalin No 1 h 3 70 % Alcohol No 1 h 4 80 % Alcohol No 1 h 5 95 % Alcohol No 1 h 6 95 % Alcohol No 1 h 7 100 % Alcohol No 1 . 5 h 8 100 % Alcohol No 1 . 5 h 9 Xylene No 1 . 5 h 10 Xylene No 2 h 11 Paraffin 60°C Yes 1 . 5 h 12 Paraffin 60°C Yes 2 h 2 . 7 . 2 . 3 Embedding and Slicing of the processed tissue sections After tissues were processed overnight , next day the samples were removed from the processor and sections were embedded in paraffin wax using embedder instrument from Leica EG 1160 model . The sections were kept in the center of the metallic blocks used for embedding , keeping 52 sections in a transverse manner , with its top as the cutting edge . The embedded blocks were left on the cooling base for 1 . 5 to 2 h . After cooling , the paraffin embedded tissue blocks were separated from the metallic cassette holders . The embedded sections were cleaned with help of blade to remove the excessive paraffin around the periphery so that it could be fit appropriately in microtome during tissue slicing procedures . The sections were cut at 6μm using Leica Microtome RM2235 and placed on the labeled glass slides . The slides labeling was done in blinded manner and kept in oven ( Thermo Scientific ; Heratherm Incubator ) at 37°C for overnight drying . 2 . 7 . 2 . 4 Staining Slides The slides were removed from the oven and kept outside for cooling . The slides were stained using the Leica Autostainer as per protocol detailed in the table 2 . 5 . The stained slides were mounted using Paramount SP15 Toluene Solution ( Fisher Scientific ) and cover slipped . V . Table 2 . 5 : Histology Slides Staining Procedure Hematoxalin and Eosin Staining Protocol Station No . Reagent Time ( min . sec ) Oven 65°C 10 1 Xylene 3 2 Xylene 2 3 Xylene 2 4 100 % Alcohol 1 5 100 % Alcohol 1 6 95 % Alcohol 1 8 H 2 O 1 . 30 53 9 Hematoxylin 2 10 H 2 O 1 11 Blank 0 . 35 12 H 2 O 1 13 Blue buffer 0 . 45 14 H 2 O 1 15 95 % Alcohol 1 16 Eosin 1 17 100 % Alcohol 1 18 100 % Alcohol 1 19 100 % Alcohol 1 20 Xylene 1 21 Xylene 1 22 Exit 2 . 7 . 2 . 5 Stereological Analysis The microscope used was ( Model DP72 , Olympus ) was used for analysis . Three fields from each slide were chosen at random and digitized using a digital camera . Images were stored as tiff files in 32 bit format . The grid reference , i . e . X and Y grid coordinates for each image was recorded by referencing the scale attached to the microscope . A 100 point counting grid was overlaid on each image in Image J 1 . 47v ( Wayne Rasband , National Institutes of Health , USA ) software package . 54 Care was taken to ensure that the software was set to 20X magnification . Once this grid was superimposed over the image , a touch count was performed by opening the pictures using Window Photo viewer . At each of 100 intersection points on the grid , a record was taken for each of the following : acinar tissue , non - acinar tissue and airspace . The intraacinar tissue was defined as all tissues within the gas exchange portion of the lung , i . e . , respiratory bronchioles , alveolar ducts , alveolar sacs , and alveoli , including blood vessels contained within their walls . The airspace was defined as all airspaces within the lumen of respiratory bronchioles , alveolar ducts , alveolar sacs , and alveoli . 55 Statistical Analysis The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 5 software . The majority of results were presented as mean ± standard deviation ( SD ) . One - way ANOVA followed by post Student Newman - Kuels Test was performed using the Primer of Biostatics version 6 . 0 by Stanton Glantz software . The significance threshold was set to P < 0 . 05 . 56 Chapter 3 Establishment of a 2 - hit Sepsis - VILI model of ARDS Abstract i . Introduction Sepsis is a complex clinical syndrome that results from a systemic inflammatory response to live bacteria and bacterial products . Despite aggressive clinical management , including antibiotic therapy and organ support , such as mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure , septic patients often progress to develop multiple system organ dysfunctions ( MSOD ) or shock or many die . Complications associated with sepsis include induced ARDS and impaired cardiac function . Mechanical ventilation , while necessary to support life , may worsen ARDS – this is termed ventilator induced lung injury ( VILI ) . Our goal was to develop an animal model combining systemic sepsis induced organ injury with ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) , with the aim of testing potential therapies such as cell therapies in this more clinically relevant model . ii . Methods After IRB / REB approval , adult male Sprague - Dawley rats were anesthetized , the abdominal wall was incised , a fecal - blood pellet placed into the abdominal cavity to make animals septic . 24 h after sepsis surgery , all the animals underwent high stretch mechanical ventilation procedures with high peak pressures using pressure control mode setting to cause an additional lung injury . All the animals were recovered from surgical procedures and randomized into time interval study point groups of 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week following VILI . The animals in respective study groups re - anaesthetized and extent of recovery from Sepsis - VILI procedures was assessed for all the study interval time points along with the SHAM group . iii . Results A total of 57 animals were used in this experimental series . Animals subjected to combine sepsis / VILI showed prominent signs of sickness at 24 h and 48 h time - point and then demonstrated signs of recovery beyond 96 h . The decrease in static lung compliance ( 0 . 49 ±0 . 11 ml / cm H 2 O ) 57 was maximal at 24h post - VILI . All the animals significantly lost weight from Day 1 sepsis procedure up until Day 9 and recovered beyond that . Statistically significant differences were observed at 24 h time point for bronchoalvelolar lavage ( BAL ) white blood cell counts , neutrophil infiltration and protein levels compared with the SHAM group . No differences were found at 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week time points in comparison to the SHAM group for blood gas oxygenation , total white blood cell counts in BAL , neutrophil counts , BAL protein levels and wet / dry weight ratios . iv . Discussion We established a novel clinically relevant rodent model for ARDS . This model allowed us to study the time course of lung injury due to sepsis combined with VILI and examine the time course of animal recovery following this 2 - hit injury . From our study data , we concluded that more serious pre - clinical model of ARDS is needed in order to test the efficacy of mesenchymal stromal / stem cell treatment in sepsis - VILI model . 58 To establish a novel 2 - hit rodent model of Sepsis - VILI Introduction : Challenge of modeling human ARDS The fundamental mechanisms that initiate and propagate the lung injury in humans have not been completely understood despite of decades of intense investigation . The primary cause of the ARDS in humans is pneumonia , which can be bacterial , viral or fungal [ 5 , 6 ] . Severe sepsis is associated with pneumonia or extrapulmonary infectious source , such as peritonitis . Other major causes of ARDS include aspiration of gastric contents ; hemorrhage and shock following major trauma and other causes such as severe acute pancreatitis , transfusion - associated lung injury and drug reactions [ 6 - 8 , 152 ] . Since there is more than one underlying cause for this devastating disease , and multiple causes can co - exist in any specific patient , it is really challenging to establish a lung injury model which will fully mimic the conditions observed in critically ill patients . Why we need to establish lung injury animal models ? Human studies provided descriptive information about the onset and evolution of the physiological and inflammatory changes in lungs which led to hypotheses about mechanisms of injury . But , there are numerous difficulties to test them in humans because of the many clinical variables that are difficult to control in critically ill patients . Therefore , pre - clinical animal models provide a bridge between patients and the research bench . We can perform mechanistic studies and test hypotheses in animal models . Without creating animal models for ARDS / ALI , we would not be able to test clinical hypothesis generated in patients using intact biological systems , prior to testing them in patients with ARDS . Characteristic features of ARDS / ALI in animal models Acute lung injury ( ALI ) is the term used to describe the injury produced in animal models , while ARDS is the clinical syndrome seen in patients . The main features that characterize ALI in animal models have been identified , and the most relevant methods to assess these features described in a recent consensus document outlining key requirements for ALI models [ 153 ] . The authors distributed a series of questionnaires to a panel of experts in experimental lung injury . The 59 Committee concluded that the main features of experimental ALI must include 4 of the following key features : (cid:1) The histological evidence of tissue injury . (cid:1) The alteration of the alveolar capillary barrier , (cid:1) The presence of an inflammatory response . (cid:1) The evidence of physiological dysfunction . The Committee also identified key ‘‘very relevant’’ and ‘‘somewhat relevant’’ measurements for each of the main features of ALI and recommended the use of at least one ‘‘very relevant’’ measurement and preferably one or two additional separate measurements to determine if a main feature of ALI is present [ 153 ] . We applied these principles in developing our combined Sepsis / VILI model . The characteristic features of ALI were tested in the animals undergoing the study procedures by measuring various parameters i . e . the decrease in the static lung compliance , the blood oxygenation levels , quantification of the total number of cells and the neutrophil infiltration in the bronchoalvelolar lavage ( BAL ) samples , water content estimation in lung tissues by wet / dry weight ratios and the histological analysis on the fixed lung tissues . All these parameters were used in accessing the lung injury caused by 2 - hits of Sepsis and VILI for all the animals in respective groups studied for time intervals of 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week . Inherent limitations of animal models of human disease No single animal model reproduces all of the characteristics of ALI / ARDS in humans , and most of the existing animal models are relevant for only limited aspects of human ALI / ARDS . Thus , efforts to mimic the bedside situation by utilizing animal models must be conducted carefully and results interpreted with caution . 60 VI . Table 3 . 1 : Important differences between animal models and human diseases [ 154 , 155 ] Animals Humans Interspecies variability Same species Limited genetic diversity Genetic diversity Exact Insult Variable Insult Interval of injury to treatment the same Variable injury to treatment interval Standardized resuscitation Variable resuscitation Standardized supportive care Variable supportive care Interventions initiated early Variable interventions ( usually later ) Note : This table is based on Figure . 1 . adapted from reference J . D . Lang et al , Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2005 [ 156 ] Challenges of modeling Human Lung Injury in the animal models Different animal species have been used to study lung injury but yet there are major differences among animal species in response to injury , particularly injury in response to microbial products . So , it’s important to choose the right animal species for respective study keeping in consideration size , availability of species specific reagents and the use of genetically modified animals etc . Several agents have been employed to establish ALI model that target the vascular endothelium , the alveolar epithelium or more than one site . The most commonly used animal models of lung injury include acid aspiration , live bacteria , peritonitis , cecal ligation and puncture ( CPL ) , mechanical ventilation and pulmonary / non - pulmonary ischemia / reperfusion . Ultimately the choice of model should reflect the specific etiologies and / or mechanisms of ARDS that one wishes to examine in detail . 61 Assessment of the lung injury in Animal models 3 . 2 . 6 . 1 Abnormalities in Gas exchange Acute severe hypoxia ( reduced blood oxygen levels ) is the hallmark of ARDS in humans . This is measured using arterial blood gas analyses . These analyses also permit measurement of the alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient ( A - a gradients ) , i . e . the difference between oxygen tension in the alveolus and the systemic arterial system which to demonstrates that the hypoxia is due to decrease in the lung function . 3 . 2 . 6 . 2 Decrease in the respiratory lung compliance Acute lung injury and ARDS result in increased lung ‘stiffness’ and a decrease in lung compliance due to pulmonary edema and atelectasis . While , strictly speaking , the measurement of the lung compliance in vivo requires an estimate of pleural pressure , so that one could separate the component of total pulmonary compliance into that due to the chest wall , and that due to the lung . However , in most situations is not necessary to separate these contributions where it is clear that the change in compliance is due to the lung component . 3 . 2 . 6 . 3 Assessment of an increased permeability of the alveolar - capillary membrane An increase in alveolar capillary membrane permeability is a critical parameter which defines ALI in the animals and results in dysfunction of the pulmonary endothelium and / or epithelium . This dysfunction causes leakage of protein rich fluid from the vascular to the interstitial and / or alveolar space and could be quantified by any of the below mentioned methods ; a ) Measure total protein concentration in the BAL fluid . b ) Measure the albumin concentration in the BAL fluid . c ) Wet - dry weight ratios of the excised lungs 62 Aims To establish a novel 2 hit model of Sepsis - VILI We aimed to establish a severe , clinically relevant model , 2 hit model of Sepsis - VILI for ARDS To approach our aims , we followed a step - wise approach to investigate the contribution of individual Sepsis and VILI on its own and later investigate the combined effect of both in our novel model . 1 . Induction of Sepsis ( Hit 1 ) : Our first aim was to study the dose response of fecal - pellet in animals , access severity of the lung injury in animals at different time - points 24 h , 48 h , and 96 h . 2 . Injurious Ventilation ( Hit 2 ) : Our second aim was to establish and standardize injurious high stretch mechanical ventilation procedures with the aim of achieving 30 - 35 % drop in the static lung compliance from the measured baseline or Pre - Sepsis value . 3 . We were interested in developing a severe , stable , recoverable and reproducible , clinically relevant model of ARDS . The stability of the model was very important which would provide us with bigger window for cell treatment intervention . Animal studies are fraught with high variability in the results , and this is true even under strictly controlled conditions and when all the animals are genetically identical . We sought to quantify the degree of variability in injury and recovery when consistent sepsis and VILI injury is performed by aiming for static lung compliance drop of 30 - 35 % after VILI . With this rationale , we planned to follow our Sepsis - VILI animals at 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week time point to assess the recovery from the induced lung injury procedures measured by measuring various parameters . 63 Methods Induction of Systemic Sepsis Figure 3 . 1C represents the flow schematic of the experimental design . Briefly , all the animals were anaesthetized , orotracheally intubated and the baseline static lung compliance was measured as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 2 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . Following this , the sepsis surgery was performed and fecal pellet mixed with blood was inserted in the abdominal region as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 2 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 6 . During all the procedures , the animals were administered 0 . 5 mg / kg of Cisatracurium besilate and 2 . 5 mg / kg of Alfaxalone intravenously ( IV ) . In the end , all the animals were recovered , placed in fresh cages and kept in the vivarium facility for overnight stay as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 . Induction of Ventilation - induced Lung Injury ( VILI ) As described in the flow schematic Figure 3 . 1C , 24 h post - sepsis surgery all the animals were anaesthetized , intravenous access was established , orotracheally intubation was performed and the respiratory static lung compliance 24 h post - sepsis was measured as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 2 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . Following this , injurious ventilation was induced by switching the ventilator to pressure control mode settings as detailed in Section 2 . 6 . 4 . The post - VILI targets to achieve 30 to 35 % drop in compliance were calculated from the baseline measure . The VILI trace was carefully monitored , to observe the injury progression and VILI time was recorded . Once the targeted decrease in lung compliance drop was achieved , VILI was discontinued by switching the ventilator back to volume control mode settings as described in Section 2 . 6 . 3 . Throughout VILI procedures 0 . 5 mg / kg of Cisatracurium besilate and 2 . 5mg / kg of Alfaxalone was administered ( IV ) every 9 min . All the animals were recovered after post - VILI procedures , placed in fresh cages and kept in the vivarium facility as described in Section 2 . 4 . 2 . 5 Animal Health and Distress Scoring The health of all the animals entering the experimental procedures was carefully observed from Day 1 to endpoint of the studies as described in Section 2 . 3 . The animals were followed for 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 weeks’ time point and sacrificed at the end of studies . 64 End - points of studies and collection of samples After a period of recovery , animals were once more anaesthetized , intravenous access was obtained , tracheostomy performed and carotid arterial cannula was inserted . Animals were baseline ventilated for a 20 minute period with FiO 2 0 . 3 and for 15 minutes with FiO 2 1 . 0 . Respiratory system static compliance and arterial blood gas measurements were obtained . Thereafter , the animals were exsanguinated under deep anesthesia ; the heart lung block was dissected from the thorax , and wet / dry weight measurements and BAL collection were performed to assess inflammatory cell infiltration as described in Section 2 . 7 . 65 Experimental Design of Pilot Study Series 1A - To evaluate fecal - pellet dose response for Sepsis Surgery We performed first pilot study in order to evaluate the lung injury induced by sepsis surgery alone . Dose response was done on 6 animals to test effects of 0 . 1g , 0 . 2g and 0 . 3g of fecal pellet ( Flow Schematic 3 . 1A ) . Sepsis surgery was performed as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 6 of methods and material Chapter 2 . Fecal - blood pellet was placed in the abdominal region and the animals were recovered as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 of methods and material Chapter 2 . The animals were then followed till 96 h post - sepsis surgery and health distress scoring was performed as described in Section 2 . 3 . 2 of the methods and materials Chapter 2 and the results are discussed in Section 3 . 7 . 1 of this Chapter . In order to induce severe lung injury , 24 h post - sepsis surgery we introduced the second hit of high stretch ventilation as described in Section 2 . 4 . 2 of methods and materials Chapter 2 . Once static lung compliance decrease of 30 - 35 % was achieved , all the animals were recovered as described in section 2 . 4 . 2 . 5 of the methods and material Chapter 2 . Series 1B - To evaluate the extent of VILI severity in animals with Septic background We also explored the extent of high stretch ventilation with septic background that our animals could sustain . Therefore , we carried pilot study on 7 animals . All these animals underwent Sepsis - VILI procedures using fecal pellet dose of 0 . 1 g and VILI was induced 24 h after sepsis surgery as described in Section 3 . 4 of this Chapter . The only change made was the intensity of VILI : 3 animals underwent VILI with targeted 30 - 35 % static lung compliance decrease from the pre - sepsis value and for remaining 4 animals targeted VILI decrease was set at 50 % . After these procedures , animals were recovered as described in Section 2 . 4 . 2 . 5 of the methods and material Section of Chapter 2 . The animals were followed for 48 h and various parameters were assessed , as described in Section 3 . 7 . 2 of this Chapter . 66 F i g u re 3 . 1 A : F l o w S c h e m a t i c o f S e p s i s ( f ec a l - p e ll e t ) d o s e re s p o n s e S t ud y F i g u re 3 . 1 A : F l o w S c h e m a t i c f o r S e p s i s - f ec a l p e ll e t d o s e re s p o n s e . F i g u re 3 . 1 A : F l o w s c h e m a t i c f o r S e p s i s - f ec a l p e ll e t d o s e re s p o n s e . A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n ae s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d a nd s e p s i s s u r g e r y w a s p e rf o r m e d . T h e a n i m a l s r ece i v e d a v a r i a b l e f eca l p e ll e t do s e o f 0 . 1 g , 0 . 2 g o r 0 . 3g a nd w e r e r ec ov e r e d po s t - p r o ce du r e s . T h e l ung i n j u r y a ss e ss m e n t w a s p e rf o r m e d a nd a n i m a l s w e r e a i m e d t o b e f o ll o w e d f o r 24 , 48 a nd 9 6 h ti m e po i n t s . F i g u re 3 . 1 A : F l o w S c h e m a t i c t o e va l u a t e t h e o p t i m a l f ec a l p e ll e t d o s e o f S e p s i s 67 F i g u re 3 . 1 B : F l o w s c h e m a t i c t o e va l u a t e t h e V I L I s e v er i t y i n S e p t i c a n i m a l s . A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n a e s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d . D ay 1 : T h e p r e - s e p s i s r e s p i r a t o r y s t a ti c l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d , s e p s i s s u r g e r y w a s p e rf o r m e d a nd t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d . D ay 2 : A t 24 h po s t - s e p s i s , r e s p i r a t o r y l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d a nd V I L I t a r g e t s w e r e ca l c u l a t e d . T h e h i gh s t r e t c h m ec h a n i ca l v e n til a ti on p r o ce du r e s w e r e i ndu ce d u s i ng i n s p i r a t o r y p r e s s u r e 35 c m H 2 O , r e s p i r a t o r y r a t e 18 / m i n a nd 0 po s iti v e e n d e xp i r a t o r y p r e ss u r e ( P EE P ) . W h e n r e s p i r a t o r y s t a ti c c o m p li a n ce w a s d ec r ea s e d by 30 - 35 % o r 50 % fr o m t h e p r e - s e p s i s m ea s u r e V I L I w a s s t opp e d by s w it c h i ng t h e v e n til a t o r t o vo l u m e c on t r o l m od e . A ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d a nd l ung i n j u r y a ss e ss m e n t s w e r e m a d e a t 48 h . F i g u re 3 . 1 B : F l o w S c h e m a t i c t o e va l u a t e t h e V I L I s e v er i t y i n S e p t i c a n i m a l s 68 Series 1C - To establish 2 - hit rodent model of Sepsis - VILI Our first goal was to establish a novel , recoverable , severe rodent model of Sepsis - VILI . Secondly , we wanted to investigate the efficacy of MSCs in Sepsis - VILI model . As our aim was to have bigger time window to test efficacy of MSCs , we followed Sepsis - VILI animals for longer time intervals to study the stability of the model at 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week time point from VILI . The experimental interventions in the study groups following flow schematic Figure 3 . 1C were performed as described in Section 3 . 4 . 1 and 3 . 4 . 2 of this Chapter . A total of 57 animals were used in this experimental series . Animals were randomly allocated to the following groups : ( 1 ) the SHAM group ( n = 10 ) ; ( 2 ) the 24 h group ( n = 10 ) ; ( 3 ) the 48 h group ( n = 12 ) ; ( 4 ) the 96 h group ( n = 7 ) ; ( 5 ) the 1 week group ( n = 9 ) ; ( 6 ) the 2 week group ( n = 9 ) . The SHAM group is a control group where animals underwent laparotomy surgery without insertion of fecal - pellet followed by protective ventilation of 60 min after 24 h . These animals were followed for 24 h after these procedures and lung injury assessments were made . The groups from 24h to 2 weeks were followed for these durations of time after insertion of the fecal pellet and induction of VILI . Measured parameters to access the lung injury after Sepsis - VILI Throughout the experimental procedures , all the animals in respective study time points were carefully monitored and distress scoring was performed as described in Section 2 . 3 . At the respective individual study end points , all the animals were re - anaesthetized , intravenous access was obtained , tracheostomy performed , carotid arterial cannula was inserted and the static lung compliance was measured as described in Sections 2 . 6 . 6 and 2 . 5 . 4 of methods and materials Chapter 2 . The blood oxygenation was measured using blood gas machine with FiO2 0 . 3 and for 15 minutes with FiO2 1 . 0 described in Section 2 . 6 . 6 of methods and materials of Chapter 2 . Once all the parameters were measured , the animals were euthanized by exsanguination ; the heart lung block was dissected from the thorax , BAL was performed and tissues were collected as well analyzed as described in Section 2 . 6 . 7 , 2 . 6 . 8 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 2 and 2 . 7 . 1 . 3 of methods and materials of Chapter 2 . 69 . F i g u re 3 . 1 C F l o w s c h e m a t i c o f S e p s i s - V I L I m o d e l f o r ARD S F i g u re 3 . 1 C : F l o w s c h e m a t i c o f S e p s i s - V I L I r o d e n t m o d e l d e s i g n f o r ARD S . A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n ae s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d , und e r w e n t 2 - h it l ung i n j u r y p r o ce du r e s o f S e p s i s - V I L I . D ay 1 : T h e p r e - s e p s i s r e s p i r a t o r y s t a ti c l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d , s e p s i s s u r g e r y w a s p e rf o r m e d a nd t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d . D a y 2 : A t 24 h po s t - s e p s i s , r e s p i r a t o r y l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d a nd V I L I t a r g e t s w e r e ca l c u l a t e d . T h e h i gh s t r e t c h m ec h a n i ca l v e n til a ti on p r o ce du r e s w e r e i ndu c e d u s i ng i n s p i r a t o r y p r e ss u r e 35 c m H 2 O , r e s p i r a t o r y r a t e 18 / m i n a nd 0 po s iti v e e nd e xp i r a t o r y p r e ss u r e ( P EE P ) . W h e n r e s p i r a t o r y s t a ti c c o m p li a n ce w a s d ec r ea s e d b y 30 - 35 % fr o m t h e p r e - s e p s i s m ea s u r e V I L I w a s s t opp e d by s w it c h i n g t h e v e n til a t o r s e tti ng s t o t h e vo l u m e c on t r o l m od e . A ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d po s t - l ung i n j u r y p r o ce du r e s a nd r a ndo m i ze d i n t o r e s p ec ti v e s t udy g r oup s w it h e ndpo i n t s a t 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 w ee k a nd 2 w ee k . 70 Statistical Analysis The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 5 software . The majority of results were presented as mean ± standard deviation ( SD ) . One - way ANOVA followed by post Student Newman - Kuels Test was performed using the Primer of Biostatics version 6 . 0 by Stanton Glantz software . The significance threshold was set to P < 0 . 05 . 71 Results - Series 1 A & 1B - Pilot study to evaluate Sepsis fecal dose response and VILI severity Pilot Study – Optimizing Fecal pellet size A total of 6 animals were used in this pilot series to test the optimal sepsis dose . The animals were grouped in 3 study groups and received fecal - pellet dose of 0 . 3g , 0 . 2g , and 0 . 1 g . All the animals were recovered according to section 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 section of Chapter 2 and were followed until 96 h . The health of animal was monitored on parameters : weight loss , piloerection , physical activity , wound Infection and temperature and scored on the scale of 1 to 5 . The defined scores are Score 1 indicates normal animal activity ; Score 2 indicates near normal activity of animal with dull appearance on hair coat ; Score – 3 indicates dehydrated , ruffled fur and reduced exploratory behavior in animal ; Score – 4 indicates dehydrated , ruffled fur , hunched posture and moved when stimulated in animal and score 5 indicates severely sick animals and needs to be sacrificed . A high mortality was observed in animals who received fecal - pellet doe of 0 . 3 g and the animals who received 0 . 2 fecal - pellet dose were severely septic . The results were suggestive that 0 . 1 g is an optimal fecal - pellet dose animals could sustain and was later used in this experimental and Chapter 4 experimental series . v . Table 3 . 2 : Sepsis - Fecal Pellet Dose response Study Tested Fecal Pellet Dose 24h Post - Sepsis ( Score ) 48h Post - Sepsis ( Score ) 72h Post - Sepsis ( Score ) 96h Post - Sepsis ( Score ) 0 . 3g ( n = 2 ) All Died N / A N / A N / A 0 . 2g ( n = 2 ) 3 3 4 . 5 3 . 5 0 . 1g ( n = 2 ) 2 . 5 2 . 5 1 . 5 N / A 72 Pilot Study to optimize VILI severity in Septic Animals A total of 7 animals were enrolled in this pilot study to evaluate the severity of high stretch ventilation with a septic background . The study procedures were performed as described in Section 3 . 5 . 1 of this Chapter and results are presented in the below Table 3 . 3 . All the animals were successfully recovered and followed for 48 h time point . With the second hit , the VILI procedure , our goal was to create uniform lung injury in every animal that underwent VILI . To evaluate the severity of VILI procedures in our animals we performed pilot study to ( 1 ) target 30 - 35 % decrease in the static lung compliance from pre - sepsis value ( n = 3 ) ; ( 2 ) target 50 % decrease in the static lung compliance from pre - sepsis value . The animals that underwent longer duration of VILI procedures and achieved 50 % decrease in compliance were more severely injured than ones with compliance decrease of 30 - 35 % , as shown in Table 3 . 3 . vi . Table 3 . 3 : Induction of severe VILI in septic animals Number of Animals Fecal Pellet Dose VILI Targets Survival Oxygenation ( A - a gradients ) Total cell counts / ml of BAL n = 3 0 . 1g 30 - 35 % 100 % 91 . 2 1 . 6 * 10 6 n = 4 0 . 1g 50 % 100 % 401 1 . 2 * 10 6 73 Results Series 1C : Time course of recovery following Sepsis / VILI injury with targeted static compliance decrease of 30 - 35 % from the baseline value In this experimental series all animals underwent induction of abdominal sepsis , followed by VILI 24 hours later , with targeted static compliance decrease of 30 - 35 % from baseline or pre - septic value . Animals were then randomized to undergo different lengths of recovery following the 2 - hit injury , from time periods of 24 hours , 48 hours , 96 hours , 1 week and 2 weeks following induction of VILI . A total of 57 animals were used in this experimental series . All the animals successfully underwent study procedures and were recovered . Data was collected on 57 animals . Animals were randomly allocated to the following groups : ( 1 ) the SHAM group ( n = 10 ) ; ( 2 ) the 24 h group ( n = 10 ) ; ( 3 ) the 48 h group ( n = 12 ) ; ( 4 ) the 96 h group ( n = 7 ) ; ( 5 ) the 1 week group ( n = 9 ) ; ( 6 ) the 2 week group ( n = 9 ) . 74 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on animal weight After sepsis - VILI procedures , the animal weight was followed till Day 14 after VILI . All the animals from respective study point groups 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week are plotted in this graph . A progressive weight decrease was observed from Day 0 until Day 7 . The animals started gaining weight from Day 8 and returned to their original baseline weight by Day 11 . The animals depicted a tendency of gaining weight in gradual manner from beyond Day 12 till Day 16 . Graph 3 . 1 : The effect of Sepsis - VILI on animal weight change Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs or Pre - Sepsis weight . 75 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on Static Compliance After sepsis - VILI procedures , the static compliance reached its lowest value at 24 h time point . The results were significantly different PRE - VILI and at 24 h , 48 h , 96 h and 2 week when compared to pre - sepsis compliance measured . When compared to the SHAM group results were significant Post - VILI and for 24 h , 48 h and 96 h time point animals . S H A M P r e - S e p s i s P r e - V I L I P o s t - V I L I 24h 48h 96h 1 W ee k 2 W ee k 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 * * m * m * m * m * Ti m e p o i n t S t a t i c C o m p l i a n c e ( m L / c m H 2 O ) Graph 3 . 2 Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on Static Compliance at 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week time points Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; ‘Pre - Sepsis’ represents static lung compliance measured on Day 0 ( before performing sepsis surgery ) ; Pre - VILI represents static lung compliance measured 24 h post - sepsis surgery and before VILI ; Post - VILI represents static lung compliance measured after VILI procedures ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of lung compliance in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group ; * P < 0 . 05 vs . the Pre - Sepsis group . 76 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on Alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient The alveolar - arterial oxygen a gradient in blood sample was examined for all the animals in their individual groups of study with different time - points 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week post - Sepsis - VILI procedures . No statistically significant differences were observed for any of the studied time points when compared to the SHAM group . S H A M 24h 48h 96h 1 W ee k 2 W ee k 0 100 200 300 400 Ti mepoi nt A l v e o l a r - a r t er i a l O xyg e n G r a d i e n t ( mm H g ) Graph 3 . 3 : Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on Alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 77 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on Bronchoalveolar lavage white cell count Sepsis - VILI procedures resulted in a significant increase in alveolar white cell counts in animals at only at 24 h study time point in comparison to the SHAM group . S H A M 24h 48h 96h 1 W e e k 2 W ee k 0 3 ·· · · 10 0 4 6 ·· · · 10 0 4 1 . 5 ·· · · 10 5 2 . 5 ·· · · 10 5 3 . 5 ·· · · 10 5 m Timepoint T o t a l n o . o f c e l l s / m l o f B A L Graph 3 . 4 Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on alveolar white cell counts Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of alveolar white cell counts in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group . 78 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on Bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts Sepsis - VILI procedures resulted in a significant increase in alveolar neutrophil counts in animals only at 24 h study time point in comparison to the SHAM group . S H A M 24h 48h 96h 1 W ee k 2 W ee k 0 4 ·· · · 10 0 4 8 ·· · · 10 0 4 1 . 0 ·· · · 10 5 1 . 5 · · · · 10 5 2 . 0 ·· · · 10 5 m Groups N e u t r o p h i l s / m l o f B A L Graph 3 . 5 Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on alveolar neutrophil counts Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of alveolar neutrophil counts in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µP < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group . 79 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on lung wet / dry weight ratios The wet / dry weight ratios of the lung tissue samples were monitored as described in Section 2 . 6 . 8 for all the individual animals in respective time - points of 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week . No statistically significant differences were observed for any of the respective study time point when compared to the SHAM group . S H A M 2 4h 4 8h 9 6 h 1 W ee k 2 W e e k 3 . 5 4 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 0 5 . 5 6 . 0 6 . 5 Ti mepoi nt W e t - D r y R a t i o Graph 3 . 6 : Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on lung Wet / dry weight ratios Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of wet / dry weight ratios in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 80 Effect of Sepsis - VILI on BAL Proteins The results for BAL proteins in Sepsis - VILI animals showed significant differenced only for 24h time point animals when compared to the SHAM group . S H A M 24h 48h 96h 0 1 2 3 4 m Groups B A L P r o t e i n s ( m g / m l ) Graphs 3 . 6 Scatter plot of effect of Sepsis - VILI on BAL proteins Note : SHAM animals received laparotomy and protective ventilation in volume mode for 60 minutes ; Time points 24 h – 2 weeks represents the final assessment of BAL proteins in each animal group . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group . 81 Discussion and Conclusion from Sepsis - VILI Model Design Study The lung injury resulting from the systemic inflammatory response syndrome ( SIRS ) , be it infectious ( sepsis ) or not , remain a significant contributor to patient morbidity and mortality worldwide [ 5 ] . ARDS is complex disease with not a single underlying cause therefore ; several single hit or 2 hit animal models of lung injury are described in literature and used to investigate the pathogenesis of ARDS . The development of ARDS in human patients is complex and rarely occurs as the result of a single instigating factor . Therefore , the concept of priming the immune response to react exuberantly to a second stimulus is widely accepted [ 157 ] . However , it is extremely difficult to mimic lung injury encountered at the bedside . Recently published animal studies have been designed with ‘two - hits’ to mimic human ARDS and have better insight into the immune - inflammatory responses due to injury . Murphy et al . [ 158 ] have tested whether changes in innate immune cell reactivity following two - hit injury contributes to the development of heightened inflammation and organ dysfunction . Fan et al . have used hemorrhagic shock prior to the administration of low dose ( 0 . 03mg / kg ) of intratracheal endotoxin in rats and described significant increase in neutrophil infiltration as well as protein leakage across the lung epithelial barriers as compared to endotoxin alone [ 159 ] . There is no doubt that two - hit animal models are complex to design and it is recommended by National Heart Lung and Blood Institute to compare the outcome of these complex models directly to one - hit model [ 160 ] . We have successfully designed and developed the clinically relevant 2 - hit model of Sepsis and Ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) in order to test the therapeutic effects of MSCs later on . We chose VILI as a second hit because there is unequivocal evidence from the experimental and clinical research that mechanical ventilation can damage the lungs and initiate an inflammatory response contributing to the injury . The animal 2 hit model design has been described in Figure 3 . 1 B : first sepsis was induced and then VILI procedure was introduced 24 h later . To design and test first injury , we have conducted pilot studies and evaluated the fecal - pellet dose response . The animals that received fecal pellet dose of 0 . 2g and 0 . 3g were severely injured and showed high mortality rate . So , we decided to use 82 0 . 1 g of fecal pellet for sepsis procedures . Then , we evaluated the severity of VILI procedures ( study 3 . 5 . 2 ) in the animals that underwent sepsis surgery and received 0 . 1g of fecal - pellet dose with VILI targets of 30 - 35 % or 50 % decrease in static compliance from the baseline or pre - sepsis value . Animals subjected to combine sepsis / VILI showed signs of sickness at 24h and 48h time - points . In the pilot series of experiments in which second hit target was 50 % decrease in static lung compliance from the baseline value , the animals were severely injured with impaired alveolar - arterial oxygenation gradient and high heath distress score ( Result Sections 3 . 7 . 2 ) . As our aim was to have bigger time window to test efficacy of MSCs , we followed Sepsis - VILI animals for longer time intervals to study the stability of the model at 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 week time point from VILI . We used 0 . 1 g of fecal pellet for sepsis procedures and 30 - 35 % decrease in static compliance from the baseline value . Animals showed signs of lung injury at 24h and 48h time points and then recovered beyond 96h . The decrease in static lung compliance was maximal at 24h post - VILI . All the animals significantly lost weight until Day 9 after sepsis procedure and recovered beyond that point . However , no statistically significant differences were observed at 48h time point and later time intervals in comparison to the SHAM group for blood gas oxygenation , total white blood cell and neutrophil counts in BAL , and wet / dry weight ratios . We concluded that the lung injury was mild using this VILI targets and that more severe lung injury is needed in order to test efficacy of MSCs treatment . In conclusion , we successfully established a novel 2 - hit model of Sepsis - VILI . VILI targets of 30 - 35 % decrease in static compliance did not result in severe lung injury as the animals started to recover at 48 h time point . However , we were able to make VILI more injurious by targeting static lung compliance decrease to 50 % from its baseline value . We then used , in our later studies , more severe 2 - hit model of lung injury to study effects of MSCs cell treatment from different sources as well as different cell dosages . This model provided us with a bigger time window to test efficacy of MSCs . 83 Chapter 4 Investigate the therapeutic potential of bone marrow versus umbilical cord derived MSCs in Sepsis - VILI model of ARDS Abstract i . Introduction Mesenchymal Stromal Cells ( MSCs ) offer hope for ARDS sufferers and findings in simple pre - clinical ARDS models are promising . MSCs have become focus of intense research effort over past years to harness their regenerative and immune - modulating capacities for a variety of clinical conditions . These cells possess immune modulating phenotype ; reduce inflammation while enhancing bacterial clearance . MSCs reduce the severity of evolving acute lung injury ( ALI ) with more efficient tissue repair , MSC - mediated lung tissue repair and regeneration after ARDS . It has been shown that these cells can be derived from bone marrow as well umbilical cord and could be propagated , stored and administered to animals and patients in clinical trials . However , the gaps in our understanding regarding which tissue source derived MSCs are better , which cell dosage would give better therapeutic effects , which are their mechanisms of action , their efficacy to repair the injured lung tissue and their safety in critically ill ; all very important questions that should be addressed . ARDS is complex disease with not a single underlying cause , the research need to be conducted in complex animal models to mimic the traits of the disease observed in intensive care unit ( ICU ) patients . In this study , our aim was to testing the efficacy of MSCs derived from two different sources bone - marrow ( BM - hMSCs ) and umbilical cord ( HUCPVCs ) in the complex , novel 2 - hit model of Sepsis - VILI . We hypothesized that BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs would prove equally effective in reducing the severity of Sepsis - VILI lung injury . ii . Methods After IRB / REB approval , adult male Spargue - Dawley rats were anesthetized , the abdominal wall was incised , a fecal - blood pellet placed into the abdominal cavity . The abdominal wound was sutured , the animal were allowed to recover from anesthesia , placed back in new cages as well 84 monitored . At 24 h post - sepsis surgery , animals were re - anesthetized , a tracheal tube was placed and animals were subjected to mechanical ventilation at high peak pressures using pressure mode to cause an additional lung injury . The target of VILI procedures was set to achieve 50 % decrease in the static lung compliance from the Pre - Sepsis measure . Once the static compliance was reduced to desired targets VILI was discontinued . Animals were then weaned from mechanical ventilation , allowed to recover from anesthesia and the degree of recovery following 2 - hit injury was assessed at 48 h post - VILI . Following sepsis - VILI injury animals were randomized to receive treatment intravenous ( 1 ) vehicle ; ( 2 ) 5 * 10 6 BM - hMSCs cells / kg ; ( 3 ) 5 * 10 6 HUCPVCs cells / kg ; ( 3 ) 1 * 10 7 BM - hMSCs cells / kg ; ( 4 ) 1 * 10 7 HUCPVCs cells / kg at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . The animals were recovered post - procedures and observed for any signs of respiratory distress . After 48 h from VILI procedures , the animals were re - anaesthetized and the extent of recovery from the sepsis - VILI induced lung injury was assessed for the vehicle and the cell treated groups . iii . Results A total of 57 animals were used in these studies . All the animals underwent the Sepsis - VILI procedures and 50 % decrease in static compliance was achieved from the pre - sepsis measured . BM - hMSCs , administration in the dose of 5 * 10 6 cells / kg resulted in the decrease in alveolar cellular and neutrophil infiltration . This reduction in cell infiltration was not seen with higher ( 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) BM - hMSCs dose or with any other administered doses of HUCPVCs . We did not observed any significant change in oxygenation , wet / dry weight ratios and bronchoalveolar lavage proteins for any of the cell treated group in comparison to the vehicle group . iv . Conclusions We established a novel , clinically relevant rodent model of Sepsis - VILI lung injury to investigate the efficacy of MSCs for repairing the lung injury . The treatment with 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs cells / kg resulted in reduced inflammatory cell infiltration into the lungs . 85 Introduction Acute lung injury ( ALI ) , and its severe form , acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) are syndromes of acute respiratory failure which cause severe hypoxemia , severe dyspnea , and a marked increase in the work of breathing . This acute syndrome develops in response to a systemic insult over a maximum period of time of 7 days . The pathogenesis of ARDS includes a complex series of inter - related pathways , both injurious and reparative , such as recruitment of pro - and anti - inflammatory cells and cytokines , activation of coagulation , and epithelial proliferation and fibrosis [ 5 , 161 ] . It also includes the lung inflammation and lung edema caused by an increased permeability of the alveolar - capillary membrane which in turn results in decreased lung compliance , increased physiological dead space and impaired oxygenation . The mortality of ARDS patients remains high at 30 - 35 % . A number of pharmacologic therapies have been evaluated in Phase II and Phase III clinical trials for ARDS therapies . Disappointedly , none of the pharmacologic treatments has proved to be effective [ 95 ] . The supportive therapies include conservative intravenous fluid administration [ 75 ] , protective low tidal mechanical ventilation in prone position for severely hypoxemic patients and use of muscle relaxants [ 76 - 81 ] . The evidence from both experimental and clinical research has shown that mechanical ventilation can damage lungs and initiate an inflammatory response , possibly contributing to extrapulmonory organ dysfunction . This type injury is referred to as Ventilator - induced lung injury which resembles the syndromes of ARDS . VILI could trigger a complex array of inflammatory mediators , resulting in a local and systemic inflammatory response . The substances produced in the lung can be translocated into the systemic circulation as results of injury to the pulmonary epithelium and to the capillary endothelium . In addition , the functional genomic approaches using gene array methodology to measure lung gene expression have identified differential patterns of gene expression in animal models of VILI , similar to those gene pathways activated during experimental and clinical sepsis . The development of ARDS in human patients is complex and rarely occurs as result of a single instigating factor . Therefore , we aimed at establishing a novel 2 - hit model of Sepsis - VILI to mimic the real disease syndromes of ARDS observed in critically ill patients in ICU . To establish our novel model , we used the concept of priming the immune response to react exuberantly to a second 86 stimulus [ 157 ] . Once the model was established , we were interested in testing the efficacy of MSC in our Sepsis - VILI model . Mesenchymal Stem Cells Past decades of the research in clinical trials and the animal models have shown promising therapeutic effects of using Mesenchymal Stromal Cells ( MSCs ) for treating ARDS . MSCs were first identified in 1968 by Friedenstein and colleagues . The characteristic properties of MSCs were defined by the International Society of Cellular Therapy in 2006 [ 109 ] on properties of adherence , specific markers expressed and differentiation potential in appropriate culture conditions . 4 . 2 . 1 . 1 Sources of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells MSCs can be isolated from variety of tissues including bone marrow ( BM ) [ 128 , 162 , 163 ] , muscle [ 106 , 164 ] , placenta [ 107 ] , umbilical cord [ 122 , 123 , 165 ] and fetal liver [ 166 ] and could give rise to progenitors cells when cultured in vitro conditions . These cells can also be found in the perivascular compartment of the tissues like an umbilical cord . Bone marrow derived MSCs supports hematopoietic cells and resides near the sinusoids . The bone marrow aspirates comprises less than 0 . 1 % of MSCs which is a limiting factor / therapeutic challenge in generating sufficient numbers of cells for therapeutic use . 4 . 2 . 1 . 2 Properties of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells Mesenchymal Stromal Cells possess fibroblast cell - like morphology , are plastic adherent , are characterized by expression of cell surface markers such as CD73 , CD90 , CD105 along with absence of expression of markers including CD45 , CD34 , CD14 , CD11b and possess differential potential into mesenchymal lineages [ 109 ] . MSCs therapeutic potential is based on their low immunogenicity , immunomodulatory properties and their ability to secrete endothelial and epithelial growth factors and , more recently antimicrobial peptides as detailed in Table 4 . 1 . These features have curiosity among researchers worldwide to explore the applications of MSCs not only for lung injuries but also myocardial infarction , skin injuries , brain disorders and other diseases . 87 4 . 2 . 1 . 3 Therapeutic effects of MSCs for ARDS The cell based therapy is an attractive , new therapeutic approach to investigate novel therapies for ARDS . MSCs possess capacity to secrete multiple paracrine factors than can regulate endothelial and epithelial permeability , decrease inflammation , enhance tissue repair and inhibit bacteria growth which is detailed in Table 4 . 1 . The secretion of soluble factors may depend on cell - cell contact or the alveolar milieu itself , such as interleukin - 10 or prostaglandin E 2 . I . Table 4 . 1 : The Paracrine soluble factors secreted by MSC Role of MSCs secreted paracrine factors in Acute Lung Injury Secreted Soluble Factors Functional effect Secretion of Keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) [ 167 ] Alveolar fluid transport and improved endothelial permeability Secretion of TSG - 6 [ 168 ] Reduces neutrophil recruitment and activation Angiopoietin - 1 Lung epithelial and endothelial permeability Interleukin - 1 receptor [ 143 ] Anti - inflammatory Interleukin - 10 [ 96 ] Anti - inflammatory Prostaglandin E 2 [ 96 ] Anti - inflammatory LL - 37 [ 118 ] Antimicrobial Note : Table 4 . 1 is based on Table 1 adapted from reference Jae W . Lee et al , Stem cells 2011 [ 169 ] . Challenges in Translating MSCs for ARDS The translation of MSCs into clinical therapeutic tool for ARDS is quite challenging . The MSCs could be derived from different tissue sources bone - marrow , umbilical cord , adipose tissue , fat or 88 muscle . However , MSCs derived from bone - marrow are most comprehensively researched though the extraction procedure is invasive as well needs to be carried in young individuals usually aging from 18 - 35 - year old donors thus limiting the supply of cells with age of donors . The bone marrow derived MSCs have limiting differentiation and proliferation potential which ceases in cultures with subsequent passages which is limiting factor . The use of BM - derived cells is not always acceptable owing to the high degree of viral exposure and the significant decrease in the cell number and the proliferative / differentiation capacity along with age . Therefore , the identification of alternative sources of MSCs may provide significant clinical benefits with respect to ease of accessibility and reduced morbidity [ 170 - 172 ] . In this study , we were interested in testing the efficacy of MSCs derived from two different tissue sources bone - marrow and umbilical cord to answer some clinical relevant questions . 89 Aims To investigate the efficacy of bone marrow versus umbilical cord Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in Sepsis - VILI induced lung injury The extraction procedures of the MSCs from the bone marrow are invasive as well number of cells obtained is a constraint depending upon the age of the donor . Not only this , bone marrow derived MSCs lose their proliferating and differentiation potential when repeated passaged in vitro giving rise to restricted self - renewing progenitors . To overcome these therapeutic hurdles , there is a need to investigate the efficacy of MSCs from other tissue sources in order to obtain necessary amount of cells with high proliferation and differential potential for therapy of ARDS . To find answers to these questions , we were interested in investigating the therapeutic potential of MSCs from two different tissues sources Bone - marrow ( BM - hMSCs ) and the umbilical cord derive MSCs ( HUCPVCs ) . To evaluate the safety and feasibility of 2 cells doses in combined sepsis and VILI model The therapeutic potential of MSCs is dependent on the phase of disease they are administered and number of cells administered to assist the recovering . Therefore , it would be worthwhile to explore the safety of single or multiple split dose of MSCs for treating ARDS patients . To find answers to safety concerns of the cell treatment dose , we administered 2 split doses of MSCs at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . 90 Methods Experimental Procedures Figure 4 . 1 represents the flow schematic of the experimental design for this study . Briefly , the animals were anesthetized , intravenous access was obtained , oro - tracheally intubated and baseline static lung compliance was measured as described in Sections 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 of the methods and material Chapter 2 . Following this , sepsis surgery was performed with 0 . 1gm fecal - blood pellet was placed in the peritoneal cavity as described in Sections 2 . 4 . 1 . 6 of methods and material Chapter 2 . Later , animals were recovered , placed in the fresh cages and placed back in the vivarium facility for overnight stay as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 of the methods and materials of Chapter 2 . At 24 h post - sepsis surgery , the animals were taken from their cages , weighed , anesthetized , tail vein cannulated and oro - tracheally intubated and static lung compliance 24 post - sepsis surgery / Pre - VILI was measured as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 of methods and materials of Chapter 2 . VILI was then induced using high stretch ventilation to produce a 50 % drop in lung compliance as described in Section 2 . 4 . 2 . 3 . Once the static compliance decrement targets were met , VILI was stopped by switching the ventilator to protective mode ventilation settings as described in Section 2 . 6 . 3 of methods and material of Chapter 2 . The administration of anesthesia was discontinued and the animals were administered the first dose of vehicle or cell therapy was given as described Section 2 . 1 . 5 and 2 . 2 . 6 of methods and material of Chapter 2 . Later , the animals were recovered , placed in the fresh cages and returned in the vivarium facility for overnight stay as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 8 of the methods and material of Chapter 2 . 91 F i g u re 4 . 1 F l o w S c h e m a t i c o f S e p s i s - V I L I r o d e n t m o d e l w i t h C e ll T re a t m e n t F i g u re 4 . 1 : F l o w S c h e m a t i c o f S e p s i s - V I L I r o d e n t m o d e l w i t h C e ll T re a t m e n t A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n ae s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d , und e r w e n t 2 - H it l ung i n j u r y p r o ce du r e s o f s e p s i s s u r g e r y a nd V I L I p r o ce du r e s ( i n s p i r a t o r y p r e ss u r e 35 c m H 2 O , r e s p i r a t o r y r a t e 18 / m i n a nd 0 po s iti v e e nd e xp i r a t o r y p r e ss u r e ( P EE P ) . T h e V I L I w a s d i s c on ti nu e d w h e n 50 % d ec r ea s e i n r e s p i r a t o r y s t a ti c l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s ac h i e v e d a nd a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d . A t 0 h po s t - V I L I ( D o s e 1 ) a nd 24 h po s t - V I L I ( D o s e 2 ) ; t h e a n i m a l s r ece i v e d : ( 1 ) I V V e h i c l e ( 800 μ l d P B S ) ; ( 2 ) I V l o w do s e B M - h M S C s ( 2 . 5 * 10 6 ce ll s ) ; ( 3 ) h i gh do s e B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 6 ce ll s ) ; ( 4 ) I V l o w do s e HU C P V C s ( 2 . 5 * 10 6 ce ll s ) ; ( 3 ) h i gh do s e HU C P V C s ( 5 * 10 6 ce ll s ) . A ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e s ac r i f i ce d a t 48 h a nd t h e e ff ec t o f M S C s on r e p a i r i ng S e p s i s - V I L I l ung i n j u r y w a s m ea s u r e d . 92 Experimental study design – Series 2 Following Sepsis - VILI procedures , ( described in Section 4 . 4 . 1 ) animals were randomized into the respective study groups : ( 1 ) the Vehicle group received 800µl of dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received total cell dose of 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received total cell dose of 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received total cell dose of 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received total cell dose of 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . All animals received the same fluid volume . The timing of administration 2 split doses of cell treatment was at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI and cell therapy was administered as described in Sections 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 1 . 5 and 2 . 2 . 6 of methods and material Chapter 2 . The preparation of administered BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs cells was performed as described in Section 2 . 1 . 4 and 2 . 2 . 4 of material and methods of Chapter 2 . The animals were recovered post - administration of cells and placed in fresh cages . The Sepsis - VILI model design results showed that the animals were sick until 48 hour time point and recovered beyond 96 h time point . Therefore , to test the efficacy of MSCs in this model we choose 48 hours post VILI as the optimal duration for cell treatment post Sepsis - VILI procedures for this experimental series . Throughout the experimental procedures , all the animals in respective groups were carefully monitored and distress scoring was performed as described in Section 2 . 3 . At 48 h time point post - VILI procedures , all the animals were re - anaesthetized , intravenous access was obtained , tracheostomy performed , carotid arterial cannula was inserted and the static lung compliance 24 was measured as described in Sections 2 . 6 . 6 and 2 . 5 . 4 . The blood oxygenation was measured using blood gas machine with FiO 2 0 . 3 and for 15 minutes with FiO 2 1 . 0 described in Section 2 . 6 . 6 of methods and materials Chapter 2 . Once all the parameters were measured , the animals were euthanized by exsanguination ; the heart lung block was dissected from the thorax , BAL was performed and tissues were collected as well analyzed as described in Section 2 . 6 . 7 , 2 . 6 . 8 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 2 and 2 . 7 . 1 . 3 of methods and materials of Chapter 2 . 93 Statistical Analysis The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 5 software . The majority of results were presented as mean ± standard deviation ( SD ) . One - way ANOVA followed by post Student Newman - Kuels Test was performed using the Primer of Biostatics version 6 . 0 by Stanton Glantz software . The significance threshold was set to P < 0 . 05 . 94 Results – Series 2 To investigate efficacy of bone marrow versus umbilical cord derived MSCs in Sepsis - VILI model In this experimental series , 57 animals underwent induction of abdominal sepsis , followed by VILI 24 h later . The animals were randomized in group as follows : ( 1 ) the Vehicle group ( n = 19 ) ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) group ( n = 12 ) ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) group ( n = 13 ) ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs ( 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) group ( n = 5 ) ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs ( 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) group ( n = 8 ) . All the animals successfully underwent the experimental procedures with no mortality seen at 48 h . Notes : 1 . For our study experiments , the animals were received in batches . To consider the variability issue of animals from every batch to batch , we always included more animal to the Vehicle group while testing the efficacy of MSCs in respective group . 2 . In addition , BM - hMSCs for treatment groups were received in several batches and accounting the variability from donor to donor , we increased the sample size while testing the lower dose . This resulted in differences in the group samples size . 3 . The SHAM group animals were not included in this experimental series as we included them in the model characterization series 3C and considering that it would contribute little additional information in this cell therapy series . 95 Effect of cell therapy on Animal weight Sepsis - VILI procedures resulted in a decrease in the weight of 6 - 8 % for the all the groups . BM - hMSCs or HUCPVCs cell therapy did not modulate weight decrease following Sepsis - VILI procedures . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 - 40 - 20 0 20 Groups W e i g h t C h a n g e ( g ) Graph 4 . 1 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on animal weight Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 96 Effect of MSC therapy on Static Compliance BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs cell therapy treatment did not attenuate the decrement in lung compliance compared to Vehicle treated animals for either of the cell dose tested . Moreover , the static compliance was reduced in higher dose HUCPVCs group compared with vehicle treated animals . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 * Groups S t a t i c C o m p li a n ce ( m L / c m H 2 O ) Graph 4 . 2 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on Static compliance Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 97 Effect of MSC therapy on Alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs cell therapy treatment did not improved the alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients compared to the Vehicle treated animals for either of the cell dose tested . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 0 200 400 600 Groups A l v e o l a r - a r t er i a l O xyg e n G r a d i e n t ( mm H g ) Graph 4 . 3 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 98 Effect of MSC therapy on Bronchoalveolar lavage white cell count Sepsis - VILI resulted in a moderate increase in alveolar white cell counts in all the groups . The animal group treated with BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 ) cell / kg dose showed significant decrease in alveolar white cell counts when compared to the Vehicle treated animals . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 0 1 ·· · · 10 0 5 2 ·· · · 10 0 5 3 · · · · 10 0 5 4 ·· · · 10 0 5 * Groups T o t a l n o . o f ce ll s / m l o f B A L Graph 4 . 4 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar white cell counts . Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 99 Effect of MSC therapy on Bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts Sepsis - VILI resulted in a moderate increase in alveolar neutrophil counts in all the groups . The animal group treated with BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 ) cell / kg dose showed significant decrease in alveolar white cell counts when compared to the Vehicle treated animals . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 0 5 ·· · · 10 0 4 1 ·· · · 10 0 5 2 ·· · · 10 0 5 2 ·· · · 10 0 5 * G r o u p s N e u t r o ph il s / m l o f B A L Graph 4 . 5 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar neutrophil counts Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 100 Effect of MSC therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios Sepsis - VILI resulted in an increase in lung edema , as assessed by lung wet / dry weight ratios in all the groups . However , BM - hMSCs or HUCPVCs cell therapy did not modulate wet / dry weight ratios following Sepsis - VILI procedures . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 3 . 5 4 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 0 5 . 5 6 . 0 G r o u p s W e t - D r y R a t i o s Graph 4 . 6 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 101 Effect of MSC therapy on BAL Proteins The concentration of BAL proteins for the cell treated groups ( BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs ) and the vehicle group was tested by performing BSA assay . No statistically significant results were observed for any of the cell treated group in comparison to the Vehicle group . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 5 * 10 / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 10 * 10 / kg ) 6 H U C P V C s ( 10 * 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 Groups B A L P r o t e i n s ( m g / m l ) Graph 4 . 7 : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on BAL proteins Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ( 3 ) the HUCPVCs group received 5 * 10 6 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 4 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 5 ) the HUCPVCs group received 1 * 10 7 cells / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 102 Effect of MSC therapy in repairing the damaged lung tissue The fixed tissue samples of the vehicle group and the cell treated group with BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) were processed to evaluate the effect of BM - MSCs lower dose in repairing the injured lung tissue after sepsis - VILI . No statistically significant results were observed for this cell treated group in comparison to the vehicle group . V e h i c l e / kg ) 6 B M - h M S C s ( 5 * 10 0 20 40 60 80 Groups A i r Sp a ce C o u n t s Graph 4 . 8 : Histogram plot of effect of BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) in repairing damaged lung tissue from Sepsis - VILI Note : All the animals underwent Sepsis - VIL study procedures . 1 ) the VEHICLE group received dPBS ( IV ) at 0 h VILI and 24 h post - VILI ; ( 2 ) the BM - hMSCs group received ( IV ) 5 * 10 6 cells / kg BM - hMSCs at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 103 Table 4 . 1 Series 2 Summary results of effect of MSCs therapy in Sepsis - VILI model Measured Parameters Vehicle BM - MSCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) HUCPVCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) BM - MSCs ( 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) HUCPVCs ( 1 * 10 7 cells / kg ) Number of animals 20 12 8 5 13 Animal Weigh ( g ) 406 . 60 ± 32 389 . 8 ± 53 . 2 370 . 92 ± 46 . 85 386 . 4 ± 22 . 6 403 . 88 ± 43 . 53 Mortality ( % ) 0 0 0 0 0 Final arterial Po 2 ( mmHg , FiO 2 = 1 ) 446 . 30 ± 107 . 9 497 . 34 ± 57 . 37 470 . 56 ±74 . 92 485 . 20 ± 32 . 3 360 . 1 ± 162 . 4 Final A - a gradients ( mmHg ) 219 . 40 ± 110 . 5 168 . 95 ± 62 . 04 195 . 49 ± 74 . 98 178 . 5 ± 23 . 8 301 . 9 ± 161 . 2 Arterial pH 7 . 4 ± 0 . 0 7 . 4 ± 0 . 0 7 . 4 ± 0 . 0 7 . 4 ± 0 . 1 7 . 4 ± 0 . 05 Arterial P Aco2 ( mmHg ) 37 . 9 ± 3 . 2 37 . 37 ± 5 . 63 37 . 55 ± 4 . 92 39 . 4 ± 6 . 8 40 . 8 ± 7 . 0 HCO 3 22 . 9 ± 1 . 2 24 . 27 ± 1 . 81 23 . 02 ± 1 . 08 23 . 3 ± 1 . 5 23 . 8 ± 1 . 7 Tryphan Counts ( BAL ) cells / ml 137361 ± 64685 138021 ± 182788 161938 ± 61818 146400 ± 52456 176854 ± 181480 Neutrophils Counts ( cells / ml ) 65953 ± 39200 61923 ± 80457 77636 ± 31220 72449 ± 33984 93725 ± 119462 BAL Proteins ( mg / ml ) 837 ± 439 597 ± 233 1079 ± 728 650 ± 84 1621 ± 1330 104 Conclusion and Discussion We have established a severe , clinically relevant model of 2 - hit lung injury using Sepsis - VILI procedures , as discussed in our Chapter 3 . Sepsis procedure was done using 0 . 1g of fecal pellet while VILI was done with targeted 50 % decrease in the static lung compliance from the pre - sepsis or baseline value , as discussed in Chapter 3 and described in Figure 4 . 1 . All the animals after sepsis - VILI procedures were recovered and randomly allocated into respective study groups to receive either lower or higher dose of BM - hMSCs or HUCPVCs ( IV ) at 0 h and 24 h post - VILI . The vehicle group animals were administered dPBS ( IV ) . All the study animals were followed for 48 h time point and two different cell doses 5 * 10 6 cells / kg or 1 * 10 7 cells / kg for BM - hMSCs or HUCPVCs were tested . The animals were sacrificed at 48 h and the effect of MSC therapy on the lung injury repair was assessed . The parameters on which assessment was made included weight change , static lung compliance , infiltration of cell in the BAL samples , water content in the lungs by wet / dry weight ratios , the protein content in BAL samples , the capacity to repair the injured lung tissue by histological analysis , as represented in Section 4 . 7 of this Chapter . There was no safety issues with cell administration for both doses of each cell type tested . No statistically significant differences were observed for weight change , wet / dry weight ratios , BAL proteins and histological analysis of BM - hMSCs ( 5 * 10 6 cells / kg ) in comparison to the Vehicle group . The static lung compliance was even further decreased in the HUCPVCs cell treated group of 1 * 10 7 cells / kg in comparison to the vehicle group , as shown in the Graph 4 . 2 . The most important result from this study was that total white blood and neutrophil cell number in the BAL fluid was significantly lower in the group treated with 5 * 10 6 cells / kg of BM - hMSCs in comparison to the vehicle group ( Graph 4 . 4 and Graph 4 . 5 ) . In conclusion , it was very sophisticated and challenging study in which we investigated the potential of MSCs from two different tissue sources in treating lung injuries with underlying cause of sepsis and VILI . In this study , the treatment with BM - MSCs showed mild improvements of lung injury whereas HUCPVCs did not showed any beneficial effects from control group in any 105 of measured parameters . Thought , HUCPVCs are considered bioequivalent to BM - hMSCs their therapeutic capacity in repairing the lung injuries has not been thoroughly explored . In this study we examined the efficacy of 2 different doses of HUCPVCs . There was no benefit seen with HUCPVCs in the physiological parameters measured . In fact , lung compliance was worse with the higher HUCPVC dose which may indicate that this dose was too high for these animals . However , additional HUCPVCs dose escalation studies would be needed to confirm this . 106 Chapter 5 Investigate the therapeutic potential of bone marrow versus umbilical cord derived MSCs in Endotoxin model of ARDS Abstract i . Introduction Mesenchymal stromal / stem cells ( MSCs ) constitute a promising therapeutic strategy for patients suffering from ARDS . MSCs have been shown to differentiate into a variety of mesenchymal cell types , including fibroblasts , myofibroblasts , osteoblasts , chondroblasts , adipocytes , and myoblasts as well as epithelial cells . MSCs can be derived from different tissues sources as bone marrow , umbilical cord , adipose tissue or others . MSCs modulate the immune response , reduce the lung injury , and enhance lung regeneration and repair . The potential therapeutic role of MSCs derived from umbilical cord in repairing acute lung injuries have not yet been thoroughly investigated which could be another potential source of MSCs for clinical therapies . In this study , we aimed at testing the efficacy of MSCs derived from two different sources bone - marrow ( BM - hMSCs ) and umbilical cord ( HUCPVCs ) in the simple single - hit , standardized , well recognized Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) model of ARDS . We hypothesized that BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCSs would prove equally effective in reducing the severity of LPS induced lung injury . ii . Methods After IRB / REB approval , adult male Spargue - Dawley rats were anesthetized and the endotoxin lung injury was induced by administering LPS . To test our hypothesis , we established a severe model of ARDS by administration of 4mg / kg of LPS intra - tracheally ( IT ) . Following LPS injury , animals were randomized to receive treatment with intravenous ( 1 ) vehicle ; ( 2 ) 1 * 10 7 BM - hMSC cells / kg ; or ( 3 ) 1 * 10 7 HUCPVC cells / kg 30 - min post - lung injury . All the animals were recovered post - procedures and observed for any signs of respiratory distress . After 24 h of administration of LPS , the animals were re - anaesthetized and the extent of recovery from the endotoxin induced lung injury was assessed for the vehicle and cell treated groups . 107 iii . Results LPS produced a severe acute lung injury as evidenced by a decrement in lung compliance , reduced oxygenation , and inflammatory cell infiltration into the lung . The effects of both BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs were relatively modest . Neither cell type has shown any effect on the compliance decrement produced by LPS administration . HUCPVCs , but not BM - MSCs , attenuated the increase in alveolar - arterial gradient , while both cell type’s decreased alveolar cellular and neutrophil infiltration . HUCPVCs slightly attenuated the increase in wet / dry weight ratios produced by LPS injury , but the difference was not statistically significant . iv . Conclusions The effect of both BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs were relatively modest . MSCs derived from umbilical cord ( HUCPVCs ) demonstrated some evidence of greater efficacy over BM - hMSCs in reducing LPS induced lung injury . 108 Introduction Sepsis is the most common cause of ARDS [ 5 , 6 ] and several animal models have been established to study sepsis induced acute lung injury [ 173 ] . The three main strategies used to induce sepsis include 1 ) the creation of an endogenous infection , e . g . , cecal ligation and puncture ( CLP ) ; 2 ) the administration of live bacteria ; 3 ) the administration of bacterial products , such as Endotoxin ( Lipopolysaccharide , LPS ) . In the endotoxin model , the LPS is administered directly into the lung or administered systemically via the venous system to induce an acute lung injury ( ALI ) in the animals . It is a well - established , standardized pre - clinical ARDS model . LPS is glycolipid which is present in the gram - negative bacteria that is composed of a polar lipid head group ( lipid A ) and chain of repeating disaccharides [ 174 ] . LPS an important mediator of sepsis in response to gram - negative bacteria and systemic administration of LPS has been used widely to model the consequences of bacterial sepsis . LPS administration activates an innate response via Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) pathways . In serum , LPS binds to a specific LPS binding protein ( LBP ) forming LPS : LBP [ 175 ] complex that activates the CD14 / TLR4 [ 176 - 178 ] receptor structure on monocytes , macrophages , and other cells triggering the production inflammatory mediators . LPS administration - into the lung directly or systemically - results in considerable lung injury . In the lungs administration of LPS is followed by activation of the polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( PMN ) and the entrapment of PMN in the pulmonary capillaries [ 179 ] . The intratracheal instillation of LPS at doses from as low as 1 - 4 ng / kg is followed by an early phase characterized by increase in BAL fluid PMN , albumin and proinflammatory cytokines ( TNF - α , IL - 1β , IL - 6 , G - CSF , IL - 8 , MIP - 1α and MIP - 1β ) [ 180 ] . Later phase , seen 24 – 48 h after instillation of LPS is characterized by normalization of the BAL fluid cytokine concentrations and increases in the BAL fluid PMN , monocyte , macrophage and lymphocyte counts [ 180 ] . Concerns with LPS induced lung injury in animals models to one observed in human ARDS patients Intra - pulmonary administration of the LPS intra - pulmonary causes a severe endothelial and epithelial injury that mimics the injury that occurs in ARDS [ 26 ] . The bacteria produces exotoxins 109 which are potent cell toxins [ 181 ] and use of effector systems such as type III results in the direct cellular lysis [ 182 ] . For these reasons , the animal models of the LPS induced lung injury provide an incomplete picture of the effects of the live bacteria in the lungs . Nevertheless , it is a useful and reproducible model pre - clinical model of ARDS . With this rationale , we selected this model to compare the efficacy of BM - hMSCs to HUCPVCs . Technical Issues in establishing LPS induced lung injury model 5 . 2 . 2 . 1 Variability in response to LPS in different animal species The response to administered LPS dose is highly variable in different species of the animals . Treating species like sheep , calves , pigs and cats with small amounts of LPS results in pulmonary inflammation but is not seen in rodents or dogs [ 183 ] . The animal susceptibility to LPS varies depending on whether the specific animal species have pulmonary intravascular macrophages ( PIM ) or not [ 184 ] . PIM is defined as a resident population of mature macrophages that adhere to endothelial cells in the pulmonary capillaries . The presence of PIM enhances susceptibility to LPS with severe lung injury seen with the lower doses of LPS ranging in μg / kg whereas species without PIM requires higher dose of LPS in the range of mg / kg . LPS administration activates an innate response via Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) pathways . The work from Hajjar and colleagues showed that Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) from humans and mice recognize different lipopolysaccharide structures [ 185 ] . Therefore , species innate immune responses need to be taken into account while designing animal models of ALI . 5 . 2 . 2 . 2 Susceptibility issue of LPS from different species The response to the administered LPS also depends upon the type of LPS used and source from where it was extracted . LPS derived from smooth colonies possess O - chain consisting of variable numbers of repeating disaccharides which makes it less pyrogenic . In contrast , LPS produced by the bacteria growing on the rough colonies lacking O - chain is more pyrogenic [ 186 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 . 3 Advantages and Disadvantages of using LPS The advantages of using LPS to produce ALI in animal models include ease of the administration , and the fact that is results in a relatively reproducible injury within few hours of administration 110 which makes the study model quite stable to investigate efficacy of cell treatment . The disadvantage of using LPS in the experimental studies includes its batch to batch variability in commercially manufactured products which requires testing and the standardization of each batch , which is challenging as well time consuming process . 111 Potential of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells ( MSCs ) to reduce endotoxin induced lung injury The cell based therapy with MSCs is an attractive therapeutic approach for ARDS . Several studies have been performed to study the therapeutic effects of MSCs following administration of the Endotoxin [ 187 , 188 ] . The potential of MSCs to exert paracrine effects was reported more than 16 years ago when Haynesworth et al . demonstrated MSCs synthesis and secretion of a broad spectrum of growth factors and cytokines [ 189 ] . These factors - termed the MSC ‘secretome’ , have been demonstrated to exert beneficial effects in the lungs . Many of these factors exert in the lung , including growth factors [ 190 , 191 ] , factors regulating endothelial and epithelial permeability [ 191 ] , anti - inflammatory cytokines [ 96 ] and antimicrobial peptides [ 102 ] . The list of soluble factors which are candidate mediators for MSC immune modulation includes transforming growth factor - β ( TGF - β ) [ 192 ] , prostaglandin E 2 ( PGE 2 ) [ 96 ] , idoleamine 2 , 3 - dioxygenase [ 193 ] , IL - 6 , IL - 10 [ 194 ] , IL - 1ra and tumor necrosis factor - α - induced protein 6 ( TSG - 6 ) [ 168 ] among others . The therapeutic action mechanism of MSCs requires cell - to - cell contact [ 195 , 196 ] . While the efficacy of BM - MSCs in reducing LPS induced lung injury is clear , the therapeutic potential of MSCs derived from umbilical cord in repairing an injured lung tissue has not been clearly established . In this study we aimed to investigate the efficacy of MSCs derived from two different tissue sources bone marrow ( BM - hMSCs ) and umbilical cord ( HUCPVCs ) in repairing endotoxin induced lung injury in our single - hit model LPS model of ARDS . We hypothesize that administration of both BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs would prove equally effective in decreasing the severity of LPS induced lung injury in the rodent . 112 Methods Experimental Procedures Figure 5 . 1 represent the flow schematic of the experimental for this study . Briefly , all the animals anaesthetized , orotracheally intubated and the baseline static lung compliance was measured as described in Sections 2 . 4 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 4 . 1 . 3 and 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 of the methods and material of Chapter . Following baseline assessment procedures , 4mg / kg of LPS , or an equal volume of dPBS ( in the SHAM animals ) was administered intratracheally ( IT ) in 2 split doses each constituted in 150µl of dPBS using 1ml syringe as described in Section 2 . 5 . 5 of methods and materials of Chapter . The animals were turned on their right side to administer other half dose of LPS quickly be disconnecting them from ventilator for short duration and then waited for 1 min to ensure instillation of LPS thoroughly , then turned back to their original horizontal position followed by recruitment of 30 seconds . Similarly , the animals were turned on their left side to administer the other half dose of LPS . The static lung compliance post - LPS and 30 min post - LPS administration was measured as described in Section 2 . 5 . 4 of methods and material of Chapter . Throughout the procedures , the animals were administered 0 . 5mg / kg of Cisatracurium besilate and 2 . 5mg / kg of Alfaxalone intravenously ( IV ) as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 4 of methods and materials of Chapter . All the animals were ventilated 30 min post - LPS administration to ensure uniform distribution of LPS in the lungs as well obtain uniform pattern of lung injury . After the study procedures , all the animals were recovered , placed in fresh cages and were placed back in the vivarium facility for overnight stay of 24 hours as described in Section 2 . 5 . 6 of methods and materials of Chapter . 113 F i g u re 5 . 1 : F l o w s c h e m a t i c d e s i g n o f S i n g l e - h i t m o d e l o f E nd o t ox i n . A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n ae s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d a nd b a s e li n e s t a ti c l ung c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d . T h e a n i m a l s w e r e a d m i n i s t e r e d 4 m g / kg L PS ( I T ) . L a t e r , t h e s t a ti c c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d a t 9 m i n a nd 30 m i n a f t e r i n s till a ti on o f L PS . A t t h e e n d o f p r o ce du r e s , a ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d a nd a d m i n i s t e r e d 1 * 10 7 ce ll s / k g o f B M - M S C s o r HU C P V C s o r d P B S ( I V ) . A ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e s a c r i f i ce d a t 24 h a nd l ung i n j u r y p a r a m e t e r s w e r e a ss e ss e d F i g u re 5 . 1 : F l o w S c h e m a t i c D e s i g n o f S i n g l e - h i t r o d e n t m o d e l o f E nd o t ox i n . 114 F i g u re 5 . 2 F l o w S c h e m a t i c D e s i g n t o e va l u a t e t h e s a f e t y o f M S C s a nd V e n t il a t i o n p r o ce du re s i n vo l v e d . F i g u re 5 . 2 : F l o w s c h e m a t i c t o e va l u a t e t h e s a f e t y o f M S C s a nd V e n t il a t i o n p r o ce du re s i n vo l v e d . A du lt m a l e S p r a gu e D a w l e y r a t s w e r e a n ae s t h e ti ze d , o r o t r ac h ea ll y i n t ub a t e d a nd b a s e li n e s t a ti c l ung c o m p l i a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d . T h e a n i m a l s i n t h e r e s p ec ti v e s t udy g r ou p r ece i v e d d P B S ( I T ) o r a i r ( I T ) . L a t e r , t h e s t a ti c c o m p li a n ce w a s m ea s u r e d a t 9 m i n a nd 30 m i n a f t e r i n s till a ti on s . A t t h e e nd o f p r o ce du r e s , t h e a n i m a l s w e r e r ec ov e r e d a nd a d m i n i s t e r e d ce ll do s e o f 1 * 10 7 ce ll s / kg o f B M - M S C s o r HU C P V C s o r d P B S ( I V ) . A ll t h e a n i m a l s w e r e s ac r i f i ce d a t 24 h a nd t h e l ung i n j u r y p a r a m e t e r s w e r e a ss e ss e d . 115 Experimental study design 5 . 4 . 2 . 1 Series 3A : Efficacy of bone marrow versus umbilical cord MSCs in endotoxin induced lung injury . 30 minutes following the induction of LPS injury ( described in Section 5 . 4 . 1 ) , animals were randomized into the respective study groups 1 ) the SHAM group received 800µl of dPBS ( IV ) ; 2 ) the VEHICLE group received 800µl dPBS ( IV ) ; 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received 10 * 10 6 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received 10 * 10 6 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . A total 37 animals were used in this experimental series and randomized distribution of animals in respective groups was as follow . SHAM ( n = 5 ) ; VEHICLE ( n = 10 ) ; BM - hMSCs ( n = 12 ) and HUCPVCs group ( n = 10 ) . All the animals successfully went through the procedures with no mortality seen at 24 h and the results from experimental series included in Section 5 . 6 of this Chapter . 5 . 4 . 2 . 2 Series 3B : To investigate the safety of administered MSCs and ventilation procedures involved in study design The aim of this experimental pilot series was to determine whether bone marrow or umbilical cord MSCs resulted in lung injury in protectively ventilated animals . The experimental interventions in the study groups following flow schematic Figure 5 . 2 involved were as follow Animals were randomly allocated to the following groups ( 1 ) Ventilation only ( n = 11 ) ; ( 2 ) SHAM ( n = 5 ) ; ( 3 ) BM - hMSCs ( n = 6 ) ; ( 4 ) HUCPVCs ( n = 5 ) . All the animals successfully went through the procedures with no mortality seen at 24 h and the results from this pilot experimental series are included in Section 5 . 6 . 1 of this Chapter . 5 . 4 . 2 . 3 Assessment of parameters of lung injury and repair mechanism at 24 h time point Throughout the experimental procedures , all the animals in respective groups were carefully monitored and distress scoring was performed as described in Section 2 . 3 . At 24 h time point post - 116 administration of LPS , all the animals were re - anaesthetized , intravenous access was obtained , tracheostomy performed , carotid arterial cannula was inserted and the static lung compliance 24 post - LPS was measured as described in Sections 2 . 6 . 6 and 2 . 5 . 4 . The blood oxygenation was measured using blood gas machine with FiO2 0 . 3 and for 15 minutes with FiO2 1 . 0 described in Section 2 . 6 . 6 of methods and materials Chapter 2 . Once all the parameters were measured , the animals were euthanized by exsanguination ; the heart lung block was dissected from the thorax , BAL was performed and tissues were collected as well analyzed as described in Section 2 . 6 . 7 , 2 . 6 . 8 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 1 , 2 . 7 . 1 . 2 and 2 . 7 . 1 . 3 of methods and materials Chapter 2 . 117 Statistical Analysis The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 5 software . The majority of results were presented as mean ± standard deviation ( SD ) . One - way ANOVA followed by post Student Newman - Kuels Test was performed using the Primer of Biostatics version 6 . 0 by Stanton Glantz software . The significance threshold was set to P < 0 . 05 . 118 Results - Series 3A Efficacy of bone marrow versus umbilical cord MSCs in endotoxin induced lung injury A total of 37 animals were used in this experimental series , with group allocation as follows : SHAM ( n = 5 ) ; VEHICLE ( n = 10 ) ; BM - hMSCs ( n = 12 ) and HUCPVCs group ( n = 10 ) . All the animals successfully went through the study procedures with no mortality seen at 24 h . 119 Effects of cell therapy on animal weight Endotoxin instillation resulted in a decrease in weight of 8 - 10 % compared to the SHAM group . BM - hMSCs or HUCPVCs cell therapy did not modulate the weight decrease following Endotoxin instillation . S H A M V E H I C L E B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 m m m G r o ups W e i g h t C h a n g e ( g ) Graph 5 . 1A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on animal weight . Note : 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . SHAM . 120 Effect of MSC therapy on static compliance Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant decrease in static lung compliance compared to SHAM animals . BM - MSC or HUCPVC Cell therapy did not attenuate the decrement in lung compliance compared to VEHICLE treated animals . S H A M V E H I C L E B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 m G r o ups S t a t i c C o m p l i a n c e ( m l / c m H 2 O ) Graph 5 . 2A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on Static compliance Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . SHAM . 121 Effect of MSC therapy on Alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant increase alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient compared to SHAM animals . HUCPVC cell therapy – but not BM - MSCs - attenuated the decrement in alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient compared to VEHICLE treated animals . S H A M V E H I C L E B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 200 400 600 800 * m G roups A l v e o l a r - a r t e r i a l O x y g e n G r a d i e n t ( m m H g ) Graph 5 . 3A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . SHAM ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 122 Effect of MSC therapy on Bronchoalveolar lavage white cell count Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant increase in infiltration of total number of cells in all the study group animals when to the SHAM group . Both the cell treatment resulted in significant reduction in cell infiltration when compared to the vehicle group . S H A M V E H I C LE B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 1 ·· · · 10 0 6 2 ·· · · 10 0 6 3 ·· · · 10 0 6 4 ·· · · 10 0 6 * * m m m G roups T o t a l n o . o f ce ll s / m l o f B A L Graph 5 . 4A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar white cell counts . Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . SHAM ; * P < 0 . 05 vs VEHICLE . 123 Effect of MSC therapy on Bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant increase in alveolar neutrophil counts compared to SHAM animals . HUCPVC and BM - MSCs cell therapy attenuated the increase in alveolar neutrophil counts compared to VEHICLE treated animals . S H A M V E H I C LE B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 1 ·· · · 10 0 6 2 ·· · · 10 0 6 3 ·· · · 10 0 6 4 ·· · · 10 0 6 * * m m m G r o ups N e u t r o ph il s / m l o f B A L Graph 5 . 5A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar neutrophil counts . Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group ; * P < 0 . 05 vs the VEHICLE group . 124 Effect of MSC therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant increase in lung edema , as assessed by lung wet / dry weight ratios compared to the SHAM animals . BM - hMSCs - cell treated group had lung wet / dry weight ratios as high as the vehicle treated group . Lung wet / dry weight ratios in HUCPVCs treated group were not statistically different from the SHAM group . S H A M V E H I C L E B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 4 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 0 5 . 5 6 . 0 m m m G r o ups W e t - D r y R a t i o s Graph 5 . 6A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on lung wet / dry weight ratios . Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group . 125 Effect of MSC therapy on BAL Proteins Endotoxin instillation resulted in a significant increase in BAL proteins in all the study groups when compared to SHAM group . Neither BM - hMSCs nor HUCPVCs cell therapy had any effect in reducing the BAL proteins when compared to the Vehicle group . S H A M V E H I C LE B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 1 2 3 m m m G roups B A L P r o t e i n s ( m g / m l ) Graph 5 . 7A : Scatter plot of effect of MSC therapy on alveolar protein concentrations . Notes : Abbreviations 1 ) SHAM group received IT dPBS ( IT ) and IV dPBS ; 2 ) VEHICLE group IT LPS and IV dPBS ; 3 ) BM - hMSCs group IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; 4 ) HUCPVCs groups IT LPS and IV 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the SHAM group . 126 Table 5 . 1 Series 3A : Summarized results of effect of MSCs in Endotoxin Model Parameters Measured SHAM Vehicle BM - MSCs ( 10 * 10 6 cells / kg ) HUCPVCs ( 10 * 10 6 cells / kg ) Number of animals ( n ) 5 10 12 10 Animal Weigh ( g ) 375 . 600 ± 8 . 29 378 . 70 ± 21 . 55 367 . 08 ± 17 . 60 354 ± 6 . 90 Mortality ( % ) 0 0 0 0 Final arterial Po 2 ( mmHg , FiO 2 = 1 ) 509 . 3 ± 21 . 91 352 . 44 ± 107 . 33 419 . 62 ± 102 . 09 484 . 03 ± 54 . 75 Final A - a gradiant ( mmHg ) 165 . 58 ± 27 . 05 309 . 29 ± 106 . 23 244 . 09 ± 101 . 63 183 . 49 ± 57 . 88 Arterial pH 7 . 42 ± 0 . 03 7 . 44 ± 0 . 05 7 . 46 ± 0 . 03 7 . 48 ± 0 . 02 Arterial P Aco2 ( mmHg ) 30 . 50 ± 4 . 69 41 . 02 ± 6 . 99 39 . 70 ± 3 . 15 37 . 69 ± 4 . 80 HCO 3 22 . 25 ± 1 . 91 26 . 74 ± 2 . 12 27 . 26 ± 1 . 41 27 . 46 ± 1 . 65 Tryphan Counts in BAL cells / ml 790000 ± 43932 2411111 ± 930359 1744338 ± 398731 1227250 ± 525813 Neutrophils Counts in BAL cells / ml 25621 ± 18506 1938941 ± 805335 1363543 ± 334746 970518 ± 430252 BAL Proteins ( mg / ml ) 18 ±19 1582 ± 713 1328 ± 448 1330 ± 392 127 Results Series 3B : Determination of the safety of administered bone marrow and umbilical cord MSCs A total of 25 animals were used to demonstrate the safety of administered MSCs and effect of protective ventilation involved in study procedures . The randomized allocation of animals as follows ( 1 ) the SHAM group ( n = 11 ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group ( n = 5 ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group ( n = 6 ) ; 4 ) the HUCPVCs group ( n = 5 ) . All the animals successfully went through the procedures with no mortality seen at 24 h . 128 Effect of cell therapy on animal weight The pilot study animal weights were monitored at 0 h and 24 h . All the animals in their respective groups showed a trend of either gaining or loosing few grams their original body weight while undergoing the surgical procedures . However , the results were not statistically significant for any of the cell treated group in comparison to the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s - 10 0 10 20 30 G r o ups W e i g h t C h a n g e ( g ) Graph 5 . 1B : Scatter plot of effect of administered MSCs on animal weight Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 129 Effect of administered MSC on Static Compliance Static lung compliance at 0 h and 24 h was measured for all the pilot animals as described in Section 2 . 4 . 1 . 5 . No statistical significant differenced were observed in any of the groups when compared with the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Groups S t a t i c C o m p li a n ce ( m l / c m H 2 O ) Graph 5 . 2B : Scatter plot of effect of administered MSC on Static Compliance Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 130 Effect of administered MSCs on Alveolar - arterial Oxygen Gradients The alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients were measured on the blood sample at 24 h as described in Section 2 . 6 . 7 of Chapter 2 . No statistically significant differences were observed in HUCPVCs groups when the SHAM group . BM - hMSCs group had even better alveolar - arterial oxygen gradients than the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 5 0 1 0 0 1 5 0 2 0 0 2 5 0 m G r o u p s A l v e o l a r - a r t er i a l O xyg e n G r a d i e n t s ( mm H g ) Graph 5 . 3B : Scatter plot of effect of administered MSC on alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test ; µ P < 0 . 05 vs . the PBS group . 131 Effect of administered of MSCs on Broncholveolar lavage white cell count The tryphan counts were performed on the BAL fluid samples to calculate the total number of cells / ml . No statistically significant differences were observed in any of the groups when compared with the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 2 ·· · · 10 0 5 4 ·· · · 10 0 5 6 ·· · · 10 0 5 G ro ups T o t a l n o . o f ce ll s / m l o f B A L Graph 5 . 4B : Scatter plot of administered of MSC on alveolar white cell counts Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 132 Effect of MSC therapy on Bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts The neutrophil infiltration in BAL fluid samples was examined as described in Section 2 . 7 . 1 . 2 . at 24 h . No statistically significant differences were observed in any of the groups when compared with SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 1 ·· · · 10 0 5 2 ·· · · 10 0 5 3 ·· · · 10 0 5 4 ·· · · 10 0 5 5 ·· · · 10 0 5 G ro ups N e u t r o ph il s / m l o f B A L Graph 5 . 5B : Scatter plot of effect administered MSC on alveolar neutrophil counts . Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 133 Effect of adminsitered MSC on lung wet / dry weight ratios The wet / dry weight ratios of the lung tissue samples were monitored as described in Section 2 . 6 . 8 at 24 h . No statistically significant differences were observed in any of the groups when compared with the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 4 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 0 5 . 5 G r o ups W e t - D r y R a t i o s Graph 5 . 5B : Scatter plot of effect of administered MSC on lung wet / dry weight ratios . Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 134 Effect of MSC therapy on BAL Proteins The concentration of protein in BAL fluid sample was evaluated by performing BSA as described in Section 2 . 7 . 1 . 3 at 24 h . No statistically significant differences were observed in any of the groups when compared with the SHAM group . S H A M P B S B M - h M S C s H U C P V C s 0 20 40 60 Groups B A L P r o t e i n s ( u g / m l ) Graph 5 . 6B : Scatter plot of effect of administered MSC on BAL proteins . Note : 1 ) the SHAM group received air ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 2 ) the PBS group received dPBS ( IT ) and dPBS ( IV ) ; ( 3 ) the BM - hMSCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg BM - hMSCs ( IV ) ; ( 4 ) the HUCPVCs group received dPBS ( IT ) and 1 * 10 7 / kg HUCPVCs ( IV ) . Statistical analysis performed using 1way ANOVA followed by Student Newman - Keuls Test . 135 Table 5 . 2 Series 3B Summary of results on safety of administered MSCs SHAM PBS BM - MSCs HUCPVCs Number of animals 5 9 6 5 Animal Weigh ( g ) 375 . 60 ± 8 . 30 368 . 67 ± 19 . 60 373 . 00 ± 9 . 12 357 . 00 ± 51 . 63 Mortality ( % ) 0 0 0 0 Final arterial Po 2 ( mmHg , FiO 2 = 1 ) 509 . 30 ± 21 . 91 528 . 22 ± 25 . 20 577 . 07 ± 27 . 32 547 . 10 ± 27 . 32 Final A - a gradient ( mmHg ) 165 . 58 ± 27 . 05 140 . 07 ± 29 . 15 93 . 04 ± 24 . 52 129 . 35 ± 28 . 36 Arterial pH 7 . 42 ± 0 . 03 7 . 41 ± 0 . 04 7 . 41 ± 0 . 02 7 . 49 ± 0 . 08 Arterial P Aco2 ( mmHg ) 30 . 50 ± 4 . 69 35 . 77 ± 5 . 07 34 . 32 ± 4 . 29 29 . 24 ± 6 . 77 HCO3 22 . 25 ± 1 . 91 23 . 18 ± 1 . 00 23 . 47 ± 0 . 75 23 . 74 ± 1 . 59 Tryphan Counts ( BAL ) cells / ml 79000 ± 43932 211111 ± 173363 84167 ± 34557 277000 ± 192373 Neutrophils Counts ( BAL ) cells / ml 25621 ± 18506 129890 ±125723 46852 ± 24586 141517 ± 86358 BAL Proteins ( µg / ml ) 16 ± 20 18 ± 19 13 ± 21 14±25 136 Discussion and Conclusion from LPS ( single - hit model ) study The aim of our study was to investigate the efficacy of MSCs derived from two different tissue sources , bone marrow and umbilical cord , in endotoxin induced lung injury . We used LPS model of lung injury since it is widely accepted and reproducible model of rodent ARDS . Moreover , it is also widely used model of lung injury for testing the efficacy of cell therapies . We successfully standardized the dose of LPS which resulted in uniform and reproducible severe acute lung injury . We performed pilot studies and tested intra - tracheal dose of 4mg / kg and 5mg / kg of LPS . No mortality was observed in animals for either of tested dose at 24 h time point . However , it was concerning that the animals who received 5mg / kg dose of LPS were severely sick , with spotted hemorrhage and high lung infiltration . Based on these observations , the LPS dose of 4mg / kg was chosen and used in our LPS experimental series . We also conducted pilot experimental series to demonstrate the safety of administered MSCs and protective ventilation , as detailed in the flow schematic ( Figure 5 . 2 ) . We did not observe significant difference in any of the measured parameters when compared to SHAM group ( Graphs 5 . 1B to 5 . 6B ) . Moreover , the arterial alveolar gradient was even lower in BM - hMSCs group compared to the SHAM group ( Graph 5 . 3B ) . Therefore , we concluded that protective ventilation procedures and the I . V . cell administration ( 1 * 10 7 cell / kg ) is safe . Then , we tested the efficacy of MSCs in established LPS induced lung injury model The efficacy of administered BM - hMSCs and HUCPVCs were assessed by measuring various parameters such as weight change , static lung compliance , infiltration of cell in the BAL samples , water content in the lungs by wet / dry weight ratios and the protein content in BAL samples in comparison to the SHAM group . Both the cell treatment groups showed mild improvements in repairing the lung injury which was evident from the decrease in total cell counts and neutrophil infiltration in the BAL fluids ( Graph 5 . 4A and Graph 5 . 5A ) , while HUCPVCs were also able to improve arterial blood oxygenation ( Graph 5 . 3A ) 137 To summarize , in this study we have shown that MSCs enhance the recovery of an endotoxin induced lung injury , with HUCPVCs being even more effective . Our findings support the notion that MSCs may be used as an important therapeutic tool in ARDS . Future experiments will reveal the mechanisms involved in the therapeutic effects of MSCs and exploit possibilities to further enhance their therapeutic potential in ARDS . 138 Chapter 6 Discussion and Conclusions 6 Introduction Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome ( ARDS ) is a syndrome of acute respiratory failure that present with progressive arterial hypoxemia , severe dyspnea , and a marked increase in the work of breathing . The disease is associated with loss of integrity of the alveolar - capillary barrier , together with infiltration of inflammatory cells into the airspaces and the development of pulmonary edema [ 197 ] . Decades of research have characterized the pathophysiology of the disease and several attempts have been pursued in search of a therapy . Although progress has been made in supportive care , no pharmacological intervention has proven effective , suggesting that novel approaches must be considered for ARDS treatment . Supportive treatments that have shown efficacy in the treatment of ARDS include prone positioning [ 198 ] , neuromuscular blockade , and extracorpeal membrane oxygenation ( ECMO ) [ 199 ] . Conservative fluid management was found to be effective in improving lung function and decreasing the duration of mechanical ventilation in patients with ARDS [ 75 ] , although this is dependent on hemodynamic stability [ 200 ] . Other studies have investigated the use of high or low PEEP in patients with ARDS [ 201 ] , with no demonstrable beneficial effects . By far the most effective intervention for the treatment of ARDS has been the use of lower tidal volumes which demonstrated a significant decrease in mortality rates when compared to conventional ventilation settings [ 47 ] . Despite being a focus of ongoing intensive research efforts over four decades , there are no pharmacologic treatments for ARDS , and management remains focused on strategies that minimize ventilator - induced lung injury . Unsuccessful large scale clinical trials of therapeutic strategies such as inhaled surfactant and NO [ 90 ] , ketoconazole , ibuprofen and corticosteroids [ 95 ] , beta - agonists [ 92 ] and statins [ 202 ] have proven to be ineffective in the treatment of ARDS . Therefore , new strategies investigating lung regeneration with stem cells have generated considerable interest . In particular , mesenchymal stem / stromal cells have provided strong pre - clinical evidence of efficacy in the treatment of ARDS [ 92 ] . A phase I , open label , dose escalation , multi - center clinical trial of allogeneic BM - MSCs in patients with moderate to severe ARDS is 139 underway in the United States ( NCT01775774 ) . However , there are considerable hurdles to be overcome prior to the translation of MSCs as a therapeutic option for patients with ARDS . The great variety of options ( cell source , timing , dose , route of administration ) and still surprisingly poor mechanistic insights pose major challenges to this undertaking . The studies outlined in this thesis aim to test the efficacy of human MSCs from two different sources in clinically relevant animal models of ARDS . 140 Modeling ARDS in animals Experimental discoveries are thought to begin at “the bench” with basic research , progress through pre - clinical animal studies , then show therapeutic efficacy in the human clinical trials . The animal models provide a bridge between patients and the laboratory bench . Hypotheses generated in human studies can be tested directly in the animal models , and the results of studies in more simple in vitro systems can be tested in the animal models to assess their relevance in intact living systems . The animal models provide a means to test clinical hypotheses generated in patients using an intact biological systems , and to validate the importance of fundamental laboratory findings without going directly to human experimentation . Until recently , there was no consensus in the scientific community as to what exactly constitutes ARDS in an animal , in part because there is no single marker or parameter that has sufficient sensitivity and specificity to identify the occurrence of all forms and severities of lung injury . As a result , it was difficult for investigators to determine if lung injury had been achieved in an experimental model . For example , if an experimental drug decreases leukocyte migration into the lungs but has no effect on permeability changes , is this a potentially promising therapy for ARDS or not ? In addition , a comparison of studies is difficult because of the diversity of assays used by different investigators to assess lung injury . In 2011 an American Thoracic Society report [ 153 ] concluded that the main features of experimental ALI include histological evidence of tissue injury , alteration of the alveolar capillary barrier , presence of an inflammatory response , and evidence of physiological dysfunction ; they recommended that to determine if ARDS has occurred , at least three of these four main features of ARDS should be present . Notwithstanding these advances , extrapolation from animal to human in diseases such as ARDS remains problematic . Although animal models continue to play a role in the evaluation of efficacy and safety of new therapeutic interventions , genetic , molecular , and physiological limitations often hinder their utility . Despite successful pre - clinical testing , 85 % of early clinical trials for novel drugs fail ; of those that survive through to phase III , only half become approved for clinical use [ 203 ] . Almost 90 % of the failures across all therapeutic areas were attributable to either lack of efficacy ( 66 % ) or safety issues ( 21 % ) [ 204 ] . Although logistical and study design issues are often 141 identified as the root cause of clinical trial failures , most futilities in fact originate from molecular mechanisms of the drug ( s ) tested . There is a growing awareness of the limitations of animal research and its inability to make reliable predictions for human clinical trials . Indeed , animal studies seem to overestimate by about 30 % the likelihood that a treatment will be effective because negative results are often unpublished . Similarly , little more than a third of highly cited animal research is tested later in human trials [ 205 ] . Of the one - third that enter into clinical trials , as little as 8 % of drugs pass Phase I successfully . The major pre - clinical tools for new - agent screening prior to clinical testing are experimental models of ARDS in rodents . Although mice are most commonly used , they are actually poor models for the majority of human diseases [ 206 ] . Crucial genetic , molecular , immunologic and cellular differences between humans and mice prevent animal models from serving as effective and reliable surrogates of human ARDS . Among 4 , 000 + genes in humans and mice , researchers found that transcription factor binding sites differed between the species in 41 % to 89 % of cases . In many cases , mouse models serve to replicate specific processes or sets of processes within a disease but not the whole spectrum of physiological changes that occur in humans in the disease setting . The failure to translate from animals to humans is likely also due in part to poor methodology as well as failure of the models to accurately mimic the human disease condition . Unlike in human clinical trials [ 207 ] , no best - practice standards exist for animal testing . Several systematic reviews and meta - analyses have identified a relationship between poor study quality and overestimation of treatment effect size in animal models of disease [ 208 ] . It has been recommended that randomization and outcomes assessor blinding should be performed . In addition , experiments should be designed in both genders and in different age groups of animals and all data , both positive and negative , should be published . By paying due attention to experimental bias , to the breadth of physiological variables known to influence ARDS outcome in patients , and by testing therapies in a range of model systems which might more faithfully reproduce the key facets of ARDS pathophysiology [ 153 ] . 142 Rationale to establish a two hit model of ARDS The pathophysiology of ARDS in human patients is complex and rarely occurs due to a single instigating factor . Usually patients with lung injury commonly encounter more than a ‘single - hit’ which primes inflammatory cells , resulting in an enhanced response when encountered with a ‘second - hit’ . ARDS in humans can be induced by a range of injuries such as sepsis , aspiration of gastric contents , inhalation of injurious substances and / or VILI . Often multiple injuries contribute to the pathogenesis of ARDS . Current models often mimic a single injury process , often for limited time periods , and with markers of injury that lack clinical correlates . Developing a preclinical model that adequately reflects the complexities of clinical ARDS is challenging . Two hit animal models are an attempt to mimic two conditions that are commonly found in conjunction ( e . g . sepsis and acid injury ) . However , despite the difficulties in developing and interpreting multiple - hit models , their greater clinical relevance makes them very attractive for additional MSC translational studies . Therefore , to mimic a human situation where more than one inciting stimulus for ARDS is present might be more useful while investigating novel therapies . Various attempts have been made to replicate the complex and heterogeneous morphology of ARDS in order to create an animal model that exhibits the same pathological changes seen in patients with ARDS . The authors of three recently published detailed comparative characterizations of the specific advantages and disadvantages of ARDS models agree that the main shortcomings of all currently available models are that they either fail to reproduce all defining criteria of human ARDS or that they lack a complete morphological characterization of the pathological changes seen in ARDS [ 121 , 209 , 210 ] . Furthermore , an urgent call has recently been published for new models combining an acute inflammatory response with direct damage to the lung Our aim was to establish a severe complex clinically relevant model of ARDS induced through a combination of two hits , in an attempt to imitate human ARDS as it has been most recently defined by the Berlin definition [ 211 ] and by the ATS Workshop on the ‘Features and Measurements of Experimental Acute Lung Injury in Animals [ 153 ] . In order to test the therapeutic potential of promising interventions ( such as MSCs ) we wished to conduct these studies in complex models 143 with sustained ARDS at time points greater than 4 hours post injury ( as the majority of pre - clinical studies have done ) . Our use of a combined sepsis - VILI model is based on the hypothesis that injurious mechanical ventilation ( MV ) may be responsible for the perpetuation and worsening ARDS in patients with sepsis [ 212 ] . Several studies in experimental animals have demonstrated that intra - tracheal instillation of bacteria is accompanied by reduced bacterial clearance , enhanced neutrophil response and positive blood cultures after initiation of mechanical ventilation [ 213 ] as a measure of the lung injury . 144 Results in context : Sepsis and VILI model design study Animals underwent injurious high stretch mechanical ventilation post - sepsis surgery with the aim of achieving a 30 - 35 % drop in compliance from baseline . We choose static lung compliance as a key measure of the extent of lung injury . We sought a more reliable injury severity parameter , in order to decrease the marked variability seen with fixed time ventilation protocols . Other physiological measures such as oxygenation are invasive , and the repeated sampling required to assess degree of injury may have interfered with our recovery model . The respiratory static compliance represented as the best available measure of lung injury . The changes in compliance represent the accumulation of pulmonary oedema as a result of damage to the alveolar - capillary membrane , as well as the influx of inflammatory cells into the alveolar space . These changes make the lung more difficult to expand and result in a decrease in compliance . Thus , compliance should represent the degree of injury in rats , and could be used to homogenize the injury among animals with different apparent susceptibility . All the animals were injured to the same degree , despite the fact that the time to achieve injury , as measured by respiratory static compliance , was different in each animal ( Table 3 . 7 . 2 ) . The variability in measures of injury and repair at harvest was less than that when animals were injured for defined time intervals . However , some variability remained . This variability may be explained by differences in the ability to repair injured lung among individual animals . In our pilot series , where animals underwent only sepsis procedures they were moderately septic with fecal pellet dose of 0 . 1g . When VILI with target of 30 - 35 % decrement in the static compliance was added to animals with septic background , they were injured until 48 h and recovered beyond 96 h . We did not detected differences in respiratory system static compliance at baseline , thus the degree of lung expansion and stretch would have been similar in each rat . Despite this , the time to achieve injury differed substantially among animals . Similarly , the ability to remove pulmonary oedema fluid , and repair a damaged alveolar - capillary barrier likely differed in each individual animal , despite similar age , weight , genetic background etc . However , these differences were minimized by our VILI model . For our cell therapy experiments we succeeded in making the model more severe by increasing the VILI to 50 % and the animals 145 were severely injured as indicated by higher alveolar - arterial gradients in comparison to group where VILI targets were 30 - 35 % . However , animal - to - animal variability remained an issue . We assessed the animals while establishing the model from Day 0 to Day 14 post - VILI procedures ( 2 weeks ) . The weight loss was monitored as represented in Graph 3 . 1 of Chapter 3 where animals lost weight till Day 9 and started getting better on their own which was reflected in their weight gain from Day 11 to Day 16 . As represented in Graph 3 . 4 of Chapter 3a significant drop in compliance was observed post - VILI . The maximum drop in compliance was observed at 24 h after which time the animals recovered , and did not have any reduction in compliance in comparison to the SHAM group . The animals were sacrificed with collection of BAL and tissue samples at each time point ( 24 h , 48 h , 96 h , 1 week and 2 weeks ) post sepsis - VILI injury . The Graph 3 . 3 of Chapter 3 represents alveolar - arterial oxygenation gradient , which were not different to the SHAM group at any time point . The total cell counts , number of neutrophils and amount of protein in BAL sample were evaluated as represented in Graph in the Graph 3 . 3 , 3 . 4 and 3 . 6 . The total cells counts , neutrophil counts and the BAL proteins were significant for 24 h group animals when compared to the SHAM group . No significant difference in wet / dry weight ratios were observed at any time point in comparison to the SHAM group as represented in Graphs 3 . 6 of Chapter 3 . We characterized a novel two - hit rodent model of ARDS . We combined an indirect insult to the lung using intra - peritoneal administration of a fecal pellet with direct pulmonary injury caused by high stretch mechanical ventilation . We characterized the degree of sustained injury and recovery over time . We demonstrated mild alterations in respiratory static compliance and alveolar capillary barrier function at 24 hours , abnormalities that were not sustained beyond this time point . The most important issue is that this model is not suitable for long - term outcome studies . Although our attempt to establish a recoverable two - hit model of ARDS was successful the degree of sustained injury was not as severe as expected , and the animals had completely recovered by 48 hours . The most important issue is that this model is not suitable for long - term outcome studies . Although , we were able to detect a period of severe impairment of respiratory static compliance , this impairment was not sustained . However , because the dynamic process of impaired compliance 146 could be enhanced by more severe VILI , an increase in short term mortality in the model could be tolerated in favor of more prolonged physiologic impairment . As a result of this characterization , we attempted to enhance the severity of injury by altering our target decline in static lung compliance to 50 % of baseline as described in pilot study Table 3 . 3 of Chapter 3 . This demonstrates the effectiveness of this measure in enhancing the duration of injury . 147 Role of MSCs and HUCPVCs in sepsis and VILI - induced lung injury Introduction MSCs exert an important effect in diverse aspects of the injury , inflammation and reparative response that are of direct relevance to ARDS . In particular , MSCs appear to directly attenuate bacterial sepsis , the commonest [ 152 ] and more severe [ 214 ] cause of ARDS , via a number of mechanisms , including enhancement of macrophage phagocytosis , and anti - microbial peptide secretion [ 102 ] which results in increased bacterial clearance [ 103 ] . In an ex vivo human lung model of sepsis induced ARDS , when the lung was treated with intrabronchial allogeneic human MSCs , 1 h after instillation of endotoxin . MSCs obtained from umbilical cord have some advantages over BM - MSCs . This includes greater potential for proliferation - it is easy to obtain a substantial number of HUCPVCs after several passages and extensive ex vivo expansion [ 122 ] . However , the most appreciable advantage is that the collection procedure is noninvasive and ethically acceptable . In addition , the extent of immunomodulation may be greater with HUCPVCs than with BM - MSCs [ 215 ] . Potential of HUCPVCs in a novel two - hit model of ARDS In the studies outlined in Chapter 4 we sought to test the hypothesis that human MSCs , either from bone - marrow or umbilical cord , enhance the degree of recovery from lung injury when administered after the second injury in a novel 2 - hit injury model . We report that : 1 ) the human MSCs derived from the bone marrow reduced inflammatory cell infiltration into the lung after injury , and 2 ) neither hMSCs from bone marrow nor umbilical cord affect physiologic indices of sepsis - VILI induced lung injury . MSCs have been extensively studied and found therapeutically efficacious in diverse models of acute inflammation in many different organ systems . In the lung , MSCs improve an injury following bleomycin [ 143 ] , endotoxin [ 216 ] , cecal ligation and puncture [ 103 ] , Pseudomonas abdominal sepsis [ 102 ] , Escherichia coli pneumonia [ 117 ] and VILI [ 1 , 2 ] . In these models MSCs work by various mechanisms , including secreting angiopoietin - 1 [ 191 ] and keratinocyte growth factor [ 2 , 217 ] , shifting cytokines from pro - to anti - inflammatory [ 96 ] , improving bacterial 148 clearance [ 102 , 117 , 118 ] and transferring mitochondria to energetically impaired alveolar epithelial cells [ 218 ] . Uncontrolled , excessive cytokine production and immune cell activation are known to be central to the pathophysiology of sepsis - induced ARDS and VILI [ 212 ] . MSCs have been shown to inhibit dendritic cell maturation [ 219 ] , suppress T cell [ 220 ] and natural killer cells [ 221 ] proliferation and cytotoxicity and promote the generation of regulatory T cells [ 222 ] . These immunomodulatory properties suggested that MSCs might be an effective therapy for sepsis - VILI lung injury . However , MSCs failed to produce any evidence of physiological benefit in our studies , despite giving two doses on subsequent days during the period of lung inflammation and injury . Administering the cells using a high and low dosing strategy failed to change this outcome . Importantly , we demonstrated that the cells were biologically active , as they reduced inflammatory cell infiltration into the lung . Similarly negative results were reported recently by Darwish and colleagues [ 223 ] and Gotts et al [ 224 ] . These researchers studied intravenous mMSCs and hMSCs as prophylaxis or therapy in mice inoculated with pandemic H1N1 influenza , finding no evidence of beneficial effect on weight loss , survival , or lung injury . Combining MSC administration with oseltamivir was also ineffective . Potential reasons for their lack of efficacy in these studies include 1 ) the route of delivery did not allow access to the injured epithelial barrier , 2 ) the dose / timing of MSCs was insufficient given the prolonged nature of the injury , and 3 ) MSCs might have mixed or even stimulatory effects on immune responses . As for route of delivery , intravenously administered MSCs have proven effective in a variety of models of epithelial injury , including VILI [ 1 , 2 ] , airway administration of endotoxin [ 225 ] and bleomycin [ 226 ] . Also , given the prominent role that lung endothelium appears to play in sepsis pathogenesis [ 227 ] , there is good reason to suspect that intravenous delivery of therapeutics is a reasonable strategy . Optimization of MSC dose regimen in sepsis - VILI We tested 2 different dose regimens in our sepsis - VILI model . Though , not statistical significant results were observed in any of the cell treated group in comparison to the vehicle group . But , the BM - hMSCs lower total dose of 5 * 10 6 cells / kg showed mild improvement in lowering the number 149 of cell counts in BAL , neutrophil counts and mild improvement in static lung compliance was seen as represented in Graphs 4 . 4 , 4 . 5 and 4 . 2 of Chapter 4 . The dose of MSCs required for benefit , while minimizing harm , is an important issue . In addition , the relative benefit of single versus multiple dose administration regimens is unclear . The highest tolerable dose and lower limits of dose effectiveness have not been established . The mean doses administered in pre - clinical models of ARDS were almost 30 * 10 6 cells / kg in mice and over 20 * 10 6 cells / kg in rats without adverse effects [ 228 ] . In the Phase II clinical trial of MSCs patients with COPD , patients were given four doses of MSCs , 100 * 10 6 cells per infusion , which is much lower than the doses used in many of the preclinical ARDS studies [ 129 ] . MSCs modulate immune cell functions in a dose - dependent manner in vitro . Similarly , a strong direct correlation was found between the number of cells applied and the therapeutic outcomes in treating chronic wound and heart infarction [ 124 , 125 ] . The ideal dose selection of MSCs for critically ill patients with ALI remains a matter of conjecture . Extrapolation from animal studies and from human studies of MSC administration in other disease states may be used as a guide . For example , 1 - 2 * 10 6 cells / kg has been used safely in healthy subjects and in patients with disease . However , these doses will need validation in the critical care setting . It has been suggested that treatment could be given over three consecutive days [ 102 ] as has been used in a trial of autologous endothelial progenitor cells in patients with end stage pulmonary hypertension [ 229 ] . However , the optimal dose of stem cells may differ depending on the disease state . In addition , the dose may be influenced by other factors , such as phase of illness , type of MSCs , route of cell delivery , viability and purity of MSCs and condition of the patient . Current clinical trials and the animal studies have indicated that the early phase of injury or an acute / subacute phases of diseases may be the optimal time window for stem cell therapy . Behr et al . [ 230 ] investigated the engraftment of autologous MSCs injected into the renal artery in an ovine model of ischemia / reperfusion - induced injury to assess the consequences of delayed cell transplantation . Results showed there was a significant increase in engraftment of tubules by MSCs when cells were injected early after injury . Similarly animals with stroke who received MSCs on 150 post - ischemic days recovered significantly better than animals treated with MSCs 30 days after ischemia . 151 Efficacy of human BM - MSCs and HUCPVCs in a single hit model of ARDS Because the most common cause of ARDS in humans is sepsis , administration of gram - negative bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) has been used as an animal model of sepsis - related lung injury in several species [ 231 - 233 ] . Endotoxin is a biologically active component of the gram - negative bacterial cell wall that exists as complexes of LPS and protein . Low - dose exposure to LPS activates macrophages [ 234 ] and polymorphonuclear cells , presumably aimed at eliminating the toxic agent , whereas higher doses cause tissue injury . Although virtually all mammalian species react to endotoxin , species sensitivity is highly variable [ 235 ] . To date , MSCs have been studied extensively in preclinical lung injury models involving intra - tracheal endotoxin exposure while bone - marrow has been the most common source of MSCs . As outlined previously , compared with MSCs from bone marrow , human umbilical cord - derived MSCs ( HUCPVCs ) have a faster population doubling time than BM - MSCs , and such proliferation characteristics do not change even after 30 passages . In addition , HUCPVCs showed lower expression of CD106 and HLA - ABC in comparison with BM - MSCs [ 140 ] . Therefore , HUCPVCs are currently being studied for clinical application due to their accessibility , ease of procurement from donors , and lack of ethical concerns [ 236 - 238 ] . We created an endotoxemia rat model via the use of intra - tracheal injection of LPS , simulating sepsis - related lung injury , in order to observe the effect of HUCPVCs on acute lung injury . In addition we compared the efficacy of HUCPVCs to BM - MSCs , the established standard for MSC therapy standard in this model . Experimental results showed that the rats exhibited varying degrees of lung tissue hyperemia , hemorrhage , infiltration of inflammatory cells , and neutrophil accumulation , hypoxia and decline in respiratory static compliance which are all physiologic and pathological changes associated with acute lung injury . This indicated the model was successful . Both the cell treatment groups showed reductions in inflammatory cell infiltration into lung ( Graphs 5 . 4A and 5 . 5A of Chapter 5 ) . HUCPVCs also demonstrated improvements in physiologic parameters such as oxygenation as represented in Graph 5 . 3A of Chapter 5 . No statistically 152 significant trend was observed towards reduction in BAL proteins and wet / dry weight ratios in comparison to the Vehicle group as represented in Graph 5 . 7A and 5 . 6A of Chapter 5 . Neutrophils are the most abundant cell type of the innate immune system and are key facilitators of antimicrobial responses . They are normally found in the bloodstream , but they accumulate within minutes at sites of injury . Neutrophils target pathogens through phagocytosis , the release of bactericidal molecules , and so ‐ called neutrophil extracellular traps . Neutrophil accumulation in the lung is an important attribute of ARDS . Neutrophils accumulated in the lung may cause mechanical obstruction of the pulmonary capillary bed , leading to microcirculatory disturbance . In addition , the metabolic products of stranded and activated neutrophils can destroy the alveolar capillary barrier and increase its permeability . This causes protein - rich fluid to leak into the alveolar lumen and interstitial lung , which results in pulmonary edema [ 239 ] . Compared to the vehicle treated controls , rats intravenously infused with both BM - MSCs and UC - MSCs clearly reduced the amount of neutrophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid . This is at odds with some in vitro studies that have demonstrated that both naive and , to a greater extent , TLR3 ‐ triggered human BM ‐ MSCs promote the in vitro survival of resting and IL ‐ 8 ‐ activated neutrophils at very low MSC : neutrophil ratios ( up to 1 : 500 ) in an IL ‐ 6 ‐ , IFNβ ‐ and GM ‐ CSF ‐ dependent manner [ 240 , 241 ] . Co - culture with MSCs up - regulated the expression of the anti ‐ apoptotic factor MCL1 and down - regulated the pro ‐ apoptotic molecule BAX in neutrophils . The capacity for the neutrophil respiratory burst was also increased [ 240 ] , despite decreased intracellular oxidative stress , which improves cellular fitness [ 241 ] . Therefore , through these mechanisms , MSCs could preserve the storage pool of neutrophils in the bone marrow , enabling a rapid release of mature neutrophils in response to pathogens . TLR3 is a sensor of viral RNA , so it can be speculated that viral infections might trigger MSCs to foster neutrophil activation as part of the antiviral immune response [ 242 ] . When activated in vitro by LPS , MSCs isolated from human parotid glands further increase their production of IL ‐ 6 , IL ‐ 8 and macrophage migration inhibitory factor ( MIF ) . Thus , MSCs attract neutrophils and enhance their lifespan and pro ‐ inflammatory activity [ 243 ] . These findings were corroborated in a model in which neutrophils were selectively recruited by LPS ‐ activated human BM ‐h MSCs that were embedded in matrigel and subcutaneously injected [ 244 ] . 153 However our results , suggesting a decrease in neutrophil infiltration into injured lung , is consistent with other models , and may be explained by the relationship of MSCs to macrophages . The relevance of MSCs in reprogramming macrophages in vivo was demonstrated in a sepsis model [ 96 ] . In this model , the transfer of mouse BM ‐ MSCs decreased lethality , and the protective effect of MSCs was eliminated by macrophage depletion or by the administration of IL - 10 - specific neutralizing antibodies . The IL - 10 produced by M2 macrophages blocked excessive neutrophil infiltration into injured tissue and therefore prevented further damage . The neutrophils that were retained in the bloodstream helped to clear circulating microorganisms . Similar observations were made in an endotoxin - induced lung injury model , in which intrapulmonary delivery of mouse BM - h MSCs decreased the production of TNF and CXCL2 and increased the production of IL ‐ 10 by alveolar macrophages [ 216 ] . Our study in a single hit model of LPS - induced lung injury also demonstrated that HUCPVCs reduced physiologic parameters of lung injury such as alveolar - arterial oxygen gradient as represented in Graph 5 . 3A of Chapter 5 ) . These improvements in physiologic parameters of lung injury were not replicated in the bone - marrow MSC group . Several studies have suggested MSCs of different origins inhibit LPS - induced inflammation in vivo and in vitro [ 35 , 36 ] and a study by Jin et al [ 245 ] . Another study supported this finding in a spinal cord injury model [ 246 ] . Our study indicates that HUCPVCs may have enhanced capacity to diminish lung injury in comparison to BM - hMSCs , and thus may be a more useful therapeutic strategy for translation to patients with sepsis - induced ARDS . 154 Summary and Future Directions Due to the success of pre - clinical experiments in diverse disease models , numerous clinical trials of MSCs are ongoing . These include phase 1 and 2 studies for neurologic disease , immunologic disorders and cardiovascular repair [ 247 ] . Currently there are two completed clinical trials utilizing MSCs for lung disease . The first has been that of Weiss et al . [ 129 ] in which patients with COPD were treated intraveneously ( IV ) using Prochymal MSCs provided by Osiris Therapeutics Inc . ( Columbia , MD , USA ) . The trial was conducted over a 2 year period and comprised of four monthly infusions of 1 * 10 8 cells per dose . Safety of MSCs administration in COPD was confirmed , and while this small study failed to demonstrate any efficacy , definitive studies are awaited [ 129 ] . The first published RCT of MSCs in ARDS tested allogeneic adipose - derived MSCs in 12 patients with moderate to severe ARDS [ 248 ] . Administration of MSCs appeared to be safe in this study , while the study size precluded any conclusion in regard to clinical improvement or surrogate endpoints of inflammation and injury . Currently active clinical trials to assess safety and efficacy of MSCs in lung disease include the use of adipose tissue derived MSCs ( Ad - MSCs ) in COPD ( NCT01559051 ) and BM - MSCs in severe emphysema ( NCT01849159 ) . As outlined , a steadily increasing variety of cell types for cell therapy of lung diseases are available . However , there are considerable bumps on the road from a cell type candidate to a clinical cell product . The great variety of options ( cell source , timing , dose , route of administration ) and still surprisingly poor mechanistic insights pose major challenges to this undertaking [ 249 ] . For example , in terms of the above mentioned studies in lung disease , Weiss et al used four monthly infusions of 100 * 10 6 allogeneic bone - marrow MSCs at passage 5 , administered directly after thawing . Zheng et al [ 248 ] used adipose tissue derived MSCs with a dose of 1 * 10 6 cells / kg at passage 4 , sub - cultured in the patient’s own serum for 24 - 48 hours prior to administration . A phase I , open label , dose escalation , multi - center clinical Phase I trial of allogeneic BM - MSCs in patients with moderate to severe ARDS , termed the Stem cells for ARDS Treatment ( START ) trial , has recently completed in the United States ( NCT01775774 ) , and been published [ 250 ] . This dose escalation study tested 1 * 10 6 , 5 * 10 6 and 10 * 10 6 cells / kg in a 3 x 3 dose escalation design , in patients with moderate to severe ARDS as defined by the Berlin definition of ARDS . To avoid 155 enrolling patients with late ARDS , the study design excluded patients in whom more than 96 h had passed since meeting the Berlin deﬁnition [ 4 ] for ARDS and the infusion of MSCs was initiated within 120 h of meeting the criteria . The patients were excluded , if the PaO 2 : FiO 2 improved to more than 300 mm Hg after enrolment but before MSCs infusion . The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment ( SOFA ) and the lung injury scores ( LIS ) were used to evaluate the health parameters of the patients before and after infusion of MSCs . The SOFA score defines the severity of organ dysfunction and predicts outcomes in critically ill patients whereas the LIS measures the severity of lung injury which is composed of four components : ( 1 ) chest radiograph ; ( 2 ) PaO2 : FiO2 ; ( 3 ) PEEP and ( 4 ) static compliance of respiratory system . The primary outcome suggests that all three doses of MSCs were safe in patients with moderate - to - severe ARDS . No patient su ﬀ ered any immediate complication or respiratory or cardiovascular compromise in the 6 h after the MSC infusion , and there were no cardiac arrests or deaths within 24 h of the MSC infusion . Speciﬁcally , no signiﬁcant changes in heart rate , mean arterial pressure , or oxygen saturation were reported in any of the three dosing groups during the infusion or in the immediate post - infusion period . Some favorable changes were observed in LIS and SOFA score with the high dose of MSCs ( 10 * 10 6 cells / kg per body weight ) compared with both reduced doses were consistent with the hypothesis that increased doses of MSCs might provide increased clinical beneﬁt . No serious adverse events were related to MSC administration after 6 months of follow - up . Based on these encouraging findings , the START trial is undertaking its phase II studies , a randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled using MSCs dose of 10 * 10 6 cells / kg per body weight in 60 patients with moderate to - severe ARDS , with a primary focus on safety and secondary outcomes including respiratory , systemic , and biological endpoints . However , in spite of these ongoing clinical studies , many questions remain regarding the best choice of stem cell type to be applied in regenerative medicine . In addition , the production of cell products poses complex challenges , particularly with product characterizations . These challenges include the variability and complexity of the cells , need for sterile processing , limitation on amount of product , difficulty in assessing potency , and challenges to product storage and distribution . In this regard , MSCs from umbilical cord possess important advantages . HUCPVCs are easier to access and collect , are more secure and abundant , and exhibit higher proliferation rates [ 130 , 251 ] . An umbilical cord may be an ideal and practical source because of its accessibility , painless 156 procurement from donors , lower risk of viral contamination , and lack of any ethical concerns . The results from our studies also indicate that UC - MSCs may be a more practical and potent therapeutic option for ARDS . The hope and enthusiasm for a future in which cell - based therapies may serve as a therapeutic foundation for lung repair remain high . There are many outstanding hurdles , not only from the clinical angle , which include identifying the eligible patient , selecting timing and method of cell administration , and selecting the correct type of cell , but also from the cell processing lab in terms of establishing process standardization to produce a safe , pure , and potent cellular product . Product characterization and analysis of product potency of cell products are complex and not well established . Potency measurements should theoretically correlate with the intended biologic activity or function in preclinical animal models and clinical outcomes , such as alveolar epithelial repair or fluid re - absorption in ARDS . It is clear from studies that have examined in vitro and in vivo measures of efficacy that not all stem cells have similar therapeutic effect , and aging and disease may impact adversely on potency [ 252 ] . Continued research in preclinical and clinical studies is needed to ensure the realization of lung injury repair regeneration by cell therapy . 157 References 1 . Curley , G . F . , et al . , Effects of intratracheal mesenchymal stromal cell therapy during recovery and resolution after ventilator - induced lung injury . Anesthesiology , 2013 . 118 ( 4 ) : p . 924 - 32 . 2 . Curley , G . F . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cells enhance recovery and repair following ventilator - induced lung injury in the rat . Thorax , 2012 . 67 ( 6 ) : p . 496 - 501 . 3 . Ashbaugh , D . G . , et al . , Acute respiratory distress in adults . Lancet , 1967 . 2 ( 7511 ) : p . 319 - 23 . 4 . Force , A . D . T . , et al . , Acute respiratory distress syndrome : the Berlin Definition . JAMA , 2012 . 307 ( 23 ) : p . 2526 - 33 . 5 . Ware , L . B . and M . A . Matthay , The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med , 2000 . 342 ( 18 ) : p . 1334 - 49 . 6 . Bachofen , M . and E . R . Weibel , Alterations of the gas exchange apparatus in adult respiratory insufficiency associated with septicemia . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1977 . 116 ( 4 ) : p . 589 - 615 . 7 . Flori , H . R . , et al . , Pediatric acute lung injury : prospective evaluation of risk factors associated with mortality . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2005 . 171 ( 9 ) : p . 995 - 1001 . 8 . Randolph , A . G . , Management of acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome in children . Crit Care Med , 2009 . 37 ( 8 ) : p . 2448 - 54 . 9 . Bigatello , L . M . and A . Pesenti , Ventilator - induced lung injury : less ventilation , less injury . Anesthesiology , 2009 . 111 ( 4 ) : p . 699 - 700 . 10 . Rubenfeld , G . D . , et al . , Incidence and outcomes of acute lung injury . N Engl J Med , 2005 . 353 ( 16 ) : p . 1685 - 93 . 11 . Erickson , S . E . , et al . , Recent trends in acute lung injury mortality : 1996 - 2005 . Crit Care Med , 2009 . 37 ( 5 ) : p . 1574 - 9 . 12 . Erickson , S . E . , et al . , Racial and ethnic disparities in mortality from acute lung injury . Crit Care Med , 2009 . 37 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 6 . 13 . Cheung , A . M . , et al . , Two - year outcomes , health care use , and costs of survivors of acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2006 . 174 ( 5 ) : p . 538 - 44 . 14 . Herridge , M . S . , et al . , Functional disability 5 years after acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med , 2011 . 364 ( 14 ) : p . 1293 - 304 . 15 . Matthay , M . A . and R . L . Zemans , The acute respiratory distress syndrome : pathogenesis and treatment . Annu Rev Pathol , 2011 . 6 : p . 147 - 63 . 16 . Staub , N . C . , Pulmonary edema . Physiol Rev , 1974 . 54 ( 3 ) : p . 678 - 811 . 17 . Staub , N . C . , Pulmonary edema due to increased microvascular permeability . Annu Rev Med , 1981 . 32 : p . 291 - 312 . 18 . Flick , M . R . , A . Perel , and N . C . Staub , Leukocytes are required for increased lung microvascular permeability after microembolization in sheep . Circ Res , 1981 . 48 ( 3 ) : p . 344 - 51 . 19 . Matthay , M . A . and G . A . Zimmerman , Acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome : four decades of inquiry into pathogenesis and rational management . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol , 2005 . 33 ( 4 ) : p . 319 - 27 . 20 . Looney , M . R . , et al . , Neutrophils and their Fc gamma receptors are essential in a mouse model of transfusion - related acute lung injury . J Clin Invest , 2006 . 116 ( 6 ) : p . 1615 - 23 . 21 . Folkesson , H . G . , et al . , Acid aspiration - induced lung injury in rabbits is mediated by interleukin - 8 - dependent mechanisms . J Clin Invest , 1995 . 96 ( 1 ) : p . 107 - 16 . 22 . Folkesson , H . G . , et al . , Congenital diaphragmatic hernia prevents absorption of distal air space fluid in late - gestation rat fetuses . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2006 . 290 ( 3 ) : p . L478 - 84 . 158 23 . Scheiermann , C . , et al . , Neutrophil microdomains : linking heterocellular interactions with vascular injury . Curr Opin Hematol , 2010 . 17 ( 1 ) : p . 25 - 30 . 24 . Cai , S . , et al . , Myeloid differentiation protein - 2 - dependent and - independent neutrophil accumulation during Escherichia coli pneumonia . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol , 2009 . 40 ( 6 ) : p . 701 - 9 . 25 . Looney , M . R . , et al . , Platelet depletion and aspirin treatment protect mice in a two - event model of transfusion - related acute lung injury . J Clin Invest , 2009 . 119 ( 11 ) : p . 3450 - 61 . 26 . Wiener - Kronish , J . P . , K . H . Albertine , and M . A . Matthay , Differential responses of the endothelial and epithelial barriers of the lung in sheep to Escherichia coli endotoxin . J Clin Invest , 1991 . 88 ( 3 ) : p . 864 - 75 . 27 . Martin , T . R . , et al . , Effects of leukotriene B4 in the human lung . Recruitment of neutrophils into the alveolar spaces without a change in protein permeability . J Clin Invest , 1989 . 84 ( 5 ) : p . 1609 - 19 . 28 . Zemans , R . L . , S . P . Colgan , and G . P . Downey , Transepithelial migration of neutrophils : mechanisms and implications for acute lung injury . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol , 2009 . 40 ( 5 ) : p . 519 - 35 . 29 . Parkos , C . A . , et al . , Neutrophil migration across a cultured intestinal epithelium . Dependence on a CD11b / CD18 - mediated event and enhanced efficiency in physiological direction . J Clin Invest , 1991 . 88 ( 5 ) : p . 1605 - 12 . 30 . Doerschuk , C . M . , et al . , CD18 - dependent and - independent mechanisms of neutrophil emigration in the pulmonary and systemic microcirculation of rabbits . J Immunol , 1990 . 144 ( 6 ) : p . 2327 - 33 . 31 . Zen , K . , et al . , The heparan sulfate proteoglycan form of epithelial CD44v3 serves as a CD11b / CD18 counter - receptor during polymorphonuclear leukocyte transepithelial migration . J Biol Chem , 2009 . 284 ( 6 ) : p . 3768 - 76 . 32 . Parkos , C . A . , et al . , CD47 mediates post - adhesive events required for neutrophil migration across polarized intestinal epithelia . J Cell Biol , 1996 . 132 ( 3 ) : p . 437 - 50 . 33 . Liu , Y . , et al . , The role of CD47 in neutrophil transmigration . Increased rate of migration correlates with increased cell surface expression of CD47 . J Biol Chem , 2001 . 276 ( 43 ) : p . 40156 - 66 . 34 . Su , X . , et al . , CD47 deficiency protects mice from lipopolysaccharide - induced acute lung injury and Escherichia coli pneumonia . J Immunol , 2008 . 180 ( 10 ) : p . 6947 - 53 . 35 . Albertine , K . H . , et al . , Fas and fas ligand are up - regulated in pulmonary edema fluid and lung tissue of patients with acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Pathol , 2002 . 161 ( 5 ) : p . 1783 - 96 . 36 . Matute - Bello , G . , et al . , Fas - mediated acute lung injury requires fas expression on nonmyeloid cells of the lung . J Immunol , 2005 . 175 ( 6 ) : p . 4069 - 75 . 37 . Dolinay , T . , et al . , Inflammasome - regulated cytokines are critical mediators of acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2012 . 185 ( 11 ) : p . 1225 - 34 . 38 . Pittet , J . F . , et al . , TGF - beta is a critical mediator of acute lung injury . J Clin Invest , 2001 . 107 ( 12 ) : p . 1537 - 44 . 39 . Hla , T . , et al . , Sphingosine - 1 - phosphate : extracellular mediator or intracellular second messenger ? Biochem Pharmacol , 1999 . 58 ( 2 ) : p . 201 - 7 . 40 . Chen , H . , et al . , Slit - Robo signaling in ocular angiogenesis . Adv Exp Med Biol , 2010 . 664 : p . 457 - 63 . 41 . Guidot , D . M . , et al . , Integrating acute lung injury and regulation of alveolar fluid clearance . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2006 . 291 ( 3 ) : p . L301 - 6 . 42 . Lecuona , E . , et al . , Ventilator - associated lung injury decreases lung ability to clear edema in rats . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1999 . 159 ( 2 ) : p . 603 - 9 . 159 43 . Adamson , I . Y . and D . H . Bowden , The type 2 cell as progenitor of alveolar epithelial regeneration . A cytodynamic study in mice after exposure to oxygen . Lab Invest , 1974 . 30 ( 1 ) : p . 35 - 42 . 44 . Bourke , S . , et al . , Development of a lung slice preparation for recording ion channel activity in alveolar epithelial type I cells . Respir Res , 2005 . 6 : p . 40 . 45 . Rock , J . R . , et al . , Basal cells as stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway epithelium . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2009 . 106 ( 31 ) : p . 12771 - 5 . 46 . Dreyfuss , D . and G . Saumon , Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1998 . 157 ( 1 ) : p . 294 - 323 . 47 . Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . N Engl J Med , 2000 . 342 ( 18 ) : p . 1301 - 8 . 48 . Villar , J . , R . M . Kacmarek , and G . Hedenstierna , From ventilator - induced lung injury to physician - induced lung injury : why the reluctance to use small tidal volumes ? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand , 2004 . 48 ( 3 ) : p . 267 - 71 . 49 . Dreyfuss , D . and G . Saumon , Role of tidal volume , FRC , and end - inspiratory volume in the development of pulmonary edema following mechanical ventilation . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1993 . 148 ( 5 ) : p . 1194 - 203 . 50 . Webb , H . H . and D . F . Tierney , Experimental pulmonary edema due to intermittent positive pressure ventilation with high inflation pressures . Protection by positive end - expiratory pressure . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1974 . 110 ( 5 ) : p . 556 - 65 . 51 . Parker , J . C . , et al . , Increased microvascular permeability in dog lungs due to high peak airway pressures . J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol , 1984 . 57 ( 6 ) : p . 1809 - 16 . 52 . Amato , M . B . , et al . , Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med , 1998 . 338 ( 6 ) : p . 347 - 54 . 53 . Zhang , H . , et al . , Conventional mechanical ventilation is associated with bronchoalveolar lavage - induced activation of polymorphonuclear leukocytes : a possible mechanism to explain the systemic consequences of ventilator - induced lung injury in patients with ARDS . Anesthesiology , 2002 . 97 ( 6 ) : p . 1426 - 33 . 54 . Greenfield , L . J . , P . A . Ebert , and D . W . Benson , Effect of Positive Pressure Ventilation on Surface Tension Properties of Lung Extracts . Anesthesiology , 1964 . 25 : p . 312 - 6 . 55 . Tremblay , L . N . and A . S . Slutsky , Ventilator - induced injury : from barotrauma to biotrauma . Proc Assoc Am Physicians , 1998 . 110 ( 6 ) : p . 482 - 8 . 56 . Parker , J . C . , C . L . Ivey , and J . A . Tucker , Gadolinium prevents high airway pressure - induced permeability increases in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) , 1998 . 84 ( 4 ) : p . 1113 - 8 . 57 . Vlahakis , N . E . , et al . , Deformation - induced lipid trafficking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2001 . 280 ( 5 ) : p . L938 - 46 . 58 . Vlahakis , N . E . and R . D . Hubmayr , Invited review : plasma membrane stress failure in alveolar epithelial cells . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) , 2000 . 89 ( 6 ) : p . 2490 - 6 ; discussion 2497 . 59 . Dreyfuss , D . , et al . , High inflation pressure pulmonary edema . Respective effects of high airway pressure , high tidal volume , and positive end - expiratory pressure . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1988 . 137 ( 5 ) : p . 1159 - 64 . 60 . Corbridge , T . C . , et al . , Adverse effects of large tidal volume and low PEEP in canine acid aspiration . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1990 . 142 ( 2 ) : p . 311 - 5 . 61 . Colmenero - Ruiz , M . , et al . , PEEP and low tidal volume ventilation reduce lung water in porcine pulmonary edema . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1997 . 155 ( 3 ) : p . 964 - 70 . 62 . Bshouty , Z . , J . Ali , and M . Younes , Effect of tidal volume and PEEP on rate of edema formation in in situ perfused canine lobes . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) , 1988 . 64 ( 5 ) : p . 1900 - 7 . 160 63 . Muscedere , J . G . , et al . , Tidal ventilation at low airway pressures can augment lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1994 . 149 ( 5 ) : p . 1327 - 34 . 64 . Slutsky , A . S . and L . N . Tremblay , Multiple system organ failure . Is mechanical ventilation a contributing factor ? Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1998 . 157 ( 6 Pt 1 ) : p . 1721 - 5 . 65 . Ranieri , V . M . , et al . , Effect of mechanical ventilation on inflammatory mediators in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA , 1999 . 282 ( 1 ) : p . 54 - 61 . 66 . Tremblay , L . , et al . , Injurious ventilatory strategies increase cytokines and c - fos m - RNA expression in an isolated rat lung model . J Clin Invest , 1997 . 99 ( 5 ) : p . 944 - 52 . 67 . Pugin , J . , et al . , Activation of human macrophages by mechanical ventilation in vitro . Am J Physiol , 1998 . 275 ( 6 Pt 1 ) : p . L1040 - 50 . 68 . Ranieri , V . M . , et al . , Mechanical ventilation as a mediator of multisystem organ failure in acute respiratory distress syndrome . JAMA , 2000 . 284 ( 1 ) : p . 43 - 4 . 69 . Wrigge , H . , et al . , Effects of mechanical ventilation on release of cytokines into systemic circulation in patients with normal pulmonary function . Anesthesiology , 2000 . 93 ( 6 ) : p . 1413 - 7 . 70 . Vaneker , M . , et al . , Mechanical ventilation in healthy mice induces reversible pulmonary and systemic cytokine elevation with preserved alveolar integrity : an in vivo model using clinical relevant ventilation settings . Anesthesiology , 2007 . 107 ( 3 ) : p . 419 - 26 . 71 . Downey , G . P . , et al . , Regulation of neutrophil activation in acute lung injury . Chest , 1999 . 116 ( 1 Suppl ) : p . 46S - 54S . 72 . Kawano , T . , et al . , Effect of granulocyte depletion in a ventilated surfactant - depleted lung . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) , 1987 . 62 ( 1 ) : p . 27 - 33 . 73 . Kolobow , T . , et al . , Severe impairment in lung function induced by high peak airway pressure during mechanical ventilation . An experimental study . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1987 . 135 ( 2 ) : p . 312 - 5 . 74 . Mead , J . , T . Takishima , and D . Leith , Stress distribution in lungs : a model of pulmonary elasticity . J Appl Physiol , 1970 . 28 ( 5 ) : p . 596 - 608 . 75 . National Heart , L . , et al . , Comparison of two fluid - management strategies in acute lung injury . N Engl J Med , 2006 . 354 ( 24 ) : p . 2564 - 75 . 76 . Bryan , A . C . , Conference on the scientific basis of respiratory therapy . Pulmonary physiotherapy in the pediatric age group . Comments of a devil ' s advocate . Am Rev Respir Dis , 1974 . 110 ( 6 Pt 2 ) : p . 143 - 4 . 77 . Gattinoni , L . , et al . , Body position changes redistribute lung computed - tomographic density in patients with acute respiratory failure . Anesthesiology , 1991 . 74 ( 1 ) : p . 15 - 23 . 78 . Gattinoni , L . , et al . , Adult respiratory distress syndrome profiles by computed tomography . J Thorac Imaging , 1986 . 1 ( 3 ) : p . 25 - 30 . 79 . Gattinoni , L . , et al . , Decrease in PaCO2 with prone position is predictive of improved outcome in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Crit Care Med , 2003 . 31 ( 12 ) : p . 2727 - 33 . 80 . Richter , T . , et al . , Effect of prone position on regional shunt , aeration , and perfusion in experimental acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2005 . 172 ( 4 ) : p . 480 - 7 . 81 . Dellinger , R . P . , et al . , Surviving Sepsis Campaign : international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock : 2008 . Crit Care Med , 2008 . 36 ( 1 ) : p . 296 - 327 . 82 . Staub , N . C . , Pulmonary edema : physiologic approaches to management . Chest , 1978 . 74 ( 5 ) : p . 559 - 64 . 83 . Prewitt , R . M . , J . McCarthy , and L . D . Wood , Treatment of acute low pressure pulmonary edema in dogs : relative effects of hydrostatic and oncotic pressure , nitroprusside , and positive end - expiratory pressure . J Clin Invest , 1981 . 67 ( 2 ) : p . 409 - 18 . 84 . Kuebler , W . M . , et al . , Pressure is proinflammatory in lung venular capillaries . J Clin Invest , 1999 . 104 ( 4 ) : p . 495 - 502 . 161 85 . National Heart , L . , et al . , Pulmonary - artery versus central venous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury . N Engl J Med , 2006 . 354 ( 21 ) : p . 2213 - 24 . 86 . Calfee , C . S . , et al . , Plasma angiopoietin - 2 in clinical acute lung injury : prognostic and pathogenetic significance . Crit Care Med , 2012 . 40 ( 6 ) : p . 1731 - 7 . 87 . Frank , J . A . , et al . , Low tidal volume reduces epithelial and endothelial injury in acid - injured rat lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2002 . 165 ( 2 ) : p . 242 - 9 . 88 . Calfee , C . S . , et al . , Plasma receptor for advanced glycation end products and clinical outcomes in acute lung injury . Thorax , 2008 . 63 ( 12 ) : p . 1083 - 9 . 89 . Parsons , P . E . , et al . , Lower tidal volume ventilation and plasma cytokine markers of inflammation in patients with acute lung injury . Crit Care Med , 2005 . 33 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 6 ; discussion 230 - 2 . 90 . Adhikari , N . K . , et al . , Effect of nitric oxide on oxygenation and mortality in acute lung injury : systematic review and meta - analysis . BMJ , 2007 . 334 ( 7597 ) : p . 779 . 91 . Frank , A . J . and B . T . Thompson , Pharmacological treatments for acute respiratory distress syndrome . Curr Opin Crit Care , 2010 . 16 ( 1 ) : p . 62 - 8 . 92 . Gao Smith , F . , et al . , Effect of intravenous beta - 2 agonist treatment on clinical outcomes in acute respiratory distress syndrome ( BALTI - 2 ) : a multicentre , randomised controlled trial . Lancet , 2012 . 379 ( 9812 ) : p . 229 - 35 . 93 . Papazian , L . , et al . , Neuromuscular blockers in early acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med , 2010 . 363 ( 12 ) : p . 1107 - 16 . 94 . Rice , T . W . , et al . , Enteral omega - 3 fatty acid , gamma - linolenic acid , and antioxidant supplementation in acute lung injury . JAMA , 2011 . 306 ( 14 ) : p . 1574 - 81 . 95 . Cepkova , M . and M . A . Matthay , Pharmacotherapy of acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . J Intensive Care Med , 2006 . 21 ( 3 ) : p . 119 - 43 . 96 . Nemeth , K . , et al . , Bone marrow stromal cells attenuate sepsis via prostaglandin E ( 2 ) - dependent reprogramming of host macrophages to increase their interleukin - 10 production . Nat Med , 2009 . 15 ( 1 ) : p . 42 - 9 . 97 . Zouari - Zaoui , L . , et al . , Multidetector row helical computed tomography enteroclysis findings in ileal endometriosis . Clin Imaging , 2008 . 32 ( 5 ) : p . 396 - 9 . 98 . Parekkadan , B . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cell - derived molecules reverse fulminant hepatic failure . PLoS One , 2007 . 2 ( 9 ) : p . e941 . 99 . Li , T . S . , et al . , Regeneration of infarcted myocardium by intramyocardial implantation of ex vivo transforming growth factor - beta - preprogrammed bone marrow stem cells . Circulation , 2005 . 111 ( 19 ) : p . 2438 - 45 . 100 . Miyahara , Y . , et al . , Monolayered mesenchymal stem cells repair scarred myocardium after myocardial infarction . Nat Med , 2006 . 12 ( 4 ) : p . 459 - 65 . 101 . Iso , Y . , et al . , Multipotent human stromal cells improve cardiac function after myocardial infarction in mice without long - term engraftment . Biochem Biophys Res Commun , 2007 . 354 ( 3 ) : p . 700 - 6 . 102 . Krasnodembskaya , A . , et al . , Antibacterial effect of human mesenchymal stem cells is mediated in part from secretion of the antimicrobial peptide LL - 37 . Stem Cells , 2010 . 28 ( 12 ) : p . 2229 - 38 . 103 . Mei , S . H . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cells reduce inflammation while enhancing bacterial clearance and improving survival in sepsis . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2010 . 182 ( 8 ) : p . 1047 - 57 . 104 . Friedenstein , A . J . , et al . , Heterotopic of bone marrow . Analysis of precursor cells for osteogenic and hematopoietic tissues . Transplantation , 1968 . 6 ( 2 ) : p . 230 - 47 . 105 . Zuk , P . A . , et al . , Human adipose tissue is a source of multipotent stem cells . Mol Biol Cell , 2002 . 13 ( 12 ) : p . 4279 - 95 . 106 . Lee , J . Y . , et al . , Clonal isolation of muscle - derived cells capable of enhancing muscle regeneration and bone healing . J Cell Biol , 2000 . 150 ( 5 ) : p . 1085 - 100 . 162 107 . Takahashi , K . , et al . , Effects of osteogenic induction on mesenchymal cells from fetal and maternal parts of human placenta . Cell Transplant , 2004 . 13 ( 4 ) : p . 337 - 41 . 108 . Pittenger , M . F . , et al . , Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells . Science , 1999 . 284 ( 5411 ) : p . 143 - 7 . 109 . Dominici , M . , et al . , Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells . The International Society for Cellular Therapy position statement . Cytotherapy , 2006 . 8 ( 4 ) : p . 315 - 7 . 110 . Shi , M . , Z . W . Liu , and F . S . Wang , Immunomodulatory properties and therapeutic application of mesenchymal stem cells . Clin Exp Immunol , 2011 . 164 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 8 . 111 . Chan , J . L . , et al . , Antigen - presenting property of mesenchymal stem cells occurs during a narrow window at low levels of interferon - gamma . Blood , 2006 . 107 ( 12 ) : p . 4817 - 24 . 112 . Stagg , J . , et al . , Interferon - gamma - stimulated marrow stromal cells : a new type of nonhematopoietic antigen - presenting cell . Blood , 2006 . 107 ( 6 ) : p . 2570 - 7 . 113 . Stagg , J . , Immune regulation by mesenchymal stem cells : two sides to the coin . Tissue Antigens , 2007 . 69 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 9 . 114 . Nauta , A . J . , et al . , Donor - derived mesenchymal stem cells are immunogenic in an allogeneic host and stimulate donor graft rejection in a nonmyeloablative setting . Blood , 2006 . 108 ( 6 ) : p . 2114 - 20 . 115 . Caplan , A . I . , Why are MSCs therapeutic ? New data : new insight . J Pathol , 2009 . 217 ( 2 ) : p . 318 - 24 . 116 . Walter , J . , L . B . Ware , and M . A . Matthay , Mesenchymal stem cells : mechanisms of potential therapeutic benefit in ARDS and sepsis . Lancet Respir Med , 2014 . 2 ( 12 ) : p . 1016 - 1026 . 117 . Gupta , N . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cells enhance survival and bacterial clearance in murine Escherichia coli pneumonia . Thorax , 2012 . 67 ( 6 ) : p . 533 - 9 . 118 . Krasnodembskaya , A . , et al . , Human mesenchymal stem cells reduce mortality and bacteremia in gram - negative sepsis in mice in part by enhancing the phagocytic activity of blood monocytes . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2012 . 302 ( 10 ) : p . L1003 - 13 . 119 . Terragni , P . P . , et al . , Tidal hyperinflation during low tidal volume ventilation in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2007 . 175 ( 2 ) : p . 160 - 6 . 120 . Vlahakis , N . E . and R . D . Hubmayr , Cellular stress failure in ventilator - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2005 . 171 ( 12 ) : p . 1328 - 42 . 121 . Matute - Bello , G . , C . W . Frevert , and T . R . Martin , Animal models of acute lung injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2008 . 295 ( 3 ) : p . L379 - 99 . 122 . Sarugaser , R . , et al . , Isolation , propagation , and characterization of human umbilical cord perivascular cells ( HUCPVCs ) . Methods Mol Biol , 2009 . 482 : p . 269 - 79 . 123 . Ennis , J . , et al . , Isolation , characterization , and differentiation of human umbilical cord perivascular cells ( HUCPVCs ) . Methods Cell Biol , 2008 . 86 : p . 121 - 36 . 124 . Falanga , V . , et al . , Autologous bone marrow - derived cultured mesenchymal stem cells delivered in a fibrin spray accelerate healing in murine and human cutaneous wounds . Tissue Eng , 2007 . 13 ( 6 ) : p . 1299 - 312 . 125 . Henning , R . J . , et al . , Human cord blood cells and myocardial infarction : effect of dose and route of administration on infarct size . Cell Transplant , 2007 . 16 ( 9 ) : p . 907 - 17 . 126 . ! ! ! INVALID CITATION ! ! ! 127 . Wang , J . , L . Liao , and J . Tan , Mesenchymal - stem - cell - based experimental and clinical trials : current status and open questions . Expert Opin Biol Ther , 2011 . 11 ( 7 ) : p . 893 - 909 . 128 . Friedenstein , A . J . , J . F . Gorskaja , and N . N . Kulagina , Fibroblast precursors in normal and irradiated mouse hematopoietic organs . Exp Hematol , 1976 . 4 ( 5 ) : p . 267 - 74 . 129 . Weiss , D . J . , et al . , A placebo - controlled , randomized trial of mesenchymal stem cells in COPD . Chest , 2013 . 143 ( 6 ) : p . 1590 - 8 . 163 130 . Baksh , D . , R . Yao , and R . S . Tuan , Comparison of proliferative and multilineage differentiation potential of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from umbilical cord and bone marrow . Stem Cells , 2007 . 25 ( 6 ) : p . 1384 - 92 . 131 . Kim , S . K . , et al . , Ex vivo expansion and clonality of CD34 + selected cells from bone marrow and cord blood in a serum - free media . Mol Cells , 2002 . 14 ( 3 ) : p . 367 - 73 . 132 . Han , I . S . , et al . , Differentiation of CD34 + cells from human cord blood and murine bone marrow is suppressed by C6 beta - chemokines . Mol Cells , 2003 . 15 ( 2 ) : p . 176 - 80 . 133 . Broxmeyer , H . E . , et al . , Human umbilical cord blood as a potential source of transplantable hematopoietic stem / progenitor cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1989 . 86 ( 10 ) : p . 3828 - 32 . 134 . Gluckman , E . , et al . , Hematopoietic reconstitution in a patient with Fanconi ' s anemia by means of umbilical - cord blood from an HLA - identical sibling . N Engl J Med , 1989 . 321 ( 17 ) : p . 1174 - 8 . 135 . Cao , F . J . and S . Q . Feng , Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells and the treatment of spinal cord injury . Chin Med J ( Engl ) , 2009 . 122 ( 2 ) : p . 225 - 31 . 136 . Malgieri , A . , et al . , Bone marrow and umbilical cord blood human mesenchymal stem cells : state of the art . Int J Clin Exp Med , 2010 . 3 ( 4 ) : p . 248 - 69 . 137 . Stenderup , K . , et al . , Aging is associated with decreased maximal life span and accelerated senescence of bone marrow stromal cells . Bone , 2003 . 33 ( 6 ) : p . 919 - 26 . 138 . Kern , S . , et al . , Comparative analysis of mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow , umbilical cord blood , or adipose tissue . Stem Cells , 2006 . 24 ( 5 ) : p . 1294 - 301 . 139 . Sarugaser , R . , et al . , Human umbilical cord perivascular ( HUCPV ) cells : a source of mesenchymal progenitors . Stem Cells , 2005 . 23 ( 2 ) : p . 220 - 9 . 140 . Lu , L . L . , et al . , Isolation and characterization of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells with hematopoiesis - supportive function and other potentials . Haematologica , 2006 . 91 ( 8 ) : p . 1017 - 26 . 141 . Blann , A . D . , et al . , Circulating endothelial cells . Biomarker of vascular disease . Thromb Haemost , 2005 . 93 ( 2 ) : p . 228 - 35 . 142 . Wu , H . , et al . , Differentiation and proliferation of endothelial progenitor cells from canine peripheral blood mononuclear cells . J Surg Res , 2005 . 126 ( 2 ) : p . 193 - 8 . 143 . Ortiz , L . A . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cell engraftment in lung is enhanced in response to bleomycin exposure and ameliorates its fibrotic effects . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2003 . 100 ( 14 ) : p . 8407 - 11 . 144 . Chang , Y . S . , et al . , Human umbilical cord blood - derived mesenchymal stem cells attenuate hyperoxia - induced lung injury in neonatal rats . Cell Transplant , 2009 . 18 ( 8 ) : p . 869 - 86 . 145 . Doherty , M . J . , et al . , Vascular pericytes express osteogenic potential in vitro and in vivo . J Bone Miner Res , 1998 . 13 ( 5 ) : p . 828 - 38 . 146 . Farrington - Rock , C . , et al . , Chondrogenic and adipogenic potential of microvascular pericytes . Circulation , 2004 . 110 ( 15 ) : p . 2226 - 32 . 147 . Yannarelli , G . , et al . , Human umbilical cord perivascular cells exhibit enhanced cardiomyocyte reprogramming and cardiac function after experimental acute myocardial infarction . Cell Transplant , 2013 . 22 ( 9 ) : p . 1651 - 66 . 148 . Boland , G . M . , et al . , Wnt 3a promotes proliferation and suppresses osteogenic differentiation of adult human mesenchymal stem cells . J Cell Biochem , 2004 . 93 ( 6 ) : p . 1210 - 30 . 149 . de Boer , J . , et al . , Wnt signaling inhibits osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells . Bone , 2004 . 34 ( 5 ) : p . 818 - 26 . 150 . Etheridge , S . L . , et al . , Expression profiling and functional analysis of wnt signaling mechanisms in mesenchymal stem cells . Stem Cells , 2004 . 22 ( 5 ) : p . 849 - 60 . 164 151 . Duda , D . G . , et al . , Differential CD146 expression on circulating versus tissue endothelial cells in rectal cancer patients : implications for circulating endothelial and progenitor cells as biomarkers for antiangiogenic therapy . J Clin Oncol , 2006 . 24 ( 9 ) : p . 1449 - 53 . 152 . Eisner , M . D . , et al . , Efficacy of low tidal volume ventilation in patients with different clinical risk factors for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2001 . 164 ( 2 ) : p . 231 - 6 . 153 . Matute - Bello , G . , et al . , An official American Thoracic Society workshop report : features and measurements of experimental acute lung injury in animals . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol , 2011 . 44 ( 5 ) : p . 725 - 38 . 154 . Marshall , J . C . , Modeling MODS : what can be learned from animal models of the multiple - organ dysfunction syndrome ? Intensive Care Med , 2005 . 31 ( 5 ) : p . 605 - 8 . 155 . Esmon , C . T . , Why do animal models ( sometimes ) fail to mimic human sepsis ? Crit Care Med , 2004 . 32 ( 5 Suppl ) : p . S219 - 22 . 156 . Lang , J . D . and J . M . Hickman - Davis , One - hit , two - hit . . . is there really any benefit ? Clin Exp Immunol , 2005 . 141 ( 2 ) : p . 211 - 4 . 157 . Rotstein , O . D . , Modeling the two - hit hypothesis for evaluating strategies to prevent organ injury after shock / resuscitation . J Trauma , 2003 . 54 ( 5 Suppl ) : p . S203 - 6 . 158 . Murphy , T . J . , et al . , Linking the " two - hit " response following injury to enhanced TLR4 reactivity . J Leukoc Biol , 2005 . 77 ( 1 ) : p . 16 - 23 . 159 . Fan , J . , et al . , Hemorrhagic shock primes for increased expression of cytokine - induced neutrophil chemoattractant in the lung : role in pulmonary inflammation following lipopolysaccharide . J Immunol , 1998 . 161 ( 1 ) : p . 440 - 7 . 160 . Matthay , M . A . , et al . , Future research directions in acute lung injury : summary of a National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute working group . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2003 . 167 ( 7 ) : p . 1027 - 35 . 161 . Curley , G . F . , et al . , Evolution of the inflammatory and fibroproliferative responses during resolution and repair after ventilator - induced lung injury in the rat . Anesthesiology , 2011 . 115 ( 5 ) : p . 1022 - 32 . 162 . Castro - Malaspina , H . , et al . , Characterization of human bone marrow fibroblast colony - forming cells ( CFU - F ) and their progeny . Blood , 1980 . 56 ( 2 ) : p . 289 - 301 . 163 . Kuznetsov , S . A . , et al . , Single - colony derived strains of human marrow stromal fibroblasts form bone after transplantation in vivo . J Bone Miner Res , 1997 . 12 ( 9 ) : p . 1335 - 47 . 164 . Wada , M . R . , et al . , Generation of different fates from multipotent muscle stem cells . Development , 2002 . 129 ( 12 ) : p . 2987 - 95 . 165 . Wang , H . S . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cells in the Wharton ' s jelly of the human umbilical cord . Stem Cells , 2004 . 22 ( 7 ) : p . 1330 - 7 . 166 . Fukuchi , Y . , et al . , Human placenta - derived cells have mesenchymal stem / progenitor cell potential . Stem Cells , 2004 . 22 ( 5 ) : p . 649 - 58 . 167 . Lee , J . W . , et al . , Allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells for treatment of E . coli endotoxin - induced acute lung injury in the ex vivo perfused human lung . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2009 . 106 ( 38 ) : p . 16357 - 62 . 168 . Danchuk , S . , et al . , Human multipotent stromal cells attenuate lipopolysaccharide - induced acute lung injury in mice via secretion of tumor necrosis factor - alpha - induced protein 6 . Stem Cell Res Ther , 2011 . 2 ( 3 ) : p . 27 . 169 . Lee , J . W . , et al . , Concise review : Mesenchymal stem cells for acute lung injury : role of paracrine soluble factors . Stem Cells , 2011 . 29 ( 6 ) : p . 913 - 9 . 165 170 . Zhang , H . , et al . , Increasing donor age adversely impacts beneficial effects of bone marrow but not smooth muscle myocardial cell therapy . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol , 2005 . 289 ( 5 ) : p . H2089 - 96 . 171 . Mueller , S . M . and J . Glowacki , Age - related decline in the osteogenic potential of human bone marrow cells cultured in three - dimensional collagen sponges . J Cell Biochem , 2001 . 82 ( 4 ) : p . 583 - 90 . 172 . Nishida , S . , et al . , Number of osteoprogenitor cells in human bone marrow markedly decreases after skeletal maturation . J Bone Miner Metab , 1999 . 17 ( 3 ) : p . 171 - 7 . 173 . Hudson , L . D . , et al . , Clinical risks for development of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1995 . 151 ( 2 Pt 1 ) : p . 293 - 301 . 174 . Raetz , C . R . , et al . , Gram - negative endotoxin : an extraordinary lipid with profound effects on eukaryotic signal transduction . FASEB J , 1991 . 5 ( 12 ) : p . 2652 - 60 . 175 . Martin , T . R . , et al . , Lipopolysaccharide binding protein enhances the responsiveness of alveolar macrophages to bacterial lipopolysaccharide . Implications for cytokine production in normal and injured lungs . J Clin Invest , 1992 . 90 ( 6 ) : p . 2209 - 19 . 176 . Tapping , R . I . , et al . , Toll - like receptor 4 , but not toll - like receptor 2 , is a signaling receptor for Escherichia and Salmonella lipopolysaccharides . J Immunol , 2000 . 165 ( 10 ) : p . 5780 - 7 . 177 . Wright , S . D . , et al . , CD14 , a receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and LPS binding protein . Science , 1990 . 249 ( 4975 ) : p . 1431 - 3 . 178 . Yang , R . B . , et al . , Toll - like receptor - 2 mediates lipopolysaccharide - induced cellular signalling . Nature , 1998 . 395 ( 6699 ) : p . 284 - 8 . 179 . Reutershan , J . , et al . , Therapeutic anti - inflammatory effects of myeloid cell adenosine receptor A2a stimulation in lipopolysaccharide - induced lung injury . J Immunol , 2007 . 179 ( 2 ) : p . 1254 - 63 . 180 . O ' Grady , N . P . , et al . , Local inflammatory responses following bronchial endotoxin instillation in humans . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2001 . 163 ( 7 ) : p . 1591 - 8 . 181 . Kudoh , I . , et al . , Exoproduct secretions of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains influence severity of alveolar epithelial injury . Am J Physiol , 1994 . 267 ( 5 Pt 1 ) : p . L551 - 6 . 182 . Roy - Burman , A . , et al . , Type III protein secretion is associated with death in lower respiratory and systemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections . J Infect Dis , 2001 . 183 ( 12 ) : p . 1767 - 74 . 183 . Winkler , G . C . , Review of the significance of pulmonary intravascular macrophages with respect to animal species and age . Exp Cell Biol , 1989 . 57 ( 6 ) : p . 281 - 6 . 184 . Sone , Y . , V . B . Serikov , and N . C . Staub , Sr . , Intravascular macrophage depletion attenuates endotoxin lung injury in anesthetized sheep . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) , 1999 . 87 ( 4 ) : p . 1354 - 9 . 185 . Hajjar , A . M . , et al . , Human Toll - like receptor 4 recognizes host - specific LPS modifications . Nat Immunol , 2002 . 3 ( 4 ) : p . 354 - 9 . 186 . Komuro , T . , et al . , Comparison of R - and S - form lipopolysaccharides fractionated from Escherichia coli UKT - B lipopolysaccharide in pyrogen and Limulus tests . FEMS Microbiol Lett , 1989 . 51 ( 1 ) : p . 79 - 83 . 187 . Liang , Z . X . , et al . , Bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells protect rats from endotoxin - induced acute lung injury . Chin Med J ( Engl ) , 2011 . 124 ( 17 ) : p . 2715 - 22 . 188 . Zhu , Y . G . , et al . , Human mesenchymal stem cell microvesicles for treatment of Escherichia coli endotoxin - induced acute lung injury in mice . Stem Cells , 2014 . 32 ( 1 ) : p . 116 - 25 . 189 . Haynesworth , S . E . , M . A . Baber , and A . I . Caplan , Cytokine expression by human marrow - derived mesenchymal progenitor cells in vitro : effects of dexamethasone and IL - 1 alpha . J Cell Physiol , 1996 . 166 ( 3 ) : p . 585 - 92 . 190 . Neuss , S . , et al . , Functional expression of HGF and HGF receptor / c - met in adult human mesenchymal stem cells suggests a role in cell mobilization , tissue repair , and wound healing . Stem Cells , 2004 . 22 ( 3 ) : p . 405 - 14 . 166 191 . Fang , X . , et al . , Allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells restore epithelial protein permeability in cultured human alveolar type II cells by secretion of angiopoietin - 1 . J Biol Chem , 2010 . 285 ( 34 ) : p . 26211 - 22 . 192 . Nemeth , K . , et al . , Bone marrow stromal cells use TGF - beta to suppress allergic responses in a mouse model of ragweed - induced asthma . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2010 . 107 ( 12 ) : p . 5652 - 7 . 193 . Meisel , R . , et al . , Human bone marrow stromal cells inhibit allogeneic T - cell responses by indoleamine 2 , 3 - dioxygenase - mediated tryptophan degradation . Blood , 2004 . 103 ( 12 ) : p . 4619 - 21 . 194 . Ortiz , L . A . , et al . , Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist mediates the antiinflammatory and antifibrotic effect of mesenchymal stem cells during lung injury . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2007 . 104 ( 26 ) : p . 11002 - 7 . 195 . Uccelli , A . , L . Moretta , and V . Pistoia , Mesenchymal stem cells in health and disease . Nat Rev Immunol , 2008 . 8 ( 9 ) : p . 726 - 36 . 196 . Augello , A . , et al . , Bone marrow mesenchymal progenitor cells inhibit lymphocyte proliferation by activation of the programmed death 1 pathway . Eur J Immunol , 2005 . 35 ( 5 ) : p . 1482 - 90 . 197 . Ferguson , N . D . , et al . , Acute respiratory distress syndrome : underrecognition by clinicians and diagnostic accuracy of three clinical definitions . Crit Care Med , 2005 . 33 ( 10 ) : p . 2228 - 34 . 198 . Taccone , P . , et al . , Prone positioning in patients with moderate and severe acute respiratory distress syndrome : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA , 2009 . 302 ( 18 ) : p . 1977 - 84 . 199 . Peek , G . J . , et al . , Efficacy and economic assessment of conventional ventilatory support versus extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe adult respiratory failure ( CESAR ) : a multicentre randomised controlled trial . Lancet , 2009 . 374 ( 9698 ) : p . 1351 - 63 . 200 . Roch , A . , C . Guervilly , and L . Papazian , Fluid management in acute lung injury and ards . Ann Intensive Care , 2011 . 1 ( 1 ) : p . 16 . 201 . Severgnini , P . , et al . , Protective mechanical ventilation during general anesthesia for open abdominal surgery improves postoperative pulmonary function . Anesthesiology , 2013 . 118 ( 6 ) : p . 1307 - 21 . 202 . McAuley , D . F . , et al . , Simvastatin in the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome . N Engl J Med , 2014 . 203 . Ledford , H . , Therapeutic success stifles medical progress . Nature , 2011 . 473 ( 7348 ) : p . 433 . 204 . Arrowsmith , J . , Trial watch : Phase II failures : 2008 - 2010 . Nat Rev Drug Discov , 2011 . 10 ( 5 ) : p . 328 - 9 . 205 . Hackam , D . G . and D . A . Redelmeier , Translation of research evidence from animals to humans . JAMA , 2006 . 296 ( 14 ) : p . 1731 - 2 . 206 . Seok , J . , et al . , Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human inflammatory diseases . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2013 . 110 ( 9 ) : p . 3507 - 12 . 207 . Begg , C . B . , The role of meta - analysis in monitoring clinical trials . Stat Med , 1996 . 15 ( 12 ) : p . 1299 - 306 ; discussion 1307 - 11 . 208 . Dirnagl , U . and M . Lauritzen , Fighting publication bias : introducing the Negative Results section . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab , 2010 . 30 ( 7 ) : p . 1263 - 4 . 209 . Bastarache , J . A . and T . S . Blackwell , Development of animal models for the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Dis Model Mech , 2009 . 2 ( 5 - 6 ) : p . 218 - 23 . 210 . Wang , Z . , et al . , A genome - wide expression analysis in blood identifies pre - elafin as a biomarker in ARDS . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol , 2008 . 38 ( 6 ) : p . 724 - 32 . 211 . Ferguson , N . D . , et al . , The Berlin definition of ARDS : an expanded rationale , justification , and supplementary material . Intensive Care Med , 2012 . 38 ( 10 ) : p . 1573 - 82 . 212 . Villar , J . , et al . , Ventilator - induced lung injury and sepsis : two sides of the same coin ? Minerva Anestesiol , 2011 . 77 ( 6 ) : p . 647 - 53 . 167 213 . Nahum , A . , et al . , Effect of mechanical ventilation strategy on dissemination of intratracheally instilled Escherichia coli in dogs . Crit Care Med , 1997 . 25 ( 10 ) : p . 1733 - 43 . 214 . Doyle , R . L . , et al . , Identification of patients with acute lung injury . Predictors of mortality . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 1995 . 152 ( 6 Pt 1 ) : p . 1818 - 24 . 215 . Prasanna , S . J . , et al . , Pro - inflammatory cytokines , IFNgamma and TNFalpha , influence immune properties of human bone marrow and Wharton jelly mesenchymal stem cells differentially . PLoS One , 2010 . 5 ( 2 ) : p . e9016 . 216 . Gupta , N . , et al . , Intrapulmonary delivery of bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells improves survival and attenuates endotoxin - induced acute lung injury in mice . J Immunol , 2007 . 179 ( 3 ) : p . 1855 - 63 . 217 . Curley , G . F . , et al . , Effects of Intratracheal Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Therapy during Recovery and Resolution after Ventilator - induced Lung Injury . Anesthesiology , 2013 . 218 . Islam , M . N . , et al . , Mitochondrial transfer from bone - marrow - derived stromal cells to pulmonary alveoli protects against acute lung injury . Nat Med , 2012 . 18 ( 5 ) : p . 759 - 65 . 219 . Spaggiari , G . M . , et al . , MSCs inhibit monocyte - derived DC maturation and function by selectively interfering with the generation of immature DCs : central role of MSC - derived prostaglandin E2 . Blood , 2009 . 113 ( 26 ) : p . 6576 - 83 . 220 . Glennie , S . , et al . , Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells induce division arrest anergy of activated T cells . Blood , 2005 . 105 ( 7 ) : p . 2821 - 7 . 221 . Spaggiari , G . M . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cell - natural killer cell interactions : evidence that activated NK cells are capable of killing MSCs , whereas MSCs can inhibit IL - 2 - induced NK - cell proliferation . Blood , 2006 . 107 ( 4 ) : p . 1484 - 90 . 222 . Prevosto , C . , et al . , Generation of CD4 + or CD8 + regulatory T cells upon mesenchymal stem cell - lymphocyte interaction . Haematologica , 2007 . 92 ( 7 ) : p . 881 - 8 . 223 . Darwish , I . , et al . , Mesenchymal stromal ( stem ) cell therapy fails to improve outcomes in experimental severe influenza . PLoS One , 2013 . 8 ( 8 ) : p . e71761 . 224 . Gotts , J . E . , J . Abbott , and M . A . Matthay , Influenza causes prolonged disruption of the alveolar - capillary barrier in mice unresponsive to mesenchymal stem cell therapy . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 2014 . 307 ( 5 ) : p . L395 - 406 . 225 . Xu , J . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem cell - based angiopoietin - 1 gene therapy for acute lung injury induced by lipopolysaccharide in mice . J Pathol , 2008 . 214 ( 4 ) : p . 472 - 81 . 226 . Moodley , Y . , et al . , Anti - inflammatory effects of adult stem cells in sustained lung injury : a comparative study . PLoS One , 2013 . 8 ( 8 ) : p . e69299 . 227 . Opal , S . M . and T . van der Poll , Endothelial barrier dysfunction in septic shock . J Intern Med , 2014 . 228 . Monsel , A . , et al . , Cell - based therapy for acute organ injury : preclinical evidence and ongoing clinical trials using mesenchymal stem cells . Anesthesiology , 2014 . 121 ( 5 ) : p . 1099 - 121 . 229 . Ghofrani , H . A . , et al . , Future perspectives for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension . J Am Coll Cardiol , 2009 . 54 ( 1 Suppl ) : p . S108 - 17 . 230 . Behr , L . , et al . , Intra renal arterial injection of autologous mesenchymal stem cells in an ovine model in the postischemic kidney . Nephron Physiol , 2007 . 107 ( 3 ) : p . p65 - 76 . 231 . Brandolini , L . , et al . , Lipopolysaccharide - induced lung injury in mice . II . Evaluation of functional damage in isolated parenchyma strips . Pulm Pharmacol Ther , 2000 . 13 ( 2 ) : p . 71 - 8 . 232 . Hocherl , K . , et al . , Cyclooxygenase - 2 inhibition attenuates lipopolysaccharide - induced cardiovascular failure . Hypertension , 2002 . 40 ( 6 ) : p . 947 - 53 . 233 . Emery , D . A . , et al . , Endotoxin lipopolysaccharide from Escherichia coli and its effects on the phagocytic function of systemic and pulmonary macrophages in turkeys . Avian Dis , 1991 . 35 ( 4 ) : p . 901 - 9 . 168 234 . Engelmann , B . , et al . , Tissue factor expression of human monocytes is suppressed by lysophosphatidylcholine . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , 1999 . 19 ( 1 ) : p . 47 - 53 . 235 . Lentsch , A . B . , et al . , STAT4 and STAT6 regulate systemic inflammation and protect against lethal endotoxemia . J Clin Invest , 2001 . 108 ( 10 ) : p . 1475 - 82 . 236 . Kim , E . S . , et al . , Intratracheal transplantation of human umbilical cord blood - derived mesenchymal stem cells attenuates Escherichia coli - induced acute lung injury in mice . Respir Res , 2011 . 12 : p . 108 . 237 . Sun , H . P . , et al . , Human umbilical cord blood - derived stromal cells are superior to human umbilical cord blood - derived mesenchymal stem cells in inducing myeloid lineage differentiation in vitro . Stem Cells Dev , 2012 . 21 ( 9 ) : p . 1429 - 40 . 238 . Li , D . R . and J . H . Cai , Methods of isolation , expansion , differentiating induction and preservation of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells . Chin Med J ( Engl ) , 2012 . 125 ( 24 ) : p . 4504 - 10 . 239 . Bowler , R . P . , et al . , Pulmonary edema fluid antioxidants are depressed in acute lung injury . Crit Care Med , 2003 . 31 ( 9 ) : p . 2309 - 15 . 240 . Cassatella , M . A . , et al . , Toll - like receptor - 3 - activated human mesenchymal stromal cells significantly prolong the survival and function of neutrophils . Stem Cells , 2011 . 29 ( 6 ) : p . 1001 - 11 . 241 . Raffaghello , L . , et al . , Human mesenchymal stem cells inhibit neutrophil apoptosis : a model for neutrophil preservation in the bone marrow niche . Stem Cells , 2008 . 26 ( 1 ) : p . 151 - 62 . 242 . Tate , M . D . , et al . , Neutrophils ameliorate lung injury and the development of severe disease during influenza infection . J Immunol , 2009 . 183 ( 11 ) : p . 7441 - 50 . 243 . Brandau , S . , et al . , Tissue - resident mesenchymal stem cells attract peripheral blood neutrophils and enhance their inflammatory activity in response to microbial challenge . J Leukoc Biol , 2010 . 88 ( 5 ) : p . 1005 - 15 . 244 . Romieu - Mourez , R . , et al . , Cytokine modulation of TLR expression and activation in mesenchymal stromal cells leads to a proinflammatory phenotype . J Immunol , 2009 . 182 ( 12 ) : p . 7963 - 73 . 245 . Jin , H . J . , et al . , Comparative analysis of human mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow , adipose tissue , and umbilical cord blood as sources of cell therapy . Int J Mol Sci , 2013 . 14 ( 9 ) : p . 17986 - 8001 . 246 . Ryu , H . H . , et al . , Comparison of mesenchymal stem cells derived from fat , bone marrow , Wharton ' s jelly , and umbilical cord blood for treating spinal cord injuries in dogs . J Vet Med Sci , 2012 . 74 ( 12 ) : p . 1617 - 30 . 247 . Trounson , A . , et al . , Clinical trials for stem cell therapies . BMC Med , 2011 . 9 : p . 52 . 248 . Zheng , G . , et al . , Treatment of acute respiratory distress syndrome with allogeneic adipose - derived mesenchymal stem cells : a randomized , placebo - controlled pilot study . Respir Res , 2014 . 15 : p . 39 . 249 . Phinney , D . G . and L . Sensebe , Mesenchymal stromal cells : misconceptions and evolving concepts . Cytotherapy , 2013 . 15 ( 2 ) : p . 140 - 5 . 250 . Wilson , J . G . , et al . , Mesenchymal stem ( stromal ) cells for treatment of ARDS : a phase 1 clinical trial . Lancet Respir Med , 2014 . 251 . Secco , M . , et al . , Multipotent stem cells from umbilical cord : cord is richer than blood ! Stem Cells , 2008 . 26 ( 1 ) : p . 146 - 50 . 252 . Bustos , M . L . , et al . , Aging mesenchymal stem cells fail to protect because of impaired migration and antiinflammatory response . Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 2014 . 189 ( 7 ) : p . 787 - 98 . 169