Escaping Death : How Cancer Cells and Infected Cells Resist Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Karoliina Tuomela , Ashley R . Ambrose and Daniel M . Davis * The Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and In ﬂ ammation , The University of Manchester , Manchester , United Kingdom Cytotoxic lymphocytes are critical in our immune defence against cancer and infection . Cytotoxic T lymphocytes and Natural Killer cells can directly lyse malignant or infected cells in at least two ways : granule - mediated cytotoxicity , involving perforin and granzyme B , or death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity , involving the death receptor ligands , tumour necrosis factor - related apoptosis - inducing ligand ( TRAIL ) and Fas ligand ( FasL ) . In either case , a multi - step pathway is triggered to facilitate lysis , relying on active pro - death processes and signalling within the target cell . Because of this reliance on an active response from the target cell , each mechanism of cell - mediated killing can be manipulated by malignant and infected cells to evade cytolytic death . Here , we review the mechanisms of cell - mediated cytotoxicity and examine how cells may evade these cytolytic processes . This includes resistance to perforin through degradation or reduced pore formation , resistance to granzyme B through inhibition or autophagy , and resistance to death receptors through inhibition of downstream signalling or changes in protein expression . We also consider the importance of tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) - induced cytotoxicity and resistance mechanisms against this pathway . Altogether , it is clear that target cells are not passive bystanders to cell - mediated cytotoxicity and resistance mechanisms can signi ﬁ cantly constrain immune cell - mediated killing . Understanding these processes of immune evasion may lead to novel ideas for medical intervention . Keywords : cell - mediated cytotoxicity , cytolytic T cells , natural killer cells , lymphocytes , cancer , resistance , viral infection , immune synapse INTRODUCTION Cytotoxic lymphocytes , including cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) and natural killer ( NK ) cells , are able to directly lyse malignant or infected cells using multiple mechanisms . Granule - mediated cytotoxicity involves the release of lytic granules containing perforin and granzymes , while death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity utilises tumour necrosis factor - related apoptosis - inducing ligand ( TRAIL ) or Fas ligand ( FasL ) that bind death receptors on the surface of the target cell ( 1 – 3 ) . In addition to these classic cytotoxic pathways , there is increasing evidence that the tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) pathway also signi ﬁ cantly contributes to lymphocyte cytotoxicity ( 4 ) . Activation of these pathways can lead to cell death in several forms , including necrosis , apoptosis , necroptosis , and pyroptosis ( 5 ) . Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 1 Edited by : Michael Loran Dustin , University of Oxford , United Kingdom Reviewed by : Julian Pardo , Fundacion Agencia Aragonesa para la Investigacion y el Desarrollo , Spain Cle ´ ment Thomas , Luxembourg Institute of Health , Luxembourg * Correspondence : Daniel M . Davis daniel . davis @ manchester . ac . uk orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 9182 - 291X Specialty section : This article was submitted to T Cell Biology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Immunology Received : 31 January 2022 Accepted : 04 March 2022 Published : 23 March 2022 Citation : Tuomela K , Ambrose AR and Davis DM ( 2022 ) Escaping Death : How Cancer Cells and Infected Cells Resist Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity . Front . Immunol . 13 : 867098 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2022 . 867098 REVIEW published : 23 March 2022 doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2022 . 867098 Lymphocyte cytotoxicity is triggered upon contact with a cancerous or infected target cell if suf ﬁ cient activating signals are received . For CTLs , this requires initial priming by antigen presenting cells followed by T cell receptor recognition of speci ﬁ c target cell antigens , whereas activating receptors on NK cells recognise a range of germline - encoded ligands without prior activation ( 6 , 7 ) . The area of cell - cell contact between a lymphocyte and a target cell is termed an immune synapse , on account of it being a highly organised interface involving cytoskeletal and membrane rearrangement ( 8 – 12 ) . Integration of multiple activating and inhibitory pathways within the lymphocyte determines the outcome of this interaction with a target cell ( 13 , 14 ) . Malignant or infected cells may , therefore , evade immune recognition through the downregulation of activating signals or the upregulation of inhibitory signals . These immune evasion mechanisms – for example reducing antigen recognition , triggering immune checkpoints , secreting immunosuppressive cytokines , as well as excluding immune cells from the microenvironment – have been extensively reviewed elsewhere ( 15 – 18 ) . And of course , many immunotherapies have been developed to target these types of immune escape mechanisms , such as checkpoint inhibitors , adoptive cell therapy , and cancer vaccines , all of which aim to enhance immune cell activation ( 6 , 19 ) . However , evasion of lymphocyte cytotoxicity may also occur downstream of immune cell activation . Even if a cytolytic response is triggered by the lymphocyte , target cells are not passive bystanders to lymphocyte cytotoxicity . This is because mechanisms of cell death generally rely on active pro - death signalling within the target cell ( 5 ) . Indeed , evasion of cell death and apoptosis is considered a critical hallmark of cancer ( 20 ) . Therefore , resistance to lymphocyte attack may arise through resistance to the mediators of cytotoxicity , including perforin , granzymes , and death receptor ligands . Here we review the molecular details behind cell - mediated killing and then examine our current understanding of how target cells may resist these cytotoxic processes as immune evasion strategies . MECHANISMS OF LYMPHOCYTE CYTOTOXICITY Granule - Mediated Cytotoxicity Following activation , effector cells polarise their microtubule organising centre ( MTOC ) and lytic granules towards the immune synapse , then release the contents of these granules across the synaptic cleft ( 21 – 23 ) . Granule - mediated cytotoxicity is dependent upon the release of perforin and granzymes from granules contained within cytotoxic lymphocytes ( Figure 1 ) . Perforin is a pore - forming protein that forms ring - shaped lesions capable of mediating ion ﬂ ux as well as the uptake of larger molecules , such as granzymes ( 24 ) . Granzymes are a family of serine proteases that cleave a variety of target proteins within cells in order to induce apoptosis . Five granzymes have been identi ﬁ ed in humans , A , B , H , K , and M , but granzyme A and B have been characterised most extensively ( 25 , 26 ) . Granule - mediated cytotoxicity can result in cell death through two mechanisms ( Figure 1 ) . The ﬁ rst is necrotic cell death induced by rapid osmotic ﬂ ux through perforin pores and membrane rupture , which can be observed upon exposure to high concentrations of perforin ( 27 , 28 ) . The second is apoptotic cell death induced by perforin - mediated uptake of granzyme B into the target cell . Two primary models have been proposed to account for the entry of granzyme B into target cells : direct diffusion through perforin pores in the cell membrane , or perforin - induced endosomal uptake of granzymes . Perforin pores observed by electron microscopy have been measured to be physically large enough to permit the diffusion of granzymes into the target cell cytoplasm ( 29 ) . Furthermore , intracellular granzyme B activity can be observed within minutes of adding exogenous granzyme B and perforin to target cells ( 30 ) , which is faster than has been observed for endosomal uptake of granzyme B ( 31 ) . Conversely , perforin has been shown to trigger a calcium - dependent membrane repair response that triggers the endocytosis of granzyme B , and granzyme B - positive endosomes can be observed within target cells following interaction with NK cells ( 31 – 33 ) . It is possible that these two pathways work in parallel or in different cellular contexts to facilitate the uptake of granzyme B into target cells . Recent evidence demonstrated that perforin and granzyme can also be secreted from CTLs and NK cells in complexes , termed supramolecular attack particles ( SMAPs ) , bound by the adhesive glycoprotein thrombospondin - 1 ( 34 , 35 ) . Further understanding of SMAP biology may shed light on whether or not the two models of granzyme B delivery work synergistically or independently . Once within a target cell , granzymes can trigger cell death through several pathways , and the speci ﬁ c pathways that are activated are dependent on the identity of the granzyme . Granzyme B is the most potent member of the granzyme family and can induce apoptosis within minutes of delivery ( 30 ) . This occurs through either direct cleavage of caspases by granzyme B or via activation of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis . Direct cleavage of caspases , such as caspase 3 , one of the executioner caspases , is the primary mechanism by which mouse granzyme B induces apoptosis ( 25 ) . Caspase 3 cleaves several targets including inhibitor of caspase - activated DNase ( ICAD ) and gelsolin , which leads to DNA damage and cytoskeletal disruption , respectively ( 36 ) . Both human and mouse granzyme B can also trigger the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway , which is characterised by mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization ( MOMP ) ( 37 – 39 ) . MOMP is regulated by the Bcl - 2 family , which is made up of three classes : pro - apoptotic BH3 proteins ( e . g . Bid , Bim ) , pro - apoptotic effector proteins ( e . g . Bax , Bak ) , and anti - apoptotic proteins ( e . g . Bcl - 2 ) ( 40 ) . Granzyme B triggers MOMP by cleaving Bid into its active , truncated form ( tBid ) ( 37 ) . After cleavage , tBid recruits the pore - forming effector proteins , Bax and Bak , to the mitochondrial membrane where they form pores that mediate MOMP and the release of additional apoptotic mediators , such as cytochrome c ( 40 ) . This process can be Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 2 opposed by the action of anti - apoptotic Bcl - 2 proteins , which bind and inhibit pro - apoptotic Bcl - 2 members ( 40 ) . Importantly , granzyme B can also induce degradation of these anti - apoptotic Bcl - 2 proteins , such as Mcl - 1 , leading to the release of the pro - apoptotic BH3 protein , Bim , which activates Bax / Bak and triggers apoptosis ( 38 , 41 ) . A granzyme B - mediated mitochondrial apoptotic pathway , independent of Bax / Bak , has also been identi ﬁ ed , and occurs through cleavage of mitochondrial proteins involved in the electron transport chain and production of reactive oxygen species ( 42 – 44 ) . Granzyme B can also cleave several additional targets that contribute to cell death . For example , granzyme B can directly cleave the caspase 3 substrate , ICAD , leading to DNA damage ( 45 ) or cleave a - tubulin , causing cytoskeletal disruption during apoptosis ( 46 , 47 ) . Recently , granzyme B was also found to cleave and activate the pore - forming protein gasdermin E , leading to an alternate form of cell death , pyroptosis , through the formation of gasdermin pores in the cell membrane ( 48 , 49 ) . Pyroptosis is a more in ﬂ ammatory form of cell death compared to apoptosis and relies on the formation of pores in the cell membrane by members of the gasdermin family ( 5 , 50 ) . Cleavage of gasdermin E by granzyme B is a potent mechanism by which cytotoxic lymphocytes can kill cancer cells and control tumour growth ( 48 ) . FIGURE 1 | Mechanisms of lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Following activation , cytotoxic effector cells can kill through granule - mediated cytotoxicity , death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity , or TNF - mediated cytotoxicity . ( A ) During granule - mediated cytotoxicity , perforin and granzymes are released from lytic granules into the synaptic cleft . Perforin forms pores in the target cell membrane . At high concentrations of perforin , osmotic ﬂ ux through pores leads to cell swelling and necrotic cell death . Perforin can facilitate the uptake of granzyme B through direct diffusion or endocytosis . Granzyme B directly cleaves caspase 3 to induce apoptosis or triggers the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway via Bid cleavage into tBid . tBid recruits Bax / Bak leading to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization ( MOMP ) and apoptosis . Granzyme B may also degrade Mcl - 1 releasing Bim to activate MOMP . Granzyme B can also cleave ICAD contributing to DNA damage , a - tubulin leading to cytoskeletal degradation , or gasdermin E , which forms pores in the cell membrane to induce pyroptosis . ( B ) Ligation of death receptors ( Fas / DR4 / DR5 ) by FasL or TRAIL triggers assembly of the death - inducing signalling complex ( DISC ) composed of FADD and pro - caspase 8 / 10 . Caspase 8 / 10 induces apoptosis via direct caspase 3 cleavage or the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway via Bid cleavage . ( C ) Ligation of TNFR1 by TNF triggers the assembly of complex I ( TRADD , RIPK1 , TRAF2 , cIAP1 / 2 ) . LUBAC ubiquitinates complex I components leading to pro - survival signalling via NF - k B and MAPK pathways . In the absence of ubiquitination , RIPK1 dissociates and forms complex II with FADD and pro - caspase 8 / 10 . Cleavage of pro - caspase 8 / 10 triggers apoptosis by the same pathways as FasL / TRAIL . In the presence of insuf ﬁ cient pro - caspase 8 , RIPK1 can also recruit RIPK3 , which activates MLKL to trigger necroptosis . Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 3 Compared to granzyme B , granzyme A is a far less ef ﬁ cient inducer of cell death and triggers apoptosis at a slower rate ( 51 ) . Granzyme A - induced apoptosis is caspase - independent and , although its targets are not fully de ﬁ ned , is mediated by cleavage of a variety of nuclear , mitochondrial , and cytosolic proteins ( 52 , 53 ) . Recently , granzyme A was also shown to trigger pyroptosis of cancer cells through cleavage of the pore - forming protein , gasdermin B ( 54 , 55 ) . In murine tumours , gasdermin B expression synergised with checkpoint blockade to promote tumour clearance by cytotoxic lymphocytes ( 54 ) . Likewise , in the context of infection by Shigella ﬂ exneri , granzyme A secreted by NK cells was found to cleave gasdermin B within the infected cell ( 55 ) . Cleaved gasdermin B demonstrated microbiocidal activity by forming pores within the bacterial membrane in order to protect the host cell . Less is known about the function and role of the other granzymes ( K , H , and M ) expressed by human lymphocytes . Death Receptor - Mediated Cytotoxicity Cytotoxic lymphocytes may also kill target cells through the expression of ligands for death receptors . Two prototypical ligands have been identi ﬁ ed that mediate apoptosis : FasL , which binds the Fas receptor , and TRAIL , which binds death receptors 4 and 5 ( DR4 / 5 ) ( 56 ) . Although FasL and TRAIL bind different receptors , both ligands trigger similar pro - apoptotic signalling ( Figure 1 ) . Both FasL and TRAIL are transmembrane proteins that belong to the TNF superfamily and can be expressed on cytotoxic immune cells upon cytokine stimulation or interaction with a target cell ( 1 , 57 ) . Upon binding of FasL or TRAIL to their respective receptors , assembly of the death - inducing signalling complex ( DISC ) is triggered . The DISC consists of the death receptor , Fas - associated death domain protein ( FADD ) , and pro - caspase 8 or 10 ( 56 ) . The DISC mediates cleavage of pro - caspase 8 / 10 to release the active caspase , which can then activate the executioner caspases 3 , 6 , and 7 . Caspase 8 can further amplify apoptotic signalling by cleaving Bid to activate the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis , similar to granzyme B ( 56 ) . TNF - Mediated Cytotoxicity TNF is a cytokine capable of inducing both pro - survival and pro - death signalling depending on the precise cellular context . Although the receptors for TNF , TNF - R1 and TNF - R2 , belong to the same family as the receptors for FasL and TRAIL , the downstream signalling pathways are distinct ( 4 ) . Of the two receptors for TNF , only TNF - R1 is able to trigger cell death through its cytoplasmic death domain , which recruits a key adaptor protein , TNF receptor - associated death domain ( TRADD ) ( 4 ) . Conversely , both TNF - R1 and TNF - R2 contain a TNFR - associated factor ( TRAF ) binding site that recruits TRAF1 / 2 , which is involved in triggering pro - survival signalling via the NF - k B and MAPK pathways . The pro - survival and pro - death signalling pathways controlled by TNF - R1 ligation are mediated by the assembly of two signalling complexes , complex I and II , respectively ( 4 , 58 ) . Complex I , which mediates pro - survival signalling , is composed of several proteins , including receptor interacting serine / threonine protein kinase 1 ( RIPK1 ) , TRAF2 / 5 , cellular inhibitor of apoptosis 1 / 2 ( cIAP1 / 2 ) , and linear Ub chain assembly complex ( LUBAC ) . LUBAC - mediated ubiquitination of complex I components leads to the recruitment of additional kinase complexes involved in NF - k B and MAPK survival signalling ( 4 ) . Survival signalling through complex I is generally the default pathway triggered by TNF - R1 ligation . However , in certain cell states , TNF - R1 signalling can switch instead to pro - death signalling mediated by complex II , which is composed of RIPK1 , FADD , and pro - caspase 8 ( 4 , 58 , 59 ) . Assembly of complex II occurs when RIPK1 is not ubiquitinated , such as in the absence of the complex I - associated proteins cIAP1 / 2 and LUBAC ( 59 , 60 ) . Non - ubiquitinated RIPK1 dissociates from TRADD and recruits FADD and pro - caspase 8 leading to similar pro - death signalling as TRAIL / FasL ( 4 ) . When caspase 8 activation is not suf ﬁ cient , complex II can also lead to necroptotic cell death . This occurs through autophosphorylation of RIPK1 , leading to the recruitment and autophosphorylation of RIPK3 followed by activation of mixed lineage kinase domain - like ( MLKL ) , which induces necroptosis ( 4 ) . Altogether , much remains to be understood about the signalling that regulates the varying effects of TNF and how this can change in different cell states . MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE TO CYTOTOXICITY Overall , there is a reliance on active processes and signalling pathways within the target cell to execute CTL and NK cell killing . This implies that each distinct mechanism of cell - mediated killing can be open to an evasion strategy by the target cell . Indeed , malignant and infected cells develop a variety of mechanisms to evade cytolytic death . The existence of these resistance mechanisms is readily observed when tracking interactions between cytotoxic lymphocytes and target cells in vitro . Even when CTLs are activated during an interaction with a target cell – as indicated by a rapid increase in calcium concentration within the effector cell – the target cell does not always die ( 61 , 62 ) . In some cases , CTLs may produce a sublethal hit , which is characterised by a transient calcium ﬂ ux , indicative of perforin pore formation , but no cell death ( 62 ) . Alternatively , in some effector - target interactions , no calcium ﬂ ux could be observed in the target cell despite apparent activation of the effector cell , indicating that perforin did not form pores in the target cell membrane . A similar study demonstrated that cancer cells often recover even after a cytotoxic hit that triggers a large calcium ﬂ ux , structural perturbations , and DNA damage ( 61 ) . The target cancer cells were observed to rapidly restore calcium homeostasis , recover nuclear integrity after structural damage , and even repair DNA to stop apoptosis at its later stages ( 61 ) . Clearly , not every interaction between a cytotoxic lymphocyte and its target results in death . While some of this survival could be attributed to stochastic variability , speci ﬁ c methods by which target cells can evade cytotoxicity can have a profound impact on Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 4 the ability of cytotoxic lymphocytes to eliminate cancer cells and infected cells in vitro . Resisting Perforin Pore - Formation The formation of perforin pores in target cell membranes is the ﬁ rst step of granule - mediated cytotoxicity and is required for the induction of both necrosis caused by osmotic ﬂ ux and apoptosis caused by granzyme B uptake . Therefore , resistance to this initial step of granule - mediated cytotoxicity has the potential to signi ﬁ cantly reduce lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Perforin resistance was initially identi ﬁ ed as a characteristic of cytotoxic lymphocytes , including CTLs and NK cells , which are less easily killed by puri ﬁ ed perforin compared to various non - cytotoxic cell lines ( 63 – 65 ) . This resistance is thought to be integral to the survival of lymphocytes when releasing their cytotoxic cargo . Resistance to perforin has also been observed in malignant cells ( 66 – 68 ) . In studies of patient - derived leukaemia and lymphoma samples , considerable variability was observed in the ability of perforin to bind and lyse cancer cells from different patients ( 66 , 67 ) . Importantly , the susceptibility of cancer cells to perforin - induced lysis closely correlated with the amount of perforin bound ( 66 ) , indicating that cancer cells may evade perforin by reducing binding . More recently , our own research has found that in vitro irradiation of cancer cells transiently reduces susceptibility to lysis by NK cells and CAR T cells by inducing resistance to perforin , possibly by preventing pore formation ( 68 ) . Our current understanding of the mechanisms that mediate perforin resistance in malignant or infected cells is predominantly derived from protective mechanisms employed by cytotoxic lymphocytes . These mechanisms of perforin resistance include altered lipid order , phosphatidylserine exposure , modulation of cell stiffness , and cathepsin B - mediated degradation ( Figure 2 ) , each of which we will now explore in detail . Lipid Order The lipid order of a membrane is a characteristic determined by several properties : lipid packing , the rotational freedom of lipids , and the thickness of the bilayer ( 69 ) . Therefore , changes to membrane composition can alter lipid order , such as increasing lipid order upon incorporation of cholesterol ( 70 ) . From the time of its discovery , perforin has been known to preferentially bind to synthetic liposomes or planar lipid bilayers composed of low - order , ﬂ uid - phase lipids , such as 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) , compared to high - order , gel - phase lipids , such as dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine ( DPPC ) ( 71 – 74 ) . This speci ﬁ city for lipid order appears to play a critical role in protecting cytotoxic lymphocytes against self - harm by perforin since CTLs have particularly tightly packed and ordered membranes ( 72 , 73 ) . Lipid order has also been observed to particularly increase at the site of the immune synapse compared to more distal areas of the lymphocyte membrane ( 75 – 77 ) . Replacing cholesterol in CTL membranes with a disorder - prone cholesterol variant increases perforin binding and sensitises cells to pore - induced lysis , consistent with tight lipid packing being protective against perforin pore formation ( 73 ) . Alterations in lipid packing may directly affect the susceptibility of cancer cells to perforin - mediated attack . Lymphocyte - resistant breast cancer cells , for example , have been found to increase lipid order at the site of the immune synapse and , similar to observations with CTLs , replacing cholesterol with a disorder - prone variant sensitises cancer cells to perforin - induced lysis ( 73 , 75 ) . More broadly , lipid composition is often highly altered during malignancy and infection . For example , multidrug resistant cancer cells frequently exhibit increased membrane lipid order due to increased cholesterol levels ( 78 , 79 ) . Therefore , it is possible that lipid order - mediated resistance to perforin is a common feature of cancer . However , most observations have been made in vitro and further work is necessary to understand whether alterations in the lipid order of cancer cell membranes can have a signi ﬁ cant impact on tumour control by lymphocytes in vivo . Phosphatidylserine Externalisation Apart from altering lipid order , membrane composition can affect perforin activity through other mechanisms . Phosphatidylserine is a negatively charged phospholipid that generally localises to the intracellular lea ﬂ et of the cell membrane but can be externalised to the outer lea ﬂ et in certain cell states ( 80 ) . In particular , externalisation of phosphatidylserine on the outer lea ﬂ et is often used as a marker of cell death , but it also has a variety of non - apoptotic roles for intercellular signalling ( 81 ) . Importantly , phosphatidylserine can be externalised on lymphocyte membranes at the immune synapse , where it is suggested to act as a protective mechanism against perforin pore formation ( 73 , 74 , 82 ) . Atomic force microscopy has shown that perforin is able to bind to phosphatidylserine - containing planar lipid bilayers , but it forms protein aggregates rather than membrane - spanning pores ( 73 , 74 ) . In addition , perforin shows little or no lytic activity against synthetic liposomes composed of high levels of phosphatidylserine ( 68 ) . Other negatively charged membrane lipids , such as 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - ( 1 ′ - rac - glycerol ) ( DOPG ) or cholesterol sulfate , had a similar effect in preventing perforin pore formation , suggesting that the negative charge of phosphatidylserine is critical for its inhibitory effect against perforin ( 74 ) . In addition to protecting cytotoxic lymphocytes , phosphatidylserine may also be utilised by infected or malignant cells to evade attack mediated by perforin . Phosphatidylserine exposure is a common feature of cancer cells and can be further enhanced in certain circumstances , such as following anti - cancer treatment ( 68 , 83 ) . Externalisation of phosphatidylserine following the treatment of cancer cells with radiotherapy or cell cycle inhibitors was found to closely correlate with resistance to perforin and lymphocyte cytotoxicity , despite normal recognition and activation by NK cells and CAR T cells ( 68 ) . Treatment of cancer cells with radiotherapy or cell cycle inhibitors did not affect perforin binding or membrane repair responses , suggesting that the mechanism of resistance was impaired pore formation , similar to the observed effects of phosphatidylserine in synthetic lipid membranes ( 68 , 73 , 74 ) . Increased surface phosphatidylserine on malaria - infected erythrocytes also correlated with reduced Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 5 susceptibility to perforin and reduced lysis by gd T cells ( 84 ) . The extent to which phosphatidylserine externalisation affects the elimination of target cells in vivo is unclear , and hard to establish . Whether this process could be targeted therapeutically is an open question . Cell Stiffness Physical properties of cells may also in ﬂ uence susceptibility to perforin , including cell tension or stiffness . Cell stiffness is commonly altered during malignancy , with cancer cells being relatively soft and deformable compared to healthy cells ( 85 ) . Accordingly , soft CD133 + tumour - repopulating cells were found to be resistant to perforin and take up less granzyme B following interaction with T cells ( 86 ) . These cells also evaded T cell cytotoxicity in vivo but killing could be enhanced if cells were treated with jasplakinolide , which promotes actin polymerisation and increases cancer cell stiffness . Cell stiffness can also be arti ﬁ cially altered by culturing cells on stiff or soft hydrogels , which directly changes the stiffness of cells to mirror the underlying substrate . Reducing stiffness in this way by culturing on a soft substrate has been shown to reduce susceptibility to perforin and lymphocyte cytotoxicity ( 87 ) . It is not entirely clear why cell stiffness affects perforin lytic ability in this way , but insertion and pore formation by hydrophobic molecules , such as perforin , is known to be more energetically favourable on stiff membranes ( 87 , 88 ) . Interestingly , cytotoxic lymphocytes have been found to utilise a mechanism which may counteract the reduced activity of perforin on soft cells . By using F - actin - rich protrusions , CTLs can exert lateral force on the target cell to increase membrane tension and enhance perforin pore formation ( 87 , 89 ) . Lytic granule secretion from CTLs was observed at the base of these FIGURE 2 | Resistance to granule - mediated cytotoxicity . Activation of a cytotoxic effector cell at an immune synapse with a target cell leads to the polarisation and secretion of lytic granules containing perforin and granzyme B . Under normal circumstances , in the absence of any resistance mechanisms , the secreted perforin will form pores in the target cell membrane and allow entry of granzyme B . This process will initiate cell death through both direct cell lysis and the activation of apoptotic pathways . Target cells can employ multiple mechanisms to evade cytotoxicity . ( A ) Increased plasma membrane lipid order to reduce perforin binding . ( B ) Externalisation of phosphatidylserine to induce perforin aggregation rather than pore formation . ( C ) Reduced cell stiffness to prevent ef ﬁ cient perforin pore formation . ( D ) Expression of Serpin B9 to directly inhibit Granzyme B activity . ( E ) Autophagy of Granzyme B to prevent activation of apoptotic pathways . ( F ) Secretion of Cathepsin B to degrade perforin . ( G ) Reduced gasdermin B and E expression or IpaH7 . 8 - mediated ubiquitination and degradation of gasdermin B can reduce pyroptosis or lysis of shigella , respectively . Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 6 protrusions so that it was spatially localised to the areas of force exertion on the target cell membrane ( 89 ) . It is interesting to note that the stiffness of a target cell can also modulate NK cell and CTL activation itself , with activation signi ﬁ cantly reduced against target cells exhibiting a soft phenotype or grown on a soft substrate ( 90 , 91 ) . Thus , alterations in cell stiffness at the whole - cell level , such as during malignancy , or at the nanoscale , at the immune synapse , may potently manipulate the sensitivity of cancerous or infected cells to perforin . Cathepsin B The pore - forming activity of perforin may also be reduced through direct degradation . Cysteine cathepsins are lysosomal peptidases with multiple roles in regulating immune responses ( 92 ) . It was initially shown that cathepsin B , which becomes expressed on the surface of lymphocytes following degranulation , can degrade perforin in order to protect against self - harm ( 93 ) . Inhibition of this surface - bound cathepsin B using the inhibitor CA074 led to enhanced CTL death after degranulation . Seemingly in contrast to this , it was later shown that CTLs from cathepsin B - null mice were not more susceptible to death following interaction with a target cell compared to cells from wild type mice ( 94 ) . To reconcile these observations , it is possible that there is redundancy in the system , and perhaps compensatory mechanisms are augmented in cathepsin B - null mice , such as increased lipid order or phosphatidylserine exposure , as discussed previously . More recent evidence has also linked cathepsin B with cancer cell resistance against lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Khazen et al . ( 95 ) showed that melanoma cells that were resistant to CTL cytotoxicity bound less perforin and took up less granzyme B despite inducing similar levels of CTL degranulation . This resistance was mediated by increased exocytosis of lysosomes or late endosomes at the immune synapse , which facilitated the secretion of cathepsin B leading to perforin degradation . Interestingly , cathepsin B is known to be overexpressed in multiple cancers , where it is associated with poor survival and metastasis ( 96 ) . Altogether , resistance to perforin through physical or degradative inhibition is an emerging aspect of immune resistance . Many of the mechanisms employed by cytotoxic lymphocytes to protect against self - harm appear to also be exploited by malignant or infected cells to inhibit perforin activity and enhance survival . However , the contribution of perforin resistance to immune escape has not yet been extensively explored in vivo . The ability to modify cancer cells pharmacologically to increase perforin susceptibility may be a way to increase the ef ﬁ cacy of lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Resisting Granzyme - Mediated Apoptosis In addition to perforin , granzymes are a critical component of granule - mediated cytotoxicity . Following perforin pore formation , granzymes enter the target cell and cleave a variety of targets to potently induce cell death . As a result , reduced granzyme activity within target cells may critically constrain killing by lymphocytes . Granzyme activity may be reduced in two ways : through reduced granzyme uptake as a result of perforin inhibition , as described previously , or through direct inhibition of granzyme function . The effect of reduced granzyme uptake on cytotoxicity was clearly demonstrated by the ﬁ nding that cancer cells , which were resistant to NK cell cytotoxicity , can undergo extensive cytoskeletal remodelling , which reduces granzyme uptake ( 97 , 98 ) . Although the underlying link between cytoskeletal remodelling and reduced granzyme uptake was not identi ﬁ ed in these studies , cytoskeletal inhibitors were found to restore granzyme levels and cytotoxicity following interaction with NK cells . Granzyme - induced cell death may also be reduced by direct inhibition of granzyme activity . Of all the proteins in the granzyme family , the mechanisms that reduce granzyme B - mediated cell death have been characterised the most . Inhibitory mechanisms that act directly on granzyme B pathways to prevent cell death include inhibition by serpin B9 , degradation through autophagy , and disruption of gasdermin - mediated pyroptosis ( Figure 2 ) . Serpin B9 Serpin B9 ( also known as serine proteinase inhibitor B9 or proteinase inhibitor 9 ) is the only endogenous granzyme B inhibitor that has been identi ﬁ ed . It was initially discovered in cytotoxic lymphocytes where it protects against apoptosis by binding to and inhibiting granzyme B ( 99 , 100 ) . When unbound to substrate , serpin B9 exists in a semi - stable form , but it is cleaved upon binding to granzyme B causing a conformational change into its most stable form and leaving a non - functional covalently - bound serpin B9 - granzyme B complex ( 101 ) . Apart from in immune cells and at certain immune - privileged sites , such as reproductive organs and the eye , normal human tissue does not express serpin B9 ( 102 ) . However , serpin B9 expression has been observed in multiple primary cancers , including lymphoma , melanoma , colon carcinoma , breast cancer , and lung cancer , in which it generally correlates with poor prognosis ( 102 – 107 ) . Overexpression of serpin B9 in various cancer cell lines results in resistance to killing by cytotoxic lymphocytes and , critically , is associated with resistance to immune checkpoint blockade in murine melanoma as well as against radiotherapy - induced type I interferon signalling ( 104 , 108 – 112 ) . Interestingly , the resistance of serpin B9 - expressing cancer cells to cytotoxic lymphocytes is less evident at high ratios of lymphocytes to cancer cells ( 111 ) . Furthermore , it has been shown through live imaging that multiple NK cell attacks successfully kill serpin B9 - expressing target cells , while single hits are suf ﬁ cient to kill targets which don ’ t express serpin B9 ( 113 ) . This is consistent with serpin B9 - mediated inhibition of cytotoxicity being overcome through increased granzyme B delivery via multiple lytic hits . Although serpin B9 has primarily been described as an inhibitor of lymphocyte - derived granzyme B , it has also been shown to have a broader role in mediating tumour immune escape . For example , overexpression of serpin B9 can inhibit TRAIL - , FasL - , and TNF - mediated apoptosis through directly inhibiting caspase 8 and 10 ( 108 , 114 ) . Furthermore , serpin B9 can promote tumour survival through inhibition of cancer cell - intrinsic granzyme B , which can become expressed in various malignancies ( 107 ) . Therefore , pharmacological inhibition of Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 7 serpin B9 may aid the destruction of target cancer cells through multiple pathways . Recently , inhibition of serpin B9 has been shown to slow the development of melanoma and increase the lifespan of mice with breast , kidney and lung tumours ( 107 ) . Autophagy Cancer cells may also evade cytotoxicity through autophagic pathways . Autophagy is a physiological process by which damaged or surplus proteins and organelles are degraded and recycled ( 115 ) . It has a particularly important role in preventing cell death during cellular stress , such as nutrient starvation or hypoxia . Increased autophagy is also a common feature of tumorigenesis to protect against the harsh environment often present within tumours . This also enables cancer cells to maintain their highly proliferative and metabolically active states even when the microenvironment is not conducive to it ( 115 ) . Autophagy may also contribute to tumour growth by promoting immune evasion . Hypoxia - induced autophagy , for example , has been shown to correlate with resistance to CTL and NK cell cytotoxicity ( 116 , 117 ) . Similarly , induction of autophagy as a result of genetic inactivation of the von Hippel - Lindau ( VHL ) gene reduces killing by NK cells ( 118 ) . Genome - wide CRISPR screens searching for genes that mediate resistance to CTL cytotoxicity have also identi ﬁ ed a range of autophagy - related genes associated with cytotoxicity resistance ( 119 , 120 ) . Degradation of granzyme B may be one mechanism by which autophagy inhibits cytotoxicity . Breast cancer cells with autophagy processes stimulated by hypoxia were found to be resistant to NK cell - mediated lysis , with granzyme B localising within their autophagosomes ( 117 ) . When hypoxia - related genes were inhibited , granzyme B activity within target cells was increased ( 117 , 118 ) . However , a later study demonstrated that a major effect of autophagy in cancer cells is to inhibit TNF a and TRAIL - induced apoptosis by reducing FADD - dependent caspase - 8 activation ( 120 ) . Thus , it is possible that autophagy can act in multiple ways to inhibit lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Gasdermins An emerging aspect of resistance to lymphocyte cytotoxicity is evasion of gasdermin - induced pyroptosis . Both granzyme A and B - mediated cleavage of gasdermin B and E , respectively , have been shown to contribute to tumour control by cytotoxic lymphocytes ( 48 , 54 ) . Furthermore , granzyme A - mediated cleavage of gasdermin B also contributes to defence against bacterial infection by NK cells ( 55 ) . Several mechanisms have been identi ﬁ ed which may cause resistance to these gasdermin - mediated cytotoxic pathways . Firstly , reduced expression of both gasdermin B and E have been identi ﬁ ed in many cancers ( 48 , 54 ) . In the case of gasdermin E , reduced expression can occur through epigenetic silencing via hypermethylation of the promoter region ( 121 , 122 ) . Low expression of both gasdermin B and E is associated with poor survival in various cancers , including breast cancer , bladder cancer , and melanoma ( 48 , 54 ) . Reducing granzyme - induced pyroptosis through silencing of gasdermin E expression in cancer cells has been shown to contribute signi ﬁ cantly to the escape of murine tumours from cytotoxic lymphocytes and accelerate tumour growth ( 48 ) . Similarly , resistance to gasdermin - mediated pyroptosis can occur through the expression of mutated gasdermin . One study found that 20 out of 22 gasdermin E mutations identi ﬁ ed within cancer samples were associated with reduced pyroptosis in response to granzyme B ( 48 ) . In the context of bacterial infection , pyroptosis has been shown to be inhibited through degradation of gasdermin B ( 55 ) . Degradation was mediated by a bacterial ubiquitin ligase IpaH7 . 8 secreted by the gram - negative bacterium , Shigella ﬂ exneri . IpaH7 . 8 was shown to ubiquitinate N - terminal gasdermin B after its cleavage by granzyme A , leading to its degradation . Expression of IpaH7 . 8 signi ﬁ cantly constrained the bactericidal activity of NK cells ( 55 ) . In summary , target cells may evade granzyme B - mediated apoptosis through inhibition by serpin B9 or degradation by autophagy . In addition , resistance to gasdermin - mediated pyroptosis is emerging as another mechanism by which cells may evade granzyme - mediated cytotoxicity in the context of malignancy and infection . Importantly , all of these mechanisms can have effects beyond granzymes and can affect other pathways of lymphocyte cytotoxicity as well as cell survival in other contexts . Therefore , targeting these pathways may directly impact cancer and could enhance other modes of treatment , such as immune therapies . Inhibiting Death Receptor - Mediated Killing Death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity is another critical mechanism by which cytotoxic lymphocytes may eliminate target cells . Several mechanisms have been described by which cells can evade death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity . Signalling can be directly inhibited by the activity of FADD - like IL - 1 b converting enzyme ( FLICE ) - inhibitory proteins ( FLIPs ) , expression of decoy receptors , or downregulation of death receptors ( Figure 3 ) . FLICE Inhibitory Proteins ( FLIPs ) One of the best characterised families of death receptor inhibitors are the FLIPs . This family of proteins includes both viral ( v - FLIP ) and cellular ( c - FLIP ) proteins , which share high sequence homology ( 123 ) . Several FLIP splice variants are expressed in humans , but the primary forms include the short variant , c - FLIP S , and the long variant , c - FLIP L ( 123 ) . The long variant contains an additional c - terminal domain that resembles the catalytic domains of caspase 8 and 10 but without functional caspase activity ( 123 , 124 ) . Both cellular and viral FLIPs inhibit caspase 8 activity by forming heterodimers with pro - caspase 8 ( 123 , 125 ) . This sequesters pro - caspase 8 , preventing it from forming the necessary homodimers required for processing into active caspase 8 . Inhibition of pro - caspase 8 processing by FLIPs prevents apoptosis induced by TRAIL and FasL , but not by granzyme B ( 124 , 126 , 127 ) . Immune cells have been observed to exert a selective pressure on cancer cells during in vivo tumorigenesis , allowing cells that highly express FLIP to escape ( 128 ) . Indeed , high tumour expression of c - FLIP , particularly of the long variant , has been found to correlate with poor prognosis Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 8 in a range of cancers , including acute myeloid leukaemia , colorectal cancer , and non - small cell lung cancer ( 129 – 131 ) . In addition to cellular FLIPs , viral FLIPs also appear to have a role in the promotion of tumorigenesis in humans . v - FLIPs that are expressed during viral infection act to protect host cells from death receptor - induced apoptosis resulting in immune escape from T cells ( 132 , 133 ) . This viral immune escape mechanism can contribute to the process by which certain viruses are particularly oncogenic . For example , Kaposi ’ s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus ( KSHV ) - FLIP is associated with Kaposi ’ s sarcoma and certain lymphomas ( 132 ) . To complicate the picture , although c - FLIP L has primarily been described as an inhibitor of apoptosis , it can also have pro - apoptotic effects . Heterodimers formed of c - FLIP L and pro - caspase 8 have been found to retain their catalytic activity and can process other pro - caspase 8 homodimers ( 125 , 134 – 137 ) . There is evidence that whether or not c - FLIP L promotes apoptosis is highly dependent on the level of expression of both the FLIP protein and pro - caspase 8 ( 125 , 136 , 137 ) . In the presence of very high levels of c - FLIP L , and therefore high levels of heterodimers , inhibition of apoptosis occurs since the amount of pro - caspase 8 homodimers that are available to be processed is decreased . Conversely , at lower concentrations , c - FLIP L preferentially acts as a promoter of apoptosis . Overall , FLIPs may play a signi ﬁ cant role in the aetiology of some cancers . As a result , FLIP inhibitors or drugs that reduce FLIP expression are currently under development for the treatment of cancer , but balancing the pro - and anti - apoptotic effects may be challenging ( 138 , 139 ) . Other anti - cancer treatments , such as doxorubicin , synthetic triterpenoids , and peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - g ( PPAR g ) ligands , can also decrease FLIP expression as a side effect , therefore increasing sensitivity to death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity ( 140 – 142 ) . FIGURE 3 | Inhibiting death receptor - mediated killing . Death receptor - mediated killing is a critical method of lymphocyte cytotoxicity . However , target cells have developed multiple mechanisms to inhibit the effectiveness of these processes . ( A ) Expression of decoy receptors , including membrane bound decoy receptors 1 and 2 that lack functional death domains , thereby preventing signalling while sequestering TRAIL . Decoy receptor 2 also inhibits death receptor 5 , preventing death receptor 4 recruitment and DISC formation . Decoy receptor 3 is soluble and binds to FasL preventing it acting upon target cell Fas . ( B ) Autophagy inhibits FADD - dependent caspase - 8 activation . ( C ) Decreased expression of death receptors , such as Fas , DR4 and DR5 inhibits apoptotic pathways . ( D ) Increased expression of cFLIP sequesters pro - caspase 8 into heterodimers to prevent its cleavage to caspase 8 and the subsequent activation of apoptotic pathways . Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 9 Decoy Receptors The majority of receptors that bind TNF superfamily proteins are capable of transducing signals . However , several receptors have been identi ﬁ ed that , despite binding the same ligands , lack cytoplasmic death domains for signalling and cannot recruit critical adaptors , such as FADD ( 143 ) . These are , in effect , decoy receptors which compete with functional death receptors for ligand binding . Physiologically , decoy receptors have been implicated in modulating in ﬂ ammatory responses but have also been hijacked as a survival mechanism in cancer ( 144 ) . One such protein is decoy receptor 3 ( DcR3 ) , a soluble receptor which binds FasL and is overexpressed in a large proportion of primary lung , colon , oesophageal , stomach , and rectal tumours ( 145 , 146 ) . Decoy receptors 1 and 2 ( DcR1 and DcR2 ) are membrane - bound receptors which bind TRAIL and also lack a functional death domain ( 147 , 148 ) . In addition to competing with functional TRAIL receptors , DcR2 is also able to interact with TRAIL - receptor variant , DR5 , preventing the recruitment of the DR4 variant to the DISC and inhibiting caspase activation ( 149 , 150 ) . Expression of DcR1 or DcR2 has been found to correlate with tumour progression and poor prognosis in breast cancer , prostate cancer , and leukaemia ( 151 – 153 ) . However , it is unclear whether targeting decoy receptors in tumours could have off - target effects , since they can also be expressed in several normal tissues , including the spleen , lung , gastrointestinal tract , endometrium , and activated T cells ( 145 , 154 , 155 ) . Furthermore , although there is evidence from over - expression systems that decoy receptors may constrain death receptor - mediated killing , the extent to which they are harnessed by cancer cells to evade lymphocyte cytotoxicity in vivo is not known . Death Receptor Expression and Mutation Death receptor signalling can also be lost in cancer cells through reduced surface expression or through inactivating mutations in death receptors . Reduced expression of the death receptors Fas or DR4 / 5 is a common feature of cancers ( 156 – 158 ) . Loss of these receptors is associated with poor prognosis , particularly upon loss of more than one receptor or when receptor downregulation occurs in tumours with low levels of in ﬁ ltrating CTL ( 156 , 158 ) . Interestingly , there is a weaker correlation between Fas expression and survival in colorectal tumours with high numbers of in ﬁ ltrating CTL ( 158 ) . This may suggest that granule - dependent cytotoxicity rather than death receptor - mediated killing is the predominant pathway of cancer cell elimination when large numbers of CTL are present ( 158 ) . Loss of death receptor expression can occur through several routes , including promoter methylation ( 159 – 161 ) , histone modi ﬁ cations ( 157 , 162 ) , promoter region mutations ( 163 ) , or reduced traf ﬁ cking to the cell membrane ( 164 ) . Notably , oncogenic Ras mutations can strongly downregulate Fas expression through the control of several genes associated with the promoter region of Fas , as well as through hypermethylation ( 159 , 160 ) . Conversely , death receptors are often up - regulated as a side - effect of cancer treatment , and this may contribute to the overall ef ﬁ cacy of the treatment . For example , receptors for FasL and TRAIL can be signi ﬁ cantly up - regulated following radiotherapy and chemotherapy , leading to enhanced killing by cytotoxic lymphocytes ( 165 – 171 ) . A less frequently occurring feature of cancers that may contribute to immune escape is mutations of the death receptors themselves . Mutations affecting function , which generally localise in the cytoplasmic domains , are infrequently observed in cancers , such as gastric cancer , non - small cell lung cancer , metastatic breast cancer , non - Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma , and head and neck cancer ( 172 – 175 ) . Induced expression of these mutated receptors in vitro can reduce pro - apoptotic signalling . Overall , death receptor signalling can be inhibited at multiple stages including reduced expression or mutation of death receptors , competition for ligand binding by decoy receptors , or inhibition of downstream signalling by FLIPs . However , there are several therapeutic strategies that may enhance death receptor signalling including pharmacological inhibition and downregulation of FLIPs or increasing death receptor expression , all of which have the potential to restore the ef ﬁ cacy of immune cytotoxicity . Inhibiting TNF - Mediated Cytotoxicity TNF is known to have both pro - survival and pro - death effects on cancer cells depending on its precise cellular context . Recently , genome - wide CRISPR screens have identi ﬁ ed TNF signalling as a major target of resistance to lymphocyte cytotoxicity ( 120 , 176 – 179 ) . These studies identi ﬁ ed several genes encoding proteins related to TNF signalling that either sensitise cells to lymphocyte cytotoxicity – including TNF - R1 , caspase 8 , TRADD , and RIPK1 – or promote evasion of cytotoxicity – including TRAF2 , cIAP1 , and FADD - like apoptosis regulator ( CFLAR ) , as well as multiple genes involved in the NF - k B pathway ( 120 , 176 – 179 ) . In particular , knockout of TRAF2 was shown to redirect TNF signalling from pro - survival signalling , via complex I proteins and the NF - k B pathway , to pro - death signalling , via complex II proteins ( 177 ) . Likewise , knockout or pharmacological inhibition of HOIL - 1 - interacting protein ( HOIP ) , the catalytic subunit of LUBAC involved in ubiquitination , also enhanced sensitivity to TNF by reducing the ubiquitination of pro - survival complex I proteins , which is required for TNF - mediated survival signalling ( 180 , 181 ) . Conversely , antibody blockade of TNF signi ﬁ cantly reduced killing by both wild - type and perforin - de ﬁ cient T cells demonstrating that TNF signalling is a major pathway of lymphocyte cytotoxicity ( 120 , 176 ) . Resistance to TNF - mediated cell death has also been suggested as one way in which autophagy can induce resistance to lymphocyte cytotoxicity . Knockout of key autophagy - related genes sensitizes cancer cells to TNF - induced death and TNF - mediated T cell cytotoxicity ( 119 , 120 ) . Autophagy can target TNF - induced cell death by modulating FADD / caspase - 8 activity ( 120 ) . Several other studies have also noted the ability of autophagy to interfere with active caspase - 8 leading to reduced susceptibility of cells to TRAIL and TNF during hepatic injury or in colon carcinoma ( 182 , 183 ) . It remains to be seen whether TNF signalling can be harnessed to successfully treat cancer patients in the clinic because its effects are highly context - dependent . This was Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 10 demonstrated by Young et al . , who found that knockout of TNF - R1 could either protect tumours against immune checkpoint blockade or sensitise tumours to it depending on whether autophagy was impaired or intact , respectively ( 120 ) . TNF has also been shown to have cancer - promoting effects in some cancer models , leading to several clinical trials of TNF antagonists demonstrating ef ﬁ cacy in some patients ( 184 – 186 ) . One possible approach to targeting TNF signalling is through the use of SMAC ( second mitochondria - derived activator of caspases ) mimetics . These are drugs that mimic the activity of SMAC , a protein that is an endogenous inhibitor of cIAP function ( 187 ) . Through the inhibition of cIAP , SMAC mimetics have been found to sensitise cancer cells to TNF - induced cell death both in vitro and in vivo ( 120 , 188 – 190 ) . Alternatively , directly inhibiting certain complex I components , such as HOIP , may redirect signalling towards apoptosis ( 180 ) . Therefore , there is potential for sensitising cancer cells to TNF - induced cell death , but greater understanding of how its functions vary is needed . Inhibiting Apoptotic Pathways In addition to the inhibitory mechanisms against speci ﬁ c components of lymphocyte cytotoxicity , cancer cells may exhibit more general resistance to apoptosis through alterations in apoptotic pathways . Prevention of apoptosis may occur through either down - regulation of pro - apoptotic mediators , such as caspases or pro - apoptotic Bcl - 2 family members , or up - regulation of apoptosis inhibitors , such as Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins ( IAPs ) or anti - apoptotic Bcl - 2 family members . These can affect both caspase - dependent and mitochondrial pathways of apoptosis , which are involved in both granule - mediated and death receptor - mediated cell death . Caspase Inhibition – Mutations and Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins Caspases are critical components of both granule - mediated and death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity . Death receptor - induced apoptosis relies on the activation of caspase 8 / 10 within the DISC to activate the executioner caspases , caspase 3 , 6 , and 7 . Conversely , granzyme B can directly cleave and activate executioner caspases as well as activating them through the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis . As a result , reducing caspase activity is a common pathway by which cancers avoid apoptosis , with reduced expression or mutations reported for both initiator ( caspase 2 , 8 , and 10 ) and executioner caspases ( caspase 3 , 6 , and 7 ) in a range of cancers ( 191 ) . For example , caspase 8 is commonly mutated , particularly in cancers of neuroendocrine or lymphoid origin ( 192 ) . Loss of caspase 8 expression contributes to resistance against TRAIL - induced apoptosis ( 193 , 194 ) . In addition to alterations in expression , caspase activity can be modulated by the enhanced expression of IAPs , such as cIAP1 , survivin , and X - linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein ( XIAP ) . IAPs can bind directly to caspases preventing their activity and leading to inhibition of granzyme B and death receptor - mediated apoptosis ( 195 – 197 ) . Bcl - 2 Family The mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis , characterised by mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization ( MOMP ) , is a critical pathway by which both granzyme B and death receptors can mediate apoptosis . This pathway is regulated by the Bcl - 2 family of proteins , which include pro - apoptotic BH3 proteins ( e . g . Bid ) , pro - apoptotic effector proteins ( e . g . Bax and Bak ) , and anti - apoptotic proteins ( e . g . Bcl - 2 and Bcl - XL ) ( 40 ) . Disruption of this pathway through either downregulation of pro - apoptotic proteins or upregulation of anti - apoptotic proteins can prevent apoptosis induced by either death receptors or granzymes . A critical mediator of MOMP is Bid , which can be cleaved by either caspase 8 following death receptor ligation or by granzyme B . Bid is responsible for recruiting additional mediators of MOMP , such as Bax and Bak ( 40 ) . As a result , loss of Bid expression in cancer cells leads to reduced sensitivity to granzyme B - induced apoptosis ( 198 , 199 ) . Likewise , loss of Bak expression , which is directly involved in permeabilization of the mitochondrial membrane , protects against apoptosis triggered by granzyme B ( 199 ) . Reduced expression of pro - apoptotic Bcl - 2 family members , such as Bid , is observed in various cancers and is associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer and colon cancer , for example ( 200 , 201 ) . Alternatively , inhibition of MOMP can occur through overexpression of the anti - apoptotic Bcl - 2 family proteins , which inhibit the activity of apoptotic proteins , such as Bax and Bak . Overexpression of anti - apoptotic proteins , such as Bcl - 2 or Bcl - XL , reduces apoptosis induced by both granule - mediated cytotoxicity and death receptor - mediated cytotoxicity , whereas pharmacological inhibition of Bcl - 2 sensitises cells to cytotoxicity ( 196 , 197 , 202 – 206 ) . Overexpression of Bcl - 2 is a common feature of multiple cancers ( 207 ) . Overall , cancer cells frequently develop mutations or altered expression of the critical caspases and Bcl - 2 family members involved in regulating and mediating apoptosis induced by immune attack . As a result , targeting these pathways , for example by inhibition of Bcl - 2 , could be a particularly effective way of enhancing the ef ﬁ cacy of immunotherapy in patients ( 208 ) . CONCLUSION Effective cytotoxicity by immune cells against cancerous or infected cells is a critical mechanism of controlling these disease states . A multitude of treatments , such as checkpoint inhibitors , have been developed to boost the immune system ’ s response to these diseased cells . However , these treatments are not always effective , and malignant and infected cells can still exploit mechanisms that enable them to evade the strengthened immune system . Here , we have outlined many ways in which diseased cells can evade the cytotoxic attacks of NK cells and CTLs . Many processes that enhance target cell resistance to cytotoxicity are the same processes that cytotoxic cells themselves use to prevent self - harm by their own deadly cargo . Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 11 Other pathways that inhibit cytotoxic killing , such as autophagy , pro - survival TNF signalling , and downregulation of apoptotic pathways , also convey other bene ﬁ ts normally , but can be exploited by cancerous cells or infectious agents . It is likely that many of these mechanisms of resistance have evolved together with the cytotoxic pathways employed by lymphocytes . This may explain why lymphocytes simultaneously utilise several cytotoxic pathways that are often redundant . For example , the broad range of granzyme B targets – including apoptotic caspases , regulators of mitochondrial apoptosis , and gasdermins – reduces the likelihood that a target cell could become resistant to granzyme B - mediated cell death . This was found to be the case in the context of haematological cancer , in which NK cells and CTLs were able to kill cancer cells despite a variety of anti - apoptotic mutations that conferred multi - drug resistance ( 209 , 210 ) . These studies demonstrate that lymphocytes can overcome some resistance mechanisms by inducing death through multiple pathways . Conceptually , it can be dif ﬁ cult to distinguish processes that have been autonomously selected to aid the survival of diseased cells that also happen to be bene ﬁ cial in avoiding immune attack , from processes that have been adopted by these cells to speci ﬁ cally resist cell - mediated cytotoxicity . Further research to investigate this could include studying the evolutionary development of cancers , and comparisons with mice de ﬁ cient in speci ﬁ c compartments of their immune system . Either way , there is great potential here to therapeutically target the processes discussed throughout this review . Targeting the ways in which diseased cells avoid death could be used alone or in combination with other therapies , including immunotherapies . Importantly , a greater understanding of these mechanisms and processes in vivo is sorely needed to indicate the most potent interventions . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS KT wrote the original manuscript . KT and ARA prepared ﬁ gures . KT , ARA , and DMD edited the manuscript . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING This work was funded by Cancer Research UK via funding to the Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute ( to KT ; C147 / A25254 ) and a Wellcome Trust Investigator Award ( to DMD ; 110091 / Z / 15 / Z ) . REFERENCES 1 . Prager I , Watzl C . Mechanisms of Natural Killer Cell - Mediated Cellular Cytotoxicity . JLeukocBiol ( 2019 ) 105 : 1319 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1002 / JLB . MR0718 - 269R 2 . Topham NJ , Hewitt EW . Natural Killer Cell Cytotoxicity : How do They Pull the Trigger ? Immunology ( 2009 ) 128 : 7 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2567 . 2009 . 03123 . x 3 . Halle S , Halle O , Förster R . Mechanisms and Dynamics of T Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity In Vivo . Trends Immunol ( 2017 ) 38 : 432 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . it . 2017 . 04 . 002 4 . Webster JD , Vucic D . The Balance of TNF Mediated Pathways Regulates In ﬂ ammatory Cell Death Signaling in Healthy and Diseased Tissues . Front Cell Dev Biol ( 2020 ) 8 : 365 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 00365 5 . Galluzzi L , Vitale I , Aaronson SA , Abrams JM , Adam D , Agostinis P , et al . Molecular Mechanisms of Cell Death : Recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death 2018 . Cell Death Differ ( 2018 ) 25 : 486 – 541 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41418 - 017 - 0012 - 4 6 . Waldman AD , Fritz JM , Lenardo MJ . A Guide to Cancer Immunotherapy : From T Cell Basic Science to Clinical Practice . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2020 ) 20 : 651 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41577 - 020 - 0306 - 5 7 . Chan CJ , Smyth MJ , Martinet L . Molecular Mechanisms of Natural Killer Cell Activation in Response to Cellular Stress . Cell Death Differ ( 2014 ) 21 : 5 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2013 . 26 8 . Davis DM , Chiu I , Fassett M , Cohen GB , Mandelboim O , Strominger JL . The Human Natural Killer Cell Immune Synapse . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 1999 ) 96 : 15062 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 26 . 15062 9 . Orange JS . Formation and Function of the Lytic NK - Cell Immunological Synapse . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2008 ) 8 : 713 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri2381 10 . Dustin ML . T - Cell Activation Through Immunological Synapses and Kinapses . Immunol Rev ( 2008 ) 221 : 77 – 89 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 065X . 2008 . 00589 . x 11 . Stinchcombe JC , Bossi G , Booth S , Grif ﬁ ths GM . The Immunological Synapse of CTL Contains a Secretory Domain and Membrane Bridges . Immunity ( 2001 ) 15 : 751 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00234 - 5 12 . Monks CRF , Freiberg BA , Kupfer H , Sciaky N , Kupfer A . Three - Dimensional Segregation of Supramolecular Activation Clusters in T Cells . Nature ( 1998 ) 395 : 82 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 25764 13 . Bryceson YT , March ME , Barber DF , Ljunggren H - G , Long EO . Cytolytic Granule Polarization and Degranulation Controlled by Different Receptors in Resting NK Cells . J Exp Med ( 2005 ) 202 : 1001 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20051143 14 . Davis DM , Dustin ML . What is the Importance of the Immunological Synapse ? Trends Immunol ( 2004 ) 25 : 323 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . it . 2004 . 03 . 007 15 . Kalbasi A , Ribas A . Tumour - Intrinsic Resistance to Immune Checkpoint Blockade . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2020 ) 20 : 25 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41577 - 019 - 0218 - 4 16 . Dhatchinamoorthy K , Colbert JD , Rock KL . Cancer Immune Evasion Through Loss of MHC Class I Antigen Presentation . Front Immunol ( 2021 ) 12 : 636568 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2021 . 636568 17 . Spranger S , Gajewski TF . Mechanisms of Tumor Cell – Intrinsic Immune Evasion . Annu Rev Cancer Biol ( 2018 ) 2 : 213 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cancerbio - 030617 - 050606 18 . O ’ Donnell JS , Teng MWL , Smyth MJ . Cancer Immunoediting and Resistance to T Cell - Based Immunotherapy . Nat Rev Clin Oncol ( 2019 ) 16 : 151 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41571 - 018 - 0142 - 8 19 . Ribas A , Wolchok JD . Cancer Immunotherapy Using Checkpoint Blockade . Science ( 2018 ) 359 : 1350 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aar4060 20 . Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . Hallmarks of Cancer : The Next Generation . Cell ( 2011 ) 144 : 646 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 02 . 013 21 . Dustin ML . The Immunological Synapse . Cancer Immunol Res ( 2014 ) 2 : 1023 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 2326 - 6066 . CIR - 14 - 0161 22 . Mace EM , Dongre P , Hsu H - T , Sinha P , James AM , Mann SS , et al . Cell Biological Steps and Checkpoints in Accessing NK Cell Cytotoxicity . Immunol Cell Biol ( 2014 ) 92 : 245 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / icb . 2013 . 96 23 . Lagrue K , Carisey A , Oszmiana A , Kennedy PR , Williamson DJ , Cartwright A , et al . The Central Role of the Cytoskeleton in Mechanisms and Functions of the NK Cell Immune Synapse . Immunol Rev ( 2013 ) 256 : 203 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imr . 12107 Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 12 24 . Osin ́ ska I , Popko K , Demkow U . Perforin : An Important Player in Immune Response . Cent J Immunol ( 2014 ) 39 : 109 – 15 . doi : 10 . 5114 / ceji . 2014 . 42135 25 . Chowdhury D , Lieberman J . Death by a Thousand Cuts : Granzyme Pathways of Programmed Cell Death . Annu Rev Immunol ( 2008 ) 26 : 389 – 420 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 26 . 021607 . 090404 26 . Voskoboinik I , Whisstock JC , Trapani JA . Perforin and Granzymes : Function , Dysfunction and Human Pathology . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2015 ) 15 : 388 – 400 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri3839 27 . Backes CS , Friedmann KS , Mang S , Knörck A , Hoth M , Kummerow C . Natural Killer Cells Induce Distinct Modes of Cancer Cell Death : Discrimination , Quanti ﬁ cation , and Modulation of Apoptosis , Necrosis , and Mixed Forms . J Biol Chem ( 2018 ) 293 : 16348 – 63 . http : / / www . jbc . org / content / 293 / 42 / 16348 . abstract . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . RA118 . 004549 28 . Masson D , Tschopp J . Isolation of a Lytic , Pore - Forming Protein ( Perforin ) From Cytolytic T - Lymphocytes . J Biol Chem ( 1985 ) 260 : 9069 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9258 ( 17 ) 39328 - 6 29 . Law RHP , Lukoyanova N , Voskoboinik I , Caradoc - Davies TT , Baran K , Dunstone MA , et al . The Structural Basis for Membrane Binding and Pore Formation by Lymphocyte Perforin . Nature ( 2010 ) 468 : 447 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09518 30 . Lopez JA , Susanto O , Jenkins MR , Lukoyanova N , Sutton VR , Law RHP , et al . Perforin Forms Transient Pores on the Target Cell Plasma Membrane to Facilitate Rapid Access of Granzymes During Killer Cell Attack . Blood ( 2013 ) 121 : 2659 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2012 - 07 - 446146 31 . Thiery J , Keefe D , Boulant S , Boucrot E , Walch M , Martinvalet D , et al . Perforin Pores in the Endosomal Membrane Trigger the Release of Endocytosed Granzyme B Into the Cytosol of Target Cells . Nat Immunol ( 2011 ) 12 : 770 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni . 2050 32 . Keefe D , Shi L , Feske S , Massol R , Navarro F , Kirchhausen T , et al . Perforin Triggers a Plasma Membrane - Repair Response That Facilitates CTL Induction of Apoptosis . Immunity ( 2005 ) 23 : 249 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2005 . 08 . 001 33 . Thiery J , Keefe D , Saffarian S , Martinvalet D , Walch M , Boucrot E , et al . Perforin Activates Clathrin - and Dynamin - Dependent Endocytosis , Which is Required for Plasma Membrane Repair and Delivery of Granzyme B for Granzyme - Mediated Apoptosis . Blood ( 2010 ) 115 : 1582 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2009 - 10 - 246116 34 . Ambrose AR , Hazime KS , Worboys JD , Niembro - Vivanco O , Davis DM . Synaptic Secretion From Human Natural Killer Cells is Diverse and Includes Supramolecular Attack Particles . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2020 ) 117 : 23717 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2010274117 35 . Ba ́ lint S ̌ , Müller S , Fischer R , Kessler BM , Harkiolaki M , Valitutti S , et al . Supramolecular Attack Particles are Autonomous Killing Entities Released From Cytotoxic T Cells . Science ( 80 - ) ( 2020 ) 368 : 897 – 901 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aay9207 36 . Elmore S . Apoptosis : A Review of Programmed Cell Death . Toxicol Pathol ( 2007 ) 35 : 495 – 516 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 01926230701320337 37 . Sutton VR , Davis JE , Cancilla M , Johnstone RW , Rue ﬂ i AA , Sedelies K , et al . Initiation of Apoptosis by Granzyme B Requires Direct Cleavage of Bid , But Not Direct Granzyme B – Mediated Caspase Activation . J Exp Med ( 2000 ) 192 : 1403 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 192 . 10 . 1403 38 . Catala ́ n E , Jaime - Sa ́ nchez P , Aguilo ́ N , Simon MM , Froelich CJ , Pardo J . Mouse Cytotoxic T Cell - Derived Granzyme B Activates the Mitochondrial Cell Death Pathway in a Bim - Dependent Fashion * . J Biol Chem ( 2015 ) 290 : 6868 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 631564 39 . Pardo J , Wallich R , Martin P , Urban C , Rongvaux A , Flavell RA , et al . Granzyme B - Induced Cell Death Exerted by Ex Vivo CTL : Discriminating Requirements for Cell Death and Some of its Signs . Cell Death Differ ( 2008 ) 15 : 567 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . cdd . 4402289 40 . Kalkavan H , Green DR . MOMP . Cell Suicide as a BCL - 2 Family Business . Cell Death Differ ( 2018 ) 25 : 46 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2017 . 179 41 . Han J , Goldstein LA , Gastman BR , Froelich CJ , Yin X - M , Rabinowich H . Degradation of Mcl - 1 by Granzyme B : IMPLICATIONS FOR Bim - MEDIATED MITOCHONDRIAL APOPTOTIC EVENTS * . J Biol Chem ( 2004 ) 279 : 22020 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M313234200 42 . Thomas DA , Scorrano L , Putcha GV , Korsmeyer SJ , Ley TJ . Granzyme B can Cause Mitochondrial Depolarization and Cell Death in the Absence of BID , BAX , and BAK . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2001 ) 98 : 14985 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 261581498 43 . Goping IS , Sawchuk T , Rieger A , Shostak I , Bleackley RC . Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes Overcome Bcl - 2 Inhibition : Target Cells Contribute to Their Own Demise . Blood ( 2008 ) 111 : 2142 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2007 - 08 - 105221 44 . Martinvalet D . Mitochondrial Entry of Cytotoxic Proteases : A New Insight Into the Granzyme B Cell Death Pathway . Oxid Med Cell Longev ( 2019 ) 2019 : 9165214 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2019 / 9165214 45 . Thomas DA , Du C , Xu M , Wang X , Ley TJ . DFF45 / ICAD Can Be Directly Processed by Granzyme B During the Induction of Apoptosis . Immunity ( 2000 ) 12 : 621 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80213 - 7 46 . Adrain C , Duriez PJ , Brumatti G , Delivani P , Martin SJ . The Cytotoxic Lymphocyte Protease , Granzyme B , Targets the Cytoskeleton and Perturbs Microtubule Polymerization Dynamics * . J Biol Chem ( 2006 ) 281 : 8118 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M509361200 47 . Goping IS , Sawchuk T , Underhill DA , Bleackley RC . Identi ﬁ cation of a - Tubulin as a Granzyme B Substrate During CTL - Mediated Apoptosis . J Cell Sci ( 2006 ) 119 : 858 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02791 48 . Zhang Z , Zhang Y , Xia S , Kong Q , Li S , Liu X , et al . Gasdermin E Suppresses Tumour Growth by Activating Anti - Tumour Immunity . Nature ( 2020 ) 579 : 415 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2071 - 9 49 . Yuying L , Yiliang F , Xinfeng C , Zhenfeng W , Xiaoyu L , Tianzhen Z , et al . Gasdermin E – mediated Target Cell Pyroptosis by CAR T Cells Triggers Cytokine Release Syndrome . Sci Immunol ( 2020 ) 5 : eaax7969 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aax7969 50 . Liu X , Xia S , Zhang Z , Wu H , Lieberman J . Channelling In ﬂ ammation : Gasdermins in Physiology and Disease . Nat Rev Drug Discovery ( 2021 ) 20 : 384 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41573 - 021 - 00154 - z 51 . Mahrus S , Craik CS . Selective Chemical Functional Probes of Granzymes A and B Reveal Granzyme B Is a Major Effector ofNatural Killer Cell - Mediated Lysis of Target Cells . Chem Biol ( 2005 ) 12 : 567 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chembiol . 2005 . 03 . 006 52 . Beresford PJ , Xia Z , Greenberg AH , Lieberman J . Granzyme A Loading Induces Rapid Cytolysis and a Novel Form of DNA Damage Independently ofCaspase Activation . Immunity ( 1999 ) 10 : 585 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80058 - 8 53 . Lieberman J . Granzyme A Activates Another Way to Die . Immunol Rev ( 2010 ) 235 : 93 – 104 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 0105 - 2896 . 2010 . 00902 . x 54 . Zhou Z , He H , Wang K , Shi X , Wang Y , Su Y , et al . Granzyme A From Cytotoxic Lymphocytes Cleaves GSDMB to Trigger Pyroptosis in Target Cells . Science ( 80 - ) ( 2020 ) 388 : eaaz7548 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaz7548 55 . Hansen JM , de Jong MF , Wu Q , Zhang L - S , Heisler DB , Alto LT , et al . Pathogenic Ubiquitination of GSDMB Inhibits NK Cell Bactericidal Functions . Cell ( 2021 ) 184 : 3178 – 3191 . e18 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 04 . 036 56 . Wilson NS , Dixit V , Ashkenazi A . Death Receptor Signal Transducers : Nodes of Coordination in Immune Signaling Networks . Nat Immunol ( 2009 ) 10 : 348 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni . 1714 57 . Bodmer J - L , Schneider P , Tschopp J . The Molecular Architecture of the TNF Superfamily . Trends Biochem Sci ( 2002 ) 27 : 19 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0968 - 0004 ( 01 ) 01995 - 8 58 . Micheau O , Tschopp J . Induction of TNF Receptor I - Mediated Apoptosis via Two Sequential Signaling Complexes . Cell ( 2003 ) 114 : 181 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00521 - X 59 . Wang L , Du F , Wang X . TNF - a Induces Two Distinct Caspase - 8 Activation Pathways . Cell ( 2008 ) 133 : 693 – 703 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 03 . 036 60 . Bertrand MJM , Milutinovic S , Dickson KM , Ho WC , Boudreault A , Durkin J , et al . Ciap1 and Ciap2 Facilitate Cancer Cell Survival by Functioning as E3 Ligases That Promote RIP1 Ubiquitination . Mol Cell ( 2008 ) 30 : 689 – 700 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 05 . 014 61 . Weigelin B , den Boer AT , Wagena E , Broen K , Dolstra H , de Boer RJ , et al . Cytotoxic T Cells are Able to Ef ﬁ ciently Eliminate Cancer Cells by Additive Cytotoxicity . Nat Commun ( 2021 ) 12 : 5217 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 25282 - 3 62 . Khazen R , Cazaux M , Lema ı ̂ tre F , Corre B , Garcia Z , Bousso P . Functional Heterogeneity of Cytotoxic T Cells and Tumor Resistance to Cytotoxic Hits Limit Anti - Tumor Activity In Vivo . EMBO J ( 2021 ) 40 : e106658 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 2020106658 Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 13 63 . Liu CC , Jiang S , Persechini PM , Zychlinsky A , Kaufmann Y , Young JD . Resistance of Cytolytic Lymphocytes to Perforin - Mediated Killing . Induction of Resistance Correlates With Increase in Cytotoxicity . J Exp Med ( 1989 ) 169 : 2211 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 169 . 6 . 2211 64 . Shinkai Y , Takio K , Okumura K . Homology of Perforin to the Ninth Component of Complement ( C9 ) . Nature ( 1988 ) 334 : 525 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 334525a0 65 . Jiang SB , Ojcius DM , Persechini PM , Young JD . Resistance of Cytolytic Lymphocytes to Perforin - Mediated Killing . Inhibition of Perforin Binding Activity by Surface Membrane Proteins . J Immunol ( 1990 ) 144 : 998 – 1003 . 66 . Lehmann C , Zeis M , Schmitz N , Uharek L . Impaired Binding of Perforin on the Surface of Tumor Cells is a Cause of Target Cell Resistance Against Cytotoxic Effector Cells ( 2000 ) . 67 . Otten HG , van Ginkel WGJ , Hagenbeek A , Petersen EJ . Prevalence and Clinical Signi ﬁ cance of Resistance to Perforin - and FAS - Mediated Cell Death in Leukemia . Leukemia ( 2004 ) 18 : 1401 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . leu . 2403414 68 . Tuomela K , Mukherjee D , Ambrose AR , Harikrishnan A , Mole H , Hurlstone A , et al . Radiotherapy Transiently Reduces the Sensitivity of Cancer Cells to Lymphocyte Cytotoxicity . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2022 ) 119 : e2111900119 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2111900119 69 . Owen DM , Rentero C , Magenau A , Abu - Siniyeh A , Gaus K . Quantitative Imaging of Membrane Lipid Order in Cells and Organisms . Nat Protoc ( 2012 ) 7 : 24 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 419 70 . Simons K , Vaz WLC . Model Systems , Lipid Rafts , and Cell Membranes . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct ( 2004 ) 33 : 269 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 32 . 110601 . 141803 71 . Blumenthal R , Millard PJ , Henkart MP , Reynolds CW , Henkart PA . Liposomes as Targets for Granule Cytolysin From Cytotoxic Large Granular Lymphocyte Tumors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1984 ) 81 : 5551 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 81 . 17 . 5551 72 . Antia R , Schlegel RA , Williamson P . Binding of Perforin to Membranes is Sensitive to Lipid Spacing and Not Headgroup . Immunol Lett ( 1992 ) 32 : 153 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0165 - 2478 ( 92 ) 90108 - Z 73 . Rudd - Schmidt JA , Hodel AW , Noori T , Lopez JA , Cho H - J , Verschoor S , et al . Lipid Order and Charge Protect Killer T Cells From Accidental Death . Nat Commun ( 2019 ) 10 : 5396 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13385 - x 74 . Hodel AW , Rudd - Schmidt J , Trapani JA , Voskoboinik I , Hoogenboom B . Lipid Speci ﬁ city of the Immune Effector Perforin . Faraday Discuss ( 2020 ) 232 : 236 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1039 / D0FD00043D 75 . Li Y , Orange JS . Degranulation Enhances Presynaptic Membrane Packing , Which Protects NK Cells From Perforin - Mediated Autolysis . PLoS Biol ( 2021 ) 19 : e3001328 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 3001328 76 . Gaus K , Chklovskaia E , Fazekas de St . Groth B , Jessup W , Harder T . Condensation of the Plasma Membrane at the Site of T Lymphocyte Activation . J Cell Biol ( 2005 ) 171 : 121 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200505047 77 . Janes PW , Ley SC , Magee AI . Aggregation of Lipid Rafts Accompanies Signaling via the T Cell Antigen Receptor . J Cell Biol ( 1999 ) 147 : 447 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 147 . 2 . 447 78 . Baritaki S , Apostolakis S , Kanellou P , Dimanche - Boitrel M , Spandidos DA . Bonavida BBT - A in CR . Reversal of Tumor Resistance to Apoptotic Stimuli by Alteration of Membrane Fluidity : Therapeutic Implications . Adv Cancer Res ( 2007 ) 98 : 149 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0065 - 230X ( 06 ) 98005 - 1 79 . Zalba S , ten Hagen TLM . Cell Membrane Modulation as Adjuvant in Cancer Therapy . Cancer Treat Rev ( 2017 ) 52 : 48 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ctrv . 2016 . 10 . 008 80 . Kay JG , Fairn GD . Distribution , Dynamics and Functional Roles of Phosphatidylserine Within the Cell . Cell Commun Signal ( 2019 ) 17 : 126 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12964 - 019 - 0438 - z 81 . Shin H - W , Takatsu H . Phosphatidylserine Exposure in Living Cells . Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol ( 2020 ) 55 : 166 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10409238 . 2020 . 1758624 82 . Fischer K , Voelkl S , Berger J , Andreesen R , Pomorski T , Mackensen A . Antigen Recognition Induces Phosphatidylserine Exposure on the Cell Surface of Human CD8 + T Cells . Blood ( 2006 ) 108 : 4094 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2006 - 03 - 011742 83 . Riedl S , Rinner B , Asslaber M , Schaider H , Walzer S , Novak A , et al . In Search of a Novel Target — Phosphatidylserine Exposed by Non - Apoptotic Tumor Cells and Metastases of Malignancies With Poor Treatment Ef ﬁ cacy . Biochim Biophys Acta - Biomembr ( 2011 ) 1808 : 2638 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2011 . 07 . 026 84 . Herna ́ ndez - Castañeda MA , Lavergne M , Casanova P , Nydegger B , Merten C , Subramanian BY , et al . A Profound Membrane Reorganization De ﬁ nes Susceptibility of Plasmodium Falciparum Infected Red Blood Cells to Lysis by Granulysin and Perforin . Front Immunol ( 2021 ) 12 : 643746 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2021 . 643746 85 . Suresh S . Biomechanics and Biophysics of Cancer Cells . Acta Mater ( 2007 ) 55 : 3989 – 4014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actamat . 2007 . 04 . 022 86 . Liu Y , Zhang T , Zhang H , Li J , Zhou N , Fiskesund R , et al . Cell Softness Prevents Cytolytic T - Cell Killing of Tumor - Repopulating Cells . Cancer Res ( 2021 ) 81 : 476 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 20 - 2569 87 . Basu R , Whitlock BM , Husson J , Le Floc ’ h A , Jin W , Oyler - Yaniv A , et al . Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing . Cell ( 2016 ) 165 : 100 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 01 . 021 88 . Lee M - T , Chen F - Y , Huang HW . Energetics of Pore Formation Induced by Membrane Active Peptides . Biochemistry ( 2004 ) 43 : 3590 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi036153r 89 . Tamzalit F , Wang MS , Jin W , Tello - Lafoz M , Boyko V , Heddleston JM , et al . Interfacial Actin Protrusions Mechanically Enhance Killing by Cytotoxic T Cells . Sci Immunol ( 2019 ) 4 : eaav5445 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aav5445 90 . Friedman D , Simmonds P , Hale A , Bere L , Hodson NW , White MRH , et al . Natural Killer Cell Immune Synapse Formation and Cytotoxicity are Controlled by Tension of the Target Interface . J Cell Sci ( 2021 ) 134 : jcs258570 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 258570 91 . Tello - Lafoz M , Srpan K , Sanchez EE , Hu J , Remsik J , Romin Y , et al . Cytotoxic Lymphocytes Target Characteristic Biophysical Vulnerabilities in Cancer . Immunity ( 2021 ) 54 : 1037 – 54 . e7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2021 . 02 . 020 92 . Peris ̌ ic ́ Nanut M , Sabotic ̌ J , Jewett A , Kos J . Cysteine Cathepsins as Regulators of the Cytotoxicity of NK and T Cells . Front Immunol ( 2014 ) 5 : 616 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2014 . 00616 93 . Balaji KN , Schaschke N , Machleidt W , Catalfamo M , Henkart PA . Surface Cathepsin B Protects Cytotoxic Lymphocytes From Self - Destruction After Degranulation . J Exp Med ( 2002 ) 196 : 493 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20011836 94 . Baran K , Ciccone A , Peters C , Yagita H , Bird PI , Villadangos JA , et al . Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes From Cathepsin B - De ﬁ cient Mice Survive Normally In Vitro and In Vivo After Encountering and Killing Target Cells . J Biol Chem ( 2006 ) 281 : 30485 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M602007200 95 . Khazen R , Müller S , Gaudenzio N , Espinosa E , Puissegur M - P , Valitutti S . Melanoma Cell Lysosome Secretory Burst Neutralizes the CTL - Mediated Cytotoxicity at the Lytic Synapse . Nat Commun ( 2016 ) 7 : 10823 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms10823 96 . Ruan H , Hao S , Young P , Zhang H . Targeting Cathepsin B for Cancer Therapies . Horizons Cancer Res ( 2015 ) 56 : 23 – 40 . 97 . Al Absi A , Wurzer H , Guerin C , Hoffmann C , Moreau F , Mao X , et al . Actin Cytoskeleton Remodeling Drives Breast Cancer Cell Escape From Natural Killer – Mediated Cytotoxicity . Cancer Res ( 2018 ) 78 : 5631 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 18 - 0441 98 . Wurzer H , Filali L , Hoffmann C , Krecke M , Biolato AM , Mastio J , et al . Intrinsic Resistance of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Cells to NK Cell - Mediated Lysis Can Be Overcome In Vitro by Pharmacological Inhibition of Cdc42 - Induced Actin Cytoskeleton Remodeling . Front Immunol ( 2021 ) 12 : 619069 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2021 . 619069 99 . Sun J , Bird CH , Sutton V , McDonald L , Coughlin PB , De Jong TA , et al . A Cytosolic Granzyme B Inhibitor Related to the Viral Apoptotic Regulator Cytokine Response Modi ﬁ er A Is Present in Cytotoxic Lymphocytes . J Biol Chem ( 1996 ) 271 : 27802 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 271 . 44 . 27802 100 . Bird CH , Sutton VR , Sun J , Hirst CE , Novak A , Kumar S , et al . Selective Regulation of Apoptosis : The Cytotoxic Lymphocyte Serpin Proteinase Inhibitor 9 Protects Against Granzyme B - Mediated Apoptosis Without Perturbing the Fas Cell Death Pathway . Mol Cell Biol ( 1998 ) 18 : 6387 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 18 . 11 . 6387 101 . Sanrattana W , Maas C , de Maat S . SERPINs — From Trap to Treatment . Front Med ( 2019 ) 6 : 25 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fmed . 2019 . 00025 102 . Bladergroen BA , Meijer CJLM , ten Berge RL , Hack CE , Muris JJF , Dukers DF , et al . Expression of the Granzyme B Inhibitor , Protease Inhibitor 9 , by Tumor Cells in Patients With Non - Hodgkin and Hodgkin Lymphoma : A Novel Protective Mechanism for Tumor Cells to Circumvent the Immune System ? Blood ( 2002 ) 99 : 232 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1182 / BLOOD . V99 . 1 . 232 Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 14 103 . van Houdt IS , Oudejans JJ , van den Eertwegh AJM , Baars A , Vos W , Bladergroen BA , et al . Expression of the Apoptosis Inhibitor Protease Inhibitor 9 Predicts Clinical Outcome in Vaccinated Patients With Stage III and IV Melanoma . Clin Cancer Res ( 2005 ) 11 : 6400 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 05 - 0306 104 . Medema JP , de Jong J , Peltenburg LT , Verdegaal EM , Gorter A , Bres SA , et al . Blockade of the Granzyme B / perforin Pathway Through Overexpression of the Serine Protease Inhibitor PI - 9 / SPI - 6 Constitutes a Mechanism for Immune Escape by Tumors . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2001 ) 98 : 11515 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 201398198 105 . ten Berge RL , Meijer CJLM , Dukers DF , Kummer JA , Bladergroen BA , Vos W , et al . Expression Levels of Apoptosis - Related Proteins Predict Clinical Outcome in Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma . Blood ( 2002 ) 99 : 4540 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1182 / BLOOD . V99 . 12 . 4540 106 . Godal R , Keilholz U , Uharek L , Letsch A , Asemissen AM , Busse A , et al . Lymphomas are Sensitive to Perforin - Dependent Cytotoxic Pathways Despite Expression of PI - 9 and Overexpression of Bcl - 2 . Blood ( 2006 ) 107 : 3205 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2005 - 07 - 2880 107 . Jiang L , Wang Y - J , Zhao J , Uehara M , Hou Q , Kasinath V , et al . Direct Tumor Killing and Immunotherapy Through Anti - SerpinB9 Therapy . Cell ( 2020 ) 183 : 1219 – 1233 . e18 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2020 . 10 . 045 108 . Cunningham TD , Jiang X , Shapiro DJ . Expression of High Levels of Human Proteinase Inhibitor 9 Blocks Both Perforin / Granzyme and Fas / Fas Ligand - Mediated Cytotoxicity . Cell Immunol ( 2007 ) 245 : 32 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellimm . 2007 . 03 . 004 109 . Ray M , Hostetter DR , Loeb CRK , Simko J , Craik CS . Inhibition of Granzyme B by PI - 9 Protects Prostate Cancer Cells From Apoptosis . Prostate ( 2012 ) 72 : 846 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pros . 21486 110 . Liesche C , Sauer P , Prager I , Urlaub D , Claus M , Eils R , et al . Single - Fluorescent Protein Reporters Allow Parallel Quanti ﬁ cation of Natural Killer Cell - Mediated Granzyme and Caspase Activities in Single Target Cells . Front Immunol ( 2018 ) 9 : 1840 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2018 . 01840 111 . Jiang P , Gu S , Pan D , Fu J , Sahu A , Hu X , et al . Signatures of T Cell Dysfunction and Exclusion Predict Cancer Immunotherapy Response . Nat Med ( 2018 ) 24 : 1550 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 018 - 0136 - 1 112 . Chen J , Cao Y , Markelc B , Kaeppler J , Vermeer JA , Muschel RJ . Type I IFN Protects Cancer Cells From CD8 + T Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity After Radiation . J Clin Invest ( 2019 ) 129 : 4224 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI127458 113 . Choi PJ , Mitchison TJ . Quantitative Analysis of Resistance to Natural Killer Attacks Reveals Stepwise Killing Kinetics . Integr Biol ( 2014 ) 6 : 1153 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c4ib00096j 114 . Kummer JA , Micheau O , Schneider P , Bovenschen N , Broekhuizen R , Quadir R , et al . Ectopic Expression of the Serine Protease Inhibitor PI9 Modulates Death Receptor - Mediated Apoptosis . Cell Death Differ ( 2007 ) 14 : 1486 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . cdd . 4402152 115 . Yun CW , Lee SH . The Roles of Autophagy in Cancer . Int J Mol Sci ( 2018 ) 19 : 3466 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms19113466 116 . Noman MZ , Janji B , Kaminska B , Van Moer K , Pierson S , Przanowski P , et al . Blocking Hypoxia - Induced Autophagy in Tumors Restores Cytotoxic T - Cell Activity and Promotes Regression . Cancer Res ( 2011 ) 71 : 5976 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 11 - 1094 117 . Baginska J , Viry E , Berchem G , Poli A , Noman MZ , van Moer K , et al . Granzyme B Degradation by Autophagy Decreases Tumor Cell Susceptibility to Natural Killer - Mediated Lysis Under Hypoxia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2013 ) 110 : 17450 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1304790110 118 . Messai Y , Noman MZ , Hasmim M , Janji B , Tittarelli A , Boutet M , et al . ITPR1 Protects Renal Cancer Cells Against Natural Killer Cells by Inducing Autophagy . Cancer Res ( 2014 ) 74 : 6820 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 14 - 0303 119 . Lawson KA , Sousa CM , Zhang X , Kim E , Akthar R , Caumanns JJ , et al . Functional Genomic Landscape of Cancer - Intrinsic Evasion of Killing by T Cells . Nature ( 2020 ) 586 : 120 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2746 - 2 120 . Young TM , Reyes C , Pasnikowski E , Castanaro C , Wong C , Decker CE , et al . Autophagy Protects Tumors From T Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity via Inhibition of Tnf a - Induced Apoptosis . Sci Immunol ( 2020 ) 5 : eabb9561 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . abb9561 121 . Kim MS , Chang X , Yamashita K , Nagpal JK , Baek JH , Wu G , et al . Aberrant Promoter Methylation and Tumor Suppressive Activity of the DFNA5 Gene in Colorectal Carcinoma . Oncogene ( 2008 ) 27 : 3624 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1211021 122 . Akino K , Toyota M , Suzuki H , Imai T , Maruyama R , Kusano M , et al . Identi ﬁ cation of DFNA5 as a Target of Epigenetic Inactivation in Gastric Cancer . Cancer Sci ( 2007 ) 98 : 88 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1349 - 7006 . 2006 . 00351 . x 123 . Humphreys L , Espona - Fiedler M , Longley DB . FLIP as a Therapeutic Target in Cancer . FEBS J ( 2018 ) 285 : 4104 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 14523 124 . Hu S , Vincenz C , Ni J , Gentz R , Dixit VM . I - FLICE . A Novel Inhibitor of Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor - 1 - and CD - 95 - Induced Apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 1997 ) 272 : 17255 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 272 . 28 . 17255 125 . Hughes MA , Powley IR , Jukes - Jones R , Horn S , Feoktistova M , Fairall L , et al . Co - Operative and Hierarchical Binding of C - FLIP and Caspase - 8 : A Uni ﬁ ed Model De ﬁ nes How C - FLIP Isoforms Differentially Control Cell Fate . Mol Cell ( 2016 ) 61 : 834 – 49 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 02 . 023 126 . Kataoka T , Schröter M , Hahne M , Schneider P , Irmler M , Thome M , et al . FLIP Prevents Apoptosis Induced by Death Receptors But Not by Perforin / Granzyme B , Chemotherapeutic Drugs , and Gamma Irradiation . J Immunol ( 1998 ) 161 : 3936 – 42 . 127 . Irmler M , Thome M , Hahne M , Schneider P , Hofmann K , Steiner V , et al . Inhibition of Death Receptor Signals by Cellular FLIP . Nature ( 1997 ) 388 : 190 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 40657 128 . Medema JP , de Jong J , van Hall T , Melief CJ , Offringa R . Immune Escape of Tumors In Vivo by Expression of Cellular FLICE - Inhibitory Protein . J Exp Med ( 1999 ) 190 : 1033 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 190 . 7 . 1033 129 . Riley JS , Hutchinson R , McArt DG , Crawford N , Holohan C , Paul I , et al . Prognostic and Therapeutic Relevance of FLIP and Procaspase - 8 Overexpression in Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer . Cell Death Dis ( 2013 ) 4 : e951 – 1 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2013 . 481 130 . Ullenhag GJ , Mukherjee A , Watson NFS , Al - Attar AH , Schole ﬁ eld JH , Durrant LG . Overexpression of FLIP L Is an Independent Marker of Poor Prognosis in Colorectal Cancer Patients . Clin Cancer Res ( 2007 ) 13 : 5070 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 06 - 2547 131 . McLornan D , Hay J , McLaughlin K , Holohan C , Burnett AK , Hills RK , et al . Prognostic and Therapeutic Relevance of C - FLIP in Acute Myeloid Leukaemia . Br J Haematol ( 2013 ) 160 : 188 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1111 / bjh . 12108 132 . Djerbi M , Screpanti V , Catrina AI , Bogen B , Biberfeld P , Grandien A . The Inhibitor of Death Receptor Signaling , FLICE - Inhibitory Protein De ﬁ nes a New Class of Tumor Progression Factors . J Exp Med ( 1999 ) 190 : 1025 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 190 . 7 . 1025 133 . Thome M , Schneider P , Hofmann K , Fickenscher H , Meinl E , Neipel F , et al . Viral FLICE - Inhibitory Proteins ( FLIPs ) Prevent Apoptosis Induced by Death Receptors . Nature ( 1997 ) 386 : 517 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 386517a0 134 . Micheau O , Thome M , Schneider P , Holler N , Tschopp J , Nicholson DW , et al . The Long Form of FLIP Is an Activator of Caspase - 8 at the Fas Death - Inducing Signaling Complex . J Biol Chem ( 2002 ) 277 : 45162 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M206882200 135 . Yu JW , Jeffrey PD , Shi Y . Mechanism of Procaspase - 8 Activation by C - FLIPL . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2009 ) 106 : 8169 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0812453106 136 . Chang DW , Xing Z , Pan Y , Algeciras - Schimnich A , Barnhart BC , Yaish - Ohad S , et al . C - FLIPL is a Dual Function Regulator for Caspase - 8 Activation and CD95 - Mediated Apoptosis . EMBO J ( 2002 ) 21 : 3704 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdf356 137 . Humphreys LM , Fox JP , Higgins CA , Majkut J , Sessler T , McLaughlin K , et al . A Revised Model of TRAIL - R2 DISC Assembly Explains How FLIP ( L ) can Inhibit or Promote Apoptosis . EMBO Rep ( 2020 ) 21 : e49254 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embr . 201949254 138 . Higgins CA , Fox J , Roberts J , Doherty D , Perrior T , Boffey R , et al . Abstract 1342 : Development and Preclinical Evaluation of Unique First - in - Class Small Molecule Inhibitors of the Anti - Apoptotic Protein FLIP . Cancer Res ( 2021 ) 81 : 1342 – 2 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1538 - 7445 . AM2021 - 1342 139 . Safa AR , Pollok KE . Targeting the Anti - Apoptotic Protein C - FLIP for Cancer Therapy . Cancers ( Basel ) ( 2011 ) 3 : 1639 – 71 . doi : 10 . 3390 / cancers3021639 140 . El - Zawahry A , McKillop J , Voelkel - Johnson C . Doxorubicin Increases the Effectiveness of Apo2L / TRAIL for Tumor Growth Inhibition of Prostate Cancer Xenografts . BMC Cancer ( 2005 ) 5 : 2 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2407 - 5 - 2 141 . Kim Y , Suh N , Sporn M , Reed JC . An Inducible Pathway for Degradation of FLIP Protein Sensitizes Tumor Cells to TRAIL - Induced Apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 2002 ) 277 : 22320 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M202458200 Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 15 142 . Hyer ML , Croxton R , Krajewska M , Krajewski S , Kress CL , Lu M , et al . Synthetic Triterpenoids Cooperate With Tumor Necrosis Factor – Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand to Induce Apoptosis of Breast Cancer Cells . Cancer Res ( 2005 ) 65 : 4799 – 808 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 04 - 3319 143 . Ashkenazi A , Dixit VM . Apoptosis Control by Death and Decoy Receptors . Curr Opin Cell Biol ( 1999 ) 11 : 255 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 99 ) 80034 - 9 144 . Mantovani A , Locati M , Vecchi A , Sozzani S , Allavena P . Decoy Receptors : A Strategy to Regulate In ﬂ ammatory Cytokines and Chemokines . Trends Immunol ( 2001 ) 22 : 328 – 36 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1471 - 4906 ( 01 ) 01941 - X 145 . Pitti RM , Marsters SA , Lawrence DA , Roy M , Kischkel FC , Dowd P , et al . Genomic Ampli ﬁ cation of a Decoy Receptor for Fas Ligand in Lung and Colon Cancer . Nature ( 1998 ) 396 : 699 – 703 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 25387 146 . Bai C , Connolly B , Metzker ML , Hilliard CA , Liu X , Sandig V , et al . Overexpression of M68 / DcR3 in Human Gastrointestinal Tract Tumors Independent of Gene Ampli ﬁ cation and its Location in a Four - Gene Cluster . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2000 ) 97 : 1230 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 97 . 3 . 1230 147 . Degli - Esposti MA , Dougall WC , Smolak PJ , Waugh JY , Smith CA , Goodwin RG . The Novel Receptor TRAIL - R4 Induces NF - k B and Protects Against TRAIL - Mediated Apoptosis , Yet Retains an Incomplete Death Domain . Immunity ( 1997 ) 7 : 813 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80399 - 4 148 . Degli - Esposti MA , Smolak PJ , Walczak H , Waugh J , Huang C - P , DuBose RF , et al . Cloning and Characterization of TRAIL - R3 , a Novel Member of the Emerging TRAIL Receptor Family . J Exp Med ( 1997 ) 186 : 1165 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 186 . 7 . 1165 149 . Me ́ rino D , Lalaoui N , Morizot A , Schneider P , Solary E , Micheau O . Differential Inhibition of TRAIL - Mediated DR5 - DISC Formation by Decoy Receptors 1 and 2 . Mol Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 26 : 7046 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00520 - 06 150 . Clancy L , Mruk K , Archer K , Woelfel M , Mongkolsapaya J , Screaton G , et al . Preligand Assembly Domain - Mediated Ligand - Independent Association Between TRAILReceptor4 ( TR4 ) andTR2RegulatesTRAIL - InducedApoptosis . ProcNatl Acad Sci U S A ( 2005 ) 102 : 18099 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0507329102 151 . Ganten TM , Sykora J , Koschny R , Batke E , Aulmann S , Mansmann U , et al . Prognostic Signi ﬁ cance of Tumour Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand ( TRAIL ) Receptor Expression in Patients With Breast Cancer . J Mol Med ( 2009 ) 87 : 995 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00109 - 009 - 0510 - z 152 . Koksal IT , Sanlioglu AD , Karacay B , Grif ﬁ th TS , Sanlioglu S . Tumor Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis Inducing Ligand - R4 Decoy Receptor Expression is Correlated With High Gleason Scores , Prostate - Speci ﬁ c Antigen Recurrence , and Decreased Survival in Patients With Prostate Carcinoma . Urol Oncol Semin Orig Investig ( 2008 ) 26 : 158 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . urolonc . 2007 . 01 . 022 153 . Chamuleau MED , Ossenkoppele GJ , van Rhenen A , van Dreunen L , Jirka SMG , Zevenbergen A , et al . High TRAIL - R3 Expression on Leukemic Blasts is Associated With Poor Outcome and Induces Apoptosis - Resistance Which can be Overcome by Targeting TRAIL - R2 . Leuk Res ( 2011 ) 35 : 741 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . leukres . 2010 . 12 . 032 154 . Tarragona J , Llecha N , Santacana M , Lopez S , Gatius S , Llobet D , et al . DcR1 Expression in Endometrial Carcinomas . Virchows Arch ( 2010 ) 456 : 39 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00428 - 009 - 0855 - 2 155 . Yu K - Y , Kwon B , Ni J , Zhai Y , Ebner R , Kwon BS . A Newly Identi ﬁ ed Member of Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily ( TR6 ) Suppresses LIGHT - Mediated Apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 1999 ) 274 : 13733 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 20 . 13733 156 . Kriegl L , Jung A , Engel J , Jackstadt R , Gerbes AL , Gallmeier E , et al . Expression , Cellular Distribution , and Prognostic Relevance of TRAIL Receptors in Hepatocellular Carcinoma . Clin Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 16 : 5529 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 09 - 3403 157 . Paschall AV , Yang D , Lu C , Choi J - H , Li X , Liu F , et al . H3K9 Trimethylation Silences Fas Expression To Confer Colon Carcinoma Immune Escape and 5 - Fluorouracil Chemoresistance . J Immunol ( 2015 ) 195 : 1868 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1402243 158 . Liu F , Bardhan K , Yang D , Thangaraju M , Ganapathy V , Waller JL , et al . NF - kB Directly Regulates Fas Transcription to Modulate Fas - Mediated Apoptosis and Tumor Suppression . J Biol Chem ( 2012 ) 287 : 25530 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 356279 159 . Gazin C , Wajapeyee N , Gobeil S , Virbasius C - M , Green MR . An Elaborate Pathway Required for Ras - Mediated Epigenetic Silencing . Nature ( 2007 ) 449 : 1073 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06251 160 . Peli J , Schröter M , Rudaz C , Hahne M , Meyer C , Reichmann E , et al . Oncogenic Ras Inhibits Fas Ligand - Mediated Apoptosis by Downregulating the Expression of Fas . EMBO J ( 1999 ) 18 : 1824 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 18 . 7 . 1824 161 . van Noesel MM , van Bezouw S , Salomons GS , Vou ̂ te PA , Pieters R , Baylin SB , et al . Tumor - Speci ﬁ c Down - Regulation oftheTumor NecrosisFactor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand Decoy Receptors DcR1 and DcR2 Is Associated With Dense Promoter Hypermethylation . Cancer Res ( 2002 ) 62 : 2157 . 162 . Maecker HL , Yun Z , Maecker HT , Giaccia AJ . Epigenetic Changes in Tumor Fas Levels Determine Immune Escape and Response to Therapy . Cancer Cell ( 2002 ) 2 : 139 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1535 - 6108 ( 02 ) 00095 - 8 163 . Xu Y , He B , Li R , Pan Y , Gao T , Deng Q , et al . Association of the Polymorphisms in the Fas / FasL Promoter Regions With Cancer Susceptibility : A Systematic Review and Meta - Analysis of 52 Studies . PLoS One ( 2014 ) 9 : e90090 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0090090 164 . Jin Z , McDonald ERIII , Dicker DT , El - Deiry WS . De ﬁ cient Tumor Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand ( TRAIL ) Death Receptor Transport to the Cell Surface in Human Colon Cancer Cells Selected for Resistance to TRAIL - Induced Apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 2004 ) 279 : 35829 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M405538200 165 . Chinnaiyan AM , Prasad U , Shankar S , Hamstra DA , Shanaiah M , Chenevert TL , et al . Combined Effect of Tumor Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand and Ionizing Radiation in Breast Cancer Therapy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2000 ) 97 : 1754 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 030545097 166 . Marini P , Schmid A , Jendrossek V , Faltin H , Daniel PT , Budach W , et al . Irradiation Speci ﬁ cally Sensitises Solid Tumour Cell Lines to TRAIL Mediated Apoptosis . BMC Cancer ( 2005 ) 5 : 5 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2407 - 5 - 5 167 . Chakraborty M , Abrams SI , Camphausen K , Liu K , Scott T , Coleman CN , et al . Irradiation of Tumor Cells Up - Regulates Fas and Enhances CTL Lytic Activity and CTL AdoptiveImmunotherapy . J Immunol ( 2003 ) 170 : 6338 – 47 . doi : 10 . 4049 / JIMMUNOL . 170 . 12 . 6338 168 . Garnett CT , Palena C , Chakraborty M , Chakarborty M , Tsang K - Y , Schlom J , et al . Sublethal Irradiation of Human Tumor Cells Modulates Phenotype Resulting in Enhanced Killing by Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes . Cancer Res ( 2004 ) 64 : 7985 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 04 - 1525 169 . Ames E , Canter RJ , Grossenbacher SK , Mac S , Smith RC , Monjazeb AM , et al . Enhanced Targeting of Stem - Like Solid Tumor Cells With Radiation and Natural Killer Cells . Oncoimmunology ( 2015 ) 4 : e1036212 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 2162402X . 2015 . 1036212 170 . Hamasu T , Inanami O , Asanuma T , Kuwabara M . Enhanced Induction of Apoptosis by Combined Treatment of Human Carcinoma Cells With X Rays and Death Receptor Agonists . J Radiat Res ( 2005 ) 46 ( 1 ) : 103 – 10 . 171 . Amm HM , Oliver PG , Lee CH , Li Y , Buchsbaum DJ . Combined Modality Therapy With TRAIL or Agonistic Death Receptor Antibodies . Cancer Biol Ther ( 2011 ) 11 : 431 – 49 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cbt . 11 . 5 . 14671 172 . Lee SH , Shin MS , KimHS , Lee HK , Park WS , KimSY , etal . Somatic Mutations of TRAIL - Receptor 1 and TRAIL - Receptor 2 Genes in Non - Hodgkin ’ s Lymphoma . Oncogene ( 2001 ) 20 : 399 – 403 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1204103 173 . Shin MS , Kim HS , Lee SH , Park WS , Kim SY , Park JY , et al . Mutations of Tumor Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand Receptor 1 ( TRAIL - R1 ) and Receptor 2 ( TRAIL - R2 ) Genes in Metastatic Breast Cancers . Cancer Res ( 2001 ) 61 : 4942 – 6 . 174 . Park WS , Lee JH , Shin MS , Park JY , Kim HS , Kim YS , et al . Inactivating Mutations ofKILLER / DR5 Gene in Gastric Cancers . Gastroenterology ( 2001 ) 121 : 1219 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1053 / gast . 2001 . 28663 175 . Pai SI , Wu GS , Özören N , Wu L , Jen J , Sidransky D , et al . Rare Loss - Of - Function Mutation of a Death Receptor Gene in Head and Neck Cancer . Cancer Res ( 1998 ) 58 : 3513 . 176 . Kearney CJ , Vervoort SJ , Hogg SJ , Ramsbottom KM , Freeman AJ , Lalaoui N , et al . Tumor Immune Evasion Arises Through Loss of TNF Sensitivity . Sci Immunol ( 2018 ) 3 : eaar3451 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aar3451 177 . Vredevoogd DW , Kuilman T , Ligtenberg MA , Boshuizen J , Stecker KE , de Bruijn B , et al . Augmenting Immunotherapy Impact by Lowering Tumor TNF Cytotoxicity Threshold . Cell ( 2019 ) 178 : 585 – 599 . e15 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2019 . 06 . 014 178 . Manguso RT , Pope HW , Zimmer MD , Brown FD , Yates KB , Miller BC , et al . In Vivo CRISPR Screening Identi ﬁ es Ptpn2 as a Cancer Immunotherapy Target . Nature ( 2017 ) 547 : 413 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature23270 Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 16 179 . Singh N , Lee YG , Shestova O , Ravikumar P , Hayer KE , Hong SJ , et al . Impaired Death Receptor Signaling in Leukemia Causes Antigen - Independent Resistance by Inducing CAR T - Cell Dysfunction . Cancer Discov ( 2020 ) 10 : 552 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 19 - 0813 180 . Freeman AJ , Vervoort SJ , Michie J , Ramsbottom KM , Silke J , Kearney CJ , et al . HOIP Limits Anti - Tumor Immunity by Protecting Against Combined TNF and IFN - Gamma - Induced Apoptosis . EMBO Rep ( 2021 ) 22 : e53391 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embr . 202153391 181 . Haas TL , Emmerich CH , Gerlach B , Schmukle AC , Cordier SM , Rieser E , et al . Recruitment of the Linear Ubiquitin Chain Assembly Complex Stabilizes the TNF - R1 Signaling Complex and Is Required for TNF - Mediated Gene Induction . Mol Cell ( 2009 ) 36 : 831 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 10 . 013 182 . Amir M , Zhao E , Fontana L , Rosenberg H , Tanaka K , Gao G , et al . Inhibition of Hepatocyte Autophagy Increases Tumor Necrosis Factor - Dependent Liver Injury by Promoting Caspase - 8 Activation . Cell Death Differ ( 2013 ) 20 : 878 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2013 . 21 183 . Hou W , Han J , Lu C , Goldstein LA , Rabinowich H . Autophagic Degradation of Active Caspase - 8 : A Crosstalk Mechanism Between Autophagy and Apoptosis . Autophagy ( 2010 ) 6 : 891 – 900 . doi : 10 . 4161 / auto . 6 . 7 . 13038 184 . Moore RJ , Owens DM , Stamp G , Arnott C , Burke F , East N , et al . Mice De ﬁ cient in Tumor Necrosis Factor - a are Resistant to Skin Carcinogenesis . Nat Med ( 1999 ) 5 : 828 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 10552 185 . Orosz P , Echtenacher B , Falk W , Rüschoff J , Weber D , Männel DN . Enhancement of Experimental Metastasis by Tumor Necrosis Factor . J Exp Med ( 1993 ) 177 : 1391 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 177 . 5 . 1391 186 . Freeman AJ , Kearney CJ , Silke J , Oliaro J . Unleashing TNF Cytotoxicity to Enhance Cancer Immunotherapy . Trends Immunol ( 2021 ) 42 : 1128 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . it . 2021 . 10 . 003 187 . Bai L , Smith DC , Wang S . Small - Molecule SMAC Mimetics as New Cancer Therapeutics . Pharmacol Ther ( 2014 ) 144 : 82 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2014 . 05 . 007 188 . Dufva O , Koski J , Maliniemi P , Ianevski A , Klievink J , Leitner J , et al . Integrated Drug Pro ﬁ ling and CRISPR Screening Identify Essential Pathways for CAR T - Cell Cytotoxicity . Blood ( 2020 ) 135 : 597 – 609 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood . 2019002121 189 . Kearney CJ , Lalaoui N , Freeman AJ , Ramsbottom KM , Silke J , Oliaro J . PD - L1 and IAPs Co - Operate to Protect Tumors From Cytotoxic Lymphocyte - Derived TNF . Cell Death Differ ( 2017 ) 24 : 1705 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2017 . 94 190 . Lin L , Mathew TR , Hidetaka S , De Brabander JK , Xiaodong W , Harran PG . A Small Molecule Smac Mimic Potentiates TRAIL - and Tnf a - Mediated Cell Death . Science ( 80 - ) ( 2004 ) 305 : 1471 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1098231 191 . Olsson M , Zhivotovsky B . Caspases and Cancer . Cell Death Differ ( 2011 ) 18 : 1441 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2011 . 30 192 . Stupack DG . Caspase - 8 as a Therapeutic Target in Cancer . Cancer Lett ( 2013 ) 332 : 133 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . canlet . 2010 . 07 . 022 193 . Hopkins - Donaldson S , Bodmer J - L , Bourloud KB , Brognara CB , Tschopp J , Gross N . Loss of Caspase - 8 Expression in Highly Malignant Human Neuroblastoma Cells Correlates With Resistance to Tumor Necrosis Factor - Related Apoptosis - Inducing Ligand - Induced Apoptosis . Cancer Res ( 2000 ) 60 : 4315 – 9 . 194 . Grotzer MA , Eggert A , Zuzak TJ , Janss AJ , Marwaha S , Wiewrodt BR , et al . Resistance to TRAIL - Induced Apoptosis in Primitive Neuroectodermal Brain Tumor Cells Correlates With a Loss of Caspase - 8 Expression . Oncogene ( 2000 ) 19 : 4604 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1203816 195 . Deveraux QL , Reed JC . IAP Family Proteins — Suppressors of Apoptosis . Genes Dev ( 1999 ) 13 : 239 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 13 . 3 . 239 196 . Sutton VR , Wowk ME , Cancilla M , Trapani JA . Caspase Activation by Granzyme B Is Indirect , and Caspase Autoprocessing Requires the Release of Proapoptotic Mitochondrial Factors . Immunity ( 2003 ) 18 : 319 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 03 ) 00050 - 5 197 . Goping IS , Barry M , Liston P , Sawchuk T , Constantinescu G , Michalak KM , et al . Granzyme B - Induced Apoptosis Requires Both Direct Caspase Activation and Relief of Caspase Inhibition . Immunity ( 2003 ) 18 : 355 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 03 ) 00032 - 3 198 . Waterhouse NJ , Sedelies KA , Browne KA , Wowk ME , Newbold A , Sutton VR , et al . A Central Role for Bid in Granzyme B - Induced Apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 2005 ) 280 : 4476 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M410985200 199 . Wang GQ , Wieckowski E , Goldstein LA , Gastman BR , Rabinovitz A , Gambotto A , et al . Resistance to Granzyme B - Mediated Cytochrome C Release in Bak - De ﬁ cient Cells . J Exp Med ( 2001 ) 194 : 1325 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 194 . 9 . 1325 200 . Sinicrope FA , Rego RL , Foster NR , Thibodeau SN , Alberts SR , Windschitl HE , et al . Proapoptotic Bad and Bid Protein Expression Predict Survival in Stages II and III Colon Cancers . Clin Cancer Res ( 2008 ) 14 : 4128 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 07 - 5160 201 . Krajewska M , Zapata JM , Meinhold - Heerlein I , Hedayat H , Monks A , Bettendorf H , et al . Expression of Bcl - 2 Family Member Bid in Normal and Malignant Tissues . Neoplasia ( 2002 ) 4 : 129 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . neo . 7900222 202 . Sutton VR , Vaux DL , Trapani JA . Bcl - 2 Prevents Apoptosis Induced by Perforin and Granzyme B , But Not That Mediated by Whole Cytotoxic Lymphocytes . J Immunol ( 1997 ) 158 : 5783 – 90 . 203 . Chiu VK , Walsh CM , Liu CC , Reed JC , Clark WR . Bcl - 2 Blocks Degranulation But Not Fas - Based Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity . J Immunol ( 1995 ) 154 : 2023 . 204 . Sedelies KA , Ciccone A , Clarke CJP , Oliaro J , Sutton VR , Scott FL , et al . Blocking Granule - Mediated Death by Primary Human NK Cells Requires Both Protection of Mitochondria and Inhibition of Caspase Activity . Cell Death Differ ( 2008 ) 15 : 708 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . cdd . 4402300 205 . Lickliter JD , Cox J , McCarron J , Martinez NR , Schmidt CW , Lin H , et al . Small - Molecule Bcl - 2Inhibitors Sensitise Tumour Cells toImmune - Mediated Destruction . Br J Cancer ( 2007 ) 96 : 600 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6603599 206 . Cingöz A , Ozyerli - Goknar E , MorovaT , Seker - Polat F , Esai Selvan M , Gümüs ̧ ZH , et al . Generation of TRAIL - Resistant Cell Line Models Reveals Distinct Adaptive Mechanisms for Acquired Resistance and Re - Sensitization . Oncogene ( 2021 ) 40 : 3201 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41388 - 021 - 01697 - 6 207 . Yip KW , Reed JC . Bcl - 2 Family Proteins and Cancer . Oncogene ( 2008 ) 27 : 6398 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2008 . 307 208 . Kapoor I , Bodo J , Hill BT , Hsi ED , Almasan A . Targeting BCL - 2 in B - Cell Malignancies and Overcoming Therapeutic Resistance . Cell Death Dis ( 2020 ) 11 : 941 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 020 - 03144 - y 209 . Sa ́ nchez - Mart ı ́ nez D , Azaceta G , Muntasell A , Aguilo ́ N , Nu ́ ñez D , Ga ́ lvez EM , et al . Human NK Cells Activated by EBV + Lymphoblastoid Cells Overcome Anti - Apoptotic Mechanisms of Drug Resistance in Haematological Cancer Cells . Oncoimmunology ( 2015 ) 4 : e991613 . doi : 10 . 4161 / 2162402X . 2014 . 991613 210 . Jaime - Sa ́ nchez P , Catala ́ n E , Uranga - Murillo I , Aguilo ́ N , Santiago L , M Lanuza P , et al . Antigen - Speci ﬁ c Primed Cytotoxic T Cells Eliminate Tumour Cells In Vivo and Prevent Tumour Development , Regardless of the Presence of Anti - Apoptotic Mutations Conferring Drug Resistance . Cell Death Differ ( 2018 ) 25 : 1536 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41418 - 018 - 0112 - 9 Con ﬂ ict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁ nancial relationships that could be construed as a potential con ﬂ ict of interest . DMD receives research funding from GSK , Continuum Life Sciences and Bristol Myers Squibb , and advises GSK , Mogrify and Bicycle Therapeutics . Publisher ’ s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁ liated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright © 2022 Tuomela , Ambrose and Davis . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Tuomela et al . Resisting Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867098 17