In 2006 , a major technological breakthrough in science and medicine was made with the report that cells with a gene expression profile and developmental potential similar to embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) can be generated from mouse somatic cells ( such as fibroblasts ) by using a cocktail of four transcription factors 1 . These cells were termed induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) , and the four factors — OCT4 , SOX2 , KLF4 and MYC — were named “Yamanaka factors” . Just 1 year later , two research groups independently reported the generation of iPSCs from human fibroblasts 2 , 3 . Human iPSC technology , which has evolved rapidly since 2007 ( BOX 1 ) , has ushered in an exciting new era for the fields of stem cell biology and regenerative medicine , as well as the fields of disease modelling and drug dis - covery . Soon after the development of the technology , human iPSCs were rapidly applied to generate human ‘disease in a dish’ models and used for drug screening for both efficacy and potential toxicities . Such approaches are now becoming increasingly popular given the surge in interest in phenotypic screening and the advantages of human iPSCs in disease modelling compared with traditional cellular screens . These advantages include their human origin , easy accessibility , expandabil - ity , ability to give rise to almost any cell types desired , avoidance of ethical concerns associated with human ESCs , and the potential to develop personalized med - icine using patient - specific iPSCs . Furthermore , recent advances in gene editing technologies — in particular , the CRISPR – Cas9 technology — are enabling the rapid generation of genetically defined human iPSC - based disease models . iPSCs are also a key component of an emerging generation of more physiologically represent - ative cellular platforms incorporating 3D architectures and multiple cell types . iPSC technology has also attracted considerable interest in its potential applicability for regenerative medicine . The first clinical study to evaluate human iPSC - derived cells was initiated in 2014 . The study used human iPSC - derived retinal pigment epithelial ( RPE ) cells to treat macular degeneration 4 , and the treatment was reported to improve the patient’s vision 5 . Although the trial was subsequently put on hold owing to the iden - tification of two genetic variants in the iPSCs of a second patient , it is anticipated to resume 6 . Clearly , human iPSC technology holds great promise for human disease modelling , drug discovery and stem cell - based therapy , and this potential is only beginning to be realized . In this article , we provide an overview of the progress in each of the main applications of iPSCs in the decade since the discovery of the technology . We present key illustrative examples , discuss remaining lim - itations and approaches to address them , and highlight emerging opportunities . iPSC - based disease modelling Identifying the pathological mechanisms underlying human diseases has a key role in discovering novel therapeutic strategies . Animal models have provided valuable tools for modelling human diseases , enabling the identification of pathological mechanisms at dis - tinct developmental stages and in specific cell types in an in vivo setting . Moreover , in mice , it is possible to develop in vitro iPSC - based disease models and the 1 Division of Stem Cell Biology Research , Department of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology , Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope , 1500 East Duarte Road , Duarte , California 91010 , USA . 2 Center for iPS Cell Research and Application ( CiRA ) , Kyoto University , 53 Kawahara - cho Shogoin , Sakyo - ku , Kyoto 606 – 8507 , Japan . 3 Stanford Cardiovascular Institute , 265 Campus Drive , Room G1120B , Stanford , California 94305 – 5454 , USA . 4 Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease , San Francisco , California 94158 , USA . Correspondence to Y . S . and H . I . yshi @ coh . org ; haruhisa @ cira . kyoto - u . ac . jp doi : 10 . 1038 / nrd . 2016 . 245 Published online 16 Dec 2016 Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) . Pluripotent stem cells that are derived from the inner cell mass of human embryos . Induced pluripotent stem cell technology : a decade of progress Yanhong Shi 1 , Haruhisa Inoue 2 , Joseph C . Wu 3 and Shinya Yamanaka 2 , 4 Abstract | Since the advent of induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) technology a decade ago , enormous progress has been made in stem cell biology and regenerative medicine . Human iPSCs have been widely used for disease modelling , drug discovery and cell therapy development . Novel pathological mechanisms have been elucidated , new drugs originating from iPSC screens are in the pipeline and the first clinical trial using human iPSC - derived products has been initiated . In particular , the combination of human iPSC technology with recent developments in gene editing and 3D organoids makes iPSC - based platforms even more powerful in each area of their application , including precision medicine . In this Review , we discuss the progress in applications of iPSC technology that are particularly relevant to drug discovery and regenerative medicine , and consider the remaining challenges and the emerging opportunities in the field . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 115 © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) . Pluripotent stem cells that are reprogrammed from somatic cells by introducing pluripotency factors . Regenerative medicine A therapeutic approach in which damaged tissues or organs are replaced by stimulating self - repair or using in vitro - cultured tissues or organs derived from cells , presumably stem cells , of a patient or a donor . Gene editing Genetic engineering in which DNA is modified by engineered nucleases . A relevant example is to make isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell lines using gene editing . CRIPSR – Cas9 technology A highly popular gene editing tool based on a bacterial clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ( CRISPR ) - associated protein 9 ( Cas9 ) nuclease from Streptococcus pyogenes . This technology has gained wide usage in gene editing because of its simplicity in design and ease of use . Precision medicine A model that aims to offer medical treatment tailored to individual patients . corresponding in vivo models in parallel . Comparing the phenotypes observed with corresponding in vitro and in vivo mouse models could provide a better under - standing of the strength and limitations of in vitro human iPSC - based models . However , substantial species differences could prevent the recapitulation of full human disease phe - notypes in animals such as mice , which are the most commonly used animal models . For example , although many transgenic mouse models have been created for Alzheimer disease , none has captured the entire spec - trum of the human disease pathology , including consid - erable neuronal loss 7 , 8 . This lack of disease recapitulation is probably due to fundamental species differences between mouse and human neural cells . Thus , there is an urgent need to establish human disease modelling platforms to complement studies that use animal models for biomedical research . Disease modelling using primary patient - derived cells is helpful for studying the aetiology of human dis - eases and for developing therapeutic strategies for these diseases . However , the lack of expandable sources of primary cells from patients , particularly hard - to - access cells such as brain cells and heart cells , is a critical limita - tion . Human iPSCs are therefore an attractive alternative because of the ease with which human diseases ( particu - larly those with defined genetic causes ) could , in princi - ple , be modelled using iPSCs that are derived from easily accessible cell types , such as skin fibroblasts and blood cells , from diverse patients . Because of their intrinsic properties of self - renewal and potential to differentiate into nearly any cell type in the body , patient - specific iPSCs could provide large quantities of disease - relevant cells and a variety of different cell types that were previ - ously inaccessible , such as neurons and cardiomyocytes . Furthermore , because iPSCs can be derived from the relevant patients themselves , they could enable person - alized disease modelling that would be a central part of precision medicine . Both human ESCs and iPSCs have been used for modelling human genetic diseases . The earlier models were developed using ESCs 9 , but , following the advent of human iPSC technology , human iPSCs have become the preferred option because of their availability and their lack of potential ethical concerns associated with human ESCs . Human iPSCs are highly similar to human ESCs . Both types of cells express human pluripotent factors and ESC surface markers , and exhibit the developmen - tal potential to differentiate into three germ layers 2 , 3 . Residual epigenetic memory of somatic cells could occur in iPSCs 10 – 12 , which may affect the differentiation potential of these cells 13 . Although the persistence of epigenetic memory of parental cells has been reported in iPSCs 10 – 12 , similar phenotypes have been reported in disease modelling using human ESCs and iPSCs in most cases 13 , supporting the effectiveness of disease modelling using patient - derived iPSCs . Disease modelling using human iPSCs begins with the process of deriving iPSCs containing the disease - causing mutation ( or mutations ) ( FIG . 1 ) . These cells are then differentiated into disease - relevant cell types . The resultant cells are used to reveal disease aetiology and to identify pathological mechanisms . In early studies of iPSC - based disease modelling , iPSCs derived from non - disease - affected individuals were used as controls for patient - derived iPSCs . However , similarly to other cells , iPSCs exhibit line - to - line variations , which compli - cates data interpretation because one has to distinguish the line - to - line variations from the true disease - relevant phenotypes . Rapidly developing genome editing technologies now enable the introduction of genetic changes into iPSCs in a site - specific manner , including correction of disease - causing gene mutations in patient - derived iPSCs and introduction of specific mutations into non - disease affected wild - type iPSCs . These approaches enable the generation of genetically matched , isogenic iPSC lines with the introduced mutation as the sole variable , ensur - ing the reliable identification of the true pathology while avoiding the confusion with any disparities in genetic background or epiphenomena resulting from possi - ble line - to - line variations . Isogenic iPSC controls will be particularly important when modelling sporadic or polygenic diseases , in which phenotypic differences are anticipated to be small 14 . The development of programmable site - specific nucle - ases , including zinc - finger nucleases ( ZFN ) 15 , 16 , transcrip - tion activator - like effector nucleases ( TALENs ) 17 – 19 and the CRISPR – Cas9 system 20 – 23 ( TABLE 1 ) , has substantially improved gene editing efficiency in human ESCs and iPSCs by inducing DNA double - stranded breaks at the site of gene modification . The CRISPR – Cas9 tech - nology in particular has attracted much attention and gained wide usage in gene editing of human ESCs and iPSCs owing to its simplicity in design and ease of use . This gene editing technology enables research - ers to introduce disease - causing mutations into wild - type iPSCs and to eliminate such mutations in patient iPSCs to create isogenic controls for iPSC - based disease modelling ( FIG . 1 ) . Box 1 | Evolution of human iPSC technology Since its beginning in 2006 , induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) technology has evolved rapidly . Because iPSCs were initially generated by introducing reprogramming factors via integrating viral vectors , such as retroviral or lentiviral vectors , there was a concern about the clinical application of these iPSCs owing to the potential for insertional mutagenesis caused by the integration of transgenes into the genome of host cells 204 . To make iPSCs more clinically applicable , various non - integrating methods have been developed to circumvent the risk of insertional mutagenesis and genetic alterations associated with retroviral and lentiviral transduction - mediated introduction of reprogramming factors 205 . These non - integrating methods include reprogramming using episomal DNAs 206 , 207 , adenovirus 208 , Sendai virus 209 , PiggyBac transposons 210 , minicircles 211 , recombinant proteins 212 , synthetically modified mRNAs 213 , microRNAs 214 , 215 and small molecules 216 , although the small - molecule approach is not yet applicable to human iPSC derivation . Among these approaches , episomal DNAs , synthetic mRNAs and Sendai virus are commonly applied to derive integration - free iPSCs owing to their relative simplicity and high efficiency 185 . The use of nonviral methods or non - integrating viruses could avoid genomic insertions , thus reducing associated risks when human iPSCs are used for clinical applications . R E V I E W S 116 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery Reprogrammingfactors Reprogrammingsomatic cells Characterizing disease phenotypes CRISPR – Cas9 Human iPSCs Personalizedmedicine Identifyingmolecular targets Creating isogenic iPSC controls Diﬀerentiating into desired cell types Neural cells Haematopoietic cells Cardiomyocytes Islet cells Patient Whole genome sequencing ( WGS ) . A high - throughput sequencing technology that uncovers the entire DNA sequence of a genome . Exome sequencing A technology that determines the sequence of all expressed genes in a genome . It is also called whole exome sequencing ( WES ) . Targeted deep sequencing An approach that determines the sequence at regions of interest using next - generation sequencing technology . Direct conversion A technology that enables one type of somatic cell to be reprogrammed into another type of somatic cell . However , a major challenge in applications using the CRISPR – Cas9 technology is the possibility of off - target effects . Nevertheless , although relatively high levels of off - target gene modifications by CRISPR – Cas9 have been described in cancer cell lines 24 , recent reports from multiple laboratories using whole genome sequenc - ing ( WGS ) indicate that off - target gene modifications are rare in normal human cells , including human iPSCs and ESCs 25 – 29 . WGS using genomic DNAs isolated from the original iPSCs and corresponding gene edited iPSCs , coupled with comprehensive bioinformatics analy - sis 25 , 27 – 29 , is useful for detecting off - target effects such as single - nucleotide variants ( SNVs ) and insertions or deletions ( indels ) , particularly for cells that will be used for clinical applications . Currently , WGS is expensive , but it is anticipated that the costs will fall as the tech - nology develops . Alternative approaches for detecting off - target effects include exome sequencing 30 and targeted deep sequencing 29 . For targeted deep sequencing , one can search for potential off - target sites that are differ - ent from the on - target sites in the human genome using Cas - OFFinder 31 , an algorithm for identifying off - target sites , including off - target SNVs or indels . Gene editing tools are also being continuously improved and refined , which may help to address the issue of off - target effects . The original CRISPR – Cas9 technology edits a genomic locus by inducing DNA double - stranded breaks using a single guide RNA - directed wild - type Cas9 nuclease . The nickase version of Cas9 ( D10A mutant ) directed by paired guide RNAs and the engineered Cas9 nuclease variants with enhanced specificity ( eSpCas9 ) are now increasingly being used for genome editing 32 – 34 because both have demonstrated substantially reduced off - target effects while retaining rigorous on - target cleavage 34 , 35 . Furthermore , catalyt - ically dead Cas9 ( dCas9 ) fused with a transcriptional activator or suppressor can be used to modulate tran - scription of endogenous genes ( so - called CRISPRi or CRISPRa ) or image genomic loci by fusing with a fluo - rescent protein 32 – 34 , 36 . Modifications of the CRISPR – Cas9 system also enable the explicit introduction of DNA sequence changes in a precise monoallelic or biallelic manner with high efficiency 37 . A recent development in base editing takes advantage of the fusion of CRISPR – Cas9 and a cytidine deaminase enzyme to enable direct conversion of cytidine to uridine without the need of a DNA double - stranded break 38 . This new approach enhances gene editing efficiency and will further facilitate gene editing in human ESCs and iPSCs . iPSC - based disease modelling is widely used for studying disorders caused by a single gene mutation ( monogenic disorders ) that have an early onset 39 , 40 . This approach is ideally suited to such disorders because iPSCs can be easily derived from patients and differ - entiated into disease - relevant cells , such as neurons . Furthermore , given the relative immaturity of cells dif - ferentiated from iPSCs 41 , there is greater confidence that the phenotypes of cells differentiated from iPSCs provide a good model for diseases with an early onset versus late onset , for which cellular ageing may be important in disease pathology 41 . For example , neurons differentiated from patient - derived iPSCs were used to model spinal muscular atrophy ( SMA ) , an early - onset disease caused by mutations in survival motor neuron 1 ( SMN1 ) 39 . Mutations in SMN1 lead to the degeneration of motor neurons and subsequent muscular atrophy . Patients with type 1 SMA usually show symptoms at 6 months from birth , with a rapid disease progression that is fatal by the age of 2 years 42 . In an initial iPSC - based dis - ease modelling study 39 , iPSCs derived from fibroblasts of a patient with type 1 SMA were differentiated into a disease - relevant cell type , motor neurons . The motor neurons differentiated from the patient - derived iPSCs exhibited reduced survival compared with that of motor neurons derived from an unaffected control . Moreover , treatment of the patient - derived iPSCs with valproic acid and tobramycin ( two compounds known to induce the expression of SMN1 ) led to increased levels of SMN1 protein and SMN1 protein - containing ‘gems’ ( REF . 39 ) . This study provided proof of principle that patient - derived iPSCs can be used to model early - onset genetic diseases and serve as potential drug - screening platforms . Modelling diseases that have a late onset is more chal - lenging because cells differentiated from human iPSCs in general exhibit fetal - like properties 41 . However , induced cellular ageing has been used to aid in the successful modelling of late - onset diseases 43 – 46 . One way to induce ageing in cells differentiated from human iPSCs is to treat these cells with cellular stressors : for example , with compounds such as MG - 132 and pyraclostrobin , which target mitochondrial function or protein degradation Figure 1 | A schematic for human iPSC - based disease modelling . The creation and use of human induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) - based disease models typically involves the following steps . First , iPSCs are derived from individual patients , and isogenic controls are created using gene editing technologies such as CRIPSR – Cas9 . The iPSCs are then differentiated into specific cell types , such as neural cells , and the resultant cells are studied to identify disease - specific phenotypes . Investigation of these phenotypes at the molecular level can allow the identification of new pathological mechanisms , providing opportunities for drug discovery and personalized medicine . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 117 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . pathways 43 , 44 , 46 , 47 . Another way to induce cellular ageing is to ectopically express gene products , such as progerin , that induce premature ageing 45 . However , whether cellu - lar stressors or progerin expression can elicit cellular age - ing through a mechanism that is similar to normal ageing remains to be determined 41 . Moreover , recent studies have indicated that cellular maturation and ageing may be distinct events 41 , 48 . It remains unclear whether the cel - lular ageing inducers can promote both cellular matura - tion and ageing , as opposed to triggering cellular ageing in immature cells 48 . Alternatively , the direct reprogram - ming approach , which involves the direct conversion of human fibroblasts into other lineage - specific cells , such as neurons , does not erase cellular ageing markers 49 . Indeed , neurons derived from aged fibroblasts through direct reprogramming maintain cellular age 50 , therefore offering an alternative cellular model to study age - related disorders . It is worth noting that there has also been suc - cess in promoting cellular maturation , such as by using improved formulations of cultured medium 51 or using a neuron – astrocyte co - culture system 52 , 53 . iPSCs also offer a new way to study sporadic diseases ( the causes of which have not been identified in patients’ family histories or genetic mutations ) , which is impor - tant as the majority of patients with many diseases have sporadic forms of the disease . For example , in Alzheimer disease , 95 % of patients fall under the sporadic category . Interestingly , an analysis of iPSC - derived nerve cells from patients with sporadic Alzheimer disease identified several sporadic cases that exhibited the same pheno - types as familial Alzheimer disease caused by a specific gene mutation 54 . This finding indicated the possibility of re - classifying the sporadic condition using iPSCs . However , modelling sporadic diseases using iPSCs is generally more difficult than modelling monogenic dis - orders because the phenotypic changes in such diseases are often thought to be induced by multiple small - effect genetic risk variants in combination with environmen - tal factors . Although iPSCs derived from patients with sporadic diseases would contain disease - relevant risk variants , using iPSCs to model such diseases is compli - cated by line - to - line variations in genetic and epigenetic background . Such variations are more problematic for modelling sporadic diseases because the phenotypes of the sporadic disease iPSC - derived cells are anticipated to be subtler than for those derived from monogenic disease iPSCs . Thus , a key question for human iPSC - based mod - elling of sporadic diseases is how to generate paired isogenic cell lines that only differ at relevant risk var - iants 14 . The ability to generate genetically controlled isogenic iPSC lines in which specific disease - associated genetic risk variants are the sole variable using CRISPR – Cas9 technology can create a well - controlled system . Recently , this approach was used to generate isogenic iPSC lines that differ at a Parkinson disease - associ - ated risk variant , which in combination with an allele - specific assay , enabled the robust dissection of this genetic risk variant 55 . This experimental strategy could be applied to studying genetic risk factors associated with other diseases . So far , many diseases have been studied using a single disease - relevant cell type derived from iPSCs . For example , iPSC - derived neurons have been used to model Alzheimer disease 54 , 56 – 68 ( TABLE 2 ) and Parkinson disease 43 – 45 , 55 , 69 – 84 ( TABLE 3 ) . However , more than one cell type may be required to effectively model some diseases . Indeed , comparable efforts have been devoted to model schizophrenia using patient iPSC - derived neurons 85 – 87 and neural progenitor cells 88 – 92 . To better recapitulate disease phenotypes , the co - culture of more than one cell type may also be needed to study the interaction of differ - ent cell types . For example , astrocyte – neuron co - cultures have been used to model the pathology of amyotrophic Table 1 | Technology for gene editing human ESCs and iPSCs System Enzyme Mode of action Refs ZFN Zinc - finger nucleases Custom zinc - finger protein DNA - binding modules fused to the cleavage domain of the bacterial endonuclease FokI induce site - specific DNA DSBs ; DNA repair through NHEJ subsequently occurs to create small indels or initiate HDR to introduce precise nucleotide modifications 15 , 16 , 217 , 218 TALEN Transcription activator - like effector nucleases Custom TALE protein DNA - binding modules fused to the bacterial endonuclease FokI induce site - specific DSBs ; DNA repair subsequently occurs through NHEJ or HDR to introduce indels or specific DNA mutations 18 CRISPR – Cas9 Wild - type Cas9 , Cas9 nickase RNA - guided site - specific DNA cleavage triggers NHEJ to create indels or initiate HDR to introduce precise DNA modifications 20 , 219 , 220 Cas9 nickase Combines a Cas9 nickase with a paired sgRNA to create targeted DSBs ; the paired nicking substantially reduces ( by 50 - to 1 , 500 - fold ) off - target activity 34 eSpCas9 Structure - guided protein engineering generated SpCas9 variants with reduced off - target effects but robust on - target activity 35 Cas9 - VRER variant Called ‘CORRECT’ , this platform enables the introduction of DNA modification in a precise monoallelic or biallelic manner 37 CRISPR – Cas9 – cytidine deaminase Fusions of CRISPR – Cas9 and a cytidine deaminase This base editing approach enables the direct conversion of cytidine to uridine without the need for DSBs or a donor DNA template 38 CORRECT , consecutive re - guide or re - Cas steps to erase CRISPR – Cas9 - blocked targets ; DSBs , double - stranded breaks ; eSpCas9 , enhanced specificity Streptococcus pyogenes ( Sp ) Cas9 ; HDR , homology - directed repair ; indels , insertions or deletions ; NHEJ , non - homologous end joining ; sgRNA , small guide RNA ; TALEN , transcription activator - like effector ( TALE ) nucleases ; ZFN , zinc - finger nuclease . R E V I E W S 118 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Organoids In vitro cultured 3D organ buds that resemble the cellular organization and structure of human organs , but are more primitive and at a smaller scale than endogenous organs . lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) 93 – 96 . The co - culture system ena - bled the investigation of non - cell - autonomous aspects of disease pathology , which would otherwise be impos - sible with single cell types such as neurons . Moreover , these studies facilitated the identification of astrocytes as a critical cellular component that contributes to motor neuron degeneration in ALS and provided a drug screening platform for ALS using patient iPSC - derived astrocytes 93 – 96 . The interactions between different cell types can be better modelled using 3D organoids . Organoids have been generated for multiple organs , including the brain , retina , intestine , kidney , liver , lung and stomach , using both tissue stem cells and pluripotent stem cells from mice and humans 97 . Human iPSC - derived organoids have been developed for various applications owing to their resemblance to endogenous cell organiza - tions and organ structures , and are particularly useful because they enable the study of cell – cell interactions in a cellular context that mimics human physiology and development . Indeed , 3D organoids have been used to model human organ development and diseases , to test therapeutic compounds and in cell transplantation 98 – 114 ( TABLE 4 ) . Multiple cell types that are physiologically rel - evant can be generated in organoids following a spatio - temporal order . Moreover , cells generated in organoids can be functionally more mature than cells derived using directed differentiation protocols owing to the interaction of different cell types , such as neurons and astrocytes , in the 3D structure . Therefore , 3D organoids facilitate the dissection of disease pathology in a devel - opmentally relevant spatiotemporal context and have the potential to model a drug response at the level of an organ rather than at the level of individual cells . Although 3D organoids provide highly promising tools for iPSC - based disease modelling , the organoid technology has limitations . One challenge is to create an organoid platform with increased efficiency and repro - ducibility compared with traditional 2D cultures 115 . The recent application of miniaturized spinning bio - reactors with 3D design has enabled the generation of forebrain organoids with high reproducibility 110 . Table 2 | Patient - derived iPSC - based modelling of Alzheimer disease Gene mutation Cell types analysed Phenotypes in the dish Refs Familial Alzheimer disease PSEN1 ( A246E ) , PSEN2 ( N141I ) Neurons Increased A β 42 secretion 56 PSEN1 ( A79V ) , APP ( K724N ) Neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio 59 PSEN1 ( Δ E9 ) Neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio , reduced γ - secretase activity 58 PSEN1 Neurons Increased A β 42 secretion , impaired autophagic function 60 PSEN1 ( A246E , H163R or M146L ) Neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio 64 PSEN1 ( A246E ) Neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio , increased expression of FOXG1 , mGluR1 and SYT1 63 APP ( V717I ) Forebrain neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio , altered APP subcellular localization , increased levels of total tau and phosphorylated tau 62 PSEN1 ( Y115C , M146I or intron 4 ) , APP ( V717I ) , APP Dp Cortical excitatory neurons Elevated A β 42 secretion , increased intracellular levels of tau and phosphorylated tau 67 APP ( V717I ) Neurons and glia High levels of A β and soluble APP α secreted from both neuronal and glial cells , especially GABAergic neurons 68 Sporadic Alzheimer disease Unknown Neurons Alzheimer disease - related protein interaction network composed of APP and GSK3 β 66 SOR1 variants Neurons Altered induction of SORL1 expression , altered A β peptide production 65 APOE ( E3 / E4 ) Forebrain cholinergic neurons Elevated A β 42 / A β 40 ratio , increased vulnerability to glutamate - mediated cell death , increased intracellular calcium levels upon glutamate stimulation 61 Familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease APP Dp Neurons Elevated A β 40 secretion , elevated tau phosphorylation , increased active GSK3 β , increased number of endosomes 57 APP ( E693 Δ or V717L ) Cortical neurons Increased A β 42 secretion , elevated A β oligomers , reduced survival , vulnerability to oxidative stress 54 A β , amyloid - β ; APOE , apolipoprotein E ; APP , A β precursor protein ; APP Dp , duplication of APP gene ; FOXG1 , forkhead box protein G1 ; GSK3 β , glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ; iPSC , induced pluripotent stem cell ; mGluR1 , metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 ; PSEN , presenilin ; SORL1 , sortilin - related receptor 1 ; SYT1 , synaptotagmin 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 119 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Table 3 | Patient - derived iPSC - based modelling of Parkinson disease Gene mutation Cell types analysed Phenotypes in the dish Refs Familial Parkinson disease LRRK2 ( G2019S ) DA neurons • Elevated oxidative stress response • Increased sensitivity to stress - induced cell death 43 • Reduced neurite outgrowth • Dysregulated autophagy system • Increased cell death in response to neurotoxins • Elevated α - synuclein protein level • Dysregulation of genes related to DA neurodegeneration 65 Neural stem cells • Increased sensitivity to stress • Progressive impairment in nuclear envelope organization • Defective self - renewal and neuronal differentiation 46 PARK2 ( exon 2 – 4 deletion or exon 6 , 7 deletion ) Neurons • Increased oxidative stress • Activated NRF2 pathway • Abnormal mitochondrial morphology and turnover • Elevated α - synuclein accumulation 71 PARK2 ( exon 3 , 5 deletion or exon 3 deletion ) DA neurons • Increased oxidative stress • Reduced dopamine uptake • Enhanced spontaneous dopamine release 72 PINK1 ( c . 1366C > T ; p . Q456X or c . 509T > G ; p . V170G ) DA neurons • Impaired recruitment of parkin to mitochondria • Increased mitochondria copy number • PGC1 α upregulation 69 PINK1 ( Q456X ) , LRRK2 ( G2019S ) DA and non - DA neurons , and immature cells • Increased vulnerability to stress • Dysfunction of mitochondria 44 PINK1 ( Q456X or R275W ) , PARK2 ( V324A ) DA neurons • Increased neuronal death • Degenerated dendrites • Impaired AKT signalling 45 SCNA ( A53T ) DA neurons • Elevated α - synuclein aggregation and Lewy body - like deposition • Induced nitrosative and oxidative stress • Increased vulnerability to mitochondrial toxin - induced cell death 76 SCNA ( A53T ) Neurons • Decreased α - synuclein tetramers • Increased neurotoxicity 80 SCNA ( A53T or triplication ) Cortical neurons • Increased nitrosative stress • Elevated ER stress and ERAD substrates 74 SCNA triplication DA neurons • Doubled α - synuclein protein expression 70 PARK2 ( exon 3 , 5 deletion or exon 3 deletion ) TH + or TH – neurons • Reduced neurite complexity • Diminished microtubule stability 82 PARK2 ( R42P , exon 3 deletion , exon 3 , 4 deletion , 255A deletion , R275W or R42P ) DA neurons • Reduced capacity to differentiate into DA neurons • Altered mitochondrial volume fraction 83 Sporadic Parkinson disease GBA1 DA neurons • Reduced dopamine storage and uptake • Elevated α - synuclein levels 84 GBA ( N370S / + ) DA neurons • Elevated α - synuclein levels • Reduced dopamine levels • Induced MAOB expression • Disrupted network activity 79 GBA1 ( RecNcil / + , L444P / + or N370S / + ) DA neurons • Elevated α - synuclein and glucosylceramide levels • Defective autophagic and lysosomal machinery • Increased basal and induced calcium levels • Enhanced vulnerability to ER stress 78 SCNA SNP Neurons • A disease - associated risk variant that regulates SCNA expression 55 Familial and sporadic Parkinson disease LRRK2 ( G2019S ) DA neurons • Increased apoptosis • Reduced neurite numbers and complexity • Increased autophagic vacuoles 73 • Hypermethylation in gene regulatory regions • Reduced expression of transcription factors related to disease 81 DA , dopaminergic ; ERAD , endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) - associated degradation ; GBA , β - glucocerebrosidase ; iPSC , induced pluripotent stem cell ; LRRK2 , leucine - rich repeat kinase 2 ; MAOB , monoamine oxidase B ; NRF2 , nuclear factor erythroid 2 - related factor 2 ; PARK2 , parkin ; PGC1 α , peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ coactivator 1 α ; PINK1 , PTEN - induced putative kinase 1 ; SCNA , α - synuclein ; SNP , single - nucleotide polymorphism ; TH , tyrosine hydroxylase . R E V I E W S 120 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . The development of a more standardized organoid culture medium , together with a more defined extra - cellular matrix , would further facilitate the generation of a highly reproducible organoid system that is more applicable for accurate disease modelling , drug discov - ery and therapeutic development 116 . Another challenge is the lack of vascularization in the current organoid system 97 . Accordingly , organoids exhibit limited growth and maturation owing to the lack of continuous nutri - ent supply . Spinning bioreactors and shaking culture platforms are able to provide better nutrient supply and improve the growth of organoids 110 , 117 . In addition , co - culture with endothelial cells has enabled the gener - ation of vascular - like network in organoids 99 . Moreover , transplantation of in vitro - generated human organoids into relevant sites of animal hosts facilitates vascular - ization and maturation of organoids . This transplan - tation approach may be applied when organoids with increased size and improved maturation are needed for the study . iPSC - based drug discovery Screening for efficacy . Many drug screens are based on targets that are considered to be relevant to the disease mechanisms . However , the low success rates of com - pounds originating from target - based screening have led to greater interest in phenotypic screening 118 . This revival in phenotypic screening has been aided by the discovery of iPSCs for numerous reasons , including the scalability of iPSC production , which facilitates assay development . Moreover , the pluripotency of iPSCs means that these cells can be differentiated into multiple disease - relevant cell types , especially those that are otherwise hard to access , such as neurons 119 . Patient - derived iPSC models make it possible to reca - pitulate disease phenotypes and pathologies in a cul - ture dish . Cells differentiated from patient - derived iPSCs could present molecular and cellular phenotypes . Whether the phenotype that is selected as a readout for a drug screen is truly relevant to the disease can be con - firmed by a gene editing approach if the gene respon - sible for the disease phenotypes is known , and can be further validated in patient samples and / or animal models 120 . In addition to phenotypic screening , iPSCs can be used for target - based screening . Using human iPSC models , many drug screens have been conducted , and potential drug candidates have been identified using either phenotypic or target - based screening . To obtain target cells with high purity on a large scale , purification and enrichment technologies using specific cell - surface markers 121 , 122 , cell - specific promoters 123 and microRNAs 124 have been established . In the first report Table 4 | Human iPSC - derived organoids for modelling development and disease Organoids Applications Refs iPSCs Brain organoids Modelling autism spectrum disorders 108 Modelling Zika virus infection 111 Modelling Seckel syndrome 112 Brain region - specific organoids Modelling Zika virus infection ; future applications include modelling human brain development and diseases , and drug testing 110 Cortical spheroids Modelling cortical development and diseases 114 Cystic organoids Modelling Alagille syndrome , polycystic liver disease and cystic fibrosis - associated cholangiopathy , and drug validation 100 Studying biliary development and cystic fibrosis 101 Lung organoids Studying lung development ; future applications include lung disease modelling 102 Kidney organoids Future applications include kidney disease modelling , nephrotoxicity screening and cell therapy 104 Liver bud Organ - bud transplantation for regenerative medicine 99 Retinal organoids Modelling glaucoma 106 ESCs and iPSCs Brain organoids Modelling Zika virus infection 109 Cerebral organoids Modelling cortical development and microcephaly 117 Modelling fetal neocortex development 107 Cortical organoids Modelling species differences 113 Gastric organoids Modelling gastric development and Helicobacter pylori infection 98 Intestinal organoids Studying intestinal development ; future applications include intestinal disease modelling 103 Small intestinal organoids Transplantation to demonstrate responsiveness to systemic signals ; future applications include studying intestinal development and diseases 105 ESC , embryonic stem cell ; iPSC , induced pluripotent stem cell . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 121 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . of a large - scale drug screen using an iPSC - based dis - ease model , neural crest precursors for autonomic neurons were sorted and purified from iPSCs derived from patients with familial dysautonomia , a monogenic early - onset disease that is characterized by degeneration of neurons in the sensory and autonomic nervous sys - tems 121 . This disease is caused by mutations in IκB kinase complex - associated protein ( IKBKAP ) , which results in a splicing defect and the production of a dysfunctional truncated protein . The drug screen was conducted using 6 , 912 compounds , and a compound known as SKF - 86466 improved disease - specific aberrant splicing . Interestingly , SKF - 86466 was not effective in non - target cells , including iPSCs , fibroblasts and lymphocytes . These results illustrate the advantage of iPSC - based drug screening to explore cell type - specific pathogenesis . Burkhardt et al . 125 performed disease modelling and drug screening using iPSCs derived from patients with sporadic ALS . The authors identified de novo aggre - gation of TAR DNA - binding protein 43 ( TDP43 ) in motor neurons of these patients , and thus used TDP43 aggregation as a readout for a high - content drug screen to identify compounds that reduced TDP43 aggrega - tion 125 . The same research team also made effective use of a patient - derived iPSC model of Alzheimer disease 126 . The authors identified a disease - relevant protein , extra - cellular tau ( eTau ) , in the conditioned medium of cor - tical neurons derived from the iPSCs of a patient with Alzheimer disease , and then generated a therapeutic antibody against eTau 126 . This disease - relevant protein would not have been discovered without using the human iPSC model . eTau causes neuronal hyperactivity and increases amyloid - β production . Using human iPSC models as a tool to identify disease - relevant targets could be a crucial component for future drug development . Naryshkin et al . 127 found that a patient - derived iPSC model of SMA could be used to validate human - and disease - specific drug responsiveness after initial screen - ing using a HEK293 cell line 127 . These compounds were then validated in patient - specific fibroblasts and in motor neurons differentiated from patient - derived iPSCs that served as a patient - specific and disease - relevant cellular model 127 . Finally , the hit compound was evalu - ated in a mouse model for in vivo activity 127 . This drug discovery approach included a patient - derived iPSC model as one of the validation steps by taking advantage of the patient - specific and disease - relevant properties of motor neurons derived from patient iPSCs . Overall , iPSC - based drug screening has been used to evaluate more than 1 , 000 compounds for several diseases 121 , 125 , 128 , 129 ( TABLE 5 ) , and several clinical candi - dates have been identified 126 , 127 , 130 ( TABLE 6 ) . However , these studies require considerable time ( several weeks or more ) to differentiate iPSCs into disease - relevant cell types . Although this length of time may not seem long for phenotypic screening , a shorter differentiation period is preferable to avoid variation in cell quality . Therefore , faster and more stable differentiation methods that result in higher maturity and purity are being sought . An alter - native approach is to perform drug screening using cells derived from direct conversion 131 , 132 . Direct conversion forces the target somatic cells ( for example , fibroblasts ) to express cell - specific transcription factors and to reprogramme one somatic cell state to another somatic cell state without passing through the iPSC state 49 , 132 . Direct conversion has been used to reprogramme myo - cardial cells , liver cells , neural cells or other types of somatic cells from a different type of somatic cell , such as fibroblasts . As noted above , an advantage of direct conversion is that authentic human neurons reflecting important aspects of cellular ageing can be generated 50 . However , the non - renewable source of cells provided by this approach may not be applicable for large - scale drug screening . The forced expression of transcription fac - tors also offers the potential to differentiate patient iPSCs more rapidly . In a recent study , the forced expression of myogenic differentiation 1 ( MYOD1 ) , a master regulator of skeletal muscle differentiation , was used to produce new cellular models of intractable muscle disease pathol - ogies such as Miyoshi myopathy 133 and Duchenne - type muscular dystrophy 134 . An important point to consider in pathology research using iPSCs is the nature of the control group . For genetic disorders , a control group can be created by conducting Table 5 | Large - scale drug screening using human iPSCs Disease Cell type derived from iPSCs Readout Number of compounds screened Hit rate ( % ) Refs Familial dysautonomia Patient neural crest cells IKBKAP expression 6 , 912 0 . 6 121 Alzheimer disease Cortical neurons Cell death ~ 350 ~ 5 . 4 128 Motor neuron disease Neural precursor cells for the hit validation Neurite length 11 , 819 0 . 3 129 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Patient motor neurons TDP43 aggregates 1 , 757 2 . 2 125 Fragile X syndrome Patient neural progenitor cells FMR1 expression 50 , 000 4 . 2 221 Patient neural stem cells FMR1 expression ~ 5 , 000 0 . 12 222 Neural progenitor cells FMR1 expression 1 , 134 0 . 17 223 FMR1 , fragile X mental retardation 1 ; IKBKAP , I κ B kinase complex - associated protein ; iPSC , induced pluripotent stem cell ; TDP43 , TAR DNA - binding protein 43 . R E V I E W S 122 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . gene correction of the mutant allele in patient - derived iPSCs . Comparisons between various groups of iPSCs ( healthy , patient and gene - corrected patient iPSCs ) can be made to validate the results of drug screening 119 . iPSCs are also invaluable models in the case of sporadic diseases . In these cases , because no causal mutation is known , the nature of a control group is difficult to establish ; however , disease - relevant single - nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) can be considered instead 65 . As described in the “Perspectives” section below , for future drug screening , sporadic disease iPSCs should facilitate the investigation of whether the disease is caused by genetic factors such as SNPs , somatic mutations , mosa - icism or epigenetic factors . These developments could further open the door to personalized drug screening using iPSCs 135 . Another application of disease - specific iPSCs is in drug repositioning , in which existing drugs already approved for specific diseases are tested to find new applications in other diseases . For example , a human iPSC model derived from patients with achondroplasia with mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( FGFR3 ) showed that patient - derived iPSCs did not dif - ferentiate well into cartilage tissue 136 . Using this model , a screen for molecules that rescued chondrogenically differentiated iPSCs from the defective cartilage pheno - type identified several statins , which are approved drugs for cardiovascular disease . The same study found that statins could promote the growth of shortened limbs in a mouse model of FGFR3 - linked disease . These results indicate that statins may be repositioned as candidate drugs for achondroplasia 136 . As another example of drug repositioning , the anti - epileptic drug ezogabine demon - strated efficacy in an iPSC model of the motor neuron disease ALS and is now undergoing a clinical trial 137 . In this study , the authors showed the effect of ezogabine on an iPSC model derived from both patients with ALS harbouring mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 ( SOD1 ) gene and patients with ALS harbouring muta - tions in other genes linked to ALS , such as C9ORF72 and FUS . It has also been demonstrated that iPSC motor neurons derived from patients with ALS initially exhibit a hyper - excitable state followed by a decrease in excit - ability 138 . This finding suggests that early intervention with ezogabine may be required for the treatment of ALS . The observation of a similar drug response in different patient groups enabled the generalization of drug responsiveness across ALS types . Drug discovery using iPSCs derived from multiple genetic forms of a disease is of great value because it allows testing of the drug responsiveness in a broad patient population . By contrast , it is challenging to analyse the effect of a drug in multiple mouse models simultaneously . Screening for toxicity . The development of new drugs is enormously costly . The high costs are mostly because of failures , particularly those in late - stage clinical trials , which are in turn partially due to unanticipated side effects 139 , 140 . Many unpredicted adverse effects of new candidate drugs can occur , with cardiac and liver tox - icity being of particular concern . Consequently , there is considerable interest in developing approaches that could more effectively predict the likelihood of candidate drugs to cause serious side effects , thereby enabling the selection of candidates that are less likely to fail owing to toxicity in late - stage trials . Lethal arrhythmias with a QT prolongation account for 21 % of total cardiac toxicities 141 . QT prolongation is an adverse effect related to human ether - a - go - go - related gene ( hERG ; also known as KCNH2 ) channels . Cardiac safety testing has primarily depended on the hERG assay because blocking the hERG current is considered to be associated with the deadly ventricular arrhythmia named torsades de pointes . However , it has been discovered that 40 – 60 % of drugs that inhibit hERG channel currents do not cause QT prolongation 142 , 143 . These false - positive results from the hERG assay may have hindered the devel - opment of promising drugs . Various preclinical strategies have been proposed to detect drug - induced electrophys - iological cardiotoxicity , including using in vitro human ion channel assays , human - based in silico reconstructions and human stem cell - derived cardiomyocytes 144 . Recent efforts have shown that multi - electrode arrays using human iPSC - derived cardiomyocytes may offer a reliable , cost - effective surrogate for preclinical in vitro testing 145 that could be used to assess pro - arrhythmic risk 146 . For hepatotoxicity , hepatocyte cell lines or human pri - mary hepatocytes are widely used . However , these mod - els also have limitations , including cell resources , loss of function due to freezing – thawing and lot - to - lot variation . Recently , human ESC - and iPSC - derived hepatic cells were generated that express functional molecules such as cytochrome P450 3A4 ( CYP3A4 ) , can take up indocya - nine green 147 and respond to known hepatotoxic drugs 148 . Functional 3D liver organ buds have also been reported , which may result in better drug screening 99 . Finally , regarding the nervous system , a platform that assesses adverse drug effects using pluripotent stem cells is currently being developed . To conduct such an assess - ment , the analysis of gene expression alterations of cells Table 6 | Drug candidates derived from iPSC research currently in clinical trials Candidate drug Disease Mechanism Modality Company Refs BMS - 986168 ( IPN - 007 ) Progressive supranuclear palsy Neutralizing extracellular tau Antibody Bristol - Myers Squibb 126 Ezogabine Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Kv7 . 2 / 3 potassium channel agonist Small molecule GlaxoSmithKline 137 RG7800 Spinal muscular atrophy Increasing SMN ( survival of motor neuron ) protein levels Small molecule Roche 127 R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 123 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery 2 1 3 4 5 6 Somatic cells Reprogramming iPSCs or Genome editing or viral transduction Genetically corrected iPSCs Diﬀerentiation Transplantation Patient Genetically matched healthy cells Quality control for cell identity , purity , activity and safety Good manufacturing practice A system that guarantees products are manufactured by following specific guidelines recommended by regulatory agencies , such as the US Food and Drug Administration . Such compliance is mandatory for all pharmaceutical manufacturing . in the nervous system , such as neuronal cells , mesenchy - mal stem cells and vascular endothelial cells derived from human ESCs in a culture dish , has been proposed 149 . Clinical applications using human iPSC products The potential of regenerative medicine based on the use of stem cells to promote endogenous regenerative pro - cesses or to replace damaged tissues after cellular trans - plantation has attracted considerable interest . Since the discovery of human ESCs in 1998 ( REF . 150 ) and of human iPSCs in 2007 ( REFS 2 , 3 ) , the stem cell research community has continued to identify more suitable sources for exploring cell therapy and endogenous repair in humans . A general approach to develop iPSC - based cell therapy products is summarized in FIG . 2 . Of the 13 ongoing clinical trials evaluating stem cell ther - apy products , 8 are for ESC - and 1 is for iPSC - derived RPE cells to treat macular degeneration , which causes the progressive deterioration of light - sensing photo - receptors in the eye ( see ClinicalTrials . gov ) 151 . In 2014 , the first clinical study using human iPSC products was initiated by transplanting RPE sheets derived from the patient’s own iPSCs . The therapy resulted in positive results , stopping macular degeneration and improving the vision of the patient . Although the trial was subse - quently put on hold owing to mutations observed in a second patient’s iPSCs 4 , it is anticipated to resume 6 . In addition , a recent study has demonstrated the feasibility of transplanting human ESC - derived cardiac progeni - tor cells embedded in a fibrin scaffold to patients with severe heart failure 152 . However , there are several obstacles associated with iPSC - based therapy that will need to be addressed before routine clinical applications can begin 153 . One concern is the risk of tumorigenicity from ESCs and iPSCs 154 . Because pluripotent cells are maintained in culture for prolonged periods of time , they can accumulate karyotypic abnormalities and copy number variants and lose heterozygosity 155 . Hence , before clinical use , iPSC - derived products need to be carefully screened for the lack of potentially risky genetic alterations 155 and rigorously tested to ensure their purity , quality and ste - rility . Increased knowledge of the basic biology of pluri - potency induction and maintenance will also help in reducing the risk of mutation development and genetic instability associated with human iPSC derivation and maintenance . Although the products differentiated from iPSCs have not been shown to generate teratomas , it is crit - ical to ensure that the final product does not contain undifferentiated cells that have the potential to generate teratomas . Accordingly , improved protocols for differ - entiating human iPSCs into desired cell types with pre - cise identity and cellular functions are needed . To this end , small - molecule inhibitors that have been shown to induce selective and complete cell death of undifferen - tiated human pluripotent stem cells without affecting their differentiated derivatives have been identified 156 , 157 . Treatment of the iPSC - derived cellular product with these inhibitors may reduce the potential tumorigenic - ity . Another potential solution is to sort the iPSC - derived cells before transplantation through positive selection for desired cell types and negative selection against human ESC markers using fluorescence - activated cell sorting . Finally , the risk of tumorigenicity can be tested in animal models before transplant . However , this approach may not be applicable in patients with rapid disease progres - sion owing to the long period of time associated with animal tests . Compliance with good manufacturing practice is man - datory before human transplantation of cell therapies . Once cells are safely delivered , patients should ideally be monitored for the development of potential tumours and activation of the immune system 158 . One approach for tumour monitoring may be to assess the enhanced angi - ogenesis that often accompanies teratoma formation , Figure 2 | A schematic for human iPSC - based cell therapy . The development of human induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) - based cell therapies can be broken down into six steps . First , somatic cells are collected from affected patients and cultured . Second , the patient somatic cells are reprogrammed into iPSCs . Third , genome editing technology or a viral transduction method is used to genetically correct the patient - derived iPSCs . Fourth , the corrected iPSCs are differentiated into desired cell types to serve as genetically matched healthy donor cells . Fifth , quality control tests for cell identity , purity , activity and safety are performed . Finally , the genetically matched healthy cells are transplanted into patients for cell therapy . R E V I E W S 124 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Autologous Of the same individual . Allogeneic Of genetically different individuals from the same species . which can be detected using the 64 Cu - labelled cyclic argi - nine - glycine - aspartic acid tetramer ( 64 Cu - DOTA - RGD4 ) radiotracer with positron - emission tomography imag - ing 159 . Another approach may be to use a combination of serum biomarkers ( for example , carcinoembryonic antigen , α - fetoprotein or human chorionic gonado - tropin ) and magnetic resonance imaging screening , as described recently 160 . However , it is worth noting that these approaches would be mostly useful at the preclini - cal stage , especially if they are already part of the imaging procedure required for evaluating an end point . Their feasibility and necessity for future human trials remain to be determined . The lack of an effective method of inducing immune tolerance is a major roadblock for human ESC - based ther - apies . ESCs were once considered to be immune privileged owing to the low levels of expression of major histocom - patibility complex ( MHC ) class I , MHC class II and co - stimulatory molecules 161 . Although undifferentiated ESCs might be immune - privileged , their differentiated derivatives can trigger cellular and humoral immune responses 162 . By contrast , autologous iPSCs might avoid the high cost and serious side effects associated with lifelong immunosuppression required for allogeneic cell transplantation 163 . Despite some controversy regarding the immunogenicity of undifferentiated iPSCs 164 , recent studies have demonstrated that the differentiation of iPSCs could result in loss of immunogenicity 165 – 167 . The application of cells derived from individual patients’ own iPSCs or iPSCs from matched donors may become a cornerstone of precision medicine and has the important advantage that there should be no need for long - term immune suppression to preserve the trans - planted cells . Indeed , the first iPSC clinical trial used RPEs from autologous iPSCs derived from the patient . Using autologous iPSC products for personalized cell therapy seems to be ideal for orphan diseases , as mas - sive cell banking is not required . However , for more common diseases , particularly acute common diseases such as cerebrovascular accident or myocardial infarc - tion , autologous iPSC therapy may not be practical for large numbers of patients given the high cost and lengthy period of time needed for careful validation of each cell line . For these reasons , the second phase of the iPSC RPE trial in Japan will be using allogeneic products 168 . The allogeneic iPSC approach could also bring down the cost for iPSC - based cell therapy . Excluding the high start - up cost , each iPSC line costs ~ US $ 10 , 000 – 20 , 000 to produce 169 . Meeting current good manufac - turing practice requirements substantially increases this cost 170 . Costs are even higher , by approximately $ 800 , 000 ( REF . 169 ) , to generate an iPSC - derived tissue product suitable for clinical use ( for example , differen - tiation of iPSC neuronal cells for cerebrovascular acci - dent , iPSC cardiomyocytes for myocardial infarction or iPSC RPE cells for macular degeneration ) . Banking iPSCs for allogeneic transplant has the potential to reduce costs because one production may be used for multiple patients . To facilitate allogeneic transplant , the effectiveness of conventional immunosuppres - sive protocols and newer regimens of co - stimulatory blockers for inducing immunotolerance will need to be improved in preclinical and clinical settings 171 , 172 . Moreover , understanding how pluripotent stem cells interact with the immune system and why they may be more tolerance - inducing than other transplanted cells may lead to the identification of new immuno - suppressive mechanisms and strategies 163 . Furthermore , transplantation into immune - privileged sites may serve as a possible strategy to overcome immune rejection . Incorporating recent advances in genome editing strat - egies to create universally accepted donor cells could be another alternative approach 173 . The combination of the human iPSC platform with the recently developed gene editing and 3D organoid technologies could make human iPSCs an even more powerful cellular resource for stem cell - based cell ther - apy development . As a proof of principle , mouse iPSCs corrected through gene editing have been used to gen - erate haematopoietic progenitors to successfully treat sickle cell anaemia in a mouse model 174 . Furthermore , the integration of genetically corrected human iPSCs with 3D organoids could enable tissues to be generated as sources for organ replacement therapies 97 . Indeed , human iPSC - derived liver organoids have been shown to successfully generate functional human liver - like tissues in transplanted mice in a proof - of - principle study 99 . However , there are still challenges to overcome for such approaches to become applicable in human cell therapy . For example , the potential off - target effects associated with gene editing need to be addressed , as do the limitations of organoids , as described in the section “iPSC - based disease modelling” . Perspectives The discovery of iPSCs has provided a revolutionary new research platform for the study of diseases . In the 10 years since the first iPSC report , great progress has been made in investigating disease mechanisms and potential treatments by combining human iPSCs with other new technologies . However , several important issues remain to be addressed . iPSC clones show variations in differentiation effi - ciency , including clones derived from the same person 119 . These variations are important to consider when selecting control groups for disease modelling studies . Applying CRISPR – Cas9 technology may help to address this issue , as discussed above . Multiple reports have now shown that gene correction of an iPSC mutation improves the dis - ease phenotype of differentiated cells 175 – 178 . In addition to correcting gene mutations in disease iPSCs , researchers have successfully introduced gene mutations into healthy iPSCs 87 , 88 . However , several challenges for the combina - tion of CRISPR – Cas9 technology with iPSC technology remain , including the off - target effects of CRISPR – Cas9 editing , the high cost of assaying for them and the lim - ited application of gene editing to genetic diseases with unknown disease - causing mutations or risk variants 14 . Nevertheless , the potential of this combination to dissect disease mechanisms and to develop new cell ther - apies is high . Moreover , CRISPR – Cas9 or CRISPRi - based genome - wide genetic screening 179 , 180 in human iPSCs R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 125 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . MicroRNA switch A biotechnology that turns a gene on or off depending on the microRNA ( or microRNAs ) inside the cell . Disease repositioning Redefinition of a disease based on disease induced pluripotent stem cell - based phenotypes to identify common and new therapeutic approaches across diseases . could open a new avenue for understanding basic biolog - ical mechanisms underlying human iPSC pluripotency , maintenance and differentiation . In contrast to mouse ESCs and iPSCs that represent the ‘naive’ state and are homogeneous , human ESCs and iPSCs represent the ‘primed’ state and are hetero - geneous in both cell population and differentiation potential 181 , 182 . Moreover , the reprogramming process can result in both fully reprogrammed iPSCs and par - tially reprogrammed cells , which may have different differentiation potential 183 , 184 . Therefore , human iPSCs need to be carefully selected and thoroughly charac - terized for their pluripotency before clinical applica - tions 185 . Further basic research on reprogramming mechanisms may help researchers to develop methods that facilitate the generation of a standardized human iPSC state , which would lead to reduced technical var - iability and enable the identification of true biological phenotypes . In addition to clonal variation in iPSC differentiation efficiency , another obstacle for disease modelling is line - to - line variations in the maturation of differentiated cells . The acquisition of mature cells requires improved culture conditions and the use of fate conversion with gene regulation 119 . A recent tech - nology , the microRNA switch 124 , is anticipated to increase the maturation quality of iPSC - differentiated cells and to reduce clonal variation . In conventional disease - modelling studies , cells are seeded in a 2D plane . However , in vitro models with a 3D structure are closer to the physiological condi - tion and thus may be better suited for the study of disease pathology . Using disease - specific iPSCs , tech - nologies for inducing the differentiation of several 3D structures , including those similar to the cortex , optic cup , Rathke’s pouch , cerebellum and hippo - campus , have been reported 186 – 191 . By taking advantage of the dynamic patterning and structural self - formation of complex organ buds , the construction of 3D struc - tures and their corresponding networks has become a reality . Such a strategy is already being used in dis - ease modelling for brain abnormalities 117 and mental illness 108 . Similarly to the self - organization of ectoder - mal tissue structures , endodermal tissue formation in 3D stem cell culture 99 has been developed and applied to gastrointestinal disease modelling 192 . Physiological interactions among complex tissues from different lin - eages but with the same genetic background , such as the blood – brain barrier 193 or the immune system 194 , 195 within the organoid , could provide new insights into normal physiology and diseases 196 , 197 . Although several limitations exist in current 3D technology 198 , 199 , as detailed in the “iPSC - based dis - ease modelling” section , combining disease - specific iPSCs with 3D technology enables the examination of spatio temporal cellular interactions that could reveal the physiological disease status , thus provid - ing an unprecedented drug - screening platform and offering a new option for tissue - replacement therapy . However , transplantation of human stem cell - derived organoids into animals to generate human tissues or organs may bring new issues in biomedical ethics that warrant further attention 200 , such as the potential of transplanted human stem cells to mix with host cells and to develop in the nervous system and germ lines of host animals . iPSCs also provide a new way to study sporadic dis - eases . Before the development of iPSC technology , it was impossible to analyse sporadic diseases in cellular mod - els , but now several studies have successfully modelled sporadic neurological diseases 54 , 57 , 65 , 73 , 85 , 108 , 125 , 135 , 201 , 202 . It has been hypothesized that the pathological mechanisms of sporadic diseases might be the same as familial ones . However , sporadic and familial diseases have marked differences , such as the age of onset and severity , as well as the pathology . iPSC models suggest that even if the effect of each individual genetic risk is small , the combined effect may initiate and accelerate the development of the pathology of sporadic diseases . In addition , even if SNP genotyping only indicates a small risk factor , it could be an impor - tant one , and modelling the pathological phenotype with iPSC technology could lead to a re - classification of sporadic diseases . Such re - classifications could have important implications for drug development . iPSC modelling has the potential to identify drug - responsive patient subgroups , including those with sporadic dis - eases , which should improve the quality of clinical tri - als 119 . A large cohort analysis with medical records and genome information combined with patient iPSCs is also anticipated ; thus , iPSC - derived cells could provide a much more precise analysis of the individual genes and proteins involved in the disease . Accumulating information from disease iPSC research , in combination with patients’ personalized clinical expe - rience , will aid disease repositioning , in which diseases are defined not by clinical but by cellular phenotypes . If an analysis of the cellular phenotypes of in vitro iPSC models of clinically different diseases indicates that the phenotype is identical or similar , then a treatment that is effective in one condition may be effective in the others . For example , an iPSC model of bipolar disorder identi - fied hyperexcitable neuronal cells 201 . Similar hyperexcit - ability was found in iPSC - derived motor neurons from a patient with ALS 203 . Therefore , the same therapeutic agent may be effective for these clinically disparate but cellularly similar diseases . Accumulating data of cellular phenotypes of iPSC models from a cross - sectional vari - ety of diseases may contribute to new stratifications and understanding of different diseases , which could also lead to new cross - sectional treatment approaches . The development of iPSC technology has generated a powerful new way to both define and treat diseases . iPSCs represent a paradigm shift because they now allow us to directly observe and treat relevant patient cells . In particular , they have revealed new relationships between disease phenotypes and gene expression profiles , which have broadened and deepened our understanding of disease development in patients , particularly those with sporadic diseases . Progress with other technologies , such as CRISPR – Cas9 , 3D organoids and microRNA switches , will further advance the already rapid pace of iPSC - based disease modelling and therapeutic development . R E V I E W S 126 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 1 . Takahashi , K . & Yamanaka , S . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors . Cell 126 , 663 – 676 ( 2006 ) . The first report to describe iPSC technology . 2 . Takahashi , K . et al . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors . Cell 131 , 861 – 872 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Yu , J . et al . Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells . Science 318 , 1917 – 1920 ( 2007 ) . References 2 and 3 are the first studies to demonstrate human iPSC derivation from somatic cells . 4 . Kimbrel , E . A . & Lanza , R . Current status of pluripotent stem cells : moving the first therapies to the clinic . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 14 , 681 – 692 ( 2015 ) . 5 . Scudellari , M . How iPS cells changed the world . Nature 534 , 310 – 312 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Trounson , A . & DeWitt , N . D . Pluripotent stem cells progressing to the clinic . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 194 – 200 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Onos , K . D . , Sukoff Rizzo , S . J . , Howell , G . R . & Sasner , M . Toward more predictive genetic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease . Brain Res . Bull . 122 , 1 – 11 ( 2016 ) . 8 . Puzzo , D . , Gulisano , W . , Palmeri , A . & Arancio , O . Rodent models for Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery . Expert Opin . Drug Discov . 10 , 703 – 711 ( 2015 ) . 9 . Ben - David , U . , Kopper , O . & Benvenisty , N . Expanding the boundaries of embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 666 – 677 ( 2012 ) . 10 . Kim , K . et al . Donor cell type can influence the epigenome and differentiation potential of human induced pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 29 , 1117 – 1119 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Ohi , Y . et al . Incomplete DNA methylation underlies a transcriptional memory of somatic cells in human iPS cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 541 – 549 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Bar - Nur , O . , Russ , H . A . , Efrat , S . & Benvenisty , N . Epigenetic memory and preferential lineage - specific differentiation in induced pluripotent stem cells derived from human pancreatic islet beta cells . Cell Stem Cell 9 , 17 – 23 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Avior , Y . , Sagi , I . & Benvenisty , N . Pluripotent stem cells in disease modelling and drug discovery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 170 – 182 ( 2016 ) . 14 . Hockemeyer , D . & Jaenisch , R . Induced pluripotent stem cells meet genome editing . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 573 – 586 ( 2016 ) . A comprehensive review of iPSCs and genome editing . 15 . Hockemeyer , D . et al . Efficient targeting of expressed and silent genes in human ESCs and iPSCs using zinc - finger nucleases . Nat . Biotechnol . 27 , 851 – 857 ( 2009 ) . 16 . Zou , J . et al . Gene targeting of a disease - related gene in human induced pluripotent stem and embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Christian , M . et al . Targeting DNA double - strand breaks with TAL effector nucleases . Genetics 186 , 757 – 761 ( 2010 ) . 18 . Hockemeyer , D . et al . Genetic engineering of human pluripotent cells using TALE nucleases . Nat . Biotechnol . 29 , 731 – 734 ( 2011 ) . 19 . Sanjana , N . E . et al . A transcription activator - like effector toolbox for genome engineering . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 171 – 192 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Cong , L . et al . Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR – Cas systems . Science 339 , 819 – 823 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Perez - Pinera , P . et al . RNA - guided gene activation by CRISPR – Cas9 - based transcription factors . Nat . Methods 10 , 973 – 976 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Shalem , O . et al . Genome - scale CRISPR – Cas9 knockout screening in human cells . Science 343 , 84 – 87 ( 2014 ) . 23 . Jinek , M . et al . A programmable dual - RNA - guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity . Science 337 , 816 – 821 ( 2012 ) . 24 . Fu , Y . et al . High - frequency off - target mutagenesis induced by CRISPR – Cas nucleases in human cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 31 , 822 – 826 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Smith , C . et al . Whole - genome sequencing analysis reveals high specificity of CRISPR – Cas9 and TALEN - based genome editing in human iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 12 – 13 ( 2014 ) . 26 . Veres , A . et al . Low incidence of off - target mutations in individual CRISPR – Cas9 and TALEN targeted human stem cell clones detected by whole - genome sequencing . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 27 – 30 ( 2014 ) . 27 . Li , C . et al . Novel HDAd / EBV reprogramming vector and highly efficient Ad / CRISPR – Cas sickle cell disease gene correction . Sci . Rep . 6 , 30422 ( 2016 ) . 28 . Chang , C . W . et al . Modeling human severe combined immunodeficiency and correction by CRISPR – Cas9 - enhanced gene targeting . Cell Rep . 12 , 1668 – 1677 ( 2015 ) . 29 . Park , C . Y . et al . Functional correction of large factor VIII gene chromosomal inversions in hemophilia A patient - derived iPSCs using CRISPR – Cas9 . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 213 – 220 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Firth , A . L . et al . Functional gene correction for cystic fibrosis in lung epithelial cells generated from patient iPSCs . Cell Rep . 12 , 1385 – 1390 ( 2015 ) . 31 . Bae , S . , Park , J . & Kim , J . S . Cas - OFFinder : a fast and versatile algorithm that searches for potential off - target sites of Cas9 RNA - guided endonucleases . Bioinformatics 30 , 1473 – 1475 ( 2014 ) . 32 . Mali , P . et al . RNA - guided human genome engineering via Cas9 . Science 339 , 823 – 826 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Dominguez , A . A . , Lim , W . A . & Qi , L . S . Beyond editing : repurposing CRISPR – Cas9 for precision genome regulation and interrogation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 5 – 15 ( 2016 ) . 34 . Ran , F . A . et al . Double nicking by RNA - guided CRISPR Cas9 for enhanced genome editing specificity . Cell 154 , 1380 – 1389 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Slaymaker , I . M . et al . Rationally engineered Cas9 nucleases with improved specificity . Science 351 , 84 – 88 ( 2016 ) . 36 . Chen , B . et al . Dynamic imaging of genomic loci in living human cells by an optimized CRISPR – Cas system . Cell 155 , 1479 – 1491 ( 2013 ) . 37 . Paquet , D . et al . Efficient introduction of specific homozygous and heterozygous mutations using CRISPR – Cas9 . Nature 533 , 125 – 129 ( 2016 ) . 38 . Komor , A . C . , Kim , Y . B . , Packer , M . S . , Zuris , J . A . & Liu , D . R . Programmable editing of a target base in genomic DNA without double - stranded DNA cleavage . Nature 533 , 420 – 424 ( 2016 ) . 39 . Ebert , A . D . et al . Induced pluripotent stem cells from a spinal muscular atrophy patient . Nature 457 , 277 – 280 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Lee , G . et al . Modelling pathogenesis and treatment of familial dysautonomia using patient - specific iPSCs . Nature 461 , 402 – 406 ( 2009 ) . References 39 and 40 are the first studies to demonstrate disease - associated phenotypes in patient - derived iPSC - based disease modelling . 41 . Studer , L . , Vera , E . & Cornacchia , D . Programming and reprogramming cellular age in the era of induced pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 16 , 591 – 600 ( 2015 ) . An important review article discussing how cellular age is erased during iPSC derivation and how the iPSC platform may be used to programme cellular ageing along with cellular fate . 42 . Munsat , T . L . & Davies , K . E . International SMA consortium meeting . ( 26 – 28 June 1992 , Bonn , Germany ) . Neuromuscul . Disord . 2 , 423 – 428 ( 1992 ) . 43 . Nguyen , H . N . et al . LRRK2 mutant iPSC - derived DA neurons demonstrate increased susceptibility to oxidative stress . Cell Stem Cell 8 , 267 – 280 ( 2011 ) . 44 . Cooper , O . et al . Pharmacological rescue of mitochondrial deficits in iPSC - derived neural cells from patients with familial Parkinson’s disease . Sci . Transl Med . 4 , 141ra90 ( 2012 ) . 45 . Miller , J . D . et al . Human iPSC - based modeling of late - onset disease via progerin - induced aging . Cell Stem Cell 13 , 691 – 705 ( 2013 ) . 46 . Liu , G . H . et al . Progressive degeneration of human neural stem cells caused by pathogenic LRRK2 . Nature 491 , 603 – 607 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Pearson , B . L . et al . Identification of chemicals that mimic transcriptional changes associated with autism , brain aging and neurodegeneration . Nat . Commun . 7 , 11173 ( 2016 ) . 48 . Ho , R . et al . ALS disrupts spinal motor neuron maturation and aging pathways within gene co - expression networks . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1256 – 1267 ( 2016 ) . 49 . Mertens , J . , Marchetto , M . C . , Bardy , C . & Gage , F . H . Evaluating cell reprogramming , differentiation and conversion technologies in neuroscience . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 17 , 424 – 437 ( 2016 ) . A comprehensive review of cell reprogramming , differentiation and conversion technologies in neuroscience . 50 . Mertens , J . et al . Directly reprogrammed human neurons retain aging - associated transcriptomic signatures and reveal age - related nucleocytoplasmic defects . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 705 – 718 ( 2015 ) . Demonstrates for the first time that directly reprogrammed human neurons preserve cellular age . 51 . Bardy , C . et al . Neuronal medium that supports basic synaptic functions and activity of human neurons in vitro . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E2725 – E2734 ( 2015 ) . 52 . Song , H . , Stevens , C . F . & Gage , F . H . Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult neural stem cells . Nature 417 , 39 – 44 ( 2002 ) . 53 . Tian , E . et al . Small - molecule - based lineage reprogramming creates functional astrocytes . Cell Rep . 16 , 781 – 792 ( 2016 ) . 54 . Kondo , T . et al . Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with iPSCs reveals stress phenotypes associated with intracellular A β and differential drug responsiveness . Cell Stem Cell 12 , 487 – 496 ( 2013 ) . 55 . Soldner , F . et al . Parkinson - associated risk variant in distal enhancer of α - synuclein modulates target gene expression . Nature 533 , 95 – 99 ( 2016 ) . 56 . Yagi , T . et al . Modeling familial Alzheimer’s disease with induced pluripotent stem cells . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 , 4530 – 4539 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Israel , M . A . et al . Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 482 , 216 – 220 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Woodruff , G . et al . The presenilin - 1 Δ E9 mutation results in reduced gamma - secretase activity , but not total loss of PS1 function , in isogenic human stem cells . Cell Rep . 5 , 974 – 985 ( 2013 ) . 59 . Mertens , J . et al . APP processing in human pluripotent stem cell - derived neurons is resistant to NSAID - based γ - secretase modulation . Stem Cell Reports 1 , 491 – 498 ( 2013 ) . 60 . Lee , J . K . et al . Acid sphingomyelinase modulates the autophagic process by controlling lysosomal biogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease . J . Exp . Med . 211 , 1551 – 1570 ( 2014 ) . 61 . Duan , L . et al . Stem cell derived basal forebrain cholinergic neurons from Alzheimer’s disease patients are more susceptible to cell death . Mol . Neurodegener . 9 , 3 ( 2014 ) . 62 . Muratore , C . R . et al . The familial Alzheimer’s disease APPV717I mutation alters APP processing and Tau expression in iPSC - derived neurons . Hum . Mol . Genet . 23 , 3523 – 3536 ( 2014 ) . 63 . Mahairaki , V . et al . Induced pluripotent stem cells from familial Alzheimer’s disease patients differentiate into mature neurons with amyloidogenic properties . Stem Cells Dev . 23 , 2996 – 3010 ( 2014 ) . 64 . Liu , Q . et al . Effect of potent γ - secretase modulator in human neurons derived from multiple presenilin 1 - induced pluripotent stem cell mutant carriers . JAMA Neurol . 71 , 1481 – 1489 ( 2014 ) . 65 . Young , J . E . et al . Elucidating molecular phenotypes caused by the SORL1 Alzheimer’s disease genetic risk factor using human induced pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 16 , 373 – 385 ( 2015 ) . 66 . Hossini , A . M . et al . Induced pluripotent stem cell - derived neuronal cells from a sporadic Alzheimer’s disease donor as a model for investigating AD - associated gene regulatory networks . BMC Genomics 16 , 84 ( 2015 ) . 67 . Moore , S . et al . APP metabolism regulates tau proteostasis in human cerebral cortex neurons . Cell Rep . 11 , 689 – 696 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Liao , M . C . et al . Single - cell detection of secreted A β and sAPP α from human IPSC - derived neurons and astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 36 , 1730 – 1746 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Seibler , P . et al . Mitochondrial Parkin recruitment is impaired in neurons derived from mutant PINK1 induced pluripotent stem cells . J . Neurosci . 31 , 5970 – 5976 ( 2011 ) . 70 . Devine , M . J . et al . Parkinson’s disease induced pluripotent stem cells with triplication of the α - synuclein locus . Nat . Commun . 2 , 440 ( 2011 ) . 71 . Imaizumi , Y . et al . Mitochondrial dysfunction associated with increased oxidative stress and α - synuclein accumulation in PARK2 iPSC - derived neurons and postmortem brain tissue . Mol . Brain 5 , 35 ( 2012 ) . 72 . Jiang , H . et al . Parkin controls dopamine utilization in human midbrain dopaminergic neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Commun . 3 , 668 ( 2012 ) . 73 . Sanchez - Danes , A . et al . Disease - specific phenotypes in dopamine neurons from human iPS - based models of genetic and sporadic Parkinson’s disease . EMBO Mol . Med . 4 , 380 – 395 ( 2012 ) . 74 . Chung , C . Y . et al . Identification and rescue of α - synuclein toxicity in Parkinson patient - derived neurons . Science 342 , 983 – 987 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 127 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 75 . Reinhardt , P . et al . Genetic correction of a LRRK2 mutation in human iPSCs links parkinsonian neurodegeneration to ERK - dependent changes in gene expression . Cell Stem Cell 12 , 354 – 367 ( 2013 ) . 76 . Ryan , S . D . et al . Isogenic human iPSC Parkinson’s model shows nitrosative stress - induced dysfunction in MEF2 - PGC1 α transcription . Cell 155 , 1351 – 1364 ( 2013 ) . 77 . Hartfield , E . M . et al . Physiological characterisation of human iPS - derived dopaminergic neurons . PLoS ONE 9 , e87388 ( 2014 ) . 78 . Schondorf , D . C . et al . iPSC - derived neurons from GBA1 - associated Parkinson’s disease patients show autophagic defects and impaired calcium homeostasis . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4028 ( 2014 ) . 79 . Woodard , C . M . et al . iPSC - derived dopamine neurons reveal differences between monozygotic twins discordant for Parkinson’s disease . Cell Rep . 9 , 1173 – 1182 ( 2014 ) . 80 . Dettmer , U . et al . Parkinson - causing α - synuclein missense mutations shift native tetramers to monomers as a mechanism for disease initiation . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7314 ( 2015 ) . 81 . Fernandez - Santiago , R . et al . Aberrant epigenome in iPSC - derived dopaminergic neurons from Parkinson’s disease patients . EMBO Mol . Med . 7 , 1529 – 1546 ( 2015 ) . 82 . Ren , Y . et al . Parkin mutations reduce the complexity of neuronal processes in iPSC - derived human neurons . Stem Cells 33 , 68 – 78 ( 2015 ) . 83 . Shaltouki , A . et al . Mitochondrial alterations by PARKIN in dopaminergic neurons using PARK2 patient - specific and PARK2 knockout isogenic iPSC lines . Stem Cell Reports 4 , 847 – 859 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Aflaki , E . et al . New glucocerebrosidase chaperone reduces α - synuclein and glycolipid levels in iPSC - derived dopaminergic neurons from patients with Gaucher disease and parkinsonism . J . Neurosci . 36 , 7441 – 7452 ( 2016 ) . 85 . Brennand , K . J . et al . Modelling schizophrenia using human induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 473 , 221 – 225 ( 2011 ) . The first study to use a human iPSC model for a psychiatric disease . 86 . Lin , M . et al . RNA - seq of human neurons derived from iPS cells reveals candidate long non - coding RNAs involved in neurogenesis and neuropsychiatric disorders . PLoS ONE 6 , e23356 ( 2011 ) . 87 . Wen , Z . et al . Synaptic dysregulation in a human iPS cell model of mental disorders . Nature 515 , 414 – 418 ( 2014 ) . 88 . Murai , K . et al . The TLX - miR - 219 cascade regulates neural stem cell proliferation in neurodevelopment and schizophrenia iPSC model . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10965 ( 2016 ) . 89 . Brennand , K . et al . Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from patients with schizophrenia . Mol . Psychiatry 20 , 361 – 368 ( 2014 ) . 90 . Topol , A . et al . Dysregulation of miRNA - 9 in a subset of schizophrenia patient - derived neural progenitor cells . Cell Rep . 15 , 1024 – 1036 ( 2016 ) . 91 . Yoon , K . J . et al . Modeling a genetic risk for schizophrenia in iPSCs and mice reveals neural stem cell deficits associated with adherens junctions and polarity . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 79 – 91 ( 2014 ) . 92 . Han , J . et al . Functional implications of miR - 19 in the migration of newborn neurons in the adult brain . Neuron 91 , 79 – 89 ( 2016 ) . 93 . Nagai , M . et al . Astrocytes expressing ALS - linked mutated SOD1 release factors selectively toxic to motor neurons . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 615 – 622 ( 2007 ) . 94 . Di Giorgio , F . P . , Carrasco , M . A . , Siao , M . C . , Maniatis , T . & Eggan , K . Non - cell autonomous effect of glia on motor neurons in an embryonic stem cell - based ALS model . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 608 – 614 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Marchetto , M . C . et al . Non - cell - autonomous effect of human SOD1 G37R astrocytes on motor neurons derived from human embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 649 – 657 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Haidet - Phillips , A . M . et al . Astrocytes from familial and sporadic ALS patients are toxic to motor neurons . Nat . Biotechnol . 29 , 824 – 828 ( 2011 ) . 97 . Lancaster , M . A . & Knoblich , J . A . Organogenesis in a dish : modeling development and disease using organoid technologies . Science 345 , 1247125 ( 2014 ) . 98 . McCracken , K . W . et al . Modelling human development and disease in pluripotent stem - cell - derived gastric organoids . Nature 516 , 400 – 404 ( 2016 ) . 99 . Takebe , T . et al . Vascularized and functional human liver from an iPSC - derived organ bud transplant . Nature 499 , 481 – 484 ( 2013 ) . The first report to describe the generation and transplantation of human iPSC - derived organoids . 100 . Sampaziotis , F . et al . Cholangiocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells for disease modeling and drug validation . Nat . Biotechnol . 33 , 845 – 852 ( 2015 ) . 101 . Ogawa , M . et al . Directed differentiation of cholangiocytes from human pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 33 , 853 – 861 ( 2015 ) . 102 . Dye , B . R . et al . In vitro generation of human pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids . eLife 4 , e05098 ( 2015 ) . 103 . Spence , J . R . et al . Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue in vitro . Nature 470 , 105 – 109 ( 2011 ) . A pioneering report of human iPSC - derived organoids . 104 . Takasato , M . et al . Kidney organoids from human iPS cells contain multiple lineages and model human nephrogenesis . Nature 526 , 564 – 568 ( 2015 ) . 105 . Watson , C . L . et al . An in vivo model of human small intestine using pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Med . 20 , 1310 – 1314 ( 2014 ) . 106 . Tucker , B . A . et al . Duplication of TBK1 stimulates autophagy in iPSC - derived retinal cells from a patient with normal tension glaucoma . J . Stem Cell Res . Ther . 3 , 161 ( 2014 ) . 107 . Camp , J . G . et al . Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal neocortex development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 15672 – 15677 ( 2015 ) . 108 . Mariani , J . et al . FOXG1 - dependent dysregulation of GABA / glutamate neuron differentiation in autism spectrum disorders . Cell 162 , 375 – 390 ( 2015 ) . 109 . Cugola , F . R . et al . The Brazilian Zika virus strain causes birth defects in experimental models . Nature 534 , 267 – 271 ( 2016 ) . 110 . Qian , X . et al . Brain - region - specific organoids using mini - bioreactors for modeling ZIKV exposure . Cell 165 , 1238 – 1254 ( 2016 ) . 111 . Garcez , P . P . et al . Zika virus impairs growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids . Science 352 , 816 – 818 ( 2016 ) . 112 . Gabriel , E . et al . CPAP promotes timely cilium disassembly to maintain neural progenitor pool . EMBO J . 35 , 803 – 819 ( 2016 ) . 113 . Otani , T . , Marchetto , M . C . , Gage , F . H . , Simons , B . D . & Livesey , F . J . 2D and 3D stem cell models of primate cortical development identify species - specific differences in progenitor behavior contributing to brain size . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 467 – 480 ( 2016 ) . 114 . Pasca , A . M . et al . Functional cortical neurons and astrocytes from human pluripotent stem cells in 3D culture . Nat . Methods 12 , 671 – 678 ( 2015 ) . 115 . Tzatzalos , E . , Abilez , O . J . , Shukla , P . & Wu , J . C . Engineered heart tissues and induced pluripotent stem cells : macro - and microstructures for disease modeling , drug screening , and translational studies . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 96 , 234 – 244 ( 2016 ) . 116 . Fatehullah , A . , Tan , S . H . & Barker , N . Organoids as an in vitro model of human development and disease . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 246 – 254 ( 2016 ) . 117 . Lancaster , M . A . et al . Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly . Nature 501 , 373 – 379 ( 2013 ) . The first report to describe human iPSC - derived brain organoids and disease modelling using human iPSC - originated organoids . 118 . Vincent , F . et al . Developing predictive assays : the phenotypic screening “rule of 3” . Sci . Transl Med . 7 , 293ps15 ( 2015 ) . 119 . Inoue , H . , Nagata , N . , Kurokawa , H . & Yamanaka , S . iPS cells : a game changer for future medicine . EMBO J . 33 , 409 – 417 ( 2014 ) . A comprehensive review of patient stratification using patient iPSCs . 120 . Matsa , E . et al . Transcriptome profiling of patient - specific human iPSC - cardiomyocytes predicts individual drug safety and efficacy responses in vitro . Cell Stem Cell 19 , 311 – 325 ( 2016 ) . 121 . Lee , G . et al . Large - scale screening using familial dysautonomia induced pluripotent stem cells identifies compounds that rescue IKBKAP expression . Nat . Biotechnol . 30 , 1244 – 1248 ( 2012 ) . The first study to perform large - scale drug screening using a human iPSC - based disease model . 122 . Doi , D . et al . Isolation of human induced pluripotent stem cell - derived dopaminergic progenitors by cell sorting for successful transplantation . Stem Cell Reports 2 , 337 – 350 ( 2014 ) . 123 . Egawa , N . et al . Drug screening for ALS using patient - specific induced pluripotent stem cells . Sci . Transl . Med . 4 , 145ra104 ( 2012 ) . 124 . Miki , K . et al . Efficient detection and purification of cell populations using synthetic microRNA switches . Cell Stem Cell 16 , 699 – 711 ( 2015 ) . 125 . Burkhardt , M . F . et al . A cellular model for sporadic ALS using patient - derived induced pluripotent stem cells . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 56 , 355 – 364 ( 2013 ) . 126 . Bright , J . et al . Human secreted tau increases amyloid - beta production . Neurobiol . Aging 36 , 693 – 709 ( 2015 ) . 127 . Naryshkin , N . A . et al . SMN2 splicing modifiers improve motor function and longevity in mice with spinal muscular atrophy . Science 345 , 688 – 693 ( 2014 ) . 128 . Xu , X . et al . Prevention of β - amyloid induced toxicity in human iPS cell - derived neurons by inhibition of cyclin - dependent kinases and associated cell cycle events . Stem Cell Res . 10 , 213 – 227 ( 2013 ) . 129 . Hoing , S . et al . Discovery of inhibitors of microglial neurotoxicity acting through multiple mechanisms using a stem - cell - based phenotypic assay . Cell Stem Cell 11 , 620 – 632 ( 2012 ) . 130 . Mullard , A . Stem - cell discovery platforms yield first clinical candidates . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 14 , 589 – 591 ( 2015 ) . Discusses the identification of clinical candidates using stem cell - based discovery platforms . 131 . Wang , H . , Li , X . , Gao , S . , Sun , X . & Fang , H . Transdifferentiation via transcription factors or microRNAs : current status and perspective . Differentiation 90 , 69 – 76 ( 2015 ) . 132 . Pereira , C . F . , Lemischka , I . R . & Moore , K . Reprogramming cell fates : insights from combinatorial approaches . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1266 , 7 – 17 ( 2012 ) . 133 . Tanaka , A . et al . Efficient and reproducible myogenic differentiation from human iPS cells : prospects for modeling Miyoshi myopathy in vitro . PLoS ONE 8 , e61540 ( 2013 ) . 134 . Shoji , E . et al . Early pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy modelled in patient - derived human induced pluripotent stem cells . Sci . Rep . 5 , 12831 ( 2015 ) . 135 . Inoue , H . & Yamanaka , S . The use of induced pluripotent stem cells in drug development . Clin . Pharmacol . Ther . 89 , 655 – 661 ( 2011 ) . 136 . Yamashita , A . et al . Statin treatment rescues FGFR3 skeletal dysplasia phenotypes . Nature 513 , 507 – 511 ( 2014 ) . 137 . McNeish , J . , Gardner , J . P . , Wainger , B . J . , Woolf , C . J . & Eggan , K . From dish to bedside : lessons learned while translating findings from a stem cell model of disease to a clinical trial . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 8 – 10 ( 2015 ) . 138 . Devlin , A . C . et al . Human iPSC - derived motoneurons harbouring TARDBP or C9ORF72 ALS mutations are dysfunctional despite maintaining viability . Nat . Commun . 6 , 5999 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Avorn , J . The $ 2 . 6 billion pill — methodologic and policy considerations . N . Engl . J . Med . 372 , 1877 – 1879 ( 2015 ) . 140 . DiMasi , J . A . , Grabowski , H . G . & Hansen , R . W . Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry : new estimates of R & D costs . J . Health Econ . 47 , 20 – 33 ( 2016 ) . 141 . Wilke , R . A . et al . Identifying genetic risk factors for serious adverse drug reactions : current progress and challenges . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 6 , 904 – 916 ( 2007 ) . 142 . Lu , H . R . et al . Predicting drug - induced changes in QT interval and arrhythmias : QT - shortening drugs point to gaps in the ICHS7B Guidelines . Br . J . Pharmacol . 154 , 1427 – 1438 ( 2008 ) . 143 . Doherty , K . R . et al . Multi - parameter in vitro toxicity testing of crizotinib , sunitinib , erlotinib , and nilotinib in human cardiomyocytes . Toxicol . Appl . Pharmacol . 272 , 245 – 255 ( 2013 ) . 144 . Gintant , G . , Sager , P . T . & Stockbridge , N . Evolution of strategies to improve preclinical cardiac safety testing . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 15 , 457 – 471 ( 2016 ) . 145 . Harris , K . et al . Comparison of electrophysiological data from human - induced pluripotent stem cell - derived cardiomyocytes to functional preclinical safety assays . Toxicol . Sci . 134 , 412 – 426 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S 128 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 146 . Qu , Y . & Vargas , H . M . Proarrhythmia risk assessment in human induced pluripotent stem cell - derived cardiomyocytes using the Maestro MEA platform . Toxicol . Sci . 147 , 286 – 295 ( 2015 ) . 147 . Yamada , T . et al . In vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells into hepatocyte - like cells identified by cellular uptake of indocyanine green . Stem Cells 20 , 146 – 154 ( 2002 ) . 148 . Takayama , K . et al . Efficient generation of functional hepatocytes from human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells by HNF4 α transduction . Mol . Ther . 20 , 127 – 137 ( 2012 ) . 149 . Schwartz , M . P . et al . Human pluripotent stem cell - derived neural constructs for predicting neural toxicity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 12516 – 12521 ( 2015 ) . 150 . Thomson , J . A . et al . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 282 , 1145 – 1147 ( 1998 ) . A pioneering report of human ESC derivation . 151 . Sayed , N . , Liu , C . & Wu , J . C . Translation of human - induced pluripotent stem cells : from clinical trial in a dish to precision medicine . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 67 , 2161 – 2176 ( 2016 ) . 152 . Menasche , P . et al . Human embryonic stem cell - derived cardiac progenitors for severe heart failure treatment : first clinical case report . Eur . Heart J . 36 , 2011 – 2017 ( 2015 ) . 153 . Neofytou , E . , O’Brien , C . G . , Couture , L . A . & Wu , J . C . Hurdles to clinical translation of human induced pluripotent stem cells . J . Clin . Invest . 125 , 2551 – 2557 ( 2015 ) . 154 . Lee , A . S . , Tang , C . , Rao , M . S . , Weissman , I . L . & Wu , J . C . Tumorigenicity as a clinical hurdle for pluripotent stem cell therapies . Nat . Med . 19 , 998 – 1004 ( 2013 ) . 155 . Lund , R . J . , Narva , E . & Lahesmaa , R . Genetic and epigenetic stability of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 732 – 744 ( 2012 ) . 156 . Lee , M . O . et al . Inhibition of pluripotent stem cell - derived teratoma formation by small molecules . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , E3281 – E3290 ( 2013 ) . 157 . Ben - David , U . et al . Selective elimination of human pluripotent stem cells by an oleate synthesis inhibitor discovered in a high - throughput screen . Cell Stem Cell 12 , 167 – 179 ( 2013 ) . 158 . Nguyen , P . K . , Neofytou , E . , Rhee , J . - W . & Wu , J . C . Potential strategies for addressing the major clinical hurdles facing stem cell regenerative therapy . JAMA Cardiol . 1 , 953 – 962 ( 2016 ) . 159 . Cao , F . et al . Noninvasive de novo imaging of human embryonic stem cell - derived teratoma formation . Cancer Res . 69 , 2709 – 2713 ( 2009 ) . 160 . Riegler , J . et al . Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging and serum biomarkers for detection of human pluripotent stem cell - derived teratomas . Stem Cell Reports 6 , 176 – 187 ( 2016 ) . 161 . Koch , C . A . , Geraldes , P . & Platt , J . L . Immunosuppression by embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 26 , 89 – 98 ( 2008 ) . 162 . Drukker , M . et al . Characterization of the expression of MHC proteins in human embryonic stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 9864 – 9869 ( 2002 ) . 163 . Pearl , J . I . , Kean , L . S . , Davis , M . M . & Wu , J . C . Pluripotent stem cells : immune to the immune system ? Sci . Transl . Med . 4 , 164ps125 ( 2012 ) . 164 . Zhao , T . , Zhang , Z . N . , Rong , Z . & Xu , Y . Immunogenicity of induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 474 , 212 – 215 ( 2011 ) . 165 . de Almeida , P . E . et al . Transplanted terminally differentiated induced pluripotent stem cells are accepted by immune mechanisms similar to self - tolerance . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3903 ( 2014 ) . 166 . Zhao , T . et al . Humanized mice reveal differential immunogenicity of cells derived from autologous induced pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 353 – 359 ( 2015 ) . 167 . Huang , K . et al . Neural progenitor cells from human induced pluripotent stem cells generated less autogenous immune response . Sci . China Life Sci . 57 , 162 – 170 ( 2014 ) . 168 . Cell Stem Cell Editorial Team . 10 questions : clinical outlook for iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 170 – 173 ( 2016 ) . 169 . Bravery , C . A . Do human leukocyte antigen - typed cellular therapeutics based on induced pluripotent stem cells make commercial sense ? Stem Cells Dev . 24 , 1 – 10 ( 2015 ) . 170 . Jacquet , L . et al . Strategy for the creation of clinical grade hESC line banks that HLA - match a target population . EMBO Mol . Med . 5 , 10 – 17 ( 2013 ) . 171 . Pearl , J . I . et al . Short - term immunosuppression promotes engraftment of embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 8 , 309 – 317 ( 2011 ) . 172 . Swijnenburg , R . J . et al . Immunosuppressive therapy mitigates immunological rejection of human embryonic stem cell xenografts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 12991 – 12996 ( 2008 ) . 173 . Meissner , T . , Strominger , J . & Cowan , C . The universal donor stem cells : removing the immune barrier to transplantation using CRISPR – Cas9 . J . Immunol . 194 ( 1 Suppl . ) , 140 . 128 ( 2015 ) . 174 . Hanna , J . et al . Treatment of sickle cell anemia mouse model with iPS cells generated from autologous skin . Science 318 , 1920 – 1923 ( 2007 ) . 175 . Hotta , A . & Yamanaka , S . From genomics to gene therapy : induced pluripotent stem cells meet genome editing . Annu . Rev . Genet . 49 , 47 – 70 ( 2015 ) . 176 . Deleidi , M . & Yu , C . Genome editing in pluripotent stem cells : research and therapeutic applications . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 473 , 665 – 674 ( 2016 ) . 177 . Seah , Y . F . , El Farran , C . A . , Warrier , T . , Xu , J . & Loh , Y . H . Induced pluripotency and gene editing in disease modelling : perspectives and challenges . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 16 , 28614 – 28634 ( 2015 ) . 178 . Orqueda , A . J . , Gimenez , C . A . & Pereyra - Bonnet , F . iPSCs : a minireview from bench to bed , including organoids and the CRISPR system . Stem Cells Int . 2016 , 5934782 ( 2016 ) . 179 . Koike - Yusa , H . , Li , Y . , Tan , E . P . , del Castillo Velasco - Herrera , M . & Yusa , K . Genome - wide recessive genetic screening in mammalian cells with a lentiviral CRISPR - guide RNA library . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 , 267 – 273 ( 2014 ) . 180 . Mandegar , M . A . et al . CRISPR interference efficiently induces specific and reversible gene silencing in human iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 541 – 553 ( 2016 ) . 181 . Narsinh , K . H . et al . Single cell transcriptional profiling reveals heterogeneity of human induced pluripotent stem cells . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 1217 – 1221 ( 2011 ) . 182 . Hough , S . R . et al . Single - cell gene expression profiles define self - renewing , pluripotent , and lineage primed states of human pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cell Reports 2 , 881 – 895 ( 2014 ) . 183 . Miura , K . et al . Variation in the safety of induced pluripotent stem cell lines . Nat . Biotechnol . 27 , 743 – 745 ( 2009 ) . 184 . Koyanagi - Aoi , M . et al . Differentiation - defective phenotypes revealed by large - scale analyses of human pluripotent stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 20569 – 20574 ( 2013 ) . 185 . Takahashi , K . & Yamanaka , S . A decade of transcription factor - mediated reprogramming to pluripotency . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 183 – 193 ( 2016 ) . 186 . Sasai , Y . Next - generation regenerative medicine : organogenesis from stem cells in 3D culture . Cell Stem Cell 12 , 520 – 530 ( 2013 ) . A comprehensive review of 3D organoid technology . 187 . Kadoshima , T . et al . Self - organization of axial polarity , inside - out layer pattern , and species - specific progenitor dynamics in human ES cell - derived neocortex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 20284 – 20289 ( 2013 ) . 188 . Nakano , T . et al . Self - formation of optic cups and storable stratified neural retina from human ESCs . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 771 – 785 ( 2012 ) . 189 . Ozone , C . et al . Functional anterior pituitary generated in self - organizing culture of human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10351 ( 2016 ) . 190 . Muguruma , K . , Nishiyama , A . , Kawakami , H . , Hashimoto , K . & Sasai , Y . Self - organization of polarized cerebellar tissue in 3D culture of human pluripotent stem cells . Cell Rep . 10 , 537 – 550 ( 2015 ) . 191 . Sakaguchi , H . et al . Generation of functional hippocampal neurons from self - organizing human embryonic stem cell - derived dorsomedial telencephalic tissue . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8896 ( 2015 ) . 192 . Dedhia , P . H . , Bertaux - Skeirik , N . , Zavros , Y . & Spence , J . R . Organoid models of human gastrointestinal development and disease . Gastroenterology 150 , 1098 – 1112 ( 2016 ) . 193 . Aday , S . , Cecchelli , R . , Hallier - Vanuxeem , D . , Dehouck , M . P . & Ferreira , L . Stem cell - based human blood – brain barrier models for drug discovery and delivery . Trends Biotechnol . 34 , 382 – 393 ( 2016 ) . 194 . Goodridge , H . S . Induced pluripotent stem cell - derived myeloid phagocytes : disease modeling and therapeutic applications . Drug Discov . Today 19 , 774 – 780 ( 2014 ) . 195 . Smith , M . J . et al . In vitro T - cell generation from adult , embryonic , and induced pluripotent stem cells : many roads to one destination . Stem Cells 33 , 3174 – 3180 ( 2015 ) . 196 . Huch , M . & Koo , B . K . Modeling mouse and human development using organoid cultures . Development 142 , 3113 – 3125 ( 2015 ) . 197 . Sasai , Y . Cytosystems dynamics in self - organization of tissue architecture . Nature 493 , 318 – 326 ( 2013 ) . 198 . Li , Y . , Xu , C . & Ma , T . In vitro organogenesis from pluripotent stem cells . Organogenesis 10 , 159 – 163 ( 2014 ) . 199 . Yin , X . et al . Engineering stem cell organoids . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 25 – 38 ( 2016 ) . 200 . Inoue , Y . , Shineha , R . & Yashiro , Y . Current public support for human - animal chimera research in Japan is limited , despite high levels of scientific approval . Cell Stem Cell 19 , 152 – 153 ( 2016 ) . 201 . Mertens , J . et al . Differential responses to lithium in hyperexcitable neurons from patients with bipolar disorder . Nature 527 , 95 – 99 ( 2015 ) . Describes a proof - of - concept study showing the potential of iPSCs for investigating individualized drug responsiveness . 202 . Lord , J . , Lu , A . J . & Cruchaga , C . Identification of rare variants in Alzheimer’s disease . Front . Genet . 5 , 369 ( 2014 ) . 203 . Wainger , B . J . et al . Intrinsic membrane hyperexcitability of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient - derived motor neurons . Cell Rep . 7 , 1 – 11 ( 2014 ) . 204 . Yamanaka , S . Induced pluripotent stem cells : past , present , and future . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 678 – 684 ( 2012 ) . 205 . Hawley , R . G . Does retroviral insertional mutagenesis play a role in the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells ? Mol . Ther . 16 , 1354 – 1355 ( 2008 ) . 206 . Yu , J . et al . Human induced pluripotent stem cells free of vector and transgene sequences . Science 324 , 797 – 801 ( 2009 ) . 207 . Okita , K . et al . A more efficient method to generate integration - free human iPS cells . Nat . Methods 8 , 409 – 412 ( 2011 ) . 208 . Stadtfeld , M . , Nagaya , M . , Utikal , J . , Weir , G . & Hochedlinger , K . Induced pluripotent stem cells generated without viral integration . Science 322 , 945 – 949 ( 2008 ) . 209 . Fusaki , N . , Ban , H . , Nishiyama , A . , Saeki , K . & Hasegawa , M . Efficient induction of transgene - free human pluripotent stem cells using a vector based on Sendai virus , an RNA virus that does not integrate into the host genome . Proc . Jpn Acad . Ser . B Phys . Biol . Sci . 85 , 348 – 362 ( 2009 ) . 210 . Woltjen , K . et al . piggyBac transposition reprograms fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 458 , 766 – 770 ( 2009 ) . 211 . Jia , F . et al . A nonviral minicircle vector for deriving human iPS cells . Nat . Methods 7 , 197 – 199 ( 2010 ) . 212 . Kim , D . et al . Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells by direct delivery of reprogramming proteins . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 472 – 476 ( 2009 ) . 213 . Warren , L . et al . Highly efficient reprogramming to pluripotency and directed differentiation of human cells with synthetic modified mRNA . Cell Stem Cell 7 , 618 – 630 ( 2010 ) . 214 . Lin , S . L . et al . miR - 302 reprograms human skin cancer cells into a pluripotent ES - cell - like state . RNA 14 , 2115 – 2124 ( 2008 ) . 215 . Miyoshi , N . et al . Reprogramming of mouse and human cells to pluripotency using mature microRNAs . Cell Stem Cell 8 , 633 – 638 ( 2011 ) . 216 . Hou , P . et al . Pluripotent stem cells induced from mouse somatic cells by small - molecule compounds . Science 341 , 651 – 654 ( 2013 ) . 217 . Urnov , F . D . et al . Highly efficient endogenous human gene correction using designed zinc - finger nucleases . Nature 435 , 646 – 651 ( 2005 ) . 218 . Lombardo , A . et al . Gene editing in human stem cells using zinc finger nucleases and integrase - defective lentiviral vector delivery . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 1298 – 1306 ( 2007 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 16 | FEBRUARY 2017 | 129 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 219 . Cho , S . W . , Kim , S . , Kim , J . M . & Kim , J . S . Targeted genome engineering in human cells with the Cas9 RNA - guided endonuclease . Nat . Biotechnol . 31 , 230 – 232 ( 2013 ) . 220 . Jinek , M . et al . RNA - programmed genome editing in human cells . eLife 2 , e00471 ( 2013 ) . 221 . Kaufmann , M . et al . High - throughput screening using iPSC - derived neuronal progenitors to identify compounds counteracting epigenetic gene silencing in Fragile X syndrome . J . Biomol . Screen . 20 , 1101 – 1111 ( 2015 ) . 222 . Kumari , D . et al . High - throughput screening to identify compounds that increase Fragile X mental retardation protein expression in neural stem cells differentiated from Fragile X syndrome patient - derived induced pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cells Transl . Med . 4 , 800 – 808 ( 2015 ) . 223 . Li , M . et al . Establishment of reporter lines for detecting Fragile X mental retardation ( FMR1 ) gene reactivation in human neural cells . Stem Cells http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / stem . 2463 ( 2016 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank the following individuals : J . Chao , L . Li , Q . Qu and E . Tian for their help in preparing the figures ; P . Karagiannis and C . Gandhi for critically reading and edit - ing the manuscript ; and R . Carrasco , L . Zaragoza , A . M . Chrisney , M . Kong , Y . Miyake , N . Endo , R . Ueno and R . Okuyama for their administrative support . The work was partially funded by the following agencies and grants : the Herbert Horvitz Fellowship ( to Y . S . ) ; the Sidell Kagan Foundation ( to Y . S . ) ; the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine grants RB4 - 06277 ( to Y . S . ) , TRAN1 - 08525 ( to Y . S . ) , RT3 - 07798 ( to J . C . W . ) and DR2A - 05394 ( to J . C . W . ) ; US National Institutes of Health grants R01 HL130020 ( J . C . W . ) and R01 HL128170 ( J . C . W . ) ; the iPS Cell Research Fund ( to S . Y . ) ; the Center for iPSC production , the Program for Intractable Diseases Research utilizing Disease - specific iPS cells , Research Center Network for Realization of Regenerative Medicine from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development ( AMED ) ( to S . Y . ) ; the grant for Core Center for iPS cell Research of Research Center Network for Realization of Regenerative Medicine from AMED ( to S . Y . , H . I . ) ; the Program for Intractable Diseases Research utilizing disease - specific iPS cells from AMED ( to H . I . ) ; Research Project for Practical Applications of Regenerative Medicine from AMED ( to H . I ) ; the Mochida Memorial Foundation for Medical and Pharmaceutical Research ( to H . I . ) ; and the Daiichi Sankyo Foundation of Life Science ( to H . I . ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare competing interests : see Web version for details . DATABASES ClinicalTrials . gov : https : / / clinicaltrials . gov FURTHER INFORMATION Cas - OFFinder : http : / / www . rgenome . net ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 130 | FEBRUARY 2017 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / nrd © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .