page - 1 CALCIUM - HOMEOSTASIS AND IONIC MECHANISMS IN PULMONARY FIBROBLASTS Luke J . Janssen † , Subhendu Mukherjee and Kjetil Ask Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health , St . Joseph ' s Hospital , Department of Medicine , McMaster University , Hamilton , Ontario , Canada L8N 3Z5 Running title : Ionic mechanisms in pulmonary fibroblasts † Correspondence : Dr . Luke Janssen St . Joseph’s Hospital , 50 Charlton Ave . East , L - 314 Hamilton L8N 4A6 , Ontario , Canada . phone : 1 - 905 - 522 - 1155 Fax : 1 - 905 - 540 - 6510 Email : janssenl @ mcmaster . ca Source ( s ) of support : Canadian Lung Association and the Ontario Thoracic Society Substantial contribution to the study : Conception and design : LJJ , SM , KA ; Drafting the manuscript for important intellectual content : LJJ , SM , KA . Page 1 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 2 ABSTRACT Fibroblasts are key cellular mediators of many chronic interstitial lung diseases ( ILD ) , including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis , scleroderma , sarcoidosis , drug - induced ILD and ILD in connective tissue disease . A great deal of effort has been expended to understand the signaling mechanisms underlying the various cellular functions of fibroblasts . Recently , it has been shown that Ca 2 + - oscillations play a central role in the regulation of gene expression in human pulmonary fibroblasts . However , the mechanisms whereby cytosolic concentrations of Ca 2 + are regulated and [ Ca 2 + ] - oscillations transduced are both poorly understood . In this review , we present the general concepts of [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostasis , of ionic mechanisms responsible for various Ca 2 + - fluxes and of regulation of gene expression by [ Ca 2 + ] . In each case , we then also summarize the original findings which pertain specifically to pulmonary fibroblasts . From these data , we propose an overall signaling cascade by which excitation of the fibroblasts triggers pulsatile release of internally sequestered Ca 2 + , which in turn activates membrane conductances including voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - influx pathways . Collectively , these events produce recurring Ca 2 + - oscillations , the frequency of which is transduced by Ca 2 + - dependent transcriptions factors , which in turn orchestrate a variety of cellular events including proliferation , synthesis / secretion of extracellular matrix proteins , auto - activation ( production of TGFβ ) and transformation into myofibroblasts . That unifying hypothesis in turn allows us to highlight several specific cellular targets and therapeutic intervention strategies aimed at controlling unwanted pulmonary fibrosis . The relationships between Ca 2 + - signaling events and the unfolded protein response and apoptosis are also explored . Key words : Calcium signaling : pulmonary fibrosis ; TGFβ ; PDGF ; gene expression , Page 2 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 3 ( 1 ) IMPORTANCE OF PULMONARY FIBROBLAST BIOLOGY Fibroblasts are a highly heterogeneous population of cells whose primary function is to mediate structural changes in a variety of organs . This function is crucial for normal repair and wound healing . Unfortunately , in some contexts , fibroblast function is uncontrolled and brings on pathophysiological consequences 1 . In fibrotic lung disease , the fibroblast is considered one of the hallmark target cells , as its transformation into a myofibroblast results in deposition of extracellular matrix and subsequent fibrosis . Of the more than 300 interstitial lung diseases of known and unknown origin , the common end - stage disease pattern is often extensive fibrosis . Since the discovery of the myofibroblast in 1969 , extensive research has focussed on fibroblast and myofibroblast biology in scarring disorders . The role of calcium in lung fibroblast biology has not been reviewed extensively and is the object of this review . Many growth factors and autacoids elevate [ Ca 2 + ] in pulmonary fibroblasts . More importantly , pharmacological disruption of [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostasis in pulmonary and non - pulmonary fibroblasts has been used to link that elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] to a variety of cellular responses , including protein synthesis 2 , transcription factor activation 3 - 6 , migration 7 , progression through the cell cycle 8 ; 9 , cell viability 2 and proliferation 2 . Finally , [ Ca 2 + ] i in all cell types is critically dependent upon a variety of ionic mechanisms , including Ca 2 + - influx and Ca 2 + - release pathways which are in turn sensitive to changes in membrane potential and cytosolic concentrations of various ions caused by the activity of many different ion channels and transporters . For all these reasons , a better understanding of [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic and membrane ionic mechanisms in pulmonary fibroblasts is essential and will undoubtedly provide a basis for the proposition of new therapies for fibrotic disease . Below , we summarize what has been shown in pulmonary fibroblasts regarding [ Ca 2 + ] - Page 3 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 4 homeostatic mechanisms ( section 2 ) and ionic mechanisms ( section 3 ) and how those are important in gene expression ( section 4 ) . We then tie those concepts together into a novel hypothesis for the control of pulmonary fibroblast function ( section 5 ) , which in turn is used to identify new interventional strategies for the treatment of pulmonary fibrotic disorders ( section 6 ) . Finally , we highlight novel future directions in this field ( section 7 ) . ( 2 ) REGULATION OF CYTOSOLIC LEVELS OF [ Ca 2 + ] ( 2 . 1 ) General concepts pertaining to [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic mechanisms In most cells at rest , there is a 10 , 000 - fold concentration gradient for Ca 2 + across the plasmalemma 10 - 12 . This gradient is ultimately maintained by a Ca 2 + - pump which is highly conserved across cell types : the pump hydrolyzes ATP to provide the energy to move Ca 2 + against its electrochemical gradient . There may also be a Na + / Ca 2 + - exchanger which uses the energy contained within the Na + - concentration gradient ( in turn set up by the Na + / K + - ATPase ) to drive Ca 2 + out of the cell . Extracellular Ca 2 + can enter the cell through a variety of ion channels 13 ; 14 , some of which are highly selective for Ca 2 + among the other cations ( particularly the monovalent cations such as Na + and K + ) , while others discriminate less well between the cations but nonetheless exclude anions . Some of the highly Ca 2 + - selective channels are activated or opened by membrane depolarization , and may also exhibit voltage - sensitive inactivation characteristics 15 ; 16 . These and some of the other voltage - independent Ca 2 + - selective channels can be distinguished on the basis of their differing activation - , deactivation - and inactivation - characteristics . In addition , they exhibit differing sensitivity to a wide palette of pharmacological tools . It is beyond the scope of this review to describe all of these points in detail . However , three particular subtypes of Ca 2 + - Page 4 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 5 channels are particularly relevant to this review , given two recent reports that highlight their potential involvement in the pathophysiology underlying pulmonary fibrosis 17 ; 18 . Transient receptor potential ( TRP ) channels are a family of voltage - independent Ca 2 + - channels which can respond to a diverse array of stimuli , including internal Ca 2 + - store depletion , stretch , and osmotic stress 19 . One sub - group , the vanilloid or TRPV channels , generally respond to temperature and a variety of ligands which are perceived as hot , including vanilla , cinnamon , and capsaicin . T - type Ca 2 + - currents serve as pacemakers of rhythmic activity in a diverse array of cell types 20 - 22 . These channels are activated by relatively small membrane depolarizations , but then also rapidly inactivate 15 ; 16 ; 20 . As such , they generate a relatively small and brief pulse of Ca 2 + - influx which can then trigger other Ca 2 + - dependent and / or voltage - dependent cellular events . L - type Ca 2 + - channels play a key role in many cell types , where they mediate large changes in [ Ca 2 + ] i in response to subtle changes in membrane potential ( including those generated by the T - type Ca 2 + - channels ) 15 ; 16 ; 23 ; 24 . The membrane depolarization and accumulation of Ca 2 + at the mouth of these channels in turn cause a delayed inactivation of the channels , providing a negative feedback control loop for this Ca 2 + - influx pathway 25 . Several intracellular organelles express Ca 2 + - pumps on their membranes and thereby accumulate Ca 2 + to concentrations nearly as high as in the extracellular space , as well as ion channels which can release that stored Ca 2 + in a controlled fashion in response to certain stimuli 10 - 12 . The endoplasmic reticulum , for example , expresses a Ca 2 + - pump ( the sarcoplasmic / endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2 + - ATPase , or SERCA ) as well as two types of Ca 2 + - permeable ion channels . One of the latter is opened by inositol trisphosphate , a second messenger generated by phospholipase C 26 . The second type of Ca 2 + - release channels , Page 5 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 6 commonly referred to as ryanodine receptors , are activated by cytosolic Ca 2 + or by caffeine ; the endogenous ligand for these channels is unclear , but may include cyclic ADP ribose 27 - 30 . Once the endoplasmic reticulum releases its stored Ca 2 + , it must be refilled . A protein in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane – STIM - 1 – senses the depletion state via an EF hand domain extended into the lumen of that organelle , and orchestrates a close interaction between the endoplasmic reticulum and plasmalemmal membranes . At the same time , it also stimulates opening of a plasmalemmal Ca 2 + - channel ( Orai - 1 ) which markedly raises [ Ca 2 + ] in that subplasmalemmal space , from which Ca 2 + can then be taken up by SERCA . ( 2 . 2 ) Technical considerations in studies of [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic mechanisms A wide variety of fluorimetric dyes are available whose excitation and / or emission properties change dramatically upon binding of Ca 2 + ions 31 . These can be introduced into living cells and thereby allow for monitoring of [ Ca 2 + ] with high fidelity on millisecond time - scales . Many groups have used multicellular preparations ( cultured monolayers ; suspensions ) to examine the changes in [ Ca 2 + ] evoked by various experimental conditions or by different agonists . In this way , they record simultaneously the sum total of all the fluorescence signals emitted by the Ca 2 + - sensitive dye within hundreds of thousands of cells . This approach greatly increases the signal - to - noise ratio , as reflected in the relatively noise - free tracings of those publications . However , this approach also suffers the drawback of averaging out all the individual events occurring in each of the cells being imaged . Such averaging may not be problematic if the cells are responding in identical fashion . However , if there were important ( i . e . , biologically relevant ) dynamic changes in [ Ca 2 + ] occurring within the cells , these would be blurred using a multicellular approach . We have used confocal fluorimetric imaging techniques Page 6 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 7 to show that the Ca 2 + - response to several agonists in fibroblasts is not a tonic elevation , but is instead a series of Ca 2 + - spikes : these will be described in more detail in the next section below . Since the Ca 2 + - spikes in each of the cells are not precisely synchronous , averaged recordings from multicellular preparations will mask the periodic nature of this activity . In fact , the collective response will appear as a smooth elevation which rises and then falls to a lower but sustained elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] i ( as exemplified in Fig . 2 ) . Several recent publications show that it is the dynamic nature of those Ca 2 + - oscillations that bears important physiologically relevant information , and which is lost using these multicellular approaches . This cell population - based experimental approach also fails to take into account the fact that [ Ca 2 + ] i may not change uniformly throughout any given cell : instead , there can be substantial subcellular heterogeneity in [ Ca 2 + ] i . Such spatial heterogeneity can say something about the mechanism ( s ) underlying the changes in [ Ca 2 + ] . For example , any Ca 2 + - signaling events which are due to voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - influx will manifest nearly simultaneously throughout the entire cell , since depolarization in one part of the cell will manifest as an essentially instantaneous change in membrane potential throughout the entire cell . The exception to this generalization may be any long , thin cellular processes emanating from the main cell body , where the membrane time - and space - constants may be considerably different 32 : in that case , the Ca 2 + - signaling event might progress quite differently down the length of the process . Conversely , if the observed Ca 2 + - signaling events are highly localized , or if the rise in [ Ca 2 + ] sweeps like a wave across the cell , this may be more indicative of a voltage - independent mechanism , such as release of Ca 2 + from the internal Ca 2 + - stores . ( 2 . 3 ) What is known specifically in pulmonary fibroblasts ? Page 7 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 8 Some aspects of Ca 2 + - signaling in fibroblasts in general have been reviewed elsewhere 33 . However , relatively little work has been done specifically in pulmonary fibroblasts . There have been many descriptions of the Ca 2 + - responses in whole populations of pulmonary fibroblasts to a long list of agonists , including : TGFβ 34 , bradykinin 35 - 37 , thrombin 38 - 40 , trypsin 40 ; 41 , cockroach allergen 41 , synthetic agonists of protease - activated receptors 40 ; 41 , ATP 42 , angiotensin II 43 , lysophosphatidic acid 44 and cholinergic agonists 39 . Due to the technical limitations which are inherent with such studies of multicellular preparations ( temporal and spatial averaging of individual changes , as described above ) , these agonist - evoked responses have typically been described as a smooth rise in [ Ca 2 + ] i which peaks within a few minutes , and then falls down to some lower plateau level which is nonetheless well above the pre - stimulation baseline level . The same type of Ca 2 + - response is evoked by TRPV1 channel agonists 19 ; 45 in human bronchial fibroblasts pretreated for at least 12 hours with either TNFα , IL - 1α or LPS 46 ( which induce expression of the TRPV1 channels ) . More recently , a similar response has been described for a TRPV4 channel agonist 18 . However , careful discrimination of the changes in [ Ca 2 + ] in individual cells reveals a very different type of response . We have shown that TGFβ 47 , PDGF 48 and ATP 49 evoke a series of repetitive Ca 2 + - oscillations in individual human pulmonary fibroblasts , and that the stimulus strength ( agonist concentration ) is encoded within the Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency ( which generally range from 0 . 1 to 1 oscillation per minute ) . Another group found that TGFβ alone did not alter [ Ca 2 + ] , but did evoke repetitive Ca 2 + - oscillations when the cells were co - stimulated with histamine 50 . We also found similar rhythmic Ca 2 + - oscillations in fibroblasts obtained from patients diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis ( manuscript in preparation ) : in this case , the oscillations are present even without exogenous addition of growth factor , are not accelerated by Page 8 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 9 further addition of TGFβ , and are abolished by addition of the TGFβ antagonist SD208 , suggesting to us that the cells are producing their own growth factors which in turn are stimulating the cells in an autocrine fashion . We found the agonist - evoked Ca 2 + - oscillations were immediately halted upon removing extracellular Ca 2 + , and immediately re - appeared when that Ca 2 + was re - introduced , which suggests Ca 2 + - influx is critically important . The Ca 2 + - influx pathway appears to include L - type and possibly also T - type Ca 2 + - channels , since the Ca 2 + - oscillations are greatly reduced in amplitude and become highly irregular when the cells are exposed to the L - type Ca 2 + - channel blockers nifedipine or verapamil or to the L / T - type Ca 2 + - channel blocker mibefradil 17 . The same disruption is seen when extracellular K + is raised to 30 mM , which is predicted by the Nernst equation to depolarize the membrane to approximately - 40 mV : at that membrane voltage , T - type Ca 2 + - channels are completely inactivated , whereas L - type Ca 2 + - channels are still largely available for activation . We also found that the agonist - evoked Ca 2 + - oscillations were disrupted by the SERCA - inhibitor cyclopiazonic acid . Rather than interpreting this to mean that Ca 2 + - release comprises a substantial fraction of each Ca 2 + - oscillation , we see this inhibition as an indirect disruption of the Ca 2 + - influx pathways . That is , depletion of the internal Ca 2 + - store disrupts a pace - making function of the internal Ca 2 + - store ( described in more detail in section 5 ) which is responsible for activating T - type Ca 2 + - channels , which in turn trigger the much larger Ca 2 + - influx through L - type Ca 2 + - channels . Ryanodine also disrupts the Ca 2 + - oscillations evoked by ATP and TGFβ ( though not those evoked by PDGF ) , while the phospholipase C inhibitor disrupts PDGF - evoked Ca 2 + - oscillations , but we feel these observations are also explained by disruption of the pace - making activity of the internal Ca 2 + - store . Page 9 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 10 ( 3 ) IONIC MECHANISMS ( 3 . 1 ) General concepts Many cellular functions in every cell type are regulated and influenced in some way by changes in the voltage gradient across the membranes of the cell . One of the reasons for this is the fact that any change in the membrane potential at one part of the membrane is realized almost immediately at all other parts of that membrane , providing an excellent mechanism for co - ordinating cellular activity . Second , proteins embedded within the membranes can undergo substantial conformational changes in response to the transmembrane voltage gradient . This is certainly true of voltage - dependent ion channels , but can also be true of receptors and enzymes in the plasmalemma . Third , the voltage gradient directly determines the driving force on cations and anions moving across the membrane into or out of the cell or organelle . The second and third points above together provide for incredibly complicated and subtle mechanisms for fine - tuning the influx of external Ca 2 + into the cell . On the one hand , membrane depolarization modulates Ca 2 + - influx through voltage - dependent channels : the latter certainly activate , but may also exhibit voltage - dependent inactivation , a form of negative feedback to limit the Ca 2 + - influx and prevent a cytotoxic level of Ca 2 + - overload 15 ; 16 . On the other hand , membrane hyperpolarization not only reverses those changes in voltage - dependent channels , but can also increase Ca 2 + - influx through voltage - independent pathways : the hyperpolarization increases the driving force on Ca 2 + entry through any available Ca 2 + - permeable pathway , including TRP channels , non - selective cation channels , reverse - mode Na + / Ca 2 + exchange , etc . The careful regulation of ion channels in the membranes allows for very subtle modulation of membrane potential . In general , the membrane is depolarized when there is a net Page 10 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 11 movement of positive charge into the cell , such as the opening of Na + - or Ca 2 + - channels ( since the driving forces on those cations are inward ) , as well as by the opening of Cl - channels or closure of K + - channels ( since the driving forces on both those ions are outward ) . Conversely , the opposite of all four of those conditions leads to membrane hyperpolarization . ( 3 . 2 ) What is known specifically in pulmonary fibroblasts ? Many different types of ion channels have been identified in the various types of cultured pulmonary fibroblasts which have been studied to date . Voltage - dependent Na + - currents have been characterized in GM2291 cells ( human fetal lung fibroblasts ) 51 ; these currents appear to be similar in many respects to those found in the heart and nerve , but certain aspects of their pharmacology and gating properties were measurably distinct from the values obtained in those other cell types . In particular , the K d for the pharmacological blockade of these currents using the highly selective Na + - channel blocker tetrodotoxin ( ~ 40 nM ) was intermediate between that typical for neuronal and cardiac cells ( ~ 1 nM and ~ 1 uM , respectively ) 51 . The full concentration - response relationship did not indicate a mixture of these two Na + - channel subtypes , but rather one distinct subtype 51 . The inactivation kinetics of this Na + - current in the fibroblast cells are also distinct from those found in classical cardiac or neuronal Na + - channels 51 . Altogether the data suggested to the authors the presence of a unique Na + channel or the post - translational modification of one of the two classical Na + channels 51 . We found it surprising that these GM2291 cells exhibited little or no K + - currents ( neither the classical voltage - dependent variety , nor inward rectifiers ) nor voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - currents : both of those findings are in conflict with our own observations that the Ca 2 + - oscillations in adult human pulmonary fibroblasts are sensitive to elevating the Nernst potential Page 11 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 12 of K + as well as to blockers of L - type and T - type Ca 2 + - channel blockers 17 . The absence of any K + currents is also in conflict with another patch - clamp study of cultured pulmonary fibroblasts explanted from murine C57BL / 6 mice , which described in great detail the electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of their voltage - dependent K + - currents 52 ; RT - PCR analysis found them to be of the Kv1 and Kv3 families of K + - channels . Moreover , those K + - currents almost disappeared upon deprivation from serum , and then reappeared when the cells were treated with dexamethasone or with insulin - like growth factor - 1 ( IGF - 1 ) , attesting to the effect of culturing conditions upon cell phenotype . A volume - regulated Cl - current ( activated by hypotonic challenge ) is present in normal human lung fibroblasts cultured in media containing 2 % FBS 53 and in the IMR - 90 human fetal lung fibroblast cell line grown with 10 % FBS 54 ; 55 . The channel underlying this current is of the CLC3 subtype within the superfamily of transporters and channels 55 ; its expression is up - regulated by endothelin - 1 but down - regulated by BMP2 53 , and is associated with transformation to a myofibroblast phenotype 54 ; 55 and with migration 53 . In other cell types , volume - sensitive chloride channels control cell migration by participating in retraction of the receding edge of the cell 56 . These channels are also activated by lysophosphatidic acid 54 or by sphingosine - 1 - phosphate 54 , which is taken by some as a marker of transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts 53 . The expression of intracellular chloride channels ( CLIC ; a subtype of chloride channels distinct from the CLC subtype described above ) was found to be increased in fibroblasts obtained from patients with lung fibrosis 57 . That proteomics study postulated that this increased expression of CLIC compensated for an observed decreased expression of glutathione S - transferase , given that the two share a degree of structural and possibly functional similarities 57 . Page 12 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 13 Otherwise , glutathione S - transferase plays a significant role in the cellular response to oxidative stress , and in this context it is interesting to note a study showing that superoxide - mediated activation of human lung fibroblasts is sensitive to the chloride channel blocker 4 , 4 ' - diisothiocyano - 2 , 2 ' - stilbene disulfonic acid ( DIDS ) 58 . Although that latter study seemed to envision the chloride channels being situated on the plasmalemma , DIDS can also inhibit CLIC and thus the chloride channels involved may in fact be of the intracellular family . Several members of the TRP family 19 ; 45 of cationic channels have been studied in pulmonary fibroblasts . TRPA1 channels have been found in CCD19 - Lu human lung fibroblasts , and agonists ( openers ) of those channels increase their expression of IL - 8 59 . Likewise , TRPV1 channels are found in lung fibroblasts explanted from patients undergoing resection for carcinoma 46 ; their expression was markedly up - regulated by TNFα , LPS or IL - 1α . TRPV4 channel proteins have been described in murine and primary human pulmonary fibroblasts 18 . Agonists for these channels elevate [ Ca 2 + ] , suggesting they are Ca 2 + - permeable , although they may also cause membrane depolarization with subsequent activation of voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - channels . Elsewhere , TRP channels play a role in detection of harmful chemicals 19 ; 45 – including cigarette smoke and other environmental pollutants – and in sensation of mechanical forces , which raises the possibility that they might be involved in smoking - related lung disease and / or in the response of the fibroblasts to matrix stiffness 60 ; 61 . Highly localized and transient high - Ca 2 + microdomains ( referred to as ‘calcium flickers’ ) were imaged at the leading edge of migrating WI - 38 human embryonic lung fibroblasts 7 . Genetic approaches revealed that these Ca 2 + - transients are mediated by TRPM7 channels , a subtype of Ca 2 + - permeable , stretch - activated cation channels . Further investigation suggested Page 13 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 14 that the relatively small Ca 2 + - rise produced by these TRPM7 channels is amplified by localized Ca 2 + - release through IP 3 - receptors ( type 2 ) in the vicinity of the TRPM7 channels . Finally , these Ca 2 + - flickers were shown to be employed by the cell to sense the directionality of concentration gradients of the chemoattractant PDGF . Uni - axial cyclic stretch induced nuclear translocation of NFκB in TIG - 1 human lung fibroblasts , leading to increased expression of cyclooxygenase - 2 3 ; 62 . This effect was inhibited by removal of external Ca 2 + or by application of Gd 3 + ( but not by nifedipine or verapamil ) , suggesting involvement of a Ca 2 + - permeable cationic channel , although its subtype was not further characterized . We are not aware of publications describing voltage - dependent Ca 2 + currents in pulmonary fibroblasts . However , fibroblasts from other organs exhibit L - type and T - type currents 63 - 67 , and we found Ca 2 + - oscillations in adult human pulmonary fibroblasts were abrogated by nifedipine or verapamil ( both L - type selective ) , or by mibefradil ( L / T - type selective ) 17 . Na + / H + antiporter and Na + / K + / Cl - cotransport are activated by several growth factors ( PDGF , FGF and EGF - 1 ) in CCL39 cells ( Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts ) 68 . This study went on to link that activation within a cascade of intracellular events , including phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 and increased transcription of early - immediate genes ( c - fos , c - jun , and c - myc ) , ultimately contributing to the mitogenic actions of these growth factors . Upon reaching confluence , GM2291 ( human fetal lung fibroblasts ) appear to become coupled via gap junctions 51 . This is of great relevance to studies of the electrophysiology and [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic properties of these cells : gap junctions allow cells to synchronize their Page 14 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 15 electrical activities , and may also allow cell - to - cell diffusion of signaling molecules , metabolites , etc . ( 4 ) [ Ca 2 + ] - TRANSIENTS AND IONIC MECHANISMS IN GENE EXPRESSION ( 4 . 1 ) General concepts : Many cellular processes are Ca 2 + - dependent , as noted above . However , how can such an ubiquitous signal elicit such specific and diverse responses ? One strategy employed by many cells is to manipulate [ Ca 2 + ] differently in different parts of the cell , even raising [ Ca 2 + ] in one part of the cell to up - regulate a certain function while at the same time decreasing [ Ca 2 + ] in another region in order to suppress another function . One example of this , already introduced above , pertains to the microdomains employed by WI - 38 fibroblasts to regulate migration 7 . In general , migrating cells exhibit a back - to - front gradient in [ Ca 2 + ] , with the lowest [ Ca 2 + ] being found at their leading edge . Paradoxically , however , that leading edge employs numerous effector proteins that require elevated [ Ca 2 + ] in order to mediate migration . The solution to this conundrum was found in the [ Ca 2 + ] microdomains described above : in the midst of this region of generally lower [ Ca 2 + ] across the entire leading edge of the cell , microdomains of considerably high [ Ca 2 + ] were found with a mean diameter of only 5 . 27 + / - 0 . 05 µm and lasting in duration only 10 ms to 4 seconds 7 . Likewise , in neurons , Ca 2 + - influx through one channel subtype ( TRPC5 ) inhibited dendritic growth , while Ca 2 + - influx through a different channel subtype ( TRPC6 ) promoted dendritic growth 69 . In smooth muscle , Ca 2 + - influx through either L - type voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - channels versus store - operated Ca 2 + - entry channels leads to expression of " distinct yet non - overlapping " sets of CRE - regulated genes 70 - 73 . Another strategy employed by cells to differentially regulate Ca 2 + - dependent events is to Page 15 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 16 modulate [ Ca 2 + ] in the form of waves with varying frequency , which in turn is dependent upon the strength of the excitatory stimulus . Several enzymes are able to convert the information encoded within Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency . For example , in T - cells , rapid oscillations stimulated one set of transcription factors ( NFAT and Oct / OAP ) to express IL - 2 , whereas less frequent oscillations activated a different transcription factor ( NFκB ) to express IL - 8 73 - 76 . This specificity is conveyed by differing Ca 2 + - sensitivity of several signalling molecules and transcription factors . Figure 3 illustrates how 4 hypothetical enzymes with differing Ca 2 + - sensitivity can respond quite differentially to the same set of transient changes in [ Ca 2 + ] i . More specifically , only a few - fold change in the rates of activation and / or inactivation of an enzyme can determine whether it is only marginally activated or maximally activated by a given frequency of Ca 2 + - oscillations . In this way , a given agonist can regulate different cell functions merely by employing different Ca 2 + - oscillation frequencies . Calmodulin ( Cmd ) , upon binding 4 Ca 2 + ions , can activate several effectors ( see Fig . 4 ) . One important candidate is Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent kinase ( CamK ) 77 , of which there are several subtypes . The transcription factor NFκB is normally held back in the cytosol by IκB : however , phosphorylation of IκB by CamK leads to its degradation , allowing NFκB to translocate to the nucleus and promote gene transcription 78 . Since IκB re - accumulates slowly ( it must be re - synthesized ) , slow frequencies of Ca 2 + - oscillations are sufficient to allow transcription of NFκB - regulated genes . There is a long and growing list of other transcription factors which are regulated by one or another CamK subtype 69 ; 79 - 91 . Another well - recognized Cmd - effector is calcineurin , a serine / threonine phosphatase which dephosphorylates NFAT ( Fig . 4 ) ; the latter then translocates into the nucleus and regulates gene transcription . Other kinases within the nucleus re - phosphorylate NFAT , causing it to return Page 16 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 17 rapidly to the cytosol . At the same time , Ca 2 + also triggers other Ca 2 + - dependent inactivation processes which take time to develop . As such , NFAT - mediated transcription is sub - optimal when [ Ca 2 + ] i is elevated in a sustained fashion , but is optimal when the Ca 2 + arrives in the form of recurring Ca 2 + - oscillations at a certain range of frequencies . This range can vary , as determined by the properties of the other co - factors involved . In contrast , other Ca 2 + - dependent enzymes with entirely different kinetic properties would be better stimulated by a sustained elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] i than the intermittent changes represented by Ca 2 + - oscillations . Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency can be transduced not only by the kinase and phosphatase described immediately above , but also by a Ca 2 + - dependent protease : calpain 77 ; 92 . Upon activation by Ca 2 + 92 , this cysteine protease then exerts its actions through various cytosolic and / or nuclear factors . S100 calcium - binding proteins are highly conserved , low - molecular - weight proteins with important regulatory functions in calcium buffering , regulation of kinases and phosphatases , cell proliferation , differentiation , energy metabolism , cytoskeletal – membrane interactions and inflammation 93 - 95 . This protein family is characterized by the presence of two Ca 2 + - binding sites of the EF - hand type , and are in this way structurally similar to calmodulin . Once activated by binding to Ca 2 + , these proteins can interact with effectors in the cytosol , or can translocate into the nucleus and interact with transcription factors , or can even activate extracellular effectors 93 ; 96 . Other Ca 2 + - binding proteins are directly linked to physiological mechanisms controlling gene transcription . As an example , the calcium homeostasis modulator 1 ( CALHM1 ) is associated with both endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) Ca 2 + - leak and reduction of ER Ca 2 + - uptake , resulting in a drastic reduction of ER Ca 2 + - content , and leading to increased ER stress and Page 17 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 18 activation of the unfolded protein response ( UPR ) 97 . The activation of the UPR is directly linked to pathways leading to increased transcription and gene expression ( please see excellent reviews in 98 - 103 ) . In addition , many ER - related chaperones involved in protein folding are Ca 2 + - binding proteins whose function is tightly linked to Ca 2 + - content in the ER ( e . g . , calreticulin , GRP78 , GRP94 , PDI ; reviewed in 104 ) . Thus , disruption of Ca 2 + - homeostasis will directly impact ER protein folding capacity and lead to impaired cellular proteostasis . At the molecular level , UPR activation may be triggered by GRP78 dissociation from the ER - membrane bound molecules , ATF6 , PERK and IRE1 ( reviewed in 105 ) . The dissociation of GRP78 leads to the direct activation of these pathways aiming to restore cellular proteostasis . Recently , UPR activation was shown to be required for differentiation of cells , including B - cells to plasma cells 106 , monocytes to macrophages 107 and epithelial cells to goblet cells 108 . This fundamental process was recently shown to be dependent on IRE1 α , governing the ER expansion program required to augment the secretory capacity of the cell 109 . The close link between Ca 2 + - homeostasis and IRE1 α was recently established 110 , where knock - down of IRE1 α resulted in accelerated calcium release from the ER and increased cell death . Here , the authors provide compelling evidence of an interaction between the IRE1 α and Insp3R , a well - known Ca 2 + - channel involved in Ca 2 + - release from the ER . In addition , activation of IRE1 has been shown to control cyclin expression and to promote cell proliferation 111 . Combined , these observations indicate vital and important roles for Ca 2 + - homeostasis in general proteostasis , gene transcription , and cellular processes linked to differentiation , proliferation and cell death . ( 4 . 2 ) What is known specifically in pulmonary fibroblasts TGFβ and PDGF are two of the most important regulators of fibroblast function : as such , Page 18 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 19 their mechanisms of action have been closely scrutinized . Many have focussed on the roles of intracellular phosphorylation events , involving effectors such as the Smad proteins , ERK 1 / 2 , etc . However , other groups , including our own , have looked at various Ca 2 + - signaling events . It should be emphasized , though , that there is considerable overlap and redundancy between these two groups of signaling pathways . We have described above the recurring Ca 2 + - oscillations evoked by TGFβ and PDGF in human pulmonary fibroblasts , with frequencies that correlate with growth factor concentration , as well as the roles of extracellular and intracellular Ca 2 + in producing these events 47 ; 48 . We went on to show that TGFβ - induced expression of matrix proteins ( collagen - 1 and fibronectin ) is markedly suppressed by depleting the internal Ca 2 + - store or disrupting Ca 2 + - release ; this parallels findings from another group using mouse embryonic fibroblasts 34 . We made qualitatively similar observations for PDGF , with one intriguing difference : ryanodine did not suppress PDGF - evoked Ca 2 + - oscillations nor gene transcription , suggesting a divergence in the signalling pathways for these two different growth factors . Instead , PDGF - evoked Ca 2 + - oscillations and matrix protein expression were blocked by inhibiting phospholipase C , which might suggest that IP 3 - mediated Ca 2 + - release is important , although we acknowledge another study which showed that PDGF does not activate the phosphoinositide - cascade in WI - 38 human lung fibroblasts 112 . Collectively , these observations suggest that the Ca 2 + - oscillations are central to regulating gene expression . This conclusion is corroborated by our finding that artificially - created Ca 2 + - oscillations in the absence of growth factor receptor stimulation ( and its subsequent down - stream kinases pathways ) also stimulated gene transcription in a frequency - dependent manner ( MS in preparation ) . Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency in our human pulmonary fibroblasts seems to be transduced by Page 19 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 20 CamK - II , since TGFΒ - stimulated gene expression was also markedly reduced by an inhibitor of that enzyme ( KN - 93 ) . We have identified the presence of Cam K IIβ and IIδ , but not IIα or IIγ , in our cells , and shown that stimulation with TGFβ leads to phosphorylation of CamK - II at a site associated with activation of that enzyme . Others have also identified CamK - I and - II in human pulmonary fibroblasts and shown these to be activated by serum or bradykinin 35 . Proliferation of lung fibroblasts was stimulated by media conditioned by alveolar marcrophages obtained from patients with interstitial pulmonary fibrosis , and this was said to be abolished by Ca 2 + - blockers and CaM inhibitors 113 . Calcineurin / NFAT may be the down - stream targets of activated calmodulin , according to data obtained in murine pulmonary fibroblasts in which calreticulin had been knocked down 34 . Calreticulin is a Ca 2 + - binding protein which buffers [ Ca 2 + ] in the ER , and has been shown to regulate calcineurin / NFAT activity 114 . TGFβ - induced expression of collagen 1A1 or of fibronectin were increased in cells in which calreticulin had been over - expressed 34 . In contrast , the response to TGFβ in cells in which calreticulin was silenced was markedly less collagen / fibronectin expression and no elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] nor nuclear translocation of NFATc3 isoform . In control cells , TGFβ - induced collagen synthesis was prevented by inhibitors of NFAT - activity or of NFAT - binding to calcineurin . Other findings suggest the changes in [ Ca 2 + ] may be transduced by calpain . Inhibition of that enzyme using calpeptin reduced bleomycin - induced synthesis of mRNA for IL - 6 , TGFβ1 and collagen in mice , and also reduced a number of cellular responses in cultured human pulmonary fibroblasts ( IL - 6 - dependent proliferation ; angiopoietin - 1 - dependent migration ; TGFβ - induced synthesis of collagen ) 115 . That study also claimed the effect was exerted through a calpeptin - mediated reduction in the transcription factor CCAAT / enhancer - binding protein β Page 20 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 21 ( C / EBPβ ; also known as nuclear factor - IL - 6 , a transcription factor that plays an important role in the regulation of cell growth and proliferation ) , although no supporting data were given . We believe that the Ca 2 + - signaling pathways described above synergize with other signaling pathways utilized by TGFβ – such as the Smad protein cascade – since gene expression was still elevated above baseline despite complete obliteration of the Ca 2 + - oscillations by ryanodine 47 ; likewise , another group showed some residual TGFβ - induced expression in cells in which Ca 2 + - signaling was obliterated by knock down of calreticulin 34 . If there is interaction between the Ca 2 + - signaling and Smad - signaling pathways , it must occur down - stream of Smad protein phosphorylation , since we found the latter to be unaffected by interventions which abolish Ca 2 + - oscillation activity . TGFβ - stimulated ROS - generation ( via tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of NADH oxidase 116 ) with consequent gene expression 117 has been linked to the Ca 2 + - response : Junn et al . 117 found that exogenously - added peroxide elevated [ Ca 2 + ] , and that H 2 O 2 - induced IL - 6 expression was reduced by chelation of external Ca 2 + using EGTA , and concluded that ROS generation was upstream of TGFβ - induced Ca 2 + - influx . We , on the other hand , feel ROS - generation must occur well down - stream of Ca 2 + - wave induction , or must be unrelated to them , since we have shown the Ca 2 + - oscillations appear immediately upon acute application of TGFβ 47 , whereas ROS - generation was undetectable at 4 hours following stimulation , was marginally increased at 8 hours , and reached a peak at 16 hours after TGFβ 118 . Other forms of stimulation than growth factors may also trigger Ca 2 + - responses and gene expression in lung fibroblasts . For example , stimulation of protease - activated receptors using cockroach allergen , trypsin or thrombin led to increased [ Ca 2 + ] in murine and Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts , with activation of ERK1 / 2 , phosphorylation of the transcription factor Elk - 1 and increased synthesis of Egr - 1 38 ; 41 ; 119 . A different study in Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts found Page 21 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 22 that the thrombin - or carbachol - induced [ Ca 2 + ] - response was accompanied by stimulation of Na + / H + exchange and transcription of the early genes c - jun , c - fos , and c - myc 39 . Stimulation of protease - activated receptors in human lung fibroblasts using thrombin , trypsin or synthetic agonists also evoked a [ Ca 2 + ] - elevation and increased expression of cyclooxygenase 1 , with consequent production of PGE 2 40 . Activation of serotonin - receptors stimulates superoxide formation and ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation / activation 120 . As noted above , histamine synergized with TGFβ to trigger [ Ca 2 + ] - elevation and increased expression of IL - 11 which was blocked by inhibition of CamK - II using trifluoperazine or two other putatively calmodulin - selective inhibitors 50 . S100A9 ( also referred to as calgranulin B and as myeloid - related protein - 14 ) , one of the Ca 2 + - binding proteins listed above , is elevated in the BAL of patients with interstitial pulmonary fibrosis or scleroderma 121 . S100A6 ( also known as calcyclin ) seems to regulate progression of pulmonary fibroblasts through the cell cycle 93 . Finally , UPR activation has been associated with fibrotic disease 122 ; 123 and is likely involved in myofibroblast transition , proliferation and survival . Baek et al , showed that UPR inhibition by the addition of a chemical chaperone 4 - PBA , reduced TGF - β 1 induced myofibroblast differentiation 124 . Data from our laboratory shows that the Ca 2 + - blocker nifedipine and the use of specific inhibitors of IRE1 α have the ability to reduce myofibroblast transition ( manuscript in preparation ) , indicating the importance of a functional UPR in these processes . ( 5 ) A NOVEL HYPOTHESIS FOR THE CONTROL OF PULMONARY FIBROBLAST FUNCTION Page 22 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 23 Collectively , these data prompt us to propose a mechanism for pulmonary fibroblasts ( summarized in Fig . 5 ) in which growth factors evoke rhythmic Ca 2 + - oscillations through a complex interplay between Ca 2 + - release mechanisms , depolarizing membrane currents and voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - influx , which in turn activate CamK - II / NF 6 B and / or calcineurin / NFAT , leading to gene expression and a variety of profibrotic responses . For example , it might be that TGFβ , together with its other down - stream signaling pathways ( Smad proteins ; ERK ; etc . ) , can use one range of Ca 2 + - oscillation frequencies to stimulate a pulmonary fibroblast to express matrix proteins , but another range of frequencies to stimulate expression of smooth muscle actin and cause the fibroblast to transform into a myofibroblast . Likewise , PDGF , together with its other down - stream signaling pathways , may use different frequencies to stimulate matrix protein production versus proliferation . We believe the internal Ca 2 + - store is ultimately responsible for the regulation of Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency . In particular , activation of the phosphoinositide cascade causes the store to release internally sequestered Ca 2 + , but feedback inhibition on IP 3 - generation and / or on Ca 2 + - release ( e . g . , Ca 2 + - dependent inactivation of the IP 3 - gated channels ) causes this release to be orchestrated into a series of rhythmic bursts . Release of sequestered Ca 2 + may in turn activate store - refilling channels ( e . g . , TRP ) and / or Ca 2 + - dependent chloride channels at the plasmalemma , leading to membrane depolarization and subsequent activation of T - type Ca 2 + - channels . The latter are highly sensitive to subtle depolarizations , and their opening will lead first to Ca 2 + - influx and further membrane depolarization , followed shortly thereafter by rapid inactivation of those channels . Nonetheless , the additional depolarization can then recruit L - type Ca 2 + - channels , which markedly augment the Ca 2 + - influx and then themselves undergo Ca 2 + - , time - and voltage - dependent inactivation . Altogether , these various ionic mechanisms lead to Page 23 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 24 large but transient pan - cellular Ca 2 + - oscillations whose frequency is ultimately determined by the internal Ca 2 + - pool ( the endoplasmic reticulum ) . This mechanism allows for the prediction and testing of potential novel approaches for the treatment of pulmonary fibrotic disease : that abrogation of the Ca 2 + - oscillations or their enzymatic transduction pathways will ameliorate pulmonary fibrosis . ( 6 ) PULMONARY FIBROSIS CAN BE TREATED BY MANIPULATING [ Ca 2 + ] - SIGNALING EVENTS ? Altogether , these diverse lines of evidence set the stage for the possibility that agents which modulate [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostasis or ionic mechanisms might prove useful in treating fibrotic disease . ( 6 . 1 ) In non - pulmonary fibrotic disease A large number of studies have shown that T - type and L - type Ca 2 + - channel blockers are useful in animal models of fibrosis in the kidney 125 ; 126 , liver 127 - 129 , heart 130 - 133 and skin 134 ; 135 . Those Ca 2 + - channel blockers presumably interfere with one or more Ca 2 + - dependent signalling events . In that context , it is worth noting that the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A or tacrolimus inhibit matrix protein deposition by fibroblasts activated by TGFβ 136 - 141 or by basic fibroblast growth factor . One of these studies directly linked the beneficial effect of Ca 2 + - channel blockade to interference with signalling through the calcineurin - NFAT pathway 133 . ( 6 . 2 ) In pulmonary fibrotic disease Pulmonary fibrosis , chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder and scleroderma - associated Page 24 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 25 interstitial lung disease continue to afflict large numbers of people with devastating morbidity and mortality . Existing therapies are only partially effective against the considerable fibroblast - related pulmonary structural changes which contribute to their demise . To date , none of these therapeutic strategies target [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic mechanisms or Ca 2 + - mediated signaling events , both of which we show above are central to fibroblast - mediated synthetic / secretory function . As such , we feel it is time to explore the potential usefulness of interventional strategies which target those pathways . Rahaman et al . 18 have found TRPV4 channels to be upregulated in patients with pulmonary fibrosis , and TRPV4 - deficient mice to be protected from experimentally - induced pulmonary fibrosis . They also showed that disrupting TRPV4 channels pharmacologically or through gene - silencing approaches abrogated myofibroblast transformation . Likewise , we showed that the L - type Ca 2 + - channel blocker nifedipine , given immediately before bleomycin and injected intraperitoneally daily for the next three weeks , protected the animals against bleomycin’s deleterious effects on lung function ( dampening of pressure - volume loops ; increased elastance ) and histological measures of pulmonary fibrosis ( collagen deposition ; expression of α - smooth muscle actin ) , without having any beneficial effect against bleomycin - induced inflammation 17 . L - type Ca 2 + - channel blockers were also protective in human embryonic lung fibroblasts against the cytotoxic effects of the cationic substance poly ( hexamethylene guanidine ) 142 , and in cultured human lung fibroblasts against the cytopathogenic effect of Clostridium difficile toxin B 143 ; that latter study further showed the protective effects of the calmodulin antagonists trifluoperazine , amitriptyline , R 24571 , and dansylcadaverine 143 . Another group tested nifedipine in three patients who had pulmonary hypertension and Page 25 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 26 right heart failure secondary to severe pulmonary fibrosis ( TLC < 50 % of predicted ) 144 : in these severely sick patients , nifedipine had an immediate deleterious hemodynamic effect , but no measurements were taken beyond the first day of treatment so it is not possible to make any conclusions about its efficacy against the fibrosis per se . We hypothesize that much earlier use of interventional strategies ( well before pulmonary function had deteriorated so markedly ) including nifedipine might have halted the accumulation of fibrotic changes and not allowed the disease to progress to right heart failure . Others have shown that the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A or tacrolimus 137 ; 145 or the calpain inhibitor calpeptin 115 attenuate bleomycin - induced lung fibrosis in rodents . Likewise , cyclosporine A blocked the necrotic cell death caused by Ca 2 + - ionophore - induced Ca 2 + - overload within mouse lung fibroblasts 146 . Calreticulin expression is up - regulated in bleomycin - induced lung fibrosis in rats 147 . The increased responsiveness to TGFβ ( synthesis of collagen - 1 and fibronectin ) in pulmonary fibroblasts from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis was impaired by genetic silencing of calreticulin 34 . ( 7 ) FUTURE DIRECTIONS Many questions remain unanswered with respect to [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostasis and ionic mechanisms in pulmonary fibroblasts . The basal currents in these cells remain largely unexplored . What is the full complement of ion channels that they express in health and disease ? Patch - clamp investigations are the best approach to study the channels and their activity in great detail , but invariably disrupt the cell in the process . For example , except in very unique cases which are beyond the scope of this Page 26 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 27 review , the electrolyte solution prepared by the researcher and loaded into the patch electrode replaces the cytoplasm of the cell . Unless the researcher knows the baseline concentrations of the various cations and anions , this has the potential to alter the equilibrium potentials for the various ions . This is a particular problem for chloride : the concentration used is often several times higher than that in the cytosol . As such , it is unclear whether opening of the chloride channels leads to membrane depolarization or hyperpolarization . There have been no studies of the membrane potential in resting fibroblasts , nor how this is altered during excitation with autacoids or during some experimentally - induced disease condition ( e . g . , exposure to bleomycin ) , despite the fact that the membrane potential is likely key to the control of Ca 2 + - influx and Ca 2 + - oscillation frequency . Which ion channels might growth factors activate ? Do different electrophysiological events underlie diverse cellular responses such as proliferation , synthesis / secretion , transformation or apoptosis ? The mechanisms underlying the decoding of Ca 2 + - wave frequency are only just beginning to be examined , but much remains to be done . The relative contributions of CamK , calcineurin or calpain – or indeed some other Ca 2 + - sensitive enzyme – in this decoding are unclear , as are the down - stream transduction factors and other regulators in this central function of the cells . Perhaps the most important direction to take is to explore further how pharmacological tools which manipulate [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostasis and ionic mechanisms might be used in the treatment of the fibrotic changes which accompany chronic lung disease . Page 27 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 28 ( 8 ) REFERENCES 1 . Katzenstein , A . L . and J . L . Myers . 1998 . Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis : clinical relevance of pathologic classification . Am . J . Respir . Crit Care Med . 157 : 1301 - 1315 . 2 . Zhang , W . , D . Q . Chen , F . Qi , J . Wang , W . Y . Xiao , and W . Z . Zhu . 2010 . Inhibition of calcium - calmodulin - dependent kinase II suppresses cardiac fibroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix secretion . J . Cardiovasc . Pharmacol . 55 : 96 - 105 . 3 . Inoh , H . , N . Ishiguro , S . Sawazaki , H . Amma , M . Miyazu , H . Iwata , M . Sokabe , and K . Naruse . 2002 . Uni - axial cyclic stretch induces the activation of transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB in human fibroblast cells . FASEB J . 16 : 405 - 407 . 4 . Corneliussen , B . , M . Holm , Y . Waltersson , J . Onions , B . Hallberg , A . Thornell , and T . Grundstrom . 1994 . Calcium / calmodulin inhibition of basic - helix - loop - helix transcription factor domains . Nature 368 : 760 - 764 . 5 . Huang , C . , M . Ding , J . Li , S . S . Leonard , Y . Rojanasakul , V . Castranova , V . Vallyathan , G . Ju , and X . Shi . 2001 . Vanadium - induced nuclear factor of activated T cells activation through hydrogen peroxide . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 22397 - 22403 . 6 . Oh - Hora , M . , M . Yamashita , P . G . Hogan , S . Sharma , E . Lamperti , W . Chung , M . Prakriya , S . Feske , and A . Rao . 2008 . Dual functions for the endoplasmic reticulum calcium sensors STIM1 and STIM2 in T cell activation and tolerance . Nat . Immunol . 9 : 432 - 443 . 7 . Wei , C . , X . Wang , M . Chen , K . Ouyang , L . S . Song , and H . Cheng . 2009 . Calcium flickers steer cell migration . Nature 457 : 901 - 905 . 8 . Schmidt , W . F . , K . R . Huber , R . S . Ettinger , and R . W . Neuberg . 1988 . Antiproliferative effect of verapamil alone on brain tumor cells in vitro . Cancer Res . 48 : 3617 - 3621 . 9 . Tupper , J . T . , W . T . Ryals , and P . V . Bodine . 1982 . Membrane transport properties differ following return of serum - deprived versus Ca + + - deprived human fibroblasts to a proliferative state . J . Cell Physiol 110 : 29 - 34 . Page 28 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 29 10 . Berridge , M . J . 1997 . Elementary and global aspects of calcium signalling . J . Physiol 499 ( Pt 2 ) : 291 - 306 . 11 . Berridge , M . J . , M . D . Bootman , and P . Lipp . 1998 . Calcium - - a life and death signal . Nature 395 : 645 - 648 . 12 . Berridge , M . J . , P . Lipp , and M . D . Bootman . 2000 . The versatility and universality of calcium signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 11 - 21 . 13 . Dolphin , A . C . 2009 . Calcium channel diversity : multiple roles of calcium channel subunits . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 19 : 237 - 244 . 14 . Triggle , D . J . 2007 . Calcium channel antagonists : clinical uses - - past , present and future . Biochem . Pharmacol . 74 : 1 - 9 . 15 . Catterall , W . A . 2011 . Voltage - gated calcium channels . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 : a003947 . 16 . Simms , B . A . and G . W . Zamponi . 2014 . Neuronal voltage - gated calcium channels : structure , function , and dysfunction . Neuron 82 : 24 - 45 . 17 . Mukherjee , S . , Ayaub , E . , Murphy , J . , Lu , C . , Kolb , M . , Ask , K . , and Janssen , L . J . Nifedipine Disrupts Signaling in Fibroblasts and Attenuates Bleomycin - Induced Fibrosis . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 2015 . Ref Type : Generic 18 . Rahaman , S . O . , L . M . Grove , S . Paruchuri , B . D . Southern , S . Abraham , K . A . Niese , R . G . Scheraga , S . Ghosh , C . K . Thodeti , D . X . Zhang , M . M . Moran , W . P . Schilling , D . J . Tschumperlin , and M . A . Olman . 2014 . TRPV4 mediates myofibroblast differentiation and pulmonary fibrosis in mice . J . Clin . Invest 124 : 5225 - 5238 . 19 . Kaneko , Y . and A . Szallasi . 2014 . Transient receptor potential ( TRP ) channels : a clinical perspective . Br . J . Pharmacol . 171 : 2474 - 2507 . 20 . Fry , C . H . , G . Sui , and C . Wu . 2006 . T - type Ca2 + channels in non - vascular smooth muscles . Cell Calcium 40 : 231 - 239 . Page 29 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 30 21 . Tanaka , H . , C . Komikado , I . Namekata , H . Nakamura , M . Suzuki , Y . Tsuneoka , K . Shigenobu , and A . Takahara . 2008 . Species difference in the contribution of T - type calcium current to cardiac pacemaking as revealed by r ( - ) - efonidipine . J . Pharmacol . Sci . 107 : 99 - 102 . 22 . Thornbury , K . D . 1999 . Tonic and phasic activity in smooth muscle . Ir . J . Med . Sci . 168 : 201 - 207 . 23 . Berridge , M . J . , P . Lipp , and M . D . Bootman . 2000 . The versatility and universality of calcium signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 11 - 21 . 24 . Tsien , R . W . , P . Hess , E . W . McCleskey , and R . L . Rosenberg . 1987 . Calcium channels : mechanisms of selectivity , permeation , and block . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 16 : 265 - 290 . 25 . Ben Johny , M . and D . T . Yue . 2014 . Calmodulin regulation ( calmodulation ) of voltage - gated calcium channels . J . Gen . Physiol 143 : 679 - 692 . 26 . Berridge , M . J . 1993 . Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling . Nature 361 : 315 - 325 . 27 . Guse , A . H . 1999 . Cyclic ADP - ribose : a novel Ca2 + - mobilising second messenger . Cell Signal . 11 : 309 - 316 . 28 . Lee , H . C . 1997 . Mechanisms of calcium signaling by cyclic ADP - ribose and NAADP . Physiol Rev . 77 : 1133 - 1164 . 29 . Sitsapesan , R . , S . J . McGarry , and A . J . Williams . 1995 . Cyclic ADP - ribose , the ryanodine receptor and Ca2 + release . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 16 : 386 - 391 . 30 . Sitsapesan , R . and A . J . Williams . 1995 . Cyclic ADP - ribose and related compounds activate sheep skeletal sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2 + release channel . Am . J . Physiol 268 : C1235 - C1240 . 31 . Tsien , R . Y . 1988 . Fluorescence measurement and photochemical manipulation of cytosolic free calcium . Trends Neurosci . 11 : 419 - 424 . Page 30 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 31 32 . Koopman , W . J . , W . J . Scheenen , R . J . Errington , P . H . Willems , R . J . Bindels , E . W . Roubos , and B . G . Jenks . 2001 . Membrane - initiated Ca ( 2 + ) signals are reshaped during propagation to subcellular regions . Biophys . J . 81 : 57 - 65 . 33 . Follonier , C . L . , G . Gabbiani , C . A . McCulloch , and B . Hinz . 2010 . Regulation of myofibroblast activities : calcium pulls some strings behind the scene . Exp . Cell Res . 316 : 2390 - 2401 . 34 . Zimmerman , K . A . , L . V . Graham , M . A . Pallero , and J . E . Murphy - Ullrich . 2013 . Calreticulin regulates transforming growth factor - beta - stimulated extracellular matrix production . J . Biol . Chem . 288 : 14584 - 14598 . 35 . Palfrey , H . C . , A . C . Nairn , L . L . Muldoon , and M . L . Villereal . 1987 . Rapid activation of calmodulin - dependent protein kinase III in mitogen - stimulated human fibroblasts . Correlation with intracellular Ca2 + transients . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 9785 - 9792 . 36 . Petecchia , L . , F . Sabatini , C . Usai , S . Carnevali , M . Ognibene , C . Vanni , A . Eva , L . M . Fabbri , G . A . Rossi , and F . L . Ricciardolo . 2010 . Mechanisms of bradykinin - induced contraction in human fetal lung fibroblasts . Eur . Respir . J . 36 : 655 - 664 . 37 . Yoshida , T . , Y . Takahashi , and S . Takashima . 1993 . Effect of low extracellular Ca2 + on growth , spreading area , cytoplasmic Ca2 + concentration , and intracellular pH in normal and transformed human fibroblasts . J . Cell Physiol 154 : 301 - 309 . 38 . Baffy , G . , L . Yang , S . Raj , D . R . Manning , and J . R . Williamson . 1994 . G protein coupling to the thrombin receptor in Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 8483 - 8487 . 39 . Seuwen , K . , C . Kahan , T . Hartmann , and J . Pouyssegur . 1990 . Strong and persistent activation of inositol lipid breakdown induces early mitogenic events but not Go to S phase progression in hamster fibroblasts . Comparison of thrombin and carbachol action in cells expressing M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 22292 - 22299 . Page 31 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 32 40 . Sokolova , E . , Z . Grishina , F . Buhling , T . Welte , and G . Reiser . 2005 . Protease - activated receptor - 1 in human lung fibroblasts mediates a negative feedback downregulation via prostaglandin E2 . Am . J . Physiol Lung Cell Mol . Physiol 288 : L793 - L802 . 41 . Kondo , S . , H . Helin , M . Shichijo , and K . B . Bacon . 2004 . Cockroach allergen extract stimulates protease - activated receptor - 2 ( PAR - 2 ) expressed in mouse lung fibroblast . Inflamm . Res . 53 : 489 - 496 . 42 . Homolya , L . , W . C . Watt , E . R . Lazarowski , B . H . Koller , and R . C . Boucher . 1999 . Nucleotide - regulated calcium signaling in lung fibroblasts and epithelial cells from normal and P2Y ( 2 ) receptor ( - / - ) mice . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 26454 - 26460 . 43 . Gupta , A . , K . A . Hruska , and T . L . Tuan . 1994 . Angiotensin II binding to human embryonic lung fibroblasts causes transient changes in cytosolic calcium and promotes fibrin gel contraction . Indian J . Exp . Biol . 32 : 603 - 606 . 44 . Swaney , J . S . , C . Chapman , L . D . Correa , K . J . Stebbins , R . A . Bundey , P . C . Prodanovich , P . Fagan , C . S . Baccei , A . M . Santini , J . H . Hutchinson , T . J . Seiders , T . A . Parr , P . Prasit , J . F . Evans , and D . S . Lorrain . 2010 . A novel , orally active LPA ( 1 ) receptor antagonist inhibits lung fibrosis in the mouse bleomycin model . Br . J . Pharmacol . 160 : 1699 - 1713 . 45 . Jardin , I . , N . Dionisio , J . J . Lopez , G . M . Salido , and J . A . Rosado . 2013 . Pharmacology of TRP channels in the vasculature . Curr . Vasc . Pharmacol . 11 : 480 - 489 . 46 . Sadofsky , L . R . , R . Ramachandran , C . Crow , M . Cowen , S . J . Compton , and A . H . Morice . 2012 . Inflammatory stimuli up - regulate transient receptor potential vanilloid - 1 expression in human bronchial fibroblasts . Exp . Lung Res . 38 : 75 - 81 . 47 . Mukherjee , S . , M . R . Kolb , F . Duan , and L . J . Janssen . 2012 . Transforming growth factor - beta evokes Ca2 + waves and enhances gene expression in human pulmonary fibroblasts . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 46 : 757 - 764 . Page 32 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 33 48 . Mukherjee , S . , F . Duan , M . R . Kolb , and L . J . Janssen . 2013 . Platelet derived growth factor - evoked Ca ( 2 + ) wave and matrix gene expression through phospholipase C in human pulmonary fibroblast . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 45 : 1516 - 1524 . 49 . Janssen , L . J . , L . Farkas , T . Rahman , and M . R . Kolb . 2009 . ATP stimulates Ca ( 2 + ) - waves and gene expression in cultured human pulmonary fibroblasts . Int . J Biochem . Cell Biol . 41 : 2477 - 2484 . 50 . Zheng , T . , M . H . Nathanson , and J . A . Elias . 1994 . Histamine augments cytokine - stimulated IL - 11 production by human lung fibroblasts . J . Immunol . 153 : 4742 - 4752 . 51 . Estacion , M . 1990 . Inhibition of voltage - dependent Na + current in cell - fusion hybrids containing activated c - Ha - ras . J . Membr . Biol . 113 : 169 - 175 . 52 . Shumilina , E . , A . Lampert , A . Lupescu , S . Myssina , N . Strutz - Seebohm , G . Henke , F . Grahammer , P . Wulff , D . Kuhl , and F . Lang . 2005 . Deranged Kv channel regulation in fibroblasts from mice lacking the serum and glucocorticoid inducible kinase SGK1 . J . Cell Physiol 204 : 87 - 98 . 53 . Shlyonsky , V . , I . B . Soussia , R . Naeije , and F . Mies . 2011 . Opposing effects of bone morphogenetic protein - 2 and endothelin - 1 on lung fibroblast chloride currents . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 45 : 1154 - 1160 . 54 . Yin , Z . and M . A . Watsky . 2005 . Chloride channel activity in human lung fibroblasts and myofibroblasts . Am . J . Physiol Lung Cell Mol . Physiol 288 : L1110 - L1116 . 55 . Yin , Z . , Y . Tong , H . Zhu , and M . A . Watsky . 2008 . ClC - 3 is required for LPA - activated Cl - current activity and fibroblast - to - myofibroblast differentiation . Am . J . Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C535 - C542 . 56 . Schwab , A . , V . Nechyporuk - Zloy , A . Fabian , and C . Stock . 2007 . Cells move when ions and water flow . Pflugers Arch . 453 : 421 - 432 . 57 . Waldburg , N . , T . Kahne , A . Reisenauer , C . Rocken , T . Welte , and F . Buhling . 2004 . Clinical proteomics in lung diseases . Pathol . Res . Pract . 200 : 147 - 154 . Page 33 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 34 58 . Qi , S . , G . J . den Hartog , and A . Bast . 2009 . Superoxide radicals increase transforming growth factor - beta1 and collagen release from human lung fibroblasts via cellular influx through chloride channels . Toxicol . Appl . Pharmacol . 237 : 111 - 118 . 59 . Mukhopadhyay , I . , P . Gomes , S . Aranake , M . Shetty , P . Karnik , M . Damle , S . Kuruganti , S . Thorat , and N . Khairatkar - Joshi . 2011 . Expression of functional TRPA1 receptor on human lung fibroblast and epithelial cells . J . Recept . Signal . Transduct . Res . 31 : 350 - 358 . 60 . Godbout , C . , C . L . Follonier , E . A . Smith , N . Talele , M . L . Chow , A . Garonna , and B . Hinz . 2013 . The mechanical environment modulates intracellular calcium oscillation activities of myofibroblasts . PLoS . One . 8 : e64560 . 61 . Huang , X . , N . Yang , V . F . Fiore , T . H . Barker , Y . Sun , S . W . Morris , Q . Ding , V . J . Thannickal , and Y . Zhou . 2012 . Matrix stiffness - induced myofibroblast differentiation is mediated by intrinsic mechanotransduction . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 47 : 340 - 348 . 62 . Kato , T . , N . Ishiguro , H . Iwata , T . Kojima , T . Ito , and K . Naruse . 1998 . Up - regulation of COX2 expression by uni - axial cyclic stretch in human lung fibroblast cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 244 : 615 - 619 . 63 . Estacion , M . and L . J . Mordan . 1993 . Expression of voltage - gated calcium channels correlates with PDGF - stimulated calcium influx and depends upon cell density in C3H 10T1 / 2 mouse fibroblasts . Cell Calcium 14 : 161 - 171 . 64 . Large , R . J . , M . A . Hollywood , G . P . Sergeant , K . D . Thornbury , S . Bourke , J . R . Levick , and N . G . McHale . 2010 . Ionic currents in intimal cultured synoviocytes from the rabbit . Am . J . Physiol Cell Physiol 299 : C1180 - C1194 . 65 . Pemberton , K . E . , L . J . Hill - Eubanks , and S . V . Jones . 2000 . Modulation of low - threshold T - type calcium channels by the five muscarinic receptor subtypes in NIH 3T3 cells . Pflugers Arch . 440 : 452 - 461 . 66 . Peres , A . , R . Zippel , E . Sturani , and G . Mostacciuolo . 1988 . A voltage - dependent calcium current in mouse Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts . Pflugers Arch . 411 : 554 - 557 . Page 34 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 35 67 . Peres , A . , E . Sturani , and R . Zippel . 1989 . Voltage - dependent calcium current in adherent mouse 3T3 fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 180 : 585 - 590 . 68 . Paris , S . and J . Pouyssegur . 1991 . Mitogenic effects of fibroblast growth factors in cultured fibroblasts . Interaction with the G - protein - mediated signaling pathways . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 638 : 139 - 148 . 69 . He , Z . , C . Jia , S . Feng , K . Zhou , Y . Tai , X . Bai , and Y . Wang . 2012 . TRPC5 Channel Is the Mediator of Neurotrophin - 3 in Regulating Dendritic Growth via CaMKIIalpha in Rat Hippocampal Neurons . J . Neurosci . 32 : 9383 - 9395 . 70 . Barlow , C . A . , P . Rose , R . A . Pulver - Kaste , and K . M . Lounsbury . 2006 . Excitation - transcription coupling in smooth muscle . J . Physiol 570 : 59 - 64 . 71 . Cartin , L . , K . M . Lounsbury , and M . T . Nelson . 2000 . Coupling of Ca ( 2 + ) to CREB activation and gene expression in intact cerebral arteries from mouse : roles of ryanodine receptors and voltage - dependent Ca ( 2 + ) channels . Circ . Res . 86 : 760 - 767 . 72 . Pulver - Kaste , R . A . , C . A . Barlow , J . Bond , A . Watson , P . L . Penar , B . Tranmer , and K . M . Lounsbury . 2006 . Ca2 + source - dependent transcription of CRE - containing genes in vascular smooth muscle . Am . J . Physiol Heart Circ . Physiol 291 : H97 - 105 . 73 . Stevenson , A . S . , M . F . Gomez , D . C . Hill - Eubanks , and M . T . Nelson . 2001 . NFAT4 movement in native smooth muscle . A role for differential Ca ( 2 + ) signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 15018 - 15024 . 74 . Dolmetsch , R . E . , R . S . Lewis , C . C . Goodnow , and J . I . Healy . 1997 . Differential activation of transcription factors induced by Ca2 + response amplitude and duration . Nature 386 : 855 - 858 . 75 . Dolmetsch , R . E . , K . Xu , and R . S . Lewis . 1998 . Calcium oscillations increase the efficiency and specificity of gene expression . Nature 392 : 933 - 936 . 76 . Li , W . , J . Llopis , M . Whitney , G . Zlokarnik , and R . Y . Tsien . 1998 . Cell - permeant caged InsP3 ester shows that Ca2 + spike frequency can optimize gene expression . Nature 392 : 936 - 941 . Page 35 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 36 77 . Smedler , E . and P . Uhlen . 2014 . Frequency decoding of calcium oscillations . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1840 : 964 - 969 . 78 . Oruganti , S . R . , S . Edin , C . Grundstrom , and T . Grundstrom . 2011 . CaMKII targets Bcl10 in T - cell receptor induced activation of NF - kappaB . Mol . Immunol . 48 : 1448 - 1460 . 79 . Ginnan , R . , P . J . Pfleiderer , K . Pumiglia , and H . A . Singer . 2004 . PKC - delta and CaMKII - delta 2 mediate ATP - dependent activation of ERK1 / 2 in vascular smooth muscle . Am . J . Physiol Cell Physiol 286 : C1281 - C1289 . 80 . Hwang , Y . P . , H . G . Kim , J . H . Choi , B . H . Park , M . H . Jeong , T . C . Jeong , and H . G . Jeong . 2011 . Acteoside inhibits PMA - induced matrix metalloproteinase - 9 expression via CaMK / ERK - and JNK / NF - kappaB - dependent signaling . Mol . Nutr . Food Res . 55 Suppl 1 : S103 - S116 . 81 . Lenz , G . and J . Avruch . 2005 . Glutamatergic regulation of the p70S6 kinase in primary mouse neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 38121 - 38124 . 82 . Maier , L . S . 2009 . Role of CaMKII for signaling and regulation in the heart . Front Biosci . 14 : 486 - 496 . 83 . Murao , K . , J . Li , H . Imachi , T . Muraoka , H . Masugata , G . X . Zhang , R . Kobayashi , T . Ishida , and H . Tokumitsu . 2009 . Exendin - 4 regulates glucokinase expression by CaMKK / CaMKIV pathway in pancreatic beta - cell line . Diabetes Obes . Metab 11 : 939 - 946 . 84 . Peng , W . , Y . Zhang , M . Zheng , H . Cheng , W . Zhu , C . M . Cao , and R . P . Xiao . 2010 . Cardioprotection by CaMKII - deltaB is mediated by phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 and subsequent expression of inducible heat shock protein 70 . Circ . Res . 106 : 102 - 110 . 85 . Persaud , S . J . , B . Liu , H . B . Sampaio , P . M . Jones , and D . S . Muller . 2011 . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase IV controls glucose - induced Irs2 expression in mouse beta cells via activation of cAMP response element - binding protein . Diabetologia 54 : 1109 - 1120 . Page 36 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 37 86 . Rosengart , M . R . , S . Arbabi , I . Garcia , and R . V . Maier . 2000 . Interactions of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases ( CaMK ) and extracellular - regulated kinase ( ERK ) in monocyte adherence and TNFalpha production . Shock 13 : 183 - 189 . 87 . Sun , L . , X . Cao , B . Liu , H . Huang , X . Wang , L . Sui , W . Yin , and K . Ma . 2011 . CaMK IV phosphorylates prohibitin 2 and regulates prohibitin 2 - mediated repression of MEF2 transcription . Cell Signal . 23 : 1686 - 1690 . 88 . Takemura , M . , T . Mishima , Y . Wang , J . Kasahara , K . Fukunaga , K . Ohashi , and K . Mizuno . 2009 . Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV - mediated LIM kinase activation is critical for calcium signal - induced neurite outgrowth . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 28554 - 28562 . 89 . You , J . , W . Peng , X . Lin , Q . L . Huang , and J . Y . Lin . 2010 . PLC / CAMK IV - NF - kappaB involved in the receptor for advanced glycation end products mediated signaling pathway in human endothelial cells . Mol . Cell Endocrinol . 320 : 111 - 117 . 90 . Zhang , T . , X . Lu , J . Li , P . Chidiac , S . M . Sims , and Q . Feng . 2012 . Inhibition of Na / K - ATPase promotes myocardial tumor necrosis factor - alpha protein expression and cardiac dysfunction via calcium / mTOR signaling in endotoxemia . Basic Res . Cardiol . 107 : 254 . 91 . Zimmerman , C . M . , M . S . Kariapper , and L . S . Mathews . 1998 . Smad proteins physically interact with calmodulin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 677 - 680 . 92 . Khorchid , A . and M . Ikura . 2002 . How calpain is activated by calcium . Nat . Struct . Biol . 9 : 239 - 241 . 93 . Breen , E . C . and K . Tang . 2003 . Calcyclin ( S100A6 ) regulates pulmonary fibroblast proliferation , morphology , and cytoskeletal organization in vitro . J . Cell Biochem . 88 : 848 - 854 . 94 . Donato , R . 2001 . S100 : a multigenic family of calcium - modulated proteins of the EF - hand type with intracellular and extracellular functional roles . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 33 : 637 - 668 . Page 37 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 38 95 . Fohr , U . G . , C . W . Heizmann , D . Engelkamp , B . W . Schafer , and J . A . Cox . 1995 . Purification and cation binding properties of the recombinant human S100 calcium - binding protein A3 , an EF - hand motif protein with high affinity for zinc . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 21056 - 21061 . 96 . Xu , X . , H . Chen , X . Zhu , Y . Ma , Q . Liu , Y . Xue , H . Chu , W . Wu , J . Wang , and H . Zou . 2013 . S100A9 promotes human lung fibroblast cells activation through receptor for advanced glycation end - product - mediated extracellular - regulated kinase 1 / 2 , mitogen - activated protein - kinase and nuclear factor - kappaB - dependent pathways . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 173 : 523 - 535 . 97 . Gallego - Sandin , S . , M . T . Alonso , and J . Garcia - Sancho . 2011 . Calcium homoeostasis modulator 1 ( CALHM1 ) reduces the calcium content of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and triggers ER stress . Biochem . J . 437 : 469 - 475 . 98 . Chapman , R . , C . Sidrauski , and P . Walter . 1998 . Intracellular signaling from the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 459 - 485 . 99 . Cox , J . S . , C . E . Shamu , and P . Walter . 1993 . Transcriptional induction of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum resident proteins requires a transmembrane protein kinase . Cell 73 : 1197 - 1206 . 100 . Gardner , B . M . , D . Pincus , K . Gotthardt , C . M . Gallagher , and P . Walter . 2013 . Endoplasmic reticulum stress sensing in the unfolded protein response . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 5 : a013169 . 101 . Patil , C . and P . Walter . 2001 . Intracellular signaling from the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus : the unfolded protein response in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 349 - 355 . 102 . Ron , D . and P . Walter . 2007 . Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 519 - 529 . 103 . Sidrauski , C . , R . Chapman , and P . Walter . 1998 . The unfolded protein response : an intracellular signalling pathway with many surprising features . Trends Cell Biol . 8 : 245 - 249 . Page 38 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 39 104 . Coe , H . and M . Michalak . 2009 . Calcium binding chaperones of the endoplasmic reticulum . Gen . Physiol Biophys . 28 Spec No Focus : F96 - F103 . 105 . Malhotra , J . D . and R . J . Kaufman . 2007 . The endoplasmic reticulum and the unfolded protein response . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 716 - 731 . 106 . Iwakoshi , N . N . , A . H . Lee , P . Vallabhajosyula , K . L . Otipoby , K . Rajewsky , and L . H . Glimcher . 2003 . Plasma cell differentiation and the unfolded protein response intersect at the transcription factor XBP - 1 . Nat . Immunol . 4 : 321 - 329 . 107 . Dickhout , J . G . , S . Lhotak , B . A . Hilditch , S . Basseri , S . M . Colgan , E . G . Lynn , R . E . Carlisle , J . Zhou , S . K . Sood , A . J . Ingram , and R . C . Austin . 2011 . Induction of the unfolded protein response after monocyte to macrophage differentiation augments cell survival in early atherosclerotic lesions . FASEB J . 25 : 576 - 589 . 108 . Martino , M . B . , L . Jones , B . Brighton , C . Ehre , L . Abdulah , C . W . Davis , D . Ron , W . K . O ' Neal , and C . M . Ribeiro . 2013 . The ER stress transducer IRE1beta is required for airway epithelial mucin production . Mucosal . Immunol . 6 : 639 - 654 . 109 . Sriburi , R . , S . Jackowski , K . Mori , and J . W . Brewer . 2004 . XBP1 : a link between the unfolded protein response , lipid biosynthesis , and biogenesis of the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 167 : 35 - 41 . 110 . Son , S . M . , J . Byun , S . E . Roh , S . J . Kim , and I . Mook - Jung . 2014 . Reduced IRE1alpha mediates apoptotic cell death by disrupting calcium homeostasis via the InsP3 receptor . Cell Death . Dis . 5 : e1188 . 111 . Thorpe , J . A . and S . R . Schwarze . 2010 . IRE1alpha controls cyclin A1 expression and promotes cell proliferation through XBP - 1 . Cell Stress . Chaperones . 15 : 497 - 508 . 112 . Rebecchi , M . J . and O . M . Rosen . 1987 . Stimulation of polyphosphoinositide hydrolysis by thrombin in membranes from human fibroblasts . Biochem . J . 245 : 49 - 57 . 113 . Zhu , Y . L . , Y . J . Zhu , Z . J . Guo , W . L . Zhao , and B . C . Liu . 1994 . Effects of calcium and calmodulin inhibitors on the abnormal proliferation of lung fibroblast . Chin Med . J . ( Engl . ) 107 : 487 - 490 . Page 39 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 40 114 . Michalak , M . , J . Groenendyk , E . Szabo , L . I . Gold , and M . Opas . 2009 . Calreticulin , a multi - process calcium - buffering chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum . Biochem . J . 417 : 651 - 666 . 115 . Tabata , C . , R . Tabata , and T . Nakano . 2010 . The calpain inhibitor calpeptin prevents bleomycin - induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 162 : 560 - 567 . 116 . Thannickal , V . J . , K . D . Aldweib , and B . L . Fanburg . 1998 . Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates H2O2 production in lung fibroblasts stimulated by transforming growth factor beta1 . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 23611 - 23615 . 117 . Junn , E . , K . N . Lee , H . R . Ju , S . H . Han , J . Y . Im , H . S . Kang , T . H . Lee , Y . S . Bae , K . S . Ha , Z . W . Lee , S . G . Rhee , and I . Choi . 2000 . Requirement of hydrogen peroxide generation in TGF - beta 1 signal transduction in human lung fibroblast cells : involvement of hydrogen peroxide and Ca2 + in TGF - beta 1 - induced IL - 6 expression . J . Immunol . 165 : 2190 - 2197 . 118 . Thannickal , V . J . and B . L . Fanburg . 1995 . Activation of an H2O2 - generating NADH oxidase in human lung fibroblasts by transforming growth factor beta 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 30334 - 30338 . 119 . Rossler , O . G . and G . Thiel . 2009 . Thrombin induces Egr - 1 expression in fibroblasts involving elevation of the intracellular Ca2 + concentration , phosphorylation of ERK and activation of ternary complex factor . BMC . Mol . Biol . 10 : 40 . 120 . Lee , S . L . , W . W . Wang , G . A . Finlay , and B . L . Fanburg . 1999 . Serotonin stimulates mitogen - activated protein kinase activity through the formation of superoxide anion . Am . J . Physiol 277 : L282 - L291 . 121 . Korthagen , N . M . , M . M . Nagtegaal , C . H . van Moorsel , K . M . Kazemier , J . M . van den Bosch , and J . C . Grutters . 2010 . MRP14 is elevated in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of fibrosing interstitial lung diseases . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 161 : 342 - 347 . 122 . Lenna , S . and M . Trojanowska . 2012 . The role of endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response in fibrosis . Curr . Opin . Rheumatol . 24 : 663 - 668 . Page 40 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 41 123 . Wei , J . , S . Rahman , E . A . Ayaub , J . G . Dickhout , and K . Ask . 2013 . Protein misfolding and endoplasmic reticulum stress in chronic lung disease . Chest 143 : 1098 - 1105 . 124 . Baek , H . A . , d . S . Kim , H . S . Park , K . Y . Jang , M . J . Kang , D . G . Lee , W . S . Moon , H . J . Chae , and M . J . Chung . 2012 . Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in myofibroblastic differentiation of lung fibroblasts . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 46 : 731 - 739 . 125 . Mishima , K . , A . Maeshima , M . Miya , N . Sakurai , H . Ikeuchi , K . Hiromura , and Y . Nojima . 2013 . Involvement of N - type Ca ( 2 + ) channels in the fibrotic process of the kidney in rats . Am . J . Physiol Renal Physiol 304 : F665 - F673 . 126 . Matsuda , H . , T . Mori , D . Kurumazuka , K . Kitada , T . Hayashi , K . Nagatoya , T . Inoue , A . Ukimura , Y . Matsumura , N . Ishizaka , and Y . Kitaura . 2011 . Inhibitory effects of T / L - type calcium channel blockers on tubulointerstitial fibrosis in obstructed kidneys in rats . Urology 77 : 249 - 15 . 127 . Shafik , A . N . , M . M . Khodeir , N . A . Gouda , and M . E . Mahmoud . 2011 . Improved antifibrotic effect of a combination of verapamil and silymarin in rat - induced liver fibrosis . Arab . J . Gastroenterol . 12 : 143 - 149 . 128 . Nakagami , H . , M . Shimamura , T . Miyake , T . Shimosato , N . Minobe , T . Moritani , O . M . Kiomy , F . Nakagami , H . Koriyama , M . Kyutoku , H . Shimizu , T . Katsuya , and R . Morishita . 2012 . Nifedipine prevents hepatic fibrosis in a non - alcoholic steatohepatitis model induced by an L - methionine - and choline - deficient diet . Mol . Med . Rep . 5 : 37 - 40 . 129 . Ohyama , T . , K . Sato , K . Kishimoto , Y . Yamazaki , N . Horiguchi , T . Ichikawa , S . Kakizaki , H . Takagi , T . Izumi , and M . Mori . 2012 . Azelnidipine is a calcium blocker that attenuates liver fibrosis and may increase antioxidant defence . Br . J . Pharmacol . 165 : 1173 - 1187 . 130 . Takatsu , M . , T . Hattori , T . Murase , M . Ohtake , M . Kato , K . Nashima , C . Nakashima , K . Takahashi , H . Ito , K . Niinuma , S . Aritomi , T . Murohara , and K . Nagata . 2012 . Comparison of the effects of cilnidipine and amlodipine on cardiac remodeling and diastolic dysfunction in Dahl salt - sensitive rats . J . Hypertens . 30 : 1845 - 1855 . Page 41 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 42 131 . Lei , B . , H . Hitomi , T . Mori , Y . Nagai , K . Deguchi , H . Mori , T . Masaki , D . Nakano , H . Kobori , Y . Kitaura , and A . Nishiyama . 2011 . Effect of efonidipine on TGF - beta1 - induced cardiac fibrosis through Smad2 - dependent pathway in rat cardiac fibroblasts . J . Pharmacol . Sci . 117 : 98 - 105 . 132 . Orenes - Pinero , E . , D . Hernandez - Romero , E . Jover , M . G . de la , M . Valdes , and F . Marin . 2011 . An insight of novel pharmacological therapies in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . Med . Chem . 7 : 275 - 285 . 133 . Horiba , M . , T . Muto , N . Ueda , T . Opthof , K . Miwa , M . Hojo , J . K . Lee , K . Kamiya , I . Kodama , and K . Yasui . 2008 . T - type Ca2 + channel blockers prevent cardiac cell hypertrophy through an inhibition of calcineurin - NFAT3 activation as well as L - type Ca2 + channel blockers . Life Sci . 82 : 554 - 560 . 134 . Zunwen , L . , Z . Shizhen , L . Dewu , M . Yungui , and N . Pu . 2012 . Effect of tetrandrine on the TGF - beta - induced smad signal transduction pathway in human hypertrophic scar fibroblasts in vitro . Burns 38 : 404 - 413 . 135 . Yang , J . Y . and C . Y . Huang . 2010 . The effect of combined steroid and calcium channel blocker injection on human hypertrophic scars in animal model : a new strategy for the treatment of hypertrophic scars . Dermatol . Surg . 36 : 1942 - 1949 . 136 . Gooch , J . L . , Y . Gorin , B . X . Zhang , and H . E . Abboud . 2004 . Involvement of calcineurin in transforming growth factor - beta - mediated regulation of extracellular matrix accumulation . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 15561 - 15570 . 137 . Nagano , J . , K . Iyonaga , K . Kawamura , A . Yamashita , H . Ichiyasu , T . Okamoto , M . Suga , Y . Sasaki , and H . Kohrogi . 2006 . Use of tacrolimus , a potent antifibrotic agent , in bleomycin - induced lung fibrosis . Eur . Respir . J . 27 : 460 - 469 . 138 . Eickelberg , O . , A . Pansky , E . Koehler , M . Bihl , M . Tamm , P . Hildebrand , A . P . Perruchoud , M . Kashgarian , and M . Roth . 2001 . Molecular mechanisms of TGF - ( beta ) antagonism by interferon ( gamma ) and cyclosporine A in lung fibroblasts . FASEB J . 15 : 797 - 806 . 139 . Rhew , J . H . , Y . A . Shin , B . H . Lee , R . W . Park , and I . S . Kim . 1999 . Induction of fibronectin gene expression by inhibitors of protein phosphatase type 2B in normal and transformed fibroblasts . Exp . Mol . Med . 31 : 71 - 75 . Page 42 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 43 140 . Lohi , J . , V . M . Kahari , and J . Keski - Oja . 1994 . Cyclosporin A enhances cytokine and phorbol ester - induced fibroblast collagenase expression . J . Invest Dermatol . 102 : 938 - 944 . 141 . Alevizopoulos , A . , Y . Dusserre , U . Ruegg , and N . Mermod . 1997 . Regulation of the transforming growth factor beta - responsive transcription factor CTF - 1 by calcineurin and calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 23597 - 23605 . 142 . Eropkin , M . I . , T . D . Smirnova , E . M . Eropkina , and E . G . Mamaeva . 2000 . [ The study of the Ca2 + role in cytotoxic response of human cells in culture to the action of xenobiotics ] . Tsitologiia 42 : 154 - 159 . 143 . Caspar , M . , I . Florin , and M . Thelestam . 1987 . Calcium and calmodulin in cellular intoxication with Clostridium difficile toxin B . J . Cell Physiol 132 : 168 - 172 . 144 . Domenighetti , G . M . and V . G . Saglini . 1992 . Short - and long - term hemodynamic effects of oral nifedipine in patients with pulmonary hypertension secondary to COPD and lung fibrosis . Deleterious effects in patients with restrictive disease . Chest 102 : 708 - 714 . 145 . Ren , Y . , H . Yang , P . Zhu , C . M . Fan , Y . H . Wang , J . Li , and H . Liu . 2012 . [ Effect of CsA bleomycin - induced interstitial pulmonary disease in mice ] . Xi . Bao . Yu Fen . Zi . Mian . Yi . Xue . Za Zhi . 28 : 232 - 236 . 146 . Yun , B . , H . Lee , M . Ghosh , B . F . Cravatt , K . L . Hsu , J . V . Bonventre , H . Ewing , M . H . Gelb , and C . C . Leslie . 2014 . Serine hydrolase inhibitors block necrotic cell death by preventing calcium overload of the mitochondria and permeability transition pore formation . J . Biol . Chem . 289 : 1491 - 1504 . 147 . Kypreou , K . P . , P . Kavvadas , P . Karamessinis , M . Peroulis , A . Alberti , P . Sideras , S . Psarras , Y . Capetanaki , P . K . Politis , and A . S . Charonis . 2008 . Altered expression of calreticulin during the development of fibrosis . Proteomics . 8 : 2407 - 2419 . Page 43 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 44 FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 Overview of [ Ca 2 + ] - homeostatic mechanisms . Binding of ligands to their plasmalemmal receptors causes generation of IP 3 , which leads to release of internally sequestered Ca 2 + as well as influx of extracellular Ca 2 + . The Ca 2 + which has been mobilized can activate ryanodine receptors ( RyR ) , which in turn trigger a massive release of internally sequestered Ca 2 + ( Ca 2 + - induced Ca 2 + - release ) . Receptor activation and / or depletion of the internal Ca 2 + store can also cause opening of a variety of plasmalemmal ion channels and reverse - mode Na + / Ca 2 + exchange , which all lead to influx of external Ca 2 + , and possible Ca 2 + - induced Ca 2 + - release . Altogether , the change in [ Ca 2 + ] i transduces some kind of cell response : we are particularly interested in the synthetic / secretory response to growth factors . [ Ca 2 + ] i levels are later brought back down to resting levels through the actions of Ca 2 + - pumps on the internal Ca 2 + - store and / or on the plasmalemma . Figure 2 Averaging of Ca 2 + - oscillations . ( A ) A series of mathematically - simulated Ca 2 + - waves in which each Ca 2 + - spike is identical in size and time - course , but with slightly different latency between each Ca 2 + - spike ; each tracing comprises 20 spikes . As such , these simulate Ca 2 + - oscillations with very slightly different frequencies . ( B ) and ( C ) illustrate the summation of the first two traces and the summation of all 7 traces , respectively . ( D ) represents an idealization of the summation of thousands of such tracings with slightly different frequencies . Figure 3 How might the frequency of Ca 2 + - oscillations regulate enzyme activity ? ( A ) A representation of a single Ca 2 + - oscillation in black , as well as the activities of four different hypothetical Ca 2 + - sensitive enzymes in response to that transient Ca 2 + - oscillation . The Page 44 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 45 “red enzyme” activates in response to the elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] ( tracing rises as activity increases ) and then quickly deactivates once [ Ca 2 + ] falls back down to baseline levels . The “blue enzyme” activates 4 times more quickly than the red one ( reaching 4 times greater activity ) , before the drop in [ Ca 2 + ] causes it to deactivate at the same rate as the red one . The “green enzyme” also activates 4 times more quickly than the red one , but deactivates 2 - 3 times more slowly than the blue and red ones . The “pink enzyme” has the same activation / deactivation characteristics as the green one , but also develops a time - dependent or delayed inactivation , as indicated by the pink triangles underneath the activity tracings ( note : deactivation and inactivation are two different processes ) . ( B ) shows a series of Ca 2 + - oscillations at two different frequencies , while ( C ) shows the net levels of activity of the same four enzymes represented in A in response to low versus high frequency Ca 2 + - oscillations . It can be seen that low frequencies are sufficient to fully activate the green and pink enzymes , while high frequencies are necessary to fully activate the blue enzyme and fully inactivate the pink one . The red enzyme is only marginally activated by either frequency , but might eventually become fully activated at yet higher frequencies or if [ Ca 2 + ] i levels were to become tonically elevated . Figure 4 Effectors of gene expression activated by Ca 2 + - oscillations . Elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] i stimulates calmodulin which in turn activates a variety of targets , leading to translocation of transcription factors to the nucleus and gene transcription . One target is CamK , which phosphorylates IκB ( leading to its degradation ) , thus allowing NFκB to enter the nucleus . Another target is calcineurin , which dephosphorylates NFAT ( allowing it to enter the nucleus ) as well as a more slowly - developing NFAT - inactivation process ; NFAT activity is determined by Page 45 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society page - 46 the dynamic equilibrium between these processes as well as rephosphorylation of NFAT by intranuclear kinases ( leading to its ejection ) . Figure 5 Overall mechanism which we propose herein . Growth factor stimulation leads to release of internally sequestered Ca 2 + ( through IP 3 - gated channels and / or ryanodine receptors ) which triggers Ca 2 + - dependent chloride channels . The ensuing depolarization ( red arrows ) triggers voltage - dependent Ca 2 + - currents ( T - type and / or L - type ) . Other Ca 2 + - fluxes may also be activated ( e . g . , store - operated Ca 2 + - entry ; Orai1 ; TRP channels ; non - selective cation channels ) . Altogether , these Ca 2 + - fluxes produce rhythmic Ca 2 + - oscillations which activate calmodulin in a frequency - dependent manner . The latter stimulates signalling through CamK - II / NFκB and / or calcineurin / NFAT pathways , leading to expression of various genes and producing profibrotic changes , as indicated . Page 46 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society Figure 1 Overview of [ Ca2 + ] - homeostatic mechanisms . Binding of ligands to their plasmalemmal receptors causes generation of IP3 , which leads to release of internally sequestered Ca2 + as well as influx of extracellular Ca2 + . The Ca2 + which has been mobilized can activate ryanodine receptors ( RyR ) , which in turn trigger a massive release of internally sequestered Ca2 + ( Ca2 + - induced Ca2 + - release ) . Receptor activation and / or depletion of the internal Ca2 + store can also cause opening of a variety of plasmalemmal ion channels and reverse - mode Na + / Ca2 + exchange , which all lead to influx of external Ca2 + , and possible Ca2 + - induced Ca2 + - release . Altogether , the change in [ Ca2 + ] i transduces some kind of cell response : we are particularly interested in the synthetic / secretory response to growth factors . [ Ca2 + ] i levels are later brought back down to resting levels through the actions of Ca2 + - pumps on the internal Ca2 + - store and / or on the plasmalemma . 677x381mm ( 72 x 72 DPI ) Page 47 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society Figure 2 Averaging of Ca2 + - oscillations . ( A ) A series of mathematically - simulated Ca2 + - waves in which each Ca2 + - spike is identical in size and time - course , but with slightly different latency between each Ca2 + - spike ; each tracing comprises 20 spikes . As such , these simulate Ca2 + - oscillations with very slightly different frequencies . ( B ) and ( C ) illustrate the summation of the first two traces and the summation of all 7 traces , respectively . ( D ) represents an idealization of the summation of thousands of such tracings with slightly different frequencies . 502x625mm ( 72 x 72 DPI ) Page 48 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society Figure 3 How might the frequency of Ca2 + - oscillations regulate enzyme activity ? ( A ) A representation of a single Ca2 + - oscillation in black , as well as the activities of four different hypothetical Ca2 + - sensitive enzymes in response to that transient Ca2 + - oscillation . The “red enzyme” activates in response to the elevation of [ Ca2 + ] ( tracing rises as activity increases ) and then quickly deactivates once [ Ca2 + ] falls back down to baseline levels . The “blue enzyme” activates 4 times more quickly than the red one ( reaching 4 times greater activity ) , before the drop in [ Ca2 + ] causes it to deactivate at the same rate as the red one . The “green enzyme” also activates 4 times more quickly than the red one , but deactivates 2 - 3 times more slowly than the blue and red ones . The “pink enzyme” has the same activation / deactivation characteristics as the green one , but also develops a time - dependent or delayed inactivation , as indicated by the pink triangles underneath the activity tracings ( note : deactivation and inactivation are two different processes ) . ( B ) shows a series of Ca2 + - oscillations at two different frequencies , while ( C ) shows the net levels of activity of the same four enzymes represented in A in response to low versus high frequency Ca2 + - oscillations . It can be seen that low frequencies are sufficient to fully activate the green and pink enzymes , while high frequencies are necessary to fully activate the blue enzyme and fully inactivate the pink one . The red enzyme is only marginally activated by either frequency , but might eventually become fully activated at yet higher frequencies or if [ Ca2 + ] i levels were to become tonically elevated . 354x352mm ( 72 x 72 DPI ) Page 49 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society Figure 4 Effectors of gene expression activated by Ca2 + - oscillations . Elevation of [ Ca2 + ] i stimulates calmodulin which in turn activates a variety of targets , leading to translocation of transcription factors to the nucleus and gene transcription . One target is CamK , which phosphorylates IκB ( leading to its degradation ) , thus allowing NFκB to enter the nucleus . Another target is calcineurin , which dephosphorylates NFAT ( allowing it to enter the nucleus ) as well as a more slowly - developing NFAT - inactivation process ; NFAT activity is determined by the dynamic equilibrium between these processes as well as rephosphorylation of NFAT by intranuclear kinases ( leading to its ejection ) . 510x568mm ( 72 x 72 DPI ) Page 50 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society 677x381mm ( 72 x 72 DPI ) Page 51 of 51 AJRCMB Articles in Press . Published on 18 - March - 2015 as 10 . 1165 / rcmb . 2014 - 0269TR Copyright © 2015 by the American Thoracic Society